The Divine Right OF Presbyterian Ordination and c. ARGUED.

The Scripture-Bishop. OR The DIVINE Right OF PRESBYTERIAN Ordination and
Government, Considerd in a DIALOGUE Between Praelaticus and Eleutherius.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed for D.HENCHMAN, in Cornhill. 1732.

The Publisher TO THE READER.
UNdoubtedly every one, acquainted with the original Principles of New England,
and a true Friend to that good Cause of a further Reformation, which brought
the first Fathers of this Country from their native Land over the dangerous
Seas to a distant Wilderness, will esteem the Subject of the ensuing Pages well
worthy the closest Consideration, and such as may justly recommend this
controversial Piece to a serious Perusal.

And as to the Form of the Composure, it may be remarked; this interlocutory
way of writing has been found by Experience very acceptable to Mankind, and
many Authors have gone into it for the Ease, the Benefit, and Satisfaction of
the Reader. It certainly approaches the nearest to personal Conference, which
is ordinarily the most eligible manner of managing a Dispute; as it carries
this on in familiar Language, prosecutes it by short Periods, and when the
Disputants are wise to preserve a just Temper, gives the best Opportunity of
settling the determinate sense of one another's Terms, of bringing Things to a
narrow, and keeping to the Pinch of the Controversy; and so affords the best
Prospect of reducing it to an issue. The like Advantages now attend this manner
of discussing a difficult and controverted Point, by way of written Dialogue.

The frequent Interchange of Arguments, the quick Return of Objections and
Replies, in this mode of writing, takes off from the tediousness of the
Dispute, invites the Reader on, engages his Attention, helps his Memory, and
assists him in forming a Judgment. And then it has been observed, The managing
of an Argument in the Form of a Dialogue has this Convenience, that it allows
more Freedom, and gives Advantage for impressing some Things, which common
Readers would not so readily take notice of, in a continued Discourse.

Nevertheless it must be acknowledged, there is one Abuse this Method of Deba^e
is incident to: and that is, the Writer for want of sufficient Skill in
personating, or of Faithfulness in representing, may give a vast Advantage to
that Side of the Question his own Principles incline him to, by making the
opposite Party argue inconsistently, or discourse very weakly: and so prepare
the way for an easy Victory and inglorious Insult over him.

But I can assure the Reader, from my Knowledge of our Author, and from the
Testimony of very capable Judges, who have had his Performance under a critical
Inspection, that there is no Occasion in the least to suspect the present
Publication of an unequal or partial management. You will here find the
Arguings of both Parties very naturally represented, and Things set in their
genuine Light, on one Side as well as the other. If any should pats a different
Censure, it may so happen, that herein they will expose their own Partiality,
or betray their Ignorance. However if any have a mind to make their Remarks,
they may try their Skill, in detecting the Author's Fallacy in one part of the
Argument, or his Weakness in the other. And I dare say in his behalf, he is
open to Conviction, and stands ready to retract what he cannot vindicate.

In fine, let it be no Prejudice in the Reader's way, that our Author has not
seen meet to prefix his Name. For I have observed, that Writings of this Form
(at least such as have occurred to me) are generally anonymous. However, it is
not the Authority of a Name, but the Justice of the Cause, and force of the
Reasoning, that ought to be regarded. On these heads an Appeal is now made to
the World, and the whole submitted to public Censure.

The Divine Right OF Presbyterian Ordination etc. ARGUED.
In Two Conferences.
The FIRST CONFERENCE.
ELeutherius was a Gentleman of a plentiful Substance, a liberal Education, and
of a serious Disposition; early designed for the Service of God, in the Gospel
of his Son: and possessed those ministerial Qualifications, as would have
entitled him to some of the highest Preferments in the Episcopal Church, had he
consulted his promotion in the choice of his Profession, and declared himself
for the national Establishment. But upon a most serious and deliberate weighing
the Cause, he found the Principles of the Presbyterians more agreeable to the
Word of God, and to the Practice of the first and purest Ages of Christianity,
than those of the Episcopalians; and was therefore constrained to join himself
to that despised Party. This being matter of great grief to some of his
ambitious and aspiring Friends, whose Heads ran much upon his Promotion,
occasioned him a Visit from one of them, a Clergyman of the established Church;
a warm Advocate for Liturgy and Prelacy, and a Man of Powers, as well as Zeal;
who thinking himself capable of refuting the Presbyterian Opinions, and obliged
in Charity to use some Pains for the recovery of his Friend, came to spend an
Evening in an amicable Debate with him; which he introduced with the following
Salutation.

Praelaticus. Sir, the near Relation between us, and our former freedom and
intimacy, have emboldened me to enter into your Retirement; and to deprive you
for an Hour, of the sweet Satisfaction of conversing with the Dead, that I
might in your Study have the advantage of a free Conference with you, without
the interruption, or observation of others.

Eleutherius. I must confess, Sir, that I find very agreeable entertainment
among my Books; but I have not undertaken the Hermit, nor immured my self in my
Study as a Cell, where I shall be shut up from the Company of my Friends, and
deprived of the satisfaction of such entertaining and delightful Conversation,
as yours has always been to me. I am therefore troubled at your Apology for
that freedom, which you have a just claim to, and which I have greatest reason
to delight in. And cannot but hope that you will yet continue my Friend, and
manifest your kindness, by your usual free and unreserv'd converse.

Prelat. I shall then follow your directions, and without ceremony or preamble,
unbosom my grief to you, occasioned by your herding your self with a
schismatical and phanatical Party; and your pretending to enter into Sacred
Orders among those, that have no Power to give them, and to undertake the Work
of the Ministry without regular Ordination. By this you cut your self off from
those temporal Honors and Advantages, which you had reason to expect; as well
as thrust your self into Christ's Vineyard without a Call, and climb into his
Sheepfold another way than by the door.

Eleuth. I make no doubt but your hearty friendship to me, and your zeal for
what you think the Cause of God, has thus transported you, beyond that candor
and calmness of Spirit, for which you have been noted; and has occasioned those
hard Epithets, which you are pleased to apply to the Presbyterians. I will
therefore if you please, in the most open and unreserved manner possible, offer
you the Reasons that have determined my Choice, and then carefully attend to
the Arguments, you will offer against my Principles and Conduct.

Praelat. I Am well pleased with the Proposal, and am ready to hear your Reasons
(such as you have) for forsaking the best constituted Church in the World, a
Church in which you were baptized, unto which you owe your best Services; and
in which you ought to have lived and died. I confess I cannot account for your
Conduct.

Eleuth. I shall not dispute the propriety of those Panegyricks upon the Church
of England, we so often hear from your party. Every one esteems his own
profession best, and the Church to which he belongs the best constituted. It is
now my business to give you my Reasons, why I differ from you in Opinion, with
respect to the Church of England And it may be proper to inform you what gave
the first turn to my Thoughts.

Having read the ecclesiastical Story of ourKingdom since the Reformation, I
was surpised to find such Clouds of Sufferers for Nonconformity to Prelacy and
Ceremony. What a dark Scene opened, before the Usurpation, of Silencing,
Imprisonments, Pillories and Death! How many Martyrs were there to this Cause!
What multitudes of the best Men in the Nation, were driven from their pleasant
Habitations, among the wild Pagans in an American Desert, choosing to forsake
their dear Country, and dearest Friends, to undergo the perils of the Sea, and
the greater perils of barbarous Salvages, in a bowling Wilderness, rather than
wound their Consciences, by a compliance with what they thought sinful! How
severe were the Persecutions after the Restoration, when above two thousand of
the most learned and pious Ministers in England were silenced in one Day; and
left without any visible means of Subsistence for themselves and Families, for
mere Nonconformity! How many of these afterward were stripped of their Estates,
languished and died in Prisons, for preaching the Gospel, which they da^'d not
neglect to do! And if we look into Scotland in the same Reign, we shall find
all their Ministry turned out, some thousands suffering Martyrdom in the most
cruel and inhuman manner, for their noncompliance with Prelacy. This now put me
upon thinking, that these Sufferers must certainly have some convincing
evidence for the goodness of their Cause, that could bear them up under all
these terrors; and make them venture upon Death it self, in his most
affrightning form; rather than comply with our English Episcopacy, and ^^posed
Ceremonies. And though I did not suppose, suffering in a Cause was a sure
evidence of the goodness of it: yet I could not but think, that the Sufferings
of so many excellently learned and godly Men, called upon me to search into the
merits of that Cause, for which they suffered.

Praelat. I am as far from justifying those severities as you are. But these
were the fault of the particular Persons then at the Helm; and not of the
Constitution.

Eleuth. This will not appear so, upon a view of the History of those Times.
But if it really were so; yet the Cause sealed with so much Blood, and I fear
Blood that is yet crying under the Altar, is worth enquiring into. And that
consideration put me accordingly upon the enquiry into the merits of the Cause,
until a rational Conviction has brought me into the Opinion you now oppose.

Praelat. I am waiting to hear the Reasons of that Conviction.

Eleuth. I have many Objections against your Ceremonies, and especially against
Impositions, and making such terms of Communion, as Christ has never made. But
I shall confine my self to the consideration of the Subject, you have led me
into: and give you the Reasons why I choose Ordination by a Presbytery, rather
than by a Diocesan Bishop; and why I esteem this more agreeable to the
Institution of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Now one Reason of my Opinion is, because our Lord Jesus Christ has inhibited
all Dominion and Supremacy among the Ministers of the Gospel over one another;
and all Lordship exercised by any of them, over the Flock committed to their
Care. Whence I cannot but esteem all the Pastors of the Church upon a level in
point of Authority; and all exercise of Dominion, over their Brethren, or over
the Flock, by a Prelacy, to be a direct opposition to Christ's express Command.
And therefore I conclude that a Prelate is at best but a human Creature, and
not of Christ's appointing.

That our blessed Lord has prohibited all Dominion and Supremacy among the
Ministers of the Gospel, is evident from Matthew. xx. 25, 26. Ye know, that the
princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them; and they that are great,
exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever
will be great among you, let him be your Minister. And to the same purpose,
Luke xxii. 24, 25, 26.

Praelat. It is secular Dominion and Dignity, that is here forbidden; and that
nothing affects the present Argument. For it is only an ecclesiastical
Supremacy, that we contend for.

Eleuth. If it be as you say, I think it nevertheless affects the Argument, we
are upon. For have our Bishops no secular Dominion, over their Brethren in the
Ministry? Are they not spiritual Lords, members of the Legislature, and often
at the Council Table? Don't their secular Dominion very much render them
incapable to preach the Word instantly, in season and out of season, as
exhorted 2 Timothy iii. 2? Is there no secular Dominion in the Bishops Courts? So
that by your own interpretation of this Text, Episcopacy of the present Form
seems repugnant to this Command of Christ, and therefore not very desirable, to
be sure not necessary.

But it is certain from the forequoted Texts, that affectation of Pre-eminence
is what our Lord condemns. There was a Strife among the Disciples which should
be accounted the greatest; upon which he takes occasion to let them know, that
there must be no greatest or least among them: they must not (like the Kings of
the Gentiles,) exercise Lordship or Authority over one another. But he that is
greatest among you (says he) let him be as the younger; and ^e that is chief,
as he that does serve. So that all Lordship, all Authority over one another, is
expressly forbidden. And this affects Diocesan Episcopacy, just so much, as it
is a Dominion over Presbyters.

And I might further observe to you, that all Ministers of the Gospel are
forbidden to exercise a Lordship over God's Heritage, 1 Pet. v. 3. which also
prejudices me against our english Episcopacy, under which such a Lordship seems
to be exercised. I can have no better opinion of imposing their Minister upon a
Congregation, without the People's Consent, than taking from them even a
natural Right of committing their most important Affairs to one that they can
approve; and thereby exercising an unwarrantable Lordship over them. And I must
tell you, it is a Lordship the Apostles themselves would not use, in supplying
the vacancy made by the death of Judas, Acts i. 15, 22. And in the election of
Deacons, Acts vi. 3, 5. In both which cases, the Suffrage of the Brethren was
called for. And therefore I care not to be set over a People in your lordly
manner. I cannot but in like manner complain of the Spiritual Courts, as they
are called, for Lording it over God's Heritage: Where, instead of the
Discipline instituted by Christ, the Church-offender is carried from Court to
Court, at intolerable Charges, subjected to heavy Fines, exorbitant Fees, or
Imprisonment, without any method taken to bring him to a sincere Repentance.
Indeed, Sir, I cannot see through these Things, and therefore cannot be a
Partaker in them.

Praelat. There is no Constitution perfect, and if you see some things in our
Church, that you think want mending, yet you must own, our Ministry is such as
Christ has appointed; and therefore you ought not to separate, for such small
dissatisfactions.

Eleuth. Pardon me, Sir, if I don't see with your eyes. The Prelacy it self is
what I cannot think of divine Appointment. I find nothing in Scripture, of the
Superiority of one ordinary Minister of the Gospel over another; but have
showed you, that this Domination is absolutely forbidden. Nor do I find any
warrant for the ecclesiastical Authority exercised over both Minister and
People, in the Bishop's name. If there be any mention in the Bible, of
Chancellors, Deans, Registers, Apparitors, Proctors, etc. be pleased to show it
me; if not, you will allow me to refuse your Hierarchy, and join with a Ministry
that is manifestly of Christ's Institution, and not of human Invention.

Praelat. Ordination by Bishops is certainly of divine Institution For Bishops
are Presbyters, if they have no higher Character: and therefore upon your own
Principles, have power of Ordination; whereas Ordination by Presbyters, is at
least questionable: and therefore ours must be allowed to be the safest side.

Eleuth. This is the constant clamor of your Party: but you know who claim
equal advantage to their Cause by this way of arguing. The Baptists plead, that
we own their Baptism is valid, while they deny that the Sprinkling of an In^ant
is any Baptism at all; and therefore they must be of the safer side. So the
Papists argue after the same manner, that all own Salvation may be obtained by
some in the Communion of the Church of Rome, but they deny the possibility of
the Salvation of Protestants; and therefore the Papists are of the safer side.
This you know is the great popular Argument they assault us with. And I would
refer you to your own Archbishop Tillotson Sermon. on 1 Cor. 3. 15.
for an Answer to it; and therein for an Answer to your self. You will find
that celebrated Author detecting the gross Absurdities, which follow from this
Argument; in particular. "That according to this Principle it is always safest
to be on the uncharitable side; also giving some parallel Instances, by which
it will be clearly seen that this Argument concludes false; and showing by a
variety of Considerations, that this is so far from being a good Argument, that
it is so intolerably weak and sophistical, that any considerate Man ought to be
ashamed to be caught by it". This might suffice for a Reply to you.

However I will not rest in these general Remarks, but shall particularly
expostulate the matter with you. Is it the safest side to acknowledge and
submit to a Hierarchy not warranted in the Book of God? Is it the safest side,
for me to solemnly declare at my Ordination, that I am moved by the HOLY GHOST,
to take upon me the Office of a Deacon, when I have no purpose to serve Tables,
for which Deacons were instituted; but to give my self continually, to Prayer
and to the Ministry of the Word? Is it the safest side, to take upon me the
Order of Priesthood, an Order typical of our Lord Jesus Christ, fulfilled in
him, and abrogated by him? Is it the safest side to take upon me the solemn
Charge of the Ministry, and to come under awful Vows to fulfill it; and yet to
depend upon the Bishops License to preach? For you know that Canon 49th
inhibits any Person whatsoever, that is not licensed, to take upon him to
expound in his own Cure or elsewhere, any Scripture or Matter of Doctrine. Is
it the safest side, to acknowledge our Bishops endued with the extraordinary
Apostolical power, of giving the Holy Ghost by the Imposition of Hands? It Is
certain they seem to assume that Power when they say, Receive the Holy Ghost
for the Office and Work of a Priest in the Church of God, now committed to
thee, by the Imposition of our Hands. Is it the safest side, to solemnly
promise at my Ordination reverently to obey my Ordinary, that is, my Bishop and
c. and to swear canonical Obedience to the Bishop, as you know has been
commonly done? When I am taught to call no man Master, but Christ, Matthew.
xxiii. 8, 10. In a word, is it the safest side, to be ordained to but part of
the Ministerial Work, and to be deprived of the Powers of Ordination and
Jurisdiction, which belong to a Gospel-Minister as such, and which he must
account for in the Day of Christ?

I cannot but think it the safest side, to seek Ordination according to
Christ's own Institution, and according to the Scripture-Pattern, where all
these Abuses may be regulated.

Praelat. I desire you would remember, that your present Business is to prove,
that the Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction belong to Presbyters; and not to
draw up a Remonstrance against our Church.

Eleuth. I have been assigning some of the Reasons, why I esteem Presbyterian
Ordination every way preferable to Ordination by Bishops. And though I highly
value the Church of England as a Protestant Church, and have a just Veneration
for the Learning and Piety of some of your Bishops; yet you must allow me
modestly to give my Reasons, why I cannot conform to the legal Establishment,
how hard so^ver these Reasons bear upon your Constitution. And I am now ready
to answer your Demand, and to demonstrate to you, that those Powers you deny to
Presbyters, are inherent in them by divine Institution. Which I shall prove,

First, From the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters,

I am sure you will own, that if Presbyters are Bishops, they have power to
ordain others; and have a right to the Government of the Church. And I think
there is nothing more plainly laid down in than that they are of the same Order
and Office.

This appears from Phil. i. 1. Paul and Timotheus the Servants of Jesus Christ,
to all the Saints in Christ Jesus, which are at Philippi, with the BISHOPS and
Deacons. From which Text, one of these two things is absolutely necessary, and
submitted to your choice; either that there was a plurality of Bishops in a
particular Church, by divine Appointment, as we see there was in the Church of
Philippi, and then there will be no room for a Diocesan, nor for Presbyters
subordinate to Bishops: Or else that Presbyters are properly Bishops, and
Bishops Presbyters, which amounts to the same thing; and was the thing to be
proved. I would entreat you to consider, what sort of Diocesan Bishops these
were, where there was a plurality in one City and Congregation; and no
Presbyters under them. Were these like our present Bishops, who have so many
hundred Congregations under their Charge?

The same thing is also manifest from 1 Timothy iii. Where the Apostle
particularly describes the Duties, and necessary Qualifications of Bishops and
Deacons, without so much as mentioning Presbyters; or giving any direction for
their Conduct. And what can you imagine to be the reason of this? Was it
because Presbyters were not worthy the Apostle's notice, and because there were
no Duties belonging to them? Or was it because they were the same Persons with
the Bishops? Certainly either there were no Presbyters at that time; and if so,
there was but one Order of ordinary Ministers in the Church, and enough of that
Order to serve the exigency of the several Congregations; and they consequently
not Diocesan but Congregational Bishops: or else Presbyters are the same with
Bishops, and mentioned under that general name; which comes to the same thing.

Praelat. The bare Omission of Presbyters, in the two places by you cited,
appears but a weak foundation to build your Hypothesis upon.

Eleuth. I have offered you my Arguments from the cited Scriptures, which you
and all your Party are incapable to give a rational Answer to. But this is not
the only foundation we build upon; we have many other texts of Scripture, which
give equal light to the same Case: particularly, --

The Identity of Bishop and Presbyter does also appear in a meridian Light,
from Tit.i. 5,6,7. For this cause left I thee at Crete, that thou should set
in Order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders (Presbyters) in every
City -- if any be blameless; -- For a Bishop must be blameless, as the Steward
of God. The Apostle is here directing Titus, in the qualifications necessary to
the Presbyters he ordains, and one of them is, that he be blameless. For which
he gives this reason, a BISHOP must be blameless. Certainly then Bishops and
Presbyters were in his Sense one and the same. He would otherwise have said,
For a PRESBYTER must be blameless, because he was speaking of the Ordination of
Presbyters. Bishop and Presbyter must therefore be the same Order; or else the
Apostle argues impertinently, and his reason has no force in it. What force
could there be in such reasoning, Let the Presbyters you ordain be blameless;
For a Bishop must be blameless: if Bishops and Presbyters were not the same? I
think you dare not suppose the Apostle spoke impertinently, and therefore must
acknowledge what I plead for.

The same thing is likewise evident from Act. xx. 17,28. And from Miletus he
sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders (Presbyters) of the Church, and said to
them -- Take heed therefore to your selves, and to the Flock over which the
Holy Ghost ^ath made you Overseers; or as it is in the Original, Bishops.
Nothing can be more certain than that the same Persons are called Elders in the
17th, and Bishops in the 28th verse. From whence it appears, that there were a
number of Bishops in the Apostles times set over one Congregation; and that
those Bishops were but mere Presbyters^ So little knowledge had they of
Diocesans in that Age of the Church. It seems the Church of England were
anciently aware of the force of this Argument; why else did they endeavor to
hide it from the common People, by using the word Overseer, in their
translation of this Text, instead of Bishop? It looks at best something
suspicious. --

Praelat. It is allowed, that Presbyters are sometimes in the New Testament
called Bishops: and there seems to be this reason for it, they have part of the
Bishops Charge, and are so far Overseers or Bishops of their respective Cures;
but we never find Bishops called Presbyters; and therefore you cannot find so
much as a community of Names, in Scripture.

Eleuth. Don't you acknowledge the Apostles to be Bishops?

Praelat. I hope to make it evident to you, that in their ordinary Character
they were properly and formally Diocesan Bishops.

Eleuth. Have you forgot, that the Apostles call themselves Presbyters? Be
pleased to read, 1 Pet.v.^. The Elders that are among you, I exhort, who am
also an Elder (or Presbyter.) So ii. Joh. 1. and iii. Joh 1. Can any thing be
plainer, than that according to your own Scheme, Bishops are in these Texts
called Presbyters? Indeed I am far from allowing your whimsical Supposition,
that the Apostles were Diocesan Bishops: but as I am sure that in their
ordinary Capacity, they were the highest standing Officer in the Church, so
that these Officers, considered in that capacity, were no more than Presbyters,
if they themselves knew their own proper Denomination.

This brings into my mind another Question, to which I would also entreat your
Answer: And that is, To whom does the Rule and Government of the Church belong?

Praelat. There is no occasion for that Question. You know my Sentiments, that
I esteem you a Schismatic for refusing subjection to the Bishops, in whom the
whole power of Jurisdiction is lodged.

Eleuth. Sir, I did not ask the Question, because I was a Stranger to your
Sentiments; but only to make way for the Conviction I propose to offer you,
from 1 Timothy v. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in Word and Doctrine. From whence it appears,

1. If Bishops are those that rule well, they are called Elders or Presbyters
in Scripture, and what then becomes of your Objection?

2. It also appears from this Text, that either Presbyters are Bishops, in that
both Ruling and Laboring in Word and Doctrine are committed to them; Or else
that they are superior to Bishops, in that they are more especially worthy of
double honor, who labor in Word and Doctrine, which you allow to be the
Presbyters Province. Choose you which part of the Disjunction you please.

Thus you see from the Scripture account of the matter, that not only
Presbyters were Bishops, but Bishops also were Presbyters, and if that don't
prove them to be the same Order, I despair of ever seeing any thing proved.

Praelat. If all you plead for be granted, that there was a community of Names
between Bishop and Presbyter, it does not prove the Order the same. The General
of a Roman Army was formerly called Emperor: It will not therefore follow that he
was the supreme Commander of the Roman Monarchy, because of the same
denomination with him that was.

Eleuth. Can you imagine that the Apostles purposely led us into a mistake in
this matter, by the promiscuous use of the Names? Can you suppose the Penmen
of the sacred Pages so confused in their account of things, that they knew not
how to distinguish one Order from another, when they knew that these had
distinct Powers, and ought to be distinguished by all succeeding Ages of the
Church: And that even the Validity of sacred Ordinances, and the Salvation of
Souls, depended upon that distinction? Were they chargeable with writing
unintelligibly, and using Words without any distinct Ideas? No, Sir, the plain
truth of the Case is this; they knew no difference between Bishop and
Presbyter, they thought the Names equivalent, and used them accordingly. -- And
as to your Example of the word Emperor, it is nothing to the purpose. Though
the word Emperor or Commander, was sometimes applied to a victorious General,
and afterward appropriated to the Monarch of the Roman Empire: yet after the
Name was so appropriated, it was not used by any subordinate General. And there
never was, nor could be, without the confusion of Language, a promiscuous use
of Monarch and General, as we find there was of Bishop and Presbyter. -- But
that you may be fully convinced that there is nothing in this Criticism; I Will
also prove to you, that the whole Work, as well as the Name of Bishop, was
committed to Presbyters.

This appears with the most convincing Evidence, from 1 Pet. v. 2. where
Presbyters are exhorted to feed the Flock of God which was among them, taking
the oversight thereof ((...)) acting the Bishop therein, as it is in the
Original. -- Now then it Presbyters were to act the Bishop in the Flock, you
must own they had the Bishops Office as well as Name, which was the thing to be
proved. -- And the same may also be proved from Acts xx. 28^ where Presbyters
are not only called Bishops, but have all the Bishops Charge committed to them.

And as the taking the Oversight of the Flock, or discharging the Bishop's
Office in it, according to these Texts, gives to Presbyters the highest
Jurisdiction in the Church: so is it likewise evident, that they were also
vested with the power of Ordination, from 1 Timothy iv 14. -- Neglect not the gift
that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with the Laying on of the
Hands of the Presbytery.

Praelat. If the Presbytery did impose Hands upon Timothy, it was only in
conjunction with St. Paul, who charges him to stir up the Gift of God that was
in him by the putting on of his Hands, 2 Timothy i. 6.

Eleuth. It is very probable that the Gift which Timothy received, by the
Imposition of Paul's Hands, was the extraordinary miraculous Powers of the Holy
Ghost, thus conferred upon the generality of Believers, in the Apostolic
times, by the laying on of the Apostles Hands. But if your Supposition be
granted, that this Imposition of Hands was for Ordination, it will follow,

1. That the Apostle acted as an ordinary Presbyter at that Ordination For
Timothy was ordained by a Presbytery, and consequently the Ordainers must be
Presbyters, and must act as such. If St. Paul was a Member of that Presbytery,
it was a Presbytery notwithstanding, and they performed that Ordination in the
quality of a Presbytery: Here is therefore a standing Warrant for all future
Presbyteries, to write after that Copy. And this further confirms what I
observed before; that the Apostles in their ordinary Character, were but
Presbyters. And

2. It also follows, that Presbyters have the Power or Ordination. Or else what
business had their Hands upon Timothy, in conferring an Order, that they had no
Authority to communicate? But after all,

3 If it be supposed, that the Apostle was superior to the other Presbyters in
this Ordination, he must then act in his extraordinary Capacity. For in his
ordinary Capacity he was but a Presbyter, as we heard before. And what Argument
can there be from the extraordinary Power of an Apostle, to an ordinary Bishop?
So that turn which way you will, you cannot weaken the Argument from this Text.

Praelat. Well, but you cannot find any Example in Scripture of Presbyters
ordaining without a Superior.

Eleuth. Yes, we find Paul and Barnabas set apart to the exercise of their
Ministry among the Gentiles, only by the Imposition of the Hands of a
Presbytery, Act. xiii. 1, 2. Which is, I think, an unexceptionable evidence,
that Presbyters may ordain without a Superior. Sure I am, here are the usual
Acts and Rites of Ordination, Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of Hands,
performed by Prophets and Teachers; who were not Apostles, nor Diocesan
Bishops: Neither indeed are pretended to have been such, by any of your Party,
that I remember, but even you your selves grant they were Presbyters. And now I
call to mind an Argument I have some where met with upon the Case before us to
this purpose. Either this Ordination is a Precedent to us, or not. If not, how
can we be sure that those of Timothy and Titus, or any other, be so? But if it
be a Precedent, then Presbyters have Power to ordain; and that without the
Presidency of any superior Officer. And hence Ordination by Presbyters (without
a Bishop, in your Sense) is valid and regular.

Praelat. I deny it was a Precedent: for these Teachers had a special and
extraordinary Commission for this particular Ordination; The Holy Ghost saying
to them, Separate unto me Barnabas and Saul, for the Work and c.

Eleuth. You know, there was something extraordinary almost ever attending the
Administrations of those primitive Times; which nevertheless does not hinder
you from drawing many things then done into Example, and forming Arguments from
them to justify your Principles and Practices. -- The Gist, Timothy received at
his Ordination, was given him by Prophecy; and 'twas by the Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, that Paulgave him that Charge, Lay Hands suddenly on no Man. So
that Timothy's Commission seems extraordinary, as much as that given to the
Presbyters at Antioch. And yet you scruple not to plead him as an Example of
Prelacy, and argue for Episcopal Ordination from the Apostolic Instructions to
him about the Exercise of his ordaining Power. Hence then, unless you will give
up your Arguments for Prelatical Orders, taken from the Epistles to Timothy;
you must not wonder, if we are not willing to give up our Argument for
Presbyterian Ordination, from the Example of the Presbyters at Antioch, upon
the account of their having a special and extraordinary Commission for what
they did. Thus much we seem agreed in, That here is an express Commission to
those Presbyters to ordain: And as to the objection of it is being an
extraordinary one, I think, I have made it appear, this does not at all weaken
our Plea from it in defense of Presbyterian Ordination.

Certainly the separation of Barnabas and Saul was as authentic, though done by
Presbyters, and as exemplary, as any Ordination by Timothy or Titus, your
pretended Bishops: and how then can you any longer deny the Power of Presbyters
to ordain? I pray you to remark it, We have here an Instance of Presbyters
ordaining by the Authority of the Holy Ghost: and an Example so circumstanc'd,
I think, must have the virtue of a divine Precept. So that if Scripture-Pattern
be a Consideration of any weight with you, you must acknowledge, we have here a
just Warrant for Ordination by Presbyters.

But now let us briefly review^ what has been said upon this Head.

If there were a plurality of Bishops in one Congregation, as appears from
Phil. i. 1. If there were no ordinary Officers in the Churches planted by the
Apostles, but Bishops and Doacons; as appears from the same Text, as well as
from 1 Timothy iii. It necessarily follows, that there were no Bishops but the
Ministers of particular Congregations: Or, which is the same thing, the
Apostolic Bishop was a Presbyter.

If Presbyters were constantly called Bishops, and Bishops Presbyters, the
Apostles knew no distinction between them; for it is certain they made none. And
you will therefore do well to inform me, whence this distinction came.

If the whole Jurisdiction is committed to Presbyters, and the Ruler is less
honorable than the Preacher, in the Apostle's account: If Ordination, as well
as Jurisdiction, was in Apostolic times, in the hands of the Presbytery, as I
have fully proved they were, my Lord the Bishop must found his superior
Authority upon something else than Scripture-Institution. In a word, what one
thing is more plain in the NewTestament, to an unprejudiced Eye, than the
Identity of Bishop and Presbyter?

If it were possible to add light to a Cause, that already appears as the Sun
at noonday, I might observe to you, that the word Bishop is never used in
Scripture but in direct opposition to Prelacy: And that the word Presbyter,
when appropriated to a Gospel-Minister, is always used for the highest ordinary
Officer in the Christian Church. Which renders me utterly incapable to imagine,
upon what Scripture-Authority the Bishops superiority can be founded. And if I
look into all the Authors, that have ever written upon the Controversy, on your
side of the Question, I am nothing assisted in that Inquiry. There is no
Argument, upon which any one of them pretends to found your Episcopacy, but
that some or other of the same Party have subverted the Foundation, and proved
the Insufficiency of the Argument.

There never was greater confusion in the building of Babel, than there has
been in digging of new Foundations for Prelacy: which gives a shrewd Suspicion,
that it is not to be found in the Bible; otherwise there would be a better
Agreement among the Patrons of that Cause, as to the true Scripture-Bottom,
upon which it is to be erected.

Praelat. I hope yet to give you good ScriptureEvidence of the divine Right of
Episcopacy. And you should hear what I have to say, before you are too
peremptory in your Conclusions. But in the mean while, I am willing to hear
your remaining Pleas and Reasons, which I entreat you to sum up as concisely as
you can, since it grows late.

Eleuth. I hope when you come to offer your Scripture-Evidence, you will
endeavor to produce a Commission for Bishops, distinct from that to
Presbyters; and to prove by some Precept or Example in Scripture, that their
Ordination is also distinct It concerns you also to show where the sole Power
of Ordination is appropriated to Bishops; where Presbyters are excluded from
it; and where the different Qualifications of Bishops and Presbyters are to be
found in the New Testament. All this must be clearly and evidently made out, in
order to establish your Hypothesis. And yet I think there is nothing of all
this to be found in the Bible. But it is fit you should be heard. I will
therefore conclude what I have to say, by two or three Arguments more, briefly
proposed.

2. Then, they that have the principal and chief parts of the sacred Ministry
committed to them, have also a claim to the inferior and subordinate parts of
that Office.

This is a way of Reasoning, that I think you must acknowledge the force of.
It Is not credible, that Presbyters should be trusted with the greater, more
honorable and important Parts of the Ministry; and the lesser concerns of it
be reserved for a superior Officer. Now that Preaching and Baptizing (which you
all allow to Presbyters) are the principal and chief Parts of the Ministry,
appears from the Commission, Matthew. Xxviii^ 19. where these are the only
Ministerial Duties expressly committed even to the Apostles themselves. Whence
it is evident, that either these are the greater parts of the ministerial Work,
under which Ordaining, Governing the Church etc. as less parts of a Minister's
Work are included; or else these Duties of Preaching and Baptizing are the less
parts of a Minister's Work, under which the greater are included in the
Commission. But I Am sure it is a gross Absurdity, to suppose the greater
included in the less^ and therefore you must acknowledge, that the less is
included in the greater: That is, that the Presbyters Offices of Preaching and
Baptizing are the principal and superior parts of the Ministry. Whence the
Consequence forces it self upon you, that as these have the greater, they have
also the less: as they have the principal and chief, they have also the
subordinate Work of a Gospel-Minister committed unto them.

The same thing receives clearest Evidence from the forecited 1 Timothy v. 17. Let
the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor; especially they
that labor in Word and Doctrine. If they that labor in Word and Doctrine are
especially worthy of double Honor, more than they that rule well; then
Laboring in Word and Doctrine is a Work superior to Ruling, and the principal
part of the Ministry. Whence the same Consequence offers it self, that they
that have the principal part of the Minister's Charge, ought also to have the
subordinate and less principal parts of the Work; notwithstanding the claim of
any superior Officer, or any pretense of a higher Order, to take it out of
their Hands.

Praelat. I shall not spend the time, by particular Remarks upon this Argument.
But shall wait with as much Patience as I can, to hear what you have yet to
offer.

Eleuth. It Is certainly the safest way not to touch that, which must
necessarily burn your Fingers. Certain it is, that there can be no just
Solution given to this Argument: it does, and will stand in full force against
you, notwithstanding any evasions that can be made. But I Will take notice of
your Caution, and not impose too much upon your Patience; but proceed to offer
another Argument.

3. I^ a Successor to any Office have all the Powers that did belong to him, to
whom he succeeds in his Office; Presbyters must necessarily have all the
ordinary Powers committed to the Apostles: and consequently cannot want
Authority for Ordination and Jurisdiction.

That Successors in an Office have a claim to all the parts of the Office, in
which they succeed, cannot be debated. None will question but King GEORGE the
Second has all the Authority of his Father, by virtue of his Succession to him.
And I constantly insist upon it, that either Presbyters are Successors in the
Ministry committed to the Apostles, considered in their ordinary Capacity; or
else they have no Scripture Door open, by which they can enter upon any Parts
of the sacred Ministry. That the Apostles, as such, have no Successors, I
readily grant; but as ordinary Ministers, they have a promise of Christ's
Presence with them to the End of the World; which must ultimately be meant of
their Successors. Now then I entreat you to tell me, how Presbyters come by
their Authority, unless they are Successors to the ordinary Ministry of the
Apostles. And be pleased also to tell me, if they are Successors to the
Apostles in their ordinary Ministry, who (...) deprive them of any Part of
their ordinary Charge.

Praelat. I shall have further Occasion to consider this Argument; and
therefore I shall not take any present Notice of it.

Eleuth. I then go on to argue --

4. They that have the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven committed to 'em, have the
Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction.

This Proposition is self-evident: For you all allow, that both Ordination and
Jurisdiction are Exercises of the Power of the Keys: And that Presbyters have
the Power of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven committed to them, is what you
your selves also do in effect allow. All grant them the Key of Doctrine: and
who then can deny them the Key of Order and Jurisdiction? Since Christ gave all
the Keys together, Matthew. xvi. 19. and Joh xx. 23. He did not give one Key to
one, and both to another. He gives no single Key to any Person, but Keys; and
so whatever these Keys serve for. Now what Christ has joined together, man may
not put asunder. But I see you grow weary; I Will therefore hasten to a
Conclusion, and only add, --

5. They that are in Orders themselves, have according to the Apostolical
Constitution, Authority to confer the same Orders upon others. And consequently
Presbyters have Power to ordain others to the same Ministry, which they
themselves have received.

This Argument is founded upon 2 Timothy ii. 2. And the things that thou have
heard of me among many Witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful Men, who
shall be able to teach others also. If Timothy had Authority to commit the same
Things, which he had received, to other faithful Men, why han't all others in
the Ministry the same Authority? You remember that celebrated Maxim of
Archbishop USHER'S, Ordinis est ordinare: He that is in Orders, has the Right
and Power of giving Orders. And indeed it seems strange and inconsistent, in
you, who allow even of Inferiors consecrating Superiors, to deny Presbyters a
Right of ordaining their Equals! If Bishops among you can consecrate
Archbishops, I pray, what should forbid Presbyters ordaining Presbyters?

Thus I have given you some of the Reasons, why I think that the Ministry and
Ordinances of the Gospel are not confined to England; and that there are no
Scripture-Grounds for your unchurching all the Protestant World but your
Selves, for want of Episcopal Ordination. And now I Am ready to hear what you
have to offer, in proof of your Hypothesis, if you can tarry any longer.

Praelat. Truly the Evening is so far spent, that there remains no Opportunity
for me to reply to what you have offered, or to give you the Reasons of my
different Sentiments. I was desirous to know the utmost you had to say in
Defense of your self: and expect you will hear my Pleas and Arguments with as much
Patience. I should gladly proceed now to lay them before you, but that it being
late I Am obliged to return home. And therefore if you please, I Will wait upon
you here at your Study again to Morrow; when I cannot but hope to give you
better Light into this Case, and to offer something that will give a new turn
to your Thoughts.

Eleuth. I shall wait your Coming, and willingly hear the best Evidence that
can be offered for your Cause; and shall gladly yield to the force of Truth, if
it appears to be on your side of the Question.

Praelat. I will certainly come, if God permit: For I Am determined to talk this
matter our with you.

Sir, I wish you good Night.

Eleuth. Your humble Servant, Sir.

The SECOND CONFERENCE
PRaelaticus makes a second Visit to Eleutherius, according to Appointment; and
after a short Salute, renews the Conversation they had begun the Evening before.

Praelat. You see, Sir, I am come according to our Agreement; and my Business
is now to offer you the Reasons, why I think the Powers of Ordination and
Jurisdiction are not committed to the Presbytery; and why they are to be
esteemed Intruders into the sacred Ministry, that enter upon it without
Episcopal Ordination.

Eleuth. Sir, I heartily desire to take the right Path; and if I am erroneous,
I Am not willing to be tenacious: but will endeavor to keep my Mind open to
Conviction, if you have so good Evidence against me, as you seem to suppose.

Praelat. You and I are agreed, that it is necessary to the Character of a
Gospel Minister, that he have not only internal Qualifications for that Office,
but that he be also regularly separated to the Exercise of his sacred Function,
by those that Christ has authorized thus to set Men apart to this Work: And I
don't yet despair of convincing you, if you will divest your self of Prejudice,
that notwithstanding all your Yesterday's Reasoning, the supreme Government of
the Church under Christ, and the sole Authority of setting Men apart to the
Exercise of the Gospel Ministry, is lodged with the Bishops of the Church; and
is what mere Presbyters have no Claim to, nor can intrude into without a daring
Usurpation.

Eleuth. I don't Know why you should suppose me prejudiced against Riches and
Honor, or incurably prepossessed in favor of Poverty and Contempt. I have too
sensible Impressions of Self-Love, to be willingly deaf to the calls of my
Interest, and persuasions of my Friends. Be pleased therefore to offer good
Evidence of what you have proposed; and I shall become a ready Proselyte.

Praelat. It Is abundantly evident, that the Commission, by which the Apostles
were put upon the Exercise of their sacred Character, was limited to them and
their Successors. And though it is confessed, that they had some extraordinary
Gifts and Powers, and were accordingly put upon various Services, that were
extraordinary and temporary, which did expire with their Persons: Yet as the
ordinary Authority and Power of the Aposiclic Office gave them a
Superintendency over other Ministers of the Gospel, so their Successors in
Office must of necessity be vested with the same superior Powers of Ordination
and Jurisdiction. So far are Presbyters from succeeding to the Apostles (as you
yesterday insinuated) that they can have no Being at all, but what is derived
from that Order, who succeed to the superior Powers of the Apostles. The sum
of the matter is, that the Apostles in their ordinary Capacity were superior to
Presbyters; and therefore their proper Successors must be so too.

Eleuth. What I found Occasion to say to this Point Yesterday, might (one would
think) have saved you the trouble of this Argument; but since you see cause to
insist upon it, you must have the Patience to hear two Objections against it,
which render me incapable of Conviction by it. In the first Place. I must
object against the Apostles having any Successors at all, in the Apostolic
Office. And I hope to convince you before we have done, that the whole Office
of an Apostle, was extraordinary and temporary. And then Secondly, I must
observe to you, that though the same Persons were clothed with the double
Character of Apostles and of ordinary Ministers of the Gospel; I cannot find
that in their ordinary Capacity, they had any Superintendency over other
Ministers of the Gospel.

To return to the first of these. I object against the Apostles having any
Successors in the Apostolic Office; but insist upon it that the whole Office of
an Apostle was extraordinary and temporary. This appears,

1 From their being appointed Witnesses of the Resurrection of Christ.

It was necessary unto their successful discharge of their Mission among an
infidel World, that they should be Eye Witnesses of that great Fact, upon which
Christianity so much depended; that they should be able to assure those to whom
they brought their new Doctrine, that Christ risen was what they had heard,
what they had seen with their Eyes, what they had locked upon, and their Hands
had handled, as 1 John i. 1. Wherefore it was proposed as a necessary
Qualification, when as Apostle was chosen in the place of Judas, that he should
be one that had companied with the eleven Apostles, all the time that the Lord
Jesus went in and out among them; beginning from the Baptism of John, to the
same day that he was taken up from them, in Order to his being a WITNESS with
them of his Resurrection, Act. ^. 21, 22. And though the Apostle Paul preached
Christ to the dispersed Jews, immediately after his Conversion; yet he must be
furnished for a WITNESS of Christ's Resurrection, by being caught up into the
third Heavens, before he enters upon his Apostleship. This may be made evident
by comparing 2 Cor. xii. 2. with Gal. i. 17, and onward, and Act. xxii. 17, 18.
By which last mentioned Text it appears, that the Trance there mentioned,
wherein he saw Christ, and received his Mission to the Apostolate, was the same
Time when he was caught up to Paradise, and heard unspeakable Words. This is
confirmed by an exact Agreement of the Chronology. To this I may add, that the
Apostles were all sent forth as WITNESSES unto Christ, both in Jerusalem, and
in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the (...) parts of the Earth, Act i. 8.
And accordingly t^^y ever insist upon this as a necessary part of their
Character, Act. ii. 32. This Jesus has God raised up^ whereof we all are
WITNESSES. See also Act. v. 32. Chap. x. 39, 40, 41. and Chap xiii^ 31. and
many other Places. Now then if you can. find any such Bishops, that have been
Eye WITNESSES of Christ's Resurrection, or have at least been born out of due
Time, as the Apostle Paul was, 1^ Cor. xv 8^ by having been caught up into
Paradise, and seen Christ there; they would be so far proper Successors in the
Apostolate: but this Qualification being wanting, they must want the very first
essential Requisite to the Apostol^^ Office.

2. That the Apostles have no continued Successors in the Apostolic Office,
appears also from this, that it was essential to their Apostl^ship, that they
should be endued with supernatural and miraculous Gi^ts and Powers.

I have already considered the Apostles as WITNESSES of the Resurrection of
Christ. But no Man is bound to receive Conviction from one single Witness. At
the mouth of two Witnesses, or at the mouth of three Witnesses, shall the
matter be established, Deuteronomy. xix. 15. They must therefore have the Witness of
the Holy Ghost in his miraculous Operations, to confirm their Testimony; and to
convey irresistible Evidence into the Minds of the Jewish and Pagan World, who
were too opposite to Christianity, to have believed the Facts or Doctrine
preached by them, upon their bare word. Our blessed Lord therefore made that
Promise to them; When the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the
Father, he shall TESTIFY of me. And ye also shall hear WITNESS, because ye have
been with me from the Beginning, Joh^ xv 26, 27. And they were accordingly
after Christ's Resurrection forbid to enter upon their Apostolic Work, until
they had this Witness to accompany them in it. And behold (says Christ to them)
I send the promise of my Father upon you, but tarry ye in the City of
Jerusalem, until ye be endued with Power from on high, Luke xxiv. 49. And to
the same purpose, Act. i. 4, 8. And being assembled together, he commanded them
that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the
Father; which, faith be, ye have heard of me -- But ye shall receive Power,
after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be WITNESSES ^^to me
and c. This you see was an essential pre-requisite unto the Apostolic Work. And
agreably, the Apostles with great Power (that is with miraculous Operations)
gave WITNESS of the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, Act. i. 33. And thus they
appealed to this indubitable Evidence, Act.v.32. And we are his WITNESSES of
these Things; and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God has given to them that
obey him. And I must needs tell you, Sir, that it is but trifling to urge in
this Case, that these miraculous Qualifications belonged to the Apostles in
their extraordinary Character. For I must again assert, that their whole Work,
as Apostles, was extraordinary and temporary. For they were APOSTLES, or
(according to the notation of the Word Apostle) they were SENT, among the
Nations, on this very Account, That they might be WITNESSES of the Truth of
Christianity, and of the Facts upon which it depended. Whence it was necessary,
that they should have these miraculous Gifts, to confirm their Testimony, and
to make way for the reception of their Doctrine.

Now then, if you can show me such Bishops, that have these miraculous Powers,
that have the Gi^t of Languages, that can heal the Sick, raise the Dead,
communicate the like extraordinary Powers to others, by laying on their Hands
etc^ I will grant that they are so far proper Successors to the Apostles. But
they have otherwise no pretense of Claim to this Succession. -- You Will be
pleased to exercise your Patience a Minute longer, whilst I only add under this
Head,

3. The universal and unlimited Commission of the Apostles makes it ridiculous
to talk of their being succeeded in that Office, by Diocesan Bishops, or any
other fixed Pastors of the Church.

As they were Apostles, they were sent among all Nations, and (as I just now
observed) 'twas on account of their being thus SENT, that they are called
APOSTLES. And accordingly we find that the Apostle Paul did personally inspect
a very large Diocese; when he assures us, that from Jerusalem and round about
unto Illyricum, he had fully preached the Gospel of Christ, Rom, xv. 19.
Wherefore it is but a reasonable demand, that you show me Diocesan Bishops, not
only furnished with Gifts suitable for this Ecumenical Charge, whereby they
can converse familiarly with all Nations in their own Language, and confirm
their Mission by undoubted Miracles; but at the same time have an universal
Charge, and yet be fixed Pastors of a particular Diocese. But I see you grow
uneasy, and therefore shall add no more upon this Head, till I have heard your
Reply.

Praelat. I have some reason to be uneasy with the tediousness and prolixity of
your Discourse; but though I don't think it needful particularly to answer all
you have offered; yet I Will just throw two places of Scripture in your way,
which I think will prove such a Stumbling Block, as all your plausible
Reasonings cannot remove: and notwithstanding all Arguments you can offer to the
contrary, will make it fully appear, that there actually is, and always will
be, a Succession in the Apostolate: The first is, ^ Cor xii 28. And God has
set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers,
after that Miracles, then Gifts of Healing, Helps, Governments, Diversities of
Tongues. The second is Ephesians. iv. 11, 12, 13^ And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers ^ for the
Perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the
Body of Christ; till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the
Knowledge of the Son of G^d By the first of these Texts it appears, that
Apostles are SET in the Church; and consequently a continuing Order. By the
second it appears, that there shall be some Apostles, till the coming of Christ
And since the first fourteen have not personally continued, a Succession in the
Apost^late is necessary unto the Verification of these Texts.

Eleuth. I would gladly obtain your Sentiments, as to the meaning of these
Scriptures, that I may be more capable to consider them. Do you imagine that
Miracles, Gifts of Healing, and Diversity of Tongues, spoken of in the first
cited Text, are necessarily so set in the Church, as to continue always, through
the succeeding Ages of it?

Praelat. No, Sir, it is plain in Fact they are not, nor is there any Reason why
they should These were Credentials necessary in the Infancy of Christianity, to
convey full Evidence into the dark Minds of infidel Nations, who wanted these
Testimonies from Heaven, to convince them of a strange and unknown Doctrine:
But when the World became fully acquainted with the Doctrines of Christianity,
and had sufficient Evidence of the Truth of it, these miraculous Gifts were not
heedful, and therefore ceased.

Eleuth. Do you suppose that Prophets and Evange^ists, enumerated in the second
Text you quoted, are continuing Orders in the Church?

Praelat I dare not say they be. For we do not find any Ministers of Religion
in the present Age, justly claiming a Prophetic Spirit. And as for Evangelists,
they were a temporary Order of Men, adapted to the infant State of the Church,
whose Business was to follow the Apostles, through the several Churches and
Nations where they went, to build upon their Foundations^ and to settle the
Ministry and Gospel Ordinances, among the newly converted Christians.

Eleuth. I would then fain know of you, how it appears from these Texts of
Scripture, that Apostles are permanently SET in the Church, and to continue
till Christ come, when Prophets and Evang^^ists, Miracles, Gifts of Healing and
Diversity of Tongues, are confessedly Temporary. Are not all the same things
predicated of these in the quoted Texts, as of those?

Praelat. By your way of arguing, neither do these Texts evidence Pastors and
Teachers to be a standing Order. For I would fain know of you, how it appears
from these Scriptures, that Pastors and Teachers are permanently set in the
Church and to continue till Christ come^ when you assert that Apostles, as well
as Prophets, etc. were temporary. For is there any thing here predicated of
them, more than of these? Help me to solve this Difficulty: and I doubt not
you will remove your own Objection. -- Sir, I must tell you, your Business is nor
to cut the Knot; but untie it. My Argument yet stands good against you.

Eleuth. I believe upon a Review you will find, that the Knot is already
untied. If you will only consider these various Offices, and various Gifts, as
they were adapted to the several Ages and Circumstances of the Church, your
Argument at once vanishes into nothing. God has set in the Church,^ first
Apostles, secondarily Prophets, with their several miraculous Gifts; in the
first State of the Church, when these Offices and Powers were wanting: and
thirdly Teachers, Helps and Governments, for the Churches standing Service. And
Christ has given some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, while
these extraordinary Officers were necessary; and some Pastors and Teachers,
while these are necessary, i.e^ to the End of Time. And thus by this
Enumeration of Officers, are Saints perfected and the Body of Christ (...) from
the first dawn of Christianity, till (...) come in the Unity of the Faith. --
This is a (...) easy Construction of the Words^ And that it is a necessary one,
your former Concessions make evident.

Praelat. If all you have said be true, and it be granted that the Apostles, as
such, have not properly any Successors, our Cause yet stands good. What we
plead for is, that our Bishops are Successors to the Apostles, as they were
ordinary Ministers of the Gospel; and so are vested with those superior Powers
of Ordination and Jurisdiction, that were proper to the Apostles.

Eleuth. This brings me to the Second Thing I proposed, and that is to show,
that the Apostles as Ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, had no Superintendency
over Presbyters. This appears very plain to me, from these Considerations.

1. I must again observe to you, what I put you in mind of Yesterday, that the
Apostles, as ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, always style themselves
Presbyters, but never use any Superior Denomination.

Thus in 1 Pet. v. 1. The Elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an
Elder, or as it is in the Original, a fellow Presbyter. So 2.Joh.1. The Elder
(or Presbyter) unto the Elect Lady. And 3 John 1. The Elder (or Presbyter) unto
the well beloved Gaius. I believe your Party would not have wanted matter of
Triumph, if they had found the Apostles intitling themselves Bishops or
Superintendants.

Praelat. I observed to you before, that it is not just arguing^ from a
Community of Names, to an Identity of Offices: for at that Rate, you may prove
the Apostles to be no more than Deacons; in that (as every Body, acquainted
with the original Text, must acknowledge) they are frequently called Deacons in
Scripture.

Eleuth. I am sorry I am forced to consider the same Thing twice; but there is
no answering your Argument without it. I have before taken Notice of this
Objection, to which I shall only add, that all the Names given to the Officers
in the Christian Church, may be considered either in a common, or an
appropriate sense. Thus the Word Bishop signifies an Overseer, and is from its
original Signification, as proper to a Steward of a great House, as to the
Bishop of London. And thus Presbyter signifies an old Man, and may with
greatest Propriety be applied to any old Man Whatsoever. But both these Names
are in the Gospel appropriated to a certain sort of Officer in the Christian
Church; and when so appropriated, it is just arguing from the Name, to what is
signified by that Name: otherwise we must suppose the Sacred Penmen to use
words without any Signification; and such as could convey no certain Idea, to
the mind of the Reader. To apply this to the present Case, The Apostles must in
the Texts quoted by me, use the word Presbyter, either in the common, or
appropriated sense of the Word. If the former, the first quoted Text runs thus,
The Old Men which are among you, I exhort, who am a fellow old Man. Which sense
of the Text I think you will hardly plead for. And its certain from the following
words, that it was not the Apostles meaning. He did not commit the Oversight of
the Flock, to all the old Men among them. If the word was there used in the
appropriated Sense, the Apostles certainly designed that the same Idea should
be joined to the word Presbyter, when applied to themselves, as did belong to
that Word, when applied to other Officers of the Christian Church so
denominated. That is, they designed to be accounted the same sort of
Presbyters, as other ordinary Gospel- Ministers were. But then as to the
Instance you give of the Apostles calling themselves Deacons, You your self
must own, that they used the word Deacon in the common, unappropriated Sense of
that word, to signify any sort of Servant whatsoever; and intended no more by
it, than that they were Servants of Christ, and of the Churches; and so your
Objection is nothing to the purpose.

But you know that we don't only depend upon a Community of Names. I proved to
you yesterday, that all the Powers of the Apostles in their ordinary Character,
are found with common Presbyters. I gave you undoubted Evidence, that
Presbyters have both the Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction, which is all
you plead for as belonging to the Apostles, and their imaginary Successors. And
you should have first answered those Texts of Scripture, by me cited to that
purpose; before you had advanced the Argument I am considering.

Praelat. To save my self and you the time and trouble of a distinct Answer to
this long Discourse, I Will take a short method to enervate your Argument; and to
convince you not only of a mis-application of the Scriptures by you cited, but
also of the confusion of your whole Scheme. In order to which, let us recur to
the original Charter for the Gospel Ministry, the Commission I mean, given by
our blessed Lord to the Apostles, and to such as should succeed them in their
ordinary Character. This Commission we find, Matthew. xxviii. 18, 19, 20. All
Power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth: go ye therefore and disciple all
Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded
you; and lo, I am with you always, even unto the End of the World. And in Joh.
xx. 21, 22. As my Father has sent me, even so send I you -- Whose soever Sins
ye remit, they are remitted; and whose soever Sins ye retain, they are
retained. By this Commission, not only the first, but the sole Power of
Discipline is committed to the Apostles. It is to them the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven are given. They only have the Power of remitting, and retaining Sins,
that is, of exercising Discipline in the Church. To them is made that
encouraging and gracious Promise, Lo I am with you always, even unto the End of
the World. By which it is plainly evident, that even by this original
Commission, Christ committed to the Apostles, the chief Care and Government of
his Church; that they were a superior Order of Gospel- Ministers to Presbyters,
and ordinary Pastors and Teachers; that the Apostles in the Exercise of these
Powers, are to be considered in their ordinary Capacity, in that these Powers
are to continue in the Apostolic Succession, to the End of the World: or else
the Commission falls, and the Promise with it. I would entreat you Sir, to
think seriously of this matter, and not adventure to enter upon a sacred
Character, not warranted by this Commission, nor received from the Apostles or
their Successors, the superior Pastors of the Church.

Eleuth. I am willing, Sir, to give your Argument it is due weight; and would
therefore willingly have you further explain the meaning of this Commission to
me, by answering a few Questions.

And I would first enquire,

Whether there are any regular Ministers of the Gospel^ but what are authorized
by this Commission?

Praelat. None at all.

Eleuth. I would again enquire, whether all that are authorized by this
Commission, have all the same Powers?

Praelat. All that are directly and immediately authorized by this Commission,
undoubtedly have.

Eleuth. Allow me to enquire again, whether this Commission be divided, Part of
it to the Apostles, and succeeding superior Pastors, and Part of it to mere
Presbyters?

Praelat. The very Supposal is ridiculous. But I don't understand the meaning
of these Questions.

Eleuth. My meaning is to put you upon a Refutation of your own Argument. And I
must observe to you, that it is impossible for any Man to answer these Questions
consistently, without the utter destruction of your Argument from the
Commission. For it falls nothing short of Demonstration, that either Christ has
instituted no Presbyters at all in the Church; or else that they have all the
Powers that this Commission gives: unless you can be so chimerical as to
suppose, the Apostles and their imaginary Successors authorized by one Part of
the Commission, and Presbyters by the other. If Presbyters are not included in
the Commission, whence have they their Existence? If they are included in this
only Commission to the Ministry, whence are their Superiors? Since the
Commission is but one, there can be but one Order by Virtue of that Commission.
If Bishops are the Apostles Successors, and have in this Commission the promise
of Christ's perpetual Presence, there are no Presbyters inferior to them. If
Presbyters are Subjects of this Promise, there are no Bishops superior to
them. If both are included, they are both the same Order, and have the same
Authority. Take which part of the disjunction you will, we shall be no losers.
Can you your self seriously think, that the same Commission from King George
would constitute one Man the Governor of a Province, anot'er a Justice of the
Peace one Man a Magistrate, another a petty Constable? If there were no other
ScriptureArgument to confirm me in my Sentiments, the Unity of the Commission
would convince me of the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter.

Praelat. You triumph before the Victory. Presbyters may indeed be said to be
authorized by this Commission, inasmuch as the superior Pastors have hereby
Authority, to commit the Ministry to faithful Men, that they may teach others
also: But they are not directly and immediately Authorized by it at all.

Eleuth. Have Presbyters no Commission at all to their Office, no Authority
from Christ for their sacred Employment? Whence then is their Original? Do they
depend upon Man for their Creation? Have they nothing but an human Institution?
Be pleased, Sir, to tell me how this Order came into the Church.

Praelat. It is by another Commission that Presbyters are directly invested
with the Ministerial Character: The Commission, I mean, given to the Seventy
Disciples, Luke x. And as these were not called APOSTLES; but were every way
inferior to them: so their Successors, the standing Presbyters, must always
continue inferior to those in the Apostolic Succession.

Eleuth. I might in answer to this justly put you upon showing from the
Commission to the Twelve and Seventy, in what respect the Seventy were
inferior to the Twelve. For if they were not inferior at all, if they had the
same Commission, and were sent upon the same Errand with the Twelve, you know
the Fate of your Argument. But to show wherein this distinction and inferiority
lay, is I know a task too hard for you. It Is what neither you, nor any of your
Party can ever be able to do. And yet there needs not a Word more to be said
upon this Subject, till that Difference and Distinction of Order, is clearly
evidenced. But that you may not think your self neglected, I Will propose some
other Difficulties, that I want to see fairly removed. And --

1. If Presbyters are Successors to the Seventy, and authorized by the
Commission given to them, they are prohibited receiving any Maintenance; but
are to seek their daily Food at other Men's Tables, Luke x. 4, 7. Consider then,
if you are a Successor to the Seventy, whether you must not quit your rich
Benefic^.

2. That Presbyters have no Authority to Baptize or administer the
Lord's Supper. For there are no such Powers given them, by that supposed
Commission.

3. That either the Seventy were superior to the Twelve, or had no Authority
out of Judea. For the Twelve were expressly commanded, not to go into the Way of
the Gentiles; nor enter into any City of the Samaritans, Mat. x. 5.^ The
consequence therefore forces it self upon you, that either Presbyters are
superior to Bishops; or else that there are no Presbyters at all in the
Gentile Churches: choose which pleases you best.

4. The worst of all is, that the Seventy were so far from being Presbyters in
the Christian Church, that they were not so much as Members of it. For there
was then no Christian Church existing. Our Savior himself, and all his
Disciples, were Members of the Jewish Church; and actually submitted to all the
Ordinances of it. But the Christian Church being founded upon his Resurrection,
there could be no Ministers nor indeed Members of this Church, before it had a
Being. The Apostle assures us, that the New Testament (and certainly then the
new Dispensation therein revealed) depended upon the Death of the Testator, Heb
ix 16, 17. For where a Testament is, there must of Necessity be the Death of
the Testator. For a Testament is of force after men are Dead: otherwise it is
of no Strength at all, whilst the Testator liv^th. From all which it is plain to
Demonstration, that the Seventy had a temporary Mission and Commission, and
were plainly sent on the same Errand, and with the same Power, that the Twelve
(in that their first Mission) were sent upon. There was then no Christian
Church, they could not therefore be Officers in the Church, nor have any
Successors.

Praelat. The time spends, and we have dwelt too long upon this Point already:
I have other Arguments yet to offer, which you will find harder Work to get over.

Eleuth If you please we will first consider where we are, and just take a
brief summary View of what has occurred under this your first Argument; that we
may find how the Case stands.

When you can find proper WITNESSES of Christ's Resurrection, to succeed the
Apostles, such I mean as can attest that Fact, from their Personal Knowledge,
either by conversing with our Lord Jesus Christ, after he rose from the Dead,
or by being caught up i Paradise, that they might there see him: When you can
find Successors to the Apostles endued with those miraculous Gifts, whereby the
Holy Ghost becomes a joint Witness with them, both of the Facts and Doctrines
which they publish: When you can reconcile the small difficulty of Men's being
itinerant Preachers through the whole World; and yet at the same time being
settled and having their Charge limited to the Bounds of a particular Diocese;
I will allow your Bishops to be the Apostles Successors.

When you can make it appear that 1 Cor. xii. 28. and Ephesians. iv. 11. by you
quoted, do by the same Words, make Gifts and Offices both perpetual and
temporary, to continue to the End of the World, and yet wholly cease with the
first Ages of the Church; I will admit your Evidence for the perpetuity of the
Apostolate.

When, notwithstanding the Apostles themselves tell us, that in their ordinary
Capacity they were Presbyters, you can make it appear, they were of another
Order: When, notwithstanding the Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction are
found from Scripture to be exercised by Presbyters, you can prove these to be
the Bishops Prerogative, to belong to him exclusive of Presbyters; I will allow
my Lord the Bishop his superior Character.

When you can find, that the same Commission gives different Powers and
Authorities: When you can find, that a temporary and occasional Mission of Men,
that were not so much as Members, much less Ministers of the Christian Church,
is the only Commission by which the ordinary Pastors of the Church exercise
their Office; I Will allow, that these depend wholly upon the Breath of the
Bishop, for their very Being.

I don't wonder to see you ^o uneasy, at this Review of the Cause. For who can
help but mourn at the Death of such a darling and favorite Argument, as this
has always been to those of your Party? If you please, I Will now attend to what
you would further offer.

Praelat. Nothing is more evident than that all the Ordinances of the Gospel
were founded upon Jewish Rites and Institutions. These being originally of
Divine Appointment, Christ was pleased to honor them, by giving them a new
Sanction; and by bringing them into the Gospel Dispensation. Thus Baptism was
taken from the Jewish Ablutions; and the Lord's Supper graffed upon the
Passover Festival. And why the Gospel Ministry is not conformed to the Jewish
Priesthood, no Reason can be given. Certain it is, that this being a divine
Contrivance, must be the best Form for Governing the Church, that can be
devised. And I need not tell you, that this was a proper Prelacy; the high
Priest being superior to to the Priests, and they to the Levites, exactly
agreeable to the constant Order in the Christian Church, of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons.

Eleuth. This Argument, if it proves any thing, proves too much; and instead of
Diocesan Episcopacy, sets up a Papacy. For as the high Priest in the Jewish
Church was but one, so there should (according to this Plan) be but one Bishop,
the Pope in the Christian Church. But waving that Consideration, I entreat you
to hear me patiently, and I think I can give you full Demonstration, that the
Jewish Priesthood is not, cannot be, succeeded under the Gospel Dispensation.

1. The whole of this Order was Typical, and had a special Reference unto the
great high Priest of our Profession.

This the Apostle largely illustrates in his Epistle to the H^brews, and
particularly in the ninth Chapter. And this is also abundantly evident, from
all the Ordinances of that Dispensation. The Tabernacle it self being a Figure
for the Time present, in which were offered both Gifts and Sacrifices, that
could not make him that did the Service perfect, as pertaining to the
Conscience, which stood only in Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings, and
carnal Ordinances, imposed on them until (...) Time of Reformation, Heb. ix. 9,
10. From which Text it is plain, that the carnal Ordinances of this Dispensation
were Figures of Christ, and were to subsist no longer than until his
Resurrection, here called the Time of Reformation. Upon which account, the
Levitical Law is called a Shadow of good Things to come, Heb. x. 1. --

2. This Priesthood was instituted with a sole Reference to the Service of the
Tabernacle and Temple.

In which respect our blessed Lord, the Antitype of this Priesthood, is called
a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, which the Lord pitched
and not Man, Heb. viii. 2. And if we take a full view of all the Charge and
Trust committed to the Tribe of Levi, of all the Service, and all the
Administrations, to which they were designed, we shall find nothing, but what
referred to the Service of the Tabernacle, during the more unsettled State of
the Jews, and of the Temple after that was erected. Such a Reference most
certainly had all their Sacrifices and Oblations of every Kind; and all their
Meats, and Drinks, and diverse Washings, in which their whole Ministry
consisted. Accordingly we find the Tabernacle must be first reered, and then
Aaron and his Sons be brought to the Door of the Tabernacle, and Sanctified,
that they might minister unto God in the Priests Office, Exodus xl. 2, 12, 13.
In like manner the whole Tribe of Levi were given unto Aaron, that they might
minister unto him, and might keep his Charge (i. e. do the Duties of the
Priesthood as Servants to him) before the Tabernacle of the Congregation to do
the Service of the Tabernacle, Numb. iii. 6, 7. and Chap. viii. 19.

3. This Priesthood was confirmed to a particular Family.

The high Priest was to descend lineally in all their successive Generations,
from the eldest Son of Aaron, the whole Priesthood from Aaron's Family; and all
that gave attendance at the Altar, from the House of Levi. This whole sacred
Order was what no stranger might intermmedle with, nor come nigh to, upon pain
of Death. Numb. iii. 10.

4. These Priests were not ordained to their Office.

They had indeed a typical and ceremonial Consecration, with Unctions,
Purifications and repeated Sacrifices, agreeable to the Nature and Design of the
Institution, Lev. viii But they not being (as Priests) public and constant
Preachers, they were not set apart to their Work by Imposition of Hands, as
such Preachers were among the Jews. It is indeed probable, that these were by
Office obliged to explain the Ceremonial Law to the People, and to bring them
into an Acquaintance with the purpose and tendency of their own Ministry and
Ordinances, as seems to be intimated, Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 10. And Mal. ii. 7. But the
Scripture no where represents them, as stated Preachers of the Doctrines and
Duties of Religion, in any other respect. There is no Institution that makes
this a part of their Character, as they were Priests.

All these Things being put together, ^t is plain to Demonstration, that the
Gospel Ministry did not, could not succeed to the Aaronical Priesthood. For
what Succession could there be to a typical Institution, after it is completion
in the Antitype? What Succession could there possibly be in the Service of the
Tabernacle and Temple, when the Temple of Christ's Body (unto which the Jewish
Tabernacle and Temple did wholly allude) had been destroyed, and raised again
in three Days? How can that Priesthood that was limited to a particular Tribe
and Family, be continued or succeeded in all Nations, and in those Persons to
whom it was so severely interdicted, at the original Institution? Or how can
that Ministry set apart by Ordination with Imposition of Hands, be said to
succeed to that Priesthood, whose Consecration was wholly with ceremonical and
typical Rites? So that we may as reasonably and scripturally deduce the
Succession of the Gospel Ministry from Julius Caesar, who was high Priest among
the Romans, as from the Priesthood of Aaron.

Praelat. It is high Time for you to stop a little; and see the Consequence of
all this fine Reasoning. You have by this arguing divested the Jews of all
Moral Worship, left none to instruct them in the important Articles of Faith
and Manners, none to inspect their religious Conduct, none to preach to 'em,
none to rule them. And so have brought the (then) only Church of God in the
World into a sort of Heathenism.

Eleuth. The Moral Worship among the Jews was not attended in the Temple, nor
administered by the Priesthood; but they had every Sabbath Day an holy
Convocation or Assembly, in the respective Places where they dwelt, Lev. xxiii.
3. And had accordingly Places appointed for those Assemblies, called by David
the Synagogues of God, Psalm. lxxiv. 8. The Jews tell us, that there were Four
Hundred and Eighty of these Synagogues in Jerusalem. Godwin's Moses and Aaron.
Lib. 2. Cap. 2.
And it is certain they had Multitudes of them, not only in Judea, but through all
the Jewish Dispersions, as at Antioch in Pisidia, Act. xiii. 14. at Iconium
Act.xiv.1. at Berea, Act. xvii. 10. at Corinth, Act. xviii. 4. at Ephesus, Act.
xix. 8 and elsewhere. And the Scriptures inform us of Officers set over these
Congregations, to preside in religious Worship, called Ministers, Luk^ iv. 20.
and Rulers of the Synagogue, Act. xiii. 15. and xviii. 17. To which the Jewish
Doctors give their Suffrage, and particularly describe the several Officers of
the Synagogue, by the Names of Bishops of the Congregation, Ruling Elders and
Deacons. Vid. Burnet's Observation on Can. 2. page 83.
These, as Doctor Stilling fleet largely proves, were Ordained to their Office.
Iren. Chap.6. Sect. 7. Seldom de Synag. Lib. 2. Cap.6. ^.2.
And why then under the Gospel Dispensation there should not be (as among the
Presbyterians there are in fact) the same Officers in the Church, as there were
in the Jewish Synagogues, it belongs to you to give a Reason. But until you do,
I shall think there is a great deal of Justice in the Conclusion of that great
Man just mentioned, It is then a common mistake to think, that the Ministers of
the Gospel succeed by way of Correspondence and Analogy to the Priests under
the Law; which mistake has been the Foundation and Original of many Errors
Iren. Cap 6. ^. 6.
Thus, Sir, you see the Argument is retorted; and that it is you, and not we,
that set up different Orders in the Church from the moral Ministry among the
Jews, with whom there were not the least Footsteps of Diocesan Episcopacy to be
found.

Praelat. If after all I shall make it appear to you, that there were in fact,
even in the Apostolic times, Bishops superior to Presbyters, constituted by
the Apostles themselves; I hope you will at last yield to the Conviction. And
this appears incontestible, in the case of Timothy and Titus, to whom the
Apostle actually committed an Episcopal Power; the one being constituted Bishop
of Ephesus, and the other of Crete: And both v^^ted with the Powers of
Ordination and Jurisdiction over Presbyters, as appears at large from the
Epistles written unto them.

Eleuth. Were it supposed, that Timothy and Titus had the Powers of Ordination
and Jurisdiction committed unto them, how does that make them Superior to
Presbyters; unless you can prove that Presbyters have no claim to those Powers?
I must entreat you, Sir, to consider, that the Proof of this is your present
Business; and that it is but a weak way of Arguing, to take for granted the
point in debate, as all of you seem to do in the case before us.

Praelat. I never knew that any of your party pretended to have these Powers
lodged in a single Presbyter, that are here committed to Timothy and Titus. And
inasmuch as each of them had singly and alone these Authorities committed to
them, and were in their own Persons, exclusive of all others, empowered to
inspect the Doctrine of other Ministers, 1 Timothy i. 3. to hear Accusations
against, judge and censure offending Presbyters, 1 Timothy v. 19, 20. to ordain
Elders in every City, Tit. i. 5. and the like; they certainly were of a
superior Order to Presbyters.

Eleuth. All that you can find in these Epistles is, that Timothy and Titus had
directions for their Conduct in the management of Ordination and Jurisdiction;
which might with like Propriety be given to any Presbyter as to them. And your
way of reasoning will as justly conclude Timothy to have the sole power of
Preaching, because he is exhorted to preach the Word, be instant in Season and
out of Season. And I desire you to show from these Epistles, how those other
Powers are appropriated to Timothy and Titus, and this not. That these had the
Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction, is certain; but it is equally certain,
that these Epistles do no more restrict those Powers to them, than the
Authority of Preaching the Gospel. How are they then set over other Presbyters?
But that this matter may be set in a true Light, I would entreat you to
consider;

1. That the Apostle Paul, when taking his final farewell of the Ephesians,
never to see their Faces any more, left them under the Government and Guidance
of a Number of Presbyters, as their proper Bishops. Act. xx. 17, 28 And from
Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church, and said, Take
heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock, over which the Holy
Ghost has made you Bishops, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased
with his own Blood. I took some notice of this Text yesterday, to prove from it
the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter. And I shall now further remark to you,

1. That the Church of Ephesus was at this time committed to the sole care of a
Presbytery; their pretended Bishop Timothy being present, as appears from verse
4.

2. That the Apostle designed unto these Presbyters the future charge of this
Flock, as appears from his Admonition to watch against the Wolves and
Apostates, that should enter in among them after his Departure, in the 29, 30,
and 31 verses. -- And then,

3. That this Apostle never did constitute Timothy Bishop of the Ephesians
after this time; for this was the last time they ever saw his Face, verse 25.
In a word, Timothy must be constituted Bishop of Ephesus, either before, or
(...) this Convention. Miletus, or not at all. If before, he was but a
Presbyterian Bishop; for there was a number of other Bishops along with him, to
guide and govern that Flock. If after, he came not in at the right Door; for
the Apostle under infallible guidance and direction had left that Flock under
another form of Government. The Consequence is therefore unavoidable, that he
never was Diocesan Bishop of Ephesus at all.

I might add to this, that the first Epistle to Timothy, upon which you found
his Episcopal Authority, was certainly writ before the Convention at Miletus:
this is acknowledged by the most learned Assertors of Episcopacy, as Dr. Hall,
Dr. Hammond, Grotius, Lud. Capellus, Dr. Lighfoot etc. And this I will prove to
you, when you will be at Leisure to hear the Evidence. And therefore its
self-evident, that his Episcopacy at Ephesus is but a mere chimerical
imagination, since the Charge of that City is left in the Hands of a
Presbytery, after his pretended Investiture in that See. But suppose, if you
please, that this Epistle was written after that Convention; This imaginary
Episcopal Authority must be the Subversion of a Government, which Infinite
Wisdom, that foresees all Events, and cannot be mistaken, had set up in that
Church. For it was the Holy Ghost that made the Presbyters Bishops of Ephesus.
Timothy therefore could not be Bishop in that Church at all.

Praelat. Bishop Pearson has proved, that St. Paul actually was at Ephesus
after his Congress at M^letus; and therefore afterward might find Reason to
change the Government of that Church; and thus your Trophies are f^llen at once.

Eleuth. Were that ^ue, could the Holy Ghost find reason to change? Did he
alter his Mind, and invent a new and better form of Government, than he had
before ordained? But I must inform you, that Mr. James Owen has not only
re^uted the Bishop, but brought the cause to Demonstration, that the Apostle
spoke Truth, in saying, Now b^hold I know, that ye all among whom I have gone
preaching the Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. And if you will not
believe the Apostle in this his strong and positive Assertion, read Mr Owen's
Tutamen Evangelicum Chap. iv. and be convinced. But I would add some other
Answers to your Argument.

2. Timothy and Titus were Evangelists, 2 Timothy iv. 5. And therefore if all the
Powers you pretend to, were lodged in their single Persons, there is no arguing
from those extraordinary and temporary Officers, to ordinary Bishops. As these
were extraordinary Officers, they wanted extraordinary Powers, for the
discharge of their Trust.

3. As these were Evangelists, they had all the Churches in their Care, and
were to follow the Apostles up and down the World, to see to the settlement of
the new Plantations. And that they were such Itinerants in fact, you will be
convinced by the following places of Scripture Romans xvi. 21. 1 Cor. lv. 17. and
Chap. xvi. 10. 2 Cor. 1. 19. Phil. ii. 19. C^l i. 1. 1 These i. 1. 2 These. i. 1.
2 Timothy iv. 9, 12. Heb. xiii. 23. 2 Cor ii. 13. Chap. vii. 6. 7. Chap. viii. 16,
23. Chap. xii. 18. Gal. ii. 1, 3. 2 Timothy iv. x. Tit. iii. 12. These Texts make
it appear, that Timothy and Titus were as well Bishops of Rome, Corinth,
Philippi, Collosse, Judea, Nicopolis, Dalmatia, and many other Cities and
Countries, as of Ephesus and Crete: and therefore all Argument for a Diocesan
Episcopacy from such an extended and universal Charge, must necessarily fall to
the ground.

Thus then stands the evidence: Timothy and Titus had just the same Powers
committed to them, which belong to other Presbyters; therefore they are
Diocesan Bishops. The Holy Ghost had set other Bishops over the Church of
Ephesus, and given them the whole charge of that Church; therefore Timothy was
Bishop of the Ephesians. The Apostle, or rather the Holy Ghost, had left that
Church under the Government of a Presbytery the last time the Apostle saw their
Faces; that Timothy's Episcopacy must be a direct subversion of a divine
Institution: And yet Timothy must be the Governor of that Flock. Timothy and
Titus were Evangelists, and had the World for their Charge; and yet they were
Bishops of a particular Diocese, and are succeeded by ordinary Diocesans. I
presume you will not urge the Postscripts to these Epistles for proof of Timothy's
Episcopacy: for you know they are no part of the sacred Canon; they belong not
to the Scriptures; but are confessedly spurious and of a late Date. And what
Argument is there then remaining for your help in this Case? -- Why (Sir) so
uneasy? I hope you will sacrifice any Opinions of your own, to plain manifest
Truth.

Praelat. I have two Arguments more to offer, and if you can give a good Answer
to them, I Will yield the Cause. The first Argument I take from the Angels of the
seven Churches of Asia, who appear to be proper Bishops of those Churches; and
were accordingly accountable for, and charged particularly with, any Disorder
or Corruption tolerated in their respective Churches; and commended for
suppressing and correcting these Disorders, and purging their Churches of
heretical Teachers.

Eleuth. Be pleased, Sir, to let me know, what Powers are committed to these
Angels, that don't belong even to a Presbyter of the Church of England,
according to your own Constitution.

Praelat. This is a surprising Question. Is not the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus commended for trying false Apostles, Rev. ii. 2.? Have Presbyters of
our Church this Authority? Is not the Angel of the Church of (...) for having
those that held the Doctrine of Balaam, and that held the Doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, in the 14 and 15 verses of that Chapter; And the Angel of the
Church of Thyatira, for suffering that cursed Woman Jezebel, verse 20 -- Have
Presbyters of our Church Power of excommunicating false Teachers, and heretical
Seducers?

Eleuth. As to your first Instance, not only Presbyters, but even private
Christians, have not only Authority, but are bound in Duty, not to believe
every Spirit, but to try the Spirits whether they are of God, when false
Prophets (or false Apostles) are gone out into the World. 1 John iv. 1. So that
there is no Episcopal Power necessary, for the trial of false Apostles. And as
to the other Instances, there is nothing like Excommunication mentioned in the
quoted Texts. The Angels of those Churches are faulted for having and suffering
those H^^^ticks, which necessarily implies no more, than that they entertained
them, and did not bear due Testimony against them. And I hope they might do all
this, without my Lord the Bishop.

Praelat. Are Presbyters of our Church accountable for the Faults and Disorders
of their Churches?

Eleuth. Most certainly, when these Faults and Disorders creep into the
Churches, through their Carelessness and Negligence, as might be the Case before
us.

Praelat. It is impossible that these Angels should be mere Presbyters, in that
there were too many Congregations in each of these Churches, to be the Charge
of such a Presbyter. This may be rationally concluded by comparing the rest of
those Churches, with that of Ephesus, where it seems absolutely necessary that
there should be diverse Congregations, under the Inspection of these Angels as
their Presidents or Superintendents. For it was at least thirty Years before
the writing these Epistles, that the Apostle Paul labored three Years there,
and we are assured from Acts xx. that there were then a number of Elders in
that Church.

Eleuth. That there were a number of Elders in the Church of Ephesus, and that
these were the proper Bishops of that Church, I have already argued, to the
confusion of your Scheme. And that in the Apostolic Age there were a plurality
of Elders or Presbyters ordained in every Church, and in every Christianized
City, how small soever, is also certain from Acts xiv. 23. and Tit. i. ^, But
that there were diverse Congregations in Ephesus, or any other of these Asi^^
Churches, when these Epistles were written, can never be made appear. So rooted
and prevalent was Heathenism in that dawn of Christianity, that Converts were
comparatively but very few. Constantine the Great, above two hundred Years
after this, though it two Temples sufficient for all the Christians in his royal
City of Constantinople. Trip. Hist. Lib. 2 Cap. 18.
An^ if we give any heed to the Epistles of Ignatius, so often urged by the
Episcopalians, it is certain there was but one Congregation in each Church. In
the Epistle to the Church of Ephesus he exhorts, Give diligence therefore to
assemble together frequently, for the Eucharist of God, and for Praise; for
when you often come into one Place, the powers of Satan are destroyed. In his
Epistle to the Magnesians he exhorts, Let all of you come together, as into the
Temple of God, as unto one Altar. In his Epistle to Smyrna he says, It is not
lawful without the Bishop, either to baptize, or to make love feasts. And in
his Epistle to Polycarp then Bishop of Smyrna, he makes it appear, that he was
but a Congregational Bishop. His words are these, Keep frequent Congregations,
enquire after all by Name, despise not Men servants and Maidservants. Dr.
Burnet Vindication of the Church of Scotland: p. 51^
therefore justly observes from these Epistles, that there was but one Place,
where there was but one Altar and Communion in each of these Parishes. And to
deal freely with you, I cannot but wonder what your Patrons of Prelacy can mean,
by arguing from these Asian Angels, when they themselves must own, that all the
Characters of these Angels belong to Presbyters, even of the episcopal kind. I
might therefore justly quit the Argument, what has been said being a sufficient
Answer to it; but ex abundant^ I Will briefly hint at some other Evidences of its
Insufficiency.

1. Then, The whole of this Apocalyptical Vision was written in the style of
the Jewish Church. Hence we so often hear of the twelve Tribes of Israel, of
the Altar, Incense, Temple, Tabernacle, etc. Upon which it is a natural
Conclusion, that if these Angels do signify Officers in the Church, they must
signify the same Officer as was so denominated in the Jewish Church: And that
certainly was a Minister of a particular Congregation: The Minister of every
Synagogue being called by the Jews, Sheliach Tsibbor, the Angel of the Church.
Lightfoot, Vol. 2 p^ 133.


2. These Epistles are written, not to the Angels only, but to the whole
Churches; and therefore whatever Power or Authority is attributed to the
Angels, belonged to the whole Churches, and not to particular Persons. Thus
Rev. i. 4. John to the seven Churches that are in Asia. And thus in the
Conclusion of every Epistle, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the
Spirit faith unto the Churches.

3. It Is certain that the word Angel is often taken collectively for a
Multitude: and so if it be here designed for the sacred Ministry in particular,
it must imply the Presbytery, and not a single Bishop Thus, Psalm. xxxiv. 7. The
Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him. And in this Book of
the Revelation, it is used for a Number of Gospel- Ministers. Chap. xiv 6. And
I saw another Angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having the eve lasting Gospel
etc. That is (as Interpreters agree) he saw a Number of faithful Ministers,
preaching the everlasting Gospel -- And that the word Angel must be understood
in these Epistles thus collectively, is undeniable from the frequent change of
Number, in the Address to these Angels, which cannot be made sense of, if
applied to a particular Person. Thus Chap. ii. 10 Fear none of these things
which THOU shall suffer, Behold the Devil shall cast some of YOU into Prison,
that YE may be tried, and YE shall have Tribulation ten Days. So ver. 13.
Antipas my faithful Martyr was stain AMONG YOU So like wise. ver. 24. Unto YOU
I say, and to the rest in Thyatira. To which I may add, that it is hardly to be
received, that the Bishops were charged with all those Sins, for which Christ
threatens to remove their Candlesticks out of their Places: Or that God would
punish a Church, by removing their Candlestick for the Sin of a particular
Person. In a word, the whole current style of these Epistles is incompatible to
a single Person. And if you will have these Angels single Persons, you must
make it good sense, to call a Bishop a Church, to have a plurality of Persons
in one Bishop, to have some of a Bishop cast into Prison, to have a Martyr
slain among a Bishop etc. But I think you will hardly attempt to reconcile these
forms of speech to the rules of Grammar.

4 If after all I should allow these Angels to be single Persons^ why might
they not as well be Moderators of the Presbyteries, as Diocesan Bishops? It Is
certain that there was a Presbytery in one of these Churches, to whom the whole
Charge of the Flock was committed, as we have already considered from Act. xx.
And its a just supposal, that all these Churches were under the same form of
Government. Why Ephesus should be Presbyterian, and the rest Episcopalian, you
can give no Reason. Now then, if the word Angel here imply no more than the
Moderator of a Presbytery, and by him the whole Presbytery, as has been the
Opinion of very great Men, both Ancient and Modern, what becomes of your
Argument for Prelacy from these Angels?

Upon the whole then, if these Angels have no Powers applied to them, but what
are applicable even to Presbyters of the Church of England, Prelacy cannot be
deduced from them. If these Angels according to the received style among the
Jews signify no more than the Minister of a single Congregation, they leave the
Diocesan Bishop to shift for himself. Or if the word Angel be in these Epistles
used collectively, for the whole Church ( or at least for the whole Presbytery)
as it is very certain it is; a Presbyterian or Congregationalist can much better
establish his Opinion upon these Epistles, than you can do. So that turn which
way you will, Angels will not be Guardians to your cause.

Praelat. But is it not a strong Presumption that you must be in a mistake, in
your Interpretation of these Scriptures in debate, that the ancient Fathers of
the Church who lived near the Apostles times, and were much more likely to
understand their meaning and to know what Government did in Fact subsist among
them, do assure us, that Episcopacy was the established Order by divine
Institution? And therefore inquire, I pray th^e, of the former Ages; and
prepare thy self to the search of their Fathers; for we are but of Yesterday,
and know nothing. Shall not they teach thee and tell thee, and utter words out
of their Heart?

Eleuth. Thus you leave the only sure and safe Light, to follow an Ignis
fatu^s, that will lead you, you know not whither. Has our Lord Jesus Christ and
his Apostles directed us to found our Faith upon Men as liable to Error as our
selves? Is an Affair of such Importance, upon which you suppose our eternal
safety depends, left so dark and undetermined in the Scriptures, that we cannot
know the mind of Christ, but by reading numerous Volumes, that the most part of
the Christian world never saw, and that scarce one in a thousand can read? Has
our blessed Lord left the only Rule of Faith so obscure, that it is impossible
to know his sacred meaning? To the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not
according to this Word, it is because they have no Light in them. Isai. viii.
20. It is enough for us, that our Ministry is warranted by the word of God, and
according to the Pattern in the New Testament, let the Ancients say what they
will.

I don't speak this, because I think the ancient Fathers are on your side of
the Question. I Am sure I have no Eyes, if the truly Primitive Fathers are not
all with one Voice in the Presbyterian Scheme. And I desire any of your Party
to bring so much as one of them, that declares Episcopacy to be of Divine Right
an Order superior to Presbytery; within the first three hundred Years after
Christ. This Demand has been often repeated; but never answered. I might
therefore conclude this Discourse, in the words of your own Dr. Stillingfleet
Ir^n. Chap. 6^ ^, 17.
( One well acquainted with the Ancient Fathers) who says, Yea I do as yet
despair of finding any one single Testimony in all Antiquity, which does in
plain Terms assert Episcopacy, as it was settled by the Practice of the
primitive Church, in the Ages following the Apostles, to be of an unalterable
Divine Right.

Only for your further Satisfaction, suffer me to add the Words of another
learned Man of your Church, I mean, Dr. John Edwards, who in a late Treatise A
Discourse of Episcopacy, printed 1731. and prepared for the Press before his
Death. -- See his Remains, Pag^ ^53, and c.
on this Argument has the following Passages.

Having considered the Testimonies of Ignatius, Clement, Cyprian, Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Jer^m, and others, whom he had Occasion to mention, he concludes
thus, --

From all these we may gather, that the ScriptureBishop was the Chief of the
Presbyters, but he was not of a distinct Order from them. And as for the Times
after the Apostles, none of these Writers, nor any Ecclesiastical Historian
tells us, that a Person of an Order superior to Presbyters was set over the
Presbyters. It Is true, one single Person is recorded to have presided over the
College of Presbyters, but this College had the same Power with that single
Person, though not that particular Dignity of Presidentship. The short is, the
Bishops in those Times were Presbyters, only he that presided over the Body of
Presbyters was called Bishop, whilst the Rest were generally known by the Title
of Presbyters: And the Bishop was still but a Presbyter as to Order and
Function, though for Distinction sake he was known by the Name of Bishop. He
was Superior to the other Presbyters as long as he executed his Office, as a
Chairman in a Committee is above the rest of the Justices whilst he holds that
Place. It was generally the Antientest Presbyter that was chosen to preside
over the College of Presbyters, but he had no Superiority of Power; all the
Priority or Primacy which he had, was that of Order. Here is the Ancient
Pattern: Why is it not followed?

To single Fathers, we may add Councils, who deliver the same Sense. One at
present shall serve for all, by Reason of its great Antiquity, and its
undoubted Authority and Certainty. About the Year of our Lord 398, above two
hundred Bishops met together at the Fourth Council of Carthage, and unanimously
agreed on the following Canons; Can. 22.
A Bishop must not ordain Any without the Counsel of his Clergy. Can. 23.
He must hear no Man's Cause, unless his Clergy be present; otherwise the
Bishop's Sentence shall be void. (Which we find also inserted into the Body of
the 15. Qu. cap. ^. Nullus^
Canon Law). Can. 34.
Whilst a Bishop s^s, he shall not suffer a Presbyter to stand. Can. 35.
He must know that he is but a Colleague of the Presbyters. So according to an
other Ancient Council, A Presbyter Th^s (...) Ancy^an. Con^. C^n. 1.
was to partake of the Honor of the ^hair. Without naming any other Ancient
Canons, it sufficiently appears from these already cited, what was the constant
Practice of the Primitive Churches, namely, that there was not that Distance
between Bishop and Presbyter as there is now, and that nothing was done without
the mutual Concurrence and Consent of the Presbyters and their President: They
all acted in Conjunction and Concert. Nothing is more evident in the Ancient
Writings of the Church than that they jointly ruled, and administered
Ecclesiastical Affairs: But the Title of Bishop was appropriated to him that
presided over the Presbytery.

This then is the true Account of the Matter, Bishops were Elders or
Presbyters, and therefore of the same Order, but the Bishops differed from the
Presbyters in this only, that they were chosen by the Elders to preside over
them at their Ecclesiastical Meetings and Assemblies Episcopi and Presbyteri
una ordinatio est: uterque enim sacerdos est, fed Episcopus primus est; ut
omnis Episcopus Presbyter fit, non tamen omnis Presbyter Episcopus; hi^ enim
Episcopus est ^ui inter Presbyteros primus est. (...). se^ (...) in ^ Tim. iii.
The Bishop was the First in Number among the Presbyters, but was not above
them in Power and Jurisdiction. The Presbyters were a coordinate Body with the
Bishop, not subordinate to him. There was not any Power or Authority belonging
to one exclusive of the rest. But in After Ages the Presbyters of some Churches
parted with their Liberty and Right, and agreed among themselves, that
Ecclesiastical Matters should be Managed by the Bishop wholly. I have proved
that this is against the Suffrage of the Ancient Fathers, both singly and in
Council, which was the Thing I undertook.

Thus, Sir, you see upon what an uncertain Foundation your Prelacy is built;
and what Reason there is to treat the Presbyterians with more Civility, and
Charity; or to convince them with better Arguguments, than were ever yet
brought by any of your Party. -- And thus I hope I have given you full
Satisfaction as to the Grounds of my Conduct in choosing the Communion of
Protestant Dissenters, and preferring Presbyterian Ordination, before Episcopal
Orders.

Praelat^ Truly I acknowledge you have said abundantly more in Defense of your
self, than I expected. And if I have learnt nothing else by the Conversation
we have had together; yet this I have learnt, to have more Charity for those of
your Way, than our Party are wont to express.

Eleuth. That Is a good Hearing! -- We are bid above all things to put on
Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness.

Praelat. And I pray almighty God to diffuse a spirit of Love among us all;
that we may not judge one another any more, but however we differ in our
Opinions about Circumstantials in Religion, may still unite in our Affections,
upon catholic Principles, as being of one Body and serving one common Lord.
Sir, I sincerely embrace you now as a Brother in Christ: and hope you will always
oblige me with your friendly Correspondence. -- I must take leave for the
present.

Eleuth. Dear Sir, you shall find me a constant Friend and your christian
Brother. I heartily bid you Farewell, and to your pious and charitable Wishes I
subscribe a sincere Amen.

FINIS.

