Dr. Colman's SERMON at the North Church, January 25. 1731/2.

MINISTERS and PEOPLE under special Obligations to Sanctity, Humility and
Gratitude; for the great Grace given Them in the Preached Gospel.

A SERMON On a Day of Prayer, Kept by the North Church in Boston on Tuesday
January 25. 1731/2. To implore the Divine Direction in their Election of
Another Pastor.

By Benjamin Colman, D.D. Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Galat. i. 15, 16. But when it pleased GOD, who separated Me from my Mothers
Womb, and called Me by his Grace, to reveal his Son in Me, that I might preach
Him among the Heathen, --

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for S. GERRISH in Cornhill.
M,DCC,XXXII.

Ministers and People Should be greatly affected With the great Grace given
Them in the Preached Gospel.
EPHESIANS. iii. 8. Unto me, who am less than the least of all Saints is this Grace
given; that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of
Christ.


IN these humble and lofty Words the Apostle lays himself low, while he
magnifies his Office, and exalts the free Grace of God that called him into it,
qualified him for it and assisted him in it.

1. HE magnifies his Office as the Apostle of the Gentiles. It was a great
Honor and special Dignity in the Kingdom of Christ and of Grace. With this the
Chapter begins, I Paul, the Prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles! If ye
have heard of the Dispensation of the Grace of God, which is given me to you
ward. The Gospel of the Uncircumcision was given to Paul, as that of the
Circumcision was unto Peter. Not but that they both preached occasionally to
Jews and Gentiles, but Peter's Mission was more especially to the One, and
Paul's to the Other. When the LORD appeared to him in the Light from Heaven on
the Way, he then declared him to be a chosen Vessel to bear his Name before the
Gentiles. This was his Mitre and esteemed Crown, this the mighty See into which
he was chosen. 1 Timothy ii. 7. I am ordained a Teacher of the Gentiles in Faith
and Verity. It is strange that the Gentiles should not magnify their own
Apostle; that the Roman Church should give the Primacy to Peter. In this Paul
came not a whit behind the very Chief of the Apostles, yet he was Metropolitan
of the Gentiles, but not of Man, neither by Man, but by Jesus Christ and God
the Father, Gal. i. 1.

THE Gentiles were alike Souls and Sinners, that needed a Savior, as the Jews.
The Jews indeed called them uncircumcised and unclean, and they had lost the
Knowledge of God, and were defiled with abominable Idolatries and Impurities.
Yet Moses and the Prophets had spoken abundantly of their Conversion; that
CHRIST should be a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and for Salvation to the Ends
of the Earth.

THE Gentiles were vastly more for Numbers, Power, Riches, Literature, worldly
Name and Glory, than the few and feeble Jews were. They were mighty Nations,
potent Kingdoms, populous Cities and vast Empires; while Judea was sunk into a
tributary Province, or dependant Kingdom on proud Rome. The Gentiles were Rome,
Athens, Corinth and the Schools of Greece, who then divided the Learning of the
World among them. To convert These to the Faith of Christ was Paul called and
sent from Heaven, and well might he say, -- That to me this Grace is given!
Wherefore

2. HE lays Himself very low, "To me, who am less than the least of all Saints
is this Grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles etc.

HERE is a double Diminutive, says One; He was as little as could be in his own
Eyes, and therefore writes himself so little as could not be; less than the
least. Long minimus; by far the least, Minimissimo; He was a Minim, an
Animalcule in his own Eyes, after all that Heaven had done to aggrandize him.
So before Honor is Humility, and true Humility increases with Worth and
Excellency, and the Honors of Providence. The Apostle always looked back on
what he had been before his Calling into the Apostleship of Christ: 1 Cor. xv.
9. I am not meet to be called an Apostle because I persecuted the Church of God
1 Timothy 1.13. Who was before a Blasphemer, a Persecutor and Injurious; but I
obtained Mercy. He therefore speaks highly of himself in the Text, where he
calls himself the least of Saints; if compared with what he says elsewhere, " I
am the chief of Sinners.

YET in the Text, 1. He acknowledges himself through Grace among the Saints. And
2. Most highly honored and dignified among them: 1. In his Mission to the
Gentiles. 2. In his Ministry, to preach Christ and his Riches to them.

Now in all this the blessed Apostle is a shining Example and Monitor to all of
us, both Ministers and People; 1. That we should be Saints. 2. Yet always in
our own Eyes the least of them, and less than the least. And 3. That we should
be exceeding affected with the singular Grace of God to us, that we should be
called into his Kingdom, whether to preach the unsearchable Riches of Christ to
others, or to have the same preached to us.

LET the Doctrines then be, 1. WE are all called to be Saints, both Ministers
and People; and the Ministers of Christ are more especially bound to be so. 2.
THE best of Ministers and the best of Saints should be and will be in their own
Eyes less than the least of 'em. 3. HUMBLE Saints, whoever they be, whither
Ministers or People, will be greatly affected with the Grace of God to them,
that they should have Christ and his unsearchable Riches preached to them, or
be called of God to preach Him unto others:


I can speak but little to these great Truths, within the Limits allowed me; I
will endeavor to fill up that Little with the more Light and Heat; and crave
the more diligent Attention from you.

I. DOCT. WE are all called to be Saints, both Ministers and People, and the
Ministers of Christ are more especially bound to be so. To me the least of
Saints; says the Apostle. He puts himself into this blessed Number; but he
speaks of all the Congregations and Churches of Saints. The Minister to be sure
implies the Christian, and if the Members of the Churches wear the Name of
Saints, the Pastors of them should be nothing less.

MINISTERS should be holy Men of God, like the Prophet Elisha, in the Spirit of
Elias; and like Aaron the Saint of the Lord, on the Front of whose Mitre was
written, Holiness to the Lord. When Moses prayed for the Tribe of Levi, his own
Tribe, and for the House of his Brother chosen to the Priesthood; to the
Ministry at the Sanctuary, and to teach Jacob God's Judgments and Israel his
Laws; "LORD, said he, let thy Urim be with thy Holy Ones. Their Separation to
holy Ministrations put the Name of Sanctity and Holiness upon them, was a
Profession of it and strong Obligation to it. It could not indeed make them
holy in Heart and Life, but it was a Bond upon their Soul. As Aaron was told in
the Presence of all Israel, on a solemn Day and upon a most awful Dispensation;
Lev. v. 3. I will be sanctified in Them that draw nigh Me.

GOD is Holy, infinitely holy. A Man in special Relation to God, solemnly
devoted to Him and employed for Him, to serve in his House and Worship, and to
minister under his Grace to the Sanctification and Salvation of Souls; is laid
under the highest Engagements to be Himself holy. Ezekiel. xx. 41. I will accept
you with your sweet Savor, and will be sanctified in You.

WELL therefore did the Apostle name Himself One among the Saints of God, the
sanctified in Jesus Christ. Had he not been one of that Noble Order, he had not
been meet to have been named an Apostle. The End and Scope of his Ministry was
to make Men Saints, by the Power and Blessing of the Holy Ghost. He durst not
deny what he was by the Grace of God. The Churches were Witnesses how holily
and unblameably he behaved before them. He would not be reputed unsanctified,
unholy or profane. If he had not been sanctified from the Womb, like Jeremiah,
and ordained a Prophet to the Nations; yet on the Day that the Heavenly Light
struck him to the Ground, his Eyes were opened and his Heart was changed.
Christ sent him qualified and spirited as he had done the other Apostles; over
whom and for whom He had prayed. Joh. xvii. 19. For their sakes I sanctify my
self, that they may be sanctified. The unclean Spirits therefore confessed his
Ministry and Saintship; " Jesus I know, and Paul I know.

AND if Ministers should be Saints, so ought Christian People also. They are
called to be Saints, even all that in every place call upon the Name of Christ,
1 Cor. i. 2. All the Lord's Congregation should be Holy. They are under the
Sign and ^^nd of Holy Baptism The LORD has loved the Church, and given Himself
for it, to sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water, by the Word.
These are the outward Sign and Means of Regeneration and inward Holiness. There
is one Body and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one Hope; One Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism: And if the ascended Jesus has received Gifts for Men, some
Apostles, some Pastors and Teachers; and poured out his Sanctifying Spirit on
them; It is for the Edifying of his Body, and to present unto Himself a
glorious Church, not have (...) spot or wrinkle. This therefore we wish (pray
and preach for) your Sanctification! That the Offering of the Gentiles may be
acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost; That the God of Peace may
sanctify you wholly, in Body Soul and Spirit; and preserve you blameless to the
Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

As soon as the LORD had formed a visible Church and Ministry, this was the
Message to 'em and by 'em; Lev. xix. 2. Speak unto all the Congregation, and
say to them, ye shall be Holy, for I the Lord your God am Holy. And again, xx.
7. Sanctify your selves, -- for I am the Lord that sanctifies you. And to the
End of Scripture this is the Character of Christians. Heb. iii. 1. Holy
Brethren, Partakers of the Heavenly Calling, consider the Apostle and High
Priest of our Profession, Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. i. 15. As He which has called
you is holy, so be ye holy.

LET what has been said be an awful ADMONITION and constraining Motive to us
all, both Ministers and People, to see to our Conversion to God; that a saving
Change be passed on us; that we be regenerated and born again; that the good
Work of God be indeed begun and going on in our Souls; that when the Lord our
GOD shall come and all his Saints with Him, we may not be missed among them:
after our visible Relation to him, and Profession of his Name; and after we
have so often heard and preached that Word of his Grace, which is able to build
us up, and to give us an Inheritance among all them that are sanctified.

LET us lie in the Dust before the Holy One, and in the Presence of all his
Saints, for all our Unholiness in Heart and Life, under our special
Obligations, Advantages and Professions; and let us be abhorring our selves and
repenting in Dust and Ashes. Yea let us tremble as Isaiah did, when he saw the
Holy Ones covering their Faces before the Throne of Christ, and heard them cry
before Him, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts! Isai. vi. 5. Then said I, Woe
is me, for I am undone! because I am a Man of unclean Lips, and I dwell among a
People of unclean Lips.

MORE particularly, I must take the Opportunity now given me of God to admonish
those that are Candidates for the Ministry: Before and above all their
preparatory Studies, and Amassment (by the Will of God) of proper Science and
Literature; that they do in the first place seek of God this more necessary
Foundation for a Gospel Minister, and more abundant Qualification for One;
namely, a blessed Regeneration, and a sound Conversion to God; That you may be
indeed Sanctified by the Spirit before you be Ordained to the Work of the Lord;
And that you have an inward Call of God within your own Soul to His holy
Ministry, before you accept of any Call from the People of God, to watch for
their Souls as One that must give an Account. We pray Christ Jesus the Lord
thus to enable you, counting you faithful, and putting you into the Ministry.

AND as for the People of God, here is a plain but most important Direction to
them, in their Choice of a Pastor; Choose One whom you have Reason to esteem a
Saint, a converted and sanctified Person, who will follow after Holiness, and
labor for your Conversion and Salvation; naturally caring for his own and your
Souls, to save himself and them that hear him -- And so I dismiss the first
Doctrine, "We are all called to be Saints, both Ministers and People.

II. DOCT. THE best of Ministers and of Saints, will be and should be in their
own Eyes the least of all Saints. This becomes, adorns and exalts Those that
most excel in Grace; " That to me who am less than the least of all Saints!
This Humility and Lowliness of the great Apostle, magnify him for ever in the
Eyes of all Saints, and leave him an Illustrious Example to them. Paul learned
it of Christ, who has said to us all, " Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly of
Heart. When He saw the Beginnings of Pride and Emulation among the Twelve, he
took a little Child and set him in the midst of them, and said, " He that shall
humble himself as this little Child, the same is greatest in my Kingdom. The
Apostles never forgot this Teaching Action and mild Reproof, but three of the
Evangelists have put it on Record. Truly the Signs of a Minister of Christ are
these: "Serving the Lord with all Humility; Gentle among You and toward all
Men; In Meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; Yea all (...) be
subject one to (...) with Humility; " For the Servant of the Lord must not
strive.

THE contrary to this is the special Character of the Devil and of Antichrist.
Pride cast Satan down from his high Seat among the Angels of Light; And He that
is entering on the Ministry of Christ is in particular warned of this Sin and
Danger; "That he be not a "Novice (a conceited vain aspiring Youth, aiming at
Pre-eminence and Applause) lest he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy iii. 6. -- You see the Danger that High Intelligences are in of this Sin.
So Angels fell, and so Adam after them. Let our learned Youth beware of this
early Sin, that easily besets 'em, betrays 'em and casts 'em down. Let the
Angels of the Churches see their Danger in their high Station.

POOR and proud is a common and mean thing in a miserable World; too common in
the Schools and in the Churches of our LORD JESUS. Such were the false Prophets
of old, and he that struck Micaiah on the Mouth, seduced by a lying insolent
Spirit. And such were the false Apostles, boasting of a false Gift, and
thinking themselves Something when they were Nothing; puffed up with a fleshly
Mind.

THE special Mark and Bloat of Antichrist is spiritual and worldly Pride
blended together. This mixture forms the Beast, after which the World wonders.
He wears the Name of Christ; and shows the Pride of Satan. You have his odious
Face and monstrous Shape, 2 These ii. 3, 5. That Man of Sin and Son of
Perdition, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped; so that He as God fitteth in the Temple of God, showing
Himself that he is God. This is plainly the Romish Hierarchy, that pretended
Spiritual Dominion of Christ's erecting here on Earth, whereof the Pope is
Head; calling himself the Servant of Servants, and yet claiming Lordship and
Authority over the Minds and Consciences of Men, and also over the Kings and
Potentates of the Earth. Such a Medley and Affectation of the Humility and
Lowliness of Christ, and yet of worldly Power and Pomp, Riches and Glory,
Dignities and Titles, Revenues and Temporalities; from the Cardinal's Cap to
the Capuchin's Rope and Hair-cloth; could never have been shapen but in the
Conclave of Hell. This is a Depth of Satan, and from Him this Mother of
Abominations had her Birth. It is of the bottomless Pit and going to it.

BUT thou, O Man of God, flee these things! Yea hate the Whore, and burn the
Attire of the Harlot. Follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love,
Patience, Meekness. Study the true Example and Law of Jesus, and imitate it,
obey it. He humbled Himself, and took the Form of a Servant. Be we not called
Masters, for one is our Master in Heaven, even Christ, and we are Brethren. Let
us not preach our Selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our Selves the
Servants of all for Jesus sake. Let us remember, that the Angels of Christ's
Little Ones do behold the Face of their Heavenly Father; And let us desire to
be like those Angels in our Ministrations to the least Soul within our Flocks.
Let us feed Christ's Lambs, and be ready to wash one another Feet.

LET the Candidates for the Evangelical Ministry lay this low and deep and
strong Foundation for it, in great Humiliation before God for Sin, and in a
lowly Heart and Life toward and before all Men; That God who resists the Proud
and gives Grace to the Humble, may count you worthy of his Calling, and use
and honor you among his People.

YEA-let all of us, who have the Honor to be among the humble Pastors of the
Flocks of Christ in these Ends of the Earth, fall down before the Lord and his
People, and say with the highest Gratitude as David did, when God took him from
the Sheep-folds to feed Israel his People; "Who am I O Lord God, and what is my
Fathers House! that thou have brought me hitherto! It is not because we were
better born, nor because we were Sons of brighter Parts, nor because we had
better Hearts than Others the Companions of our Childhood, that we were
selected by Providence, and entered into Collegiate Schools, and preferred to
sit at the Feet of some Men of God, to hold Water to 'em while they washed
their Hands; if so be we might receive a Portion of their Spirit and come into
their Place. No; how many of us may rather say in the humble Words of Amos, "I
was no Prophets Son, but a Trades-man's or Herds-man's; and yet the Lord took
me and said to me, "Go, prophecy to my People.

BUT this on the Second Doctrine, That the best of Saints and the best of
Ministers will be and should be in their own Eyes less than the least of all.

SEE then what a glorious Grace this of true Christian Humility is, and of what
a sweet Odor in the House of God. It is (...) Aarons priestly Garment for
Glory and Beauty, and as the precious Ointment for Fragrancy, that ran down to
the Hem of it. But it is far from the Sign and Spirit of a Minister of Christ,
to be elated with a Conceit of his own Gifts or Sanctity, and to say unto
Others, "Come not near me, I am holier than thou.

LET the Grace of Humility, among other Requisites and Ornaments, recommend a
Person to a People's Choice into the Pastoral Office over them; that they may
find a Moses or a Jeremiah in the Person called, who both answered the Divine
Call with the most humble and sincere Excuses, "Lord, who am I? slow of Speech
and of a slow Tongue! and Lord, I cannot speak for I am a Child!

BUT I come to the third and last Doctrine,

III. DOCT. THAT humble Saints, whoever they be, whether Ministers or People,
will be greatly affected with the Grace of God to them, That they should have
Christ and his unsearchable Riches preached to 'em, or be called themselves to
PREACH Him unto others. "That to me the least of all Saints is this Grace given.

First then, IT is a great Grace given to the Ministers of Christ, that they
should be called to preach Christ and his unsearchable Riches unto others. And
Secondly, It is in like manner the great Grace and Favor of God to People to
have Christ and his unsearchable Riches preached to them.

BY Grace here we may understand, 1. The outward Favor of God on Spiritual
Accounts, and in point of distinguishing Privileges. And by Grace given is
meant granted or shown to one more than to others who are in as much need of,
and as much deserve the same Favor of God. But 2. Saving Grace is more
especially here meant; for the Grace given to the Apostle was special and
saving, and so it is to all Saints; and this it is that makes the Dispensation
of the Gospel, committed to us, great and rich Grace indeed, both to Ministers
and People.

To begin then with the Ministers of the Gospel, as my Text leads me,

I. IT is great Grace given to the Ministers of the Word, that they should be
singled out and called to preach Christ and his unsearchable Riches unto others.

WE need the Heart of an Apostle to conceive, and the Tongue of one to speak of
this Grace of God to sinful Man; and the Tongues of Angels would fall short of
it. 1. To preach 2. To preach Christ. 3. His Riches, his unsearchable Riches.
4. To preach these to immortal perishing Souls for their Salvation.
What Honor and Grace is this to some among the sinful Sons of Men.

1. To preach. To speak in God's Name, his Words; to declare and publish his
Will, his Good Will to Men! To be made His Mouth, as though He spoke! How great a
thing is it for One formed out of the Clay, and born in Sin! Well might a Moses
plead his Unfitness for such a Work; and his Unworthiness of such a Mission!
that he had neither Soul nor Tongue, Head or Heart for such a Ministry. When
Paul was furnished for it with Gifts, and fortified by Grace, yet he needed a
Thorn in the flesh to keep him from being exalted. Nay the Son of God himself,
the Lord of Glory, speaks of the Fathers Grace to Him, even to Him, in his
Anointing him to preach good Tidings to the Meek, Isai. lxi. 1.

ONLY let us speak as the Oracles of God, the Truth as it is in Jesus, the
Doctrine which is according to Godliness. Let us not preach our Selves, our own
Parts and Powers, natural or acquired; Our own Reason or Wit, our Philosophic
or Poetic Genius, our own Fancies and Conceits, our Piques and Passions, Spleen
and Wraths. But let us consecrate all our Talents and Abilities to the Service
of Truth and Grace, to the Honor of Christ and the Good of Souls; preaching
the pure Word of God with Plainess and Simplicity, Gravity and Authority,
feeding the Babes with Milk, and the Adult with strong Meat; keeping back
nothing that is profitable to Souls, and being earnest and zealous in our
Addresses to the Hearts and Consciences of Men.

2. To preach Christ. He is the Subject of Gospel Preaching, and how great a
Grace it is to be accounted, that we may preach Him? CHRIST, in his Person,
Natures, Offices, Benefits! Christ, in his Eternal Godhead, in the Covenant of
Redemption and Grace; in the Promises, Prophecies and Types of Him! In his
Birth, Life, Doctrines, Laws, Miracles, Sufferings and Death! In his
Resurrection, Ascension to and Session at the right Hand of God; his
Intercession and Second Coming to judge the World! In short, The Covenant of
Salvation through Him. -- This is a copious and wide Field for Gospel Preaching;
and every Doctrine or Law of Natural Religion with a direct Reference unto Him;
as revealed "and enjoined by Him, as performed only by his Grace, and
acceptable only for his Sake, who is the End of the Law for Righteousness; that
as enforced upon us by his Promises and Threatenings; yet He in all may be
glorified, and the Grace of God through Him. -- So it is noted in the Life of Mr.
Philip Henry, that whenever he preached of Moral Duties, he would always bring
Christ into his Sermon, his Life as the Pattern of the Duty, his Love as the
grand Motive to it, his Merits as the great Atonement for our Defects in it. --
This is primitive and Apostolic Preaching, and may it always be the Manner of
our Preaching to You the Gospel of the Grace of God. We would wear this as our
Crown, and make it our Triumph: Romans i. 15, 16. For I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ; for it is the Power of God to Salvation unto every one that
believes, to the Jew first and also to the Greek: For therein is the
Righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith; As it is written, The Just
shall live by Faith.

3. To preach the Riches, the unsearchable Riches of Christ! In Him are hid all
the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; He is the Pearl of great Price, and the
Treasure hid in the Field, for the gaining of which a Man may well sell all
that he has. His Fruit is better than Gold and his Revenue than choice Silver;
He makes those that love him to inherit Substance, and he will fill their
Treasuries. We read of the exceeding Riches of his Grace, and of the Riches in
Glory by Jesus Christ. What a Treasure is this, put into earthen Vessels! for a
mortal Man to minister for the enriching Souls in the saving Knowledge of
Christ!

WHO can by Searching find out the Mystery of the Father and of the Son! Or
what Eye has seen, or Ear heard, or what Tongue can speak the Things which
Grace has prepared for those that believe! The SPIRIT Himself, who searches the
deep things of God, seems to labor in the speaking of them: Ephesians. ii. 18. "
And what is the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints! and what
the exceeding Greatness of his Power to us ward that believe! according to the
working of his mighty Power, which He wro't in Christ, when he raised Him from
the dead, etc.

ALL the Works of God are unsearchable, but most of all that of our Redemption
and Salvation. O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
God, his Holiness and Grace. Justice and Mercy glorified together in this Work!
Which thing the Angels of Heaven desire to look into! They have looked long,
with great Desire; intently looked and learned much; but never have searched it
out, nor ever can; but are still bowing their Faces, with fixed Eyes, upon the
Mercy-Seat. Unto Them, within the Vail, is made known by the Church the
manifold Wisdom of God.(...), Multiformis Sapientia: As in the Work of Creation
there were a Multitude of Forms, and all unsearchable; so are there in the
Mystery of Grace. Our Context calls it the Mystery, which passes Knowledge.

To speak only of that which is most plain and level to us, The Benefits of
Christ are his Riches, and these are unsearchable. O what is the Price; what
are the Riches of Pardon, Grace and Glory, to guilty condemned perishing Souls!
Who can search out the immense Riches of an Infinite Savior! of an Eternal
Salvation! of Salvation with Eternal Glory! It is high as Heaven, what can
thou do? and deep as Hell what can thou know? the Knowledge thereof is
immeasurable and incomprehensible as Eternity, and Infinity!

4. O then the Grace! the great Grace shown to some of us, the least and
sinfullest among the Sons of Men, that we should be called to preach these
Riches of Christ to Immortal, perishing Souls for their Salvation! That I
should preach among the Gentiles, says the Apostle. And again, Romans i. 5 By
whom we have received Grace and Apostleship, for Obedience to the Faith among
all Nations. for his Name.

BUT who are we, to have any like Honor put on us? Any like Heart and
Inclination, Gifts and Graces, from the same Spirit of Promise, that came in
Tongues of Fire from the Ascended Savior on the Day of Pentecost! That we
should be as Successors to Aaron and his Sons, to Moses and Elias, to Apostles,
Prophets and Evangelists; not in their Inipiration, and immediate Mission and
Enduing from on High, but in their common Spiritual Ministry. For it is the
self same Spirit, in his common Gifts and Operations, dividing to every Man
severally as He will; and saying to us in his glorious Providence, " Soparate
me this and the other unto the Work whereto I have called them. He gives us our
Dispositions for Study, Promptness to learn, Invention and Judgment, and the
Tongue of the Learned to speak a Word in Season; to speak with Art and
Authority, to inform and affect, to give Light and Heat, to move the Affections
and address the Conscience, and make Men's Hearts burn within them. He gives
the holy, humble, serious, fervent Ministerial Spirit, that naturally cares for
Souls, and is acted from pure and single Aims at the Glory of God, in our own
and their Salvation.

Now that any of Us should be among these Gifts of God to Men, what a rich and
free Act of Grace is it? As Daniel said after all his Preparations to stand
before the King, and that he might be meet for God to use and honor him; " I
thank thee and praise thee, O thou God of my Fathers! that have given me
Wisdom. With like religious Gratitude let us bow down at the Word of God, and
run with Cushi, to carry good Tidings: If so be we may be made to Souls
Ministers by whom they believe; Workers together with Christ, active
Instruments in the Hand of the Spirit, Stewards of the Mysteries of God,
faithful and wise Servants to give the Household their Meat in due season.

WHAT a distinguishing Grace will this be found in the Day of Christ, When they
that are wise shall shine as the Firmament, and they that turn many to
Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever.

O if our Souls were duly affected with the Grace of God to us as Paul was, it
would bring us into the holy Ministry, and carry us on in it with his gracious
Spirit; whereof we read, Col. i. 25, -- 29. Whereof I am made a minister
according to the dispensation of God, which is given to me for you, to fulfill
the word of God: Even the mystery which has been hid from ages, and from
generations, but now is made manisest to his saints. To whom God would make
known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which
is Christ in you, the hope of glory. Whom we preach, warning every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus. Whereunto I also labor, striving according to his working, which
works in me mightily.

BUT I come to say Secondly, and so draw to a Close,

II. IT is in like manner the great Grace and Favor of God to any People, to
have Christ and his unsearchable Riches preached to Them. Ministers and People
are at last One, and equal in this Grace. I Paul the Minister of Christ for You
Gentiles. What were Apostles, and what are Pastors and Teachers, but Gifts for
Men, that the LORD GOD may dwell among them. They are ordained for Men, in
things pertaining to God Are they Ambassadors from Christ? it is to beseech You
in his Stead to be reconciled to God. Are they Servants of the most High God?
it is to show You the Way of Salvation. Are they Workers together with God? You
are God's Husbandry and his Building. Are they ^^gels of the Churches? it is to
minister unto the Heirs of Salvation. Are they Watchman? it is to watch for
Souls as those that must give an Account. Is there any Dispensation of Grace
granted 'em? it is to You-ward; to save themselves and those that hear them.
Are they Stewards? it is for the Household. And are they Shepherds, it is for
the Flock.

THE Grace and Favor in the preached Gospel is therefore the same to People
and to Ministers. Ministers are given for the People and to the People; Not
they formed into Congregations and Churches for the sake of Ministers, 1 Cor.
ii. 7. We preach the Wisdom ordained before the World unto YOUR Glory. 3.5. Who
then is Paul? and who is Apollos? but Ministers by whom YOU believe; even as
God gives to every Man. 2 Timothy 2.10. I endure all things for the Elects sake,
that they may obtain the Salvation which is in Jesus Christ, with Eternal
Glory. 2 Cor. vi. 11. Our Mouth is open to YOU, our Heart is enlarged; Be YE
also enlarged.

THUS Ministers and People are One in the Grace of the preached Gospel. The
Hearers of the Word are therefore to be now invited and admonished to say
within Themselves, "That to us this Grace is given, to have Christ and his
Riches preached to us!

IT is a distinguishing Privilege, and it should be a saving Mercy.

1. IT is a distinguishing Grace of God to any People, and to Persons of
whatever Rank and Degree, and they should be greatly affected with it. Few,
very few are so distinguished. The Line of Election is as it were drawn down to
us, in the Mission of the Gospel to us. As God gave to Abraham the Promise of
the glorious Seed, in Whom all the Families of the Earth should be blessed; So
to us he has fulfilled the Promise and revealed the blessed Seed. and set all
Spiritual and Eternal Blessings before us through Him. The Covenant He gave to
Abraham, and his Blessing is come to us Gentiles through Faith. We have Moses and
the Prophets read and preached to us every Sabbath Day. We have Moses unveiled,
and can look upon the Luster of his Face, and see the Glory of Christ shining
in all the Types and Shadows of the Law. We have Life and Death, the Blessing
and the Curse set before us in the clearest Light. We have a Tribe, like that
of Levi, separated to teach us God's Judgments. We have the Sanctuary of God in
the midst of us, his Altar and his Court. We have his Sabbaths and Sacraments
We have his more spiritual Worship, Statutes and Ordinances. The righteous Men
of old desired to see the Things which we see, and to hear the Things which we
hear They prophesied of the Grace that is come to us. God has provided the
better Things for us, that They without Us should not be made perfect. Unto us
they did minister the things that are now reported to You, by them that preach
the Gospel. Wherefore gird up the Loins of your Mind, and lift up your Hearts
and Hands in the Sanctuary, for the Grace that is brought to You at the
Revelation of Jesus Christ. -- The Church of old saw Moses come down shining
from the Mount, with the Tables in his Hands: But blessed are your Eyes and
Ears that see and hear Jesus as it were preaching to the Multitudes on the
Mountain, and transfigured in the Mount, with Moses and Elias in their Glory
waiting on Him. -- When Balaam prophesied of Him that should come out of Jacob,
to have the Dominion, he concluded thus, " Who shall live when God does this?
We can tell him who shall: We live when God has done it! And O that it may be
Life Eternal to us! -- But in order to this

2. THIS very distinguishing Grace of God to us must become saving. And woe to
us, if Christ and his unsearchable Riches be preached to us, and preached by
us, and we are not saved by it. If we come to plead in Vain, Lord we have
prophesied in thy Name, and thou have taught in our Streets. Where and what
will the Grace and Favor then be to us? It is received in vain, and will but
turn to our greater Wretchedness, Misery and Curse. As it is written, You only
have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you from
your Iniquities. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted to Heaven shall be bro't
down to Hell; For if the mighty Works done in thee had been done in Sodom, it
would have repented and remained. Wherefore it shall be more tolerable in the
'Day of Judgment for Tire and Sidon than for You.

LET it be therefore our earnest Care and Prayer that the Word preached be
savingly profitable to our Souls; that we receive that special Grace which the
Lord means us from his preached Gospel. It were below His Grace to give a
revealed Word, to institute a Sabbath, to ordain a Ministry, to appoint
Ordinances, for any less End. He would have us come to the Knowledge of the
Truth and be saved. He sends his Ministers now, as He will his Angels
hereafter, to gather in his Elect from the four Quarters of the Earth. The
Election will receive his Grace, obtain his Mercy, while the rest are blinded;
blindly reject it. Give your Ministers the Joy of saying to You, in the Words
of the Apostle to the Thessalonians; "Knowing, Brethren beloved, your Election
of God! For our Gospel came not to You in Word only, but in the Power of the
HOLY GHOST.

THIS, this is saving Grace and Mercy! what Sinners should seek, and what
Saints may triumph in! what Ministers should preach, and People hear for. Else
what go ye forth to see? A Reed shaken with the Wind! Or what go ye forth to
hear? The Songs of Children in the Market, in their idle Plays! For can any
thing answer to the Incarnation, Dying and Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, but
the Eternal Salvation of your precious Souls from Sin and Death and Hell? Or
can the Holy Ghost be given from on High, but for the piercing Sinners to the
Heart, and to set them a crying out, Sirs, What must we do to be saved! For
what a Farce is this Solemnity of a preached Christ and his unsearchable Riches
turned into, if it have no Effect upon the Hearts and Lives of Men? if it
effect no change of Souls here, nor turn to their Salvation in the Life to
come? Let us throw up our Sabbaths, and cast away our Bibles, and lay aside the
Order and Work of a Ministry; if they be not for the Conversion of Souls. But
if this be the End and Fruit of a preached JESUS, how glorious is it and worthy
of his blessed Name! whose Glory is infinite and eternal in our Salvation.

READ then the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ to us in his preached Gospel, and
let it animate both Ministers and People, as it inspired holy Paul; "If by any
Means I may save some! "I please all Men in all things, secking their spiritual
Profit that they may be saved! "Whether we be afflicted or comforted, it is for
your Consolation and Salvation! "Men and Brethren, Unto You is this Word of
Salvation sent! "to You is preached the Forgiveness of Sins! "judge not your
Selves unworthy of eternal Life! "For there is Salvation in no other.

I have thus endeavored in as few and strong Words as I could to represent to
You, the Grace given us in the Gospel preached to us. And what are we in this
wide and wild World, that to Us this distinguishing, and (if it be not our own
Fault) this saving Grace of God should be given and not to Others! or to Us
more and in a better Manner than to many Others!

LET Ministers Examine and judge themselves before the Lord and his People:
"How are we affected with the Grace of God to us, in his All-disposing
Providence respecting Us, putting us into the Ministry! choosing for us our Lot
and Station! giving us an early serious and humble Mind for the great Work it
self, and furnishing us in any measure for our Places! granting us any Tokens
of his Presence with us in our Ministrations to the Souls of our respective
Flocks! any Seals of our Ministry, and Hopes of Glory with them at the
Appearance of JESUS CHRIST! How do we, and how have we preached CHRIST and his
Riches to our People! and to what Effect on our own and their Souls together!

LET Candidates for the Ministry learn with what Temper and Exercise of Soul,
with what kind of Affections, they should prepare for and enter on it:
beginning as they purpose (by the Grace of God) to hold on, preaching Christ
and his unsearchable Riches unto Souls ready to perish; that the Spirit of
Christ and his Glory may rest on 'em and shine in 'em, and be the Alpha and
Omega, the first and the last with them, in their holy Studies and public
Performances.

LET them learn of blessed Paul how and what to preach, and with what Aims at
the Conversion and Salvation of Souls: And therefore let them look unto their
own Souls first, and give Diligence to make their own Effectual Calling sure:
That they may be able to use such Words as these, "When it pleased God to call
me by his Grace, and reveal his Son in me; that I should preach Him unto Others.

LET 'em give no Occasion to the Ministers and Churches from their public
Discourses to fear or say, That they are going off to another Kind and Way of
Preaching, and that the serious humble and earnest Preaching of Christ and his
Riches, for the Salvation of lost Souls, is not the plain Aim and Scope of
their Ministry. And if it be not let 'em know, that the End of the Ministry is
not like to be reached by Them, either as to Themselves or those that hear them.

I turn me now to the Honored Congregation and Flock of Christ, who have
called us this Day to pray with Them and preach to 'em, that God may graciously
direct Them in their Election of Another into the Pastoral Office over Them.

WE would have You greatly affected (you see) with the Grace of God to You, in
that You have had Christ and his Riches preached to You, from your Beginning
unto this Day. You and We are Witnesses for God, that He has been so by your
Deceased excellent Pastors, now with Christ, both Dr. Increase Mather and Dr.
Cotton Mather.
Father and Son. This was the loved Subject of their Preaching, with what Light
and Flame and Power you all know. -- And this is the Spirit and Manner of your
present Pastor The Reverend Mr. Gee.
His soft and still Voice breathes among You the same Christ and his Riches.
May it be with like and greater Efficacy; for your Illumination, Excitation and
Salvation! -- I have been exhibiting to You the Spirit of Grace in his Ministry
and Conversation among You: "That to Me, the least, this Grace is given, to
preach unto You the riches of Christ.

YOU will doubtless desire the same Kind and Way of Preaching to be continued
among You, and to your Children after You. And may it ever be so. Therefore
take this general Direction in the Choice before You, "Choose Him, of Whom
(after serious Seeking to God) You in your Consciences think, will most and
best labor, with Affection and Joy, to preach Christ and his unsearchable
Riches to You.

AND the Lord direct Your Hearts into such a Choice, of a Pastor after his Own
Heart!

I conclude with those Words, from which your Aged venerable Pastor preached to
the Church and Congregation to Whom I minister, two and thirty Years ago, Heb.
xii. 14. Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness without which no Man shall see
the Lord.

I think that Truth, Peace and Holiness have flourished together in this Church
and Congregation from their Beginning. A most distinguishing Grace and Favor
to it. May they still flourish among You! They hang one upon another as Links
in a Chain of Gold. Let not the Chain be broken, but still worn on your Hearts
and about your Necks. I trust it is like to be so, however Providence shall
direct your Choice. And consequently that You must see it to be your Duty
(every One of You) to acquiesce and unite in its Determination, and to continue
together, waiting on God, under the Ministry of the Person that shall be
chosen, till You see these Great Ends of the Gospel failing among You through his
Deficiency: Which God forbid.

I conclude with that Apostolical Benediction, Ephesians. vi. 23. Peace be to the
Brethren, and Love with Faith from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 11, l. 30. for that read and. l. 31. for yet read that


