THE Reasonableness OF CHRISTIANITY, IN Four SERMONS.

WHEREIN The Being and Attributes of GOD, the Apostasy of Man, and the
Credibility of the Christian Religion, are demonstrated by rational
Considerations.

And the Divine Mission of our blessed Savior proved by Scripture-Arguments,
both from the Old Testament and the New; and vindicated against the most
important Objections, whether of ancient or modern Infidels

By Jonathan Dickinson, M. A. Minister of the Gospel at Elisabeth-Town, N.
Iersey.

Cum dilectione fides Christiani: Sine dilectione fides daemonum: Qui autem non
credunt, pejores sunt quam daemones. --

Aug. de Charit. With a Preface by Mr. FOXCROFT.

BOSTON* N. E Printed by S. KNEELAND and T GREEN, for SAMUEL GERRISH at the
lower end of Cornhill. MDCCXXXII.

TO Christian READERS.
THE reverend and learned Author of the ensuing Discourses needs not any
Epistles of Commendation to such as are acquainted with his Person and
Character: Whose Praise is in the Gospel thorowout all the Churches in those
remote parts, where Divine Providence has cast his Lot. Neither is he unknown
to the Public: which has been favored with several lesser Writings of his,
formerly published on special Occasions; that must have left on the Minds of
those who have read them, a grateful Relish, and such an Idea of Mr.
Dickinson's peculiar Genius, Capacity and Judgment, as cannot but prepare them
to come with raised Expectations and a particular Gust, to the Perusal of the
following Tracts: Which it would therefore be as superfluous to recommend to
such, as it would be thought vain in me to attempt a profuse Encomium on them
for the sake of others; nor indeed would the known Modesty of the Author
indulge me in taking this Liberty.

Only I must be permitted to say, that in reading these Sheets I have thought
my self very agreably entertained, with the Variety and Compass of Thought,
Excellency of Matter, Strength of Argument, and Vivacity of Expression. And I
must needs think, every serious discerning Reader will find the Beams of Divine
Light, shining round the Gospel-Revelation, collected here in so close a Union,
and borne in upon him with such a Force, as cannot fail (with a common
blessing) to give Heat and Energy to Faith and Love, establish him in the
principles and duties of Christianity, and guard him against the Attacks of
Infidelity on all sides.

The general Design of these Papers is suggested in the Title of 'em; yet it
may not be improper to open the way to the reading them, by exhibiting a brief
Scheme of the whole Work.

The first Sermon is on the Being and Attributes of GOD. Where we are led into
deep and entertaining Contemplations upon the Divine Nature; by a particular
View of the eminent Perfections of GOD, a^ they are illustrated in the Works of
Creation: and have laid before us very plentiful and irresistible Convictions
of his eternal Power and Godhead, to the utter Confusion of all atheistical
Pretenses.

The second Sermon gives us the rational Evidences of our Apostasy from GOD:
and then carries us into a delightful Meditation on our Recovery by a Mediator;
producing a Variety of presumptive Arguments, many fair and lively Characters
of Probability, that attend the Christian Institution: its unparalled
intrinsic Excellencies are considered; its perfect Congruity to all the Divine
Prerogatives, and Illustration of the Attributes of GOD; its Correspondence to
the Nature and Necessities of Man, and Conduciveness to our present Welfare and
future everlasting Happiness, are set in View; and a numerous Train of
Arguments drawn together in a comprehensive and perspicuous manner, that
deserve a very attentive Consideration, and which would have admitted of a
copious Display, had not designed Brevity obliged our Author to restrain his
Pen.

The other Discourses point out to us the one Mediator between GOD and Men, the
Man CHRIST JESUS; and by many infallible Proofs demonstrate, that he is the
true Messiah, to the manifest Confutation and Shame of all Deistical Exceptions.

The third Sermon considers the Evidence from Prophecy: explains the Nature of
a Prophecy, as it is to be understood in the present Argument; sets forth the
various Ways, in which Divine Predictions may be said to be fulfilled;
instances in some of the more signal Prophecies of the Old Testament, relating
to the Messiah, his Person and Character, the Time, Circumstances, and
Consequents of his Appearing; then shows from the Evangelical Historians, that
they have been literally and exactly verified in JESUS of Nazareth: And
finally, to complete the Demonstration, it is shown, that as the Accomplishment
of those ancient Prophecies is a certain Indication of their Divine Original,
so the united Accomplishment of them all in the blessed JESUS is a loud
Testimony from Heaven, that he is the predicted Savior, and justifies his
Claim to the high Titles, Perfections and Relations, attributed to the Messiah
in the prophetic Descriptions of his Person and Kingdom; all which, being of a
Divine Extraction, consequently plead a Divine Veracity.

The fourth and last Sermon is upon the Argument from Miracles. Where we have
the correct Notion of a Miracle briefly stated: In the next place Matter of
Fact asserted, that there were true and proper Miracles wrought by our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, in his own Person, and by his Apostles in his Name: Then it is
shown how those miraculous Operations illustrate the Verity of his Divine
Mission, and the Certainty of his being the promised Messiah (in Attestation to
which Character, assumed by him and ascribed to him, they were all performed)
and so infer, by a just Consequence, the Truth and heavenly Original of the New
Testament, that admirable Collection of Divine Revelations; which being written
by inspired Penmen, has been preserved and transmitted in authentic Copies,
without any material depravation, down to the present Age.

Finally, the Author having thus demonstrated the Divine Authority and
Reasonableness of the Christian Institution, shuts up the whole with some wise
and good Rules, to settle the Minds of wavering Professors, and direct Persons
convinced of the Truth of Christianity in general (but at a Loss, among the
various Divisions of Christendom, which Persuasion or Party to join with) how
they may resolve their Doubts, fix their Choice, and determine in what
particular Way, Mode or Form, they may best serve CHRIST, to his Acceptance,
and their own eternal Advantage.

Thus I have given the Reader a short and imperfect Table of Contents; a View
of the principal Scope and Tenor of the Discourses here exhibited to the
public Light. -- They are surely upon the noblest Subjects, sublime in their
Nature, useful in their Tendency, and seasonable for this skeptical Day. And by
a particular Application of them to the Ends of Practice and Devotion, which
runs through and enlivens the Work, it is adapted to impress and engage the
Heart, as well as employ the Mind; to warm the Christian, as well as please and
improve the Scholar.

In perusing this little Volume, the Reader must summon his thinking Powers to
a vigorous Attention, and call up his most devout Reflections: The seriousness
of the Theme demands the latter; and the Variety, as well as Connection of
Argument, the former. And when you have deliberated over the following pages, I
doubt not you will be ready to break out in the Language of the Apostle; This is
a faithful Saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, that CHRIST JESUS came into
the World to save Sinners. -- Without Controversy great is the Mystery of
Godliness: GOD was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into
Glory. -- And GOD forbid, that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST.

You will see what abundant Honors Heaven did to Christianity, in the splendid
Appara^us to its Introduction and Establishment, and in the extraordinary
Successes that crowned it, when it made its solemn Entrance into the World;
which spread its Fame, and justly recommended it to the high Esteem and
Admiration of succeeding Ages.

You will find, that the only wise GOD our Savior has taken all possible Care
for our Satisfaction in the Certainty of revealed Religion, and does not
challenge our Belief of the Gospel, without giving us sufficient Grounds;
whether in regard of the internal Signatures of Truth and Reason inseparable
from it, or the external Motives of Credibility that accompany it: which
considered together, do put it beyond all rational Doubt, and must needs
produce a moral Assurance of its heavenly Original, in every one that will
allow himself carefully and impartially to examine the Credentials it brings
with it.

Sure I am, You will see all the Marks of Divinity most evident on the
Christian Institution: and cannot doubt but you will be ready to say with the
Apostle, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of CHRIST: Though I suffer Reproach as a
Christian, nevertheless I am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed. -You
will see the Apostle had good Grounds for that Exhortation, Be not ashamed of
the Testimony of our Lord, nor of me his Prisoner.

You will rather turn your Resentments another way, and be ashamed of the
profane abandoned Mortals, who reject, insult and deride a Religion, so worthy
of the blessed GOD; so consistent with the infinite Dignity of the SON of GOD*
so calculated every way to the true Principles of Reason, and to the Exigencies
of our apostate Condition; so fortified with Arguments of the noblest and
strongest kind; so long triumphant over all oppositions from Earth and Hell,
and in so many happy Instances from Age to Age the Power of GOD unto Salvation
All which Considerations serve to aggravate the Guilt and F^lly of Unbelievers;
to discover the just Reasons of their future Cond^mnation, and detect the
Vanity of their present Pretensions to natural Religion, while they ridicule a
Revelation, the Credit of which is so Divinely supported, and the believing
Entertainment of which is indeed no other than a moral Duty, founded in the
natural Fitness of Things: it being a most fit and reasonable Thing, that we
should submit to credible Testimony; and if we receive the witness of Men, the
Witness of GOD is greater. He therefore that believes not GOD, in the Record
that he gave of his Son, and so makes him a Liar, does herein act contrary to
the fundamental Law of Creation, and must needs stand condemned of himself, as
well as of all about him, as the Shame and Disgrace of human nature. Surely all
truly rational and serious Thinkers must inwardly blush for such a one, and be
ashamed of his absurd and guilty Prejudices against the Gospel of CHRIST; when
they see the Frenzy and Perverseness of conscious Infidelity so exposed, in a
glaring and convincing Light, as in the su^sequent Discourses; which fully make
it appear, that no Man rejects the Principles of Christianity, because his
Reason runs Counter to them, but because his Lusts control his Reason and
debauch his Judgment, sin a depraved Bias upon his Will, and commit a Rape on
his Conscience, by their infatuating Charms. Hence it may be observed, these
Latitudinarian Moralists are generally as libertine in their Practice, as in
their Belief, and show as little of the Man, as they pretend of the Christian.

Again, You will be ashamed of those thronging Herds in Christendom, of
unprincipl'd implicit Believers, who are so supinely negligent and ignorant in
Divine Things, that they take the Christian Profession upon blind Trust, and
not out of Conviction and rational Choice; stupidly led by Education, popular
Fashion, public Establishment, Antiquity, or the like ignoble Attractives:
without acquainting themselves with the illustrious Proofs of the Divine
Authority of the Gospel, or indeed with its important Informations. So that
they are unskilful in the Word of Righteousness; have need that one teach them
which be the first Principles of the Oracles of GOD; and have nothing or little
more to plead for Christianity, than a Turk for the Alcoran, or an Heathen for
his national and antique Superstition: while yet the Religion of Christians
admits of the most rational and ample Apology. But some have not the knowledge
of GOD: I speak this to your Shame.

Again, You will be ashamed also of those assuming and imposing Christians
(whether pharisaical and bigoted Papists, or too symbolizing Protestants) that
adulterate the Institutions of CHRIST, deform his Religion, and invade his
Prerogative, who is sole King and Legislator to his Church, and the only Lord
of Conscience, by mixing their own presumptuous Devices, or the anomalous and
spurious Inventions of others, in the sacred Affairs of the christian State,
See an excellent Sermon of Mr. Dickinson 's on this Subject; where the true
Boundaries of Church Power are particularly considered and set in their proper
Light^
by setting up unscriptural Officers in the Church of CHRIST, by making new
Decrees and Constitutions for the Substantials of Ecclesiastical Polity, by
framing new Articles of Faith, new Parts or Modes of Worship; and severely
enforcing their apocryphal Innovations, Rites and Tenets, by secular Penalties,
or rigorously obtruding the same as indispensable Terms of Communion, under the
specious Colors of Apostolic Tradition, Uniformity, Decency, Edification, and
the like: So shutting the doors of the Church against many, to whom a
reasonable Charity cannot but hope our Savior will open the gates of Heaven,
and rudely reflecting too on the Wisdom and Fidelity of CHRIST, the great
Trustee of Divine Power, and Dispenser of Truth and Good, who has given us a
System of Principles and Body of Laws, in the inspired Records, that must needs
be a perfect and decisive Standard; to which nothing essential is necessary,
nothing lawful, to be added, and by which every thing in the Service of GOD is
to be tried and regulated, and all our religious Inquiries and Observations
bounded. Though, we confess, human Guides are appointed by him, for the clearer
understanding the Mysteries of his Doctrine, the Order of his House, and Laws
of his Kingdom, and for promoting the Belief and Observation thereof. Not for
that we have Dominion over your Faith, or Conscience, but are Helpers of your
Joy; and your Servants for JESUS sake.

To proceed,

You will be ashamed likewise of those unevangelical and (pretended) rational
Christians, whether Preachers or Professors, whose favourite-^opick is the
Religion of Nature, and whose darling Rules and Motives are of the Philosophic
kind; who leave a crucified JESUS very much out of their Schemes of Divinity,
and make but little use of this blessed Mediator of Atonement and Intercession,
in their Devotions and Dealings with GOD: who teach the Principles or practice
the Duties of natural Religion, with little or no explicit Reference to a
Redeemer, or Reduction of Things to the Gospel Model; and pay a very cold
Respect to the grand Peculiars of the Christian Revelation (though so nearly
connected with Salvation in the Gospel Covenant, and in the Reason of things)
whether Doctrines, relating to the Person, Character, and Offices of CHRIST,
distinguishing Grace, supernatural Infusion, imputed Righteousness, final
Perseverance, etc. or Precepts, concerning Covenanting with GOD, relying on
CHRIST, living by the Faith of the Son of GOD, and doing whatever we do in his
Name, praying with the SPIRIT and walking in the SPIRIT, directing our Aims to
the Glory of GOD as our last end, and (in a word) consulting and applying the
Gospel of CHRIST, as our complete and un^rring Canon of Faith, Ritual of
Worship, and Rule of Mor^ls, as well as Charter of Privileges and Blessings All
which is so vital to Religion, so coincident with Apostolic Instruction and
Example, so congruent to the Temper and Complexion of primitive and sound
Believers: but scandalously neglected, or indifferently regarded in the present
day, by many Professors and Preachers even in the reforming World, to the great
Grief and Regret of such as are jealous for the Honor of CHRIST, and tenderly
concerned for the Souls of Men.

Further* You will be ashamed of those heretical and wild Opinionists, who
professedly receive Gospel Revelations, and it may be in pretense preach
CHRIST, but do miserably abuse, torture and pervert the Scriptures, to their
own and others Destruction: As also of those enthusiastical Perfectionists (
spiritual Men, falsely so called) who act in Religion by no certain stated Rule,
but by a variable fanatic Impulse or capricious Humor, and vainly bo^st of
th^se superior Lights and Refinements, which they think supersede all Necessity
of ministerial Teaching and outward Ordinances; and hence they explode the
Sabbath, and Sacraments, and Discipline of the Gospel, those blessed
Appointments of infinite Wisdom and Grace, as obsolete, and useless
Superfluities.

You will be ashamed too of the many carnal and inconsistent Hypocrites, Fools
in Israel, who while they name the Name of CHRIST, do not depart from Iniquity;
and though perhaps orthodox Scripturists, punctual Devotionists, and precise
Zealots for some disputed matters of Doctrine, or some affected Formalities in
Religion* yet are shameful Delinquents in point of Morality, and live in open
Defiance to some essential Precepts of the Gospel; are public Blemishes to the
Christian Name, by the most visible Indications of a worldly Spirit, by profane
Speech, or a dissolute Behavior: and thus give Scandal to weak Believers, and
take the most probable Method to harden Infidels in their Aversion and Disgust
to the Christian Faith, by practically renouncing it themselves. Such therefore
the Apostle condemns as Enemies of the Cross of CHRIST, and requires the
Churches to extrude with shame, as unworthy the holy Communion or even common
Society.

In fine, I will say to every humble and pious Christian, You will upon a
serious Review be ashamed even of yourselves also; from a Consciousness of your
being so unstudy'd in the glorious Gospel, its rich Contents and numerous
Proofs; so unfurnished for the Vindication of your holy Religion against the
Assaults of its many Opposers; so unaffected with the amazing Grace of God in
the Evangelical Dispensation, its transcendent Fullness of Light and Glory, its
extensive Spread among the Gentiles, and yet the astonishing Distinction of
Providence, in revealing it to some while it is hid from others; -- so
unthankful for its great and precious Promises, and incomparable Benefits; so
infirm in your belief of its peculiar Discoveries, and soon shaken in Mind by
the impotent Cavils of various Seducers; so wavering and languid in your
religious Resolutions; so remiss in your Endeavors of Obedience to its
excellent Precepts; so indolent and careless about the Propagation of Christian
Knowledge, among such as sit in Darkness and are perishing for lack of Vision,
while you sit under a meridian shine of the Sun of Righteousness.

In a word, You will be ashamed that you have so little of an experimental
sense of the Power and Truth of the Gospel; and that you are no better able to
set a Seal hereto, from your own personal and lively Experience of that
Communion with CHRIST (in his Word and Ordinances) which is so congenerous to
the new Creature, so relishing to the spiritual Taste of a real Christian, so
improving to Divine Knowledge and true Holiness; and the Want or low Degree
whereof in many Professors is so justly the matter of our mournful Observation.

I doubt not you will find such Reflections and Resentments awakened in you;
while with a due Application of Mind and with serious Pauses, laboring to
enter into the Spirit of the Author and Importance of the Subject, you peruse
the following argumentative and pathetick Defense of Christianity. You Will feel
uneasy Sensations and Relentings in your thoughtful breasts, with respect to
your selves: and must needs blush and be ashamed for the Multi^udes of
defective Christians, who fall under any of the preceding ignominious
Characters, so opposite to the true Genius of the Gospel, and so derogatery to
the Credit of its Divine Founder.

And now let me recall your Thoughts to the above-hint concerning Experience:
upon recollecting which, that of the Apostle comes with a peculiar weight and
force on my mind, He who believes on the Son of GOD, has the WITNESS IN
HIMSELF, 1 John 5.10 -- A Text that I would commend to every one for their
frequent solemn Consideration: and gladly could I on this Occasion expatiate
upon it in some pertinent and affecting Meditations; but that in so doing I
should too long detain you, and much exceed the proper Limits of a presatory
Epistle. I will hasten therefore to a Close, with this Hint, --

It should be our main Solicitude, our first Desire, that the SPIRIT of CHRIST
may cause the Light of the glorious Gospel to shine into our Hearts; and
testify to its Verity and Divine Extract, by making it instrumental, through
his concurrent Efficacy, to an indelible Impression of the Image of CHRIST on
our Souls: And let it be our nex^ and constant Care, that by visibly exhibiting
this inwar^ Experience, in an active Life of universal Conformity to the
Example and Laws of CHRIST, we may give a solid Attestation to the Reality of
our Faith, and adorn the Doctrine of GOD our Savior, as it becomes us, in all
Things: and thus evidencing our selves sincere Confessors, living Witnesses for
CHRIST, we may hope for his Approbation in this World, and a glorious Reception
in the next.

To promote this experimental Religion, and spread the genuine Spirit and
Practice of Christianity, is the ultimate Design of the following Essay on the
Reasonableness of it. And to that happy End may the special Blessing of CHRIST,
whose Cause is here espoused, accompany it to all, into whose hands it may
come! So will the worthy Author (who, I wish, may long live, a burning and
shining Light have Occasion to rejoice, in seeing this his Labor attended with
the desired Prosperity: and we have Reason to be thankful, for the Benefit of
this valuable Publication.

These are the unfeigned Sentiments, and the passionate Wishes of

Your christian Friend, THOMAS FOXCROFT.
Boston, Feb. 29. 1731, 2.
ERRATA: Page 61. lin. 6. read of. Page 79. lin. 22. read (...).

A DEMONSTRATION OF THE Being and Attributes OF GOD.
ROMANS I.20. For the invisible things of Him, from the Creation of the World,
are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even His
eternal Power and Godh^^d; so that they are without Excuse.


REASON is the dignifying and distinguishing property of humane nature; whereby
Man, above the rest of the lower creation, is qualified to know, obey, and
enjoy his Creator: By which alone he is capable of that Faith, without which it
is impossible to please God; and even of believing that first Article, That God
is, as well as that He is a rewarder of those that diligently seek Him. Whence
it follows, that He who has made us rational Creatures, expects from us a
reasonable Service; and cannot be pleased with that faith, practice, or hope,
that is grounded on education, or common opinion; and not the result of
rational reflection, or enquiry.

IT must therefore be agreeable both to our duty and interest, to enquire into
the grounds of our holy Religion; and reasonably to establish our selves in
those precious Truths, on which we build our hopes; and not to take them upon
trust, as I Am afraid too many do. For which cause, I shall endeavor ( God
willing) to offer you some rational evidences of the truth of Christianity: and
(I hope) full conviction, that we have not followed cunningly devised fables,
in embracing the Christian Religion; but a light shining in a dark place,
whereunto we do well to take heed. And my first work is, to lay the
cornerstone of this building; and to take a brief prospect of some of those
Demonstrations of the Divine Being and Perfections, which we are so plentifully
furnished with, from the works of Creation and Providence. For which end, I
have pitched upon the words before us, as the ground of our present
meditations: wherein we may Note;

1. THE Subject here treated of, which is the GLORIOUS GOD; denoted by the
relative HIM, which relates to, and is connected with the foregoing verse,
where the Being and Nature of God are expressly considered.

2. THE sublime immense Nature, and glorious Perfections of the Divine Being.
[The invisible things of Him] The things of God are not only invisible to the
bodily eye; but infinitely above the search of the most exalted understanding,
inscrutable, and incomprehensible, to the most sagacious of created Beings. For
who can by searching find out God?

3. THE clearest and most infallible certainty of these incomprehensible
perfections of God. [ Are clearly seen] Though we cannot soar to the
interminable heights, or dive to the boundless depths, of this Infinite Nature;
we have demonstrative evidence of His Eternal Power and Godhead, with many of
his essential perfections. We may be infallibly certain, that there is a God,
Infinite in Holiness, Justice, Goodness, and Truth, etc. though we know not the
manner of His existence, and operations.

4. THE foundation of this certainty, or the means of our obtaining this clear
vision of the Invisible things of God. [Being understood, by the things that
are made.] We see the cause by the effect; and have brightest evidence, that
this vast and spacious World, with its amazing magnificence, luster and
harmony, was not its own efficient; did not proceed from chance, nor could be
the product of an Author unequal to the Work: And must therefore be the
Workmanship of an Infinitely wise, and powerful Being.

5. THE consequence of this evidence, [ So that they are without excuse.] The
heathen world, who know nothing of God, but what is visible from the works of
creation and providence, may there observe such bright displays of Infinite
Wisdom and Power, with other Divine Perfections, as will leave their infidelity
inexcusable. -- But we may more concisely sum up the words, in this
OBSERVATION, That the glorious Being, and infinite Perfections of God, are
evidently manifest, from the works of Creation.

THIS I shall endeavor to demonstrate, by these following Arguments.

I. I think it unquestionably evident to all men, that they themselves have a
Being. This case admits of no debate; no man being capable to call in question
his own existence, or doubt of his Being. Whence,

II. IT is equally certain to every man, that he has not always been, what he
now is. Within the compass of a few years, we were first begotten, conceived,
and born; and have passed the several stages of time, unto the age, to which we
are now arrived. This no man can doubt of. Therefore,

III. IT IS most sure, that we must have our Original from some cause. An effect
without an efficient, or a real Being produced by nothing, is the most palpable
absurdity, and the boldest affront to common sense. -- This then is
indisputable, that we did not make our selves. For (...) we had a Being, we
were nothing, and could do nothing. And it is equally certain, that we are not
the product of blind unactive chance. For how could so noble a Being happen to
spring out of nothing, without any creating power or energy? Whence ^^en do we
derive our Original? Not (...) Parents: they were not omnipotent, to command us
into Being by their powerful word. Nor could such noble, immaterial, thinking
substances, as our Souls, proceed from them in a way of natural generation. For
its the height of absurdity to suppose, that a material substance, could give
Being to a spiritual one; as we shall hereafter consider. But were it supposed,
that even our whole man, soul and body* was begotten by our immediate parents*
whence had they this power? Or whence their own existence? If it be said, that
they proceed in a continued chain of succession from their predecessors, the
difficulty ye^ remains: For whence came the first link of this chain? It is
equally absurd, to apply self-existence, or self-origination, to the first of
our species, as to our selves. -- Thu^ from the consideration of our selves, we
are led to the clearest views of an efficient cause; by which we are what we
find ou^ selves to be. It is just arguing, Psalm. c. 3 It is He that has made
us, and not we ou^ selves.

IV. IT IS also clearly evident, that all those other Beings, which are in the
world* were produced by some cause. We are not only certain of our own Being;
but by the same intuitive certainty, we perceive multitudes of Beings beside
our selves. -- If we look upward, we behold a vast magnificent Arch,
replenished with innumerable multitudes of bright and glorious Orbs; all of
them performing their revolutions, and discharging their appointed functions,
with the greatest harmony, beauty, and order. If we look downward, we see this
huge massy ball of Earth, upon which we tread, abounding with a surprising
variety of animals and vegetables, each carrying in 'em the marks of consummate
Art and Skill.

AND can we imagine, that this immense canopy of the Heavens was stretched out,
those mighty globes of light hung up in the air, and whirled round in their
respective circuits; or this Earth, with all its furniture, created and founded
on nothing, by their own efficiency? Can we, upon the view of a most stately
and curious building, overlook the workman that made it, suppose it to spring
out of nothing; or to make it self? No surely! the work shows the workman, and
the effect the cause.

HENCE then, the consequence is inevitable, that there is some great and
glorious Cause of our selves, and of every thing we see and know: And this
Cause is what we call GOD. And hence, the very heathen world may discover the
God that created the Heavens, and stretched them out; tha^ spread forth the
Earth, and that which comes out of it; that gives breath unto the people upon
it, and spirit to them that walk therein, Isai. xlii.5. For the Heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament shows Hi^ handy work, Psalm. xix.1.

I know of but one considerable Objection, against this reasoning and
conclusion that seems worthy of an intelligent mind which is this,

THE World, in all its parts, may have Eternally existed; All the mutations and
revolutions in nature, may have been effected (...) an Eternal law or
propensity; and all the kinds of Beings in the World, continued (...) an
Eternal succession.

THIS Objection, at first view, may fill the minds of some enquirers with
confusion while their thoughts are lost in the bound^less Abyss of Eternity. I
shall therefore take liberty to be something particular, i^ answering it.

THAT the World has not Eternally existed, is demonstratively evident from the
consideration, -- Had the Universe bee^ eternal, it must have had a necessary
ex^istence: and it would have been impossible that either the whole, or any
part of it, should not have been, or have been any otherwise than it is. For,
if not necessarily self-existent, it must derive its Being from some cause, and
consequently have a beginning: and it must also have continued by an Infinite
and Eternal series and succession of necessary causes and effects. For if all
the causes and effects in an eternally existing World, are not necessary, but
contingent; that is, if they from their own nature might be, or might not be
what they are: Then the World in all its glory and magnificence, in all the
symmetry, order, and perfection of its several parts, has for ever continued by
mere accident, without any cause or reason: Which is the height of absurdity.
This then is most certain, that if the World be Eternal, it derives both its
being and continuance from absolute necessity. -- But is it not most absurd and
unreasonable to suppose the necessary self-existence of things that are
evidently in their own nature contingent; and for whose existence, there is no
more apparent reason or necessity from the nature of the things themselves,
than for their nonexistence? Is it not even ridiculous to imagine, that from
the nature of things, the World must consist of just so many, and just such
kind of parts as it now does, without any possible addition, diminution, or
alteration? That the Earth, for instance, could not have in its composition,
one particle of sand more or less, than it has, nor produce one plant or
animal, worm or fly, different from what it does? And yet this is the
inevitable consequence of such necessity: For if the whole be necessary, every
most minute particle is equally so.

BESIDES, If the World be from its own nature necessary, it is every where
necessary, to every point of real or imaginary space. For what may from the
nature of the thing be absent from one place, may notwithstanding any necessity
to the contrary, be absent from any other, and consequently from every place.
It being impossible that there should be any thing in one place more than
another, to make it necessary. What therefore is necessary, must be every where
so, and so be Infinite, as well as eternal. Nay and even every part and
particle of the whole World, must by the same Argument be infinite: For there
must be the same necessity for all the parts, as for the whole, as is before
observed. Whence, there must be (upon this supposition) more Infinite Beings
than there are atoms of sand, or rays of light: Which is the grossest absurdity.

AGAIN, If the World exist from necessity, and all the parts of it necessarily
perform their various functions and operations: Then it is also necessary that
they for ever do so, without any diversity, variation or change. Nature must
always act by invariable and immutable laws, in the same order, with the same
force, and to the same effect. For what is from the nature of the thing
necessary to day, will be so to morrow and for ever. And thus that man that
necessarily lives to day, must by the same necessity live always; he that is in
health to day must be so for ever. And in a word, there can be no change in any
part of the Creation: which is so contrary to our constant experience in this
World of change, that it need not be insisted on.

I will just mention one Argument more against the eternity of the World, which
possibly may be more intelligible, and more adapted to the capacity of my
hearers, than what I Have already offered.

THE supposition of the World's eternity does necessarily contradict the
possibility of a succession in any thing whatsoever. For a succession does in
the nature of it imply a first and last, which are altogether incompatible with
Eternity, and cannot without greatest absurdity be predicated of a perpetual
and unchangable duration. To exemplify this, The succession of day and night
could not have been eternal; such succession naturally supposing, that either
the day was before the night, or the night before the day: If either preceeded,
there was a first, a beginning of the succession, on this side Eternity.
Supp^sing the day was before the night, it must either have had a temporal
beginning, or an eternal existence: If the latter be granted, there could yet
have been no eternal succession of day and night; but an everlasting day must
have preceeded the night, had the night commenced never so many Millions of
ages ago; there being an infinite distance between eternity and the remotest
time: Nay more than so, had the day been eternal, there could never have been
(upon the supposition before us) any night at all: For from whence could there
be so great a change in the eternal and immutable course of Nature? How could
there be such new revolutions in nature, when under the same invariable laws,
that had continued from eternity?

I might offer many other Arguments to obviate the Objection; but what has been
said is sufficient, and possibly in the opinion of my hearers more than
sufficient; I therefore reassume the former conclusion.

IF the World has had a beginning (as is demonstrated) there must have been
some Author, some efficient cause, by which it was created and made.

HAVING thus by a view of the creature, discovered the Creator, and found
evident demonstration of a Divine Being from the works of His Hands; Let us
next consider some of those invisible things of Him, which may be clearly seen
and understood, by the things that are made.

V. THEN the Eternity of GOD is ungainsayably evident from the works of
Creation. We are not capable of a greater certainty of any thing whatsoever,
than of this, that there has been something from Eternity; since what has not
eternally existed, had a beginning; and what had a beginning must be produced
by something else. There cannot be a more unreasonable supposition, nor a more
glaring contradiction, than that there was a time wherein there was perfectly
nothing: For if so, there could have been nothing t^ all Eternity. It being
rather madness, than weakness, to attribute Creating power and energy to mere
nothing. This consequence therefore forces it self upon us, that the Cause of
all things, is an eternal, uncaused, independent Being. Whence we may justly
declaim with the Psalmist, Psalm. xc.2. Before the mountains were brought forth,
or ever thou had formed the Earth and the World: even from everlasting to
everlasting thou art God.

VI. IT IS likewise demonstrable from the works of Creation, that this Glorious
Author of all things is a Spiritual Being. We certainly know, that we our
selves are thinking substances: The very meditatior before us makes it evident,
that we are capable of Thought, Reason, and Reflection; that our Minds can
suddenly soar to the fixed Stars, compass the vast circuit of the Heavens, and
even launch into the boundless Abyss of Eternity, where they have just now
been. -- And whence d^ we derive this power? Is it from dead unactive matter?
Impossible! for matter is it self utterly incapable of thought, and therefore
certainly unable to produce a thinking Being. This may be brought to strictest
demonstration. -- If we allow thought to any matter whatsoever, we must allow
it to every particle of matter; and thereby suppose as many thinking Beings as
there are atoms in the Creation (the properties of all matter being the same)
The absurdity of which supposition lies open to every eye; and it would be no
less absurd to imagine, that some certain composition or modification of matter
can produce thought. For unthinking particles of matter, however put together,
are matter still; and if there was no thought in any of the parts, there can be
none in the whole, whatever be its composition; since the whole can have
nothing, but what it receives from the parts The curious Reader may see this
more largely handled by Mr. LOCK of Humane Understanding, Lib. IV. Cap. X. And
in Dr. CLARK'S Letters to Mr. Dodwell.
. The consequence is therefore inevitable, that since all matter is from its
own nature necessarily destitute of thought, our thinking rational souls must
derive their Being from some immaterial Author: It being utterly impossible for
that to be produced in the effect, which was not in the power of the cause. --
And by the same Argument, this glorious Spirit must have eminently i^ Himself,
all the perfections of all the innumerable intelligent beings that now are, or
ever have been in the World, were they all contracted into one Intelligence:
Since they all depend upon Him for their Beings* capacities, and operations.
And then cannot be more in the streams than in the Fountain. -- It is rational
arguing i^ Psalm. xciv.9, 10. He that planted the ear* shall he not hear? He
that formed the eye shall He not see? He that teaches man knowledge, shall not
He know?

IF these speculations are too Philosophical for some of my hearers, the
Argumen^ may be proposed in a more easy and familiar manner. -- It is plain to
every ca^pacity, that we have souls as well as bo^dies, that our more noble
part is a thinkin^ intelligent spirit, that there are and have been multitudes
of spiritual Beings besid^ our selves; and that these all proceed from some
cause, at least equal to the effect, wh^ must therefore Himself be a Spiritual
Sub^stance, possessed of all the excellencies of al^ other spiritual substances
in the World: o^therwise He must give what he has not and the effect must
exceed the virtue of the cause; which is manifestly absurd.

THUS by a reflection upon our own Souls, we have discovered the necessary
truth of our Lord's Doctrine, Joh. iv.24. That GOD is a Spirit. Let us now go
on to consider some other of the Divine Perfections, legible in the Book of
Creation.

And,

VII. IT further appears from the things which are made, that the first Cause
of all things must be an Infinite Being.

THE prodigious magnitude and amazing extent of the Universe do loudly proclaim
the Infinite nature of its glorious Author. -- Though we can have but an
imperfect view of this scene of wonders, we may yet gaze our selves into
admiration and surprise, by what obscure and distant glances we are capable of.
If we go no further from home than this globe of Earth upon which we dwell, we
have here a vast body, computed at near Eight Thousand Miles Diameter, and
above Two Hundred Thousand Millions of Miles in its bulk or solid content;
which must appear to every eye a Mass worthy of an Infinite Creator. But as
great as this seems to be, it is (as Astronomers inform us) exceeded in
Magnitude by most of the heavenly bodies, and must be esteemed but small in
comparison of some of the Planets; especially if compared to tha^ stupendous
Globe of Fire, the Sun. No^ if we are filled with just admiration at the massy
bulk of these huge bodies, how surprizingly great must be the space in which
they perform their revolutions! The Su^ being esteemed above Eighty Millions
(...) Miles distant from the Earth, and much further from some other of the
Planets which at those vast distances, are all observed to move round the Sun,
and yet never to interfere, or clash with one another*

HERE we might make a stop, and ado^^ the infinite perfections of the glorious
Author of this spacious system of the Sun and Planets: But there are yet more
distant* and greater Objects of Astonishment, tha^ invite our attention, the
fixed Stars (...) mean, which seem to fill the spangle^ canopy, and appear
innumerable to the naked eye; and yet vastly more numerous when viewed through
a Telescope, which discovers Myriads of 'em not otherwise visible. These being
supposed at due distances from each other (as they certainly are) how Immense
must be the space which they occupy! And if our modern Astr^nomers are not
mistaken in a matter which they think themselves pretty certain of, there is a
new scene before us, which will captivate our understanding, and utterly lose
our thoughts; they suppose the great multitude of fixed Stars to be so many
Suns, all of 'em endued with native light and heat; of like Dimensions with our
Sun; and each of 'em accompanied with a system of Planets, as our Sun is; and
consequently each of 'em occupying as great a space, as was formerly supposed
in the whole Firmament. -- This account of the Universe makes it appear many
thousand times greater than is ordinarily imagined, and should answerably
excite our admiration and praises of the glorious Creator and Contriver of such
a magnificent World.

BUT having thus long gazed at the prodigious Masses of these heavenly Bodies,
and the immeasurable space possessed by them; it is time to apply these
considerations to the present purpose, and see if we cannot discover the
Infiniteness of the Creator, from this view of the Heavenly regions: Which, if
we will but open our eyes, must appear in the clearest light. For it is manifest
to every observation, that the Maker, Guide, and Governor of the Universe,
must be always present in every part of this incomprehensible space; (He could
not else have made, nor could He otherwise superintend, order, and direct all
the parts, operations, and influences of this stately fabric) which is
impossible to conceive, of any but an infinite Being.

BESIDES, He that made the World, must also of his free will and choice, have
ordered and appointed the place of its residence; and nothing but His own
pleasure could circumscribe it to these limits, or confine it to this
particular space, in the boundless void, rather than any other. He must
therefore Himself be equal to all space, whether real or imaginary; that is, He
must be an Infinite Being, whom the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain, as 1 King. viii.27. Which was the thing to be proved. And thus we see
the Immensity of that glorious Being, that sits upon the circle of the
Earth, that stretches out the Heavens as a curtain; and spreads them out as
a tent to dwell in, Isai xl.22.

I might here have urged the simplicity and uncompounded Nature of GOD, as a
further evidence of His Infinity: But this would be to go out of the way of my
Text, which confines me to the consideration of the Divine Perfections, as
visible in the works of Creation; and I think what is said is sufficient upon
this Head. I therefore proceed.

VIII. THE Unity of the Godhead is also clearly seen from the works which are
made.

FOR if there were more Gods than One, they could not be Infinite; two
infinites being a palpable contradiction: And if finite, they could not be the
first cause of all things; as is before demonstrated.

BESIDES, If there be more Gods than One, they must all be either supreme,
subordinate, or coordinate. Two supreme Beings is a contradiction in terms:
for either one must be superior, or both equal; and therefore neither supreme.
A subordinate God must be himself dependent, and could not have all things
depend upon him; or in other words, could not be the creator nor upholder of
the World. It remains therefore, that if there be a plurality of Gods, they
must be coordinate, which is equally absurd: For were there several coordinate
Gods, they must either create the World conjunctly or separately; not
conjunctly, for if they joined together in Creating the World, they would all
make but one first Cause, and each severally but part of the Cause; which being
supposed, there could be no perfect Being, and consequently no God: Nor could a
plurality of Gods make the World separately; there would then be no first Cause
of all, if each caused but a part of the World.

I might further urge the Unity of God, from His necessary existence. -- I have
already demonstrated, that the first Cause of all things must be Eternally
necessary: And nothing can be capable of plainer demonstration; for if there
ever had been a time wherein He had not existed, He could have had no existence
to Eternity, unless we suppose a Cause of the first Cause, which is absurd. --
Besides, if all things were created by Him, He must necessarily be Himself
uncreated, and being uncreated He must necessarily be Eternal: For what at any
time did not exist, can never come into Being without being created, either by
it self or by something else. Now if we suppose God to have created Himself, we
attribute to him action before existence; which is the grossest absurdity. If
we suppose Him created by any thing else, we suppose a Cause of the first
Cause, as before. He must therefore be Eternally necessary; and consequently
can be but One: For if it be possible that the World could be created by one
Efficient Cause (which cannot be doubted) there can be but one necessary cause
of all things. Every thing else may be derivative and dependent, and therefore
cannot be necessary. Whence it is certain there can be but one God, who (as I Have
already proved) must be a necessary Being. -- Thus we have clearest evidence of
that truth, Deuteronomy. vi.4. The Lord our God is one Lord. And of that 1 Cor.
viii.6. But to us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and
we in Him.

IX. IT is moreover apparent from the works of Creation, that this glorious GOD
is an Omnipotent Being. I Have already proved, that the Heavens and the Earth, in
all their amazing magnificence, curious frame, and regular order, sprung out of
nothing, at the powerful command of the great Creator. Wherefore since there is
an infinite distance between perfectly nothing and any real Being, there must
be Omnipotence employed in this glorious work. The united powers of every
finite Being would in vain endeavor to create from N^thing the most despicable
worm, or even a particle of sand. For (as I observed) there is an infinite and
eternal opposition between mere nothing and the most inferior creature; and
therefore the vilest insect, or smallest particle of dust, could not be brought
from nonentity into Being, but by an Omnipotent arm. -- What a surprising
scene then do the Heavens and Earth afford us of the great Creator's power?
What less than an ALMIGHTY GOD could first find matter for an endless train of
such vast bodies, and then compose the stately fabric!

AND I might further observe, that the creation of the World cannot be the
extent of the Creator's power: For if once possessed of creating skill and
ability, He must always retain it; and therefore could (had He pleased) have
spent Millions of ages in creating new Worlds, until their number had exceeded
the utmost stretch even of an Angel's thought. -- And from this view of His
Omnipotence, it also appears, that he could (had it been His pleasure) have
created a like number of World^ in a moment: For there can be no limits to
Almighty power. Let us then dismiss this Head, with Elihu's admiration upon a
like occasion, Job xxxvii.22, 23. With Go^ is terrible Majesty. Touching the
Almighty, we cannot find Him out; He is excellent i^ power.

X. THE Infinite Wisdom of the Creator, is also clearly manifest from the
things that are made.

WE have already observed, that whatever perfection is found in the creature,
must be first eminently in the Creator: For it is clearly evident, that what had
its Being and beginning from another, must have all the properties of its Being
from the same source. If we apply this to the present case, we shall find it
necessary that He who has animated our dust and endued us with so much wisdom,
must have more Wisdom in Himself than all the men in the World, since all
depend upon Him, and can have no other ways of knowledge, or extent of power,
than what He gives them. The same may be said with respect to all created
Wisdom in Heaven and Earth, which equally flows from the same fountain, who
must therefore Himself be Infinitely Wise.

THE glorious art and contrivance in the admirable frame of Nature, do likewise
loudly proclaim the infinite Wisdom of the Creator; while the whole, and every
part, do so visibly conspire to answer the great ends of their Being. -- Should
we confine our speculations to the most inferior parts of the Creation only,
how many marks of Divine Skill, that would nonplus the thoughts of the most
sagacious enquirer, might be found in the least pebble! What a great variety of
shapes, colors, smells, qualities, and uses, are there in the smallest herbs
or flowers, not to be imitated nor even fully understood by created wisdom! And
how are they propagated by an unsearchable seminal virtue! How curiously
formed, and admirably adapted to their several ends and uses, are the most
contemptible insects! What industry, conduct, and seeming government, are there
found with so inferior a creature as the Be, that even rivals the policy of
Princes Courts! With what wonderful beauty are the smallest birds and beasts
adorned! And with what apparent sagacity do they subserve the ends of their
creation; especially in their own preservation, and the propagating their kind!
-- These and such like contemplations, do sufficiently discover the Infinite
Wisdom that has thus ordered, and does thus superintend and direct all those
minute and disregarded parts of the creation.

BUT if we continue our view, and lift up our eyes to the superior parts of the
World, the scene will yet further open, and flash brightest conviction into our
minds, of the unsearchable Wisdom of God.

How came the parts of the Earth to cohere together, and not separately fly in
the boundless space? Who has given the Sea his decree, bounded it by the shore,
and said to its proud waves, Hitherto shall thou go and no further? Who has
hung the Earth upon nothing, and placed it in such due distance from the Sun,
that it is neither by too near approaches to that orb of Fire scorched up and
consumed, nor by a too remote station made a continent of ice? Who is the
father of the rain, or has begotten the drops of the dew, whereby the Earth is
watered and replenished? Whence are those amazing and innumerable Orbs that
spangle the Sky, placed and kept at due distances, and whirled in their several
courses, without interfering and dashing together, to the destruction of the
World? Don't all these, and innumerable more wonders of Nature concur, to
proclaim that man even mad as madness it self, that can suppose any lower cause
of these things than Infinite Wisdom? especially if he considers the whole
frame of this stately fabric, with the disposition of its several parts;
together with that subordination, dependence, relation, and mutual society,
which is in the whole, and which each have to other.

BUT we need not go so far from home to find the truth we are seeking; we being
our selves so bright a discovery of it. If we consider our bodies, how
wonderfully are they made! what astonishing art and skill appears in the
variety of the parts, in their beauty, symmetry, and proportion, their
connection, dependence, and use! Who can search out the wonders of this frame,
or fully account for so much as the motion of a leg or finger? But if we
reflect upon the wonderful operations and faculties of the Mind, the surprise
sti^^ grows upon us. The nature of the Soul* with its powers of Understanding,
Memory* Will, etc. are beyond our search, and co^ver'd from our view with thick
darkness* like their glorious Author. -- Well may these and the like
reflections strike us with astonishment.

AND there are doubtless vastly superio^ marks of art and skill in the
Creation, which we know nothing of. How can we the^^ but join with the Psalmist
in his holy admiration of these things, in Psalm. civ.24 O Lord, how manifold
are thy works: i^ WISDOM have thou made them all!

XI. WHAT has been said under the last head, does likewise clearly discover
the Divine Omniscience: And show us plainly, that He that contrived and made,
that does direct and govern this magnificent World with such order and
regularity, must have all things present and future in His view at once.

FOR had not the whole plan of these amazing works, been before the Architect,
He could not have contrived and disposed all the innumerable parts with such
admirable glory, and surprising harmony. And did not his Omniscient eyes
inspect every atom of the Creation, and clearly behold the darkest recesses of
nature, it would be impossible, that His providence could take care of the
whole World, and all the minutest parts thereof, as we see it does. How else
could they all subsist? And what else could keep them from destruction and
confusion? -- Nay, had not all things future been eternally naked and open to
His all-searching eye, it would have been impossible, that He could have so
disposed 'em all, that they should have for ever conspired in their own mutual
good and preservation, and their Author's glory. -- It is therefore the natural
result of these speculations, in Psalm. cxlvii.5. Great is our Lord, and of
great power, His UNDERSTANDING is infinite.

I might still continue the thread of discourse, and by necessary deductions
from the works of Creation, find brightest evidence of all other Divine
perfections, which we have any notion of.

I might clearly prove, that the Author of all created goodness, whether
natural or moral, is Himself infinitely Good; that the fountain of all created
justice, is Himself infinitely Just; that He whose Nature i^ highest
perfection, cannot be chargable with any defect (as all sin and immorality is)
and must therefore be infinitely Holy; and that He who has made, does so
carefully preserve and bountifully provide for al^ the parts of the World, is
Himself infinite Mercy and Love. But the time would fail me to particularly
insist upon these things; and these and the like consequences, are so natural
and easy from what has been already observed, that they don't require to be
largely insisted on.

I shall therefore now hasten to some practical Inferences from the Doctrine.

And,

I. IF there be a God of such infinite perfections, it is a natural Inference,
that He should be worshipped in a manner agreeable to His glorious Nature.

THIS is a truth so plainly legible in the law of Nature, that the most
barbarous Heathen and salvage Pagans have always assented to it; and it is even
impossible for a rational mind to refuse an assent. Can we consider Him as the
Author both of our essence and subsistence, as the fountain of all our mercies
and comforts, upon whom we depend, in whom we live, and unto whom we are
beholden for all things; and yet suppose we owe Him no reverence or homage?
Don't even Nature it self teach us to look to the Rock whence we are hewn? A
son honors his father, and a servant his master; if then He be a Father,
where is His honor? If He be a Master, where is His fear? Mal. i.6.

BUT to be more particular;

WE are hereby instructed to manifest our dependence upon God, by praying to
Him.

IF our life and breath are at His dispose; if all the good we want or hope
for, is treasured up in Him, and must flow from Him; the very first principles
of reason will teach us to repair to Him for a supply of our wants; not only
because we have no where else to go for any supplies, but because it is a
rational acknowledgment of the fountain of our mercies, to look to Him for all
our good; and to receive all as coming from His bountiful Hand. This is an
acknowledgment that a Parent expects from his Children, a Prince from his
Subjects: and much more may the Eternal Majesty expect it from such vile warms,
and indigent creatures as we. -- We should therefore come to Him with a deep
impression of our own nothingness: For what are such clods of animated dust, if
compared to the Immense fountain of all glorious perfections? We should come to
Him, with a humble sense of our natural unworthiness. For besides our moral
pollution (which I may hereafter have occasion to consider) we are but poor
potsherds of the Earth; but clay in the hands of the sovereign Potter, and can
therefore have no claim of favor from Him. We must come to Him with a humble
resignation and submission to His will: For He is an Eternal Sovereign; and we
at His absolute and uncontrolable dispose.

THE ends of this proposed duty of prayer, are not to give God a new
acquaintance with our circumstances and necessities, or to make any change in
His counsels. No! there can be nothing hid from the flaming eye of His
Omniscience. And touching His counsel, He is in one mind, and who can turn Him?
And what His Soul desires, even that He does. But we should pray to Him, that
we may be our selves fit recipients of His Mercy: This being a direct means to
keep us humble, and to awaken in us a sense of our indigent, helpless,
depending state: It being likewise a means to keep us religious, to actuate our
love to Him, from whom we implore, and obtain all our good; And to incline us
to live to Him, as we live from Him.

THAT prayer has a direct tendency thus to excite, and enliven our religious
contemplations and affections, is self-evident. And it is plainly obvious to
every man's reason, that he is not qualified for the receipt of Mercy, that
forgets both his God and his own soul; that regards neither the bounty nor the
Benefactor; and that will no way testify his dependence upon God, nor his
subjection to Him. The very light of nature does therefore preach that
doctrine, Psalm. xcv.6, 7. O! come let us worship and bow down, let us kneel
before the Lord our Maker. For He is our God, and we are the people of His
pasture, and the sheep of His hands.

IF against this it be objected, that the glorious Nature of God is so highly
exalted above such poor worms of the dust as we, that we are too inferior
creatures to be the objects of His care and regard: -- This Insinuation
discovers thoughts, altogether unworthy of such an Omniscient, Omnipresent, and
infinitely Perfect BEING, who without any pains or difficulty, inspects and
orders every atom in the Creation, takes care (as we may plainly see) of every
worm and fly, arrays the lillies of the field, with their beautiful clothing,
and provides food even for the ravens of the valley. -- Were any thing below
His notice, whence could it subsist? What could uphold it in being, or prevent
its return to its original causes?

FROM what has been said, it further appears, that we should not only manifest
our dependence upon God by praying to Him, but our Gratitude by Thanksgiving
and Praise*

THAT Gratitude is a natural debt to a Benefactor, and that our thankfulness
should be proportioned to the benefits received, are truths every where
acknowledged. How then should our hearts and mouths be for ever filled with
praises to the infinite Fountain of goodness; from whence so many streams of
mercy are continually flowing to us, and from whom we are continually receiving
such a variety and affluence of what is fit for our use, comfort, support,
ornament, and delight!

BESIDES the wonders of Redeeming love, and the mercies which refer to another
life (which I hope to have a further occasion to consider) the good things of
this World only, which we all enjoy, give us cause to rouse up our grateful
resentments, in that language, Psalm. ciii.1, 2. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and
all that is within me, bless His holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all His benefits.

I might further observe under this head, that the consideration of the Divine
Perfections, should make us most serious, hearty, sincere, and spiritual in all
our religious devotions. It Is most evident, that this Omniscient eye cannot be
flattered and deceived, with any formal shows and superficial pretenses: For He
knows our thoughts afar off, searches our hearts and reins; and has clearest
views of our most inward motions and retirements of soul: Nor can He be pleased
with our mock-shews of devotion, while we flatter Him with our lips, and lie to
Him with our tongues, and have our hearts far from Him: No! God is a Spirit,
and they that worship Him, must worship Him in spirit and truth, Joh. iv.24.

To Conclude,

II. THIS Doctrine teaches us the last necessity that we are in, of an
interest in the favor of this glorious God. Horror and surprise accompanies
the very thought of being at odds with this dread^ Majesty; who has made us,
does preserve us, and can crush us in pieces in a moment; or fill us with
unutterable anguish, at His pleasure. Better would it be for us, that the whole
Creation should conspire our misery and ruin, than that the God that made us,
should refuse to have mercy upon us; and the Rock that formed us, should show
us no favor: For if God be for us, who can be against us? It is therefore a
case worthy of our most solicitous enquiry, What are the means of obtaining the
favor of God? But the answer of this enquiry must be deferred to a further
opportunity.

A DEMONSTRATION OF The Apostate state of Man by Nature, And of the glorious
Provision made for his Recovery BY JESUS CHRIST.
ROMANS V.6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for
the ungodly.


HAVING already demonstrated the Being and infinite Perfections of God, and
from thence inferred our extreme necessity of an interest in His favor, I am
now (according to my promise) to enquire into the way and means, of becoming
favorites of this glorious Majesty: And in order thereto, to consider, whether
we are naturally in g^od terms with Him: And if not, whether He has made any
provision for our reconciliation, and re-obtaining His lost favor. Both which
considerations offer themselves, in a manner worthy of the Divine Nature, and
agreeable to humane reason, in the words before us: Wherein we may Note,

1. THE fallen apostate state of mankind Christ died for the UNGODLY, i. e. for
such as were in an estate of distance from God, of enmity and opposition to Him.

THE Text indeed gives us no light into the cause of this guilt and woe; but
reason as well as revelation plainly dictates, that it is inconsistent with the
merciful nature of our glorious Creator, and natural Lord, either to create us
in an estate of sin and misery; or to reduce us to those wretched circumstances
without just provocation* And therefore that rebellion and apostasy must
necessarily be the source of this corruption and pollution, as we shall more
particularly consider.

2. WE may note the awful consequences of our apostasy. We were without
strength. The original word here rendered without strength, is very emphatical,
and represents us in most languishing, helpless, and distressed circumstances.
It alludes to and is taken from the imbecility of those that are reduced to
the last extremity, and brought to the brink of the grave, by sore sickness.

3. WE may note the Remedy provided for this distress; and the means of our
recovery from this languishing helpless state: Christ died for us. When all
humane help failed, and we might have utterly despaired of recovery by any
created power, then the glorious SON OF GOD stepped in to our rescue, and
purchased our deliverance with his own blood.

4. WE may note the seasonableness of this remedy provided for us. In due TIME
Christ died, etc. which must either refer to the time pre-ordained of God for
this glorious deliverance, as some understand the words; or rather to the
fitness of the season, wherein our blessed Redeemer undertook and accomplished
our ransom.

THE misery of the World at the time of Christ's appearing, by their universal
depravation of manners, and by the deluge of Idolatry, that covered the face of
the Earth; makes it appear to have been a fit season, for the glorifying the
Divine compassion. And the union of the nations under the imperial government,
made it a fit season to publish the salvation procured for them.

BUT for a more distinct handling the words, I shall consider them as
consisting of these two Propositions.

I. THAT mankind is brought into a sinful, miserable, helpless state.

II. THAT our Lord Jesus Christ did in due time die for their deliverance out
of this state.

THE method I propose to my self, in discoursing upon these Propositions, is to
distinctly show, that they are not only revealed truths, but also most
consonant and agreeable to the light of reason: And then as I pass along, make
some brief Reflections by way of Improvement.

Prop. I. THAT mankind is brought into a sinful miserable and helpless state.

THIS may be illustrated, by first offering some rational evidences of this
awful truth; and then by enquiring into the cause or reason of it.

FOR evincing the truth of the Proposition, I shall offer these following
considerations.

1. IT IS plain to every intelligent mind, that a rational creature may sin
against God. Every one must upon first thought acknowledge, that our glorious
Creator sustains a near relation to us as our common Parent, and the Author of
our Being, on which account He justly claims our love and reverence: And that
He has an absolute sovereignty and dominion over us, as our Lord and King;
whereby He is entitled to our subjection and obedience. If then instead of that
love and reverence which we owe to our Heavenly Father, we set light by o^
disesteem any of His infinite Perfections: Or if instead of that obedience,
which is due to this gl^rious King, we do those things which we know to be
contrary to His will; we violate the first laws of nature, and sin against God.
This is a plain case, and admits of no dispute.

THE only difficulty before us is, how we shall know what is the Will of God
concerning us. If there be no law, there can be no transgression; and if God
has given us no manifestation of His will, He cannot expect or require our
obedience.

IN answer to this Objection, I must not take it for granted, that the
Scriptures are a Divine revelation; that is yet to be proved. But must
consider, whether we cannot by the light of nature, discover such
manifestations of God's will and our duty, as will render our nonconformity
thereto criminal and sinful.

AND if we do but contemplate the perfections of the Divine nature, this will
appear in the clearest light. For whatever is contrary to any of them, must be
displeasing to God, and repugnant to His Will; His own Attributes being what He
cannot but eternally and unchangeably love and delight in. To exemplify this,
The light of nature enjoins the belief of one God alone; and thereby teaches
us, that He is the only Object of properly Divine and Religious Worship: And
consequently that it is a violation of the law of nature to worship other gods;
Or that any idol of our imagination should be esteemed, loved, trusted, obeyed,
or honored as God.

MOREOVER, our own reason dictates to us, that God is Himself infinite
Rectitude and Justice, and therefore, that every act of injustice whether it
respects God or man as its immediate object, is contrary to His Nature and
Will. -- Thus likewise does God appear to the eye of reason, to be a Being of
infinite Goodness and Mercy, whence it is manifest that an imitation of this
Divine perfection in beneficence, clemency, love, and charity is acceptable in
His sight; while bitterness, wrath, hatred, cruelty, or any acts of unkindness,
are as contrary to His Will, as to His merciful Nature.

BY a particular reflection on these mentioned Attributes, much of our duty
toward God and man might be discovered. And by a survey of His other
perfections, we might find further acquaintance with His will concerning us;
and thereby further evidence, that we are capable of sinning against Him. The
same thing might be demonstrated by several other Arguments; but I think few
men in their right wits can call this into question.

WHAT man will teach his neighbor, that treachery, fraud and violence are
sinless and innocent? What Parent will instruct his eldest son, that he may
innocently, if he can secretly, take away his life to possess his estate? What
Prince will teach his Subjects, that they are under no religious bond to
obedience; but may without sin against God, turn rebels, traitors and
regicides? If man be under no duty to God, and if nothing be sin against Him,
what a creature would man be, and what a hell would Earth be!

UPON the whole, it is most evident, that there are such things in nature, as
virtue and vice, right and wrong; this is what our own consciences continually
remonstrate, and what all Nations have always agreed in. Whence that appears
agreeable to the very first dictates of reason, in Genesis iv.7. If thou do
well, shall thou not be accepted? And if thou do not well, sin lies at the
door.

2. WE have all a sad experience, that our first and chief inclinations, are to
those ways that are most repugnant unto the holiness of the Divine nature; and
to that rectitude that God reasonably expects from us.

AS soon as ever we are capable of action, the leading affections and passions
of the mind are manifestly irregular and vicious, the appetite exorbitant, and
the whole bent of soul after what is most opposite to our duty and happiness:
That if our tender age were without restraint and government, and a loose given
to our natural inclinations; we should be worse than the wild asses colt, and
be authors of destruction to our selves, and one another* With what care and
pains must our first years be cultivated* With what perpetual instructions and
admonitions must the seeds of virtue be sown in our minds! And with what
diligence and vigilance must the poison sprouts of vice and immorality be
weeded up, in order to prevent our headlong progress in impiety toward God and
man!

THUS we begin our course: And in our more advanced age, what combat does every
thinking person find, between his reason and passions, whereby he is even
distracted with this perpetual struggle and contest for victory! With what
difficulty do we form our minds to any reverence of our glorious Creator, or
conformity to His justice, goodness, or holiness! How difficult a task is it to
regulate our appetites, or to hold the reins of our inordinate inclinations and
desires! -- This is what the heathen World have from the eldest ages observed
in themselves; whereby they have been filled with great vexation and
inquietude; and put upon vain enquiries, after means of composing these jarring
principles in their minds; which have issued in this ancient and common
complaint, Video meliora, proboque, de^eriora sequor. Agreeable to that of the
Apostle, The good I know, I do not; and when I would do good, evil is present
with me. These things ly open to every observer, whereby they cannot but
discern, that the imaginations of the thoughts of their hearts are evil
continually, as Genesis vi.5.

3. WE cannot but observe, that the greatest part of the World do, against the
light of their own reason, live in courses of sin against God, and of
disobedience to Him

HOW great a part of the World bow down to stocks and stones, worship the hos^
of Heaven, or ly prostrate at the altars of some vile pagods; while they forget
the God that made them, and the Rock tha^ formed them! And though custom or
education may so darken their understandings, as to satisfy their minds in this
stupid idolatry, yet their own reason (were that consulted) would certainly
teach them the sin and folly of thus worshipping and serving the creature, more
than the Creator, who is blessed for ever*

AND besides this superstition and idolatry, whereby the Eternal Majesty is
thus dishonored, by the much greatest part o^ mankind; How does lust and
passion ge^ the victory of reason and principle, even in the most enlightened
parts of the World* Whence else are the ambition and tyranny, the ravages,
massacres, convulsions and confusions, that render the Earth an Aceldama? Or
whence the enormous actions, and flagitious lives, the injustice and fraud, the
malice and envy, the luxury, riot and excess; or other like sinful and sensual
pursuits, that the most of the World are chargeable with? Can the perpetrators
of such impieties plead ignorance? Don't they sin against light, and against
the frequent remonstrances of their reason and consciences? Yes certainly! Though
they know God, they glorify Him not as God, but become vain in their
imaginations, until their foolish hearts are darkened, as Romans i.21.

4. IT IS evident that this promptitude to sin, flows from the corruption and
pollution of our natures.

WHENCE can such corrupt streams proceed, but from a polluted fountain? And
whence such a progress of impiety, but from a wicked and depraved nature? What
reason can be assigned, why men should choose irregular and sinful, rather than
innocent and rational pleasures and satisfactions; and gratify their lusts at
the expense of their comfort, health, reputation, estates, and every thing else
that is pleasant and precious, as we see they do? Why do bold daring wretches,
without any apparent prospect of pleasure or profit, with an effronted bravery,
defy Heaven it self, profane the Divine Attributes, and curse their own souls?
And why do they rush on in their sinful and irrational courses, against
contrary convictions, and against all restraints, Divine and humane? What (I
say) can be the cause of all this, but the pravity of our natures; and the
cursed enmity of our hearts to God, and all that is good?

THOUGH there needs no other Argument to give us full assurance of this sad
truth; yet a particular view of the faculties, habits and dispositions of our
Souls, would give us further evidence, that our hearts are deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, as Jer. xvii.9.

5. THIS state of sin and pollution, which we find our selves in, must
necessarily be a state of guilt and w^.

SIN in its formal nature is directly repugnant unto all the properties and
perfections of God; and is the highest affront and indignity to Him. It is a
contempt and denial of His propriety in us, and dominion over us; as it is a
refusing subjection to His known will.

IT is a contempt of His goodness and mercy, in choosing base and brutish
pleasures, before His favor; and refusing to be allured to His service, by all
the sweet attractives of His graci^us providence. -- It is a horrid slight and
disregard of His Omniscienc^ and Omnipresence, that we dare sin in His very
presence, and act contrary to Him, though we know that our actions are open
before Him. -- It Is a daring defiance of His Omnipotence, for such worms as we
to oppose, as though we could make our party good against the God, who made the
World, and can make us fuel to His flaming vengeance, at pleasure.

IT is a vile contempt of His Holiness and Purity, in preferring the pollutions
of our own irregular appetites, before the rectitude of His Nature. -- In a
word, it is a contempt of all His Attributes, and direct enmity and rebellion
against Him.

FROM this contemplation, it is most apparent, that we wretchedly deviate from
the great end of our Creation, both by the habits and acts of sin. For it is the
height of stupidity to imagine, that Infinite Wisdom should make so noble a
Being, for no higher purposes, than to contemn His Attributes, spurn His
Authority, and maintain a course of opposition to Him. And the same
consideration lays open before us the guilt of a sinful state. For if rebellion
and treason against an earthly Sovereign be by all men voted so black a crime,
as to involve the rebel in deepest guilt, and expose him to sharpest revenges;
how much more criminal and guilty must he be, that maintains a rebellion
against the King of kings, and lives in a course of open enmity and defiance
both to His Being and Government! which we have seen to be our case.

WHAT kind or degrees of punishment, an offended Sovereign will inflict upon
such rebels, is not so easily discovered by the light of nature. But that we
are justly exposed to punishment, is visible from the nature of our crimes.
None calls in question the equity of penal rewards to traitors in the State:
how much less can we reasonably expect to escape unpunished for our treason
against Heaven! If it be justice in man to punish the delinquent, it must
necessarily be so in God; who is the fountain of all created justice, and whose
holy Nature is the only pattern of our virtues and regular conduct. It is
therefore but reasonable to expect, that those who prefer the ways and fruits
of sin, to the favor of God, should be left to their unhappy choice, and be
shut out of His favor for ever. They may not, they cannot suppose, that such
guilty and polluted creatures, such enemies to God and holiness should be the
objects of the Divine love and complacency; or be admitted to the favorable
presence, and delightful fruition of a holy God. No! He is of purer eyes than
to behold evil, or to look upon sin with approbation. -- Thus we see, that the
loss of God's favor, and thereby the loss of all happiness (which can only
consist in His favor) is the natural and necessary result of our state of sin
and enmity to Him. And though we cannot discover by natural light, to what manner
or measure of positive penalties our sins expose us: Yet we have greatest
reason to expect and fear some terrible manifestation of God's righteous
displeasure.

IF it be objected against all this, that the contrary is evident, from the
dispensations of Providence; it being a constant observation, that the most
impiously wicked and profane are often in happy and flourishing circumstances,
and seem to be the darling favorites of Heaven, while the more holy and
virtuous are under greatest afflictions, and pressed with many calamities, as
though they were the especial objects of God's wrath: -- I answer, this Objection
does nothing militate against the awful considerations before us, but rather
confirms them; For how dark and inexplicable soever the present dispensations
of providence may be, God is a God of justice; and the Judge of all the Earth
will do right. Whence it is ^ natural conclusion, from the present seeming
inequality in God's dealings with us, that this life is not the place of
reward^ and punishments; but that there will be ^ future retribution, wherein
these crooked things will be made straight, and the flourishing prosperity of
wicked men, will appear to be but a preparation for their ruin, and a fatting
for the slaughter. W^ may reasonably conclude, that God will first or last
discover the justice and equalit^ of all His dispensations. And since this does
not appear from the present face o^ providence, we may look for a future
season, for the manifestation of His just aversatio^ to sin and sinners, and
for the execution o^ His deserved wrath upon them.

THAT we are made for a future state, will appear from the contemplation of our
own natures: Whereby we may certainly find, that we have spiritual and
immaterial substances within us (as I have fully demonstrated in a former
discourse) and that ou^ Souls being immaterial, must be likewise incorruptible,
and naturally immortal; made to survive their earthly tabernacles, and to live
and act when our bodies return to their dust. -- Now can it be imagined that
God has made so superior a creature as man, endowed him with a rational and
immortal S^ul, and with such elevations of mind, only to act a short part in
this World, and to just propagate his kind, and then return to an eternal state
of insensibility and inactivity? No surely! these low and mean views are
altogether unworthy of infinite Wisdom. It Is therefore evident from the
immortal nature of our Souls, and from the shortness of our continuance in this
World, that we are here but in a state of probation; but candidates for another
World, where we are like to meet with the rewards of our present behavior,
whatever it be. And what will be the reward of that sin and impiety, which we
are all chargeable with, we have already seen.

THUS we discover our guilty miserable state by sin, that God is angry with the
wicked every day, Psalm. vii.11. And that there is destruction to the wicked,
and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity, Job xxxi.3.

6. IT IS certain that we are naturally helpless and without strength or skill,
to recover our selves out of this plunge.

WE see our selves in the pit, but cannot find the way out, by our own power o^
wisdom. We have lamentable experience, that our nature is polluted, and all our
faculties depraved, that our passions rebel against our reason; and that we are
continually sinning against God, and provoking Him to anger. But which way
shall we conquer our lusts, regulate our affections, and get reconciled to God?
Here reason is non-plus'd, and our best rational enquiries fruitless, and in
vain.

HERE let the Deist try his skill: Let him without the assistance of
revelation, draw up a perfect system of the laws of nature: Let him consult the
means of restoring our lost innocence; and of keeping our affections and
passions, under the government of religion and reason: Let him call in the help
of all the Philosophers of Greece and Rome, for his assistance in this arduous
undertaking: And in the conclusion, he will have but his labor for his pains,
and continue in the same inextricable labyrinth.

THIS is apparent from the fruitless pains of all the wisest moral heathen in
this case; who, though all sensible of our pravity and misery, could never find
out the cause nor cure. They have indeed, some of 'em, given excellent moral
rules, for the government and conduct of human life. But then, these were all
very defective in many essential articles; and their best systems have
countenanced and encouraged, even the grossest and most unnatural impieties.
But what light have any, or all of 'em given, in the present enquiry? What
remedy have any of their schools proposed for our misery? What means to restore
unto reason the empire of the mind, and to reduce the exorbitancy of the
passions and appetites? What way have they contrived to shake off our guilt,
and to re-obtain the Divine favor? Hic labor, hoc opus est. Here they have run
themselves out of breath to no purpose, while every Sect have proposed a
contrary, or different scheme; and all have left the difficulty as they found
it. And had all human wisdom been collected into one head, the case would have
been the same. For we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses
are as filthy rags, and we do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities like the wind,
have taken us away, Isai. lxiv.6.

HAVING thus discovered our misery, we may next consider the cause of it, under
this enquiry, --

WHENCE is it so, that mankind is thus brought into a sinful, miserable, and
helpless state?

To which I answer;

1. WE could not at first come out of the hands of our holy Creator, in such a
corrupt, polluted, and sinful state.

HAD God at first created us in this state of defilement, He must have taken
pleasure in our sin and pollution; and where then would have been His holiness?
Had He at first made us with a natural necessity of being guilty and criminal,
He must have been the Author, as well as punisher of our guilt; and where then
would have been His Justice? Or had he been the original and necessary cause of
our misery, where would have been His goodness and mercy? Therefore, to suppose
God to be the Author of that nest of sin and uncleanness, in our wicked hearts;
the cause of our vile affections, ungovernable passions, and exorbitant
appetites; and the fountain of all these poison streams; is to attribute to Him
worse than the worst of human affections. It is implicitly to say, that He made
us on purpose that He might delight Himself in our misery: Which shocking
blasphemy must be far from every imagination. Whence it appears, that God made
man upright, though we have sought out many inventions, Eccl. vii.29.

AND hence,

2. THE state that we find our selves in, makes the account of this matter in
the third of Genesis very probable.

I shall not now concern my self with that debate, whether this story be
literally, or allegorically to be understood: Be it which it will, it is a
natural and rational supposition, that our first Parents, through the power of
temptation, were guilty of disobedience against God; and thereby both for
themselves and their posterity, lost the innocence and happiness of their first
state.

IT appears very likely, from the consideration of our present degeneracy, that
we are the branches of a corrupt stock; and the offspring of rebellious parents
And let those that question this account of our apostasy, either assign some
more probable cause of it; or for eve^ly under the just imputation of obstinacy
and unreasonableness.

THOUGH we may meet with some difficulty, in reconciling the imputation of
Original Sin, to the rectoral holiness and justice of God: Yet as much as may
serve to our present purpose, and clear up the consideration now before us, may
be set in a plain and easy light. It is not difficult to suppose, that God
should punish an ungrateful rebel, with the loss of all his original
excellencies and perfections, both of body and mind. And it is a natural and
familiar supposition, that a degenerate st^ck will have degenerate branches;
that the offspring will be like the parent; and the streams partake of the
nature and qualities of the fountain.

BESIDES, God may justly impute the sin of Adam unto his progeny, by way of
attainder; as when a rebel among men forfeits his estate and honors from
himself, and his seed, to his offended Sovereign. And this will be a more easy
supposal, if we consider these two things, (1) That we were all seminally in
our first parents, and in that sense partakers with 'em in their transgression.
And (2) That they acted as our public representatives, and therefore were to
stand or fall for us, as well as themselves: Which being allowed, the
difficulty vanishes. And I see nothing in the nature of the thing, that can
make it incredible, that God as an absolute Sovereign should constitute Adam
the moral, as he was the natural head of all his posterity, to represent and
act for them all, in what he did. We don't esteem it a hardship in our temporal
affairs, to be equally obliged by what our representatives act in our name and
stead, as if they were our own personal actions. Nor should we in the present
case have thought it unjust, to have partook of the blessed fruits of Adam's
obedience, had he stood. What cause then can we have to complain of the
imputation of his disobedience in this public character?

AFTER all, whether we can thoroughly reconcile this matter, to our own ways of
thinking or not; we cannot find a more probable reason of our lost miserable
circumstances, than that by one man sin entered into the World, and death by
sin, as in Romans v.12.

BUT whatever be the cause, we cannot doubt the malady. We have too sad
experience of our misery, to call that into question: And since we see the
house on fire, it does not so much concern us to anxiously enquire by what
means the flame was kindled, as to consult a method to extinguish it.

THE Improvement therefore, that I would make of this Proposition, is, That it
is of infinite importance for us, to consult some way of obtaining a pardon of
our sins, a sanctification of our natures, and a reconciliation unto God. Our
present state is not to be continued in. It Is a dreadful condition to be God's
enemies, a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. And whither
shall we flee for help? From what quarter shall we look for deliverance from
the miseries we feel or fear? Will the pagan religion afford us relief? We have
already heard, that the best schemes of their wisest Sages have been utterly
insufficient to this purpose.

AND a thinking person will hardly be persuaded, that the worship of a herd of
vile deities, with rites as vile and detestable as the gods themselves; should
be well pleasing unto that Eternal Majesty, who will not give His Glory unto
another; nor His Praise unto graven images.

SHALL we then repair for help unto the Mohammedan religion, and consult the
Alcoran in our present distress? Alas, in vain! For no wise man can trust in
such a rhapsody of nonsense and confusion, and in such a medly of inconsistent,
and absurd doctrines of religion and tyranny, twisted together, without some
better evidence of its Divine authority, than the bare word of the voluptuous
and ambitious author.

BESIDES, that book makes no pretenses to show a way how our sins can be
pardoned, our natures renewed, and we re-instated into God's favor. Nor does
it propose any other happiness, than a fool's paradise of sensual pleasures;
most disagreable to a virtuous and rational mind.

WHITHER shall we next go? Shall we consult our Oracles of wit, and seek some
rational scheme of religion and happiness, from our modern pagans, the Deists?
These libertines can vainly boast of unprejudiced Reason and Science, as though
they were the men, and wisdom must die with them. They can put out the eyes of
conscience, and bravely scoff at revealed religion, as an idle dream, and the
effect of a melancholy imagination, enthusiasm or Priestcraft. But which of
'em has ever pretended to propose a method of our obtaining inward peace and
purity, happiness here, and salvation hereafter?

THUS far our search has been vain and fruitless. And must we now yield the
cause, and sit down in despair? By no means! We are miserable indeed, if we can
find no end of our enquiries, no Religion to trust in, no foundation to fix
upon.

LET us then examine the Christian Religion, and see if there be no more
reasonable satisfactions to be found in that; whether that has made any
adequate provisions for the recovery of fallen man, and for securing our
present and future happiness. And our entrance into this enquiry, does
immediately bring us to the consideration of the second Proposition:

Prop. II. OUR Lord Jesus Christ did in due time die, for the deliverance of
sinful man, out of his miserable and helpless state.

THE glorious and eternal SON OF GOD beholding our apostate and perishing
state, looked down with Divine compassion upon a miserable World, deluged in
sin and guilt, and undertook their ransom. And that God might be just, in the
pardon and justification of sinners, He is become their Surety; that so by His
bearing the punishment due to their sins, He might atone offended Justice, and
by His Sponsorial Righteousness, He might purchase for them glory and happiness.

THAT this glorious Mediator might be qualified for this great undertaking; He
was the Eternal God, that so the dignity of His person might give sufficient
merit to His obedience. And He likewise became man, like our selves, that so He
might be able to suffer the penalty due to our sins; and that satisfaction
might be given to Justice, by the same nature that offended. He was moreover
both God and man, that representing both the parties at odds, He might mediate
between them. -- And since Death, in the largest signification of the word, was
the just and natural demerit of our sins, our almighty Savior has for our
sakes, and in our stead, encountered this King of terrors, in his most terrible
appearance, in all his pomp, with all his darts and poison. Thus has He tasted
Death for every man; and redeemed us unto God with His own Blood.

THIS is summarily the meaning of the words of our Text, and of the Proposition
before us. And if this Doctrine be true, it reflects a glorious light into our
dark minds, plucks us out of the jaws of despair, and proposes a happy means of
life and peace. It is therefore well worth our while to distinctly consider the
verity of the Christian Institution; and see whether its precious and
comfortable Doctrines may be confided in.

THAT I may assist you in this enquiry, I shall at present, only offer you some
strong probabilities on the side of Christianity; and then (if God permit) in
some future discourses to that purpose, offer you full, plain, and
ungainsayable evidence of these blessed truths.

THE strong probabilities, that I would now take notice of, may be proposed
under these two considerations; I. THAT the Christian Revelation, if true, is
every way worthy of God. II. THAT it every way answers the miserable
circumstances of fallen man.


I am first then to consider, That the Christian Revelation is every way worthy
of God.

THIS consideration, if fully pursued, might discover to us, how all the Divine
Attributes and Perfections most gloriously harmonize, and shine forth with
brightest luster, in this way of our salvation by Jesus Christ. But the time
before us will allow only some very brief hints upon this Subject: However, I
would willingly say enough to establish you in the present truth; and assist
your contemplations upon this delightful theme.

THIS way of salvation appears worthy of God, in that herein was a glorious
manifestation, and illustration of infinite Goodness, Mercy and Love. An
Eternity is short enough to admire, adore, and praise the surprising wonders of
redeeming Love: For if we consider the objects of this Mercy, poor apostate
rebels; there could be no motive but Divine compassion, for mercy to take place
of justice, in the deliverance of such criminals from deserved wrath. If we
consider the freeness of this love, not only without any obligation, or
possibility of retaliation from us, but against highest provocations to the
contrary; It will appear infinite, like the glorious Fountain of it. If we
consider the nature of that salvation thus procured for us, that it contains
not only a freedom from sin and guilt, but a title to God's favor, and to an
eternal state of glory and happiness: We may with just admiration cry out, What
is man that thou art thus mindful of him? But if we consider the Author and
price of this salvation, that God has so loved the World, as to give his dear
Son for us, and has redeemed us with his own blood; the surprise still
increases, and Mercy appears in its highest exaltation. How then do all these
considerations together, with the many others that might be proposed, give us
cause with ravished souls to acknowledge, that the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height of the love of God in Christ, passes knowledge, as Ephesians.
iii.18.

THE bright display of infinite Justice in our redemption by Christ, makes it
also appear worthy of God. Were justice swallowed up of mercy (as it must have
been, had God saved sinners without a satisfaction) we might reject the
doctrine, as unworthy of an infinitely just and holy God. But since He has
shown Himself inexorable in His demands of satisfaction, by requiring the
utmost farthing of the surety, that was due from the principal debtor; and by
punishing His own dear S^n with a bitter death, as the sinners representative:
His work appears perfect, and all his ways judgment, as Deuteronomy. xxxii.4.

IF it be here objected, That it cannot be just, to transfer the punishment
from the guilty to the innocent:

I answer, That God by right of His supreme jurisdiction, might relax the law,
and transfer the penalty. And though justice requires full satisfaction, He might
in absolute sovereignty, accept it from a surety. True indeed, the Redeemer as
He was the Lord from Heaven, was not liable to any constraint or compulsion, to
this undertaking. But I see nothing either in the Nature or Law of God, that
should make it unequal, to accept of full satisfaction from Him, when
voluntarily offered.

I acknowledge, that it would be unjust among men, to accept of the life of an
innocent for a guilty person, because we have not the disposal of our own
lives. But this nothing affects the present case, since our Lord had in
Himself, power to lay down His own life, and power to take it up again.

BUT I must hasten to observe, that

THE most glorious manifestation of God's holiness and purity in this work of
our Redemption, makes it likely to be a Divine contrivance. Nothing could give
a brighter discovery of God's implacable antipathy to sin, than the amazing
sufferings of His own dear Son, when imputatively guilty. This discovers sin to
be a weight that even infinite mercy could not bear, in that the blood of His
well-beloved Son must be the only sacrifice to appease His displeasure against
it; and that He could without relenting, behold the bitter agonies of Him, with
whom He was well pleased, when He was made sin for us. This shows us, that He
is glorious in Holiness. Exodus xv.15.

THE Omnipotence of God does likewise appear in its highest perfection, in this
glorious work. God's creating the World out of nothing, and His upholding and
governing all things by the word of His power, are not greater evidences of
Omnipotence, than our Redemption by His incarnate Son. The incarnation of
Christ, and the union of the Divine Nature with the human, is such a miracle of
power, as exceeds all finite thoughts, in their highest elevation. And the same
Almighty Agent is discovered in our Lord's miraculous conception of a Virgin,
without the help of man; in the triumphs of His cross; and the victory over all
our spiritual enemies, obtained by His death; as well as by His resurrection
from the grave, and His ascension into Heaven. In a word, the whole transaction
of our salvation by Christ, is a manifestation of Omnipotent grace. But I may
but hint at things, and shall only add;

THE glories of the Divine Wisdom do also shine forth with brightest splendour
in the work of Redemption. The very projection of this scheme, was beyond the
capacity of any finite understanding. The method (though most reasonable and
agreeable) is so deep and mysterious, that it could not have been the product of
human invention: Which consideration alone, is enough to convince us of the
Divine original of the Christian institution. The end of this contrivance, viz.
the exalting God's glory, and restoring man's happiness, was worthy of infinite
counsel: And the means of accomplishing this vast design, could be adjusted
only by God Himself. -- Infinite the Wisdom! Unsearchable the Counsel! that
took occasion from our sin, which was the highest opposition to the Divine
Perfections, to make all His Attributes shine forth with brighter glory; hereby
not only to bring infinite Mercy and inflexible Justice into the sweetest
harmony; but to manifest both in greatest luster, the one in punishing the sin,
the other in pardoning and saving the sinner! Who but God could have found the
means for Mercy and Truth thus to meet together, and Righteousness and Peace to
kiss each other?

AND we may still with greater admiration, adore the miraculous contrivance for
the reconciling God and man, by uniting the infinitely distant Natures into one
person; and thereby ordaining such a Mediator, who by partaking of both
Natures, is interested in both parties; and so every way fit to reconcile God
to man, and man to God! But I must not enlarge upon this copious subject, which
would take a large Volume, to the distinct consideration of it; and a whole
Eternity, in the just admiration of it. The short glance we have already had of
this contemplation, makes it appear, that God has herein abounded toward us,
in all Wisdom and Prudence, Ephesians. i.8.

THUS I have with all brevity considered how the Christian revelation is worthy
of God. I am now to observe:

II. THAT it every way answers the miserable circumstances of fallen man.

WHAT could be more agreeable to the perishing circumstances of guilty condemned
sinners, than the joyful tidings of pardon and salvation, of a deliverance from
the depth of woe, and a title to joy unspeakable and full of glory; upon such
easy and honorable terms? This justly recommends the Christian Religion above
all others, that ever were or could be contrived.

AND if we take a view of the tenor and properties of this institution, we
shall find it so adapted to the nature of man; to his various stations and
relations in the World; to his comfort here and happiness hereafter; that as no
other Religion could ever claim like regards, on these accounts, so this above
all others, appears to be of Divine original.

THE Doctrines of the Gospel are all holy and spiritual, agreeable to the
ennobled nature and faculties of our Souls. The precepts are most just and
reasonable, directly tending to make us holy and happy, charitable and
beneficent. The motives are most noble and sublime, fit to work upon our
affections and passions, to deter us from sin, and inflame our desires after
the reward of holiness. -- Here the vices of pride, worldliness and sensuality;
of injustice, fraud, persecution or oppression, fierceness or impatience, are
justly condemned and prohibited; and a flaming sword brandished before us, to
prevent our commission of these and such like sins. -- Here we are taught
self-denial, justice and mercy, brotherly love, unity, peace, and kindness one
to another; with the most sweet and endearing attractives to such a blessed
life. -- Here we have most excellent rules, for order and government in the
World; for the peace and stability of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, for the
restraining ambition and tyranny in the Prince, and rebellion or sedition in
the subject. -- Here we may find choicest cordials and supports, under all the
troubles and afflictions we can conflict with; and even against the fears and
terrors of death it self. -- Here we have all rational pleasure and
satisfaction indulged us, though the sinful cravings of our corrupt and vitiated
appetites, are prohibited, as most hurtful and pernicious. -- Here may our
minds be spiritualized and exalted to the highest elevation, they are capable
of in this life, and yet raised with expectations of higher perfections in the
World to come. -- In a word, the Gospel-scheme is every way perfective of human
nature, and calculated for our present and future happiness; and is therefore
worthy to be esteemed the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God, as 1 Cor. i.18.

HAVING thus seen some of the strong probabilities of the truth of
Christianity; which cannot but reflect a convincing light, into the mind of
every serious and impartial enquirer: I must defer the further demonstration of
this truth, till another opportunity; and conclude my present Discourse, with
some brief practical Inferences.

And,

I. WE have cause with raised affections to adore and praise the infinite mercy
of God, for revealing this glorious salvation to us in the Gospel.

LIFE and Immortality were purchased by the obedience of Christ; but they are
brought to light by the Gospel. And it would have been as well for us, to have
had no salvation purchased, as none revealed. In both cases a thick cloud of
despair had covered our Souls, that we could never have seen through. But now
from the distinguishing Mercy of God, the sun of righteousness has arisen upon
us; and the day spring from on high has visited us. The light of life blazes
into our Souls; and the way to Heaven like the path of the just, is as a
shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day: That we are
under the most happy advantages possible, to secure an interest in this
Savior, and a title to the glories that will be revealed.

LET us but consider, how great a part of the World are yet groping in thick
darkness, have utterly lost their way, in the mists of ignorance and error; and
are without God, without Christ, and without hope in the World: While the grace
of God that brings salvation, having appeared to us, we are even lifted up to
Heaven by our privileges: And it will surely appear, that this special favor
calls for special thankfulness; and loudly summons all the faculties of our
Souls, to be closely engaged in that inquiry, Psalm. cxvi.12. What shall I
render to the Lord, for all these benefits toward me?

AND if we yet further consider, how unworthy we are of such discriminating
favor, it will give us cause to reflect upon these Divine obligations, with a
rapture of Soul. Had there been any thing in us, that could have been any
incentive to this distinguishing mercy, 'twould have lessened the obligation:
But there was nothing in us, more than in the darkest regions of the earth, to
move God's compassion to us; or to excite Him to make known to us, the riches
of the glory of this mystery, among the Gentiles. Free sovereign grace only
deserves the praise. And our ingratitude will be of the blackest dye, if these
reflections don't make the fire burn in our breasts; and inspire us with most
exalted sentiments, and thankful resentments of such special and signal mercies.

II. LET us hence be exhorted, to make it our sedulous concern, to obtain an
interest in this salvation, in such a wonderful way provided for us, and so
freely tendered to us.

LET us with flaming ardour of soul, and with most undeniable importunity,
wrestle with God for an interest in Christ by Faith; that He may become of God
unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. And that we
through Him, may be heirs to an inheritance with the Saints in light.

WE should be awfully careful, that we don't perish from under the Gospel, lest
this enhance our guilt, and aggravate our future condemnation, that light is
come into the World, and we choose darkness rather than light.

A Demonstration OF THE Christian Religion From the PROPHESIES of the Old
Testament.
LUKE XXIV.44. And he said unto them, These are the words which I spoke unto
you while I was yet with you; that all things must be fulfilled, which were
written in the law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning
me.


HAVING in our last Discourse considered our apostate and miserable
circumstances, and the hopes of recovery from this state of sin and guilt, by
our Lord Jesus Christ: I am now to add to the strong probabilities then urged,
some full and clear demonstrations of this precious truth, that God has so
loved the World, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in Him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. For the proof of which, I
shall first consider the clear evidence of this Doctrine, from the Prophecies
of Christ in the Old Testament; and then show you how it is ratified by God
Himself, with the great Seal of Heaven; by the miracles, I mean, performed by
Christ, and by others in His name. -- The latter proposal must be deferred to a
future opportunity: The former falls under present consideration from the words
of our Text. In which we may Note;

1. SOMETHING supposed and taken for granted, viz. that the Scriptures of the
Old Testament did prophesy of Christ; That the Messiah was written of in the
law of Moses, in the Prophets, and in the Psalms; which expressions, according
to the Jewish mode of speaking, include all the sacred and canonical Books of
the Old Testament.

THIS was a truth (...) universally received among the Jews* both before and at
the time of our Lord's incarnation, that it wanted neither illustration, nor
confirmation.

2. WE may note the Divine authority, and undoubted veracity of these
prophecies of Christ. They must all be fulfilled.

THESE sacred prophecies being the Oracles of God, are founded on His truth and
faithfulness, are immutable as God Himself; and therefore cannot fail of
accomplishment.

3. FOR the clearer understanding the words before us, we may note the end and
design of our glorious Lord, in this Argument, which was to confirm and
establish the Faith of His Disciples in Himself, as the hope of Israel and the
Savior of the World.

THIS appears from the connection of these words with the foregoing context. --
In the 37 th verse, we find the Disciples terrified and affrighted with our
Lord's miraculous appearance among 'em; supposing they had seen a spirit. And
we are told in the 41 st verse, that their surprise not only continued, but was
accompanied with incredulity and unbelief. Our Lord therefore to obviate both
their difficulties, first takes meat and eats before them, to convince 'em that
He was not a spirit; and then urges the present Argument, as sufficient for
ever to silence all their doubts and scruples, about the cause of His
sufferings, and His Resurrection from the dead. This Argument He had before
inculcated upon 'em, and now again leaves with 'em, as a standing confirmation
of their Faith, in that important Article. The sum of which Argument is this,
That all the sacred writings (which could not fail of accomplishment) did
unanimously predict the manner of life, the death, and resurrection of the
Messiah. And that therefore they could have no room left for surprise or
diffidence, with relation to Him, in whom they had seen the accomplishment of
all these prophecies: This being an attestation from God Himself, of His Divine
Mission.

OR we may more summarily take up the words, in this DOCTRINE, That the
accomplishment of the Old Testament Prophecies concerning our Lord Jesus
Christ, are a sure evidence, that He is the Messiah.

FOR the illustration of this Observation, I shall endeavor to show;

I. WHAT a prophecy is.

II. HOW a prophecy may be said to be fulfilled.

III. THAT there were prophecies of Christ in the Old Testament, which are
fulfilled.

And,

IV. THAT the accomplishment of these prophecies, is a sure evidence, that
Christ i^ the Messiah.

I. I am to consider, What a prophecy is.

I mean not in this enquiry, to consider the word in its full latitude, nor to
take notice of the various acceptations it obtains in Scripture: But briefly to
show, in what sense it is to be understood in the present Argument. And as it
affects the case before us, I understand a Prophecy to be a Divine prediction
of future contingent events. -- I call it a Divine prediction, because it is the
sole prerogative of Omniscience, to foresee future contingencies: And it cannot
come within the compass of any finite understanding, to foretell those things,
that have no foundation in nature, nor dependence on natural causes. -- And I
consider contingent events, as the only object of prophecy; because it requires
in ordinary, no prophetic spirit, to predict those events that are in
themselves necessary, or that depend upon the nature of things.

BUT I need not insist upon this description, the case being plain, familiar,
and universally agreed in. I proceed therefore,

II. To consider, How a prophecy may be said to be fulfilled.

And,

1. A prophecy is sometimes said to be fulfilled, by way of accommodation only:
when a prediction of one thing, may by reason of some eminent parity or
similitude between them, be aptly accommodated to another.

IN this sense, the word fulfilled was in frequent use among the Jews: who
affecting to speak in Scripture Language, would frequently mention the
fulfilling of Scripture, when they meant no more by it, than a parity or
agreement of circumstances, between the case considered, and the quoted Text;
or an example parallel to something foretold, or spoken of in Scripture.

IN this allegorical sense, the sacred Penmen of the New Testament, do also
sometimes speak of the fulfilling of prophecy, where there is no direct or
literal accomplishment, nothing but an agreement, or accommodation of the event
and prediction. Thus our Lord's return from Egypt is said to be That it might
be fulfilled, that was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying, Out of Egypt
have I called my Son, Mat. ii.15. And thus the destruction of the young
children by Herod, is said to be a fulfilling of that which was spoken by
Jeremy the Prophet, saying, In Rama was a voice heard, lamentation, and
weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, etc. Whereas it
is evident, that the first cited words of the Prophet, did immediately refer to
the deliverance of the children of Israel, from their Egyptian bondage, and the
latter to their distress and anguish from the Babylonian carnage and captivity.

FROM this use of the word Fulfilled, our modern Infidels have, unreasonably
enough, taken occasion of insult and triumph; thence insinuating the weakness
or unfaithfulness of the Evangelical Historians. But a due consideration of the
case will discover more of spleen, than argument, in these irreligious fleers.
Was there any thing more common among the most famous Greek Orat^urs, than to
adorn their discourses with flowers taken from Homer, Hesiod, Euripides, or
other of their P^ets, when they never intended, nor could their Auditors
understand any more, than a bare accommodation of the citation to the matter
treated of? Or is there any thing more common among our selves, than to cite
Scriptures in this allusive manner, which have no direct or immediate reference
to the subject matter of the Discourse? To exemplify this, It is consonant to
the received modes of speaking, to call these unbelieving Gentlemen, mocking
Ishmaelites, or insulting Edomites; although those Scriptures, Genesis xxi.9. and
Psalm. cxxxvii.7. which are fulfilled in them, did not originally and primarily
refer to Hobbs, Blount, Collins, or of any of their admirers. And I must tell
them that continue in their infidelity, after such full and clear evidences of
the truth of Christianity, as have been from time to time offered 'em; that
there is fulfilled in them, what was spoken by the Prophet Jeremy, chap. v.
ver. 21. that they are a foolish people, and without understanding, which have
eyes and see not, which have ears and hear not. Though I don't think the
Prophet had them in view when he spoke those words.

2. A prophecy is more strictly and properly fulfilled, when a prediction,
according to its direct meaning, and primary design and intention, meets with
an exact and full accomplishment. And,

3. A prophecy may be said to be fulfilled, when it has a double
accomplishment; and is completed both in the Type and Antitype, in the Sign,
and the Thing thereby signified.

IT has been indeed questioned by very learned and judicious men, whether any
prophecies may in strictness of speech, be said to have such a double
reference: They rather suppose, that those prophecies that have been so
understood, do look unto Christ, and Him only: But then it must be
acknowledged, that there is a sudden transition, from some other person or
thing, unto the Messiah: And that two different events are predicted, in the
same continued Discourse. Thus was that prophecy in the 2 Samuel vii.12, 16.
fulfilled, both in Solomon, and in one greater than Solomon. The promise to
David in ver. 12, That when his days were fulfilled, and he should sleep with
his fathers; God would set up his seed after him, that should proceed out of
his bowels; and establish his kingdom: this was literally verified in Solomon:
But then the promise in the 16 ver. That his House and Kingdom should be
established for ever, and that his Throne should be established for ever;
though it might first refer to, could not ultimately terminate in Solomon; but
pointed to a more stable and durable Reign than his, even to an everlasting
dominion which shall not pass away; and to a kingdom which shall not be
destroyed. In this sense the Psalmist understands this promise, in Psalm.
lxxxix.36, 37. His Seed shall endure for ever, and his Throne as the Sun before
me. It shall be established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in
Heaven. And agreably, from this prophecy, the tradition universally obtained
among the Jews, that the Messiah must be the Son of David. Which interpretation
we see justified by the event.

BUT I don't design to insist upon this Head, my present purpose leading me to
consider the accomplishment of prophecy, only in the second and strongest
sense. In order to which, I proceed to observe;

III. THAT there were Prophecies of our Lord Jesus Christ in the Old Testament,
which are strictly, literally, and exactly fulfilled.

THE time before us will not allow, that I should enter into a distinct
consideration of the multiplied prophecies of the Messiah, every where found in
the Old Testament; and show how they are verified in Christ. I shall therefore
only consider four or five of those, that exactly point out the time of our
Lord's coming, and then just take a cursory view of some of those predictions,
that describe the circumstances of His appearing.

I begin with the blessing of dying Jacob to his son Judah, Genesis xlix.10. The
Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his fe^t,
until SHILOH come; and unto Him shall the gathering of the people be. It is
generally allowed, even by the Jews themselves, that by SHILOH here, is meant
the Messiah: And thus their three Targums expound it The Jerusalem Targum, that
of Jonathan, and Onkelos.
. But there is not such a joint agreement among Interpreters, in the meaning of
the word SCHEBET or Scepter. The modern Jews, in despite to Christ, do
perversely understand it a R^d of correction. But this is to do utmost violence
to the whole scope of the context, which every way gives Judah the preference
above the other Tribes; and does not mark him out for special correction. And
it equally militates against the event, which shows us, that Judah has not
drunk so deep of God's fierce displeasure, as the other Tribes; whose name and
remembrance are long since blotted out from under Heaven. -- Besides, it is
evident, that an emblem of Dominion and Government is hereby designed, from the
following clause, nor a Lawgiver from between His feet: For, how I pray, does a
state of correction, debasement, and affliction, constitute them a Legislature?

BUT leaving these Rabbinical dreams and dotages; I must take leave to observe,
that the generality of Interpreters, have (I think) mistaken the meaning of
this word, supposing, from the use of a Scepter in our times, that it must
imply an ensign of Royal or Imperial power; and thence understand the prophecy,
that a Kingly dominion should remain in the hands of Judah, until the coming of
Christ. But there are such objections in the way of this Interpretation, that I
cannot come into it: Particularly, it seems very inaccurate, to speak of the
Scepter's departing from him who never had it. Judah at this time had no Kingly
power, and therefore could not lose it. And the Kingdom was so far from
continuing in that Tribe, from the time of the prophecy, until the coming of
Christ; that there was no Royal authority in any of the Tribe, for much the
greatest part of the time: It commenced in David, and ended in Zedekiah. It not
only ceased, but perished at the Babylonish captivity. For though there was a
regal authority, after their return from Babylon, exercised by the Maccabees
and Herod; yet the former were of the Tribe of Levi, and the latter was an
Idumean, and none of 'em of Judah's posterity.

I therefore choose with Mr. Mede, to understand the word SCEPTER to signify,
not Kingly dominion only; but any power or Majesty of government, under what
form or name soever; whereof a Rod or Staff was anciently the ensign. Whence
every Tribe is called SCHEBET (the word here used) as being united together
under one Staff, or power of Government. The meaning therefore, is not, that
Judah shall never cease from having a King, or being a Kingdom; but that it
should not cease from being a State, a Body Politic, or Commonwealth, having a
power of Government or Jurisdiction within it self, until Messiah come. Thus
Mr. Mede. In favor of whose construction of this word SCHEBET or SCEPTER, it
is remarkable, that the word is not only frequently used for Tribe, and
particularly applied to every of the Tribes of Israel, Numb. xiii; thereby not
obscurely intimating, that it was such an Ensign of Government as pertain'd to
each of the Tribes: But it is also used in the sense I contend for, in this very
C^ntext. Thus verse 16. Dan shall judge his people, as one of the Tribes (or
SCEPTERS) of Israel. From which use of the word in the 16 th verse, it appears
plain to me, that not only Dan, but each of the other Patriarchs, then had the
Scepter of judgment in their hands. And I cannot see that there was any other
Scepter promised to Judah in the 10 th, than to Dan in the 16 th verse of this
Chapter. The difference between them consisted not in the formal nature of
their Government or Dominion; but in the duration or continuance of it. They
each had, according to this pr^phecy, their Princes, Rulers, Judges, or Heads
of their Tribes, for a long time after, even until the captivity of the Ten
Tribes, when Dan lost his Scepter.

NOW if this Interpretation be allowed me (as I cannot see why it should not)
it is obvious to every eye, that this famous prophecy has had a literal, full,
and perspicuous accomplishment. The Scepter never departed from Judah, until
the coming of Christ. Even in the time of the Babylonish captivity, they yet
had their Lawgivers from between their feet; they being indulged the use of
their own Laws, when removed from their own land, as appears from Esther iii.8.
And Haman said unto Ahasuerus, there is a certain people scattered abroad, and
dispersed am^ng the people, in all the provinces of thy Kingdom; and their laws
are diverse from all people, neither keep they the King's laws.

BUT how soon after the Incarnation of our blessed Savior, did Judah lose all
authority; both their Civil and Ecclesiastical State being utterly subverted!
And they instead of swaying a Scepter, are become an astonishment, a hissing,
and perpetual desolations.

AND are not we our selves, as well as the other Christian Nations, a happy
evidence of the gathering the people unto this predicted Shiloh, according to
the prophecy before us?

THUS we have blazing evidence, that the Patriarch Jacob did foresee Christ's
day, and foretell both the time, and consequence of His appearing in the World:
And that this prediction is punctually and exactly verified in our glorious
Savior.

I shall now proceed to the consideration of another prophecy, which likewise
precisely points out the time of the Messiah's manifestation: It is that in
Dan. ix.24, 25, 26 Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy
holy City; to finish transgression, and to make an end of sin, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness, and to
seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the MOST HOLY. Know therefore,
and understand, that from the going forth of the commandment to restore and to
build Jerusalem, unto Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks and threescore
and two weeks. The streets shall be built again and the walls, even in
troublous times. And after threescore and two weeks, shall Messiah be cut off;
but not for Himself. And the people of the Prince that shall come, shall
destroy the City and Sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be with a flood; and
unto the end of the war, desolations are determined.

HERE is a plain prediction, that within the space of Seventy prophetical
Weeks, or weeks of years (that is 490 years, as the Jewish Rabbis themselves
expound it) the great things determined upon the Jewish people and the holy
City, should be accomplished, transgression finished, reconciliation made for
iniquity, everlasting Righteousness brought in, the vision and prophecy sealed
up, and the MOST HOLY anointed. And within seven weeks and sixty two weeks
(that is 483 years) after the going forth of the Commandment to restore and to
build Jerusalem, the Messiah should appear, and be cut off; but not for
Himself: And that after His death, the City and Sanctuary should be destroyed,
and the people given up to desolations. Now every one skilled in Chronology,
may see a most exact accomplishment of this prophecy.

THOUGH we have not so plain and express direction, when to begin the seventy
weeks, or 490 years; within which term, all those transactions relating to the
MESSIAH were to be accomplished: We are plainly told, that the sixty nine
weeks, or 483 years, were to commence with the going forth of the Commandment
to restore or to build Jerusalem; and to terminate at the excision, or death of
the Messiah. Let us then begin this reckoning on the twentieth year of
Artaxerxes Longimanus (the date of the Decree for building Jerusalem, as
appears from Neb. ii.1.) and it will end on the thirty third year after Christ,
the year of His death. Thus exactly did the event answer the prophecy, as to
the time of His manifestation, and crucifixion. And were not the predicted
consequences of His coming, also most exactly fulfilled? Did not the R^mans,
the future people of this Prince (as the 26 th verse might be translated)
destroy the City and Sanctuary; and bring the determined flood of war and
desolations on the Jewish State?

NEVER did face answer more exactly to face in a glass, than this prophecy and
its accomplishment in our Lord Jesus Christ answer one another; that to refuse
our assent to this glaring evidence, is not only stupidity, but obstinate
blindness. -- Even a Pagan Porphyry was long since so confounded with this
prophecy, that he could with all his learning and craft, find no other answer,
but that it was spurious, and of a later date.

ANOTHER prophecy, which evidently foretells the time of our Savior's
appearing, may be found in Hag. ii.7, 9. And I will shake all Nations; and the
desire of all Nations shall come; and I will fill this House with glory, says
the Lord of Hosts. The glory of this latter House shall be greater than of the
former, says the Lord of Hosts; and in this place will I give peace, says the
Lord of Hosts. These words consist of a threefold prediction, (1) The
convulsions and confusions that all Nations were to be exercised with. (2) The
appearance of the desire of all Nations in the Temple then building, whereby it
should exceed the former Temple in glory. And (3) The peace that should be
consequent upon the manifestation of the Prince of Peace. Now as to the first,
none acquainted with History, is ignorant of the bright accomplishment of it,
by the ravages and devastations made in the World, by Alexander and his
followers; By the perpetual bloody wars and desolations, continued in the four
Kingdoms, that succeeded to, and stood up in the place of the great horn of
that rough Goat; And by the Romans, whose conquering sword at last brought 'em
all into subjection. -- And then, how soon after the end of this concussion of
the Nations, did the desire of all Nations come into the Temple; and by His
sacred presence, make that House more glorious than the former, though it was
in every thing else inferior to it! And as to the last of these predictions,
how exactly was it fulfilled, in the peaceable Reign of Augustus, wherein all
Nations seemed to have forgot their former fierceness and rage, as well as the
use of their Military Armor!

THUS we are irresistibly constrained to acknowledge the accomplishment of this
prophecy, in our Lord Jesus Christ, by His coming at the very time here
foretold, immediately after the shaking of all Nations, during the continuance
of the second Temple; and in that remarkable time of universal peace.

A fourth famous prediction of the time of our Lord's Incarnation, is that in
Mal. iii. 1. Behold, I will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way
before me: And the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to His Temple; even
the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in: Behold, He shall come, says
the Lord of Hosts. That this prophecy did relate to the Messiah, is clearly
manifest by the Titles and Epithets here given Him, The Lord whom ye seek, The
Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in. And that it was fulfilled in our
Lord Jesus Christ, is equally manifest, by his appearing in the Temple, before
the destruction of it, suddenly after the Messenger, viz. John Baptist, was
sent to prepare his way, by Baptizing, preaching repentance, and warning the
people to believe in Him that should come after him. But this is so plain that
I need not insist upon it.

I might here have also urged Nebuchadnezzar's Dream, in Dan. ii.31, -- 46. as
a prophetical indication of the time of the Messiah's appearing. By which is
foretold, that after the expiration of the Third, and during the subsisting of
the F^urth Monarchy, a stone should be cut out of the Mountain without hands,
that should break the Fourth or Roman Monarchy to pieces, and become a great
Mountain, that shall fill the whole Earth; or as the Prophet expounds it, a
Kingdom that shall never be moved. -- The exact verification of which prophecy
is too obvious, to escape the notice of any observer. None that has but dipped in
the Roman History can be ignorant, that our Lord did appear in the height and
glory of that Empire; that after His advent, the Fourth Monarchy did gradually
moulder away, until 'twas utterly subverted, by the inundation of the Goths and
Vandals; and that this stone, against all opposition from that Kingdom of iron,
has grown to a great Mountain; and will (as we may surely conclude from this
prophecy) in His own time, fill the whole Earth. But the time before us will
not allow me to particularly insist upon these things.

BEFORE I proceed to the consideration of other prophecies of our Blessed
Savior, I would here take liberty to observe, that not only the Jews, but all
the neighboring Nations, did about the time of Christ's coming, entertain
raised expectations of some glorious Monarch, that should bring great
Revolutions upon the World. And from whence should they derive these notions;
or whence form these expectations, but from these cited prophecies? -- If it be
alleged, that they might find these predictions in the books of the Sybills,
the supposal adds force to our Argument: For if these were really distinct
prophecies, their accomplishment in the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, is
additional evidence to His Divine Mission. But if these Sybilline prophecies
were (as they are thought by very learned men to be) a Jewish composition,
designed to propagate the belief of the Messiah, and to prepare the way for His
reception by the Gentiles; and called Sybilline, only from a Hebrew or Chaldee
word of the same sound, which signifies to prophesy See Bp. of Coventry and
Litchfield Defense of Chris. p. 10, 11.
. This convinces us that these Divine Oracles under consideration, were
understood by the Jews before Christ, not only to refer to the Messiah, but to
point out the very time of His manifestation.

THAT there were such expectations among the Nations, about the time of our
Lord's incarnation, is set in a clear light, by many learned Writers,
particularly by the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, Des. of Chris. p. 124,
125. I have not that Book by me, and the short Notes I took out of it when I
read it, will not enable me to acquaint the Reader from what Authors he took
this piece of History: I must therefore refer him to the Book it self, for
satisfaction.
No sooner (says he) was the Kingdom of the Seleucides (one of the remaining
branches of Daniel's third Kingdom) extinguished by Pompey, in the person of
Antiochus Asiaticus; but the Jews every where lifted up their heads, as if they
saw the sign of their Redemption, in the dawnings of the Fourth Monarchy. Then
rumors went about, no body knew how (though indeed originally from the Jews) that
nature was in pangs to bring forth a King for the Roman people. At which the
frightened Senate decreed the strangling of every child that should be born
within that year; But their vain hopes of having that King in their own family,
spoiled the execution of the Decree; and so Augustus was suffered to live. Then
Lentulus, thinking this to be the fatal year of the Roman Government, and that
he might be the man intended for the new Empire, became principal in Cataline's
conspiracy. Thus he.

To which I may add, that Josephus in a base servile flattery to the Emperor
Vespasian, applies these prophecies to him, and says, That which chiefly
excited the Jews to war, was an ambiguous prophecy found in the sacred Books;
that at that time, some one within their country should arise, that should
obtain the Empire of the whole World De bell. Judaic. Lib. vii* Cap. 13.
. And Tacitus Hist. Cap. 13.
and Suctonius In Vespasian. Cap. 4.
two Roman Historians report, That it was contained in the ancient books of the
Priests (according to one) or in the Fates (according to the other) that one
from Judea should at that time (the time of Vespasian) obtain the Dominion.
Much more might be added, to show the common expectation of the Messiah, about
the time of Christ's coming, both by the Jews, and also by the Gentiles now
made acquainted with the Scriptures, by the Greek translation of them.

BUT it is time I should return to the consideration of some other prophecies,
that predict the circumstances and consequents of our Lord's appearing.

IT was foretold, that the Messiah should be born of a Virgin, Isai. vii.14. In
the Town of Bethlehem, Mich. v.2. That he should reside in Galilee; and
particularly in Zebulon and Naphtali, Isai. ix.1. That He should enter
Jerusalem upon an Ass, and a colt the fool of an Ass, Zech. ix.9. That by His
miraculous operations, the eyes of the blind should be opened, and the ears of
the deaf unstopped, the lame restored to the use of their limbs, and the dumb
to their speech, as Isai. xxxv.5, 6. That He should appear in low, mean, and
afflicted circumstances; be despised and rejected of the Jews, be a man of
sorrows and acquainted with grief, Isai. liii.2, 3. That He should finally be
cut off but not for Himself, Dan. ix.26. And the particular circumstances of
His death, with the opprobry and ignominy that attended it, were likewise
foretold by the Prophets. And I need not tell you from the Evangelical
Historians, how all these circumstances of His life, and death, were exactly
fulfilled in our Lord Christ.

AND as to the consequents of the Messiah's coming, it was prophesied, that
after His death, the Jewish sacrifices and oblations should cease, their holy
City and Sanctuary be destroyed; and they made desolate, Dan. ix. 26, 27. That
He should bring forth judgment to the Gentiles, who should come to His light,
and see His Righteousness and Glory, Isai. xlii.1. and lx.3. and lxii.2. Which
were so visibly accomplished, in cutting off the natural branches of the
Olive Tree, and graffing the Gentiles into the same stock; that it must be
wilful blindness, not to see it.

I might largely insist upon this subject, and show you, that there is scarce
any passage of the birth, life, sufferings, death, resurrection, ascension, or
glory of our Savior; or scarce any circumstance of the state of His Kingdom
here in the World; but what are particularly prophesied of in the Old
Testament. But the time will not allow, nor does the case require, that I
should enlarge upon this Head. I therefore proceed to consider,

IV. THAT the accomplishment of these prophecies is a sure evidence, that Jesus
Christ is the Messiah.

I confess indeed, that the accomplishment of some single prophecies in our
Lord Jesus Christ, is not convincing proof, that He was necessarily the Person
predicted, and pointed out by them. There were (for example) many others,
beside Jesus of Nazareth in Judea, before the Scepter departed from Judah, who
descended from the Tribe of Judah, from the loins of Abraham and David, were
born at Bethlehem, at the same time that the Messiah was to be expected, etc.
But then, the united accomplishment of all these Prophecies in our Blessed
Lord, renders the evidence clear and incontestable, that the characters of the
Messiah, in the Prophets, belonged to Him, and him only. There was none but He,
that with any color could claim the characters of descending from Abraham,
from Judah, and David; of appearing just 483 years after the Decree for
building and restoring Jerusalem; of being born of a Virgin, in the Town of
Bethlehem; of working so many miracles; of dying and rising again; of setting
up a Spiritual Kingdom, whereunto the Gentiles should be subjected; And all the
many other prophetic descriptions of His Person and Government, too many to be
here distinctly enumerated; which all agreed to our Lord Jesus, and therefore
(as I observed) prove Him to be the Messiah. This will plainly appear, if we
consider,

1. THAT the accomplishment of these prophecies is a clear and certain
indication of their Divine original.

FINITE understandings can have no means of foreknowlege, but either
conjectural, from the nature and reason of things; or by inspiration from Him,
who has all things present and to come in His Omniscient eye. By one of these
means therefore all the events we have been considering, must have been
foretold; or else they were all a juggle and imposture. Mere conjecture they
could not be; for what resemblance could be found, in all the face of Nature,
of an Incarnate God; or what even obscurest hints of the time, manner, and
consequences of His manifestation? Nor could they have been an imposture; for
if so, they could not be justified by the event. We see 'em fulfilled; and
thence are ascertained that they were pr^phetically foretold. We see that God
Himself acknowleges the prophecy, by its completion; which He would not have
done, in justification of most audacious and impudent deceivers. The
consequence therefore irresistibly forces it self upon us, that these were the
Oracles of God. It is a just challenge, and reasonable Argument, in Isai.
xli.22, 23. Let them bring forth and show us what shall happen. Let them show
the former things what they be, that we may consider them; and know the latter
end of them: or declare us things for to come. Show the things that are to come
hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods.

I know of but one Objection that can with any color be offered against this
arguing; which is, that Diabolical predictions have often been fulfilled, as
appears by the ancient Oracles of the Heathen, so frequently consulted; and so
frequently verified by the event. In answer to which, I need not insist upon
the craft and collusion used in those Oracles; or the dark and doubtful
meanings, in which they were usually delivered, seldom to be understood, but by
the issue. But I allow it to be possible (as the Scripture also supposes it (
Deuteronomy. xiii.1, 2, 3.) that God may, for the trial or punishment of a people, let
the Devil into an acquaintance with some of His future purposes. But then GOD
is the Author, though the Devil be the communicater of these prophecies. God
only reveals the event, though an accursed Balaam be the Prophet. HE, who
adjusts all future things in His own breast, and whose sovereign pleasure and
purpose make them possible, can only foresee what, how, or when they shall be.
To ascribe a foreknowlege of future contingencies to the Devil, is to place him
in God's Throne, and to give him the glory of the Divine perfections. But I
proceed to consider,

2. THAT it is hence necessary, that all the characters of Christ in the Divine
prophecies, are true, since God can neither deceive, nor be deceived.

THE accomplishment of these prophecies discovers their glorious Author; the
Author, their necessary truth and faithfulness. If they are of Divine original,
they have a Divine veracity; and can no more be chargable with falsehood, or
mistake in any instance, than God can deny or contradict Himself.

THUS have we strongest and most unquestionable assurance from the holy
Prophets, that our Lord Jesus Christ, whom they have foreseen, and of whom they
have so particularly foretold, is the Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; that He is God's own Son; and the Man
that is His Fellow; that He is Immanuel God with us, the Lord our
Righteousness; and the Salvation of the ends of the Earth: And in a word, that
all things are fulfilled that were written in the Law of Moses, in the
Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning Him.

I am aware that Porphyry's ancient objection may be urged against all this,
That these prophecies were all written since the event; and so are indeed
rather histories of what is past, than predictions of things to come. But this
is absolutely impossible, the sacred Books having been kept in the hands of the
bitterest enemies of Christianity (the Jews I mean) whose malice against Christ
would not have allowed 'em (had they been capable) to have conspired in such a
forgery and interpolation.

CAN it be imagined, that they would have devised these prophecies on purpose
to have brought a perpetual infamy upon themselves? Could they thus frame
weapons against their Religion, and study the confusion of their own faces! --
Besides, if they had been willing, they could not have been able thus to have
imposed upon the World. Had it been possible that all the Jews in the World, in
their most distant dispersions, should have to a man combined in this
undertaking; had they corrupted all their Bibles; and not left one copy to
detect the fraud (which is unreasonable enough to suppose) This blessed Book
was in the hands of multitudes beside them; and every where dispersed among the
Gentiles, especially in the Greek translation of it; who must also have been in
the conspiracy, if any such thing had been done. In a word, the World must have
conspired in this cursed imposture; and no copy of the Bible be left to bewray
the villainy; nor any man know how, why, or when it was done. But it is time we
proceed to some Improvement of the Doctrine.

And,

I. WE hence learn, that as the foregoing prophecies of the Messiah are by
their accomplishment in our Lord Jesus Christ, a Testimony from Heaven that He
is the predicted Savior of the World; so likewise is the completion of His own
predictions, an attestation unto and confirmation of His Heavenly Mission.

THE Messiah was foretold to be a Prophet like unto Moses, whom we should hear
in all things, Deuteronomy. xviii.15. And our blessed Jesus has justified His claim to
that character, by His many prophecies of future things, which have been so
punctually verified. He not only discovered the most secret thoughts of men's
hearts; and foretold the treason of Judas, while confined to his own breast,
and perhaps before it was conceived in his mind: But also particularly
fore-shew'd His own death, with the manner and circumstances of it, the time of
His continuance in the grave, His resurrection, and glorious ascension. He
promised to the Apostles and others the gifts of the Holy Ghost; with His
miraculous powers and operations. He predicted the destruction of Jerusalem,
and the utter abolition of the Temple, with the preludes of that amazing
desolation. And I need not be particular in showing you the exact
accomplishment of all these prophecies; nor have I time to consider the many
prophecies in the New Testament, professedly received from Him, and spoken in
His name. I shall therefore select one only from among them, the verification
whereof is at this time visible to all the World: The prediction of Antichrist
I mean; the time of whose coming was foretold to be upon the downfall of the
Roman Empire, when that could no longer let, or restrain his Tyranny, 2 These.
ii.7. The manner of his coming was to be with pride and arrogance, exalting
himself above all that is called God, and worshipped; and yet under the guise
of a minister of Religion, sitting in the Temple of God, and there strengthening
his interest by all power, and signs, and lying wonders, 2 These. ii.4, 11. The
place of his residence was to be in a great City, built upon seven mountains;
that is, in the City of Rome, which only answers this description, Rev. xvii.9,
18. His Reign was to be tyrannical, with horrible persecution of the Saints.
Rev. xiii 7, and elsewhere. Now who can help but see an exact accomplishment of
these, and many other characters of Antichrist, in the Pope and Roman papacy;
and thereby a full evidence of our Savior's Omniscience, in foretelling these
events?

II. HENCE are we instructed in the Divine Authority of the sacred Scriptures.

THE Spirit of prophecy, which every where appears in them, must necessarily be
the Spirit of God; who only (as we have heard) can be the Author of a true
prophecy.

THE Old Testament has this attestation to its verity and Divine original, it
being throughout a continued series of accomplished prophecy. A great part of
that blessed Book consists, either of more direct, clear, and express, or more
dark and allusive predictions, of the hope of Israel, and salvation by Christ.

BESIDES the more explicit prophecies of this great salvation, interspersed
through almost every book of the Old Testament; What were all the typical
persons, the typical actions and ordinances; and what the whole Mosaic
Institution, with the Levitical Priesthood, Rites and Ceremonies; and
especially their Sacrifices, and bloody Oblations; but Types and Shadows of our
Blessed Savior, to keep alive their Faith, Hope, and Desire of His Salvation,
before His coming? There are indeed some Historical parts of this holy Book,
not properly prophetical: but these have also their reference unto Christ, and
not only represent God's care, guidance, and government of His Church; but also
show us His faithfulness in securing the promised Seed, in the promised line;
and in preserving the Tribes entire, that our Lord's descent might be, as was
promised, from the loins of Abraham, the Tribe of Judah, and the family of
David.

THUS was a great part of the Old Testament an Index, to point out the Person
of Christ, with the time, manner, end, and consequences of His manifestation.
And the full and bright accomplishment of all these things, is not only a
verification of the promises and prophecies; but a declaration from Heaven,
that these Scriptures were given by inspiration of God.

I might here also, as a further evidence that the Old Testament is indeed the
Word of God, consider the many other prophecies that had no special reference
unto Christ. Such were the particular predictions of the vastly numerous
posterity of Abraham; of the children of Israel's sojourning in Egypt; of the
time of their continuance and state of bondage there; of their deliverance,
return to Canaan, utter extirpating the Inhabitants; and their flourishing
circumstances during their obedience in that happy land. -- Such likewise were
the predictions of the Ten Tribes destruction; of the Babylonish captivity,
with the term of its duration; of the circumstances of the Jews after their
return, and of their desolation and dispersion, for their rejecting of Christ.
-- And such also were the numerous prophecies relating to particular Persons,
Kingdoms, or Countries; as well as the prophetical description of the Four
successive Monarchies; and of the state of the World, during the continuance of
each of them, and after the subversion of 'em all. There are, as you all know,
innumerable accomplished prophecies of this kind, every where in the Old
Testament, and therein innumerable evidences, that those holy Books were the
dictates of God Himself.

THE New Testament has likewise, from hence, surest confirmation of its Truth
and Divinity; not only by the multiplied prophecies therein contained, many of
which are fulfilled, and some are yet to be expected; but also by the glorious
light reflected upon it, by the predictions of this New Dispensation in the Old
Testament. The Old Testament has foretold the coming and Kingdom of the
Messiah; the New Testament assures us that He is come, and has erected His
spiritual Kingdom, as was predicted of Him. The Old Testament Dispensation
consisted of many Types, Shadows, and mystical Ceremonies; the New Testament
shows us how they were completed in Christ, the Substance of 'em all. The Old
Testament describes the time, circumstances, and manner of this new
Dispensation; the New Testament every way answers the description, as a copy
the original, or the face a well drawn picture, in all the parts, features and
lineaments.

THUS we see the Old Testament illustrated by the New, and the New confirmed by
the Old, and both contrived by Infinite Wisdom. For, is it possible that any
created understanding could devise and foresee so many and various
representations of Christ and His Kingdom of Grace, all agreeing with the
event, at such a distance from their completion? No surely! this must exceed
the foresight of every created intelligence. Is it possible that the Religion
should not be of God, which has been predicted and confirmed, by a successive
series of prophecy, from the very earliest ages of time; and joyfully beheld
through the prospective glass of the promises, by all the faithful, since man's
first apostasy? No certainly! our infidelity would debase us below humanity.

III. HENCE, from the accomplishment of past prophecies, we have greatest
assurance that those yet future shall be also fulfilled. For they have all the
same glorious Author: all depend upon the same power and veracity.

FROM hence may we entertain certain expectations of that flourishing state of
the Church, when Antichrist shall be destroyed, by the Spirit of Christ's mouth
and the brightness of His coming; when the fullness of the Gentiles shall be
brought in, and all Israel be saved; when Christ shall have the heathen for His
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for His possession: and when
the kingdoms of the Earth shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of His
Christ.

FROM hence may impenitent Sinners surely expect a swift approach of their
dreadful and eternal woe. They may justly entertain trembling expectations of
the accomplishment of those terrible predictions, of indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish; of snares, fire, and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest, for the portion of their cup: And of their part in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second Death.

FROM hence also may Believers lay down their heads in the dust with comfort,
under a blessed prospect of Christ's glorious Appearing, to change their vile
bodies, and fashion them like to His glorious Body: And from a view of that
glorious reward, which when He comes He will bring with Him. They may with
courage encounter the King of Terrors, and pass through the dark valley of the
shadow of death, keeping their promised inheritance in view; and looking to
that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior
Jesus Christ. They may joyfully make this echo to the promise of His coming,
Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

A DEMONSTRATION OF THE Christian Religion From the MIRACLES Wrought by our
LORD JESUS CHRIST, both before and after His Crucifixion.
ACTS II.22. Ye men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a man
approved of God among you, by miracles, and wonders, and signs, which God did
by Him in the midst of you; as ye your selves also know.


THESE words directly lead us to the consideration of the last evidence
proposed, for confirmation of the Divine Mission of our Blessed Savior. They
were successfully urged by the Apostle Peter, as an irrefragable Argument of
this important truth; and if duly considered, cannot fail of yielding us also
full and complete conviction of it.

FOR the right understanding the words, we may note in them,

1. A declaration of a matter of fact, that God did work Miracles, and Wonders,
and signs by Jesus of Nazareth.

THE Apostle here considers our Lord Jesus Christ in His human nature only,
according as He had appeared to the Jews, and was by their wicked hands
crucified and slain: And thus considered as a Man, He could not be the Author
of these Miraculous operations. These were (some of them) effects beyond the
capacity, not only of men, but of Angels; and therefore the necessary products
of Divine power and energy. Upon which account these Miracles, Wonders, and
Signs (words of like signification) are justly here ascribed unto the Deity, as
the sole Efficient; not exclusive of Christ, as the second Person in the
Godhead; but only as He was Jesus of Nazareth, or the Man Christ Jesus.

2. WE may note the end and design of this declaration, viz. To convince the
Audience, that our Lord Jesus Christ was by these Miracles approved of God. [Ye
men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among
you, by Miracles, etc.] Peter here takes the advantage of a vast concourse of
people, convened from all quarters, to the feast of Pentecost, to preach a
crucified Savior; and by irresistible Arguments, to convince them, that Jesus
of Nazareth was indeed the expected Messiah. This he evinces, first, by the
accomplishment of Prophecy, now surprizingly visible to 'em all, in the gift of
Tongues, newly conferred on the Apostles and company: And then, as a concluding
Argument, urges the miracles of our Lord, as a declaration from God Himself, of
His heavenly calling; and as a Testimony from Heaven, that the same Jesus whom
they had crucified, was sent, authorized, and approved of God, and by Him
constituted both Lord and Christ.

3. WE may note an appeal to the Auditors themselves, as Witnesses of the Facts
alleged, [ As ye your selves also know.] The Argument was founded upon matters
of Fact; and was therefore more or less forceable, according to the truth or
falsehood, notoriety or uncertainty of the Facts on which it depended. If they
were false or uncertain, the conclusion drawn from them must be very
precarious; if true and publicly known, it must be most just and necessary.
The Apostle therefore concludes the Argument with these words; thereby
intimating, that it must needs be of irresistible force to them, who were
themselves spectators of these Miracles. But we may more particularly consider
the Argument, in speaking to this DOCTRINE, That the Miracles wrought by our
Lord Jesus Christ, are a full and clear evidence, that He was approved of GOD,
and had His Mission from Him.

IN speaking to this Doctrine, I propose this method; I. To consider what a
Miracle is. II. To prove, that there were real Miracles wrought by our Lord
Jesus Christ. III. To make it appear, that these Miracles are full and clear
evidence of Christ's Divine Mission, and that He was the promised Messiah.


I. THEN I Am to consider what a Miracle is.

AND for explaining the nature of a Miracle, in the common Theological sense of
the word, I may observe to you, that a Miracle has been ordinarily described,
An extraordinary operation of God in nature, either stopping its course, or
producing some effects, that are above its laws and power. And it has been the
received Doctrine of Divines, that the working of Miracles is the sole
prerogative of God Himself. But some very learned men, who have lately written
upon this subject, have justly found fault with this Description; and made it
evident, that a true miracle may be wrought by the instrumentality of Angels.
They therefore choose thus to define a Miracle, A work effected in a manner
UNUSUAL, or different from the common and regular method of Providence, by the
interposition either of God Himself, or of some intelligent Agent superior to
man; for the proof or evidence of some particular Doctrine, or in attestation
to the Authority of some particular person. But how just soever this
description may be of Miracles in general; yet there were certainly such
miraculous works performed by our Blessed Lord, as exceeded the powers of all
the Angels of light; and it is upon such operations only, that I shall put the
stress of the present Argument: And shall therefore in illustrating the truth
before us, consider Miracles as extraordinary, and immediate operations of God,
in producing effects, either contrary to, or different from the common course
of Nature and Providence. I call them extraordinary and immediate operations of
God, exclusive of all finite power: For allowing that Angels may be able to
work some true Miracles; yet there are many of those operations, whereof we are
now to treat, that are as much the peculiar prerogative of God Himself, as the
creation of the World; as we shall see more particularly hereafter. -- I
describe Miracles to be effects contrary to, or different from the common
course of Nature and Providence: For though the power of God is as much
discovered in the ordinary works of Nature and Providence, as in those effects
that are most contrary to, or different from their common course: Yet those
only that are extraordinary, are properly miraculous; as they are evidences,
that God suspends the common motions of nature, for some uncommon or
extraordinary purpose.

II. I am to prove, that there were real Miracles wrought by our Lord Jesus
Christ.

THIS may be fully confirmed by the following considerations:

1. THE sacred Writers report, that many such Miracles were wrought by our
Blessed Savior.

IT would take up more than all the time before us, to particularly consider
all these demonstrations of His Mercy and Power, recorded in the Scriptures;
and yet their number doubtless far exceeded the particular account of them: But
were they more or fewer, if such as were the necessary productions of
Omnip^tence, they will sufficiently serve the present purpose, and prove the
point under consideration. I shall therefore select some few (and I need
mention but a few) of those indisputable instances of the miraculous works
performed by our Lord Jesus, both before His death, and after His resurrection;
and recorded in the sacred Writings.

WE read Ioh. ii. begin. of our Lord's honoring a wedding with His presence;
and manifesting the glory of His Omnipotence, by turning water into wine better
than the natural blood of the grape. Now though it be possible, that created
spirits might invisibly remove the water, and substitute wine in the place of
it; yet the Historian plainly intimates, that this was immediately done by our
Lord's powerful Word; and that it therefore was what no less than a Creating
Power could possibly effect.

A like instance was His feeding five thousand men, beside women and children,
with five loaves and two fishes: And four thousand men, beside women and
children, with seven loaves and a few little fishes: And causing the bread to
increase by being eaten, and the fragments to exceed the quantity of the
loaves, at first set before the multitudes, Matthew. xiv.19. and Chap. xv.34.
Though in this case it may likewise be easily supposed, that an Angel might
invisibly bring a fresh supply of bread and fish, in the place of what was
eaten; yet the sacred story represents it as Christ's own immediate work, and
therefore as a clear manifestation (...) His omnipotent power.

AN equal evidence of His immediate and omnipotent agency, was His forcing the
Elements to acknowledge their Sovereign Lord; and the Wind and Sea to forget
their tempestuous ruffle, and to become calm and quiet at His Word, Mark iv.39.
Though it may be possible for created Angels to raise or lay storms; yet this
must necessarily be a work of time: and I can as easily conceive them capable
of doing EVERY THING, as of quieting the troubled Air and Sea, without the
intervention of time or means; and of making them instantaneously obedient to
their command: As was the case before us, as appears from ver. 37. where we
find the ship filled with water, and ready to sink, by the impetuosity of the
storm; and they yet rescued from the brink of destruction, by an immediate calm.

I might add to this, His curing so many diseases, in their own nature
desperate, without any visible means, but His own powerful word. And the
multiplied instances of His casting out Devils; and even forcing the unclean
spirits themselves to acknowledge and proclaim Him the Son of God, as Matthew.
viii.29.

BUT if any shall except against all these instances, as what might (for ought
we know) be the agency of created Spirits: There are others yet to be
considered, that did certainly exceed the utmost stretch of angelic power. Such
were His giving life unto the dead, and commanding their departed Souls into
their bodies, by the same powerful word, by which they at first had their
being. Thus he raised Ia^rus's daughter to life, to the just astonishment of
the spectators, Mark v.41. Thus he stops the mourning train, that were carrying
the widow of Nain's son to the grave, and delivers him alive to his sorrowful
Mother, Luke vii.14, 15. And thus He speaks life into Lazarus, that had been
four days dead, and was now corrupting in his grave, Ioh. xi.43, 44. I might
here also add the testimony born to His heavenly Mission, by the resurrection
of many at the time of His crucifixion, Matthew. xxvii.52, 53. Though it be not
expressly told us, that these were raised by His power; yet their resurrection
was plainly done in honor to His sacred character, and an express declaration
from Heaven, that He was verily the S^n of God.

BUT the greatest Miracle of all was His own Resurrection from the grave, which
he assures us was performed by His own power, Joh. x.18. Which (if true) gives
brightest evidence of His Omnipotence; and that it was true is certain, in that
God would never have justified a false pretender and impostor, by raising him
from the dead: We have therefore a plain declaration from God Himself, that
Jesus Christ our Lord is the Son of God, with power, by His Resurrection from
the dead.

UPON the whole, it appears plain to me, that all the Angels in Heaven, or
Devils in Hell, could not break the bars of the pit asunder, summon the dead
from their graves, and cause 'em to reassume life and action. This must be the
work of Him only, who holds the keys of life and death in His hands.

BUT after all, were it admitted, that all these mentioned Miracles might be
performed by the interposition of Angels; they are nevertheless God's seal, to
justify Christ's Person, and render his Commission authentic. They were at
least Extraordinary works of Providence, wrought in justification of our Lord's
Person and Doctrine; and therefore a Testimony from Him, who either mediately
or immediately governs all the wheels of Providence, to that Truth, which they
were wrought in confirmation of; as we shall see more particularly hereafter.

IT IS true, that if these wonderful works were the agency of created Spirits,
they would not agree to the Description of Miracles, upon which I proposed to
found the present Argument. But then, there are multitudes of miraculous
operations, professedly performed in the Name, and by the Power of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that do not, cannot lie open to any cavil or exception; and in
which we have all the assurance of God's immediate agency, that is possible to
be obtained in any case whatsoever.

WHAT I mean are the Miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, conferred not only on
the Apostles and other Officers in the Church, but upon many (if not upon all)
true Believers, at the beginning of the Gospel Dispensation. The excellent
Author of Miscellanea Sacra, has handled this subject with such strength and
perspicuity, as to give infidelity a fatal wound, and lay it gasping at his
feet. What I now propose is to just give you a few hints out of that admirable
Author, to convince you, that God has born witness to Christianity, not only
with signs and wonders and diverse Miracles (such as we have already treated
of) but also with these Gifts of the Holy Ghost.

JOEL prophesies in Chap. ii.28. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I
will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy, your Old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions;
and also upon the servants, and upon the handmaids in those days, will I pour
out my Spirit. And agreably John Baptist, Christ's forerunner, bare record, I
saw the Spirit descending from Heaven like a dove; and it abode upon Him; and I
knew Him not; but He that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me,
Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, the same is He which BAPTIZETH
WITH THE HOLY GHOST, Joh. i.32, 33. The material part of which record, the
three other Evangelists give us: Thus Matthew says of John Baptist, Matthew.
iii.11. I indeed baptize you with water unto Repentance; but He that comes
after me, is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; He shall
BAPTIZE YOU WITH THE HOLY GHOST AND WITH FIRE. To the same purpose in Mark i.8.
and Luke iii.16. Here are plain predictions of a prophetic Spirit to be poured
out upon all flesh; and of our Lord's baptizing His Disciples with the Holy
Ghost and with Fire: But when should this be? Not while tabernacling here in
the flesh, but after His ascension to the Father; as He Himself assures His
Disciples, Joh. xiv.12. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes in
me, the works that I do, shall he do also; and greater works than these shall
he do; because I go to my Father. ver. 16. And I will pray the Father, and He
shall give you another Comforter, that He may abide with you for ever. ver. 26.
But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
Name, He shall teach you all things; and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you. Our Savior adds, Chap. xvi.7. Nevertheless I
tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away: For if I go not
away, the Comforter will not come unto you: But if I depart, I will send Him
unto you. And after our Lord's Resurrection, He renews the same promise unto
them, Luke xxiv.49. And behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you; but
tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with Power from on high.
And, Acts i.4, 5. And being assembled together with them, commanded them that
they should not depart from Jerusalem: but wait f^r the promise of the Father;
which, says He, ye have heard of me. F^r John truly baptized with water; but
ye shall be BAPTIZED WITH THE HOLY GHOST, not many days hence. See also Mark
xvi.17. Ioh. xx.22.

THUS we have seen the prediction and promise of the gifts of the H^ly Ghost.
Let us next consider the accomplishment of these prophecies, which will appear
in the clearest and strongest light, by reflecting upon the representation of
this matter in the Acts and Epistles.

THESE gifts of the Spirit were communicated two different ways, either
immediately by the H^ly Ghost's falling upon them; or mediately, by the laying
on of the Apostles hands. Those who received the Holy Ghost in the former way,
were said to be baptized with the Holy Ghost, to have Him poured out, or shed
down upon them; or to be filled, or anointed with the Holy Ghost. See Acts
xi.15, 16. Chap. ii.23. and iv.31. and x.38 And probably none ever received the
Holy Ghost in this immediate way, without the visible symbol of cloven T^ngues
like as of Fire. When the Holy Ghost did not so visibly descend, but was
communicated by the imposition of hands, it is called the giving and receiving
the Holy Ghost, Acts viii.15, 17, 18, 19. And the ministering of the Spirit,
Gal. iii.5. And imparting Spiritual gifts, Romans i.11. I shall endeavor briefly
to exemplify both these kinds of Inspirations or Illuminations of the Holy
Ghost, in some few instances.

THE Holy Ghost is said to fall or to be poured out upon the Disciples, but
five times only. The first instance of this miraculous effusion of the Holy
Ghost, was upon the Apostles and their company. Acts. ii.1, 2, 3, 4. And when
the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one
place: And suddenly there came a sound, as of a rushing mighty wind; and it
filled all the house where they were sitting; and there appeared unto them
cloven Tongues like as of Fire; and sat upon each of them: And they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues, as the
Spirit gave them utterance. This company, upon whom the Holy Ghost thus
miraculously descended, were about an hundred and twenty Men and Women, as
appears from Chap. i.14, 15, who are here said to be ALL with one accord in one
place, when the Spirit fell upon them. [From the mixture of Men and Women in
this inspired Society, we may remark, as we pass along, the bright
accomplishment of Ioel's prophecy, that the Spirit should be poured out upon
the handmaids as well as servants of the Lord; and that daughters as well as
sons, should prophesy.]

THE second instance of this kind was a new (and probably a like) effusion of
the Spirit upon the same Apostles and company, in answer to their prayer for
BOLDNESS and Courage, when they were brought before the Council. Acts iv.31.
And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled
together; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost; and they spoke the Word
of God with BOLDNESS.

THE third instance was in Saul, who (as a qualification for the Apostleship,
unto which he was designed) was FILLED with the Holy Ghost, Acts ix.17.
compared with Chap. xiii.9.

A fourth instance was in Cornelius and his household, who (that there might be
no prejudice against admitting the proselytes of the gate, into the fellowship
of the Gospel) had the Holy Ghost poured out upon them, Acts x.45, and FELL
upon them, as on the Apostles and company at the beginning, Chap. xi.15.

THE fifth and last instance of the effusion of the Holy Ghost, without the
imposition of hands, was on the first harvest of Idolatrous Gentiles, that were
converted to the Christian Faith; which was at Antioch in Pisidia, Acts
xiii.16. ad fin. For it is said of them verse 52, that they were FILLED with
the Holy Ghost. And there is no mention of any imposition of hands to that
purpose.

WE are next to consider how the gifts of the Holy Ghost were received, in a
more mediate way, by the laying on of the Apostles hands. Under which Head I
shall only observe, that these miraculous gifts of the Spirit were conferred
upon very many; and probably upon all true Believers, wherever the Apostles
came. This will appear from these considerations:

OUR blessed Savior promised this success to the Apostles Ministry, That these
signs shall f^llow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out Devils,
they shall speak with new Tongues, they shall take up serpents; and if they
drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them, they shall lay hands on the
sick, and they shall recover, Mark xvi.17, 18. And the Apostle P^ter promises
the three thousand, Acts ii.38, That upon their Repentance and Baptism, they
should receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. And he likewise speaks of the Holy
Ghost, as given to them (i. e. to all them) that obey him, Acts v.32. Where he
could not mean the sanctifying influences, but must intend these miraculous
gifts of the Holy Ghost: For the Holy Ghost is here spoken of, as a witness of
the Resurrection and Exaltation of Christ, whereof these gifts were an
unquestionable evidence (see Acts ii.33.) But not the common sanctifying gifts
of the Spirit: these could be no evidence at all of these truths unto others.

AS soon as the Samaritans were converted by Philip, the Apostles send Peter
and John to them, that they might receive these gifts of the Spirit: And they
laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost, Acts viii.14, --
17. When Paul came to Ephesus, and found certain Disciples there, he asked them
(as a question of course, which he constantly proposed to all that he did not
know) Have ye received the Holy Ghost? And finding they had not, he laid his
hands on them; and the Holy Ghost came upon them, and they spoke with Tongues
and prophesied, Acts xix.1, -- 6.

ALL the members of the Church of Corinth seem to have had these gifts in a
very plentiful manner. They spoke with Tongues, they prophesied, they
interpreted, 1 Cor. xiv. throughout. EVERY ONE of them had a Psalm, a Doctrine,
a Tongue, a Revelation, an Interpretation, verse 26. And that these gifts were
not peculiar to the Corinthians, but were at least frequent in other Churches
also, appears from 1 Cor. i.7. where the Apostle tells them, that they came
BEHIND in no gift. And from 2 Cor. xii.12. where he tells them, that they were
not inferior to OTHER CHURCHES, i. e. in these signs, wonders, and mighty
deeds, the evidence of his Apostleship among 'em, as appears from verse 11.
Which plainly shows us that these gifts were in the other Churches also, though
not in a superior degree. The same thing appears from most of the other
Epistles to the Churches, as may be seen from Gal. iii.2, 5. Ephesians. i.13, 17. 1
These. i.5. and v.20. 2 Timothy i.6, 14. Heb. vi.4, 5. 1 Pet. i.12. 1 Ioh. ii.20.
With too many other Texts, to the same purpose, to be now distinctly enumerated.

THESE gifts of the Spirit, whereof I am treating, were sudden Illuminations of
the mind whereby the recipients were instantaneously endued, with the knowledge
of a vast variety of languages, Acts ii. begin* and Chap. x.46. With a large
extensive knowledge of all needful Doct^^^es of Religion, whereby they were able
to teach the mind of God clearly, and powerfully, Romans ii.10, 11, 12. and 1
Pet. i.11, 12. With the Gift of Prophecy, whereby they could foretell future
events, Acts xi.28. and Chap. xx.23. And could discern the spirits of others,
and tell the secrets of their hearts, 1 Cor. xiv.24, 25, 32. And also judge of
the fitness of persons for peculiar service in the Church, Acts xiii.1, 2. and
1 Timothy i.18. They were frequently inspired with new Revelations, 1 Cor. xiv.30.
With the Gift of Interpreting, as well as speaking foreign Languages, 1 Cor.
xiv.27. With courage and fluency of speech upon all occasions, 1 Cor. i.5. To
all which, and many other Gifts that might be mentioned, I may add, that some
of these had the gifts of working Miracles, and of healing Diseases, as appears
from 1 Cor. xii.29, 30. And all the Apostles were instrumental by laying on of
their hands, to impart these gifts to others, wherever they themselves came. --
A more summary exemplification of these several Gifts, may be found in 1 Cor.
xii.8, 9, 10. For to one is given by the Spirit, the Word of Wisdom; to
another, the Word of Knowledge by the same Spirit; to another, Faith by the same
Spirit; to another, the gifts of Healing by the same Spirit; to another, the
working of Miracles; to another, Prophecy; to another, Discerning of spirits;
to another, diverse kinds of Tongues; to another, the Interpretation of Tongues.

THOUGH these gifts of the Holy Ghost are sometimes in Scripture distinguished
from MIRACLES, particularly in Heb. ii.4. yet as they are elsewhere expressly so
denominated (see Gal. iii.5. and 1 Cor. xii.29.) so were they certainly in
their own nature, Miracles of the highest kind, such as could not have been
wrought by the united power and skill of all created Spirits: For though we
know not what power Angels may have; yet we may certainly know, that it is the
peculiar prerogative of the Father of Spirits, so to enlarge the faculties of
the Soul of Man, as to communicate those degrees of knowledge in an instant,
which probably the most capacious mind could not contain, without these Divine
Inspirations; and which certainly the most sagacious of human beings could not
obtain in an ordinary way, without spending his whole life in the closest
application to those studies. No man living can conceive how so many Arts and
Divine Sciences could be at once imparted to them, by any but Him, who is the
Author of our Souls, and can enlarge their faculties as He pleases.

To exemplify this in two of these Gifts, which seem to have been common to
most of the first Believers; the Gift of Tongues, and of Prophecy. Was it
possible for unlearned Men and Women, to instantaneously possess such a vast
variety of languages, in such perfection, as to be able to use them with
readiness and propriety, upon all proper occasions; without having their minds
enlarged, and this knowledge communicated to 'em, by an Infinite Agent? Was it
possible that any but He, who only foreknows all future events, could inspire
these Disciples with a spirit of prophecy, whereby they could foretell things to
come? Or that any but He who knows the mind of the Spirit, and searches the
heart and reins, could enable these to discern the Spirits, and know the secret
thoughts of other men's hearts? No surely! we may as well attribute all the
incommunicable Perfections of God to a created being, as these miraculous gifts
and operations.

THUS I Have considered some of those Miracles performed by our blessed Lord in
His life, and by His Power and Authority after His crucifixion; which are an
evident attestation from Heaven, not only to His Divine Mission and Commission,
but to the whole Christian Institution. But it is time I proceed to the
consideration of some further evidences, that there were such Miracles wrought
by our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. The Reporters of these Miracles have all the marks of honesty, integrity,
and honor.

THE Doctrines they taught, show the innocence and divine excellencies of their
Faith. The unexampled pains and fatigues they underwent to propagate these
Doctrines, show 'em sincere and in earnest in their profession; and make it
evident, that they themselves both believed and practiced what they taught to
others: And the most spiteful and malicious of their enemies never did, and
therefore we may be sure never could charge them with any impiety and
immorality of life.

THAT they were eminent for their sanctity, as well as other extraordinary
endowments, appears from their success. What irresistible charm so suddenly
conquered the mighty opposition, and insuperable obstacles, in the hearts and
lives of men, against the Gospel? What torrent bore down those seats of luxury
and voluptuousness, those sanctuaries of Idolatry and Devil-worship, that were
subjected to the Cross of Christ? How came so many People, Cities, and
Countries, converted from the opinions and manners which they had embraced from
their infancy, to those not only different, but contrary? The despised Doctrine
of the Cross had no such charms in it, in the eye of carnal reason, as to
produce such wonderful effects. The unlettered Fishermen, by whose
instrumentality this amazing change was wrought, had no advantage of military
Power, or of learned Art and Eloquence, to force 'em to submission. These
things therefore loudly proclaim the innocence and sanctity of their lives,
without which they could not have been regarded. Nay more than so, these things
clearly evidence that the Apostles and other Disciples, had themselves
miraculous Gifts; and did confirm their Doctrine by miraculous operations;
without which Seal of Heaven '^would have been impossible to have persuaded so
many to forsake their lusts and pleasures, their comfort, ease and safety, for
a persecuted Religion, and a Crucified Savior.

THUS we see that the Witnesses were above reproach. And if we always allow for
truth, what is confirmed by a number of faithful Witnesses, we may well depend
upon the joint Testimony of such a number, who could all truly appeal to the
World, that they had renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
craftiness; nor handling the Word of God deceitfully; but by manifestation of
the truth, had commended themselves to every man's conscience, in the sight of
God, as 2 Cor. iv.2.

3. THESE miraculous works and spiritual gifts reported by the sacred Writers,
were matters of fact, in which it was impossible that they themselves could be
deceived.

OUR Lord's Miracles were not matters of speculation or science, wherein the
understandings of the Disciples might be imposed upon: but matters of fact,
that came under the immediate cognizance of their senses; such as they could
see, hear, and feel; and be ascertained of, by all possible means of certainty.
-- They were not dark and obscure performances; they were not done in a corner:
but most visibly, in the open light, and view of the World; so that there could
be no possible opportunity of Legerdemain, juggle or deceit. -- They were not
only some few and doubtful, but multitudes of unquestionable Miracles, repeated
again and again, in view of the same persons, who daily waited on their Master,
and saw His wonderful Works. -- Nor were these things done before some few
ignorant, and brainsick persons; but in the face of the World, before
multitudes of all sorts (beside the twelve Apostles, seventy Disciples, and
many others that followed our Lord) who all acknowledged the facts; though they
were not all converted by them. -- And to sum up all, these same Witnesses
assure us, that they and many others beside them, had themselves the miraculous
gifts of the Holy Ghost; and were employed in working the same or like
Miracles, in Christ's name, and by His Power and Authority.

AND now, will it not outdo the utmost strength of imagination, to find out
the means by which these Witnesses could be deceived? Is it possible for any
man to be more certain that he ever saw the sun, than these could be that they
saw the sick healed, the dead raised, their Lord expiring upon the cross,
restored again to life, eating drinking and conversing familiarly with them
forty days together, and ascending up to Heaven before their eyes? Is it
possible to have greater assurance of any thing we do, or can do, than these
could have, that they themselves, and multitudes beside them, had the gifts of
Languages, Prophecy, and other Miraculous Powers; and did perform many Miracles
in the Name of Christ? The Apostles therefore justly refer to these means of
knowledge, as sure evidences, that they could not be deceived in the Doctrines
they taught. 2 Pet. ii.16. For we have not followed cunningly devised fables,
when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: but
were EYEWITNESSES of His Majesty. And 1 John i.1. That which -- we have heard,
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon; and our hands have
handled of the Word of Life.

4. As these Witnesses were incapable to be deceived themselves, in the facts
reported by them, so were they without any possible temptation to deceive
others, by obtruding falsehoods of this kind upon the World.

THE common springs of great actions lay altogether out of their way; and could
be no motive to 'em, to impose upon mankind in this matter. -- They could not
hope for honor or worldly grandeur, by appearing in the head of a despised
Party; and by being of a Sect every where spoken against. They could not make
their court to Princes and the great men of the World, by a Religion, which
they all opposed and persecuted. They could not ingratiate themselves with the
Jews, nor gain esteem and applause from them, by subverting their darling
constitution, and charging the guilt of most precious innocent Blood upon 'em.
They could not expect honor and reputation from the Gentiles, by condemning
their manners, decrying their Religion, and vilifying their gods. No! they had
nothing to expect from their Doctrine of the Cross, but to be (like their
Master) despised and rejected of men, and every where loaded with contumely and
reproach, stripes and imprisonment. This indeed was what their Lord had
foretold 'em; and in just expectation hereof they undertook His service.

AND now let us see whether Riches and Wealth could be their incentive, to
publish these Miracles, and preach a crucified Savior. So far from it, that
poverty and penury, distressing indigency and want of all things, were the
necessary consequences of their extremely difficult and perilous travels
through the World (to preach this Doctrine) where they had nothing to depend
upon for sustentation; but that Providence which gives to the beast his food,
and to the young ravens when they cry.

OR could a view to worldly Ease and Pleasure animate them to their
undertaking? Could these be expected, by forsaking their country and kindred,
by traveling from Nation to Nation, both by Sea and Land, and running upon the
pikes of all difficulty and danger? Did they not know beforehand, as well as
find by experience, that they should be hated of all men for Christ's Name
sake; and that in every city bonds and afflictions did abide them?

UPON the whole then, when we can find men in love with misery and ruin, when
we can see Men court poverty and hugg contempt, fetters and bonds; and prefer
both a miserable life and death, to riches and honor, liberty and ease, then
may we imagine that the Apostles had some forcible motive to impose forgeries
and lies upon us, in the case before us.

BUT what sets this matter in the clearest light is, that they sealed this
Testimony with their Blood. Though it be possible that men may be Martyrs for a
false Religion; yet it must be when they think the Religion true, for which
they die, and so are equally acted by the dictates of Conscience, in their
sufferings, as if it was indeed the cause of God. But now there were
multitudes, who parted with their lives in confirmation of the Christian
Religion, that were themselves the coiners and forgers of the Doctrine, if it
was an imposture. They could not themselves be deceived (as I have already
proved) and therefore their report must necessarily be true: Or else they must
be charged with sacrificing their lives to confirm a lie of their own
inventing; and a lie which the most exquisite torments could never cause any
one of 'em to retract, or repent of. In a word, they must be supposed to part
with all temporal comfort, with all worldly satisfactions, and even with life
it self; nay and even to destroy both body and soul for ever, without any
manner of reason or motive. And I Am sure this is what every body must allow, to
be so repugnant to humane nature, as to be altogether impossible.

THUS we have seen the strongest evidence of these truths, that any Facts in
the World were ever capable of: And have thereby stripped infidelity of all its
armor, and found just satisfaction, that the Apostles and other promulgators
of the Gospel have approved themselves the Ministers of God, in their patience,
in their afflictions, necessities, distresses, stripes, imprisonments, tumults,
labors, watchings, and fastings, 2 Cor. vi.4, 5.

5. THE reported Miracles were matters of Fact, in which it was impossible that
these Historians could deceive the World at the time when their Narratives were
published.

LET us first consider this case, with respect to the Miracles performed by our
Lord, while tabernacling in the flesh. These (as we observed before) are said
to be done most publicly and openly, in the eye of the World, before the most
malignant and implacable enemies to Christ, who by all their vigilance and
subtilty could not detect any deceit or imposture; nor did they charge the
Sacred Story with falsehood or forgery. The Narratives were written in the place
where the Facts were said to be done, immediately after the performance of
those wonderful transactions, when they were fresh in every bodies memory; and
when no body could be ignorant of their truth or falsehood. Had therefore these
Histories been false, they must have been so far from gaining repute, and
making Proselytes, that they had been censured, confuted, and testified
against, as the most wicked and impudent forgeries that ever the sun saw. They
could not have been neglected or disregarded, as too mean and trivial for
particular notice: For as they were themselves of greatest importance, so were
they esteemed by the Jews (among whom these Miracles were both acted and
published) of two great moment and consequence, to be slightly overlooked. This
appears by their fortified prejudice, flaming rage, and malicious opposition,
both to the Doctrine and Publishers of the Gospel. Whence it plainly appears,
nothing but full conviction of the truth of these Miracles, could silence all
opposition, that not a Dog should move his tongue against them.

BUT what very much strengthens this Argument, is not only the adversaries
tacit assent to these matters of Fact; but their explicit attestation to some
of 'em. Thus (...) Josephus, the Jewish Historian, give us an Epitome of the
life, death, and resurrection of our Savior, whom he acknowleges a worker of
great Miracles. Tacitus the Roman Historian informs us also of the time and
circumstances of his death; and Tiberius the Emperor, upon a letter from
Pilate, informing him of the Miracles, death, and resurrection of Christ, moved
in Senate, that He might be numbered among their gods, which was rejected by the
Senate, because the motion was not first from themselves See Baxter's Saints
Rest, Chap. 4. Part II. where many Testimonies of the Adversaries to
Christianity may be found.
. I shall pass over many other Remarks of the like kind; and only observe, that
the Jews universally from that time till now have acknowleged the truth of
these miraculous operations; and inform us of many of them, whereof there is no
mention in the Gospels. They indeed sufficiently manifest their spite and
malice against Christ, by ascribing (in a most ludicrous manner) His miraculous
works, to wicked and unlawful Arts: But the Facts themselves they have never
denied.

AND now let us take a short view of the case, with respect to those miraculous
gifts of the Holy Ghost, of which we have before treated. These, at the first
effusion of the Spirit, are said to have been most openly manifested, in the
view of devout men, out of every Nation under Heaven, in a most public time,
place, and manner: The whole World therefore had the advantage of discovering
the fraud, and of contradicting the Story, if this Narrative had been false. --
Besides, the Apostle in almost all his Epistles to the Churches, not only
mentions these Gifts, as what they themselves had experienced, and were vested
with: But frequently directs and exhorts 'em to a right use and improvement of
'em; which implies an appeal to the Churches, that there were such Gifts
exercised among them. And what adds strength to the evidence is, that the
Apostle reproves the Romans and C^rinthians for their pride and conceit about
these Gifts, which occasioned contentions and parties amongst them (see Romans
xii.3, -- 8. and 1 Cor. xii, xiii, xiv Chapters.) Now can it be imagined, that
any man in an Epistle to a Society, where there are heats and parties, would so
particularly have directed 'em to the use, and so largely have reproved them
for the abuse of such Gifts, as they must all know were not in any of them?
This were not only ridiculous conduct, but perfect distraction. And what yet
further strengthens this evidence is, that the Apostle puts the truth of his
Doctrine and his Apostolical authority upon this proof, when some of the
Churches were in a great measure drawn away from his Gospel, and preferred the
Jewish false Apostles with their licentious Doctrines before him. This was
evidently the case of the Corinthians and Galatians, and especially the former,
unto whom the Apostle urges this Argument again and again in his First Epistle
to 'em: And shows 'em that if he was not an Apostle to others, yet doubtless he
was to them: For (says he) the Seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord,
Chap. ix.2. What this Seal or evidence of his Apostleship was, appears from his
Second Epistle, where he resumes the same Argument, particularly in Chap.
xii.12, 13. Truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you, in SIGNS and
WONDERS and MIGHTY DEEDS: For what is it wherein ye were inferior to other
Churches? And thus he puts the truth of his character and his Gospel upon this
single evidence. Gal. iii.1, 2, 5. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you,
that ye should not obey the Truth, etc. This only would I learn of you,
Received you the SPIRIT by the works of the Law; or by the hearing of Faith? He
therefore that ministers to you the SPIRIT, and works MIRACLES among you,
does He it by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? Now can it be
conceived, that the Apostle would put the proof of the Truth of his Gospel, and
his Apostolical character, upon Gifts of the Holy Ghost, conferred upon 'em by
his instrumentality; and that in a dispute with false Apostles, rivalling him
in those Churches, when there were no such Gifts among 'em? Such a supposition
is the height of absurdity. It was utterly impossible, that these Churches
could be imposed upon in this matter: And it was also impossible to impose upon
the World about 'em, who had all imaginable advantages and opportunity to
examine these Facts, and to discover their truth or falsehood If any would see
this Argument more largely handled, they may read the forementioned Miscellanea
Sacra, from which I have taken these last hints.
.

UPON the whole, it is as clear as the light, that the World was not, could not
be imposed upon by these reports, when they were first published. Whence the
Apostle boldly makes that appeal to King Agrippa, Acts xxvi.26. For the King
knows of these things, before whom also I speak freely: For I am persuaded,
that none of these things are hidden from him: For this thing was not done in a
corner.

6. WE have also good assurance, that these Narratives are handed down
uncorrupted unto the present time.

THE actions recorded by the sacred Writers, were notably famous in the World,
such as procured great revolutions and alterations in States; and even turned
the World upside down, by the conversion of so many from Superstition and
Idolatry, to the true worship of God. Whence they were worthy the critical
notice of every one. The Records have been kept publicly in all ages; and
publicly preached by the Ministers of Christ, which has given the most
negligent enemy advantage to discover and detect any fraudulent depravation, or
interpolation, had there been any such.

AND what makes this clearer, multitudes of most bitter Adversaries have in
every age been converted to Christianity, who could not want means to discover
any fraud of this kind; nor could they profess, and even suffer and die for a
known falsehood.

BESIDES, the Doctrine taught in this blessed Book, rendered the professors of
Christianity incapable to corrupt it: No less than eternal damnation is therein
denounced against him that shall add or diminish one jot or tittle of the
Sacred Canon. Should an Angel from Heaven teach any other Doctrine than what is
there taught, he is pronounced accursed. What temptation then could any have to
vitiate these Records, who kept them as their Rule of life, and Charter for
future Glory?

THEY that were friends to Christianity and believed the History of these
Miracles, could not corrupt them, on purpose to procure damnation to their own
Souls. They that were enemies to Christianity and disbelieved these truths,
would not corrupt them, on purpose to prepare Armor against their own
Infidelity. From whence then could such a depravation come, when the interest
both of friends and enemies was every way so strongly against it?

BUT had any man, or Society of men, never so earnestly desired, and never so
artfully attempted such an interpolation, it must have been without success:
For these Records in the very words of the sacred Penmen, were immediately in
the hands of multitudes of People, translated into various Languages, and
dispersed through all Nations, which rendered it impossible for the World to be
imposed upon, by such fraud and villainy. 'Twere easier to suppose, that a
designing Knave could corrupt our Magna Charta, frame a new body of Laws for
England, trump them upon us, and wheedle us into the belief, that these are and
always have been the Statutes of the Nation; than to imagine the like
corruption in these Statutes of Heaven. For the Statute-Books are in the hands
of but one Nation only: the New Testament (as I observed) dispersed through the
World, and found in every copy of it to agree, in attesting these miraculous
Facts.

THUS have we utmost certainty, that the Accounts of these Facts, now in our
hands, are the uncorrupted Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists. And thus
do we see the promise hitherto fulfilled, that the Word of the Lord shall
endure for ever, even that Word which by the Gospel is preached unto us, 1 Pet.
i.25.

WE are now prepared to consider,

III. THAT these Miracles, which I have proved to have been wrought by our Lord
Jesus Christ, both before and after His passion, are a full evidence that He
was approved of God, and had His Mission from Him.

THIS may be evinced by the following considerations.

1. THESE Miracles are certainly the work of God Himself: His direct agency is
plainly visible in them.

IF it be possible for any created beings to work a true Miracle, yet such
their agency must be always under God's control: otherwise the infernal powers
might interrupt the revolutions of Nature, and bring the World into a chaos.
Such Miracles therefore, whosoever be the instrumental agent, must be
acknowledged the works of God* God is Himself as near to the effect when He
uses Instruments, as when He acts immediately without 'em. But I have put the
present issue (as you heard before) upon such Miracles only, as are the
immediate effects of Omnipotence; that there can be no room either for
ignorance or malice, to raise any cavil in this case. If the Facts are true (as
I Have already proved 'em to be) all the World must own, that the wonderful works
which did show forth themselves in our Lord Jesus Christ, were the mighty works
of God; that those sacred gifts which we have considered, were certainly
Divine: And that these did as certainly discover God's immediate efficiency, as
the works of Creation. Whence it is certain, that our Lord Jesus had this
approbation of the Deity, and this seal to His Commission, that God did by Him,
and He by His Apostles, perform such stupendous works, as justly amazed the
World, and infinitely exceeded the power of all created Angels. And it was
therefore a just and natural inference, made by Nicodemus, Joh. iii.2. Rabbi,
we kn^w that thou art a Teacher come from God: For no man can do these Miracles
that thou do, except God be with him.

2. IT IS contrary to the goodness and faithfulness of God to justify an
Impostor, or confirm a falsehood by Miracles.

IT is impossible that we should in this imperfect state, have better evidence,
that any Person or Doctrine is from God, than these Miracles are. By these we
have visibly before our eyes, God's own immediate agency; We see the
extraordinary display of His Omnipotent power; we certainly know that there is
the immediate finger of God in these mighty works. And our Lord Jesus produces
this seal of Heaven, as a voucher to His Doctrine and Authority: He declares
Himself to be the expected Messiah; and these surprising Wonders are wrought to
confirm it. He publishes by His Disciples, His Resurrection from the dead; and
His Ascension into Heaven, which are also confirmed by the same evidence. Both
He and His Disciples appeal to the senses of mankind, that He is indeed what He
declares Himself, the Son of God, and Lord of Life and Glory; and that He has
indeed been declared the Son of God with power, by His resurrection from the
dead. God justifies the appeal from Heaven, and gives the visible Testimony of
Miracles, both before and after His crucifixion, that He is His beloved Son, in
whom He is well pleased. Infidelity can therefore have no place of retreat. We
must believe in this Savior, or disbelieve the Attestation of the God of
truth. If we are deceived, the deceit is inevitable; and the best men in the
World, who have the most sincere love to God, and despise whatever is desirable
or terrible, for His sake and service, are deluded in their most important
concerns by God Himself. Now can it be imagined, can we entertain the least
thought, that infinite Holiness would thus justify a fraudulent Imposture; that
infinite Truth and Faithfulness would thus seal to a lie; and that infinite
Wisdom and Goodness would thus give up the World to unavoidable error and
delusion? No surely! To refuse this Testimony, is not only stupidity and
madness, that transforms men into bruits; but obstinacy and malice, not far
distant from the nature of devils.

THUS we see two most faithful Witnesses, the power and veracity of God,
deposed to the truth of our Savior's heavenly Mission. Whence we must divest
our selves of reason and humanity, or yield to the irresistible force of our
Lord's Argument, Joh. x.37, 38. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me
not: But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works, that ye may know
and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in Him.

I may add to all this:

3. THERE is no Religion under Heaven, that can bring the attestation of
Miracles for its confirmation, but the Christian Religion only.

HERE all the Patrons of Infidelity may be challenged, to produce one instance
since the creation of the World, that looks any thing like a parallel to the
case before us. Let 'em search all the Histories of the pagan deities; let 'em
call in the help of the Alcoran, or what other legendary fables they please;
and bring convincing proof of but one single miracle wrought in confirmation of
any other Doctrine. -- I Am sensible they can produce romantic and fabulous
Histories enough, that will discover the fruitful invention of the obscure
deceitful Authors; such as Philostratus's Life of Apollonius Tyanaeus,
Mahomet's night-journey to Heaven, and the infamous Popish Legends: But what
attestation have they to the truth of these Facts, and what to confirm our
belief of 'em; but the bare reports of the unknown Authors? Just as much as can
be brought to prove the seventy years sleep of Epimenides, Lucian's true
History, or any other idle Romance.

IF the wonders wrought by the Egyptian Sorcerers be here objected; the answer
is easy. They were none of 'em Miracles of this superior kind, which we have
now been considering: none of 'em necessarily discovered the immediate agency
of Divine Omnipotence. Besides, they were immediately controlled by greater
miracles, in which the Magicians themselves were forced to acknowledge the
finger of God: And therefore they were an attestation to nothing else, but
Satan's impotent malice and shameful foil. God served Himself of these Wonders;
thereby taking occasion to glorify His own superior power. And He might
probably permit them for that very end. No man could be deceived by 'em, when
there was such an obvious preservative. Upon the whole, I may sum up this
evidence, by applying of that Text to the present case, in Joh. xv.24. If
Christ had not done such w^rks as none other man could do, we had not had sin;
but now we have no cloak left for our sin of unbelief.

BEFORE I proceed to a particular Application of this Doctrine, I would here
more particularly observe, that whatever has been said to verify the Divine
Mission of our Lord Jesus Christ, may equally serve to confirm the truth and
heavenly original of the whole Christian Religion. The Doctrine, and the Person
of Christ, are authorized of God, by the same seal of Heaven. If the Lord Jesus
be indeed the Son of God and Redeemer of mankind, His Institutions must be
worthy of His glorious Nature and Office. If the Apostles, and other holy
Writers, were indeed commissioned and inspired of Him, they were equally
incapable to deceive us, in an affair of everlasting consequence.

IF it be demanded, how can we be certain that the sacred Penmen were Divinely
inspired, in writing the New Testament? I answer, we have the same assurance of
this, as of the matters of Fact by them reported. They themselves attest it.
They have proved themselves persons of probity and integrity. They could not be
deceived in this matter, but must certainly know whether they were acted by a
heavenly Inspiration, or not. They could have no temporal inducement, to
obtrude false Doctrine, any more than false History upon us; but sealed both
with their blood. And we have the same security, that both have been handed
down uncorrupted to our times.

To all which we have this additional evidence, that God declared from Heaven
his approbation of their Doctrine, by the gifts of the Holy Ghost conferred upon
them. Christ promised them this seal to their Commission, that the works that
He did, they should do also; and greater works than these, when He was gone to
the Father, Joh. xiv.12. And that He would send the promise of His Father upon
them; and endue them with Power from on high, Luke xxiv.49. Which promise was
visibly verified to 'em. The Holy Spirit did (as was promised) descend from
Heaven upon 'em, and instantly invest them with the knowledge of various
Languages (so that they could speak them with their peculiar idioms and
accents) and with the several other gifts, which we have before considered;
whereby they were qualified to travel through the Nations, and universally
publish the glad tidings of Salvation. And wherever they went, they made the
Gentiles obedient, by word and deed, through mighty Signs and Wonders, by the
Power of the Spirit of God, Romans xv.18, 19. They every where confirmed their
Doctrine, by leaving behind 'em some miraculous blessing, either upon the body,
or mind, or both. Serpents were tamed, devils ejected, the sick healed, and the
dead raised at their word. And we have the most unquestionable evidence of
these Facts, that we can have of any thing not done in our own sight, as you
heard before. We are therefore constrained to give a full and entire assent to
all the Doctrines of Christianity, as what God has born Witness to, both with
signs and wonders; and with diverse Miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost,
according to His own will, Heb. ii.4. But it is time we draw to a

CONCLUSION.
THIS Doctrine teaches us what indispensable obligations we ly under, to a life
of holy obedience to this precious Savior, whom the Father has sanctified,
sent into the World, and thus incontestibly declared to be His beloved Son, in
whom He is well pleased.

I hope, what you have heard, has brought you without any hesitancy to conclude
with Philip, Joh. i.45. We have found Him, of whom Moses in the Law and the
Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth the son of Joseph. Whence you will all be
ready to address our Lord, in the language of Nathanael, Rabbi, thou art the
Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. But it concerns you also to consider,
that Christ came to save His people from their sins, and not in them. He came
to redeem us from all iniquity; and to purify unto Himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works. And the design of the Gospel is, to turn men from
darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God. Christianity
consists not merely in speculation, but in practice. We must not only give our
assent to the truth of the Gospel, but give up our hearts to Christ. The Faith
which He requires, is not a slight superficial belief, that He is the Redeemer
of mankind; but such a Faith as will form us into subjection and obedience to
Himself.

Do we believe that Jesus Christ is our only Savior, what stupidity, what
madness then is it, to reject or neglect Him, and His tendered Salvation, to
retain our lusts and perish in them! Do we believe the truth of the Gospel, and
can we notwithstanding be deaf to all its gracious invitations; and despise all
its promises and threatenings, as if they were mere Fables! Are we lifted up to
Heaven by the exhibitions of so great a Salvation; and shall we nevertheless
cast our selves down to Hell, by wilfully refusing it, and preferring our
sinful pleasures before it! This is not only to reproach our holy profession;
but to bring such a degree of guilt upon our own Souls, as will render us most
inexcusable, and most aggravatedly miserable at last. Let us therefore that
name the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. Let His Throne be set up in our
hearts, that all our faculties may bow down to Him. Let us choose Him for our
portion, seek an interest in Him with importunate earnestness and diligence,
depend upon Him as the Lord our Righteousness, and live to Him with our whole
hearts. If we thus come to Him, He will in no wise cast us out: But otherwise,
our most flourishing profession will not secure us from having our portion with
Hypocrites and Unbelievers, in the day of Retribution.

I am sensible, that there lies an Objection yet in our way: Some may be ready
to say, How shall we know in what way to serve Christ to His acceptance? There
are so many particular Sects and Parties among professed Christians, each of
whom censure and condemn the other, that we know not where to find rest for the
soles of our feet; nor in which of these different paths, to steer our course
for Heaven.

THIS Objection, I confess, may procure trouble and difficulty to some sincere
and well-minded persons; as well as offense and scandal to them of a wavering
and unsettled Faith. I shall therefore spend the remaining time before us, in
obviating this difficulty; and in giving you plain directions, how you may be
infallibly secure of serving Christ acceptably here; and of inheriting the
reward of a patient continuance in well-doing hereafter.

1. THEN labor to make sure of a true and lively Faith in Jesus Christ.

No one of what ever Sect or Party ever did or ever will get to Heaven, without
a true unfeigned Faith; nor will any true Believer, however denominated, fall
short of Eternal life. Faith transforms the Soul into the Divine Nature; and
God cannot be displeased with His own Image, wherever it is. Our great concern
therefore is, to fly to the blood of Christ for cleansing, and to His
Righteousness for justification; to ly at the footstool of His grace, with a
humble sense of our own nothingness, and with importunate suits for the
sanctifying influences of His Holy Spirit, whereby we may receive Christ Jesus
the Lord, and walk in Him. If we are chargeable with many mistakes, in matters
not essential to Salvation; yet being clothed with the Righteousness of
Christ, we shall appear without spot and blameless, the sons of God, without
rebuke, in the great day of trial. In that day it will not be enquired, Who is
of Paul? who of Apollos? or who of Cephas? But who is savingly united unto
Jesus Christ? And then shall the promise be certainly verified, in Joh. iii.16.
That whosoever believes in Him, shall not perish, but have Everlasting life.

2. EVIDENCE the truth and sincerity of your Faith, by a holy and heavenly life.

FAITH without Holiness is as a carcass without breath. Whosoever is born of
God, does not (cannot) commit sin, 1 John iii.9. The allowed practice of any
sin, either of omission or commission, is inconsistent with the quality and
grace of a Regenerate state. There is no middle between a Saint and an
Unbeliever: So that to entertain hopes of our justification, and yet live an
idle or sensual life, is to compass our selves about with sparks of our own
kindling, that will expose us at last to ly down in sorrow. The best means
therefore to discover the sincerity of our profession, and the safety of our
state is to show our Faith by our Works. If we are true Believers, our hearts
are purified by Faith: And if we are pure in heart, we shall see God. Let us
then walk as becomes the Gospel of Christ. Let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness, in the fear of God. And
God will approve Himself no respecter of persons, but in every Nation, and in
every Sect and Party, he that fears God and works righteousness, shall be
accepted of Him, Acts x.34, 35.

3. EMBRACE and live upon those Doctrines which tend most to debase your
selves, and magnify the free grace of God.

THE whole of our Salvation, from the first corner stone, unto its complete
perfection in Glory, is a continued series of infinite free Grace. By Grace are
we saved through Faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians.
ii.8. Mercy must shine forth in its brightest glory, if such guilty rebels, as
we, are saved, and such brands are plucked out of the fire of sin and hell.
Wherefore if we ever hope to find acceptance with our Lord Jesus Christ, we
must come to Him with an impressed sense, that we are poor, and miserable, and
wretched, and blind, and naked, that we deserve nothing but wrath; and can do
nothing that will entitle us to His favor. We must come to Him both for power
to serve Him, and for a gracious acceptance of our services, for His own sake,
and not for ours. We must remember that we are indigent beggars, that live only
upon Alms; that we are criminal delinquents, that are kept from execution by
mere sparing goodness, and therefore, have our whole dependence upon Christ, to
do all in us and for us; to be of God unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption. In a word, we must not depend upon works of
Righteousness that we have done, or can do; but count all as loss and dung,
that we may win Christ, and be found in Him, not having our own righteousness
which is of the Law; but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith, Phil. iii.8, 9.

IT IS remarkable, that most of the Heresies that have ever sprung up in the
Church, have some way or other exposed those fundamental Articles of our Faith
and Hope, the Sovereignty of free Grace in our Sanctification, and the
necessity of Christ's imputed Righteousness, in order to our Justification and
acceptance with God. But my Soul, come not thou into their secret: mine honor,
be not thou united to their assembly, who thus depreciate the grace of God, and
the satisfaction of Christ, and thus subvert the whole scope and design of the
Gospel. Let us avoid all such errors, as most dangerous shelves and quicksands,
in our voyage to Heaven, whoever profess 'em, and with what colors soever they
are painted; And venture our Salvation only upon unmerited Mercy, hoping to be
justified freely by God's Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, Romans iii.24. -- Let Christ have all the glory of our Salvation now,
that we may hereafter join with those that shall ascribe Glory and Dominion,
for ever and ever, to Him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in His own
blood; and made us Kings and Priests, unto God and His Father.

4. RELIGIOUSLY attend all the Ordinances and Institutions of Christ.

LET the Word of Christ be your Rule of Worship, your Directory in the service
of God. Let it be your care to keep the Ordinances as they have been delivered
to you in the holy Scriptures: And while you adhere to this Rule, be not
ashamed to confess, that after the way, which some call Heresy or Schism, so
worship you the God of your Fathers. It must be the character of every true
Christian, that he endeavors to walk in all the Commandments and Ordinances of
the Lord, blameless, Luke i.6. Though the means of Grace may want all that
external pomp, beauty, or ornament, that will recommend them to a carnal eye,
as worthy of special regard; yet how weak and foolish soever they may appear,
they are the institutions of God, which He will therefore own and bless. It has
pleased God by the foolishness of His Ordinances to save them that believe, 1
Cor. i.21. And we have no reason to hope for Salvation, in the contempt or
wilful neglect of them. If we would find Christ, we must seek him where He
walks, in the midst of His golden Candlesticks. If we would inherit the
blessing, we must watch daily at Christ's gates, and wait at the posts of His
doors. Whoever pretend any other way to Heaven, than this path of Ordinances,
which God has marked out for us, after the first and second admonition reject
them.

5. CONCERN your selves as little as possible with matters of doubtful
disputation: But where you must be of a party choose the charitable side.

THERE will be different sentiments among Christians, as long as we are on this
side Jordan. We shall not come to an exact unity in all Articles of Faith,
until that which is in part shall be done away; and we know even as also we are
known. But cannot we bear with the different thoughts, as well as different
complections of those that agree with us in the essentials of Christianity; and
receive one another, as Christ also received us, to the glory of God? Have we
no way to approve our selves Disciples of the Prince of Peace, but by
wranglings, contentions, strife and debate? This is a direct means to destroy
all practical Religion; and wholly root out all serious vital Piety.

IT IS true, we cannot our selves be of two contrary persuasions. It Is of
necessity, that we part ways with those, in some disputed points, with whom we
may agree in the main Foundations of our Faith and Hope; and with whom we hope
to join in eternal Anthems of praise. But how shall plain and weak Christians
act in this case? How shall they know with what party to join? It Is impossible
that I should now descend to particular Directions in this case; I must
therefore content my self with commending that general rule of the Apostle, 2 Timothy ii.22. Follow righteousness, faith, CHARITY, peace, with them that call on
the Lord out of a pure heart. Never herd your selves with those that are for
cutting off all the Protestant Churches, but themselves, from the fold of
Christ; nor expect to be saved by damning every body but your selves.

FINALLY, Constantly and fervently commit your Souls to the keeping and conduct
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

WE are liable to a thousand mistakes; but we have a safe and sure Pilot, upon
whom we may boldly depend. If we commit our way to Him, He will bring it to
pass. If He leaves us to lesser mistakes, He will save us from damning errors,
unless our own sin and sloth put us out of His protection. We must therefore
not only carefully and diligently try our selves; but with greatest earnestness
and constancy, implore the directions of His Holy Spirit; and wrestle with Him
by earnest Prayer, that He will search us and try us, and see if there be any
wicked way in us, and lead us in the way Everlasting: That He will guide us by
His counsel, and afterward bring us to glory. And in that way, we may with
courage conclude with the Apostle, 2 Timothy i.12. I know whom I have trusted; and
am persuaded, that He is able to keep that which I have committed to Him,
against that ^ay.

FINIS.

