Mr. Prince's SERMON AT The North Church.

The Dying Prayer of CHRIST, for his People's Preservation and Unity.

A SERMON TO THE North Church in BOSTON, January XXV. 1731, 2.

Being a DAY of PRAYER for the Divine Direction, in their Choice of Another
Colleague Pastor, to succeed the Rev. Dr. COTTON MATHER.

By Thomas Prince, M.A. And One of the Pastors of the South Church.

Ephesians. iv.1 -- 3 I therefore -- Beseech You, that Ye walk worthy of the Vocation
wherewith ye are called; With all Lowliness and Meekness, with Long suffering,
forbearing one another in Love; Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in
the Bond of Peace.

BOSTON: NEW ENGLAND. Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN for S. GERRISH in
Cornhil, MDCCXXXII,

THE Dying Prayer of CHRIST, FOR His People's Preservation and Unity.
JOHN XVII.11. And now I am no more in the World; But THESE are in the World,
and I come to Thee: HOLY FATHER! Keep, through thine own Name, THOSE which THOU
have Given ME; that THEY may be ONE, as WE are.


THE Words are part of the wonderful Prayer of CHRIST for his Disciples on the
Evening before He suffered. It seems to be his parting Prayer at the Paschal
Supper, and but a few Minutes before He was to be taken from them.

Having drank of the Cup of the Communion with them, He tells them; He should
drink no more of the Fruit of the Vine, till the Day he should drink it new in
the Kingdom of GOD. Mark xiv.25.
And after some of the most indearing Discourses with them, He concludes with
this astonishing Address to his FATHER, both for Himself, and Them, and the
Rest of his People to the End of the World.

He seems now in an eminent manner to enter the Exercise of his Priestly
Office: and this Great High Priest here Consecrates Himself thereto by Prayer
(1) For HIMSELF; that his FATHER would Raise Him to his Original Glory: (2) For
his dear Disciples, and all other Believers, both Present then, and Future;
that they might be Preserved in Grace and Unity, and be with Him for Ever.

However, it is One of the Petitions only that we are now to consider. -- And
now I am no more in the World, but THESE: are in the World, and I come to Thee:
HOLY FATHER! Keep, through thine own Name, THOSE which THOU have Given ME; that
THEY may be ONE as WE are!

It is Preservation and Unity while they stay in this lower World, that He here
so earnestly Prays for, and uses so many moving Arguments with his dear FATHER
to bestow upon them. And what more desirable things than these for CHRIST's
Disciples in this evil World? or of what greater Consequence to their present
Interest or Comfort?

And now, says CHRIST, I am no more in the World -- I am going to leave them as
to my Humane Presence: I shall have no Opportunity more, to teach, admonish,
advise, exhort or comfort this dear People: Their Faith has been ready
sometimes to fail them, but my Words would soon confirm them: And they have
been sometimes apt to jarr and differ; but when I came among them, my Presence
and my Voice would awe them, and soften their Hearts, and calm their Passions,
and bring them to an excellent Frame of Spirit, put an End to their Contentions
and unite them in Love. But now they are to loose this great Advantage, and I
am to be with them no more, as I have been, to influence and engage them to ME
and to one another.

But THESE are in the World -- They are to continue a while, in this dangerous
and evil World; a World full of Snares, Temptations and powerful Enemies; where
Satan has a dreadful Range, as a roaring Lion goes about seeking whom He may
devour, and is yet invisible and exceeding subtle: who tempts them when they
have no suspicion of it, and has a multitude of Ways and Instruments to carry
on his malicious Purposes against this my poor People, to divide and ruin them:
And while they are in this evil World, their natural Corruptions and selfish
Principles remain within them, and on many Occasions will be ready to arise and
operate, to the great Hurt of one another and my great Dishonor.

And I come to Thee, HOLY FATHER! -- Thou can keep them, as I have kept
them: There is not one lost, except the Son of Perdition, whom we have agreed
to leave to the Power of Sin and Satan: And now I have none but THEE to leave
them with. To thee, I therefore come, to entreat Thee for them, and commit them
to thy Care. O MY FATHER! Deny Me not in this -- They are dear to ME, and I
cannot be free to leave them alone, in this Evil World, exposed to so many
powerful Enemies. And as Thou art Holy, I can safely trust them with Thee, to
preserve and advance the Work of Grace I have begun in them, to keep them from
the Pollutions of the World and from all Iniquity.

HOLY FATHER! Keep, through thine own Name, THOSE whom THOU have Given ME. --
They were thine own, and they are still thine own, though Thou have Given them to
Me: For all mine are thine; They are Ours together: But Thou have Given them to
Me, To teach and keep, and save by laying down my Life for them. HOLY FATHER! I
have received this precious Gift at thine hands; and I prize them as They are
Thy Gift, the Gift of thy Love to Me. And They being thine own Gift, those very
Persons which Thou have Given me, They are also dear to Thee: and upon my being
taken from them, I may therefore freely come and resign them to thy Care. O!
Keep them: For they are utterly unable to Keep themselves. Keep them through
thine own Name; for thine own Name sake, for thine Honor, for the Love Thou
bear them and Me: and in thy Name (...) in the Original.
, in thy Fear and Favor, and by thy mighty Power: Keep them from Sinning
against Thee, from Dishonouring Me, and from falling out with one another. Keep
them safely, and preserve them blameless to thine Heavenly Kingdom.

That they may be ONE as WE are -- As Thou have given Them to me, and they are
jointly Ours; I have bro't them into One Body, into One Company: I have bro't
them to be One in Love and Interest with Me and with one another, except the
Son of Perdition, for whom I do not Pray -- I let Him go -- But for the Rest I
pray, that Thou would keep them in this happy State and Union; that they may
continue to be One Body and One in Love, and to hold a most intimate Communion
with one another, as WE do: that as WE are One; so this dear People may be One
with Us, and with one another!

O Divine Expressions! O inimitable Affection! O most lovely SAVIOR! Thou art
the true Sheperd! O what manner of Love is this! How great, how deep, how
tender thy Concern for thy poor People! Who shall not love Thee! What Heart
will not be moved, when thine own dissolves with a tender Fear, least thy
People fall away, and loose their Love, and break their Company, and not
continue in their Fellowship and Union! And that they may be kept in Love and
Grace, Thou did thus commit them to thy FATHER's Care; and thus most
earnestly implore, that He would keep them in his own Name, and as his own
People, in thine Absence from them; that We may be One with Thee, as Thou art
One with Him!

And O! who among thy People will not do their utmost, to comply with this most
earnest Desire and Prayer; which is so much for thine own Honor and
Satisfaction, and for their Advantage!

This is Part of the Substance of this Petition: which by Divine Assistance, I
would somewhat further dilate upon in the following Observations.

I. That the FATHER has given a peculiar People to CHRIST, and his true
Disciples are They.

HOLY FATHER! Keep through thine own Name THOSE whom Thou have Given ME.

Now these must be firstly Sinners, or Persons considered as in the State of
Sin, and not as in a State of Grace, when they were given to CHRIST of the
FATHER. For wherefore were they Given to CHRIST, but as to a Savior, that He
might Redeem and Keep them and bring them to Glory?

And this will plainly appear from what He says concerning them in this dying
Prayer.

In the 2d verse, He says of HIMSELF and THEM to the FATHER. As THOU have Given
HIM Power over all Flesh, that HE should Give ETERNAL LIFE to As MANY as Thou
have Given Him. They were first Given to CHRIST; and then CHRIST had Power
Given Him, that He might give them Eternal Life, that He might give it unto as
many as the FATHER had given Him. He gives it to Those whom the FATHER had
given to Him before, for this great Purpose. And in the following verse, He
says, And this is LIFE ETERNAL, that They might KNOW THEE the only TRUE GOD,
and JESUS CHRIST whom Thou have sent. i.e. The Right Apprehension of GOD and
CHRIST in the present State, is Eternal Life in the Principle: For the nature
of this is to be vital, active and to grow to maturity: and when it comes to
this, as it does in the Heavenly Places, it is Eternal Life in Perfection.

This Principle of Eternal Life, consisting in the Right Apprehension of GOD
and CHRIST, must be therefore that Eternal Life, which CHRIST had Power to give
to as many as the FATHER had given Him. And as a Proof of his answering this
great End; He appeals to the FATHER, in verse the 6th I have MANIFESTED THY
NAME to THE MEN which Thou gave me out of the World. i.e. of that Great
Multitude Thou have given me out of the World, and who in the Process of Ages
are all to receive the Gift of Eternal Life; I have already given the Right
Discovery of Thee to that small number, viz. to These my Disciples and Others,
to whom I was to Reveal Thee in my present State of Humiliation They were
therefore first chosen out of the World by the FATHER and given to CHRIST; and
then CHRIST gave the Manifestation of the FATHER to them: And thus He gave them
Eternal Life in the Principle: and for this great End the FATHER had given them
to Him.

Now by this Manifestation of HIMSELF and the FATHER, He brings this People to
a Right Apprehension of the FATHER and HIMSELF; so as to Admire and Love and
Choose Them above all other things in Heaven and Earth: He brings them to
Believe in CHRIST, and so to become his true and hearty Followers. And when we
come to this; Then it appears, that we were Given to CHRIST of the FATHER, that
CHRIST might bring us rightly to Know and Follow them: And then it appears,
that CHRIST has faithfully answered this great End, has given us Eternal Life
in the Principle, and has thereby bro't us into the Kingdom of Grace, in order
to lead us to the Kingdom of Glory.

And O! how happy, how exceeding happy are They that have once cleared, up this
great and momentous Point unto Themselves? For thereby they may joyfully see
their Interest in this most effectual Prayer. For it is only for Those whom the
FATHER has given to CHRIST, that this Great High Priest is so deeply concerned,
and for whom He made these earnest Supplications. For in the Two verses before
our Text, He says, -- I Pray for Them, I Pray not for the World, but for Them
which Thou have given Me: For they are thine, and thine are mine, and I am
Glorified in Them.

I Pray not for the WORLD; inasmuch as multitudes therein will continue finally
Impenitents and Unbelievers: And how can I Pray that such as these should be
kept in Grace, and received to Glory? But I Pray For THEM which Thou have Given
Me. i.e. not only These Disciples, but for all Others also; as in verse ^0
Neither Pray I for These alone; but for Them also which shall Believe on Me
through their Word. These the FATHER has also Given Him: And of These H-speaks in
Chap. vi.37. All that the FATHER gives Me, shall come to me: in Chap x.16 And
other Sheep I have, which are not of this Fold: Them also I must bring, and
They shall hear my Voice: verse 28. And I give to Them Eternal Life: and verse
29. My FATHER, which gave Them to Me, is greater than all.

II. We may here observe, That it was a great Advantage to CHRIST's First
Disciples, that He came into the World in their Day, and called and took them
into his immediate Care.

This plainly appears from the Argument first laid down in the Text -- And now,
I am no more in the World; But These are in the World, and I come to Thee.
While CHRIST was with them and had them under his Eye, they were safe enough:
and upon his departing from them -- to make up the Loss, He applies to the
FATHER, to keep them for Him.

And what a glorious Privilege had the first Disciples of CHRIST above the Rest
of Men? To see with their Eyes that wondrous Person, both GOD, and Man, the SON
of the FATHER, and the mighty Redeemer! To behold his amazing Miracles, to hear
his lively Calls, and therewith receive his attractive Influence to obey and
follow Him! To survey Him in all the Progress of his astonishing Life of
Humiliation! To enjoy his usual Presence, to hear the Gracious Words come out
of his Lips, to sit under the Heavenly Doctrines He continually dropped; and to
view in every Part, the most perfect and divine Example He set before them!

But O! -- to be under his tender Care and Eye: to behold his kind and
condescending Looks: to be allowed to speak familiarly with Him: to hear his
melting and engaging Language: to receive his gentle and wise Instructions: to
feel the Power of his Grace attending: and to see his indearing Love in all --
What Tongue can express, what Heart conceive the Delight and Happiness! The
very Officers who were sent to take Him, bare this Public Testimony, Joh.
vii.46. Never Man spoke like this Man! And an intimate Eyewitness tells us,
Chap. i.1 -- 3, 14. The WORD was GOD: the same was in the Beginning with GOD:
all things were made by Him: And the WORD was made Flesh, and dwelt among us:
and we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the ONLY BEGOTTEN of the FATHER, full
of Grace and Truth.

And how exceeding happy were those Disciples of his in the Fruits of his Care,
as long as he sojourned with them! For as He called them out of the World; so
he constantly watched over and kept them from falling away. When they began to
doubt, He strengthened their Faith: when they began to sink with Fear, He bare
them up: when they began to rise in Pride, He quickly brought them to an humble
Frame of Spirit: when they began to contend, He rebuked and calmed them: and
when they had begun to Deny Him, He looked them into Repentance.

And see what He says of their Happiness in Him, in the Prayer before us,

In ver. 6.7, 8. -- I have manifested thy Name to the Men which Thou gave me
out of the World: Thine they were, and Thou gave them me, and they have kept
thy Word. Now they have known that all things whatsoever Thou have given me,
are of Thee: For I have given to Them, the Words which Thou gave me, and They
have received them, and have known surely that I came out from Thee, and They
have believed that Thou did send Me. In ver. 12, 13. -- While I was with Them
in the World, I kept Them in thy Name: Those whom Thou gave Me, I have kept;
and none of them is lost, but the Son of Perdition, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled. And now come I to Thee, and these things I speak in the World; that
They might have my Joy fulfilled in Themselves. And in the closing Words of the
Prayer -- O RIGHTEOUS FATHER! The World has not known Thee: But I have known
Thee; and These have known that Thou have sent Me. And I have declared to Them
thy Name, and will declare it: that the Love wherewith Thou have loved Me, may
be in Them, and I in Them

Methinks, as once in the Mount of Transfiguration, when they saw his Glory;
They must now, in a most astonishing Rapture, feel their Happiness in Him; and
at the End of the Prayer, cry out as They, -- Lord it is good for us to be
Here! But alas! in the next Lines we read, that when JESUS had spoken these
Words, He went forth over the Brook CEDRON, into the Garden, whither Judas
quickly came and betrayed Him.

III. We may now observe, that CHRIST'S leaving the World and being in it no
more, was therefore a great and sorrowful Loss to his poor Disciples, which He
was deeply concerned about.

And now, says He, I am no more in the World: But These are in the World --

He was soon -- within twenty-four Hours -- to go out of the World: He that was
the Light of the World, and the Divine Leader and Joy of his People. They must
quickly loose these great and blessed Privileges they had been highly favored
and satisfied with, in his delightful Company. Their Head, their Lord, their
Guide, their Heavenly Instructor was to be ravished from them, and leave them
as Sheep without a Shepard.

Could the Children of the Bride Chamber mourn, while the BRIDEGROOM was with
them? But the Hour is come, when their lovely BRIDEGROOM is to be taken away!
How shall not their Hearts be filled with Grief, their Face with Sadness, their
Breasts with Sighing, their Eyes with Tears, and their Mouths with peircing
Cries and Lamentations! Who, but the hard hearted Judas, could now bare to part
with this Divine Person, the Hope, the Consolation, the Glory of Israel: and a
Person linked with them in the most dear Affection, who had loved them in a
distinguishing manner, had called and taken them most near to Himself, had
revealed the FATHER to them, and unveiled his own Glory; had taken the
tenderest Care of them in this Evil World, and kept them safely from its
polluting Influence: In brief, had been their Light and Comfort, their Guide
and Defender, their chief Delight and Joy.

And now to be taken from them -- a Poor, exposed, feeble, friendless and
despised People -- while their Hearts are full of Sorrow, His is pained with
Anguish for them. He sees their Loss, and He sees their Grief: He bears them on
his tender Heart. In their extreme Affliction, He is afflicted more than They.
He sees more their Loss, than They can, Themselves. He sees more their Dangers
in this evil World, without His Presence. And the affecting Prospect ushers in
the dismal and sinking Sorrows of his advancing Passion: For a few moments
after, He began to be sore amazed and to be very heavy, i.e. extremely
oppressed in his Spirit, and tells them -- My Soul is exceeding sorrowful even
to Death!

IV. We go on to observe, that this is a dangerous and evil World which
CHRIST's Disciples are for a time to stay in, while He is absent from them.

I am no more in the World, says He, But These are in the World.

CHRIST was now a going out of the World; But not to carry his People with Him.
They were now to Part as to his Humane Presence: and though He was to go out of
the World, He was to leave them in it: In a World of Evils, Snares and Hazards;
where they would be much exposed both to Sin and Trouble, especially in his
Absence from them. This lay much upon the Heart of CHRIST, that He was to leave
them in such a World as this; so full of Evils and awful Dangers to their
precious Souls.

And here are these few things, which may serve to show us, what a kind of
World it is, which He has left his People in, and which made Him so much
concerned for Them.

1. They are in a STRANGE World.

It is not the appointed Place for their long Abode. They have here no
continuing City, no durable House of Residence, no lasting Inheritance. Their
Eyes are to another World, which they may call their own. There they have
certain Titles, large and rich Possessions, glorious and eternal Mansions; a
spacious Temple that will hold them all, shall never decay, and shall be for
ever filled with Glory.

There their Hearts, their Thot's are fixed: Thither reach their strong
Desires: Thither are they traveling: and by their present Travels, are growing
more prepared and accomplished for the exalted Services, Enjoyments, and
Honors There.

But here they account themselves as Pilgrims, passing through a foreign Country
to their own. On this account, their Great Leader says, in the 14th verse of
the Prayer, -- They are not of the World, even as I am not of the World. This
is not the World they choose for theirs: This is not the World they are to have
their Portion in. As they are passing through it, they settle not their Hearts
upon it, but let it go, and all the Enjoyments of it. And while they sojourn
here, they live as Strangers; and the People often carry Strange to them. Yea

2. They are in a World of ENEMIES.

This lower World is become united in a grand Rebellion against the Glorious
GOD. Satan, once a bright Archangel in Heaven, at first began it, and drew a
multitude of Angels after Him: who are become a mighty Host of Devils,
renounced of GOD, and full of Enmity and Rage against Him. And being cast down
into this lower World, they soon seduced our first Parents also, brought them
under their Power, and infused their Enmity into them against their Great
Creator. And these being the natural Heads of all mere Mankind, have derived
the same sinful Spirit to all their natural Offspring. And thus this lower
World is filled with Enemies to the Blessed GOD. They have set up themselves in
Opposition to Him, to his holy Laws and Government: and they are all combined
in this Rebellion.

Now, CHRIST's true Disciples are by his Grace delivered from this reigning
Enmity to GOD: They are brought to love Him with all their Hearts, to an
unreserv'd Submission to his Will and Government, to an entire Devotion to Him.
And thus they separate from the rest of Men, and under CHRIST, their Great
Commander, join in Opposition to all this Enmity. And being thus divided from
the World, the World comes to hate them and to rise up against them. And so
CHRIST describes it in the verse last mentioned. -- And the World has hated
Them; because They are not of the World; even as I am not of the World.

They have Principalities and Powers, the Rulers of the Darkness of this World,
and Spiritual Wickednesses in high Places, to combat with. And the Prince of
the Power of the Air, is the Spirit that works in the Children of
Disobedience, and leads them captive at his Pleasure. The greater Part of their
own Species are set against them. The Hosts of Hell and Earth are combined
against the LORD and against his People. And as all these Enemies are great in
Power and vast in Number; so they are exceeding subtle, and full of restless
Hate: and against nothing more is their malice pointed, than at the Purity,
Union, Peace and Order of CHRIST'S Disciples in combined Societies.

And after all -- their most dangerous Enemies, are their own Corruptions hid
within them, and always ready to betray them to the other.

3. They are therefore, in a World of SNARES, TEMPTATIONS and OPPOSITIONS.

We are every where, at all times, surrounded with them. The great Design of
our Spiritual Enemies, is to take us off from our obeying GOD and following
CHRIST, and bring us to join again in their horrible Rebellion. Now, Sin is
this Rebellion against the Glorious GOD. And that they might accomplish this;
they make use of every Stratagem and delusive Argument, they try a thousand
Ways to bring us, either by Force, Allurement or Fraud, to Sin again.

And O! how secret, artful and unsuspected, are oftentimes their Snares, to
catch and ruin us? How strangely will they put false Colors upon things? make
Evil seem to be beautiful and good; and that which is Good appear under the
Form of Evil? And thus they charm the Affection, delude the Conscience, and
engage the Will; and bring us on to hate and renounce the Good, and to love and
choose the Evil, till we come to be habituated to it, and cannot leave it.

In short, by numberless and concealed Devices, these active and subtle
Enemies, are for ever striving to induce us to Sin, and fall away from GOD, and
divide from one another. And O! how ready are these sinful Hearts within us, to
entertain their Insinuations, to kindle with their Motives, to rise into
Resentments, to run into censorious Sentiments and Speeches; and so disturb the
Love and Harmony which must continue us together.

4. CHRIST's Disciples are therefore left in a World of SINS and TROUBLES.

There is a bitter Fountain of Sin within them: And O! what a Source of
constant Sorrow is it, and how does it make them mourn! There are their own
actual Sins, and the Sins of others. When they see Transgressors, they are
deeply grieved: and Rivers of Tears run down their Eyes, when their Neighbors,
Friends and Relatives, especially Professors, break the Laws of GOD, dishonor
CHRIST, and contend with one another.

And a World of Sin and Enemies, must needs be a World of Trouble. We are born
to Trouble as the Sparks fly upward: They are without account and they are ever
following in quick Successions. And O! what heavy and sinking Sorrows do we
often meet with! Many from without, and many from within: Our Load is great,
and our Strength but small; and we need Divine Supports and Consolations to
bear us up.

While CHRIST was with us, He could support and comfort us: But what shall his
Disciples do in such an evil World as this, upon his Removal from them? What an
awful Prospect is here before them? And the affecting View, was that which
seemed to usher in this most fervent Prayer. For in the verse before, He was
telling them -- In the World ye shall have Tribulation: But be of good cheer; I
have overcome the World. And then it nextly follows -- These Words spoke JESUS,
and lift up his Eyes to Heaven.

In such a World as this, He has left his People: and being greatly affected
with it; He applies Himself to his FATHER for them, and earnestly implores,
that He would take them into his special Care, and Keep them for Him. Our

V. Observation, therefore is, That the true Disciples of CHRIST are very Dear
to Him, and the Subjects of his great Concern.

But THESE are in the World.

He seems to turn his Eyes on Them, and to point them out, as He was now
presenting them to his Heavenly FATHER. His Heart appears to be greatly moved
with a most tender Sympathy: and it is likely They now sat weeping under his Eye

And there are various Reasons for this dear Affection.

1. They are that peculiar People which the FATHER had chosen and given Him.

The FATHER was pleased, in his Sovereign Grace, to Pitch on These, to choose
them out of the World, and Give them to CHRIST, that He might sanctify and save
them.

Now the Choice and Gift of the FATHER, must needs render them precious in the
Eyes of CHRIST He received them as a grateful Present, Fruit and Token of the
Love of the FATHER, to Him. Any thing Chosen and Given of the FATHER, must on
this account have a singular Value with Him, how worthless soever in it self
considered. But how much more dear must they be to CHRIST, on account of the
End of the FATHER's choosing and giving them to Him? It was to take them out of
the World, to Purchase their complete Redemption, and to make them an Holy
People, to his Praise for ever.

And then, as CHRIST has gratefully received the Gift, and they are his
FATHER's still; They are especially Dear to Him, as They are, both his Father's
and His own Propriety.

2. As He has kindly called them; so They have heard his Call, complied and
followed Him.

They are by this distinguished openly from the Rest of the World. My Sheep
says He, Hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow ME. Chap. x.27. They
comply with his Gospel Call, to Forsake their Sins, to renounce the Creature as
their Happiness, to deny themselves, take up his Cross and follow Him; to
imitate his lovely Example, and submit themselves to his Will and Government.
And this must render them very dear to Him.

It is true indeed, that in all this, there can be nothing of Desert in Them:
For They would not have complied or followed, if He had not put forth his
Almighty Power, and changed their Hearts, and drawn their Wills, and bro't them
to be a freely willing and obedient People. But though their free Obedience be
the Fruit of his Divine Power and Grace; Yet the Fruit it self must needs be
lovely, and therefore make them precious to Him.

3. He sees his own most beautiful Image In Them.

The true Knowledge of GOD, with Righteousness and Holiness, are the lively
Image of CHRIST; which both HIMSELF and the FATHER must needs delight in. And
these are in some measure stamped on his true Disciples. Their Understandings
are enlightened with most agreeable Conceptions of the Glorious GOD; their
Affections purified and bro't to Love Him above all Others; and their Wills
induced to choose Him as their only Happiness. And as this must needs be
delightful in the Eyes of CHRIST, it must therefore render his People dearer to
Him.

4. He likewise sees their indearing Love to HIM, and has had agreeable
Communion with Them.

He desires that Those whom the FATHER has Given Him, should come to Love Him.
And when they come to this, He sees it with indearing Pleasure: He delights to
see the actings of it in Communion with Him and Obedience to Him. Love thou
ME? said CHRIST, even three times over, to one of his first Disciples -- not to
see whether He Loved or no; but to call forth this agreeable Expression of it --
LORD! Thou know all things; Thou know that I Love Thee: Chap. xxi.15 --
17.

And to see how pleasing is our Love to CHRIST, and the Actings of it; Let us
hear those gracious Words of his -- Joh. xiv.21. He that has my Commandments
and keeps them, He it is that Loves me: And He that Loves me, shall be Loved
of my FATHER, and I will Love Him, and will manifest my self to Him. And verse
23. If a man Love me, He will keep my Words; and my FATHER will Love Him, and
WE will come unto Him, and make our Abode with Him. Yea

5. and lastly. He not only Loves them for what He sees in them already, but
even for all that Future Loveliness they are aspiring after, and He designs
they shall arrive unto.

They are Given Him, that He might not only Begin, but that He might also carry
on the Divine Image in them to Perfection. And He intends to make Them
completely like Himself; that they may not only grow more and more like Him, as
He appeared on Earth; but may also rise in a great measure to the glorious
Likeness of his Form in Heaven. And! O who but He, can now conceive the
wondrous Sights, and the ravishing Communion He designs to be between them
There?

But He even now delights Himself in the lively Prospect of all the future
Growings of his Image in them, of their Affection and Obedience to Him, of
their Sufferings for Him, of their Communion with Him, of their Aspirations to
be entirely like Him, till they attain the Height of all their Wishes: and in
the Views of this, He now looks on them with increased Pleasure.

And this dear Affection must needs excite an answerably great Concern, in his
Humane Nature, for their Preservation in this dangerous and evil World He has
left them in, and through which they are traveling to the Heavenly Places.

But how does this great Affection and Concern express themselves and operate?

The Prayer before us is an amazing Discovery of them. They here exert
themselves in a most servent Application to his Almighty FATHER for this dear
People -- But These are in the World; and I come to THEE! Our

VI. Observation then is this -- That the great Affection and Concern of CHRIST
for his People left in this lower World, excites Him to the most earnest
Intercession with the FATHER for their PRESERVATION and UNITY.

Thus it wro't when He was here upon Earth, in this Farewell Prayer. He was
going to lay down his Life for his People to purchase their eternal Salvation
and Happiness. But just as He was entering his Agonies, He would not leave them
in this evil World, without applying to his FATHER for them. He knew the World
infinitely better than they: He had a most awful Prospect of all their Dangers:
He should be no more with them, in so familiar a manner, to help and keep them:
and what should He do, but apply to the FATHER, with strong Crying and Tears,
and resign them into his Hands?

We may see his Earnestness by the many moving Arguments He improves to prevail.

And O! how happy -- that in this glorious Prayer, He confined not his Views to
his first Disciples, but extended them to all Others, to the End of the World.
In the forementioned verse 20. Neither Pray I for These alone, but for Them
also which shall Believe on Me, through their Word. All Believers, and every
Company of 'em in-every Place and Age, are comprehended in it. There is none of
'em all, but what Believes in CHRIST through the Words either spoken or written
by the first Disciples. And his great Concern and Love for us all, were the
powerful Motives that led Him thus to carry our Case in this Evil World, and
Present us as his own dear People, to his Heavenly FATHER.

O omniscient and most merciful SAVIOR! in the near and urging Prospect of thy
growing Passion, Thou wast not unmindful of us! Thou did even then Remember
and View us: and it Began thine Agonies! Thou did then carry our Dangers,
Sins and Sorrows!; and did make them thy Burden! And then Thou did carry
us to thy Dear FATHER, and most earnestly Plead with Him for us! --

And surely, this was but an early Specimen of his continued Intercessions in
the Heavenly Places. He then, (...) the Eyes of his People, Began that glorious
Work, which He was to carry on in a more exalted manner, at the Right Hand of
the FATHER. And thither His Humane Nature is raised, and ever living and
acting, in the same merciful Properties, as our dear INTERCESSOR. Heb. ii.17
Wherefore in all things it behooved Him to be made like (...) his Brethren; that
He might be a MERCIFUL and FAITHFUL HIGH PRIEST, in things, pertaining to GOD,
Chap. iv.14, 15. We have a GREAT HIGH PRIEST, that is passed into the HEAVENS;
JESUS the SON of GOD: and in Him, we have NOT an High Priest which CANNOT be
touched with the Feeling of our Infirmities: And Chap. vii.25. He ever lives to
make Intercession.

But what are the important Blessings which our GREAT HIGH PRIEST so earnestly
desired and prayed for?

Now these are Blessings both for the Present and Future World: But our Text
seems only to respect the Former: and the most excellent Blessings requisite in
the Present Life therein desired are these,

1. The more immediate, -- that the FATHER would KEEP us in his own Name.

2. The more ultimate; -- that WE may be ONE, as the FATHER and CHRIST are ONE.

And these Two Blessings are comprehensive indeed of Every Other.

1. That the FATHER would Keep us through his own Name. FATHER! KEEP through thine
own Name, Those whom Thou have Given Me.

Now this KEEPING signifies in General; that He would Take us into his special
and tender Care, Conduct and Protection, both of Grace and Providence.

In Particular -- That He would Keep us from all those Evils both of Affliction
and Temptation, that would be hurtful to us. That He would keep from sinking
under our Burdens, and from yielding to our strong Temptations. That He would
keep from Falling from the Grace received, and from Declining in the Measures
of it. That He would keep from Errors in our Understandings, and from Sins in
our Hearts and Lives; both from Omission of incumbent Duties, and from
Committing things forbidden. That He would keep especially from those more
Scandalous Sins, which greatly dishonor GOD and CHRIST, offend our Neighbors,
and wound our Souls. And more Especially... what our Blessed LORD seems here to
have a peculiar Eye to -- That He would keep us from Falling out with one
another; keep us in a mutual Love; and Preserve us blameless to his heavenly
Kingdom.

These are the Great Blessings which CHRIST so earnestly desires and prays for.
And this is through his Father's own Name. i. e. Keep us in his Love and Fear,
for his own Honor, and by his mighty Power and Wisdom, through this World of
Faith and Trial to complete Salvation.

And this is in a special manner desired by CHRIST, for this great End; that WE
may not be Divided, but may be ONE, even as the FATHER and HE are One. If We be
not kept from Sins or Errors, We shall soon fall out and Separate: But if we
are thus Preserved in Truth and Grace, in Love and Righteousness; our Union
will be unbroken, and come to its Perfection.

2. That We may be One, as the FATHER and CHRIST are One.

It is our perfect, firm and steadfast UNION, that is here desired and prayed
for. A Union of Affection; a mutual Esteem and Love; a mutual Tenderness and
Sympathy, Good Will and Kindness; an entire Friendship and Communion; an
unjarring Harmony of Interests and Inclinations, Designs and Actions.

Of such a perfect Union, CHRIST has here set His own with his Divine FATHER,
as the Glorious Example.

The Oneness between THESE Two, is indeed transcendent and absolute, above
Conception. How their Divine Substance is the same, and yet their Persons
diverse, -- is a mysterious Depth, like their own Immensity, beyond our finite
and shallow Comprehension. But this we know, that there is a perfect and
eternal Harmony between them. They have the same Nature, the same Love to one
another, the same Views, Desires, Wills, Designs, and entire Concurrence in all
their Actions. And what an inconceivable Felicity must arise from this in their
Divine Nature!

How sublime then and great will be the Beauty and Happiness of CHRIST's own
People, to be thus One together, as the FATHER and HE are One!

Our Views of things, indeed, can scarce be One in the present State of
Darkness and Imperfection. But we may be One in Love and Charity: Excusing,
Forbearing and Forgiving one another; and thus Preserve a Blessed Harmony in
our Hearts and Actions. And O! how Good, how lovely and how pleasant is it, for
Brethren thus to dwell together in Unity! They therein resemble the admirable
and happy Harmony among the several Per^^^^ in the Divine Nature.

But we must now come on to one Observation more, viz

VII. That HOLINESS is a Title proper to GOD the FATHER, and suitable to think
of in our Applications to Him.

And I come says CHRIST, to Thee, HOLY FATHER, in the Prayer before us: and
therein has doubtless set us a becoming Example, which it is our Duty and
Wisdom to imitate.

HOLINESS seems to consist in the Love of what is Excellent; in the highest
Love of GOD as the most excellent of Beings, as a Being indeed of absolute
Excellence; in the Desire of his Glory; and from thence derives to the Love of
what is like Him, and a Detestation of what is contrary to Him. And as this is
a certain Excellence essential to GOD; so the GODHEAD only is essentially Holy.
All other Beings may alter, and yet retain their Existence and essential
Nature: But GOD alone can never change, or in the least abate of this Divine
Perfection: And we can no more conceive of GOD without this Excellence, than
without Justice, Wisdom, Knowledge, Life, or any other. When Moses contemplates
upon Him, He cries out in trembling Admirations, Exodus xv.11. Who is like
to-THEE O LORD among the Gods! who is like THEE! Glorious in HOLINESS! Fearful
in Praises! Doing Wonders! And while the Seraphims are flying in his Presence,
they are described as covering both their Feet and Faces, and crying out to one
another -- Holy! Holy! Holy! is the LORD of Hosts! the whole Earth is full of
his Glory! Isai. vi.1.3.

When we think of THIS GLORIOUS BEING, we should therefore think of this
Perfection in Him: and we should especially apprehend Him as HOLY, when we come
to worship Him; that we may yield Him the Honor of this spotless Attribute,
and behave our selves with a becoming Care and Reverence.

And this Conception of GOD is in a special manner suitable, when we are
applying to Him for the Dispensations of his Favor. For this will both direct
us what to Pray for, and also encourage us to Plead and Hope that He will
bestow them on us. For of an HOLY GOD, we can never venture to implore for any
thing in the least offensive to this Perfection; But have Reason to Ask and
Hope for those things which are agreeable to it; as our Savior did in the
Prayer before us.

With what a cheerful Freedom and Assurance, may we go to GOD and Pray -- HOLY
FATHER! They are only Holy things that we ask of Thee: These are the things we
chiefly Want and Desire -- things that are the most agreeable to thine own
Nature. That the Impurity, Power and Guilt of Sin may be taken away. That we
may be delivered from the Dominion of Satan and all thine Enemies. That we may
be brought home to THEE, and have thine Holy Image stamped upon us. That we may
have this Sacred Image kept and advanced in us, till we are thoroughly Purified
in Spirit, Soul and Body, both in Heart and Life, and come to be completely
like Thee. That we may be kept from every Sin; from the Sins especially of
hating and contending with thy beloved People; and may be preserved in that
Sacred Union and Communion with them, which of thy free Grace, Thou have bro't
us into. That we may be One in Love and dear Society, as CHRIST our common Head
has so earnestly desired and prayed for; and as HE is One with THEE!

Such things as these must needs be pleasing to the HOLY GOD: and if we have a
due Conception of this Divine Excellence, We could not but desire them of Him,
and dare not enter his Presence with any other Desires.

How can any come before his Face with Confidence, who instead of such holy
Frames as these, must rather confess and say, -- O HOLY FATHER! I love Thee not
above all Others; but I love the things that are hateful to Thee: I desire some
Interest in the World above Thee: I have Affections, Passions, Resentments,
Humors disagreable to Thee, which I cannot part with. I cannot love thy
People, though they are dear to Thee: I cannot live in Charity with Them: I
cannot in my Heart be reconciled to them; nor delight in their Society, nor
keep their Company: But I must brake away; though they are One with CHRIST and
THEE, though THOU thy self have Fellowship with them, and though CHRIST has most
earnestly desired and prayed that we might live in Love and Unity, and be of
one Heart, as Thou and He are One.

What an unsuitable Frame is, this, to the Presence of the HOLY GOD? And with
what a guilty Tumult and Confusion of Soul, must such a Temper as this presume
to approach his Face and hope for his Mercy? The Presence of the HOLY GOD, is
enough, if we do but duly conceive it, to chase away all our sinful and selfish
Views, to still our angry Passions, and unite our Hearts to every one that
bares, in the least Degree; his Sacred Image.

And thus have we considered briefly some ^o the Principal things represented
in this Petition. We now proceed to some

IMPROVEMENT.

And

1. Are the People Given to CHRIST of the FATHER, only They for whom this
Prayer is made; O Let us then Endeavor to make it clear, that We are of this
happy Number.

This Prayer of his comprizes all that Blessedness which He was going to lay
down his Life, to Purchase for them: And it belongs to Those alone, whom the
FATHER has given Him. HOLY FATHER! Keep through thine own Name, THOSE, whom Thou
have Given Me etc.

But O! how shall we come to know that we are of this Blessed Number?

Why, we must Receive the Words of CHRIST, and Keep them, Believe in, Embrace
and Follow Him: And then we are sure, we are Given to CHRIST of the FATHER, and
have an happy Interest in this Dying Prayer. Neither Pray I says He, for These,
i. e. my first Disciples, alone; but for Them which shall Believe on Me through
their Word.

Now, this Word of theirs is the glorious Gospel. And O! how long and often,
has it been Preached to You; that you might believe on CHRIST, and so come to
know your selves to be the People given Him of the FATHER, and thereby see your
Interest in this blessed Prayer. This is the great thing you have been
earnestly and continually called, urged and entreated to, within these Walls,
by CHRIST'S Ambassadors, ever since You set Your Feet within them. It is to
believe in CHRIST, embrace and follow Him; that you may come to know your
Interest in Him, that you lie near his Heart, and have an happy share in his
prevailing Intercessions with his Heavenly FATHER.

And O! what excellent Ambassadors Dr. INCREASE MATHER, the Father; and Dr.
COTTON MATHER, the Son.
have been sent Successively among you? How many lively Sermons have They made
you from this Pulpit? How many affectionate and awakening Calls have they given
You in the Name of CHRIST, and in his Stead, entreating You to come to HIM and
be reconciled to GOD? And now they have finished their Ministry, they are gone
before the Throne, to render their Account, not only of what They have done to
bring You to believe in CHRIST, but also how You have received their Testimony:
And they have the Holy Angels also, who meet in our Assemblies, to witness with
them.

But O! how many are there that are yet unperswaded? And how increased is your
Guilt? how hard your Hearts? how ripe are you by this time grown for Eternal
Judgment? What Grace have you despised? what Long-suffering abused? How have
you trampled under your Feet, the Blood of the SON of GOD? And how
inconceivably have you thereby provoked his HOLY FATHER, who has offered Him to
you, and who loves HIM as his own Soul!

Yet, through the Riches of his Grace and Patience, You have now another
Opportunity and Invitation more: O! to Day, if Ye will hear his Voice, harden
not your Hearts* But let them yield and now comply: And then you will know, you
are given to CHRIST of the FATHER, that CHRIST has made this Prayer for you,
and your Souls shall live for ever. For thus has He assured us in Chap. vi.39,
40. And this is the FATHER's Will -- that of all which He has given Me, I
should loose nothing -- and this is the Will of Him who sent Me, that every one
who sees the SON, and believes on Him, may have Everlasting Life.

2. Is this a dangerous and evil World we live in; How vigilant have we always
need to be, and how careful in all our Conduct?

3. Are CHRIST's true Disciples very dear and precious to Him, and the Subjects
of his great Concern; Let this indear Him to them, and be improved by them for
their great Support and Comfort in his Absence from Them.

4. Does the great Affection and Concern of CHRIST for his People left in this!
lower World, excite Him to the most earnest Intercessions to the FATHER for
them; Let them then securely, in the way of Duty, leave the Interest of his
People with Him.

5. Is CHRIST so earnestly desirous of his People's UNITY; How lamentable is it
that any should presume to hinder the Accomplishment of this Desire of his, by
adding Terms of such a Union, as CHRIST Himself has not required!

What an awful Opposition to this Desire, are They engaged in, who prevent this
Unity* by imposing on the Conscience, Things, which the Imposers own, CHRIST
has not appointed; and so urge his People to this hard Necessity, either to Sin
against their Light, or else to separate from their imposing Brethren! And how
opposite both to Christian Charity and Union is it, for the Imposers to make
Themselves the Judges of the Hearts of Those who differ from them, and engross
the Sacred Name of Conscience to Themselves; By asserting, the Dissent of
Others, is from Humor only, and not from Conscience.

And how exceeding Beautiful and Happy would be the Christian World, if every
Party would lay down every thing they apprehend is not an Institution of CHRIST
Himself, and He requires not therefore as a Term of Fellowship among his
People: And where they differ about an Ordinance of his; There both preserve
their Brethren's Consciences entire, and believe in Charity, they differ from a
Conscientious Regard to what they apprehend to be CHRIST's Appointment! With
what Comeliness and Majesty would the Christian Churches throughout the World
appear! -- like the Regiments united in One great A^^y, with displayed Banners!

6. Are the great Blessings which CHRIST most earnestly desires of his FATHER
for us in this Evil World, that He would keep us in his own Name, that We may
be One as They are One! How obliged are We then, to our utmost to comply with
this Desire of CHRIST, that his earnest Prayer may be fulfilled and his Desire
satisfied.

Shall not our Desire for Our selves be the very same with CHRIST's
Affectionate and most wise Desire for us? And shall not we earnestly labor after
those Great Blessings He has pleaded for us; which will be a great Honor and
Delight to CHRIST Himself, as well as Pleasure and Advantage to our selves?

Will not You in Particular of this Flock of His, do your utmost in the present
Hour of your Temptation, that You may be safely kept in the FATHER's Name, from
every Sin and Snare, from every thing that may dishonor CHRIST, or divide you
from one another? Will Not you do your utmost to live in Love and Unity, to
preserve your Covenant, your Company unbroken -- that you may still watch over
one another -- And in order to it, still meet and walk together in the Ways of
CHRIST, and feed in one Flock and Pasture, under the Care of the same Sheperds?

And shall not We all do our utmost to be like to CHRIST, to be most agreeable to
Him, and to imitate the admirable Harmony and Oneness, we have heard there is
between HIM and his dear FATHER?

For O! it is this, that CHRIST most earnestly desires and longs to see; that
herein we may be like to Him, and there may be among his People, the like
indearing Union and Communion, as between those Two Divine Persons. And the
more we are like to CHRIST, the more we shall resemble Him in Love, and the
more shall we be United with one another: the greater Honor shall we do Him,
and the more lovely shall we be in his Eyes: yea the more united will both HE
and the FATHER be with Us. And in this wondrous Prayer, He seems to speak of
this -- the Union and Communion among us all in Perfection, as the very Height
of his own Desires both for Himself and Us, and the very Top of our ^^^ture
Felicity, verse 21. That THEY ALL may be ONE, (...) Thou FATHER art in ME, and
I in THEE: that. THEY ALL may be ONE in US: And verse 22, 23, And the Glory
which THOU gave ME, I have given THEM; that THEY may be ONE, even as WE are
ONE: I in THEM, and THOU in ME; that WE may be made Perfect in ONE.

O! how inconceivable is this Exaltation and Happiness! And will not every true
Disciple of CHRIST, most earnestly aspire after it?

7. And Lastly, Is Holiness a Divine Excellence, to be considered in our
Applications to the FATHER of our LORD JESUS CHRIST; With what Sincerity and
Purity, Care and Reverence, should We then approach Him?

If CHRIST Himself, who was Holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from
Sinners, did not come into the FATHER's Presence, or look up to Him, without a
special View to this Glorious Excellence -- How shall We? -- In our Approaches
to Him, Let us therefore have a special Care to view Him in this Perfection.
And what need have we to come with a ^^^ed Awe and Reverence? how careful to
present our selves before Him in Sincerity, with holy Frames and pure Desires.

HOLINESS becomes his Presence, his House, his People, his Worship, for ever:
And without some measure of this, there is none shall see his Face in Mercy. And
as He sees our Hearts, and all the allowed Hypocrisy, and unholy Frames and
Desires in them; He beholds them with Hatred, and cannot accept us. No -- if in
our Hearts we now regard or allow of any Iniquity; He will not hear us, when we
approach his Altar, or look for a Blessing, And if our secret, selfish and
unholy Desires, Frames and Passions, cannot be separated from us; if we cannot
part with Them -- He is a Consuming Fire, and will devour Us with Them together.

As we are therefore now come into His Sacred Presence, to implore Him for a
Special Favor; Let Us all, and Those of this Communion in particular, Take
Care to come in Sincerity and with pure Hearts, full of fervent Love to GOD and
CHRIST and One another; that We may be entirely One, as CHRIST has Prayed. And
O Remember, that all uncharitable Frames of Spirit toward your Fellow
Disciples, is part of that Unholiness which is offensive to GOD, and will
hinder your Services from being accepted of Him.

Now therefore, with the utmost Care and with all your Hearts, observe those
pungent Exhortations in Ephesians. iv. and v. at the Juncture of those Two Chapters.
And grieve not the SPIRIT of GOD, whereby ye are sealed to the Day of
Redemption. Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Glamour, and Evil
speaking, be put away from you, with all Malice. And be ye kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving each other, even as GOD for CHRIST's sake, has
forgiven You. Be ye therefore Followers of GOD, as dear Children: and walk in
Love; as CHRIST also has loved Us, and given Himself for Us, an Offering and a
Sacrifice to GOD, for a sweet smelling savor.

And to show, that You are unfeigned and hearty in this -- O! do not lay these
Evils aside only just for the Present, and return to them on the Morrow; But
put them away with Hatred and renounce them for ever.

In Fine, When You proceed to the Choice of another Pastor -- Come (...) the
Presence of the Holy GOD: Commit Your Choice into the Hands of CHRIST: Resign
Your own Inclinations and Views to his wife Disposal; Who knows the Person that
will be most suitable for You in times to come; Who has a greater Care for his
People and Interest than You can possibly have; and who has every Heart at this
Direction. Thus Resign Your selves to Him: And then, though You should not have
Your present Desire; You will be sure of a Blessing, and You will also see the
excellent Wisdom therein hereafter.

And O! Thou GOD and Sheperd of Israel! Who have all things, Present, Past, and
Future, in thy perfect View; Who leadest Joseph like a Flock; and dwell on
the Mercy Seat, between the Cherubims! -- Do Thou shine forth clearly to this
thy People, and show Them the Man Thou have chosen for Them!

FINIS.

