QUAKERISM A Judicial Infatuation. etc.

QUAKERISM A Judicial Infatuation Represented in Three Dialogues,

Adapted to the meanest Capacities, and containing A full Reply to J. Mott's,
pretended Answer to the Letter to a Parishioner, etc. and an Answer to the
common Objections of the Quakers against outward Ordinances: With a Detection
of R. Barclays Sophistry, in proving Christ's Baptism spiritual without Water;
and E. Burlings, arguments upon that head refuted.

By JAMES WETMORE, Missionary from the Honorable Society for Propagating the
Gospel, etc. And Rector of Christ Church in the Parish of Rys.

2 Pet. iii. 15.16. Even as our beloved Brother Paul also, according to the
Wisdom given unto him has written unto you.

As also in all his Epistles speaking in them of these Things: In which are
some Things hard to be understood, which they that are Unlearned and Unstable
wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own Destruction.

NEW YORK, Printed and Sold by J. Peter Zenger, in South-Street, near the Old
Slip.

A PREFACE To the Reader
Reader;
YOU have here another Attempt to confute the great Errors of the People called
Quakers, wherein, I think, sufficient is said to make it appear to any serious
and considerate Person, That that People are not led by the Spirit of Christ,
because they do so plainly, and it must be added so prophanly deny the Commands
and Ordinances of Jesus Christ.

I. They deny that Baptism and the Lord's Supper in the outward Elements of
them, Water, Bread and Wine, are Christ's Commands: And yet it is here made
plain and Evident from the express Words of Christ and his Apostles.

1. With Respect to Baptism, that Water and the Spirit are joined together, and
both made necessary to our Regeneration: And what Christ has joined together,
Joh. iii 5. let ^ Man presume to put assunder.

It is evident, that the Apostles understood outward Water to be commanded, by
their actual using of it, as Peter and Phillip did, which the Quakers allow,
and yet pretend it is not necessary: Do they think, that the Apostles would
have used Water, if they had not thought it necessary? Would they have presumed
to do it, if they had not been assured it was the Mind and Will of their
Master, that it should be done.

And as Christ joined Water and the Spirit Joh. iii 5. to St. Paul joins The
Washing of Regeneration with The Renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. iii 5. which
must mean Washing with Water in Baptism, joined with the Sanctificaticn of the
Spirit; For to say that by Water and the Washing of Regeneration is meant the
Spirit, and the Renewing of the holy Ghost, where the Spirit and holy Ghost are
mentioned at the same Time, is to make Christ and his Apostles speak Nonsense;
for it makes them say, We must be born of the Spirit, and of the Spirit: We
must be renewed by the Holy Ghost, and by the holy Ghost: Which is ridiculous.
The Quakers therefore are very Profane in making Christ and his Apostles speak
Nonsense, and in separating what they have joined together, and in making that
needless which Christ has made necessary, who so evidently required both Water
and the Spirtt.

2. With Respect to the Lord's Supper, nothing can he plainer, than that we are
required to Eat Bread and Drink Wine, in Remembrance of Christ's Death,
litereally as well as spiritually: For the Quakers themselves don't deny but
that Christ administered the outward Elements: And it is clear, that be
commanded expressly saying. Do this in Remembrance of me, Luke xxii 19. Yet the
Quakers reject this Command of Christ, and will not do it in Remembrance of
him. They allow that St. Paul meant outward Bread and Wine, whereby we are to
show forth Christ's Death till he come, and then ridiculously pretend he was
not yet come spiritually, though he had long before sent his holy Spirit to
'em: And on the other Hand they say, he is now long since come, though that
Text evidently means his coming to Judgment, and can be meant of nothing else,
since he was long before that come both personally and spiritually: Yet they, I
doubt wilfully, shut their Eves and say they will not show forth the Lord's
Death by that outward Ordinance.

Thus Water Baptism and the Supper of Bread and Wine are as plainly required as
Words can make them; and I defy the Quakers to show in what Words, they could
have been more plainly expressed, if it had been Christ's Design to command
them.

In short, I think it must be very plain to any unprejudiced Person, that by
the same Method of Interpreting Scripture as they use against Water Baptism,
and Bread and Wine, they may Interpret away all the Doctrines of Christ, and
even his own Humane Nature of Flesh and Flood it self, and may say that it was
all only spiritual, and there is ^ne but a Christ within, and that be only died
spiritually, as that Baptism and the Lord's Supper are only spiritual: and thus
indeed George Fox, their original Teacher first taught. And then where is
Christianity? It is all Delusion and nothing but parable and Allegory; but
dreadful delusions these are. Let therefore every serious Person beware of the
fatal Tendency of these Doctrines that deny the literal Meaning of these plain
Commands of Christ, of Water Baptism and Bread and Wine. for,

II. It is plain that since they deny these express Commands of Christ, what
ever they pretend they are not led by the Spirit of Christ;for his Spirit would
teach them, that they are his Laws and that they must be Obedient to them, if
they would be saved: Instead of which they make a mere Mock of them.

Let therefore the people of God diligently read what is here offered, and take
care not to be deceived by these Seducers, who would tempt them to deny their
Baptism, and consequently to deny Christ by denying his sacred Laws and
Institutions.

I conclude with the Last Words of St. Paul in his second Epistle, Ye therefore
Beloved, seeing ye know these things, beware lest ye also being led away with
the Error of the Wicked fall from your own Stedfastness: But grow in Grace and
in the Knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus christ: to him be Glory (...)
now and for ever, AMEN.

S. J

THE AUTHOR to the Reader
particularly to those of his own Parish,
Reader.
MY solicitous Concern for the Honor of Christ's Institution, and the Safety
of those Souls committed to my Charge, has induced me to appear publicly, in
Opposition to the Attempts of those wicked Seducers that labor by all possible
Means to propagate their poisonous Errors, and influence Men to neglect,
despise and contemn those sacred Rites of Religion, that have always been
treated with the greatest Reverence and Respect by the Church of Christ, yea,
by all Christians all the World over, and looked upon, not only as the
Ordinances of Christ himself, but also as necessary Means of our Salvation and
Happiness, and the proper Instruments of conveving to us the Grace and Comforts
of God's holy Spirit; of which holy Ordinances the sacred Scriptures speak with
no less Honor and Reverence:

And yet these in^uated Enthusiasts (I mean the Quakers) show the same Zeal and
E^rnestne^s in decr^ing these sacred Observations as if they were right down
Idolatry, and giving Adoration to Stocks and Stones.

MY first Letter was wrote to one of my Flock, seduced by them, desig^ with all
Tenderness and Compassion to represent the dangerous Sna^e she was drawn into;
to which I received two Answers (such as they were) from the Quakers, before I
put that Letter in Print. The first was from James Mott, to which I wrote a
large Reply, and sent it in Manuscript, of which they have taken no Notice. But
Edward Bur^ing sends me an Answer to the first Letter, to which also I have
replied by Way of Apendix to my Reply to James Mott, and proposed the Printing
of both together, as soon;as their Answers appeared; but instead of Printing
the Answer to which I sent a Reply in Manuscript, they have hamered out a new
Answer, which is the third to my first Letter, and take no Notice of that Reply
This Answer of Mott now in Print, however silly and Contemptible, is mightily
magnified among their Zealots, and by that Means ^museth some ignorant People,
which has induced me to write the following Dialogues, to give a short
Representation of the Wicked Principles and Practices of the Quakers. Wherein
also I have represented the Pleas for their Justification as fairly and fully,
as I believe they would have done themselves; and have taken in, I think, a
full reply to Mott and B^rling both: I don't meant ^ery particular Paragraph,
but to the Drift and Substance of their Answers. I have not so much insisted
upon the Previledges and Benefits of Baptism in these D^s because I had
considered these in my Letter, and from the^ justly inferred, that the Quakers
(...) Gospel than what the Apostles preached and therefore are under St, Paul's
Anathema. And all (...) was necessary to establish this consequence, was to
make (...) appear, That the Baptism Christ instituted, is with Water, and not
what the Quakers pretend to hold to; which I think I have here done ess^tually

I HAVE taken no Notice of James Mott's Exposition of 1 Pet. iii 21. because I
saw no Argument in it; but am since told, that Paragraph is reckoned by 'em the
finest flower in his Book; and therefore I will offer a Word or two upon it in
this Place. St. Peter says, v. 20. -- Fight Souls were saved by Water. v. 21.
The ^ike Figure whereunto Baptism does now save us. James Mott says, The Water
of Noah's Flood was sent to destroy, and not to save. That it was the Ark that
was saving, and the Water destroying. I refer to his Book, without reciting the
whole Passage, p. 11, 12. From whence I conclude he would infer, that what Noah
and his Family were saved by, was no Type of Water Baptism, because the Type
was not Water, but the Ark.

NOW if James had been a very little learned in the Greek, he might have found
out that nothing in all that 15 verse could be pitched upon for the Type but the
Water, of which Baptism is expressly called the Antitype, for in the Original
it is Omega
HO ANTELUPON BAPTISMA rendered The like Figure whereunto Baptism, etc. HO
being a Relative of the Neuter, must have an Antecedent of the same Gender in
the preceding Verse, which cannot be the Ark, for that is Feminine, but the
Water only, which is Neuter. So that St Peter certainly meant that Water as a
Type of Baptism, and not the Ark: And if he did not speak Sense, J. Mott must
dispute it with him.

BUT it is sufficient for me to observe, that the harder St. Peter strained
himself for the Allusion, by so much the Stronger is the Argument for Water
Baptism, since Water is expressly mentioned as the Type, even at the Risque of
his own Reputation, if the Quakers must stand Expositors.

AND when J. Mott in the same Paragraph expounds the Resurrection of Christ, to
be a spiritual raising up of Christ in the Soul: What shall we think he designs
to make of the most demonstrative Prove of our Religion^ And he will do well to
tell us. how he will allegoriz^ the following Words. v. 22. Who is gone into
Heaven, and is on the right Hand of God etc. If the Resurrection be spiritual
and inward, the Ascension must be so too. The Evidences of our Religion would
soon be demolished, if they were left to these ignorant Allegorizers. But
indeed they have no Occasion for such Evidences; if it will serve only to turn
Men's Minds inward, to such Manifestations as may be found there, without any
Thing outward: For whatever they pretend of other Teachers, Christ and his
Apostles did not preach such Doctrine, Christ referred Men to his Works, as the
fullest Proofs of his Doctrine; and the Apostles preached the Resurrection of
Christ, that God raised him up, not in their Hearts, but out of the Grave.

BUT I will now add no further upon this, but only ask J. Mott, what he
imagines St. Peter would think if he was now upon Earth, to find his own plain
easy Writings thus wrested by the Unlearned and U^stable, as well as those
Writings his Brother Paul writ according to the Wisdom given him (that is above
others) being a very learned and polite Writer) in whose Epistles St. Pet^
says, are some Things hard to be understood? His Schollarship carried him
sometimes above vulgar Capacities, but little did the plain Fisherman think,
his Writings should meet with the same Fate, 2 Pet. iii 16.

I SHOULD have added some things farther in the Dialogues, but found them swell
to a Bulk faster than expected; perhaps I may find Occasion to ^dd another
Dialogue hereafter. My Aim is to discover Truth, and establish my Flock in the
Faith that was once delivered to the Saints, a nd preserve them from the wicked
Attempts of such Deceivers, as under a Cloak of great Sobriety and
Abstractedness from the World, would draw them into Divisions and Parties, and
an utter Contempt of what is most valuable in Christianity.

LET me earnestly desire your Prayers with mine, that the Great God of Heaven
would succeed my Endeavors for this End, and effectually by his Grace preserve
you from all Attempts of wicked Men to seduce you from the Simplicity of the
Gospel of JESUS CHRIST.

J. W.

QUAKERISM A Judicial Infatuation, etc.
DIALOGUE 1.
Eusebius and Tremulus
Tremulus, Welcome Eusebius, I am glad thou art come in, just as I have beer
neading this Letter to a Parishioner, which represents the Consequences of
Quakerism (as he calls it) very fatal and distructive to the Souls of Men: I
would fain know of thee, whether thou do not think in thy Conscience the
People called Quakers to be very good People notwithstanding all that is said
against their Principles? --


Eusebius. I am glad my coming is acceptible, for indeed I am come with no
other Design, but to have a little Discourse with you upon the Subject of
Religion, for I have heard of late, you are inclining to Quakerism.


Trem. I will not deny the Matter, but freely own my self to be, what thou
call a Quaker; but yet if thou can convince me, it is my Duty to be any
Thing else, I will hearken to thee.


Eusebius. I hope you are sincere in promising to hearken to Conviction, this is
much better than to resolve you never will be convinced; but I conclude you
speak it with a Confidence, that I never can convince you, that is, make you
own your selves in an Error; this may indeed be a difficult Task, but it is a
very easy Matter to offer you sufficient Arguments, to prove the Consequences
of Quakerism fatal to the Souls of Men: And this in reason ought to convince
you, and will do it, if you be not obstinately prejudiced or given up to
judicial Infatuation.


Trem. Thou have Confidence, whatever I have: But why shoulst thou believe me
obstinately prejudiced? Or given up to judicial Infatuation? These are hard
Words.


Eusebius. I don't say, I believe you so: I entertain Hopes that the Arguments I
shall offer will have a proper Influence upon you: Men may be mistaken without
being obstinate, or judicially infatuated; and there is ground to hope when
this is the Case, that God will have Mercy on them, and bring out them of their
Errors, as he did St. Paul. But when Wickedness, Irreligion and Profaneness is
the Prelude to Error, and a wilful Neglect and Contempt of proper Means for
their Instruction and Reclaiming, is consequent upon their Wandering, we may
well attribute their Continuance in Error, at least to a Spirit of Infatuation,
sent by God in Judgment to punish their Wickedness and Obstinacy: And of such
there is little Hopes of their being reclaimed.


Trem. Thou can not with any Force apply this to the People called Quakers;
for they are a sober well ^^posed, good People, which I presume (...); a
therefore I put this Question to the^ first.


Eusebius. I can make you no such Concessions, their Principles and Practices are
very Wicked, whatever Soberness they pretend to.


Trem. Can thou discern the Heart, and see that they pretend to more
Soberness than they have? Is not this uncharitably censuring?


Eusebius. I don't pretend to see more than is apparent enough; allow them to be
as remote from Intemperance, Carnality, evil Speaking, etc. as they pretend to
aim at, and ten Times so far as the Generality of them are in Practice; yet
there is enough appears, to denominate them very wicked.


Trem. If sober Quakers are very wicked, what are profane, swearing, drunken
Churchmen? You have enough of them.


Eusebius. They are fit for Quakers of the highest Form. I have nothing to say in
their Justification. Without Repentance they will go to Hell with drunken,
lying, cheating, demure Quakers; and you have enough of them too: And if you
pretend the contrary, you must tell them that know no beter, if you can find
them: But this is known Matter of Fact, That the Devil's School of Debauchery,
Lewdness and Impiety, furnishes the Common Wealth of Quakers. It Is here their
Teachers are trained up, instead of Colleges and Schools of Learning; here they
procced Masters, and then are fit for Quakers of the first Rank.


Trem. Away with this Railery; I thought you were more moderate.


Eusebius. I speak the Words of Truth in Soberness, and assert nothing but such
plain Facts as are known to every Body, and if you desire it I will bring
plentiful Proof of 'em. It is very hard Men must be called Railers, for saying
of People that are openly and boldly wicked, that they are so. That the Quaker
Teachers are generally Men that have been excessively wicked, irreligious, and
debauched, needs no Proof but their own public Confessions, from Time to Time.
And as to others that turn Quakers and become first and foremost in the Herd,
you and I can tell of our own Knowledge, so far as we are acquainted, that they
are People that have lived without God in the World, People that never had any
serious Sense of their Duty to God, or Regard to Religion; that never lived up
to what they professed to believe; whose Irreligion and Wickedness has been the
greatest Scandal, to the Religion they were rekoned of: These Things Tremulus
you know as well as I, to be sorrowful Truths: And if you want more Proof, I
will call them in directly.


Trem. Thou need'st not call Evidences, I perceive what thou intendest, and I
don't deny the Matter; many serious good People are Converts from a State of
Irreligion and Wickedness; and our Teachers often tell us their Experiences,
how very wicked their Hearts and Lives were, before it pleased God to pour his
Spirit mightily, upon them, which led them into the Way thou call'st Quakerism.


Eusebius. This is the very Thing I said, their Lives were before a Contradiction
to their Profession, and they were a Scandal to the Religion they owned;
Christianity would have had more Credit, if they had professed themselves
Mabometans. And when all Methods of Conviction and Instruction proved
ineffectual to reclaim them, and bring them to a Temper and Spirit becoming
Christianity, God gave them up to a Spirit of Error and Infatuation, as a just
Judgment upon them, for refusing to be reformed by the powerful Methods of his
Grace; as Saint Paul speaks of some, 2 Thessalonians. ii 11. 12. For this Cause God
shall send them strong Delusions, to believe a Lie, that so they may all be
damned who believed not the Truth, but bad Pleasure in Unrighteousness. We have
Reason to fear, this is tne Case with many. And then their Delusions and Lies
which they are left to believe, they endeavor to put off for Divine
Inspirations, and that Fullness of the Spirit they talk of, is no other but
such a Spirit as I have now mentioned.


Trem. Their turning from their Vices and Wickedness, to live soberly and
virtuously, and persuading others to live in the Fear of God, and to keep from
such Wickedness as they once lived in, shows that they are true Converts, and
not the Servants of the Devil, as thou woulst insnuate.


Eusebius. If they turned from Sin to God, that is to the Practice of true
Religion and Godliness, and persuaded others to do so, it would be well: But
their Conversion is from Bad to Worse, and their Repentance it self needs to be
repented of; and all tne Virtue they practice, and would persuade others to, is
cons;istent enough with a State of Sin and Servitude to the Devil, whose
Interest they more effectually promote now they are Quakers than when they were
Debauchees.


Trem. If thou can convince me of this, I will look out for a better
Religion; but it seems to me, the Grand Promoter of Wickedness has a hopeful
Crew of Servants, if the Quakers are his, who show so much Zeal against Vanity
and all sorts of Immorality.


Eusebius. By the help of Gods Grace I will Endeavor to Convince you, and hope I
shall see you settled in a better Religion; for I assure you Quakerism is a bad
one.


Trem. It is bad indeed, if all their Zeal proceed from a Spirit of Error and
Infatuation, and while they think they are doing God good Service, they are
effectully promoting the Devil's interest. Truly thou semest to be a High-Flyer.


Eusebius. Be not angry, but have a little Patience and I will prove all I have
said, I hope to your Satisfaction: I have no Manner of ill Design in what I
have said, I tell you what I verily believe, and what I think I have good
Reason to believe, and the Matter is of too great Consequence to trifie with;
it is no Kindness to flatter Men in their Errors, and to hold ones Peace when
the Salvation of many Souls is at Stake. My Aim is to fly as high as Heaven and
if you will go with me. Truth and Charity must assist our Flight.


Trem. I am for Truth and Charity? and if the Quakers are so wicked as thou
representest them, it will truly be Charitable in thee, to Undeceive so many
good honest People, as are in danger of being led away by 'em; but I am very
confident thou will not be able to make out what thou have offered; and thy
Condemnation will be the greater, for being so Uncharitable toward those good
People of God.


Eusebius. They are neither good, nor God's People in any other sense, than as all
Creatures bad and good are his. Nor do I think there is any great Danger of
good honest People's being led away by 'em; those that are good and honest have
the Security of God's Providence and Grace, and are so far under the Guidance
and Influence of his holy Spirit dwelling in them, as to be secure from the
Danger of Infection, by such extravagant, wild and wicked Principles and
Practices as the Quaker's be, God never withdraws his Grace and the Influences
of his Spirit, from those that by Baptism have been consigned to the Indwelling
and Comforts thereof, till by often grieving his holy Spirit, and quenching his
kindly Motions. by neglecting to walk worthy of their high and holy Calling,
they provoke his Displeasure against them: And such Men cannot be called good
honest People, though they may be neither Drunkards nor Fornicators.


Trem. Do thou think then, that none that are good honest People turn Quakers.


Eusebius, None indeed; if you know of any, Pray name them, and I will alter my
Thought upon this Head.


Trem. I never was sensible, but that all my Neighbors reckoned me a good
honest Man, before I turned Quaker; and I think I have given them no Cause to
change their Opinion of me since.


Eusebius. Charity oblidgeth us, many times to think better of Men, than they have
any Reason to think of themselves; and sometimes People spoke better of their
Neighbors, then Charity obliges them to think; but, pray why did you turn
Quaker?


Trem. It pleased God to send a sudden Death into the Neighborhood, and it
very much startled me to think how suddenly I might be snatched into Eternity
and how unfit ^ found my self to die: I thought my self too much encumbered
about the things of this World, and too regardless of a further State, and
resolved for the future, to be more seriously religious than I had been and one
of my Neighbors knowing my Condition, lent me a good Book that gave me Light
and Comfort, and Satisfaction in this Way.


Eusebius. What Religion did you profess before?


Trem. I did not make much Profession of any one Sort; indeed I had not that
Thought of God and Judgment and Eternity as I hope I now have. I endeavored to
be a good Neighbor, and to be careful about my own Business and to keep clear
from the Vices of the Times: I sometimes went to one sort of Worship and
sometimes to another, but very seldom to any, however my Neighbors all had a
good Opinion of me, and I hope they have no Cause to alter it.


Eusebius. You offer your self for an Instance of a good honest Man turning
Quaker, and yet confess, when you came to be started at the Thoughts of saddain
Death, it put you into great concern, because you thought your self not fit to
die; and i^ed you had reason enough to think so; and whatever your Neighbor's
Opinion was of you you cannot pretend to justify the State you then was in, and
therefore you resolved upon mending; in order to which you turned Quaker, that
is, from nothing to worse; in short, you seem to have been like many others I
can name to you a Man that paid your Debts pretty well, no right down Sot; and
if once in a while you got drunk, you was no ways apt to be quarrelsome in your
Liquor, but as to any serious Thoughts of your Dependence on God, and the
Duties of a Religious Life, they never approached you till you had so long
forgotten God, and neglected his gracious Invitations, as to provoke him most
justly to give you over to perpetual Wandering, in Darkness and Error, so as
never to find the Way of Life.


Trem. I cannot say but it might have been just in God to have dealt so with me,
but I trust he has been more merciful; and I have Hope.


Eusebius. You may have great Hope, and yet when you come into Eternity find it
cut off, and prove but a spider's Webb you must never call him a good honest
man, that lives thoughtless of God and neglectful of Religion, we have many of
whom we may say, without Breach of Charity, that they are so sottish and
stupid, as to regard the Promises of Eternal life, and the Discoveries of
God's Will in the Gospel, and his kind merciful Invitations in Christ, as
Matters in which they have no manner of Concern: they never trouble themselves
what Instances of Obedience and Thankfulness they owe to God, for his
unpeakable Favors, to be sure as for any public Thanks or Praise they give
him none, such are stupid Sinners: and their long neglect of God's Invitations,
their Irreligion and worldly Immersions, Besides other Sins we don't observe,
may denominate them, Wicked and ungodly Men; and it is no Wonder if God permits
such to embrace the foulest Errors: And as this seems to be vours, so its the
Case of many others that turn Quakers; they never were good nor honest any
further than Men may be, without any serious sense of God or practice of
Religion.


Trem. I will instance in one that I think thou can not except against,
Narcessa is well known to thee and me, she was brought up in the Way of the
Church, and her Parents strict Church Folks, and she a sober Woman, and yet
turned Quaker.


Eusebius. I don't pretend that all are good and honest that are brought up in the
Church; Men may be Hypocrites in the Church of God, and though their outward
Conversation appear regular yet their secret Hypocrisy be such as God abhors:
The most excellent Part of Religion, is such as no Eye can see but God's, and
the Defects here may be as provoking to God as open Immorality; what secret
Wickedness Men may indulge them selves in, their nearest Neighbors cannot
discern; but, as to Narcissa there is enough appears to be an exception against
her Goodness, though she believed and did some Things well.


Trem. I never heard any thing amiss of her. though she is my near Neighbor.


Eusebius. She never received the Communion of the Body and blood of Christ though
she professed an entire Liking, to the Principles of the Chruch of England for
many Years after she was come to Discretion; so that she continued in the
Neglect of a very important Duty, and which she believed to be so; and in this
sinful Neglect she persisted, notwithstaning many serious Warnings and
Exhortations to amend.


Srem. Perhaps she thought her self not fit for it.


Eusebius. If she knew her self to live in any Habit of Wickedness, and yet for so
long Time refused to reform and amend, then she was so far from being good and
honest, as to be a hardened obstinate Creature, fit to make a Quaker of; and
indeed her wicked Neglect of which she knows to be her Duty, was living in a
known State of Sin, and contrary, to her own profession, and sufficient Cause
why God should at last abondon her, to a state of Error and wandering as a
punishment of her Obstinacy. But besides, she was very remiss and negligent for
a long time, in attending that Worship of God which she believed it her Duty to
be constant and unmovable in: And when People grow careless and negligent of
their Duty to God, and more and more remiss, instead of improving and growing
in Grace, it is no wonder if God abandon them to Error and Delusion.


Trem. Perhaps that seeming Remissness was unavoidable; she is but fa Woman,
and thou know her Husband is o another Religion.


Eusebius. This was undoubtedly a Ground of her Remissness and Neglect; and we may
well think it almost unaoidable that it should be so: But if People vountarily
put themselves into a State of unavoidable Temptation, they have no Ground to
depend upon God's Grace, to preserve them from Error and Wickedness. Religion,
being the Means of our Eternal Salvation and Happiness in the Fruition of God,
should be our chiefest Care and Concern; and no Wordly Interest or
Gratification should induce us to put our selves under Disadvantage in this
respect: And for a Woman especially, to dispose of herself for Life so as to
put herself voluntarily under such a Clogg and Imbarasment in the Affairs of
Religion, shows, that her Care for her Body, is greater then that for her Soul,
which is a great Wickedness: This one Care St. Paul recommends above all others
in Christans marrying, that it should be with those of their own Religion: 1
Cor. vii 39. She is at liberty to marry to whom she will, but only in the Lord.


Trem. Well, I don't see what great Consequence this is of; they are sober
good, religious People, after they come to be what thou call Quakers, and if
so, it matters little what they were before.


Eusebius. The Consequence of what I have said is considerable. for it shows us
what little Ground there is to imagine that God should make choice of these
People, to bestow his most distinguishing Favors upon; to make them his
choicest Darlings, as they pretend; to dwell personally in them, and reveal his
hidden Secrets to 'em, and send them with immediate Commissions to make new
Discoveries to the World. But when we see by what Steps, they had prepared and
ripened them selves for Vengeance, it will be no Matter of Surprise to find
them abandoned by God, and given over to the strongest Delusions; that is,
permitted to the power of the Devil, to be actuated and influenced by him, so
as to become his mere Tools and Engines in seducing others, who are in the like
preparatary Dipsositions; thus filling up the I leisure of their Wickedness,
they become Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction.


Trem. We must have some other Reasons to convince us that this is the Case,
besides a former State of Wickedness and Irreligion. I confess God might
justly, if he so pleased, abandon such wicked People to Error and Delusion; and
from what St. Paul says, it is undoubtedly true, that he sometimes does so; but
thou have no Reason to pitch upon the People called Quakers, to be the
abondoned, for some very wicked Men have Grace given them to repent; and they
become good Men and great Instruments of Good to others; thus it was with Paul
himself, and to the Corinthians he says, such were some of you, but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, etc. 1 Cor. vi 11.


Eusebius. I am far from denying the Grace of Repantance; very wicked Men by the
grace of God, may become Converts to Piety and Goodness: And I allow that their
future Life and Practice, must discover whether they receive the Grace of God
to Repentance, or for their Obstinacy, become abandoned to Infatuation.


Trem. Well then, let us look to what they are after they become what thou
call Quakers; without regarding what they have been before.


Eusebius. We will lock to what they were after; but yet attending to what they
have been before, serves to remove all Cause of Wonderment and Surprise, if we
find them yet in a State of Wickedness and gross Error, notwithstanding in some
Points of Virtue they appear very zealous, and really think themselves guided
by the Spirit of God. For though some Sinners by the Grace of God become true
Penitents, yet great Wickedness is so far from recommending Men to God's
special Favor, that on the contrary, it gives Ground to expect his severe
Judgment, and Dereliction in Error, when Men persist long in their Wickedness
and Irreligion, after proper Means and Opportunities afforded them for their
Conviction and Reclaiming. This is the Case with many that turn Quakers, which
could not be said of St. Paul or the Corinthians, and yet, either of them might
justly have been left to perish in their Sins.


Trem. So long as former Wickedness don't obsolutely bar Men from the Grace of
God, and his Mercy in Christ, I will hope those thou call Quakers, have the
Benefit thereof until thou show, that their Lvies and Conversations
afterward do not discover the proper Fruits of a true Repentance; if thou
can show this I will readily give all up, and conclude them to be abandoned
of God indeed.


Eusebius. We have not left our selves Time to go through the Consideration of
this so perticularly as it deserves, let us therefore agree to meet again to
morrow, and call in what Assistance you think fit; for I will Endeavor to
convince you, that if ever you hope to be saved, you must make a new Choice of
your Religion.


Trem. I will not shun the Light, if thou have any to offer, but I believe they
Confidence will prove vain, however, I will meet thee as thou proposest; so
fare thee well.


Eusebius. Adieu.


DIALOGUE II.
Eusebius returns at the Time appointed, and finds Tremulus waiting for his
coming, and withou much Ceremony the Conference begins anew.
Eusebius. I Hope Tremulus by what I offered yesterday, you are convinced, that
those People that turn Quakers, are generally so far from such Dispositions as
recommend them to God's extraordinary Favor, and ^e intimate and immediate
Communion and Inspirations of his Holy Spirit; that there is much greater
Reason to conclude them abandoned for their Wickedness, and so permitted to the
Devil's Delusions, by his Instigations to be shape^ to such Opinions and
Practices as are most ensnaring to themselves and pernicious to others.


Tremulus. We concluded yesterday, That their State and Behavior after they
become Quakers shall determine, whether God has given them the Grace of
Repentance, or in Judgment sent them strong Delusions to believe a Lie?


Eusebius. The Wickedness I design to prove upon them, is not Swearing, Cheating,
Drunkenness, Fornication, and such like; whatever Sins of this Kind any of 'em
may be guilty of, shall not be brought into the Charge, nor any other but such
a are open and Manifest.


Trem. I hope thou will not call them Wicked, if they are free from such Vices.


Eusebius. There are other Sins which polute the Soul with Guilt as black as
these, which reflect as great Dishonor to God, and efectually hinder Men's
Salvation and Happiness; and these the Quakers are Guilty of: Such as the
rejecting the possitive Commands and Institutions of Jesus Christ, and refusing
to comply with the Methods of Divine Grace for the Salvation of Mankind, and
conspiring with the Grand A^lversary, to hinder our blessed Redeemer of the
Glory of his wonderful Achievements, and the Honor justly due to him, as the
King of the Church, and the Delieverer of Mankind; in as much as they instigate
others, as themselves are instigated by the Divil, to contemn, despise and
neglect those sacred Ordinances and Rites of Worship instituted for the Honor
of Christ, to express his Kingly Power, and the Wisdom of his Government, and
to be Memorials of his Glorious Acts, as well as Means effectually to secure
and promote the Salvation and Happiness of Men: And while they are promoting
these Hellish Designs, and indeed, that they may promote them the more
effectually, they pretend Friendship to Christ, and immediate Inspiration of
his Spirit, and Commissions from God, to Authorize them hereto; and what
greater Wickedness can Men be guilty of.


Trem. If these Things be true, thou needst say no more: But for my Part I am
very far from believing they intend or design any such Dishonor or Disrespect
to Jesus Christ.


Eusebius. This is undoubtedly the real Tendency and event of their Practices,
whatever their Designs be; they may really believe their Practices have a
contrary tendency; this is a natural Effect of those strong Delusions to which
they are given up, as a Punishment of their former voluntary Wickedness and
irreligion: And nothing is more agreeable to what St. Paul says, of their
believing Lies that so they may be damned, than that being permitted to the
Devils Delusions, they should really believe, they are compassing their
Salvation, while, for that Reason, they are the more zealously promoting the
Devils great Aim and Design, to dishonur Christ, discredit and destroy
Religion, and bring about their own heavier Damnation. Let their Designs be as
they will, if their Practices have such a Tendency as I have mentioned, it
shows, that their Fruits are not meet for Repentance, and whatever Change may
appear in them, they are not converted to God: And if their Practices discover
this, you have consented already, that they are deluded by the Devil.


Trem. Dwell no longer upon this; come to the Proof of these Things thou
chargest upon them: Thou say they reject the possitive Commands and
Institutions of Jesus Christ, pray what be they?


Eusebius. Baptism and what we call The holy Eucharist, or The Lord's Supper.


Trem. They hold to the Baptism of Christ, and the Lord's Supper; and do not
deny, reject and contemn them as thou sav'st.


Eusebius. They allow that Christ instituted Baptism and a holy Supper, because
the Institution thereof is so very clear, that they can have no manner of face
ot deny it; but yet they virtually and effectually reject, deny and contemn
them, by substituting their own Inventions in the Room of what Christ commanded
to be done. So that they deny and contemn those Instances, of Honor and Duty
that Christ commanded, and under those Names set up what themselves have
invented: And thus, their own Inventions they have exalted above Christ's
Institutions, and his Commands they treat with Scorn and blasphemous
Scurrility, that they may put the stamp of Divine Authority upon their own
Whims and Devices.


Trem. Why this is the very Thing they charge upon thee, and others that are
for setting up outward Ceremonies.


Eusebius. I am for setting up no outward Ceremonies as Institutions of Christ;
but those I find set up by Christ himself, and have been observed in all Ages
of his Church, I am for paying an Honor to: And whoever reject them, do it
upon the Peril of their own Damnation, Mark, xvi 16.


Trem. Christ's Baptism and the Lord's Supper don't consist in any outward
Ceremonies, but are merely Spirtual and inward; and I wonder how thou can
call the Work of God's Spirit, Men's Whims and Devices.


Eusebius. It was never the Work of God's Spirit, but the whims of Quakers Brains,
to call any mere internal Action or Motion Christian Baptism, or the Baptism
that Christ has instituted in his Church: This is a device of their own. And
those very Motions and Impressions which they feel in themselves, and call
Inward Baptism, and Spirit Baptism, you can never prove nor persuade me they
come from the Spirit of God: God's Spirit indeed dwells in his own faithful
People, but not in the Wicked and Reprobate, and those that are abandoned to
Error and Delusion. Such Men may feel Motions and inward Impulses, but they
come rather from the Devil than from the Spirit of God. And even in good Men
that have the Guidance and Comforts of the Holy Ghost, and feel his inward
Motions, it would be very improper to call those Inspirations Chrisian Baptism,
because they are never so called in Scripture and what the Scriptures call
Baptism, that was commanded and instituted by Christ, believed in and practiced
by his Apostles and his Church ever since, was an external Washing to consign
the indwelling and Comforts of the holy Ghost, whose gracious Inspirations are
therefore a Privilege consequent upon Baptism, but not Baptism it self.


Trem. Thus thou would turn Men away from the inward Work of God's Spirit in
their own Hearts, to outward Ceremonies and Traditions of Men, and therein
place the Substance of Religion. This is what James Mott has taken Notice of,
in his little Book lately Printed, and very will observes the contrary Practice
in the People called Quakers, which he observes too to have been the Concern of
true Ministers in all Ages, to turn Peoples Mind to obey the Teaching of God's
Sprit in their own Hearts, p 2. And this Work of the Spirit is what we account
Baptism in Subtance, and Christ's Baptism, p. 29.


Eusebius. I don't know what Opinion you have of J. Mott's Authority, but for my
Part I look upon him a very despicable Creature, and that he has advanced
nothing in that silly Book worth a Resutation: And particularly as to what you
have mentioned from him, if he has any Meaninig, it is all Fatshood, and that is
what his whole Treatise is built upon.


Trem. Pray don't speak so contemptibly of J. Mott and his little Book; we
reckon he has performed, wonderfully: Besides what he has printed was first
approved and is recommended by our wiser Heads, who understand what is Truth
and Falsehood as well as thy self.


Eusebius. Perhaps your wise Sages have more Understanding than Honesty; but their
approving that Book, discovers very little of either: For to say, as J. Mott
does, p. 4. That we set up Men's Inventions (for the Substance of Religion)
instead of and against the Work of Christ's Spirit in Peoples Hearts. This is
an absolute Falsehood: And the same he sundry Times mentions in his Book, only
because we plead for outward Obedience to the Commands of Christ, where he has
commanded outward Actions.


Trem. But it is an inward Spiritual Work that is to be understood, where you
take the Thing conmanded to be an outward Action.


Eusebius. We will try that by and by: But when we believe and teach, that these
very outward Actions are accompanied with a spiritual Influence and Energy:
That Baptism with Water is a Spiritual Regeneration, wherein we are born of the
Spirit as well as Water; that we become hereby entitled to the indwelling,
comforting and sanctifying Influences of the holy Ghost; and reckon our selves
hereby obliged and bound by professed Stipulation, to conduct our Lives for the
future according to his holy Guidence and gracious Inspirations: And the same
Engagements we renew as often as we receive the holy Supper, and believe we
receive larger Measures of the holy Spirit, whose gracious Influences support
our spiritual Life: And to this we apply that of the Apostle, We are all made
to Drink into one Spirit. When this is well known to be our Doctrine and
Belief, set forth in our public Offices, by the public Writing of our
Doctors, and taught publicly and frequently from all our Pulpits, how could
this Ignorant Fellow say, and these juggling Deceivers approve it, That we turn
Men from the Work of the Spirit in their Hearts and set up any Thing else for
the Substance of Religion against it? This is such impudent Falsehood, that any
Man but a Quaker would blush at.


Trem. They will blush at Falsehood as soon as other Men.


Eusebius. Don't you discern this to be a glaring malicious Lie? Pray look into
our Liturgy, where you may see what our public Devotions consist of, then
judge if we turn Peoples Minds from the inward Work of Gods Spirit in our
Hearts: We give Adoration to the Holy Ghost, as the third Person in the blessed
Trinity, equal with the Father and the Son, in the Doxology we repeat at the
End of every Psalm and Hymn; Glory be to the Father, and to Son, and to the
Holy Ghost, etc. We are constantly exhorted, after the public Confession of
our Sins, to beseech God to give us true Repentance, and his holy Spirit, that
the Rest of our Life may be pure and holy: For the Royal Family, we pray God,
to endue them with his holy Spirit, and to enrich them with his heavenly Grace.
And for the Bishops and Clergy, that God would send down upon them the
healthful Spirit of his Grace. In the Collect for the Sunday before Lent, we
pray God, to send the holy Ghost, and pour into out Hearts that most excellent
Gift of Charity, the very Bound of Peace and of all Virtues. In the Collect for
Christmas we pray God, to grant that we being Regenerate and made his Children
by Adoption and Grace, may daily be renewed by his holy Spirit. In the Collect
for the Circumcision of Christ, we pray God to Grant us the true Circumcision
of the Spirit, that our Hearts and all our Members being mortifyed, from all
wordly and carnal Lusts, etc. And every Sunday, in the Collect for the
Communion we pray God to cleanse the Thoughts of our Hearts, by the Inspiration
of his holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love him, etc. Do these Things look
like turning Men away from the inward Work of the Spirit? And are nor those
maliciously wicked, or grossly and scandalously ignorant, that give such
Representations of us?


Trem. Truly I don't know what to say: I thought indeed the main Difference
between the Church and those called Quakers consisted in this, That the Quakers
are for an inward Work of the Spirit, and the Church depends wholly upon
ca^ward Forms.


Eusebius. The Quaker, have endeavored to amuse ignorant People after this sort,
and this is the main Drift of J. Mott's silly Book: But it is horrid Falsehood,
as you may see by what I have cited aready out of our Liturgy, and it that be
not enough, I can give you a great deal more. Read the Hymn called Veni
Creator, to be sung at the Consecration of Priests.

Come holy Ghost, Creator, come,
inspire the Soul of thine,
Till every Heart which thou have made
is filled with Grace Divine.
Thou art the Comforter, the Gift
of God, and Fire of Love,
The everlasting Spring of Joy,
and Unction from above.
Thy Gifts are manifold, thou writ it
God's Laws in each true Heart:
The Promise of the Father, thou
do heavenly Speech impart.
Enlighten our dark Souls, till they
thy sacred Love embrace.
A fist our Minds (by Nature frail)
with thy celestial Grace, etc.
What further Proof can thou desire, Tremulus, of our Dependence upon the
Grace and Inspirations of the holy Spirit, as the very Fountain of our
Spiritual Life?


Trem. Verily I think of you letter than I did, but still I think your outward
Forms and Inventions of Men draw Men from depending wholly upon the Spirit as
we do.


Eusebius. We will consider by and by how far you depend upon the Spirit. But pray
what do you think J. Mott ^ntends, when he says. That we set up the Inventions
of Men (for the Substance of Religion) instead of and against the Work of the
Spirit in Peoples Hearts.


Trem. He means Water Baptism (...) and other outward Ceremonies, which the
(...) be undertakes to answer calls The Institutions of Christ.


Eusebius. Edward Burling wrote an Answer to the same Letter, and has the same
Impudence to say of Baptism, with Water That we know it is no Institution of
Christ, but was instituted by 'Men, and wicked Men too, rather the Pope than
Christ.,


Trem. And can thou disprove what they say? If it be not Christ's
Institution, it must be Men's Inventions, and ought not to be set up in the
Room of Christ's Baptism, which is that of the Spirit, without outward
Ceremonies. --


Eusebius. Hold Tremulus, tell me, what Man invented Water Baptism?


Trem. Edward Burling tells thee it was the Pope.


Eusebius. There have been many Popes, pray name the Man.


Trem. I believe Ed. Burling can tell thee; I don't pretend to know for my part.


Eusebius. We will go back to John the Baptist, you know he baptized our Savior
himself with Water, tell me what Pope he had his Commission from, or what
wicked Many. -- Why do you seem surprised? The Quakers call Water Baptism John's
Baptism, was it from Heaven or of the Pope?


Trem. Truly John's Baptism was from Heaven; but his Commission extended only
to himself.


Eusebius. Very well, tell me then what Pope our Savior had his Commission from
when he was upon Earth; for we read of his Baptizing, Job. iii 26. Behold the
same baptizeth, and all Men come to him.


Trem. He did not Baptize himself, but it was his Disciples, Joh. iv 2.


Eusebius. It Is likely he baptized some, but his Disciples many more, which seems
to be the true Intent of those Words: For NOT is sometimes used comparatively,
as I will show anon, when we come to consider St. Paul's Meaning, when he says
he was sent, not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. However, if the
Disciples of Christ baptized either mostly or wholly, then certainly it was
with Water; and it could not be said, that Christ himself baptized by their
Ministry, if they did not do it by his Command and Institution; was Christ then
a Pope or wicked Man?


Trem. He was neither: We must not go back so far.


Eusebius. You must go to the first Rise of a Thing to find whose Invention it is,
and by whom commanded and instituted, and especially as to what Christ
instituted, you must go back to the Time of his living upon Earth, his
Institutions all bear date about that Time: New seeing John had a Command from
God to baptize with Water, and our Savior himself was baptized, that he Might
fulfill all Righteousness, and baptized with Water himself, at least by his
Ministers, whilst he was upon Earth, and sent his Apostles out with a
Commission, after his Resurrection to baptize, without mentioning a Word of
changing the Matter they had been used to; and seeing we find it so evident,
that the Apostles after our Savior's Ascension into Heaven did baptize with
Water, not in the Name of John or the Pope, but in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
Act. viii 16. which the Quakers allow to be Water Baptism: What can you think
of their Sense or Honesty to call Water Baptism the Inventions of Men, and say
we set up Men's Inventions against the Work of the Spirit.


Trem. It is of no great Consequence whose Invention it is; I confess they seem
to be mistaken, and have spoken rashly; but however. Water Baptism ought to
have been laid, aside after the Baptism with the Holy Ghost, Christ's Baptism,
took place.


Eusebius. Mott and Burling ought to tell no Lies to degrade a sacred religious
Rite of such venerable Antiquity; and if it should have been laid aside, why
was it not? Were there no wise Servants of Christ, name that understood the
Nature of Christian Religion, in all the sixteen Hundred Years from Christ,
till George Fox's crazed Head turned (...) Jack with a Lantern, or some other
distracted b^ain about that Time, began to hang out new Lights, which those
that follow must lay aside their Reason, as altogether useless, when they have
as the Quakers tell us, an inward Light so much better, teaching them all
Things that concern the Salvation of their Souls.


Trem. Thou pretendest to hold to an inward Spirit too, why then do thou
ridicule the Quakers Light or Spirit in their own Hearts?


Eusebius. I hold an inward sanctifying and comforting Influence of God's Spirit,
but not in all Men, nor in any to set aside the Use of Reason or any instituted
Means of Grace, but cooperating with our natural Faculties, assisting them in
a due use of such Means as are appointed to instruct and engage us in the
Practice of our Duty. But Pray can you tell what J. Mott means in sundry
Passages of his Letter, where he intimates that there is something very
remarkable in the Quakers Religion, in respect of an inward Light, to which
they turn Men's Minds as to the Spirit of God, for all teaching and Instruction?


Trem. He intends, that Convictions of Truth come only from God's Spirit in us,
that all Men have a Measure of this Sprit that will teach them all Things that
concern their Salvation, if they will but attend to it; and that the People
called Quakers, instead of persuading Men to outward Performances and
Ceremonies, only direct them to bearken to such Teaching as they will find in
themselves without going to any Men to teach them; and that all Religion, Hope
and Comfort consists in such inward Feelings and Motions as every Man's Spirit
will guide him to, without any manner of outward Performances.


Eusebius. Is it not Men's Duty then to hearken to this inward Spirit, and is it
not necessary they should know this to be their Duty, and the only Way to be
happy?


Trem. Undoubtedly, and this is what our Teachers persuade Men to, and to
depend wholly upon Christ and his Spirit in their own Hearts.


Eusebius. Thus while they are teaching outwardly and prescribing Men's Duty in
the most necessary Part, they juggle them into a Belief, that they have no
outward Teaching, but all is in ward and from Gods Spirit, and not from any
Man; and certainly all the Labors of all your Teachers are wholly useless upon
this Principle; but the Matters of Fact are false, and you cannot but know them
so; they depend upon outward Teachings as much as others. In Sewal's History of
the Quakers, there is a Letter of Samuel Crisp, and another of Evan Je^ans,
both giving an Account of their Conversion to Quakerism, and they ascribe it to
reading Barclay's Apology firstly, and then completed by others Books and
Conversation, and one of them mentions a very hearty shaking of Hands among the
Quakers. S^xal gives an Account that George Fox persuaded and convinced many,
and it was by speaking not much but powerfully. This is the same outward Way
that all false Teachers take, to persuade Men of what they would have them
believe and receive. If all Men have a Light or Spirit within them, teaching
them all Things, why don't they leave them to that Teaching? or else why do
they impose such Falsehoods upon the World, that they depend upon an inward
Spirit, and turn People to that, and not to outward Teachings of Men? Can any
Body think, but that the Books that the Quakers have written and printed and
dispersed, are designed to persuade and turn People to be of their Religion.
And though they persuade them against some outward Performances, that we
believe and teach to be necessary, yet they have outward Performances of their
own instead of them; they pretend to pray as loud as other People, and hold
forth their Principles and teaching with a Voice that may be heard with outward
Ears, without being in 'em; they have Weekly Meetings, and Monthly and Yearly
and Quarterly, according as the Sun passes through the several Signs in the
Zodiak: Thus they observe Times and Seasons, Days and Months and Quarters,
according to their own wicked Inventions, honoring their own Traditions above
the ordinances of Jesus Christ.


Trem. I hope thou do not find Fault that they have some outward
Performances.


Eusebius. I find Fault with J. Mott's Falsehood, in pretending the Quakers
Religion is purely inward and, and opposing of it as the Religion of the
Apostles and the Gospel of Christ, to outward Performances and Rites of Divine
Worship, instituted by Christ himself: For though an inward sanctifying Work of
the Spirit upon the Soul be necessary, as we believe and teach, yet outward
Acts of Worship and Honor are required of us, and the Instructions of holy
Scriptures are necessary to establish our Faith and direct our Practice, and
for the explaining and enforcing these, Christ has appointed his Ministers, who
ought to be received as the Ambassadors of Christ, and their Business is to
teach Men the Way of Salvation, which no ways hinders the Teaching of God's
Spirit in the Hearts of his faithful People, but cooperates with it. And so far
as the Quakers labor to set aside the Use and Necessity of such outward
Teaching, they impeach the Wisdom of Christ, and take part with the Devil, who
would gladly overthrow the whole Christian Economy.


Trem. How can they fight against Christ, when they persuade People to hear
Christ only, speaking in their own Hearts, waiting upon the Lord in Silence,
which our Friend Barclay will tell you is by withdrawing their Minds from all
Meditations and Thoughts that so Christ with his Light may come in upon '^m.


Eusebius. This which they call waiting upon the Lord in Silence, even from all
Thougnts, is one of the most crafty Delusions the Devil could put into their
Heads; Christ requires no Service of us but what is performed with the Exercise
of our best Reason, but when Men put themselves into such a stupid State of
Expectancy, with a persuasion that the first sudden Impression upon their Minds
will then certainly come from Christ, and be a Motion of his Spirit, they have
delivered up themselves to the Power of the Devil, in the most essectual manner
that can be; for, as they have no reason to think that Christ will thus dart
Impressions upon their Minds, so they may be assured the Devil will be ready to
do it, when he has an Opportunity of being received as Christ himself, and thus
to have the Advantage of Guiding them as he pleases; and we may well think he
has Craft enough to carry on the Juggle, when he is entered so fairly, by
insinuating that all is for the Glory of God, and Benefit of their Souls to
which he is leading them: This is the most effectual Delusion. --


Trem. J. Mott shows that the Way Christ manifests himself is by inward
Feelings, and that thus Christ is in us the Hope of Glory, and calling such
Feelings and Manifestations, the Devils Delusions, is turning Men away from
Christ, which is pernicious Doctrine.


Eusebius. The Devil may transform himself into an Angel of Light, and nothing can
put Men's Souls into greater Danger, than persuading them to believe that all
such Feelings and Impressions as they find upon their Imaginations after
shutting up all the Avenues of Sense and Reason, are the Manifestations of
Christ: Good Men may feel Impressions and Motions from the Spirit of christ,
this I don't deny at all; but there are many inward motions from the Devil too;
and such Wicked Men as don't belong to Christ have ^one of his Spirit. And this
I believe of the Quakers; St. Jude says, these be they that separate
themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit, v. ^9. And it is a very false and
dangerous Position which J. Mott lays down, That God has given a Measure of his
Spirit in the Hearts of all People, (or all Mankind, as his Manuscript explains
it) teaching them all Things that concern their Salvation.


Trem. How then shall Men come to know the Way to Salvation?


Eusebius. They must diligently read the Holy Scriptures, and attend to the
Methods of Grace and Instruction that God has appointed, making the best Use of
that Reason and Understanding God has given them to distinguish between Truth
and Imposture; And if they are sincerely desireous to know and do the Will of
God, the must use their utmost Diligence, and pray earnestly to God for his
Direction and Help, and there is great Hopes their Labor will not prove vain:
But if they only wait and expect and do nothing, instead of having immediate
Revelations they will be like to sind the Devil's Delusions.


Trem. I am willing to be saved, and my Reason tells me, a loose vain and
wicked Conversation will not bring me to Heaven.


Eusebius. You say right, and did you ever hear that any professed Teacher of
Religion persuaded Men to live wickedly?


Trem. I ner heard that, but Men way perform outward Ceremomies, and yet live
Wickedly; whereas the Light and Spirit which those called Quaker hold to,
effectually subdues all Sin and Wickedness, if Men will but follow it.


Eusebius. What they hold to will naturally lead them to such Wickedness as I have
mentioned; but those that are truly led and guided by the Spirit of God, will
live holy and pure lives, walking with Zacharis and Elizabeth, in all the
Commandments of God blameless. They will not pretend inward Love and Sincerity,
to excuse them from outward Obedience to the Commandments of God; Obedience
they will look upon beter than any inward Sacrifice, and to bearken than the
Fat of Rams.


Trem. The Service that God requies is certainly inward in the Heart, he says,
My Son give me thy Heart; and our Savior says, ^od seeks such to worship him,
as worship in Spirit and Truth, and this is what those called Quakers hold to.


Eusebius. God certainly requires inward Obedience, but not only, and when he
commands outward Actions, will you perform them only in the Heart? Don't God
require Justice in all our Dealings? And that every Man speak the Truth unto
his Neighbor? And that we should best ^w our Goods to relieve the Wants of the
Poor? Will God take up with any thing less than outward Obedience in these
Cases.


Trem. This is not properly religious Service.


Eusebius. But it ought to be obediently performed from a religious Principle, and
if it be according to God's Command, done out of Obedience to him and in
Sincerity of Heart, then herein we give God our Heart and serve him thus far in
Spirit and Truth: And it is the same in matters of Religion. To worship God in
Spirit and Truth, is, with a true Devotion of Heart and inward Sincerity, to
perform all such Acts of Religion as tend to God's Glory and Honor, according
to the Commands and Institutions of Jesus Christ our Redeemer; and if we would
know what they are we must search the Scriptures, and follow the Footsteps of
the holy Apostles and faithful Disciples of Christ, that were instructed by the
Apostles, who through Faith and Patience now inherit the Promises. Brethren,
(says Paul, Phil. iii 17.) he Followers together of me, and mark those that
walk, as ye have us for an Ensample.


Trem. It is hard to know what the Apostles practiced, and there are so many
different Interpretations of Scripture, that one knows not what to believe
without an immediate Revelation.


Eusebius. It is a great Reflection upon the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, to say he
has made a Revelation that cannot: answer the Design and F^d of it, viz. show
Men the Way to Salvation; and if we must depend upon new Revelations, to what
Purpose is the old? It must certainly be useless if the Sense of it needs to be
ditermin'd by new Revelations. The Case is not so, the Revelation of the
Scripture is plain, and the Way to Salvation their described, easy to be known
by the unprejuidic'd and attentive Inquirer. If some Difficulty attends the
Inquiry, by reason of the M^^^ of Error that Wicked Men have raised, we n^
patiently endure the Difficulty, endeavor by the greater Diligence to surmount
it, and be thankful for the Assistances we have, Success will reward our Pains.


Trem. I am not able to answer you; I wish I may find what is right, and am not
so (...) to dry Party as to refuse Truth when it appears. If (...) to Baptism
and the Lord's Su^ (...) answer J. Mott's little Book, to my Sa^, I will
acknowledge the Errors of the Quakers (...) very great, and that they are very
wicked in endeavoring to proselite Men to such Principles.


Eusebius. I must appoint you another Meeting let it be to Morrow if you please; I
shall not think much of any Pains I can bestow, so long as there is any
Prospect of setting you right in an Affair of so great Concernment as this is.


Trem. I am willing to hear what thau can say concerning Baptism and the
Lord's Supper; and will therefore meet thee again according as thou proposest.
Exit Eusebius.


DIALOGVE II.
Eusebius, Tremilus, and Titius.
Tremulus passed the Evening in meditating upon what passed the day before, and
found himself so pressed with the Force of Eusebius's Reasoning, that he wished
himself disengaged from being a Party in next Day's Dispute, and yet could not
but with to hear what was to be offered upon so important a Subject, with a
real Desire to know on which side the Truth lies that he might embrace it to
the Salvation of his Soul, He therefore rises early in the Morning, and goes to
an intimate Aquantance, whose Name was Titius, a very zealous Quaker, and
rekoned a Man of good Sense, who had been instrumental in bringing Tremuls into
the Principles of the Quakers; he finds his Friend Titius just returned from
his Morning Walk, and relates to him some Part of the Conference he had with
Eusebius, and withal told him, that he found himself so far influenced by
Eusebius's Talk, that he questioned what the Event of that Days Conference
would prove: He told him the Time appointed for their Meeting, and the Subject
they were to be upon. Titius offered to go along with him, and assist him if
there were Occasion, which Tremulus accepted gladly, and accordingly they went
together. By the Way Tremulus gave as full an Account as he could of what had
passed, and they had not been long at the Place before Eusebius came according
to Appointment; and after giving the Time of the Day, Eusebius begins as
follows.

Eusebius. I Am glad, Tremulus, you have your Friend here to assist you; for I
design by God's Assistance to pluk up the very Roots of Quakerism out of your
Mind this Day, if there was any Sincerity in your yesterday's Promise.


Trem. Here is J. Mott's Book, wherein he endeavors to show, That the true
Baptism of Christ is an inward Work of Christ's Spirit only, and so is the
Lord's Supper, without any outward Performances. If yau can show that the
Disciples and Followers of Jesus Christ are required to observe any outward
Baptism, and outward Eating of Bread and Drinking Wine, to remember Christ, I
will grant you, that those called Quakers are no Disciples of Christ; For
whatever Christ's Baptism is, I know we cannot be in Christ without it, and
unless we eat his Flesh and drink his Blood, we have no Part in him.


Eusebius. The Necessity of Christ's Baptisim I am glad you allow, and Edward
Burling will tell you, that Men cannot be saved without it: Of the Lord's Supper
we will discourse by and by; we will first see what is to be said of Baptism:
The Letter which J. Mott pretends to answer had given a plain and easy Account
of the Nature and Benefits of Christian Baptism, as set forth in the Writings
of the Apostles. What Mott chiefly undertakes is to assert, That the Apostles
in the Texts cited in the aforesaid Letter, don't mean Baptism with Water, but
Spirit Baptism: Now I desire before we proceed farther, you or your Friend
Titius would explain to me what he means by Spirit Baptism; and then we will
see whether the Apostles ever intended any such Thing in those Places.


Titius. Thou seem to invite me to explain J. Mott's Meaning; I should
readily do it, but I think be has explained himself fully enough, and I believe
thou will not be able to disprove him, notwithstanding thy Considence.


Eusebius. I shall be glad to take his Meaning rightly, and I desire you to do the
best you can to defend him: But truly his Meaning is not so plain to me as you
seem to imagine. p. 8 He says, it was not Water Baptism that People were saved
by, but the Work of Christ, who washes the Souls of his Peaple by the Spirit
of Judgment and Burning, Isa. iv 4.


Titius. Well that is what be means by Spirit Baptism.


Eusebius. This is a Way of being baptized that I am confident no Nation will be
fond of, and I question whether the Body of Quakers will own they expect to be
baptized after that Sort; and if ever they come to it, it must be in the next
World, and then they will be like to fail of the cleansingand purging Part of
the Judgment and Burning, unless you can bring better Proofs for a Purgalo^y
than the Papists have ever done.


Titius. We have nothing to do with the Papists Purgatory.


Eusebius. If there be any State necessary for Men now to pass through, fortold by
the Prophet under that Allusion, Isa. iv 4. being pu^ged from Sin by the Spirit
of Judgment and Burning, it must be a proper Purgatory; and the Papists can^t
find so plain a Proof in all the Bible for their Purgatory, as this Text; and
indeed with J. Mott's Interpretation it is a pretty good Proof of a Purgatory,
and nothing else under a Christian Dispensation.


Titius. This is thy Carnal Way of Reasoning.


Eusebius. The Prophet only declares in a Style familiar with the Prophets, the
severe Judgments God would bring upon that People to punish their Wickedness,
viz. by destroying the wicked Part in so tremendous a manner, that the small
Remnant should be awakned to Repentance and Righteousness; which indeed would
be an effectual Washing and Purging the Land. This you will find he plainly
related just before at the very End of the former Chapter, which Relation is
carried on through this fourth Chapter, Chap. iii 25. Thy Men shall fall by the
Sword, and thy Mighty in the War, and her Gates shall l^nent and mourn, and she
being desolate shall sit upon the Ground. Chap. iv I. And in that Day seven
Women shall take hold of one Man, etc. The destroying of their Men by the
Sword, and burning up the Gates and City, is the purging their spoken of by the
Spirit of Judgment and Burning. And if there be any State for Christians to be
washed and purged (...) by like this, (...) certainly a proper Purga^,
according to the Papists Sense: But I fancy neither the Papists nor J. Mott
will be able to prove a Purgation of Sin by any such State, necessary for all
Christians.


Trem. (...) indeed see any Propriety in J. Mott's ap^l^g that Text. Titius can
tell you (...) by Spirit Baptism beter than he ex^ (...) there.


Titius. J. Mott plainly ^ns ^n inward spiritual of the Soul by Christ himself,
and to prove the Prophet meant so, he brings the Words of Christ himself to
Peter, If I wash thee not, thou have no Part with me.


Eusebius. This is very impertinently brought to prove the Prophet Is^iah's
Meaning, for it has no manner of Allusion to it, nor indeed does it say one
Word of inward or spiritual; but the Washing there spoken of was outward with
Water, that was the Washing St. Peter first refused, but after these Words of
our Savior desired to have his Hands and his Head as well as his Feet washed:
There was undoubtedly a spiritual Signification in this Action of our Savior
his washing the Feet of his Disciples; but the Washing expressly spoken of was
outward with Water, for so we read. Joh. xiii 5. After that he pours Water
into a Basin and began to Wash the Disciples Feet. then comes he to Simon
Peter, etc. And don't you see now what a mighty Hand J. Mott is to prove Spirit
Baptism without Water? If this Text has any Reference to the Baptism of Christ
as J. Mott certainly thinks it has then certainly it is outward Water as a
visible Sign, with an inward and spiritual Grace given thereby, according as we
understand Christian Baptism in our Church: I am afraid J. Matt will prove
Water so fully himself, that there will be nothing left for me to do.


Trem. Truly Friend Titius, that Proof is in favor of Water or nothing, I
wonder J. Mott brought that as Proof for Baptism which our Opponents would have
passed by, if he had not himself applied it to Baptism. This was poorly done, I
protest, ouhad better give up J Mott for a Bl^head than drop your Cause so.


Titius. The Cause is good however J. Mott has managed it, but he has done
better in other Places There is certainly a Work of Christ's Spirit upon the
Souls of his People, and that is what we are to understand by the Baptism of
the Spirit, and all the Baptism necessary for Christians.


Eusebius. We allow, and our Ministers Preach the Necessity of an inward Work of
the Spirit as much as any People can do, and our Use for Water in Baptism, as
it is designed to signify this, can be no more Hindrance thereto than our
Savour's using outward Water with a spiritual Significancy, in the Instance we
mentioned but now; and therefore you may see J. Mott misseth his Mark, when he
would make you believe our outward Ceremonies are such a Hindrance of the
Spirit, and such a Substistuting of something else in his Room, as to make our
Religion a new Gospel, rather than the Quakers. That Cant p. 19 20 will not
pass, and so J. Mott may ene take it back again, without any further Reply to
it. But whatever Necessity there is of an inward Work of the Spirit, in order
to Men's being saved eternally, yet those Dispositions or Tempers, be they what
they will, that are thereby wrought in us, are never meant by the Word Baptism
in scripture.


Titius. I don't know what thou meanest by Dispositions and Tempeors, but
Repentance and Conversion being wrought in us by the Spirt, burning. up the
Chaffy Nature, is Christ's Baptism.


Eusebius. Indeed this is what the Quakers seem to intend, at least J. Mott; but
yet when he has Occasion to evade a pregnant Text of Scripture he calls it
something else: But I will omit my Remarks upon that at present. you following
J. Mott, by that Work of the Spirit which is Spirit Baptism intend, such a
Destruction of the Chaffy sinful Nature, by the Troubles which Men endure from
the sight of their sinful guilty Condition, as brings them to the Sorrows of
Repentance and a hearty Conversion from former their Wickedness to serve God
for the future.


Titius. This is the Thing J. Mott means as you may gather from several
Passages as P. 18 19. and P. 15. and Especialy P. 16 be calls it the great Work
of Repentance and Conversion by which those mentioned Acts, ii 38. should have
their Sim Remited and not Water Baptism.


Eusebius. I affirm that nothing of this Nature was, ever called Baptism in
Scripture or in the least intended where we read of the Baptism of the Holy
Ghost; nor had J. Mott Sense enough to make his Answer to several Passages,
Consistant with themselves, according to this Nation, the Letter J. Mott
pretends to answer, says, Baptism is called regeneration, or the washing of
Regeneration, Tit. iii 5. J. Mott to prove it must mean Baptism with the Spirit
and not Water, he says it is plain, it cannot be with outward Water, because the
Text says, not by works of Righeousness which we have done, but according to
his Mercy, and therefore no^ Water, but Spirit Baptism. This is the Force of
his Reasoning; but is not the great Work of Repentance and Conversion Works of
Righteousness? or are they Works of Sin? certainly repenting and turning from
Sin to serve God faithfully are works of Righteousness, by this therefore we
are, not there said to be saved, as J. Mott would have. but by Baptism with
Water, which is the woshing of Regeneration, Entituling us to Gods Mercy and
gra^us Pardon; you see how poorly he ha^ answered that Passage.


T (...). You go so far round for your Fetches, I don't know how to follow you.


Eusebius. Whilst Words have no Determined Sense you may apply them to what you
please and s^angely amuse ignorant People, and so the Quakers do with the word
Spirit Baptism but their Contradictions and Absurdities soon discover
themselves when the word has some Signification fixed to it.


Trim. The A^surdities are in thy Head and no where else.


Eusebius. Is not Repentance and Conversion the Work of the Spirit.


Titius. Doubtless.


Eusebius And is not this that measure of the Spirit you say is in Peoples Hearts
to which the Quakers say they turn People not to any Thing outward.


Titius. Ti^ the Spirit of Christ in us, working these I (...), which is true
Baptism.


Eusebius. N^w then see the Absurdity and Nonsense of another of J. Mott's Answers
P. 16. where he Endeavors to make silly People believe, that St. Peter did not
intend that Baptism with Water, Act. ii. ^8, would procure Remission of Sins
and the Gift of the holy Ghost joined with Repentance. But says it was only by
Repentance and Conversion without Water.


Titius. Where is the Absurdity of this?


Eusebius. It is Nonsense and Absurdity to say, that by the Baptism of the holy
Ghost Men receive the holy Ghost; receiving the holy Ghost in that Text is
undoubtedly what is meant in the Evangelist by the Baptism of the holy Ghost;
and how can this then ^an Effect of Repentance and Conversion, if Repentance
and Conversion be the Baptism of the holy Ghost, if you see not this Absurdity
you can see nothing.


Trem. It Is a very Evident Absurdity, I wonder I did not see it before you
pointed it out I had read it over and over and never Discerned it.


Eusebius. His Book is full of such Nonsense, but ignorant People don't discern it
because, they don't consider the real Meaning of his Words. indeed some of them
have no real meaning, and I believe they never design this Word Sprit Baptism
should have any one certain meaning, but it serves for any thing they have
Occasion to use it for. Sometimes meaning one thing and sometimes another.


Titius Thou strainest his Words and put Meanings of thy own to 'em.


Eusebius J. Mott says, p. 20. The Spirit is the uniting Substance that joins the
Soul to God, must not all those then that have this Spirit in them, be united
to God?


Titius. It Is undoubtly so.


Eusebius. Then according to J. Mott. Men are joined to God before they are joined
to God, and in order to their being joined to God. This is another of his
Absurdities arising from this Notion of Christ's Baptism, it is p. 15. Where he
says, the Spiritual Baptism destroys the first Nature in Man before the Soul
can be joined to God, the Spirit the uniting Substance is in us, then you say
we are united, and he works in us before he can be in us uniting us to God. If
you can make Sense of such Staff, you have a Talent beyond my Capacity, to me
it is rightdown Nonsense and Obsurdity.


Trem. Never justify it Friend Titius, Eusebius, will convert us both, why
could we not see this Nonsense before.


Titius. Spirit Baptism must then be some other Work of the Spirit.


Eusebius. I am tired of exposing the Nonsense of J. Mott's Book, by what I have
offered you may see the Insufficiency and Impertinence of his Answers. If you
can advance any Thing from J. Mott, or Edward Burling, or else where, to prove
the Baptism of Christ instituted, (without which Burling says Men cannot be
saved) is inward and spiritual without Water, I will endeavor to Reply to you.


Titius. John foretold plainly of Christ, that he would baptize with the holy
Ghost, John i 33. This then, is Christ's Baptism, Distinguished from John's,
which was with Water.


Eusebius. This is Robert Barclay's Sophistry, I have read his Arguments at Large
in his Apology and the Syllogisms he makes upon it; but they are all answered
by distinguishing between the Work of Christ and his Institution. John speaks
of what Christ was to do personally, as a Demonstration of his Divinity which
is Baptizing not literally but metaphorically, and this Promise or Prophesy was
actually fullfilled according to the true Intent and Meaning thereof, when
after our Savior's Ascension, he sent down the holy Ghost upon his Disciples,
in that miraculous Manner, of which read Act. ii. and at sundry Times after:
The Baptism Christ instituted, is what he gave Commission to his Apostles to
administer, and of this John made no Mention; and this ought to be understood
literally, which is with Water, unless Barclay or some other Quaker will give a
beter Reason for a metaphorical Interpretation than I have yet heard.


Titius. Christ told his Apostles, Act. i 5. they should be baptized with the
Holy Ghost.


Eusebius. He only put them in Mind of what John had fortold, and repeats the
Assurance with respect to themselves, that they should receive the miraculous
Gift of the Holy Ghost, which came to pass accordingly in a few Days, of which
we read Act. ii. But here is not the least Syllable said of that Baptism he had
commanded them to administer, this was Christ's own Work, and not theirs.


Titius. But ought they not to baptize with the same Baptism Christ did?


Eusebius. If you can find a Command for that, it will be something; but you can
find none, and indeed the Work exceeds the Capacity of Men: But further, whilst
Christ was upon Earth he baptized with Water, which I have before taken Notice
of. Joh. iii 36. which is a good President for Water Baptism.


Titius. There is a farther Proof for Spirit Baptism in Act. xi 16. Then
Remembered I the Word of the Lord how that he said, John indeed baptized you
with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost.


Eusebius. St. Peter only observes, that it was an Argument with him to admit the
Gentiles to the Privilege of Baptism with Water, because he saw that Christ
had accepted them, by bestowing the same Gift upon them that he had bestowed
upon the Disciples at first, which was in fulfillment of his gracious Promise;
this he remembered, and when he saw the like special Favor granted to Cornelius
and his House, he could not but think them worthy to be admitted into the
Society of Christ's Church, by that Baptism Christ had instituted, which was
with water. In all these Places there is not one Word said of Christ's
Instituting Spirit Baptism, as you call it, or that the Apostles understood the
Baptism Christ instituted to be spiritual without Water.


Titius. If these Proofs don't serve, I will bring you a Text that is plain and
possitive, it is 1 Cor. xii 13. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one
Body: What can be plainer?


Eusebius. J. Mott and E. Burling think this a plain Proof, that Christ's Baptism
is spiritual and without Water; but I cannot see any such plain Proof in it: It
seems to me the Apostle mean to join Water and the Spirit, as we understand
Baptism in our Church.


Titius. The Spirit is expresely mentioned, but nothing is said of the Water.


Eusebius. According to the literal Signification of the Word Baptize, it implies
an outward application, which cannot be understood of any Thing but Water,
especially considering Water was then made use of in Baptism. Baptizing
signifies either Washing or Immersion, thus our Savious says, the Jews held the
Washing of Cups and Platters, Mark. vii 4. Now to say of a Cup or Pot, that it
is well washed, who would not understand naturally, the Water had been used
about it: And in that Place the original Word is Baptism. But as touching these
Corinthians, it is very evident they were baptized with Water as well as by one
Spirit. In the first Chapter of this same Epistle St. Paul finding Fault with
the Party-Names and Divisions among them, uses this Argument to convince them
they ought to be united and o divided into parties, that they were not baptized
into the Names of those after whom they called themselves, particularly to
those that said, I am of Paul, to distinguish themselves from those who said
they were of Apollos or Cephas, he fars to them. Chap. i 13. Is Christ divided?
Was Paul crucified for you, or were you baptized into the Name of Paul?
Intimating that they had but one Head or Master, and that was Christ, who was
crucified for them, and into whose Name they were all baptized; now this
Baptizing the Quakers allow to be with Water, because Paul thanked God he had
only baptized such and such. And indeed the Reason he thanked God for it was,
that their dividing Dispositions should have no Advantage from that, as though
he had baptized into his own Name, to make a Body or Party of (...). under his
own Name: When therefore Baptism in his same Epistle is spoken of as a
combining the Baptized in a Body, it is natural to understand it of the same
Thing, when he says over again, we are baptized into one Body, though he there
mentions the Spirit to correspond with the Argument he was upon, for the Spirit
and the Water may agree in one Effect, as we always understand it, according to
the Words of our Savior. Joh. iii 5. Except a Man be born of Water and the
Spirit, etc. and 1 John v 8. The Spirit the Water and the Blood, these three
agree in one.


Trem. I confess this appears to me a solid Answer.


Titius. Eusebius confounds us with his far fetched Consequences.


Eusebius. I argue for plain and evident Facts, and the Consequences make
themselves: But I have now answered to all the Arguments I think you have to
produce in behalf of what you call Spirit Baptism, without Water; what is
Metaphorically called Baptizing with the holy Ghost in the several Texts, was
the miraulous Gift of the holy Ghost, sent down by Christ himself in a visible
Manner: there was an outward appearance of firey Tongues overshadowing them;
and there was nothing called Baptizing with the holy Ghost without this
miraculous Appearance, and whenever we shall see this upon a Congregation of
Quakers, accompanied with the same inward Effects, as we read Act. ii. we will
conclude they have been baptized by Christ himself with the holy Ghost and with
Fire, and will take this for such a clear Proof of Christ's accepting their
Persons, that none forbid Water that they may receive the Baptism Christ has
instituted to entitle Men to the Privileges of his Church, as St. Peter argues
in the Case of Cornelius; but if after that they should refuse Water, I should
say of them, they have received the Grace of God in vain: But what is the Work
which the Quakers call Repentance and Conversion in Comparison of the visible
Descent of the holy Ghost? It is nothing like it, nor have they any Thing among
them that ever had the Name of Baptism in Scripture, so far are they from the
Conditions of Salvation, Mark xvi 16.


Titius. Thou seem to lay great Weight upon Water Baptism, but for my Part I
cannot see any great Benefit by it, and People are as well without as with it.


Eusebius. The Benefits of Baptism are not properly visible, and those have wrong
Nations, that conclude there is none, because they cannot see 'em. Relative
Changes are not visible Things, and yet may be accompanied with singular
Benefits; a Man may adopt a Child and make it an Heir to an Estate of a
Thousand Pound per Annum, and you see no Change in the Child, as to Temper,
Disposition and Manners, till an Education agreeable to such an Heirship has
formed him; Baptism makes us the adopted Children of God, and though we are
immediately put into a State of Privileges; yet by reason that some Men
receive the Grace of God in vain through their own Fault and Neglect, there may
in some Cases never appear any real Effect of such Privileges, and in other
Cases they are not always discernable, The Wind blows where it lists, and
thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, etc. so is
every one that is born of the Spirit.


Titius. J. Mott will tell you p. 8 of a great Absurdity in persuading People
they are regenerated or born again, when they don't know what it is to become
Children of God.


Eusebius. And is it not as great an Absurdity to tell People that their Bodies
are framed in the Womb, when they can give no Account how it was done? Persons
know they have Bodies, and they know they have been baptized according to
Christ's Institution; and if they know this, by believing the Scriptures they
will know they belong to Christ, and are Heirs of Happiness and Salvation, in
the Faith of which they may draw nigh to God with full Assurance, as the
Apostle reasons, Heb. x 22. Having their Hearts sprinkled from an evil
Conscience, and their Bodies washed in pure Water, that is, having had
Christian Baptism.


Titius. This must be Spirit Baptism can outward Water sprinkle the Heart from
an evil Conscience?


Eusebius. You do as J. Mott has done all along through his Book, take for granted
what he never proved, nor never will be allowed, viz. that there is any such
Thing as Spirit Baptism in your Sense, without Water. The Spirit and Water are
joined together in Christian Baptism; and in this Text, if Sprinkling the Heart
be the spiritual Part of Baptism, the outward Part and visible Sign is plainly
enough expressed too, the Washing the Body in pure Water; you can have no Face
for making this an internal Action, nor say that this outward Washing is not
mentioned as the Christians Confidence. Take the whole Action together, and
then think when Men have their Sins remitted by being Baptized, a Belief of
this Quiets their Consciences, that were before guilty and condemning, so that
a Belief of Remillion takes away an evil Conscience, which is a Consequence of
being baptized with Water.


Titius. How can Water remit Sins?


Eusebius. Water it iself can not remit Sins; but it is applied in Baptiism by the
Command of God for this Purpose, and Christ has promised such a Privilege to
accompany it, it is no hard matter to believe it, if we can take God's Word,
who alone is the Dispensor of Pardon, and may annex it to what Conditions he
pleases; and the Possibility of the Thing you may be convinced of from an
allowed Instance, I mean John's Baptism which was with Water, and yet entitled
Men to the Remission of their Sins upon proper Conditions, Mark i ^.


Titius. You have not made it appear that ever Christ commandeded Water Baptism.


Eusebius. It Is evident and the Quakers allow that he commanded some Baptism to be
continued in the Church, as a necessary Means of Salvation. I have showed it
cannot be what you pretend to, and then you must needs allow it to be Water
consigning the Spirit, to perform those inward Opperations which are our
spiritual Sanctification: Hence St. Paul says, He has cleansed and sanctified
his Church, by the Washing of Water, by (or in the Word


Titius. J. Met shows that Text to be no Proof for Water Baptism, because the
Word means Christ, who is called the Word of God, p. 10. so that he renders it
thus, 'The Washing by the word, or by 'the Spirit, which is the same; for the
Spirit of Christ is often in Scripture called Water, and the Work thereof in
the Soul Washing. --


Eusebius. There never was so much Absurdity Nonsense and Heresy put together in
so few Words: Here is a plain Denial of a Distinction of Persons in the
Trinity, Christ the Word and Spirit he makes Terms reciproeal. But to pass his
Hetrodoxy, see the Sense with the reciprocal Use of these Names; the Water he
says is the Spirit too, as it is often used in Scripture, then the Apostle must
say after this Manner, Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that he
(i. e. Christ) might cleanse and sanctify it by the Work of Christ by Christ.
It will be the same Nonsense if it be ( with the Work of the Spirit by the
Spirit.) But if you will allow the Apostle to speak but common Sense, the Water
must be understood literally, and then I will not contend about the following
Passage, viz. by the Word, if it be, as J. Mott says, the Spirit, then here is
Water and Spirit again together for Sanctification; if it means any Thing else,
then Sanctification is attributed to the Water of Baptism without mentioning
the Spirit, which is doing some Honor to Water in Baptism.


Trem. You show so much of J. Mott's Nonsense, that I begin to think there is
nothing else in the Book.


Eusebius. Truly it is a heap of poor Stuff; and I am ashamed for my self that I
have taken so much Notice of him; but now I have begun, I will go a little
further and consider what he says relating to the Lord's Supper.


Titius. Hold thou have not yet cleared up this Point; Paul says he was sent
not to Baptize, and if his Commission was not to Baptize, that is with Water,
there is no reason to think the Rest had any Commission.


Eusebius. You understand baptizing here to be with Water, though this Text says
no more of Water then Matt xxviii, 19, and there is as much Reason to
understand Water in that plain Commission, as in this of St. Paul, especially
considering that in other Places the Quakers, allow Water to be employed, in the
Word Baptize where there is nothing to determine it to a metaphorical Sense as
Act. viii 12.16. cited by J. Mott p. 20, so that the other Apostles had a plain
Commission to do, what St. Paul says he was not sent for; so that either his
Commission was different from theirs, and then his Words don't disprove an
Institution of Water, or else to reconcile his Words to his Practice and the
Commission Matt. xxviii, we must understand this Expression not absolutely
negative but Comparatively only; thus the Particle Not is often used in
Scripture, and such a Manner of Speech is often used without designing an
absolute Negative.


Titius. I don't know any such instances we always take Not to be absolutely
Negative.


Eusebius. I could give you a great many Instances; but two or three plain ones
will suffice Jer. vii, 22. I spoke not unto your Fathers nor commanded them in
the day that I brought them up out of the Land of Egypt, concerning burnt
Offerings or Sacrifices, but this thing Commanded I them, etc. Only intimating.
that God laid more Weight upon steadfast Obedience, than upon Sacrifices and
burnt Offerings. There is a plainer Instance yet Hos. vi, 6. I disire Mercy and
not Sacrifice and the Knowledge of God more than burnt Offering; to which our
Savior refers Matt. xii, 7. If (...) had known what this mean^, I will have
Mercy and not Sacrifice, etc. He must be extremly ignorant, that don't know God
required Sacrifices and burnt offering under the Law, but he laid greater
weight upon Mercy. so St. Paul had realy a Commission to baptize, but
preaching. (...) Gospel was a Work that more required his Masterly Abbities.
However same he did.baptize even of those Corinthians; and in other Phers of
his Travels we find he Baptized, as at Macedonia, Lydia and her House, the
Joylor and his House: at Ephesus he found some that were looked upon Disciples
of Jesus only having (...) baptized with the Baptism of John. When St. Paul
seemed surprised to hear them say, they had not heard any thing of the holy
Ghost, he (...) what they were baptized into? Act. xix, which seems to me a
plain Intimation, that St. Paul thought Baptism with Water essential to a
Christian or Disciple of Jesus Christ; when he heard they were Disciples he
concludes certainly they must have been baptized with Water; and when they tell
him they had only been baptized into John's Baptism, St. Paul lets them know,
there was something farther necessary to make them Christians; for even John's
Baptism Engaged them to receive the Religion of Christ which was not then
published; And when they heard this they were baptized in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, (...) make them complete Disciples of Christ, this being done by St.
Paul himself, shows how necessary he thought the Baptism of Christ, and that it
was with Water.


Titius. How due is appear to be Water Baptism, when nothing is said of Water?


Eusebius. Because it is said, that by laying on of St. Paul's Hands they received
the holy Ghost afterward; and the very same Expressions is allowed by the
Quakers particularly J. Mott, to mean Water Baptism Act. viii, 16, as yet the
holy Ghost was fallen upon none of them, only they were baptized in the Name of
the Lord Jesus: now this in Act. xix, being expressed after the same Manner,
and the giving of the holy Ghost afterward, shows, that in both Places the
same Thing is meant, viz. Baptism with Water.


Titius. We don't deny the use of Water Baptism in the Apostles Time; but they
did it in their own Freedom J. Mott tells you p. 9, i. e. Upon their own Heads,
(as we often say) without any Authority or Command of Christ therefore.


Eusebius. This is a pi^i^ul Shift, and has neither Reason nor Scripture to suport
it. They had Authority from Christ by the Commission Matt. xxviii, 19, to
baptize; they constantly in every Place, where Men were converted by their
Preaching, used Water and called it baptizing, and never called any thing else
they did by that Name: of this they speak in such Manner as plainly to intimate
the Necessity of it, and the consequent Benefits:And from their Example it has
always been esteemed honorable in the Church, and practiced every where with
an Opinion of its being a Means to make Men the Disciples of Christ and Entitle
them to the Privileges of Christianity; and indeed this opinion is
sufficiently justified by the Manner of Expression Act. viii, 16, and xix, 5.
they were baptized in Name of the Lord Jesus: for my part I should take this
Expression to intimate a Command or Power derived from Christ, to do what is
said to be done in his Name; ARISEIS into the Name means that Baptism with
Water, Entitled them to wear the Name of Christ, made them Christians, put
them under the Discipline of his Religion, with a Title to the Privileges of
it; still, it will infer as strongly Christ's Institution, without which it
could have none of these Effects. Besides this, the Letter J. Mott pretends to
answer, had argued for a divine Institution or appointment of Water Baptism
from Act. xx, 10, 16, to which J. Mott has pretended to Answer.


Titius. He says the main Part of the Verse was left out, viz. calling on the
Name of the Lord by which he says Men's Sins are washed away and not by Water
Baptism.


Eusb. James can make any thing wasbing, he can make this Effect suit to
Burning and Judgment and Repentance and Prayer and any thing besides
application of Water; but when Annanias says arise and be wasbed with water,
and wasb away thy Sins, it is very hard that Water may not claim the Effect
called Wasbing rather then Prayer. But that was not at all to the purpose, the
Effects were not disputed for in that Passage, but the Institution: and if J.
Mott. had said Annanias did not direct Saul to be bapized, then we might have
conclnded he thought all that God had oppointed for him to do, was to call on
the Name of the Lord? but when Christ ^rected him there, to know what was
ordained or oppointel for him and for others in order to become Christians; and
there he finds this direction, ar^e and be baptizad. we may conclude this to be
a sivine appointment; here lay the Argument to which he gives no Answer at all.


Trem. I confess Eusebius, you have given me abundant light and Satisfaction
concerning the In^t^uon, Necessity and Benesits of water Baptism I thank you,
for the pains you have taken; and for the rest, I can almost give up my self to
an implicit belief, having seen so much of the foll and Imper^nence of J.
Mott's anser: but vet if your Pationce willhold out, let us bait a few words
con^ning the Lord's Supper.


Th^ius. I am sorry Tremlus to see thec so soon mdeu Conquest of Eusebius would
not be able to make such Havcck of some of our Friends as he does of J. Mott.


Trem. They ought to have printed the best Answer they could make, and I
believe they have; and you know how much they all admire this Book of J. Mott;
and for that Reason I shall never admire them for the future.


Eusebius. I am glad Tremulus it has pleased God to open your eyes, and to make
me in anv Degree instrumental, in bringing. you out of this fatal Snare: For
whilst rhey labor to fet aside the Institutions of Christ, and brirng Men to
contemn, slight and neglect them, they must be instigatcd by the Devil, thus to
endeavor the Ex^ipation of Christ's Religion and to overthrow the Constituticn
of his Kingdom; and while their Principles reslect so much Dishonor upon
Christ and spread such Confusion in his Church, to pretend they are immediately
sent by God, and have the Witness of the holy Ghost; what can be more wicked
and blasphemous? these are Sins of a blacker Nature than Drunkenness, Swearing
and Fornication. The great Use and Benefit of J the Lord's Supper I have not
lime now to explain to you, but it will be well worth your while to read an
exellent Treatise of the present Bishop so London upon that Subject, which I
will put into your Hand, and I make no Doubt but it will give you full
Satissaction in every Respect.


Trem. The Quakers don't them our Savior's tating Bread, and drinking Wins with
his Di^ci^les, and that it had a spiritual Signisication, and thatv be
commanded them to do th like.


Titius, J. Mott t^is you, it was only to show tham how they should seed upon
his Body and Blood spritually, when be should come again in Spirit in them.


Eusebius. St. Paul bids the Corinthians show forth he Lord's Death till he come;
I suspect the Quakers realty believe no coming of Christ but what 7. Mott calls
in Spirit in them, nor no Resurrection of Christ but in their Souls. And if
Chfist is not to come bodily and visibly, then neither did he ascend visibly
and bodily; and the Consequence of making these Things merely spiritual and
allegorical (if the Quakers do so) is to destroy the Foundation of our Hope,
and make the Apostles all Liars, and the Faith of Christians all vain. But let
J. Mott for once be in the Right, if by Passovcr he means the Supper of the
Lord, out Savior celebrated it with his Disciples to show they should seed
upon his Body and Blood spiritually, when he should be spiritually in them. And
certainly for a Master to do a Thing before the Eyes of his Servants, to show
them hew to do it, is a very proper familar and easy Way of Instructing, and
thus indeed we believe our blested Savior taught his Disciples what he in
tended they shoul]dl do in order to make a show or Memorial of his Death: But
would not any Body think then. they ought to do as they were showed? Which was
to perfrom an outward Action with a spiritual Signification. And without such
outward Action, they never can do as they were showed. And it is very plain
that the Apostles, and the Church of Christ ever since, have observed our
Lord's Direction in this Point, (except some Popish Corruptions which our
Church has reformed according to the primitive Model) and especially may we
find plain Instruction in this Matter from St. Paul's Directions to the
Corinthians, whom he commends for observing the Ordinances as he had delivered
'em to them, 1 Cor. xi 2. And though in respect to this Ordinance, he finds
Fault with scme Irregularities in their manner of Celebration, yet he is so far
from intimating an Indifference as to the observation it self, that he asserts
the Divine Institution v. 23. And what he had received in Command from Christ.
lie goes on to relate to them, which is an outward taking the Bread and Cup,
and after giving Thanks and Blessing, to bid them all really cat and Drink, to
she forth the Lord's Death, which as he exhorts them to v. 26, 28. so in the
preceding Chapter he relates such Effects and Benefits of receiving these
outward Symbols of Christ's Body and Blood, as must certainly prove an
Institution of perpetual Use and Necessity, 1 Cor. x 16, 17. The Cup of
Blessing which we bless, is it it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The
Bread which we breaks, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we
being many, are one Bread and one Body; for we are all partakers of that one
Bread.


Titius. St. Paul never writ thus to any other Churches, J. Mott tells us.


Eusebius. The Epistles to the several Churches were adapted to some particular
Emergencies, and we are not to imagine, they contain all Instructions the
Apostles gave to these Churches; but as they preached one Religion every where,
we may conclude, that whatever is delivered as Christian Doctrine or
Institution to one Church, the same was taught in all the rest, and particular
as to this Epistle, we find that all Christians in every Place are concerned in
the Contents of it, it is a Catholic Epistle, directed to the Corinthians,
with all that in every Place call on the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord. 1 Cor.
i 2. And the Benefits of this Institution here mentioned are such as are
absolutely necessary for all Christians, and therefore the Celebration a Duty
for all; and accordingly we read that the first Converts to Christianity
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in Breaking
of Bread, and in Prayer, Act. ii 24. And at Troas, when the Disciples came
together to break Bread, Paul preached unto them, Act. xx 7.


Titius. J. Mott tells a particular Reason for Paul's observing this Supper
among the Corinthians, because they were carnal and weak Believers, and to show
that Christ was not come spiritually in them.


Eusebius. I am weary of hearing his Nonsense and Absurdities; how could they have
Communion to the Body and Blood of Christ, which is certainly a spiritual
Privilege, if Christ was not in them by his Spirit? How could St. Paul say to
those very Corinthians, Chap. xii v. 13. We are all by one Spirit baptized into
one Body, if the Spirit of Christ was not in them? Does J. Mott think Men may
be baptized with the Spirit of Christ, and yet Christ not be in them
spiritually? Thus you see the silly ignorant Creature opposite to himself as
well as to all Truth and Reason If J. Mott had taken notice of what St. Paul
says to these Corinthians, Chap. i v. 4, 5, 6, 7. he would not have pronounced
them thus destitute of Christ's Spirit; St. Paul says they were emiched in
every thing by him in all Utterance and Knowledge, so that they came behind in
no Gift. And Chap. vi ^. 5. he says, And such were some of you; but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus and by the Spirit of our God: What think you now of those carnal
Believers without the Spirit of Christ.


Titius. You have such turns for every Thing that I will not pretend to say any
Thing more to you.


Trem. Truly Titius I believe you have no more to say; you must needs be
sensible that we have been wretchedly imposed upon, espicially by that silly
impertinent Book of J. Mott. For my Part I must confess my self fully convinced
by what Eusebius bas offered. I think Quakerism a very dangerous Snare, of
which I hope by the Grace of God to keep clear of for the Future.


Eusebius. Give God the Glory, and I hope I shall see you steadfast and canstant in
the Duties of a pious and religious Life, according to the sacred Institutions
of Christ.


Trem. Dear Eusebius, I shall be glad of your intimate Friendship and further
Advice relating to the Conduct of my self, that I may make sure the Salvation
of my Soul.


Eusebius. You shall always be welcome to the best Assistance I can give you, and
I pray the God of Heaven to direct and bless you.


AMEN. FINIS.
Lately printed and sold by John Peter Zenger in Smith-Street, New York, A
Letter to a Parishioner, etc. Which J. Mott pretended to answer in a Pamphlet
entitled, the great Work of Christ's Spirit, etc.

ERRATA.
The reader is desired to Correct the mistake of the Press particularly Page 7
of the Preface for Paul read Peter, P. 9 l. 21. 5. A^tit^pon, l. 19 for 15. r.
20. verse, p. 10 l. 7 r (...) l. 17. dele for p. 7 l. 27. for offered r.
asserted, (...). r. Instances p. 12, l. 18. for which r. what p. 13 l. 6. r.
unavoidable, l. 7 r. voluntarily. p. 15 l. 10 for were r. are p. 31 l. 15. dele
all p. 44 l 24. for for r. of, p, 49 l. 15. dele of p. 53 l. 23. for for r.
from, l. 28 for the several r. those sevaral p. 54 l. 10. r. none. shall p. 56
l. 18. r. as a ground of, l. 28. r. when it is, p. 62 l. 15 for ARISE^S r. or if
it is to ONOMA, in the Original l. 26. for (...) p. 65 l. a^. r. (...)


