EARLY PIETY recommended and exemplified. A SERMON Occasioned by the Death OF
Elisabeth Price, An eminently pious Young Woman, Who departed this Life,
February 22. 1731/2. In the Seventeenth Year of her Age.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, M. A. One of the Pastors of the First Church in BOSTON

1 Chronicles 28. 9. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and
serve him with a perfect heart and a willing mind. -- If thou seek him, he will
be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. 2 Chronicles. 34. 3. For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he
began to seek after the God of David his father. BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND
and T. GREEN, for B. GRAY, at the Head of the Town Dock. 1732.

The PREFACE.
BY Virtue of that stimulating Passion or Principle of Imitation, so deeply
radicated in human Nature, Example has usually a very attractive Force and
Government over Mankind, and a distinguishing Efficacy on young People in
particular. Whatever is the latent Cause, we find by constant Experience, it
strikes very powerfully on their tender and ductile Minds; is more engaging
than the strongest and most persuasive Reasonings, or the most solemn Precepts
of Superiors; and has the earliest Influence, to bias their Thoughts and
Inclinations, and to form their Deportment. Thus it is in Morality and Civils;
and thus in Christianity and Spirituals.

It Is of great Importance therefore, what Precedents young People have set
before them, in the Family and Place of their Education: and of happy Tendency,
when good Examples present themselves betimes, to prepossess them in Favor of
pure Religion and the best Interest.

It is the Wisdom and Goodness of GOD, that He has in the sacred Scriptures
preserved brief Memorials of many primitive Saints; some of whom were shining
Patterns of early Piety: the Review of which, while young ones have been
reading their Bible, has often led them by a sweet and powerful Constraint into
the Consideration, Love and Practice of the Things that please GOD, and Things
that accompany Salvation.

In Conformity to Scripture Sample, many biographical Pieces, of human
Composure, have been published by Christian Writers from Age to Age. Among
others, large Accounts have been exhibited to the World of the Lives of some
young and eminent Christians* and shorter Memoirs have been given of many
others, particularly in Funeral-Sermons: which by the Blessing of GOD have
often been of singular Use, to promote the early Practice of Piety, by
provoking Survivors of the same Age to an holy Emulation.

I look upon it the primary Business of Funeral-Discourses, not so much to
praise the Dead, as instruct the Living; to give GOD the Glory of his Grace
bestowed on the Deceased, and to enforce a Care of Religion, by the Advantage
of their Example, on the Surviving. Instances of early Piety, especially where
it has been signal too for the Degree, seem to claim a peculiar Notice: And
public Characters in this Case are wont to be entertained with a peculiar
Candor and Attention; while on other Occasions many times groundless
Prejudices are unhappy Impediments to a candid Reception of them, although drawn
up with the wisest Caution, and the exactest Regard to Truth of Fact, as well
as Sobriety of Language.

I was very much pleased in hearing the Funeral-Character, in the following
Sermon, from the Pulpit, on so just an Occasion: and am glad now to see it in
the public Light. As it seemed very acceptable, to an attentive Audience; I
wish it may be no less profitable, to every Reader, and particularly to young
People, by stirring up their Resolutions and Endeavors of conforming to the
bright Pattern here bro't to their View: concerning which, Much in a little is
said with Words of Truth and Soberness.

'Twas the Hope of doing some Service to the great Ends of the Gospel, among
the rising Generation in special, by proposing a remarkable Example of early
Religion, that at length prevailed on my Rev. Brother to give way to the
Importunity, with which this Publication was called for. May the pious Desires
of the Author and the Publishers be abundantly answered, in the quickening of
many to be "Followers of them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the
Promises!

May the bereaved Parents, while mourning the Death of their lovely Child
(saying, "Alas my Daughter) often refresh their sorrowful Minds by reflecting
on her holy Walk with GOD, and peaceful End, and taking a Prospect of that
blissful World, they have such Reason to hope, she is translated to! May they
secure and enjoy 'the good Part, that shall never be taken away from them; "a
Name better than of Sons and Daughters, an everlasting Name, that shall not be
cut off! And may their surviving Children be also a Joy and Crown to them!

May we all that are Parents, be excited and encouraged to pray and hope and
labor for the early Conversion of our Children! So we may comfortably part
with them, if Death take them from us (knowing "the Day of their Death is
better than the Day of their Birth) or else cheerfully leave them to the
Covenant-Care of a gracious God, if we are removed from them.

Let young People lay to Heart such Instances of early Mortality: and pray to
GOD, that by his Grace they may become like Examples of real and vital Piety;
that if they also should die in Youth, they may have Hope in their Death, and
willingly bid Adieu to Earth and Time, desirous to be with CHRIST.

Let the Daughters of Zion in particular set this fair Copy before them, and be
solicitous to get it transcribed in their Hearts and Lives. "Many Daughters
have done virtuously: and she excelled, who is gone before you, in a spiritual
Mind, and heavenly Conversation; fleeing youthful Lusts, and remembering her
Creator betimes. Now hearken, O our Daughters* "Go and do likewise. Resolve
with virtuous Ruth, "Thy God shall be my God, and thy People my People.
"Forsake the foolish, and live. "Come out from among them, and be ye separate,
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and ye
shall be my Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Be concerned to "cleanse your
way in Youth, by taking Heed thereto according to his Word. "Look to JESUS (who
only can "work in you to will and to do) that he would enable you to "cleanse
your Hands, and purify your Hearts. Get "clothed with the Robe of
Righteousness and the Beauties of Holiness: that, as the King's Daughter, you
may be "all glorious within. "Your Adorning, let it not be that outward
Adorning of plaiting the Hair, and of wearing of Gold, or of putting on of
Apparel: but let it be the hidden man of the Heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, a humble and devout
Soul, which is in the sight of God of great Price. "For after this manner, in
old Time, the holy Women who trusted in GOD, adorned themselves: "Whose
Daughters ye are, as long as ye do well. Their Example is left on Record for
your Imitation. Keep it in your Eye, and study a Resemblance to them in the
Temper of your Mind, and Tenor of your Life. So will you shine as
"Corner-Stones polished after the Similitude of a Palace. God will have Glory
from you: "The King shall greatly desire your Beauty; and Christ will "rejoice
over you, as the Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride. All that see you, will
bless you: and your anxious Parents will have unspeakable Joy, "while they
behold your chaste Conversation coupled with Fear; and see you betimes "Heirs
of the Grace of Life, "espoused to Christ, as the Husband of your Youth; fitted
for Usefulness in this World, and entitled to Happiness in the next.

I pray GOD to bless to the female Reader in particular, the following
Discourse, wherein you have early Piety so well recommended, and exemplified:
and to continue the worthy Author, my dear Colleague, long a burning and
shining Light, for the Glory of CHRIST, and the Good of Souls. And may we both
"rejoice in the Day of CHRIST, that we have not run in vain, neither labored
in vain! AMEN.

BOSTON, May 10, 1732. THOMAS FOXCROFT.

EARLY PIETY Recommended and Exemplified.
PSALM CXIX. 9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way?
By taking heed thereto according to thy word.

MY text is not the only passage of Scripture, that mentions the young man by
name, and calls upon him to keep himself pure from the defilements of this evil
World. Perhaps the design of the holy Spirit herein might be, to place an
emphasis upon this age of life, and recommend Religion as a business peculiarly
seasonable for persons in their young and tender years. It Is certain, religion
never appears more lovely, than as exemplified in the well ordered conversation
of those, who are in the bloom of life. Nor can such employ their time and
pains, more to the divine honor and acceptance, or their own truest advantage,
than by an early care in governing their appetites, purifying their hearts, and
forming within themselves the seeds and principles of virtue and a holy life.

AND to engage our young people in a zealous application of themselves, in the
use of all proper means, to such noble purposes, is the design I have in view
from the words which have been red to you.

THEY are found in that inspired Psalm which is the longest, and (as some
think) the most artfully composed of any in the whole book of Psalms. The
general scope of it is, to show forth the excellency of the written word and
laws of God: and it is justly admired for that variety of though it, in which it
recommends them to our practice.

IT has been disputed who was the penman of the Psalm; but so much of the royal
Prophet is apparent in every part, that it is generally ascribed to David.

THE verse I have chosen for my text* is made up of two parts; a question, and
an answer to it.

I. THE first part of my text contains a question; wherewith shall a young man
cleanse his way? By a young man we are here to understand all in their youthful
days; both men and women. And from the express mention of persons of this age
and character, we are naturally led to look upon those, who are in the prime
and vigor of life, as under peculiar obligations to become seriously pious and
sober: for this is the great thing meant by cleansing their way; which they
would not, with such particularity, have had urged upon them, if there had not
been some special reasons binding them hereto, as their inviolable duty.

I am sensible there are several things of considerable importance, obviously
implied in the phrase of my text, under which the duty of early Piety is
recommended to us. And I might accordingly to good purpose employ your
meditations, both on the natural and contracted filth, young persons are too
commonly defiled with: As also, the particulars of that purity of heart and
life, wherein consists the sum of true Religion. But as I Am obliged to confine
my self to a single discourse, and it may be presumed we are fully instructed
in these things, I shall pass them over, and make it my only business from this
part of my text,

To represent to you, in as clear and strong a light as I am able, the special
Considerations that oblige young persons to be religious in their early days.

And here I would offer as follows,

I. THIS age of life is the best and most convenient, in which to enter upon a
religious course. I would charitably hope, there are few if any, but look upon
a religious life to be a matter of necessity: which they have accordingly
determined to betake themselves to, some time or other; as they would not give
up all hope of future and eternal blessedness. And if religion be at all a
matter of necessity, it is certainly wisdom to take that season to engage in it,
which is the fairest and best; the least entangled with difficulty, and
attended with the most hopeful prospect of success. Now such a season is the
age of youth. We may, at this time of life, begin and go on in a religious
course, with greater advantage than we shall be ever able to do afterward.

THERE are indeed, it must be acknowledged, some difficulties, that seem almost
peculiar to this age of life: As a high relish of the pleasures of sense; the
ungovernableness of carnal appetites and evil passions; an exceeding aptness to
be seduced by bad example; an over airiness and gaiety of temper; want of
judgment and experience; rashness, sickleness, inconsideration, and the like.
But these inconveniences are vastly more than balanced, by distinguishing
advantages common to the days of youth.

WE are now most free from a wrong biass; and lie most open to the impressions
of religious principles, and the power of those Gospel motives, by which the
practice of true piety is recommended and enforced. For this age of life is
easily wrought upon, and molded almost into any form. "A young and tender
plant readily takes the ply, which he who tends it thinks proper to give; and
if by accident it becomes warped, and has received a wrong bent, by due and
early care it is easily reduced: but if it be suffered to continue so a
considerable time without suitable attendance, and grow old; it becomes
stubborn and inflexible."

ALSO, we are now most under the influence of conscience, and a natural sense
of shame and modesty; than which there are scarce any stronger restraints to
keep us from doing evil. As corrupt as humane nature is, persons cannot at first
commit sin without trouble and uneasiness from conscience; and they have
naturally such a sense of the indecency and irregularity of most wicked
actions, as that they ordinarily start back from their first approaches toward
them. I doubt not but most men have had their innocence preserved in many
instances, by the sole help of innate modesty and shame; which powerful
principles cannot at once be stifled and suppressed.

BESIDES, sin has not yet got so full possession of us; nor have we contracted
so many vicious Habits; nor are they so deeply rooted, as in those who have for
a considerable length of time accustomed themselves to do evil. For by
repeating the acts of sin, the habit is strangely encouraged; and by degrees
will become so obstinate, as to make it almost an impossibility to get
recovered from it. The prophet therefore describes this matter in such strong
language as that, Can the Ethiopian change his skin? or the leopard his spots?
then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. Jer. 13. 23.


MOREOVER, fewer clogs and encumbrances now lie in the way of religion, than
there will, when we come to settle in the world, and are entangled with
business; the cares, temptations, difficulties, hurries and disappointments of
which, are so many and great, as will endanger our not so much as thinking of
our Souls; if a sense of religion has not before been impressed upon our minds.
And under these circumstances we shall be far more likely to put off the
business of Salvation, than ever before. Our unexperience of the world may keep
us from feeling the force of this argument; but the further we get into the
world, and become acquainted with the cares and distractions of it, the more
weight shall we find to be in it.

FURTHER, we shall certainly have more time for the work of religion, if we
engage in it now. For every moment we defer this work, the space allotted to us
for the accomplishment of it, is just in the same proportion lessened. This
perhaps we may not be much concerned about: imagining religion to be a matter
of ease; a business we may begin and finish at our leisure. But we are herein
greatly mistaken. It Is truly a hard and difficult matter to be sincerely pious,
and will require a great deal of time and labor. And if ever we are made
seriously concerned about our Souls, we shall certainly find it to be so. It Is
therefore an advantage, the longer time we have for the work of getting our
selves prepared for heavenly happiness: And if we are wise for eternity, we
cannot but esteem it to be so. To be sure, the longer time we have, the greater
progress we shall be able to make in holiness, and the more strengthened will
the habits of virtue be likely to be in us; the more mature and perfect the
graces of God's holy Spirit. Nor is it possible we should ever be eminent in
piety; exemplary proficients in grace and goodness, if we cut short the time to
improve herein, by not entering upon a life of religion till we have passed the
prime of our days.

IN FINE, we have in this age of life the most hopeful prospect, of being
effectually assisted by the holy Spirit of God, in the great work of serving
our maker. For young persons may, at least ordinarily, be supposed to have
least resisted the Holy Ghost, quenched his motions, stiffled convictions and
opposed the methods of divine grace. And having given least provocation to the
holy Spirit, there is the least danger of his withdraw, and giving over to
strive with us. And of all persons, We have the highest encouragement, upon
suitable applications herefor, to expect those supernatural operations and
assistances that are needful for us. It Is in experience found true, the holy
Spirit usually strives more with young persons than others: They are oftener
bro't under convictions; filled with concern about their Souls; and made
seriously inquisitive, what they must do that they may inherit eternal life? In
this age, we are most likely to be wro't upon and prevailed with: and therefore
the holy Spirit does not lose this best opportunity; but improves it by more
abundant strivings and motions in us.

AND O how great is our advantage, in being actually under the influences of
God's Spirit! and the most hopeful prospect of all supernatural aids, as we may
need them! There cannot be a stronger encouragement to us, to enter upon a
religious course in these our first days. For of our selves we can never turn
to God, or serve him to his acceptance. The assistances of divine grace are
absolutely necessary hereto: and in this time of life these we do in some
measure enjoy: and have the highest reason further to except them, in degrees
proportionable to our wants. And is it prudence to make no use of such an
inestimable privilege? And shall we not by slighting and despising it, provoke
God to resolve, that his Spirit shall not afterward strive with us? And to say
concerning one and another of us, "I have done with him, and he shall hear no
more of my despised offers, nor any more reject the motions of my Spirit: Let
him now take his own course, he shall for a while hear no more from me, till I
speak in quite another manner; and rend the caul of his heart, and take away
his rebellious Soul."

II. RELIGION in this age of life is most pleasing and acceptable to God. It is
indeed of so recommending a nature, that the glorious God is pleased with and
will graciously accept it, whenever and in whomsoever he beholds it. Though we
should have spent the first of our time and strength in the service of sin and
Satan; yet if we afterward heartily devote our selves to God, and faithfully
employ our powers to the purposes of a holy life, he will not upbraid us with
our former folly, or deny us his favor. The repentance of a sinner is always
matter of joy to the blessed God: He conceives a pleasure at this, in
whatsoever age of life, we come to our selves, and return to our duty; and will
readily receive us to mercy. But early Piety is peculiarly pleasing and
acceptable to God. He has the most endeared affection for young Converts: None
so welcome to him, or that meet with such distinguishing regards from him. Says
God, I love them that love me: and those that seek me EARLY shall find me.
Prove. 8. 17.
Of all the Apostles of our Lord, John was the youngest; who is frequently
spoken of in that style, THE DISCIPLE WHOM JESUS LOVED. John 13. 23. 19. 26.
20. 2.
Yea, the blessed JESUS is represented, as having an uncommon love to the young
man in the Gospel, who was only in a tho'tful serious frame of spirit;
expressing it self in respectful desires of knowing, what he must do to inherit
eternal life. Mark 10. 21. compared with Mat. 19. 20.
So pleased is he with every thing that looks like a tendency toward early
Piety! And when we read of the firstborn and first fruits, Exodus 22. 29.
as appointed to be separated for the service of God; may it not symbolically
represent it our duty, to devote the first of our time and strength to the
honor of our Creator, as what he would most kindly accept at our hands?

AND it is entirely consonant to reason, to suppose the blessed God will be most
pleased with the service of our youthful days. For we are now most active and
vigorous; our spirits brisk and lively; our resolutions animated; our strength
firm; our health unbroken; and in a word, the several powers both of our souls
and bodies, in their prime and glory: Upon which accounts, we are in our best
capacity for the services of religion, And to exercise our selves to godliness
NOW; in this most valuable part of life; when we are best able, in the best
manner, to do the duties and go through the difficulties of religion, is most
valuable in it self, most conducive to the divine honor; and will never fail of
the most distinguishing acceptance. If we should be so unhappy as to neglect
God till afterward, we might, it is true, of his abundant mercy, upon our
through humiliation and sincere repentance, notwithstanding this most unworthy
treatment of his divine majesty, be admitted to his favor: But it is not
reasonable to think, we should meet with so easy and free a reception under
these circumstances, as if we had returned to him in the flower of life. "Our
youthful capacities are as the male in our flock;" with which God cannot but be
most of all pleased and readily accept.

III. RELIGION in this age of life is peculiarly seasonable, and will make
those who practice it, signally amiable and lovely. The wise man observes, To
every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven.
Eccl. 3. 1.
And when is the proper season in which to enter upon a religious course?
unless upon our first coming to the free exercise of our rational powers; while
the blessing of life is new, and the sense of it fresh upon our minds; and we
are newly arrived at a capacity of knowing the Author of our Beings, and
rendering back to him our most grateful acknowlegements. If there be at all a
fit opportunity, to begin to be seriously Godly, it is now; upon the buddings of
reason and understanding; the first appearances of a capacity to distinguish
between moral good and evil: that so the principles of virtue may, with our
intellectual powers, gradually grow up to a state of maturity; and when our
life comes to be in its highest perfection, we shall be in the most vigorous,
lively and perfect religious capacity, to serve and honor our creator and
father.

AND what more lovely sight than that of a young person, in his most early days
enquiring after the God that made him, in the language of holy Job, Job 35. 10,
11.
Where is God my maker? who teaches me more than the beasts of the earth, and
makes me wiser than the fowls of heaven. It adds a beauteous luster to
religion, to be practiced by those, who have but lately come out of the hands
of God, and are in the pride and vigor of life. And none among the sons of men
shine more bright and glorious than such instances of early piety. Their name
is better than precious ointment; they are esteemed as the excellent in the
earth; are universally well though it and spoken of; and the grace of God appearing
in them, is admired and acknowleg'd to their own, as well as the honor of God.
They are beloved, and treated with uncommon respect by all that have a regard
to virtue and goodness: and even the wicked and profane, who are hardy enough
openly to ridicule religion, will yet inwardly feel reverence and veneration
for them.

IV. THERE is great hazard we shall never be religious, if we ben't so in this
age of life. For who of us knows, whether our youthful days are not the only
ones, we have to live in the world? Whether God has not designed us to be in
the number of those millions, who die in youth? in their full strength, being
wholly at ease and quiet; having their breasts full of milk, and bones moistened
with marrow. Or if we were secure of our lives, is there not danger, when we
have vexed and grieved and quenched the Spirit, of his departing from us? Would
it be any wonder, if He should so resent our contempt of him, in resisting his
motions and stiffling convictions, as to retire and withdraw forever? And would
not this be a fatal bar to our ever turning to God? since of our selves we can
do nothing, and must have our chief dependence upon the assistances of divine
grace. But besides, what likelihood is there of our being recovered to God and
duty, after we are grown old in sin, when we could not be prevailed with in our
young and tender years? While young our hearts are soft; our wills pliable and
yielding; our consciences easily awakened, affections moved, and minds
impressed with a sense of religion: And if when under these advantageous
circumstances, we are not restrained by the word, nor providence, nor Spirit of
God, from walking in the way of the ungodly; what probable prospect is there of
our being called back afterward, and converted to God? And the hope of this
will be still less, after we have long continued in our evil courses: for by
this means we shall contract and render obstinate and inveterate, innumerable
vicious habits; shall very much weaken, if not quite destroy, the influence and
authority of conscience; shall make our hearts like an adamant stone, hard and
unrelenting; and in a word, shall become stupid and entirely lost to all sense
of virtue and religion. And under these circumstances, what hope is there of
our repentance and conversion to God? It Is indeed a possible thing; but there
is little more than a naked possibility of it. Nicodemus's question is in this
case very pertinent, How can a man be born when he is old? It Is a most unlikely
thing! one of the greatest rarities! And whenever it happens, it may be justly
looked upon as even a miracle of super-abundant grace in God!

In the last place,

V. TWILL be much to our advantage to be seriously godly betimes. This is the
best method we can take to secure the divine blessing in outward regards. For
our Savior has encouraged us to hope, upon our seeking first the kingdom of
God and his righteousness, that all these things shall be added unto us. Matt.
6. 33.
Agreeable to which is that of the Apostle, But godliness is profitable unto all
things, having promise of the life that now it, and of that which is to come. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
And in virtue of this promise, those that serve God; especially those that do
so in the first of their days, may with the greatest confidence depend upon the
divine power and goodness for the supply of their wants; and are of all
persons, the most likely to be smiled upon in providence, and so come to the
enjoyment of temporal good things; at least so far as God shall see it to be
best for them. But besides this advantage, there are vastly greater ones of a
spiritual and eternal nature. Thus,

BY our being pious betimes, we shall early obtain the pardon of our sins; the
favor and friendship of our maker; an adoption into the family of heaven, and
with it an investiture in all the rights and privileges of the sons of God. --
We shall hereby escape innumerable sins and follies, which would wound our
consciences: defile our souls; dishonor and provoke God, and make work for a
most bitter after-repentance. -- We shall hereby have a longer opportunity for
the work of serving God, and our generation according to the will of God; and
so shall be able to do more good, and be greater blessings in our day. -- We
shall hereby take the most certain and easy way to live and die good men. For
when once the seeds of virtue have taken root in our young and tender minds,
they will grow up into nature and fit us to live in the world: setting us in a
good measure free from the power of lust, preserving us from the infection of
evil example, and guarding us against the force of those numberless temptations
we shall meet with -- We shall hereby be likely to enjoy, in the most
uninterrupted course, that inward ease, peace and religious satisfaction,
wherein consists the greatest happiness on this side heaven. This, those who
have given way to youthful lusts, and were not seriously inclined 'till in
their latter years, are often strangers to. Or if their consciences are
sometimes at ease, it is often interrupted with perplexing fears and doubts,
whereby their lives are rendered very uncomfortable. Whereas those who have by
the grace of God, been enabled to enter upon, and walk in a religious course,
from their early days, do ordinarily for the most part enjoy a holy calm in
their breasts; that peace of God which passes all understanding. Persons even
in old age, have received more solid comfort from a reflection on their early
piety, than from all other considerations whatever. And when nothing else has
been effectual, in their melancholy hours, to bring ease to their minds, it has
at once scattered their fears and doubts, to look back upon that grace of God,
whereby in the pride and flower of youth, they were assisted to prefer a course
of religion to the pleasures of sin; and to hold on in this course, amidst all
the temptations of this evil world. -- And O the blessed peace and serenity of
mind! the holy joy and triumph of soul! such will be likely to be filled with
at the hour of death: when conscience shall testify, that they began to seek
after God, while they were yet young; and that they have all along had their
conversation in the world, in simplicity and godly sincerity; not by fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God. The reflection hereon will excite the lively
actings of faith and hope, in the mercy of God through Christ; yield an unfailing
spring of consolation to their hearts, and enable them in the midst of the
throws and agonies of death, to sing in that triumphant language, O death,
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which gives us the
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 15. 55, -- 57.
But the greatest advantage of all is,

THAT our future and eternal crown of glory will hereby be the greater. There
will, no doubt, be degrees of glory in the coming world. The Scriptures plainly
teach this, by distinguishing between the reward of a prophet, and an ordinary
righteous man; Mat. 10. 41.
as also, by assuring us of both a sparing and bountiful future harvest,
according as we have at present, sowed either sparingly or bountifully. 2 Cor.
9. 6.
But the most full declaration of this doctrine is in the parable of the ten
Servants; Luke 19. 12. and onwards.
who received of their Lord, being about to go into a far country, one pound
each to trade with, till he should return: at which time calling them to an
account, he is represented as rewarding every man, that had made a good use of
the pound delivered to him; and the reward bears an exact proportion to the
several improvements made by the servants. He that had gained ten pounds, is
made ruler over ten cities; and he that had gained five pounds, is made ruler
over five cities: which obviously and unavoidably leads us to conceive, that
the future glory will be proportioned to men differently, according to the
different improvements, they have made in grace and goodness. Nor does this
inequality, in the least argue their happiness to be imperfect, who are
admitted to the lowest degrees of future glory. For "a Star is as perfect in
its order as the Sun, yet they shine in a different luster": agreeable whereto
is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 41, 42. There is one glory of the sun,
another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star
differs from another in glory: SO also is the resurrection of the dead. Where
he not only argues that the resurrection-bodies of the saints will differ from
each other in glory; but insinuates the perfection of these bodies in their
several glories; as the moon and stars are perfect in their degree and order,
though they shine with far less glory than the sun.

Now since we have reason to believe God will reward men in the coming world,
with different degrees of glory according to the different improvements, they
have made in holiness; who among men will shine with such distinguishing
luster, as early converts? As they have had the longest opportunity and best
advantages for it, we may well suppose them to be most confirmed in goodness;
to be most grown in grace; to have done most service in the world, and to have
bro't forth most of that fruit whereby our father in heaven is glorified. They
are therefore most meet for future glory; and will not only be admitted to it,
but to the highest degrees of that glory. And O how great will be their
blessedness! when they shall be made the most distinguished subjects of that
happiness, the lowest degree whereof is so surpassing, that eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, nor has it ever entered into the heart of man to conceive of it!

AND having thus laid before you some of those many considerations, which cannot
be denied to come with peculiar force upon young persons; obliging them in the
strongest manner, to be religious betimes: I think I may with propriety now
turn my discourse, into an earnest exhortation to the duty of early piety.

AND O that those of us who are in our youthful days, would be prevailed with,
to engage in the great affair of religion and our souls salvation! This is what
the blessed God most heartily desires, and would be peculiarly well pleased
with. He therefore often with the greatest particularity, bespeaks the service
of our young and tender years. Holy David puts the question in my text,
Wherewith shall a YOUNG MAN cleanse his way? intimating the great stress that
is laid upon the age of youth; and that now to cleanse our selves from sin, is
emphatically our duty. Hence young persons are by name solemnly called upon,
Eccl. 12. 1. Remember NOW thy creator, in the days of thy YOUTH. So in 1 Chronicles.
28. 9. And thou, Solomon my SON, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him
with a perfect heart and a willing mind. And because young people are generally
inclined to rejoice in their youth, and to let their hearts cheer them in the
days of their youth, and to walk in the way of their own hearts, and in the
sight of their own eyes; great care is taken to check and restrain this
irregular inclination: Particularly in Eccl. 11. 9. BUT KNOW THOU, THAT FOR ALL
THESE THINGS GOD WILL BRING THEE INTO JUDGMENT. And why should God thus single
out and particularly advise, caution and direct young persons? but that it is
their distinguishing duty, and eminently his expectation from them, to yield up
themselves to him; cleansing their way from sin, and employing their powers in
his service.

OUR obligations hereto are very solemn and particular: and I would fain hope,
we are so far convinced of the reasonableness and necessity of complying with
them, as that we are resolved upon loving and serving our most merciful God and
father.

BUT it may be we flatter our selves with the though it, of having a more
convenient season for the work of religion, in the after-part of life: and so
are for putting it off till then. This I believe is the vain imagination of
most young persons; and an effectual bar in the way of their becoming seriously
godly. To which I would say, What if death should be betwixt us, and our
hereafter-opportunity for the business of our souls salvation? This is no
improbable supposition. Multitudes of the same age and character with our
selves, die within the reach of our observation: And who can say, it will not be
our own lot to die young? And if this should be our case, "how strange and
unreasonable will our conduct appear to be? Reasonable creatures sent into the
world to seek and serve God, and made capable of it, and that had time for it;
but went out of the world, and spent all their time in an utter disregard and
neglect of God, and forgetfulness, of the principal end and business of life!"
Besides, we shall certainly be as unfit and indisposed for religion afterward
as at present; and look upon any after-season when we come to it, as
inconvenient as that we now enjoy, and be under the same temptations to adjourn
this business. For let us pitch on what part of life we please, it will be
encumbered with difficulties of one sort or another; and innumerable pretenses
for delay will offer themselves, and be apt without the greatest resolution, to
prevail with us. We shall be ready to say with our selves, "to morrow will we
amend our ways; and when that to morrow comes, we shall still say to morrow:
and so our tomorrow will prove endless." In short, the greatest objection we
have against the present season is, that it is present: and whenever our
imaginary hereafter-season comes to be present, we shall have the same
objection against that, and find it as hard to leave our sins, and return to
God and our duty.

OR if any should be discouraged from early piety, apprehending it to be a
matter of such difficulty, as that it cannot be accomplished without the
greatest labor and pains: I would say upon it, if it should be allowed to be a
difficult thing to be truly religious, this ought not to be improved as an
objection against our endeavoring to be so. For it is an affair of absolute
necessity; what must be engaged in, as ever we would hope for admission into
the eternal Kingdom of God. And therefore the proper use to be made of the
difficulties of religion, is not to discourage our selves from setting about
it; but to put on so much the more resolution, to labor in it with the utmost
speed and all possible diligence. And in so doing, we may upon good grounds
expect, aids of divine grace proportionable to the need we stand in of them,
and the difficulties and temptations we may meet with.

BUT, what is peculiarly matter of encouragement in this case is, that
notwithstanding all the difficulties of a religious course, many young persons
have been enabled to go through them, and to become illustrious patterns of an
early close walk with God. The Scripture instances of this sort we are all
acquainted with. Nor have there been wanting, even from among our selves,
remarkable examples of the same kind. And this leads me to make mention of a
young woman of this Congregation, ELISABETH PRICE, who was the last week
followed to her grave; of whom it may with good reason be said, she was an
uncommon instance of that early piety, of which we have been speaking. And as
this is a case, wherein I flatter my self I shall not be suspected of sinister
views, I have been the rather inclined to take public notice of it to the
honor of free grace, and to recommend religion to our choice and practice in
our youthful days.

FROM a child she was deeply impressed with an awe and reverence of God; which
remarkably manifested it self, upon the first deliberate exercises of her
reason and understanding, in a careful endeavor to abstain from those things,
she apprehended to be evil: being to a scruple fearful least in any thing she
should offend God. Particularly, she discovered a great abhorrence of the sin
of lying; and guarded against that vain, tho'tless temper and conduct, which
are so incident to childhood and youth: and often expressed her displeasure
thereat, to those of her acquaintance, in whom she perceived these faults to
reign.

SHE was observed to be constant, even from her most early days, in retirements
evening and morning, to pour out her soul before God: except only when she now
and then intermitted this duty; which she never did from a negligent careless
frame of spirit, as is too commonly the case: but whenever she was blameable in
this kind, it proceeded from perplexing fears and temptations, uncommon to one
of her age; for which omissions she was heartily sorry, and would bitterly
complain of her self.

HER carriage toward her parents was full of love, tenderness, honor and
reverence. She cheerfully obeyed their commands; attended their instructions;
hearkened to their advice, and followed their counsels. And as she did not allow
of the least unseemly disobedient behavior toward them in her self; so
neither could she bear to see it in her brethren and sisters. And whenever she
observed any discoveries of disrespect, irreverence or undutifulness, either in
their words, looks or actions; it would sensibly affect and grieve her:
especially when they were grossly guilty. And she would not now fail of taking
an opportunity, to represent to them the sin of undutifulness to parents; how
offensive it was to God and provoking in his sight.

SHE was favored with a peculiarly soft and tender conscience, which made her
watchful against sin, careful to avoid even the appearances of it, and to
maintain a close walk with God. And this, when many times she was under great
spiritual fears and darkness. So far as I could observe, she was of a tho'tful
pensive temper; and by her constitution subject sometimes to the power of
melancholy: to which I attribute her not enjoying, at least for a constancy,
the comforts of religion, in so great a measure as might be expected: Though I
doubt not the hand of Satan, was evidently to be seen in many of the
temptations, discouragements and perplexing fears, she passed through; which were
greater and of a more extraordinary nature, than is usual for persons of so few
years.

I don't remember she was able to six upon the particular time, in which she
though it she might pass under a work of sanctifying grace. Nor is it at all to be
wondered at: When it was never observed, that the principles of corruption were
habitually predominant in her, in any part of her life. From the first
appearances of reason, and all along till the time of her death, her general
temper and behavior were such as gave grounds to hope, that from a child she
was savingly converted to God. A most distinguishing privilege! -- Thrice
happy they that are the subjects of it! -- The grace herein discovered, can
never be enough magnified and admired!

SHE was a great reader of her bible; not suffering it to lie by a neglected
book: but as her delight was in the law of God, so did she make it the man of
her counsel; repairing to it upon all emergent occasions, besides her more
stated times for studying of it.

SHE was a strict observer of the Sabbath; behaving her self as one that had an
awakened sense of the solemnity of the day: constantly went up to the place of
public Worship; where she appeared with a visible awe and reverence, and
attended with such care and diligence, as that she was able to bring home, and
from her memory repeat, more of the preached word, than is common for persons
grown to years; who yet are persons of good understanding. And though through a
mistaken apprehension of the Lord's Supper, as if it was an Ordinance designed
only for Christians of more than ordinary seize in holiness, and
satisfaction about their good estate; she dare not venture to approach to it:
yet she would not willingly neglect being present at the administration of it;
at which times she was often most sensibly affected, and her Soul refreshed and
comforted.

IN her sickness, by which she was for a considerable time detained from the
house of God, 'twas admirable to behold her breathings after God in his
Sanctuary. With holy David, her soul thirsted for God, the living God: and that
was her complaint, O when shall I come and appear before God!

HER bodily pains were great and of long continuance; which gave opportunity
for the illustration of divine grace, in that uncommon degree of patience,
meekness, contentedness and subjection to the father of spirits, she was an
eminent pattern of: never complaining; never murmuring; but always
acknowledging her own deserts, and justifying God in all that he laid upon her.

IT IS to be hoped her brethren and sister will never forget her calling them to
her bedside; when with a holy freedom of soul she gave her dying testimony in
behalf of religion, and took her farewell of them: with great earnestness
beseeching and exhorting them, to seek and serve God in their youthful days; to
improve the present season of grace, and time of their youth to the purposes of
a holy life. And O! with what fervor of Soul did she repeat the words, O THAT
WE MAY DIE IN PEACE! AND MEET TOGETHER IN GLORY AT THE DAY OF CHRIST! Nor did
her concern for religion end here; but she advised, cautioned and exhorted all
that came to see her, as she had opportunity, and apprehended it might be
proper and decent.

BUT what is still more wonderful, though but in her 17th year, she was enabled
in the midst of tormenting pains, and the near views of approaching death, to
correct the excessive sorrow of her distressed parents: minding them of the
sovereignty of God; and from the consideration that all things are ordered by
him, recommending to them the duty of submission. And in various ways, she more
than once endeavored to calm their grief, compose their spirits and bring them
to a willingness to resign her up to the God who had given her to them.

SHE was in the beginning of her sickness, and for some time, under darkness
and fear; and expressed a desire, if it might be God's will, of living still
longer in the world. But for many days before her death, she had a comfortable
sense of her Interest in CHRIST; a good hope through his merits of future glory
and immortality; and was freely willing to depart hence to be here no more. And
this she declared upon several occasions. Once, upon her Mother's discovering
her grief under the view of parting with her, and asking her whether she was
willing to die and leave her; Her answer was, Yes, yes: and added, though you
have been a loving tender mother to me, I can at God's call readily forsake all
to go to CHRIST. At another time, recovering from a fainting-fit, and
over-hearing some body say they though it she was gone; she presently cried out, O
that I had gone then! It would have been happy with me now. Some time after
being asked, whether her faith and hope held out; she replied, Yes, yes:
doubling the word. And a little before her death, being desired to suffer her
mouth to be moistened, which was almost scorched up with a canker; she said no;
for I am going where I shall no more want drink. And not long after, in a holy
calm and blessed serenity of soul, she fell asleep in Jesus.

HAPPY the parents of such a child! -- You have infinite reason to magnify and
adore this distinguishing rich grace of God: -- Nor should you think hardly of
God for taking from you, one so dearly beloved; when he first did so much for
her, in making her meet for heavenly happiness: In the enjoyment whereof, we
trust she is now solacing her self. Comfort your selves herewith. -- And O! be
excited to the greatest diligence in working out your own salvation; that you
may hereafter come to be where she is to behold her face in glory, and never be
again parted from each other.

IN FINE, my hearts desire and prayer to God now is; that there may be, in this
Church, many such instances of an early conversion to God! We trust there are
some such: Alas! that they are so rare! -- The good Lord increase their number!
-- O our young people! We are the hope of this Church of our Lord Jesus. It Is
increase; it is glory; it is very continuance in being is in a measure dependant
on us. If we should rise up in our father's stead, a generation that know not
God; what is like to become of the gospel worship and ordinances in this place?
-- I would willingly believe, the breasts of many of us are warmed with a
generous concern for the honor of God and perpetuating religion, when our
father are dead and gone. Let us then give our hearts to God; -- seek FIRST his
kingdom and righteousness; -- repent of our sins; -- believe in Christ; -- and
yield up our selves absolutely and entirely to him, in an everlasting covenant.
And O! let us this day choose our fathers God for our God, and know and serve
him with a perfect heart and a willing mind: So shall we rejoice the heart of
God's people; yea, we shall cause joy all over heaven: making glad not only the
holy Angels, but God himself and the Lord Jesus Christ. But thus much for the
question in my text.

II. THE other thing observable is, the answer to this question; By taking heed
thereto according to thy word. And here are two things, which the time will
allow me to give you only a few broken hints upon.

I. IF we would become truly religious, we must take heed to our way. i. e. We
must not live at random; without care or caution: but must advise with our
reason and conscience; make a pause before we act, and not enter upon any
course heedlesly; without though it or consideration.

THIS is a fault too common, especially among young persons: who are therefore
particularly here directed to guard against it. And this, not only because it is
in it self a gross inconsistency; for what sounds more incongruous? a rational
and intelligent, yet tho'tless and inconsiderate creature. -- But because it is
a means necessary to our being preserved from the pollutions of sin. It Is very
much owing to that giddy tho'tlessness which is so exceeding apt to prevail
among young people, that they are so often led astray in the path of
wickedness, that terminates in destruction And unless we take care to rectify
this temper, and recover a seriously tho'tful, cautious and considerate
disposition, there will be great hazard of our never becoming truly religious.
-- Consideration is the first step mentioned in David's return to God and his
duty. -- And if with him we would turn our feet unto God's testimonies, we must
as he did, first think of our ways.

LET us realise the necessity of becoming seriously considerate. -- Let us not
allow our selves to live without though it; as though we were not endowed with the
noble powers of reason and understanding: -- But let us use our selves to
deliberate before we act. -- And let us review our past actions: and often
bring them under strict examination* So will there be a hopeful prospect of our
being kept within the line of duty; or otherwise, we shall soon see our
mistake, be likely to repent of it, and alter our course, before we get into a
habit of doing evil.

II. WE must take heed to our way, according to God's word. -- And this also is
a proper and wise direction in order to our becoming truly religious. For,

1. THE word of God is the best and most suitable rule, by which to govern our
selves in the business of religion. One great reason that young persons
especially, are so often found walking in a wrong way is, their not having
settled in their minds a rule, by which to govern their conduct; and not using
themselves to bring their actions to some standard, to judge of them whether
they are good or bad. -- It Is therefore a good direction, the proposing to us a
rule of life, and to govern our selves by this rule. And the direction is still
more wise and suitable, as the rule it recommends is the word of God; which is
the best that can be. We have the excelling properties of this rule elegantly
described, in Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9. The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; the statutes
of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the commandment of the Lord is
pure, enlightening the eyes: the fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever;
the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether. Nor was the world
ever favored with so clear and perfect a rule of life, as that we have in the
word of God. -- We are here taught the whole of our duty both toward God, our
selves and one another; and this, as it ought to be practiced in every
relation, and under all the varying conditions and circumstances of life:
insomuch that if we follow this direction; making the word of God the rule of
our actions, doing whatever that prescribes, and nothing that it disapproves
of; we shall not fail of keeping our selves free from sin, and exercising our
selves in all religious services to the honor of God, and our own establishment
in grace and goodness. -- To take heed to God's word as a rule of life, is
therefore good advice; -- a better direction could scarce have been given us.
--

2. THE word of God offers the most powerful arguments to prevail with us to
engage in a religious course. For they are in short, nothing less than the
rewards and punishments of the eternal world. These sanctions of the law of
God, were not I am sensible, at the time when David gave the advice in my text,
so fully and clearly expressed as they have been since: Yet had good men in
those days sufficient reason, from divine revelation, to expect a future state
of eternal blessedness; and the impenitently wicked, to dwell with devouring
fire, and to inhabit everlasting burnings. But however it was then, the coming
of Jesus Christ has brought life and immortality to light; and immortality both
of happiness and misery. "It has scattered all those clouds that hid the other
world from our sight; and removed all doubt concerning the future existence
both of good and bad men. The kingdom of heaven is now laid open to our view
with all the glories of it: Hell also is represented naked, and destruction
without a covering." And what powerful arguments are these? And what are all
other motives in compare with them? -- They are certainly, in the wisest manner
adapted to work upon our hope and fear; the two strongest and most leading
passions of humane nature: And their operation is so powerful, that if the fear
of eternal misery will not affrighten us from sin; nor the hope of eternal
happiness encourage us to enter upon a life of serious godliness, we are sunk
into the depth of stupidity. -- More powerful arguments cannot be used with us;
and if we will not be wro't upon by these, our case is truly lamentable.

Now this also obviously justifies the wisdom of the direction in my text. For
we stand in absolute need of very strong and forcible arguments to prevail with
us, to engage in the business of religion: and these which the word of God
offers, are the most so of any that can be used with us.

3. IN the last place, the word of God is a most powerful means to purify the
heart, and beget and increase in the soul, the principles of holiness. It has a
strong natural tendency to these ends; as it contains that in it, which is most
suited to enlighten the mind; inform the understanding; convince the judgment;
persuade the will; move the affections, and stir up the executive powers. --
But its chief efficacy to promote more real piety, lies in its being an
instituted means of God's dispensing those divine assistances, that are
necessary to our being truly religious. Upon this account especially, the
Gospel is called the power of God to salvation; Romans 1. 16.
And our Savior makes that prayer, John 17. 17.
Sanctify them through thy truth: thy WORD is truth: And we are said to be
sanctified and cleans'd with the washing of water, by the WORD. Ephesians. 5. 26.
All which texts do abundantly point out the word to be one special means, that
is ordinarily made use of in the work of recovering sinners to God and duty. I
deny not but the holy Spirit may convert persons without means: but instances
of this kind are very uncommon, if there be any such at all. And as the Spirit
generally makes use of means; so the word, both red and preached, is a special
means to this end. And perhaps there are few persons, who have passed under a
work of regenerating grace, but from their own experience are able to say, the
word has been instrumental herein; and can tell what parts of it in particular,
were impressed upon their minds by the good Spirit of God.

AND now, when they holy psalmist was about directing young men in the way to
religion and happiness; what more suitable and effectual method could he advise
to, than this of paying a due regard to God's word? since this is naturally
adapted to promote this design; and is the very method in which it pleases God
ordinarily to bestow renewing, saving grace. What more likely way can be taken,
to become sincerely pious, than by attending to that word, which God has
instituted as a means, which he has given us the greatest encouragement to
hope, he will bless to this end? -- None sure, may be though it to be under a more
hopeful prospect of a real through conversion, than those who put themselves in
the prescribed way of meeting with divine grace, by heedfully regarding God's
word.

AND now from what has been said,

1. How great is our indebtedness to God for his Word! Having always been
favored with it, we scarce know our advantage herein, or how justly to prize
it. -- It Is truly a rich gift, that to us are committed the oracles of God. --
O let us value this privilege! -- We can never too much esteem it, or be too
thankful for it. --

2. SUCH deserve a severe reproof, who treat the word with neglect; seldom or
never looking into it, and making little or no more use of it than if they had
no concern with it. -- This is the character of multitudes, as is too evident
from the gross ignorance of some in the great points of christianity; and the
wretched carelessness of others, about eternal concerns. -- O be admonished of
your sin and folly! You are greatly guilty before God; cast horrid contempt on
his grace; -- and not only so, but hurt your own souls, and lose one of the
best advantages in order to your being happy for ever. --

3. WE should be much in reading the word; having our stated times herefor, and
not allowing our selves ordinarily to pass a day, without repairing to it. --
And while we are studying the word, we should guard against a light, vain and
trifling frame of spirit, as no ways becoming the importance of the duty; but
should endeavor to compose our selves to seriousness, getting our minds into a
tho'tful considerate temper. -- This doubtless is a likely method of reading
the word to saving advantage. --

4. WE should especially attend on the preached word; making it our care to be
always at the place of public worship, at the stated times herefor on Lord's
days; and on other days also, as our occasions will permit. -- Nor should we
content our selves merely with an attendance on the word: but should take heed
how we hear; and attend with reverence, and an awakened sense of the awful
weight of future and eternal concerns: with desires of and aims at being
spiritually profited; that we may be quickened in duty and strengthened to the
performance of it; that we may get possessed of sanctifying grace, and have it
increased in our souls; and in a word, that the life of God may be begun,
maintained and carried on in us as much as may be to perfection. --

5. IN FINE, let us make use of the word to the purposes of religion, for which
it is here prescribed. I will suppose we are, at least some of us, convinced of
the reasonableness and necessity of an early course of piety, and are
accordingly resolved to enter upon such a course: And for our direction, let us
as the psalmist has advised, take heed to our way according to God's word. --
We have here the great rule of all religion: Let us compare our pretenses to
virtue and goodness herewith, and not satisfy our selves with any thing short,
of that which the Gospel allows to be pure and undefiled religion. -- We have
here the most powerful motives, and are laid under the strongest obligations to
a pious holy life: Let us herefrom learn our duty, and fetch our
encouragements; quickening our selves in the way of godliness, from those
considerations which are here proposed to us. -- We have here one special means
the holy Spirit makes use of, in converting sinners to God: Let us attend to it
as such, humbly waiting and hoping for the manifestations of that power to our
salvation, whereby Jesus Christ was raised from the dead. -- In a word, as the
Scriptures are profitable to all saving purposes, and every way sufficient to
make the man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto all good works; let
us use them accordingly. Let all our views, all our hopes, all our
encouragements and dependances in and from religion, be regulated by the word.
-- And let us from the beginning of our lives, and through the whole course of
them, under all the changes of time and various distributions of providence,
govern our hearts, and order our walk according to the Gospel directions; and
we shall not fail, through the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, of being built
up in faith and holiness, till we become possessed of an inheritance among them
that are sanctified.

THE good Lord now touch our hearts with a sense of these things! and cause
that that grace of his which has appeared to all men, bringing salvation; may
effectually teach us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: So may we with
comfort look for the blessed hope, and glorious appearing of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ; to whom, with the Father and the holy Spirit, be
eternal praises. AMEN.

FINIS.

