Mr. Mitchel's LETTER To his Brother.

A LETTER, etc.
Dear and entirely beloved Friend,
IT is an afflicting Providence from God, and just Cause of Shame to me (for I
cannot clear my self from a great deal of just Blame) that I have not done, nor
can now do any Thing for you in Regard of those Writings you desired of me: I
have, and am continually pressed with Variety of urgent Occasions, and much
Time ( in the Way I am in) is daily taken up from my personal Studies, besides
many incident Avocations. And alas! I can do little, and make but slow Progress
in the long Race of Learning I have to run! And it is my miserable Guise,
either by Wickedness or Weakness, to fall short of that Good I should either
get or do; and if it be so in this Case toward you, it is no Wonder, though it
should be my deep Sorrow! But yet considering some Passages in your last and
former Letters concerning your spiritual Condition, and knowing by Experience
in my self, the Reality of such Complaints; I would not be so graceless as to
neglect you wholly therein. And though I can say or do very little, yet a Word or
two might be of some Use; nor do I know what Guilt might lie upon me, if I
should be silent or slight in this Case! And therefore ( Dear --) if my barren
Heart would suffer me, I would present you with a few Words, as if you and I
were alone in a Corner, in the Presence of God!

The Condition you express, is the common ( but fearful) Epidemical Calamity of
those Times and Places where the Gospel is preached, and among such as
outwardly carry fair: Convinced, but not humbled; some Apprehensions of Misery
and Affections now and then, but not deep effectual Mournings; something
burdened with Sin and Misery, and Wrath of God; but yet able to bear it, and
contented to live, without being delivered from it: Knowing every Thing and
feeling nothing; or rather knowing every Thing, and yet indeed knowing nothing;
in seeing not, etc. For my own Part, it is that which has been the baneful
Misery of my Soul ( even that very Thing which you say and mean) ever since I
knew any Thing; and the Lord knows how little I am delivered from it, and how
much of my Work in this Point ( upon which the very Hinges of our Salvation
turn) is yet to do to this Day! Oh (my --) if my Heart were not Adamant, I
should weep with and for you: And truly when I am most near God, I have no
greater Request than this for my self and you, that God would use any Means to
make us see Things really as they are, and pound our Hearts all to Pieces, and
make indeed Sin most bitter, and Christ most sweet, that we might be both
humbled, and comforted to Purpose! An imperfect Work of the Law, and then an
imperfect Work of the Gospel is the Bane and Ruin of us in these Days! Some
Fears and Affections, and then some Hopes of Mercy (without finding full Rest
and Satisfaction in Christ only) Men rest in, and here perish! But hence is the
Ground of that you speak of* An Heart that does not, cannot feel Sin, ( and
consequently, no other Thing that God's Word speaks of) and the Wrath of God
for it, to purpose; cannot be sensible of Sin or Misery in an effectual Manner!
Now a Word or two of Counsel to you in this Case!

First. Consider the End and Things you are to strive after. Secondly, The Way
and Manner how: Your Business is never to rest till you come to feel Sin as an
insupportable Burden, and then to find Rest and everlasting Satisfaction in
Christ, embracing him as your own! To go on humbling to be humbled, and to see
such intolerable Evil in Sin; and to be so burdened with the Wrath of God lying
upon you for it, as it may make Sin everlastingly odious to you, and force you
to fly for Refuge to lay hold of the Hope set before you; and to have strong
Consolation there! This is a great Thing, not easily and quickly gotten: But
sit not down at Quiet, till you come to this! This is the Way to make all sure.
But you will say I know not whether I ever had any true Humiliation; whether
there is any Thing in me that will stand by me, when an Hour of Temptation
comes! Therefore now resolve, I will padle and dally with God and my own Soul
no longer, I will never give God rest till he show me Things really, and till I
have attained that Sense of Sin, and Faith in Christ Jesus, which is real and
effectual! This is the Work of our Lives, Joh. 6.29. Let me never rest till it
be put out of all Doubt, that God in Christ is mine own, and has made an
everlasting Covenant with me! This I will have, or I will be in Bitterness
before the Lord while I have any Being; and for the Residue of my Days, I will
dwell with them that lie down in Sorrow, I will have my Society with such
forsaken Souls; who being desolate and deserted, are free among the Dead: If
the blessed God shall excommunicate this wretched Soul from his gracious
Presence, (which yet is but an Act of his most holy and just Severity.) O! let
me find this Favor in his Sight, that I may also excommunicate my self from
the Pleasures and Enjoyments of this present World! And resolve this, If God
will not me see the Good of his Chosen, ( and I have nothing to say why he
should.) I will mourn, I will mourn; let me live and dye in the House of
Mourning! If God will not Comfort me, nothing else shall; if I may not have
Peace and Rest in God. I Will have none at all; if God will take no Pleasure in
me; I Will take no Pleasure in myself: Let my Tears be my Meat continually; let
me go mourning up and down the World while I (...) a Day to live: If God cast
me off, let this be my Condition! Nay, ( come to this Pass) I (...) not live,
unless God be reconciled to me: My Spirit fails, if the Lord redeem not
presently. There is no Being, no Biding for me, unless he speak a Word of Peace
to me. ( Psalm. 69.2, 3, 17, 18. and 143.4, 7.) And in a Time of Need God will
help; when you are lost, God will find you, when you are sick to Death, he will
heal you, Isa. 57.16, 28, 29. His Bowels will yearn toward you! Never fear
want of Consolation, if your Humiliation be not ineffectual! And here let me
warn you of a Thing or two!

Take heed lest some lesser Sorrows and Affections heal and ease you, and so
you be kept from great and effectual Sorrows and from Comfort by Christ only!
Many a one sees himself in a miserable Condition; hereupon he goes alone, he
prays ( and weeps too it may be) very affectionately for Mercy: Upon this he
grows well and whole again! His good Affections please him, and heal him; though
he be indeed still as far from Christ and grounded Comfort as ever! Take Heed
of this: As also secondly, Of resting in some Hopes of Mercy, or in some Tastes
of Mercy! Many Things give a Man a good Hope that God may save him, and the
Words of Comfort are sometimes sweet and refreshing to his Heart; this quiets
him: He has enough now, he runs away with this, when as Christ himself is not
yet his; nor is he satisfied with him only! Many perish here; not but that
these Affections and Hopes are very good, and they may be true, (and be sure to
be exceeding thankful for any such Thing; that you have any Desire to seek God,
any Tears at any Time before him, and Hope toward him; it is more than Thousands
have) and very good Encouragement to seek after Christ more; but not to be
rested in without Christ. It Is a Sign a Man's Heart is false when a little of
any thing will serve him! Use those Sorrows, Heart-breakings and Hopes, as
blessed Encouragements and Engagements to follow on still, and get nearer to
Christ, and to gain in upon him; but rest not till you be sure you have Christ;
and fully rest in him, and your Heart live upon him only, alone, wholly and
always! Now for the Way you are to take in the Case, owned and expressed by
yourself, I would add a little as the Lord shall help.

Do not say there is no Hope, and so give over striving! Give not Way to a
sullen Desperateness and Deadness of Heart; to a dulled, sunk, discouraged
Spirit, as if it were in vain to stir, and will never be better with you! Do
not say, Thus it has been, and thus it is, and you cannot help it, and there
leave it! No, no, Arise and be doing, and God will be with you; is an old Rule!
Whatever your Case be, never be discouraged: Be humble and afflicted under Sin
and Misery, ( the more the better) but never be discouraged! Resolve, I will
yet follow God for all this, come on me what will! See 1 Samuel 12.20. Know that
God is God, and not Man, he can help, nay he will! He is willing to help you,
if you be not unwilling to have it: See Isa. 55.8. Jer. 33.3. Hos. 13.9. Joh.
4.10. and 6.36. He has after Mercies for them that have abused former Mercies,
Ezekiel. 39.26. Jer. 3.1, 22. If it were but a may be, Amos 5.15. Zeph. 2.3. A who
can tell? Jon. 3.9. Joel 2.14. A Lord, if thou will, Mat. 8.2. It Is enough to
make us follow after God to the last Gasp! Secondly, Look up to the infinite
God to help you for his Name sake, and for the Lord Jesus sake. You know you
are miserable, and have unspeakable Need of his Help; though you do not feel it,
and be not affected with it. Upon this Ground (and this is Ground enough) go to
God and tell him, that the less Sense you have, the greater is your Misery, and
the more Need you have of his Help: None but God can pull you out of this Pit,
can inlighten this Darkness, and break this Adamant; to him therefore you come
according to his own Counsel, Rev. 3.18. Tell him, He knows you and sees you,
though you do not know or see him, no, nor your self neither: He can take hold of
you, though you cannot take hold of him, Joh. 15.16. Bring such an Heart as you
have (longing that it were better) to him, that he would mend it: Bewail this
impenitent Heart, cry out of this secure sottish Heart, as the greatest Evil
that could befall you; beseech him to use any Means to break it and change it:
Fill your Mouth with Arguments before him; tell him of his free, ( Oh hang
there upon free Mercy) his tender, his preventing, his manifold rich Mercy: Say
you are resolved never to leave him till he give you this Grace effectually,
and all the Grace you want, everlasting Mercy: Cry to him out of the thick
Darkness, and out of the low Dungeon, Lam. 3.55. When you have no Mind to pray,
when Devil and World, when Heart and the Gates of Hell are against you: Yet
then, even then, pray in Spite of all your spiritual Adversaries: Offer
Violence to the Kingdom of Heaven, stir up your self to take hold on God; lay
hold on Eternal Life, when nothing but Darkness and Death is about you; when
God stops his Ear against you, and shuts up his Heart too; yet then fall down
before him, put your Mouth in the Dust; judge and loath your self, hate your
Sin, that brought you to this Pass: Look again toward him, (as Jon. 2.4, 7.)
close with him at and upon the Sword's Point, ( though he kill me, yet will I
trust in him.) Bless his Name and say as Lam. 3.21. Chatter before him; leave
your self to his Mercy, to his absolute, sovereign, mere Mercy, renouncing all
other Props and Comforts: See Isa. 50.10. Tell him as Dan. 9.9. resolve to
follow him, though blindfold, and see Romans 11.32, 33. Gal. 3.22. When you are
shut up under Sin and Unbelief, then look to him who is able to save to the
utmost them that come to God by him: You know not how to look to him, nor what
it is to believe, nor how to go about such a Thing; therefore tell God that you
come to him for Faith, as well as other Things. You want every Thing, and you
come for every Thing: ( the poorest Creature that lives) and know that the
blessed God would have you come to him in Christ for every Thing: Christ has
all Power in his Hands to help you, Joh. 17.2. and see Joh. 6.37. Thirdly,
continue in seeking God till you find him: Follow on to know the Lord; and then
be your Case what it will, you shall know him, Hos. 6.2. Col. 4.2. Luke 18.1.
Many are very serious and earnest for a Fit; but they give over before the Lord
come, and will rather patch up their Comfort and Salvation of any Fashion, than
take the Pains to hold out in seeking God with all their Might: Multitudes
perish here. Oh! look to this; for do not think ( especially in the Case you
are in) to get Grace and Christ ( in the Sense before spoken of) presently! No,
no, God may make you seek and wait many a Day; but you shall reap in due Time
if you faint not, Gal. 6.9. Diligently therefore and constantly attend and
improve all the Ordinances and Opportunites that God gives: In special, let me
speak a Word or two for your better Help in them, (being more private and
personal) viz.

First, Meditation (a most necessary and effectual Thing which few Practice:)
Get a little Time to meditate daily, laying aside other Things, and in other
Occasions too, think as much of spiritual Things as you can: We do not see nor
feel because we do not think of Things; think of God and of Christ, of Sin, of
Heaven, of Hell, of Judgment, of Eternity, how few shall be saved, how
necessary it is to take the present Time: What we come into the World for; of
quickening Passages in Scripture, of God's Dealings with you, of your former
Life and present Condition, etc. But you will say, my Heart is so vain and
stupid, I cannot think of Things. I answer, First, Let this deeply humble you;
and the Vileness of your Heart that here discovers it self will be worth the
while. Secondly, beseech God to help you. Thirdly, By use of Time you will find
it more easy. Fourthly, Take Advantage upon all the evil Frames that at present
you feel, to apply and set on some soaking Expression in Scripture: As in Case
of Hardness, Blindness, Vanity, see Romans 9.18. 2 Cor. 4.4. Prove. 10.20. Yea,
hence see and say, that God is true, and his Word is true; for the Scripture
tells me of this Heart I feel; and the rest of it will be verified upon me as
well as this. Fifthly, Take the Advantage of special Seasons for Meditation,
when your Heart is in a feeling Frame ( as after Prayer, after Sermon, if you
cannot before) and lay up what you get: One Truth felt in Meditation, is worth
a World, and it will make Way for more. Sixthly, Do something that is
equivalent and helping to it, at least when you cannot so directly meditate: as
reading of a good Book, writing of your former and present Life: ( that is a
Thing of endless Use) gathering up God's Mercies, and your Sins, in writing
sometimes, etc.

Secondly, Prayer, this is the blessed Means of getting a poor Soul to Heaven:
And what an Happiness is it, that we may pray to God! Besides Family Prayer,
get some Time for secret Prayer, daily less or more: Be telling God your Heart
alone; I know your Occasions and Labors ( the Lord break my Heart for you)
would not afford you that Liberty that I ( Wretch) have: But do what you can;
love the Duty, and God will pity you, wherein you are justly and by his
Providence ( not your own Negligence) hindered. And this is certain, he that
has an Heart, shall never want Time nor Place to pray! Endeavor to order your
Matter so, as you may have Time for it: And if you could weekly have a Piece of
an Afternoon ( as Saturday in the Afternoon an Hour or two or as God guides)
set a part for secret and close converse with God by Meditation and Prayer,
thinking, writing, reading, examining, mourning before God; and do this
constantly, you will never repent it: The Business of Salvation is mainly
carrried on in secret between God and a Man's own Soul: And by all Means
provide, that you may have your Sabbaths as free as possible all the Day, and
the Evening before and after, for spiritual Work: Ply God in such Seasons as
these be, and be very thankful if you ^et but any little Ground of your
Corruptions and Miseries: Go about your lawful Occasions, not as a Liberty to
the Flesh, (as to think that now my Task of praying is over, now I may please
my self and refresh my Heart in the World, etc.) but as the Service of God, and
as unto him, because he bids you be thus employed; as when he bids me pray, I
will pray with all my Might; so I will work too, when he bids me work; and not
do it to please myself ( alas, if I consider it, what Pleasure or Comfort is
there in this evil World) but to please him I will busy and employ my self in
this World, ( because he bids me) but my Place and my Rest shall be only in
God, or no where: As Seamen go to Sea, but build their Houses on Land; so I Will
go into the World, but lay up my Heart and Comfort and my whole Support in God!
I will live in the World, but not upon it; I will live only upon God, and have
my Portion in him. And do not think that this Sorrow and Sense of Sin, and
mourning after God, stands in a monkish drooping Sullenness and Sadness, ( though
it is certain that by the Sadness of the Countenance the Heart is made better;
and one should not give himself to unnecessary Mirth, which is very poysonful;
nor purposely choke his spiritual Sorrows with temporal Delights:) But when you
have seriously spent your Time with God, and have left your Heart with him, and
he calls you to your Occasions; go about them with Alacrity and Cheerfulness,
so as you may dispatch them comfortably; and carry amiably and delightfully to
those about you. And let your Sorrows and Sense of your Soul's Miseries lie
deep and undermost, so as you may recall them in their Season; when you come to
pray, or be alone with God again! Labor to have a constant habitual feeling of
your self, ( and get as many good Thoughts and Affections as you can, at all
Times) so as it may be livelily, actual, especially in your Seasons of
attending upon God; and in them drive on the Business of your Soul, as if there
were nothing else to be minded but that. And if you find your Heart gone when
the Season of seeking God comes, then know that you have in some Measure
backslidden and forsaken God; and never leave till you have recovered it.
Recall and review often the chief Sins of your Life that you can remember;
confess and aggravate them before God in a special Manner, (but have your Times
of confessing and bewailing all the Sins that ever you can remember) and think
of what Sins or Course it was that caused God to leave you to this woeful
Impenitency of Heart, and bewail them bitterly. One thing more I must add; Do
not think it much to have some special Seasons of seeking God, besides those I
have named. If you had a Friend with whom you might now and then spend a little
Time, in conferring together, in opening your Hearts, and presenting your
unutterable Groanings before God, it would be of excellent Use: Such an one
would greatly strengthen, bestead, and further you in your Way to Heaven. Spend
now and then ( as Occasions permit) an Hour ( or so) with such a Friend more
than ordinary (sometimes a Piece of a Day, sometimes a whole Day of
extraordinary Fast, in striving and wrestling with God for everlasting Mercy.)
And be much in quickening Conference, giving and taking mutual Encouragements
and Directions in the Matters of Heaven! Oh! the Life of God that falls into
the Hearts of the Godly, in and by gracious heavenly Conference. Be open
hearted one to another, and stand one for another against the Devil and all his
Angels. Make it thus your Business in these and such like Ways, to provide for
Eternity while it is called to Day; looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher
of your Faith. But you will say ( it may be) and I speak but what I have found
in my own Heart: ( Dear -- I deal plainly with you, as I know you would have me
do, and therefore let me suppose it should be said) This is a tedious and hard
Task, and my Heart likes not to be so yoaked and toiled in such Things? I can
take no Pleasure therein; and if I force my self to it for a while, yet it
would soon weary me: I have no Heart to these Things; it may be something might
be done in this Way, or another might do something; but I have no Heart to it.

Ans. 1. Wonder not at this, nor think the worse of that Course, because your
Heart lusts against it; but think the better of it. For, the better any Thing
is, and the more instrumental for our Salvation, the more it is opposed by our
vile Hearts, which are Enemies to God, and consequently to our own chief Good.

2. Confess to God this Naughtiness of your Heart: Beseech him to help you
against* this Devil, to change your Nature, and let this occasion you to see,
and loath the Wickedness of your Nature, and be enraged against it. The Spirit
that dwells in us lusts unto Envy, but he gives more Grace; Jam. 4.5, 6.

3. Consider what is the Reason why this Way seems so irksome and tedious, and
you have no Heart to it? Is it not because of inward Blindness and Security?
because you see not Things as they be, nor the Weight and Worth of them? It is
an irksome Thing to a Man to rise out of his Bed in the Night, when he lies
warm, and knows no Danger, nor urgent Occasion to rise; but if he awake, and
see his House on Fire about his Ears, he will make no Demur about the Matter,
but be glad he may rise! Verily, one real Glimpse of the Wrath of God burning
about us, or of Eternity that is a coming; one real Glimpse of God's Anger (
lying upon our Souls) which is infinitely above the most awful Apprehension of
Man or Angel; Oh! this would make us skip at a Time to pray in, at an Hour to
cry out to God for Mercy in, especially if we might do it with any Hope of
being heard and saved, as now we may. So the Reason why I have no Heart to this
Course, is not because there is Want of Reason to persuade me, but because I am
blind; and I feel my Blindness, I know that I do not see Things as they be, and
therefore I have good Reason to be deaf, to the Counsel of mine own blind
ignorant Heart, and to strive by all Means to see better; and in the mean Time
to believe what I do not see.

4. Offer Violence therefore to the Kingdom of Heaven, and be resolved in this
Point: Let my Heart say what it will, let Hell and World be against me; my God
I must have! my God I will have! I must get Sight of Sin, and Faith in Christ
Jesus? I must make my Salvation sure, or else I am undone for ever; and
therefore pray I will, and follow God I will, in Despite of the Devil: Unto him
will I look and ( in such a Cause as this) on him will I wait, who gives the
same Spirit of Zeal, of Indignation against Sin and Self, as sometimes was in
holy Samuel, when he hewed Agag in Pieces before the Lord in Gilgal. Lord, thou
have commanded me to seek thy Face, and thy Face will I seek: I will not confer
with Flesh and Blood; I will not consult with carnal Reason; but what God bids
me do, that will I do, and do it with all my Might.

5. Know that if you conscionably attend upon God, he will by Degrees make it
sweet and easy to you: He will strengthen your Heart and Hands in your Way and
Work, Isa. 40.31. You will find it a sweet and blessed Thing to stand
confessing your Sins before God, and emptying your Heart in his Sight, opening
all your Complaints and Soul Concernments to him: You will find it an Happiness
that you may pray to the God of Heaven, and have any Communion with him. Our
wicked Hearts make religious Duties irksome; else they are in themselves the
sweetest Things in the World: Oh! if ever we come to know God aright, we shall
account it our Happiness that we may do any thing in Way of Service to him, and
Communion with him.

6. Salvation is worth all our Labor, he it what it will: Is it a Trifle to be
saved eternally? Do we think to get to Heaven by a good Wish? Or to go thither
in a Feather-Bed? No, God will make us strive, and sweat, and wrestle for it:
and be sure it will quit the Cost! It will never repent us of any Prayer we
have made, or Tear we have wept, when we come there! Oh! follow not the Guise
of this secure World, that ( in these Days) is cast into a dead Sleep: Many
profess, but few know what it is to work out their own Salvation with Fear and
Trembling* It is another Matter to be a Christian indeed than most make of it:
And of those that are sincere and lively, you see but their dark Side, you know
not what they are in secret: Follow not Example, but follow the Word of God.

Thus I have given you the Sum of my Tho'ts, according to my Measure and
Manner. I beseech you to make some Use of this poor Letter, and read it at such
Times as may most suit you: You may have many Doubts and Difficulties that I do
not here touch; but seek God, and he will guide you. As for your outward
Condition, follow on in these Things, and your Trouble for Sin and Soul Misery
will swallow up all other Troubles: and future Consolations will sweeten all;
And whatsoever may happen to you here, yet hereafter it shall be well with you;
and in your wearisome Pilgrimage it may be for a Consolation to you, that you
shall rejoice in Time to come.

Now the tender Mercies of God be with you ( Dear --) and the Lord lead you by
the Hand to his eternal Rest, through all Sins and Sorrows, to his own Glory,
and your everlasting Comfort; so I remain,

Your unfeignedly loving Friend to serve you, J. M.
From Harvard College in Cambridge, May 19. 1649.
A Copy of an excellent LETTER wrote by the Rev. Mr. John Eliot of Guilford,
deceased, to his Brother Mr. Benjamin Eliot of Roxbury. Five several
Manuscripts: By THOMAS PRINCE. How to live in this World, so as to live in
Heaven.
DEAR BROTHER,
YOurs I received, and thought on. The Question, is, How so to live in this
World, as yet to live in Heaven? It is one of the common Places of my Heart
that I have often Occasion to study, and therefore takes me not unprovided. It
is hard to keep the Helm up among so many cross Winds and Edyes, and Out-Land
and boarding of Creatures, as we meet withal upon this Sea of Glass and Fire.
And truly that Man knows not his own Heart who finds it not difficult to
break through the Entanglements of the World. Creature Smiles stop and entice
away the Affections from JESUS CHRSIT: Creature Frowns encompass and
tempestuate the Spirit, that it thinks it does well to be angry: Both Ways
Grace is a looser. We had all Need to watch and pray, lest we enter into these
Temptations. The greatest of your Conflicts and Causes of your Complaints, seem
here to have their Original. Temptations follow Tempers. As there are two
predominant Qualities in the Temper of every Body; so there are two predominant
Sins in the Temper of every Heart: And Pride is one in all Men in the World:
the other is Care about Futurities.

I will tell you familiarly what GOD has done for my Soul, and in what Tract
my Soul keeps toward himself. (1) I am come to a Conclusion to look for no
great Matters in the World; but to know JESUS CHRIST and him crucified. I make
best Way (...) low Gale. A high Spirit and a high Sail together will be
dangerous: and therefore I prepare to live low. I desire not much, I pray
against it. My Study is my Calling: so much as to attend that, without
Distraction, I am bound to plead for; and more I desire not. By my secluded
Retirements, I have Advantage to observe how every Day's Occasions insensibly
wear off the Heart from GOD, and bury it in it self; which they that ever live
in the Noise and Lumber of the World, cannot be sensible of. (2) I have learned
to see a Need of every Thing GOD gives me; and to need nothing that he denies
me. There is no Dispensation, though cross and afflictive, but either in it or
after it, I find I could not be without it: And nothing that I am without,
whether it be taken from me, or not given to me; but sooner or later GOD quiets
me in himself without me. (3) I cast all my Care on the LORD, and live security
on the Wisdom and Care of my heavenly Father. My Ways are you know, in some
Sense hedged up with Thorns, and grow darker and darker daily; but yet I
mistrust not my good GOD in the least; and live more quiet in the Absence of
all by Faith, than I should do, I am persuaded, if I possessed them. I think
the LORD deals kindly with me, to make me believe for all my Mercies, before I
have them: they will then be Isaac's, Sons of Laughter. For the less Reason
has to Work upon, the more freely Faith casts it self on the Faithfulness of
GOD. I find that while Faith is steady, nothing can disquiet me; and when Faith
totters, nothing can establish me. If I ramble out among Means and Creatures, I
am presently lost, and can come to no End: But if I stay my self on GOD, and
leave him to work in his own Way and Time, I am at rest, and can lie down and
sleep in a Promise, though a Thousand rise up against me. Therefore my Way is not
to cast before Hand, but to work with GOD by the Day. Sufficient to the Day is
the Work thereof. I find so much to do continually with my Calling and my
Heart, that I have no Time to puzzle my self with Per-adventures and Futurities.

As for the State of the Times, it is very gloomy and tempestuous: But why do
the Heathen Rage? Faith lies at Anchor in the midst of the Waves, and believes
the Accomplishment of the Promise, through all these Overturnings, Confusions,
and seeming Impossibilities. Upon this GOD do I live, who is our GOD for ever,
and will guide us to the Death. Methinks I lie becalmed in his Bosom, as Luther
in such a Case, I am not much troubled; let CHRIST see to it. I know Prophecies
are now dark, the Books are sealed, and Men have all been deceived, and every
Vision fails: yet GOD does continue faithful: it is he that promises, who will
also do it. I believe these dark Times are the Womb of a bright Morning.

Many Things more I might have added; but enough. O! Brother, keep close to
GOD; and then you need fear nothing. Maintain secret and intimate Acquaintance
with him; and then a little of the Creature will go a great Way. Take Time for
Duties in private. Crowd not Religion into a Corner of the Day. There is a
Dutch Proverb, No body will get by thieving, or loose by praying. Lay up all
your Good in GOD; so as to overbalance the Sweetness and Bitterness of all
Creatures. Spend no Time in fore-hand Contrivances for this World: they never
succeed: God will run his Dispensations another Way. Self-Contrivances are the
Effects of Unbelief: I can speak by Experience. Would Men spend those Hours
they ware out in Plots and Devices, in Communion with God, and leave all on him
by venturesome believing; they would have more Peace and Comfort. I leave you
with your GOD and mine. The LORD JESUS be with your Spirit. Pray for your own
Soul, pray for Jerusalem; and pray hard for your pour Brother.

J. E.
Guilford, May 18. 1664.
The late Rev. Mr. KILLINGHALL, in England, upon reading the foregoing Letter,
wrote the following Lines.
I.
IN all my Trouble, sharp and strong,
My Soul to JESUS flies;
My Anchor-hold is firm in him,
When swelling Billows rise.
II.
His Comforts bear my Spirits up,
I trust a faithful GOD:
The sure Foundation of my Hope,
Is in a Savior's Blood.
III.
Loud Hallelujah's sing, my Soul,
To thy Redeemer's Name:
In Joy and Sorrow, Life and Death,
His Love is still the same.
FINIS.

