THREE DISCOURSES CONCERNING The Reality, the Extremity, AND the absolute
Eternity OF Hell Punishments.

BY WILLIAM COOPER, A. M. One of the Pastors of the Church in Brattle-Street,
Boston

Published by Desire of many of the Hearers.

2 Cor. v. 11. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men.

1 Cor. xv 11. So we preach, and so ye believed.

Heb iii. 12. Take heed, Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief.

BOSTON, Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for JOSEPH EDWARDS, at the Corner
Shop on the North-side of the Townhouse. MDCCXXXII.

The Reality OF Hell Punishments.
LUKE XVI. 23. AND in Hell be lift up his eyes being in torments.


THE words belong to that awful and awakening discourse of our Savior,
commonly called the parable of the rich man and Lazarus; though some don't so
well approve of calling it a parable, for there is no similitude used in it. It
is rather a narrative or description of the different state of good (...) had
men in the other world. To illus^^^ this description, and make it the more
solemn and affecting, two particular persons, whose circumstances were very
different in this world, are supposed, and made the subjects of it. What is
designed to be represented in the whole, is true in fact; and there are many
instances and examples of it, in this and in the other worlds. The wicked are,
some of them, rich, great, and prosperous in this world; but extremely and
everlastingly miserable in the next. The godly are, some of them, poor,
afflicted, despised in this world, but infinitely and everlastingly happy in
the other. This is the substance, scope, and end of this discourse of our
Savior.

The words of our text are spoken of the wicked rich man. He died, as well as
the poor beggar; for riches cannot deliver from death. And was buried, which is
not obse^v'd of the other; had a pompous and costly funeral, suitable to his
worldly ^^tate and degree. But his condition after death, was most wretched and
miserable: In^^^el ^e lift up his eyes being in torments. O sad end of a soft
and delicate, a careless and stupid, a sensual and voluptuous life!

In hell (...)
; in Hades, the state of the wicked dead, the region of damned spirits. He lift
up his eyes: Not the eyes of his body, for that was buried in the grave; but
the eyes of his mind. For (as says a judicious writer on the place, Mr. T.
Cruso, in his pious and accurate discourses upon the Rich Man and Lazarus.
) bodily members and sensible acts, are ascribed in scripture to separate
souls, by way of allusion; as they are likewise many times ascribed to God
himself, though he be a pure and perfect Spirit. The eyes of his mind, which were
shut while he lived, were opened after death; his understanding and conscience
were now awakened, and he was convinced of those things which he did not
apprehend, or would not believe before. Being in torments: The pains of hell
had now actually got hold upon him; he felt such impressions of the wrath of
God upon his soul, as were not to be matched with the greatest bodily torments
in this world.

The DOCTRINE I would now offer from these words is this, viz.

It is a most certain and awful truth, That there is a HELL, a place of misery
and torment, in which the wicked shall be punished after this life.

Under this Doctrine I propose only these two things. 1. To give the proof and
evidence that there is such a place and state of misery, as we call hell, for
the punishment of wicked and unholy persons after this life. 2. To speak of the
awful seasons or periods at which sinners pass into this place of punishment.


1. To give the proof and evidence that there is such a place and state of
misery, as we call hell, for the punishment of the wicked and ungodly after
this life.

This is indeed no pleasing subject for us to insist upon, but a necessary one
for you to hear of, which we, who are put in trust with the gospel, must not
baulk. A part of the counsel of God which we must not shun to declare to you,
as we would be found faithful to your souls, and to our own, and to our master
that sends us. Our LORD JESUS CHRIST frequently preached upon this subject in
the days of his ministry. How often and earnestly did he tell his hearets of
the damnation of hell Mat. xxiii 33.
, the furnace of fire into which the wicked shall be cast Mat. xiii. 42.
, the place of darkness Mat. viii. 1^.
where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth; of the worm that dies not, and
the fire that shall never be quenched Mark ix. 45.
, the everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels Mar. xxv. 41.
? How many such passages might I gather up, and you easily remember, from his
sermons recorded in the holy gospels? And we should learn of Him how to preach,
and fulfill our ministry. Surely men need to hear of this now as much as then.
Men have within them an evil heart of unbelief, that inclines them to question
this truth. Satan endeavors to persuade them out of the belief of it, as he
did our first parents. He said to the woman, Though ye do eat, ye shall not
surely die, Genesis iii. 4. So he says to sinners now, Though you do transgress you
shall not be damned; ye shall not surely go to hell. He promises them impunity,
and so makes them the servants of sin. Men had need therefore be confirmed in
the belief of this truth now, lest their infidelity be cured by woeful
experience. Hell torments are not a melancholy fancy, no cunningly devised
fable, nor empty threatening; but an awful truth, a dreadful reality. For

1. This is a doctrine that does but agree with the majesty and authority of
the great God as the king and judge of the world. The Lord is a great God, and
a great king above all gods. He is the king eternal, immortal, invisible; the
blessed and the only potentate: The king of kings, and lord of lords; with whom
is terrible majesty 1 Timothy vi. 15. Job xxxvii. 22.
Now the kings and princes of the earth you know, have not only their royal
palaces for themselves, and for their nobles and attendants, but also their
prisons, jails, and dungeons, into which they cast and secure criminals and
malefactors, traitors and conspirators. And this is needful to keep up the
greatness and secure the honor of their government. And shall not the great
king, whose name is dreadful Mal. 1.14.
, have a place wherein to secure and punish those who are so hardy and insolent
as to break his laws, and rebel against his authority? How would his government
be exposed and weakn'd if it should be otherwise? This would encourage mutiny
in heaven, and rebellion on earth. To what purpose would it be for him to call
sinning angels and men to an account, if he had no where to punish them for
their offenses? Thus, it is but suitable to the divine majesty and authority that
there should be a hell for the punishment of the wicked.

2. It is necessary for the maintaining and vindicating the divine justice and
holiness. We know that the Lord is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness,
neither shall evil dwell with him: The foolish shall not stand in his sight;
for he hates all the workers of iniquity Psalm. v. 4, 5.
. He is infinitely opposite in his nature, will, and works to all moral
impurity. And as he has forbidden it in his law, justice requires him to punish
it according to its deserts. Shall not the judge of all the earth do right Gen,
xviii. 23.
; and therefore make a difference in his dispensations, between the righteous
and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not?
This is not visibly done in the present world. Now wickedness seems to be
connived at, and sinners to be countenanced, rather than otherwise, by being
indulged with outward ease, pomp, and prosperity, as was the rich man the text
speaks of. This was an ancient difficulty, which the people of God observed,
and were ready to stumble at. Jer. xii. 1. Righteous art thou, O Lord! Yet let
me talk of thy judgments: Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? Job
xxi. 7 -- 13. Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in
power? Their seed is established in their sight with them, and their offspring
before their eyes. Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God
upon them. -- They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their
children dance. They take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the
organ: They spend their days in wealth --. The Psalmist was in the like
anxiety, being pressed with the same temptation. Psalm. lxxiii. Init. As for me
my feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh slipped. For I was envious at
the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. For they are not in
trouble as other men, neither are they plagued like other men. -- Their eyes
stand out with fatness, they have more than heart can wish. -- Behold these are
the ungodly who prosper in the world, they increase in riches. But now that
which eases the difficulty, and satisfactorily clears up the matter is, That
the Lord knows h^w to reserve the unjust to future punishment 2 Pet. ii. 9.
, whom he forbears for the present, or touches but lightly. The rod of God is
not upon them now, because his fury is to" rest upon them hereafter. We are
therefore bid to judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come 1 Cor. iv.
5,
. And hence the day of wrath is called the day of the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God R^^^. ii. 5.
. Thus the present impunity of the wicked, plainly refers us to a future
punishment. Psalm xcii. 7. When the wicked spring as the grass, and all the
workers of iniquity do flourish: it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.

3. CHRIST'S coming into the world, his sufferings and death, are a convincing
argument and proof that there is a hell. Why did He come into the world, but to
save his people from this place of misery? "He did not come to save them from
the lesser consequences of sin, such as the calamities of this present life,
and bodily death; for to these they are still exposed, though he is made
redemption to them. It cannot reasonably be though it a design great eno' for the
son of God to come from heaven to earth upon, and to lay down his life for, to
save us only from bodily and temporal evils. Surely our Lord had not come from
the highest heavens, but to save us from the lowest hell. The salvation of
Christ is called a deliverance from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10. But (as
one observes upon it) if that wrath be imaginary, so must our deliverance from
it be too See the Author before reser'd to, p. 57.
.

Moreover, They were the very pains of hell which our Lord suffered. Indeed, he
did not locally descend into hell, to suffer there amongst the damned We are
not so to understand that article of the creed He descended into hell. The
meaning is, That h^ went into the state of the dead, and continued under the
power of death, till the third day.
; nor did he suffer after the same manner as they do. No, these things were
absolutely inconsistent with the holiness, purity, and dignity of his person.
The sufferings of Christ and the sufferings of the damned, were therefore
necessarily different in several circumstances of them. Nevertheless our Lord
did suffer in his soul such pains, horror, agony, and terror, as were of the
same nature and kind with the sufferings of hell After this manner very
judicious Divines, the great Calvin and others, speak of the sufferings of
Christ
; such as none ever suffered on this side hell, and carried in them the essence
of the punishment of the second death. For the wrath of God due to the elect
for their sins, was poured into his soul, and he bore the curse of the law in
the full weight of it. Gal. iii. 13. How inconceivably great were his
sufferings in the garden? In his agony there he was afraid, and amazed, and
fell flat on the ground: He began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy; and
said to those that were with him, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto
death: And his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the
ground Mat. xxvi. 37, 38. Mark xiv. 32. Luke xxii. 44.
. And must not this arise from such a sense of the wrath of God, as is, for the
substance of it, like that suffered in hell. He felt the same in the time of
his crucifixion, when that bitter outcry was extorted from him, My God, my God,
why have thou sorsaken me Mat. xxvii 46.
? The sufferings of Christ were answerable to the pains of hell, and therefore
called such in scripture. For to Christ the son of David, of whom David was a
type, we may apply those words of the Psalmist, Psalm xviii. 5. The sorrows of
hell compassed me about. Psalm cxvi. 3. The sorrows of death compassed me
about, the pains of hell gat hold upon me. Christ did not feel the sorrows of
hell after death, but he felt them in his soul while he lived, before his
death; the very same (as has been said) for kind and substance, though not after
the same manner, and in the same circumstances.

Here now is another proof or demonstration of this truth, That there is a hell
for the wicked. If Christ did feel and suffer the very pains of hell, when he
bore the wrath and curse of God due to the elect for their sins, then certainly
there is a hell, a place provided and prepared, in which the wicked shall
suffer his wrath and vengeance for ever. As our Lord was going to suffer and
die, he turned himself to the company which followed him, and said, If they do
these things in a green Tree, what shall be done in the dry? Luke xxiii. 31. As
much as if he had said, "If God deliver me up to such sufferings as these,
because I am made a sacrifice for sin, what will he do with sinners
themselves"? Truly from the bitter sufferings of Christ, we may justly infer
what should have been done to the whole race of mankind, if he had not
interposed; and what shall be done to those who die in their sins, unsanctified
and unpardoned. If God did this to the son of his love, when he found sin but
imputed to him, what shall he do to the children of his wrath, whom he will
find under the guilt and reigning power of sin? The apostle argues after this
manner in another case, 1 Pet. iv. 17. If judgment begin at the house of God,
what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God?

4. Men have the intimations and presages of this truth within themselves:
Natural conscience bears witness to it. There are implanted in the minds of men
by nature, apprehensions and expectations of a state of misery after this life,
for them that do wickedly. The very heathen have had the apprehensions of it
without the light of revelation What else made the Heathen Emperor when he lay
a dying, cry out, O animula vagula blandula, etc. O my wretched wandering soul,
whither are thou now hastening? What will become of me? Live I cannot, die I
dare not!
. It would take up too much time, and be not so fit for the holy sabbath, nor
for a christian and popular audience, to mention what some of their
Philosophers and Poets Gnossius haec Rhadamanthus habet durissima regna:
Castigatque, auditque dolos: subigitque fateri
Quae quis asud superos, furto laetatus inani,
Distulit in seram commissa piacula mortem.
Continuo sontes ultrix accincta flagello
Tisophone quatit insultans: ^o^vosque sinistra
Intentans angues, vocat agmina saeva sororum.
Virg. Aeneid. lib. 6 lin. 566. Saxum ingens volvunt alij, radiisque rotarum
Districti pendent: sedet, aeternumque sedebit
Infelix Theseus; Phlegyasque miserrimus omnes
Admonet, et magna testatur voce per umbras:
Discite justitiam moniti, et non temnere Divos.
lin. 616.
have said of future punishments: Wherein though for want of scripture revelation
their imaginnations have been vain, yet they give evidence to the thing it self
written in their consciences, about which the word of God does inform us more
fully and clearly.

They that are loath to believe this truth, and try to dispute themselves out of
it, yet cannot deliver themselves from the fears of it. An awakened conscience
will suggest it, let sinners strive what they can to silence it. Doubtless they
were the fears of this which caused Belshazzer the king to change his
countenance, and his knees to smite ^neagainst another, in the midst of his
impious feast, when he saw the handwriting on the wall. Dan. v. 5, 6. And this
is what the Apostle calls a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery
indignation, Heb. x. 27.

Nay, not only have all men the fears and apprehensions of a wrath to come, but
some have had the very fore-tastes of it. The pains of hell have even gat hold
upon them in this world. The worm that never dies has began to bite them here.
"Some have felt such a hell within them, as has been a plain indication of one
before them" Cain, Lamech, Saul, and Judas; Spiva, and other such affecting
instances.


5. If there is a heaven for the good, doubtless there is a hell for the
wicked. The belief of future rewards for good men, does necessarily dra^ after
it the belief of future punishments for the wicked. The arguments that prove
the one, do equally prove the other also. So that if there be a heaven, a place
of light, joy, and blessedness, where the godly are received and comforted
after this life, there is likewise a hell, a place of darkness, sorrow, and
misery, into which the wicked are carried when they leave this world.

6. The scriptures of truth do plainly and clearly reveal this to us. Here is
at last the proper proof of the thing. Other arguments are strongly
presumptive, but this puts the matter out of doubt, renders the thing beyond
all dispute true; and by this we are to regulate our faith. Whatsoever is
revealed in the word of God, challenges the honor of being believed because it
is there contained. Not to credit what is there delivered, is to affront the
divine veracity, and make God a liar.

The scriptures are a sure word of prophecy. They have all the evidences that
can reasonably be desired, that they are indeed from God. They have been
confirmed by numerous surprising miracles; which were all well attested, being
openly showed in the sight of the world. And can it be supposed this divine
seal would be affixed to a lie? Beside this outward attestation of miracles,
the scripture has all internal tokens and characters of divinity. It carries in
it such impressions of wisdom, holiness, majesty etc. as are nothing less than
divine. It appears to us in a self-evidencing light. They that look into it
with a mind rightly disposed, must needs find a difference between this and all
other books in the world. For what is the chaff to the wheat? says the Lord
God. Is not my word like as a fire, says the Lord? And like the hammer that
breaks the rock in pieces? Jer. xxiii. 29, 30. The word of God is quick and
powerful, sharper than any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit, of joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the
tho'ts and intents of the heart. In the reading and hearing of it, many have
been convinced of all, and judged of all, and had the secrets of their hearts
made manifest; and so falling down on their face, have acknowledged, God is in
it of a truth. Heb. iv. 12. 1 Cor. xiv. 24, 25. The learned Francis Junius, in
the account he gives of his own life, tells us how he was in his youth infected
with loose notions in religion, and by the grace of God was wonderfully
recovered, by reading accidentally in a bible, which his good father had
designedly laid in his way, the 5 first verses of the gospel of J^hn. He says,
That he observed such a divinity in the argument, such a^ authority and majesty
in the style, that his flesh trembled, and he was struck into such an
amazement, that for a whole day he scarce knew where he was, and what he did,
and from thence he dates the beginning of his being religious.


In short, If the bible be not the word of God, then there is no divine
revelation now in the world; no discovery at all of God's mind concerning our
duty and happiness: And can it be supposed God has left the world wholly
destitute of what it stands in so much need of? If therefore there are any who
despise the sacred scriptures, who would contradict and bear down the divine
authority of these holy books, and laugh at those who regulate their faith, and
govern their lives by them; as do some of the scoffers of these last days,
affecting to be though it fashionable, and to have more sense than the rest of
mankind: There is just cause to fear their antipathy to the bible is such as
that they will not read it at all; or if they do, that their lusts and
prejudices darken their understandings, and hinder them from receiving the
truth in the love of it: That they try to persuade themselves and others that
it is not true, only because they would not have it to be so; for if it be,
then woe, woe, woe, to such scepticks and unbelievers; whose peculiar and
aggravated condemnation will be this, That light is come into the world, and
they have loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil, John
iii. 19.

But we know and are assured, that the scriptures are the word of God, and
consequently the word of truth. And in them the curtain between this and the
invisible world, is a^ it were drawn back, and we are shown things that are to
come hereafter. How plainly and abundantly do they tell us, that there is a
place of everlasting misery and torment, in which the wicked shall have their
portion assigned them after this life. Both testaments are full of it. It is
needless, and would be almost endless, to turn you to the several texts that
speak of this. Yea, they tell us of many who are already turned into this
dreadful place, and are now actually suffering in it. So are the sinning
angels. 2 Pet. ii. 4. God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down
to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto
judgment. So are the sinners of the old world: Their spirits are now in prison,
which some time were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in
the days of Noah, while the ark was preparing It is the opinion of some of the
learned, That these: sinners are referred to in some places of Solomon's
Proverbs, where hell is called the congregation of the dead. As in chap. xxi.
ver. 16. The man that wandreth out of the way of understanding, shall remain in
the congregation of the dead. And in chapter ii. 18. speaking of the strange and
foolish women, he says, That her house inclines to death, and her paths to the
dead. And chapter x. 18. That the dead are there, and that her guests are in the
depths of hell The hebrew word here used and trans^^^ed dead, is, Rephaim,
which properly signifies Giants and is rendered by the seventy (...) The meaning
seems to be this, that the strange woman will bring those who are her guests to
hell, to keep the apostate Giants company. Those mighty men of renown of the
old world, (Gen vi. 4, 5) whose wickedness was so great in the earth, that it
repented and grieved God that he had made man, and to take vengeance upon whom
he brought the general deluge upon the earth: These great oppressors were first
drowned, and then damned, and sent to that accursed place which was appointed
for them. And to that place and condition in which they are; the Spirit of God
by Solomon tells us, the harlot will bring her guests, those who to follow her,
wander out of the way of understanding. See to this purpose, an Exercitation
upon Prove. xxi. 16. by the very learned Joseph Mede, Vol. 1. p. 41.
, 1 Pet. iii. 19, 20. So also are the sinners of Sodom, Jude 7. ver. Even as
Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them, giving themselves over to
fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example,
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. They were for their abominable and
unnatural wickedness consumed out of the earth by fire from heaven, and are now
suffering the vengeance of hell fire. To this place was committed the soul of
the rich man the text speaks of. And thither went the soul of miserable Judas,
when he had dispatched himself out of this world. Acts i. 25. From which Judas
by transgression fell, that he might go to his own place, i. e. to hell, which
was his place by divine appointment, and his own demerit.

These things are enough to prove the Doctrine, and set it beyond all sober
contradiction. A hell there is; and they that will not be convinced of it by
such arguments as these, will have a dreadful conviction of it at last by sense
and feeling.

II. We come now to speak a little of the awful seasons or periods at which
sinners pass into this place of punishment. These are two: At death, and after
the general judgment.

1. The souls of the wicked go into the place of punishment at death. The
scripture gives us to apprehend a particular judgment to which the souls of all
men go immediately after death. Heb. ix. 27. It is appointed for all men once
to die, and after this the judgment; the latter follows upon or immediately
after the former. When the dust returns to the dust as it was, the spirit goes
to God who gave it, Eccl. xii. 7. It goes to him as a judge, to be by him
determined to its eternal state. And this way looks that of the Apostle, Romans
xiv. 12. So then every one of us will give account of himself to God; every one
singly and alone will do so, at the end of this life. Then a judgment passes
upon every soul, previous to that which will be at the end of the world, though
there is the same event as to both: For the particular judgment at the end of
this life, determines the soul to that happiness or misery, which the general
judgment at the end of the world will determine soul and body to. There is
therefore a first damnation, antecedent to the resurrection, and that treads
upon the heels of death, which respects the soul only. This is represented to
us in vision, Rev. vi. 8. And I looked, and behold a pale horse; and his name
that sat on him was death, and hell followed with him. The souls of such as die
in their sins are adjudg'd to hell by God, and carried there by devils, as soon
as they leave their bodies; and while their bodies lie in the grave, their
souls are in torment there. This is plain from our text, and the whole
narrative which it is a part of. The wicked rich man, was no sooner dead, but
in hell he lift up his eyes being in torments: and cried out, I am tormented in
this flame.

The reward of the righteous begins at the hour of death: so does the
punishment of the wicked. It would be a favor indeed if sinners might have
their punishment suspended till the resurrection, during the long interval
between their death and the judgment day: but it will not be so. When the souls
of the wicked go to God at death, he delivers them to the tormentors, Mat.
xviii. 34. And therefore we have the Psalmist praying and deprecating, as in
Psalm xxvi. 9. Gather not my soul with sinners.

2. After the resurrection they will be cast into it in their whole persons,
body and soul united as they are now. When the trial of the great day is over,
that sentence will be pronounced upon the wicked, Mat. xxv. 41. Depart ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. This
sentence will be executed as soon as passed. The holy angels, those ministers
of his that do his pleasure, being armed with power sufficient, shall be the
executioners of it. Mat. xiii. 41, 42. -- So shall it be in the end of the
world. The son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of
his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast
them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. We
are told what the issue of the last judgment will be, in Rev. xx. 14. And death
and hell (the wicked whose bodies were raised out of the grave, and whose
spirits were fetched from the infernal region) were cast (body and soul
together) into the lake of fire which is the second death. So we read, Job xxi.
30. The wicked is reserved to the day of destruction; they shall be brought
forth to the day of wrath: As malefactors are brought forth out of prison in
order to their execution. Agreably our Savior has forewarned us, Mat. x. 28.
Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but
rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

Upon this account damned spirits do now dread the judgment day, and think of
it with horror. The devils do so; for then their misery and torment will be
greater than now it is. Mat. viii. 29. And, doubtless, it is the same with
damned souls: For though their misery is now inexpressibly great, yet not so
great as it will be after the judgment day, when body and soul together shall
be cast into hell, and they will suffer in their whole man. Hence the unjust
are said to be reserved unto the day of judgment to be punished; because that
will be the day of their complete punishment. 2 Pet. ii. 9.

If now it should be asked by any, Where is the hell you have been discoursing
of? And is the place of misery the same now that it will be after the day of
judgment? I answer, This is what the scripture has not clearly revealed; and
it becomes us to beware of vain curiosities; of intruding into those things
which we have not seen, as the Apostle's phrase is, Col. ii. 18. It concerns us
but little to know now, whether hell be in the air, or in the concave of the
earth. It is enough that we know there is such a place; and it concerns us to
spend our tho'ts, and time, and pains how to keep out of it, rather than to
exercise our selves with needless inquiries about it.

Let therefore the present discourse come to us upon the same errand, the rich
man desired Lazarus might be sent upon to his brethren in his father's house,
namely, to testify unto us lest we come into this place of torment. O let all
of us be convinced of that now, which none of us will be able to doubt of
hereafter. Let us take heed lest there be in any of us an evil heart of
unbelief. This is indeed a place to us now unseen; there is a vail between us
and it. But hell is naked before God, and to him destruction has no covering,
Job xxvi. 6. And he could have laid it open, and exposed it to common view, if
he had so pleased. But besides his sovereign pleasure in this matter, it is
easily apprehended this would not be so suitable to our state of trial and
probation in this world, where we are to walk by faith, and not by sight.
Therefore by faith being warned of God, of things not seen as yet, let us be so
moved with fear, as to prepare an ark to the saving of our souls. Let us make
haste to CHRIST, and see that we are in him by a true faith; for there is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit.

The Extremity OF Hell Punishments.
MATTHEW XIII. 42. AND shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be
wailing and gnashing of teeth.


HOPE and fear are the most active passions of humane nature: And the blessed
God having made us with them, deals with us according to our frame, and makes
use of these affections, to bring us to himself, and keep us within the compass
of our duty. He has therefore propounded to them such objects, as when believed
and duly considered, cannot but powerfully move and excite them. To encourage
and raise our hopes, he in his word propounds a reward infinitely great; and to
awaken and alarm our fears, he threatens us with a punishment inconceivably
dreadful: And that this threatening may be the more regarded, the infliction and
execution thereof, in the full extent and extremity of it, is as certain as
eternal truth can make it.

In the words of our text we are told, what will be the final portion of the
wicked and ungodly in the other world; what will be the certain end and
consequence of a life of irreligion and impiety persisted in. And this is told
us by our Lord Jesus Christ himself, who is the faithful and true witness; who
lives, and was dead, and behold he is alive for evermore; and has in his own
hand the keys of hell and of death Rev. i. 18.
.

In this chapter we have Christ preaching the gospel of the kingdom, to great
multitudes which were gathered together to hear him. He spoke many things to
them in parables; in a way of continued similitude or comparison, by which
spiritual and eternal things, are described in language borrowed from the
things of this life. Our text belongs to the parable of the tares. We have the
parable it self from the 24th to the 30th verse. And the exposition which
Christ gave of it to his disciples at their request, from the 37th to the 43d
verse.

The drift of the parable, is to let us know the present and future state of
the gospel church. At present there are in it a mixture of good and bad, who
are to continue together to the end of the world. Then a separation will be
made, and the place of their everlasting abode, will be as far distant as
heaven is from hell.

The particulars of the application or reddition of the parable, as our Savior
gives them to us, are these. He that sows the good seed is the son of man,
Jesus Christ, who is the Lord of the harvest. The field is the world, the
visible church, scattered all the world over, and not confined to any
particular nation. The good seed are the children of the kingdom, true saints,
the godly and righteous, formed and made such by the Spirit of Christ,
scattered here and there like precious seed, the planting of the Lord that he
may be glorified. The tares are the children of the wicked one, the devil, such
as bear his image, and do his lusts; who makes men wicked and keeps them so;
who takes unwearied pains, watches all opportunities, and lays hold on all
advantages, to corrupt men's minds and manners, to propagate error and
infidelity, wickedness and profaneness. Who is therefore said in the 25th
verse, to sow these tares, while men slept; before the Lord's servants and
laborers were appriz'd of it. The harvest is the end of the world, the great
day of judgment, when time shall be no longer. The reapers are the angels, who
shall be employed by Christ in the great day, as the ministers of his justice.
And the fire into which the tares shall then be cast, is hell torments The 40,
41, and 42. verses. As therefore the tares are gathered and burnt in the fire;
so shall it be in the end of this world. The son of man shall send forth his
angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and
them which do iniquity: And shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall
be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

The words of our text, are a very awful and moving description of the misery
and torment, which the wicked are to undergo in the other world. The place in
which they must have their abode, is called a furnace of fire: And what a
horrible and frightful idea does this convey to the mind? Who can dwell with
devouring fire? Nebuchadnezzar's burning fiery furnace, heated seven times, was
but a faint image of it Dan. 3. chapter
. Into this dreadful place they are not barely sent or put, but cast, with
force and violence, against their wills, notwithstanding their loud shrieks and
cries, and the utmost resistance they are able to make. And the extremity of the
torments they are here to undergo, is set forth by the effects thereof, which
are wailing and gnashing of teeth. These actions are the effects of extreme
intolerable pain and anguish, rage and horror; and are designed to set forth
the intense degree of the torment of the wicked in the coming world; especially
of such as perish from under the gospel, and go to hell out of the visible
church. And as Joseph told Pharaoh his dream was doubled, because the thing was
established by God, and God would shortly bring it to pass, ( Genesis xli. 32.) so
for the greater confirmation of this awful truth, the words of our text are
thrice doubled, repeated no less than six times by this evangelist Matthew in
his gospel Chap. viii. ver. 12. Chap. xiii. ver. 42 and 50. Chap xxii ver. 13.
Chap. xxiv. ver. 51. Chap. xxv. ver. 30.
.

The DOCTRINE now from the words is this, The misery and unishment of ungodly
sinners in the future world, will be EXTREME and INTOLERABLE.

On the last sabbath I gave you a discourse concerning the reality or certainty
of hell punishments; endeavored to set before you the proof and evidence of
this awful doctrine of our holy religion, That there is a hell, a place of
misery, for the punishment of obstinate finners in the next world. This I did
as a foundation for the discourses that were to follow. The greatness and
extremity of the misery of the damned in hell, is to be the subject of the
present discourse. For if satan, the great enemy of man's happiness, cannot
prevail to make men think there is no hell, his next endeavor is to soften
future punishments, and represent them with as little terror as may be. It
shall therefore be my endeavor at this time, as God shall help, to represent
them to you in their nature, weight and terror, from the holy scriptures, which
are a sure word of prophecy, whose intimations I would follow, and lay aside
uncertain conjectures. And O! that we might all employ our most serious and
attentive tho'ts to this important subject, and so mix the word with faith that
it may savingly profit us! In speaking to this Doctrine, I shall take the
following method.

1. To explain what I mean, and would have you understand, when I say the
punishment of the damned in hell will be extreme and intolerable. 2. Offer some
considerations from whence their punishment must be though it to be extremely
great. 3. Inquire into the nature and kind of this punishment, from whence the
greatness and extremity of it will still further appear. And

4. Mention some heavy circumstances, which help to render their punishment so
extreme and intolerable.
1. To explain what I mean, and would have you understand, when I say the
punishment of the damned in hell will be extreme and intolerable. And by the
properties of extremity and intolerableness, which are inseparable from hell
torments, I would be understood to mean the following things.

1. That they far exceed all the most heavy afflictive evils of the present
life and world. There are various kinds of evils and miseries, which men suffer
in this world, from the righteous hand and providence of God, as the fruit and
punishment of sin. There are particularly many painful dolorous distempers to
which we are liable; burning fevers, corroding cancers, the tormenting gout,
stone and strangury. How many miserables have we seen, who have been chastened
with pain upon their bed, and the multitude of their bones with strong pain, so
that their life has abhorred bread, and their soul dainty meat: who have been
full of tossings to and fro to the dawning of the day; saying in the evening,
would God it were morning, and in the morning, would God it were evening! Who
have like Job complained even of life, and expostulated, Wherefore is light
given to him that is in misery, and life to the bitter in soul? Which long for
death, and it comes not: Who would rejoice exceedingly and be glad to find the
grave! Job iii. 20, 21. And many exquisue punishments have been invented for
the torturing great and public offenders; such as burning in the fire, breaking
upon the wheel, and boiling in oil or lead. But the torments in hell do far
exceed any of these, or whatever other can be invented by the wit or malice of
men. What the Apostle says of the glory of heaven, may as well and truly be
said of the misery of hell, All the afflictions of the present time, Romans viii.
18.
are not worthy to be compared therewith.

2. That they are s^ great that the wretched subjects of them could not endure
them, without being utterly consumed, were they not upheld in being for this
end by the mighty power of God. Gracious supports the damned in hell have none.
God does not support them in their misery, as he does his children in this
world, under the fatherly afflictions he lays upon them for their good; whereby
they are kept from fainting in the day of adversity, and are enabled to bear
his hand with meekness, patience and resignation; with a filial subjection to
him the father of spirits. No; the damned in hell have no such supports as
these; if they had, their punishment would not be so intolerable. They are only
supported in being by a continued act of God's power. Without this support, the
extremity of their misery would be the extinction of their being. If this
should be withdrawn, the spirit would fail before him, and the soul which he
has made. The damned are said to be vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, in
which God makes his power known, Romans ix. 22. They are by the power of God
rendered capable to bear such torments, as would else utterly consume them, Once
more,

3. That the greatness of them cannot be fully comprehended in though it, nor
expressed by words. After all the terrible representations made hereof in
scripture, our most terrified tho'ts do not equal the horror and misery. Here
all tho'ts as well as words are swallowed up. Psalm xc. 11. Who knows the power
of thine anger? Alas! none does. It passes knowledge. Eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has
prepared for them that hate him. If one should arise from the dead, and come to
us from the place of torments, he could not in full declare and describe to us
what a state of misery it is; because the torments thereof are unutterable. As
the things of heaven are unutterable to mortal ears by a mortal tongue, (as one
who had been caught up to the third heavens has told us The Apostle Paul 2 Cor
xii 4.
,) so are the things of hell, the wondrous plagues there prepared, the strange
punishments there reserved for the workers of iniquity. Thus extremely and
intolerably great are the punishments of hell.

Yet will there be degrees of misery there. Though the punishment of all will be
intolerable, some will have a heavier punishment than others. Some will have
the capacities of their souls more enlarged than others, to receive
proportionable degrees of inflicted wrath. As the vessels of glory will be all
full, though some by being larger than others, will hold more glory; so the
vessels of wrath, will have as much inflicted on them as each of them can bear,
yet some will have their capacities enlarged to bear more wrath than others.
Mark xii. 40. These shall receive greater damnation.


II. I shall in the next place offer some brief considerations, which must
needs lead us to think, the torments of hell are extremely and intolerably
great.

And

1. It is but reasonable the punishment of offenders should be proportioned, as
to the degree of it, to the nature of their offenies.

This is an allowed rule of equity among men. To apply this now to the present
case. There is an infinite guilt in sin. An offense rises in proportion to the
dignity of the person offended against. Now the majesty of God is truly
infinite, against whom sin is committed; and consequently the guilt of sin
exceeds our tho'ts, is immense and infinite. O! what an intolerable thing is
it, that proud dust should fly in the face of his glorious maker, and deny his
authority over him? What an insufferable provocation, that the reasonable
creature, who is naturally and necessarily a subject, should despise the divine
law and lawgiver! should boldly and insolently say, Who is the Lord, that I
should obey his voice? and hardily dare him to do his worst! Which is indeed
the language of every sinner, as often as he sins knowingly and wilfully. Thus,
as the Apostle says, Sin ly^the commandment is exceeding sinful Romans vii. 13^
. And what but an exceeding great punishment must then belong to it? Fools make
a mock at sin Prove. xiv. 9.
, carnal minds alleviate it, but when weighed in the balances of the sanctuary,
it is found so heavy, that the most weighty and intolerable punishment inflicted
on sinners, cannot exceed the deserts of it.

2. The torments of hell are of God's own preparing for his enemies that rebel
against him; and therefore must be supposed to be exceeding great.

It may well be expected the extremity of the punishment will be in proportion
to the preparation that has been made for it. Now T^phet was ordained of old,
Isai. xxx. 33. And hell fire is called fire prepared, Mat xxv. 41. prepared for
the de^t' and his angels, and his children, even from the foundation of the
world, as was the kingdom for the righteous. Prepared for them by God in the
greatness of his wisdom and power. Hell's torments as well as heaven's glories,
are the product of divine eternal counsels. As there is great preparation made
for the entertainment of the saints in the kingdom of glory, so is there also
great preparation made for the punishment of the wicked in the place of misery.
And surely the punishment must be exceeding great which is thus prepared. The
preparation shows the extremity.

3 The punishments of hell are also inflicted by God in the greatness of his
power and wrath; therefore they are extreme and intolerable.

Because none else can inflict punishments heavy eno', He will then deal with
sinners Himself, take them into His own hands. And what a fearful thing must it
be to fall into the hands of the living God? Temporal evils are inflicted by
the mediation of second causes, that are of a limited power to hurt: but in the
next world God more immediately torments the damned by his own power. And who
knows the power of his anger? Even according to his fear, so is his wrath,
Psalm. xc. II. God will show his WRATH, and make his POWER known in the vessels
of wrath, Romans ix 22. In them, and upon them, God will show to all the world,
his punishing justice, his enmity to sin, and the strength of his inflicting
power. How great then must their sufferings be, which are designed as a
demonstration of these things? Once more,

4. The punishment of the damned will be in a proportionable degree to the
happiness of the blessed.

The scripture makes a direct opposition between these. Therefore as the saints
in heaven will be infinitely happy and blessed, so the damned in hell will be
infinitely wretched and miserable. As in heaven there is fullness of joy,
happiness in perfection, so in hell there is fullness of woe, misery in
perfection. For as for God, his work is perfect. These he has set the one over
against the other.

III. We come to speak of the particular nature and kinds of the punishment of
the damned; by which the greatness and extremity thereof will further appear.
And this punishment may be said to be of two kinds, that of loss, and that of
sense. We have both these in that sentence to be pronounced on the wicked in
the great day, Mat. XXV. 41. Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire.

1 It is a punishment of l^ss; which consi^s in the privation of all that is
good, comfortable and desirable; even of the chief, the highest, the most
excellent and everlasting good. The loss not only of temporal good things,
worldly enjoyments, which are comparatively small and inconsiderable things;
but the loss of GOD, of CHRIST, of HEAVEN. O inconceivable loss! The loss of
friends, of estate, of health, yea, of life it self is nothing to this. To the
loss of that GOD in whose favor is life, and whose loving kindness is better
than life; who is the only adequate portion of our immortal souls, whose
perfection and satisfaction consist in the clear and transforming vision of his
glory! To the loss of CHRIST, the Savior, the glorified JESUS, with whom to
be, the Apostle counted far better than to continue in this world; in whom we
shall see God, and who is the very light of heaven: For the lamb is the light
thereof Rev. xxi. 23.
. And the loss of whom both ascertains and includes the loss of heaven, and all
the felicities of that blessed world, all those great preparations which God
has made for the entertainment of his sons and daughters, who by him to be
brought to glory. O infinite loss! What overwhelming sorrow must it bring those
into who shall suffer it?

How deeply do some resent temporal losses; the loss of their estate and
substance, the loss of near and loved relatives, a consort, or a child? Many
years sometimes, do not wear out the impression of such losses. They that bear
them, do as Jacob said he should for the supposed death of Joseph, go down to
the grave mourning Genesis xxxvii. 37.
. This sorrow of the world works death, breaks the constitution, and bring on
those diseases that end in death. And if the loss of creature comforts be so
hard to bear, what will the loss of the blessed God be? And, as one speaks Dr.
Bates.
, If Cain, when banished from the society of the saints, wherein God was
publicly worshipped, and graciously made himself known, cried out in anguish of
soul, My punishment is greater than I can bear, putting the accent of grief
here, And from thy face shall I be hid Genesis iv. 13, 14.
; how intolerable will the final separation from his glorious and joyful
presence be?

I know carnal and earthly minds, are not much affected now, with the
consideration of this punishment of loss. If the loss of God, of Christ, and of
Heaven, was all they were to suffer in the next world, they think it would be
no such great matter, they could bear this well enough. But they will have other
apprehensions of this hereafter. The damned in hell will have a constant,
quick, and lively apprehension of the happiness they have lost. Their
understandings will be enlarged and assisted to take a prospect of it, on
purpose to aggravate their grief. They will also see much of the happiness of
the saints in the great day: They will see with what glorious bodies they are
raised, how joyfully they are embraced by Christ, and what honors he puts upon
them; see how they ascend smiling, triumphing, shining, with him their Lord
into the highest heavens. This will give them a sensible conviction how great
happiness they have lost, and this they will always remember to their greater
vexation. Thus the punishment of hell, is a punishment of loss.

2. It is a punishment of sense. With the loss of the greatest good, will be
joined the suffering of the greatest evil. This part of their punishment is set
forth to us in scripture, by fire quickened and enraged with brimstone. Whether
this be material or metaphorical, the intenseness or extremity of their torment
is signified thereby.

If it be material fire, as the scripture, in what it says of it, would lead us
to think; it is of a different nature from ours, and such as can act on a
spiritual substance, such as devils and damned ghosts Indeed it is difficult to
conceive how a material fire can act on a spiritual substance. But it is
unreasonable to determine that it is impossible. For if we consider what pain
is, it is as conceivable how pure spirits are capable of it, as spirits in
conjunction with bodies. The humane soul in its nature is spiritual as the
angels, yet has a painful sense of fire, or other afflictive evils incumbent on
the senses. The body merely feels not pain, but it passes through the body to the
soul. If the soul by a strong diversion of tho'ts apply it self to an object,
the body is insensible of pain, as is evident in some diseases; and that in the
heat of battle deep wounds are not felt. And as God by a natural constitution
has ordered, that the body so touched and moved, excites a painful sense in the
soul; he may have ordained that devils shall feel the impressions of material
fire, in the place to which they shall be confined. Dr. Bates.
. "It is a peculiar fire, for a peculiar terrible purpose. It is something
which God has created and made by his infinitive power, to be his instrument to
punish and torment his rebellious creatures, to afflict the bodies and souls of
wicked men, and even spirits which have no bodies".

But if it be metaphorical, and the torments of hell are only shadowed out to
us by fire and brimstone, as the happiness of heaven is represented to us by
feasting, eating bread, and drinking wine, etc.; then it will follow, that the
torments of hell are unspeakably greater, than for one to be cast alive into a
furnace or lake of fire. This is but a weak and faint representation of that;
is but as painted fire to rea^ fire.

It is but just and reasonable that sinners should suffer, both in their bodies
and in their souls. They sin in both. The body is not only the souls partner,
but instrument in sinning. And therefore shall be punished in all the parts,
members, and senses of it; which have been all defiled with sin, and yielded as
members of unrighteousness.

But the soul being the chief sinner in this world, shall be the chief sufferer
in the other. That shall suffer beyond what the body is capable of, from the
immediate impressions of divine vindictive wrath. The essence of the punishment
of hell lies in this, THE WRATH OF THE ETERNAL GOD, FILLING AN IMMORTAL SOUL,
WHOSE FACULTIES ARE VASTLY ENLARGED TO RECEIVE THE IMPRESSIONS OF THAT WRATH.
What the most enraged fire is to the body, that, and more than that, is this to
the soul. And as the body will be tormented in all its members, so will the
soul in all its faculties.

The mind will have presented to it dreadful visions of horror. It will then
have the most dismal apprehensions of the evil of sin, the holiness, justice,
power, majesty and eternity of God. Then the vail of judicial blindness will be
taken away, and the spirit of deep sleep which is now upon sinners will go off,
and they will be powerfully convinced of those things, which here they did not
apprehend, or would not realise. Nor will they be able to take off their own
tho'ts from those things which trouble and torment them.

The will remains, and strongly wishes for good, but finds none; can meet with
nothing but what is evil, what it is averse from and contrary to.

The conscience will always be accusing and condemning, lashing and scourging,
for sins committed, and duties neglected; for the many calls of God which have
been refused, and the strivings of the Spirit which have been resisted.

The MEMORY will then be employed in recollecting what is past, for present
disquiet. As old sins, so former mercies will then be bro't to remembrance,
which were made an ill use of, and can never be enjoyed more. So Jerusalem
remembered in the days of her affliction and misery, all her pleasant things,
which she had in the days of old, Lam. i. 7. And so Abraham said to the rich
man, Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, Luke xvi.
25.

Finally, All the tormenting passions of the soul will then be moved and at
work. The most confounding shame, overwhelming sorrow, pining envy, violent
fury, cruel hatred, and sinking despair. All these tormenting passions will
then be let loose upon the soul, and be to that, worse than so many gnawing
worms upon the vital and most tender parts of the body. Thus the soul will be
the seat and subject of the greatest suffering, and will be continually its own
tormentor.

Nor may any one think this is light and easy to be born; for great is the
power of the mind to torture and torment. Yea, of all torments that of the mind
is the worst. The spirit of a man can sustain his infirmity, but a wounded
spirit who can bear? Prove. xviii. 4. Of the intolerableness of this there have
been some unhappy instances in this world. Judas whose anguish of spirit put
him upon destroying himself. Spira and others, whose breath has smelt of the
brimstone of hell fire, in their direful outcries, and blasphemous expressions.
Yea, we have an image of this in the agonies of spirit, and troubles of
conscience, which some of God's children have been in. Job was afflicted in
such a manner, that he complains, The arrows of the almighty are within me, the
poison whereof drinks up my spirits. The terrors of God do set themselves in
array against me Job vi. 4.
David's complaint is as bitter, Thine arrows stick fast in me, thy hand
presses me sore. I have rored by reason of the disquietness of my heart Psalm
xxxviii. 2, 8.
And Heman seems to exceed, Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness,
in the deeps. Thy wrath lies hard upon me; and thou have afflicted me with all
thy waves. Lord, why castest thou off my soul, why hidest thou thy face from
me? I am afflicted and ready to die: While I suffer thy terrors, I am
distracted. Thy fierce wrath goes over me, thy terrors have cut me off, Psalm
lxxxviii. 6, 7, 15, 16.

And above all, How great were the sufferings of CHRIST in his soul, in the day
when the Lord laid on him the iniquities of his people, and the sense of his
father's wrath due to them was let into his soul^ He was sore amazed! His soul
was exceeding sorrowful! The agonies of his spirit threw him into a bloody
sweat; forced through the pores of his blessed body, great drops of blood falling
down to the ground! What great sufferings then, must we suppose the souls of
sinners to be the subjects of ^n the other world, when the almighty will render
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every SOUL of man that
does evil? Romans ii. 9. Thus the punishment of the damned in both the kinds of
it, that of sense, and that of loss, will be extreme and intolerable.

IV. We come now to mention some heavy circumstances which heighten their
punishment, and help to render it extreme and intolerable. I might here mention,

1. That of the place. Than which no place can be more dismal and
uncomfortable. It is therefore called a prison, a pit, a fiery and smoking
furnace, a place of utter darkness, where there is blackness of darkness for
ever. 2. The company. If they must suffer in such a place, may they not have
some good company there, to minister to their support and relief? O no! their
company will add to their misery. Devils and damned spirits will be very
vexatious and uneasy companions to one another. For they are all extremely
miserable and extremely wicked both. They will suffer from the rage and madness
of one another. And they will hear from each other nothing but disquieting
groans, piercing shrieks, and horrid blasphemies. David laments himself, Psa.
cxx. 5. Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar;
among a people rude and barbarous, hatful and hating. But how miserable must
they be, who are everlastingly to dwell with such companions and associates as
devils and damned spirits? 3. They will have nothing to refresh them under
their sufferings. There will be none of the delights of sense, for the soul to
divert the tho'ts of its own miseries with. All former pleasures are entirely
past away. They Will meet with none of those objects which pleased and gratified
them here. They Will indeed carry their sensual lusts with them into the other
world, but meet with no objects to satisfy the same. What is said of Babylon
upon her fall, may be truly said of them in hell, Rev. xviii. 14. That all
things which their souls lusted after are departed from them. 4. Their
sufferings will have no intermission nor abatement. This is a furnace in which
the fire never goes out, nor so much as decays. They Will be so far from having a
release, that they will have no relaxation. David's complaint will be more
pathetically theirs, Day and night thy hand was heavy upon me Psalm xxxii. 4.
. They shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without
mixture, into the cup of his indignation; and be tormented with fire and
brimstone, in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the lamb;
and have NO REST DAY NOR NIGHT, Rev. xiv. 11, 12. 5. The apprehension of others
happiness will add to their misery. That the perception of the saints glory,
will b^ a great aggravation of sinners misery, our Lord has told us, Luke xiii.
28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and you your
selves thrust out. They will not be able to bear it, that others are happy
while they are miserable; that others are in the mansions of light and glory
above, while they are in the regions of darkness and misery below. Psalm cxii.
10. The wicked shall see it, and be grieved; he shall gnash with his teeth, and
melt away. And what will render this part of their misery more acute and
afflictive, will be the consideration, That this very blessedness was once
offered to them, as well as those who are now enjoying it; and they might have
been in the present actual possession of it, if they had not been wanting to
themselves; if they had not neglected and disobeyed the Savior who would have
bro't them to it also. 6. They are without pity from any. Here in griefs that
cannot be remedied, sympathy in others, and pity from them, is some small
relief, and helps to assuage the troubled mind. Therefore Job says, To him that
is afflicted, pity should be showed Job vi. 14.
. But the damned in hell have not this least of comforts. In their most pitious
state they are absolutely unpitied. The devils don't pity them: They are
destitute of love, kindness, and pity, since their fall, and the loss of their
original holiness; their tender mercies are cruelties. Their fellow sufferers
don't pity them; for all humane tender affections are lost in hell: The wicked
there are hateful and hating one another. The holy angels, and the blessed
spirits in heaven, don't pity them; for they are not the objects of pity, their
misery being the effect of their own obstinate choice. The saints in heaven
will not pity their nearest relations in hell. For they now know them no more
after the flesh. The love which they once bare to them is now swallowed up in
the love of God. Neither will the blessed God pity them. All their agonies and
cries will not move his heart. His compassions now fail for everm^re, and he
has in anger shut up his tender mercies Psalm lxxvii. ^^, 89.
. For we must know God's pity is not moved as ours is, naturally and
necessarily. Others misery naturally moves our pity, whether we will or no. But
God's pity and mercy are never moved without an act of his will. Therefore he
says, I will not pity Jer. xiii. 1^.
. Instead of pitying them, He will laugh at their calamity, and mock when their
fear comes, Prove. i. 26.

Once more,

7. As they are without pity from others, so they are without hope in
themselves. Hope is the last refuge of men in trouble in this world, but it
leaves sinners in hell. They are no sooner there, but they fall into total
desparation. For when a wicked man dies his expectation perishes, Prove. xi.
7. Whatever tho'ts they pleased and deluded themselves with before, now they will
know the decree is irreversible, their state remediless: That as their tree
fell, so it must lie for ever Eccles. xi. 3.
. They will utterly despair of its ever being better with them th^n it is:
Their present misery is insupportable, and they will always fear more to come.
And this is the very height of misery, to have nothing to hope, and much to
fear! Psalm xlix. 19. They shall never see light. But the Eternity of hell
punishments is to be the subject of our next discourse, and I would not
anticipate it here. --

From what has been said in the present discourse concerning the Eternity of
them, Let secure sinners, who are sleeping as upon the top of a mast; who are
hanging by the slender thread of life, over the lake of fire and brimstone; be
awakened and effectually excited to fly from the wrath to come, and to work out
their own salvation with fear and trembling! --

Let all serve to make sin formidable, Christ precious, and the gospel offer of
salvation acceptable to every soul of us? --

Let us think no care too much, no pains too great, to escape such extreme
misery! Let this be our earnest and constant prayer, LORD, Gather not my soul
with sinners! However thou dealest with me in this world, let me, by thy mercy
and grace, be delivered from condemnation in the next: that I may never know by
experience, what it is to dwell with devouring fire, and to inhabit everlasting
burnings!


The Eternity OF Hell Punishments.
REVELATIONS XIV. II. AND the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and
ever.


NEXT to there being no hell at all, the most acceptable doctrine to a sinner
would be, that the punishment of hell is temporary, and should sometime or
other come to an end. This is what satan, that old deceiver, would induce men
to believe if he could; and this is what the sinner would fain flatter himself
with the hopes of. If therefore they cannot raze such words as everlasting, for
ever and ever, out of their bibles, they will try what softning interpretation can
be put upon them; whether by some weak criticism of language, or trifling
cavils of carnal reason, they cannot overthrow a doctrine which gives them so
much disturbance in their sins, and puts such a block in the way of their
unlawful pursuits.

The Eternity of the punishment of hell is what above any thing makes it so
dreadful. If men did once imagine it to be any thing short of an endless
duration, their fear of it, and care to avoid it would proportionably abate;
the threatenings of God would loose their force and terror; and when men heard
the words of the curse, they would bless themselves in their hearts, saying, We
shall have peace, though we walk the imagination of our hearts xxix. 19.
.

Lest therefore there should be any among us, flattering themselves with such
delusive and destructive hopes, through the subtilty of satan, the slight of men,
or the efficacy of natural unbelief, I purpose now, by divine help, to
discourse to you of the eternity of the torments of hell, as I have before of
the reality and extremity of them. And as an introduction to this discourse, I
have taken the words now read unto you, And the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever.

From the 6. ver. of this chapter, we are told of three angels, or messengers,
sent from heaven, to give notice of the fall of Babylon, and of those things
that were antecedent and consequent to that great event.

The first angel was sent on an errand previous to it; and that was to preach
the gospel, the everlasting gospel to them that dwell on the earth: that so men
might be bro't to fear God, and give glory to him; because the hour of his
judgment was come, verse 6, 7.

The second angel follows the other, and proclaims the actual fall of Babylon,
saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city; because she has made
all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.

A third angel follows the other two, and gives warning to all of that divine
vengeance, that tremendous punishment, which would overtake all that
obstinately adhered to the antichristian interest, and persisted in their
damning idolatries. They should drink deep of the wine of the wrath of God,
poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and be tormented
with fire and ^imstome, in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence
of the lamb, verse 10^ A very dreadful vengeance this! Inflicted by CHRIST
himself on his enemies, his holy angels beholding it and approving it. And what
gives weight and terror to the punishment it self is, the continuance and
duration thereof. This is not for any term of time, but for ever and ever. And
the smoke of their torment ascends up (...)
for ever and ever. Words expressive of an endless and interminable duration;
as may be shown by and by. And if the smoke of their torment ascends for ever
and ever, then their persons must endure so long in their torment. This is what
is called the second death, in 20th chapter 14th verse, and is to be the
portion not of Idolaters only, but of all obstinate and impenitent sinners, of
all that retain their pleasant and profitable sins, of all such as know not
God, and obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The point of DOCTRINE to be spoken to from the words is this, The torments of
the damned in hell will be ETERNAL, and never never have an end.

Eternity is an amazing thing! O the vastness of an endless duration! Who can
measure the length of it? While we strive to reach it, it is still further off
from us! When we have set off as many thousands and millions of years, as
numbers can reckon up, we are no nearer to an end, than before we began!
Divines have stretched their wits to represent eternity, that apprehensions of
it might be more suitable and affecting, but were never able to reach it.

Eternity does not waste at all as time does. There is not the less duration to
come for all that is past. The damned in hell are not at all nearer an end of
their punishment, for having lain long in it. It will never be nearer an
expiration, than when they first went away into it. In a word, They will always
have an eternity of torments to expect and endure.

This now is the very hell of hell; that which is most terrible in it. This is
what men are most loath to believe concerning it; what they would fain argue and
dispute away the truth of, and therefore what we shall at this time endeavor
the confirmation of.

For this end I propose to show, 1. How plainly, strongly, and incontestably
this is revealed to, and taught us, in the word of God. 2. Why, or whence it
is, that the torments of the damned are to be, and must be, nothing less than
eternal. And. 3. How weak and insufficient the objections, or rather cavils
are, with which some would oppose it.


1. To show you how plainly, strongly, and incontestably, this truth is
revealed to and taught us in the word of God.

And if the eternity of hell torments is a scripture doctrine, this is
sufficient to convince those of the truth of it, who profess to regulate their
faith by the bible. Now, as this is a most important doctrine, so God has been
pleased to reveal and make it known in his inspired word, in such a manner, so
plainly, clearly, and strongly, as one would think should leave no room for so
much as doubting, much less denial.

Here

1. We find the words eternal, everlasting, for ever, for ever and ever, joined
with the torments of hell, the misery of the damned, throughout the book of God.
Isai. xxxiii. 14. The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised
the hypocrites thereof: who among us shall dwell with devouring fire? who
amongst us shall dwell with EVERLASTING BURNINGS? Dan. xii. 2. They that sleep
in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to
shame and EVERLASTING CONTEMPT. Mat. xxv. 41. Then shall be say also unto them
on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into EVERLASTING FIRE. Verse 46.
These shall go away into EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT. 2 Thessalonians. i. 7, 8, 9. When the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty angels, in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with EVERLASTING DESTRUCTION from
the presence of the Lord. 2 Pet. ii. 17. To whom is reserved the mist of
darkness FOR EVER. Jude 7. verse, Suffering the vengeance of ETERNAL FIRE. Rev.
xx. 10. And shall be tormented day and night FOR EVER AND EVER. And in the
words of our text, The smoke of their torment ascends up FOR EVER AND EVER.

It is true, the words everlasting, and for ever, are sometimes used in
scripture, as well as in common speech, for a duration that will have an end.
But when they are so used, the sense is obvious, and the nature of the thing
spoken of, sufficiently shows the meaning in which they are to be taken; and,
which is of great weight, they commonly signify too that the thing spoken of
shall endure, as long as the subject of it does endure. Thus for instance, when
the hills are called everlasting hills, (Genesis xlix. 26.) every one readily
apprehends they are so called, because while other things perish out of the
world in a number of years, these will remain till this lower world it self,
which they are so conspicuous a part of, will be dissolved. Thus also the
priesthood entailed upon Phineas's family, for his pious zeal in the matter of
Zimri and Cosbi, is called ( Numb. xxv. 13.) an everlasting priesthood, because
it should continue to the period of the old testament dispensation. So, when
it is said the leprosy of Naaman should cleave to him, and his posterity for
ever. (2 Kings v. 27.) the meaning is plainly this, That so long as any of his
posterity remained, that evil disease should cleave to them. After the same
manner, when it is said, Eccles. i. 4. One generation passes away, and another
generation comes: but the earth abides for ever; the sense is most obviously
this, That the earth is to remain, till the several generations of men designed
by God to be born, are completed. In such a way as this, the words
everlasting, and for ever, are sometimes used for a duration that will have an
end. But they cannot be so understood when applied to, and joined with future
punishments: And this for the following weighty reasons.

1. The same words are used to express the everlasting misery of the wicked, as
are used to express the everlasting happiness of the godly in the other world.
Thus when it is said, in Mat. xxv. 46. These shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal, one and the same word is used
in the original. Our translation indeed gives two words of the same import, and
of equal extent, everlasting and eternal. But the same word is used in the
greek to signify the duration of the happiness of the one, and the punishment
of the other (...).
. If therefore the happiness of the godly in the other world must be understood
to be eternal, and their blessedness to be such as shall have no end, (which
none deny) we must understand the same of the misery and punishment of the
wicked. Both are spoken of exactly in the same manner, without any the least
intimation of a difference in the duration of them. And which makes the matter
clearer, 2. The happiness of the godly, and the misery of the wicked, are set
in direct opposition one to another. These shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. The direct opposition, between
everlasting punishment and everlasting life, in these words of our Savior, is
a convincing argument they are to be understood in the same extent, for an
absolute eternity. And which is still more,

3. The eternity of hell torments, is expressed in the same words that are used
to express the eternity of God himself. Thus when we read of the everlasting
God (...).
, in Romans xvi. 26, the same word is used as when we read of everlasting fire,
everlasting punishment, and everlasting destruction, in the places that have
been mentioned. And thus the phrase in our text used to express the eternity of
hell torments, viz. for ever and ever, is used to express God's own eternity.
Rev. v. 14. Him that lives for ever and ever: and in other places. So that if
God's own eternity can be proved from scripture, the eternity of hell torments
is to be proved from it also. The eternity of both is spoken of just in the
same manner; and there is as much scripture proof of this as there is of the
other. And indeed the words for ever and ever, used in our text, and in other
places respecting the torments of hell, are used no where in the new testament,
where they are to be understood of any thing less than an endless duration. I
find them used eighteen or twenty times, and always importing an endless
duration.
2. Every thing that relates to the torment of the damned, is in scripture said
to be eternal. Thus God, the author of their punishment, is the eternal God,
the everlasting Jehovah, who ever lives to punish. Hence it is said to be a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God Heb. x. 31.
. The fire that torments them is everlasting fire, that never goes out, as the
worm that gnaws them is said never to die. Which words are repeated three times
by our Savior, for their greater certainty, and more heedful observation. Mark
ix. 44, 46, 48. WHERE THEIR WORM DIES NOT, AND THE FIRE IS NOT QUENCHED. --
WHERE THEIR WORM DIES NOT, AND THE FIRE IS NOT QUENCHED. -- WHERE THEIR WORM
DIES NOT, AND THE FIRE IS NOT QUENCHED. The chains that hold them in their
torment are called everlasting chains, Jud. 6. ver. And, which is very
considerable in the present argument, the judgment by which they are condemned
to it, is called eternal judgment, Heb. vi. 2. Now, it cannot be called eternal
judgment in respect of the continuance of administration, but only with a
regard to the effect and issue of it. The act of judgment is not eternal, for
the process will be over in time, though it may l^st long; but the result and
consequences of it are eternal: It determines men's state unalterably and for
ever. Thus, not only is the punishment of the damned said to be eternal, but
every thing that relates and conduces to it, is said to be so also.

3. Agreeable to all this, the scripture represents the condition of sinners in
the other world to be hopeless and desperate. Thus we are told, When a wicked
man dies, his expectation shall perish, Prove. xi. 7. That the eyes of the
wicked shall fail, and their hope be as the giving up of the ghost, Job x. 20.
That they that go down to the pit cannot hope for God's truth, Isai. xxxv. 18.
All which expressions, are to show the sinners case and state in the other
world to be desperate, and such as admits of no possibility of relief. For
where any possibility is, hope will still abide and fasten upon it; and
therefore if all hope be taken away, it is a plain sign there is not any ground
to support and encourage it.

And hence it is that hell is called the place of outer and utter darkness,
because the condition of those that are in it, is for ever hopeless and
remediless; and they are without the most distant reserves of mercy. If there
were any hope in hell, it would not be the place of utter darkness. No, the
hope that the torment of it would ever come to an end, though thousands and
millions of years off, would let down a gleam of light into those dark regions;
and be like the star light to the horrors of the night. But because there is
nothing of this, therefore it is called the blackness of darkness for ever.

Thus we see, how plainly and strongly the doctrine of the eternity of hell
torments, is taught us in the word of God. The scripture speaks of the eternity
of the punishment of the wicked in the other world, in words that import an
endless duration, in the same manner that it speaks of the eternity of the
happiness of heaven, yea of the eternity of God himself. It speaks of every
thing that relates to their punishment as being eternal. And agreeable to this,
it every where represents the condition of sinners in the other world, as
hopeless and desperate. After this manner is this doctrine taught us in the
holy scriptures; so plainly and fully, that words cannot be found out to express
it in a fuller or clearer manner.

II. The second thing proposed was, to show, why or whence it is, that the
punishment of the damned is to be, and must be, nothing less than eternal. The
resolving this into the reasons of it, will not only help to clear the
righteousness of God in it, but be so many arguments further to evince the
truth and certainty hereof.

This indeed might be resolved into the will and determination of God; and
there is good reason why his creatures need look no further: For we are sure,
whatever God wills and determines cannot be unreasonable, unjust or unholy, but
must perfectly agree with the excellencies and perfections of his nature,
however it may appear to our depraved reason. Yet we have several things to
offer as reasons of the doctrine, and for the showing how fitting, agreeable,
and just it is, for God to punish sin and sinners everlastingly.

1. A less punishment would not be a suitable sanction to the divine law.

Where a law is not guarded and enforced by suitable sanctions, the wisdom o^
power of the lawgiver may be called in question. The sanctions must be suited to
the nature and capacity of the subject for whom the law is designed. Now, as
man is an immortal creature, a creature made and designed by God for an endless
life, it is certainly most fit and suitable for him, to be ruled by a law that
promises an immo^tal reward, and threatens an endless punishment. Otherwise the
law would not be framed agreeable to the nature of the subject, who will not be
fully ruled by any lower means, than the hopes and fears of everlasting things.

Indeed, we find by sad observation and experience, that these are not always
sufficient to keep men within the compass of their duty, and to restrain them
from sin. For the sake of some momentany pleasure or profit, or for the fear of
some present temporal detriment and inconvenience, men will every day break
God's law, and thereby hazard the loss of eternal good, and incur the enduring
everlasting evils. This makes it plain that such a sanction is no more than is
needed. If it was any thing lower, and the punishment threatened was but
temporary and limited, how much more bold would sinners be in transgressing the
divine law? And might they not then with some reason too, lay the fault upon
the lawgiver, for being so defective as not to enforce his law with a suitable
penalty?

2. A less punishment would not be proportionable to the guilt of sin.

There is an infinite guilt in sin: it offends against an infinite majesty; it
violates those infinite obligations we are under to subjection and obedience to
him, and reflects an infinite dishonor to his laws and government: Therefore
an infinite punishment does but come up to the demerit of it. A punishment
infinite in duration, because an infinite weight of wrath at once, cannot be
born by a finite creature.

And if any think a temporary punishment may suffice for it, this is because
they have light tho'ts of sin, and don't see how exceeding sinful it is. If
nothing but the blood of the son of God, which was the blood of God, inasmuch
as He was God and man in one person; and which was a satisfaction infinite in
value, the dignity of his person giving such a merit to his sufferings: If, I
say, nothing less than His blood, could procure a pardon for believing
repenting sinners; what less punishment than eternal, can reasonably be
supposed, to be inflicted upon sinners that are finally impenitent and
unbelieving, and so cut themselves off from the benefit of his satisfaction?

3. The truth of God is now concerned to make the punishment of the damned
eternal.

For what we read in scripture of eternal punishments, are not threatenings
only, (and if they were, it is certainly most agreeable to the divine
perfections they should be fully executed; The reader may see this argument
excellently well pursued in Dr. Wigglesworth's Lecture Sermon, concerning the
duration of future punishments.
for it is unbecoming the great Governor of the world to affix penalties to his
laws, which he never intends to execute;) but they are open declarations of
God's purpose and resolution, plain predictions of matters of fact, solemn
assurances of what shall certainly come to pass, in the accomplishment and
execution of which the divine veracity is concerned.

That none may persuade and flatter themselves, that the judge will in the
great day be more favorable than the threatening of the law, He who is to be
the judge has told us, that the wicked shall not only be sentenced to
everlasting fire, but that the sentence shall be executed. Mat. xxv. 46. THESE
SHALL GO AWAY INTO EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT. This is no other than a strong and
positive affirmation: an express declaration of God's invariable decree, will,
and purpose. Christ, the faithful and true witness, has told us this, as
directly and positively, as he has any thing else relating to the last
judgment, or concerning any other fact of his gospel; and we have as little
reason to suspect he has a reserved meaning in this particular, as in any other
whatsoever. So that the truth of God in his word, obliges him to make the
punishment of the wicked eternal. For God is not a man, that he should lie; nor
the son of man, that he should repent: has He said, and shall he not do it? or
has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? Numb. xxiii. 19.

4. The punishment of the damned in hell must be eternal, that so the justice
of God may have its everlasting display.

Every divine attribute is to shine forth with an eternal luster; for they are
all dear and glorious to him, one as well as another. His wisdom, power, and
goodness, will be eternally manifested in the things which he has made in the
upper world. His grace and mercy will for ever be admired and magnified in the
salvation of a remnant of lost sinners, who will then be made vessels of glory.
His justice, that must take place, and act its part, in rendering to sinning
angels and men according to their works, in the due and proportionable
punishment of their offenses, and that is in their suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire. The glory of this attribute cannot endure for ever, if there are
not some to be the everlasting monuments of it.

5. The damned in hell are, and for ever will be, utterly unqualified for the
divine favor; therefore their punishment will be endless and everlasting.

They are filthy still, unholy still, impenitent still; their hearts are as
full of enmity to God, hatred of holiness, and love to sin as ever. Their
punishment works no change in their nature or will. "They have abundant
conviction indeed, but no true conversion. They are full of sorrow, but not
godly sorrow. In all their bitter wailings their is no holy mourning". They
grieve for their own misery, but not for God's dishonor. If a new life was
granted them, it would be filled up with new sins and provocations. Nay, they
keep on sinning still. As Amon in his affliction, so they in their misery,
trespass more and more. We have a true representation of the condition and
temper of the damned, in what we read of the antichristian idolaters, the
worshipers of the beast, Rev. xvi. 9, 10. They were scorched with great heat,
and blasphemed the name of God, which has power ever these plagues, and they
repented not to give him glory! They gnawed their tongues for pain, and
blasphemed the God of heaven, because of their pains and sores, and repented
not to give him glory. Thus soul "in the fire of hell are not melted, bu^
rather hardened. And from hence it appears that they are the proper objects o^
divine revenging justice for ever and ever^ They are for ever unqualified for
the divine favor, and therefore must never have it extended to them.

III. We proceed to the third thing proposed, To show how weak and insufficien^
the objections, or rather cavils, are, wit^ which some would weaken this truth.

It need not surprise or stumble any, that this truth, how plainly soever it is
revealed in the scriptures, should be denied by some: This does not at all
weaken its credit, or bring it under any suspicion with wise and considering
persons. For which of the truths of the gospel has not been struck at? Satan
has a spite against them all, and has in the several ages of the church
spirited some to oppose them all in their turns. They have all of them stood a
trial. And that they are preserved to this day, and still owned and professed
in the church of God, is a mark of their divinity, an evidence that they indeed
came from heaven. In the days of the Apostles, there were those who erred
concerning the truth, even in such an important point as that of the
resurrection, to the endangering the faith of many, and the overthrowing the
faith of some; their words did cat as does a canker, as the Apostle Paul says
of them, in his second epistle to Timothy, ii. 17, 18. And in his first
epistle, chap. i. 6, 7. He speaks of some others, who had swerved from the
faith, and turned aside unto vain jangling; desiring to be teachers of the law,
but understanding not what they said, nor whereof they affirm. And in another
place he tells us, that evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse; which
was one thing that would make the last days, which are now come upon us, so
perilous: Upon this account he gives this needful advice to Timothy, Continue
thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been assured of, knowing
of whom thou have learned them, 2 Timothy iii. 14.

Having given this general remark, I shall now suggest something, by way of
answer to the most plausible cavils or objections, that any bring against this
truth. And these are taken from the justice and righteousness of God; from the
love, goodness and mercy of God; from the grace and glory of God; or from the
redemption of Christ, which some will have to be universal.

1. Some take an objection against this truth, from the justice and
righteousness of God; and would represent it as inconsistent herewith, for God
to punish the transient sins of men in this mortal life, with eternal torments
in another.

In answer to whom it may be said, We are but very incompetent judges of what
agrees with the justice of God, and what does not. That may well eno' agree
with this, and other the perfections of God, which we can scarcely apprehend to
do so.

But especially are weincompetent judges in the present case, concerning the
desert of sin; and this on two accounts. We are both blind and partial. We are
blind and ignorant, and don't fully know the desert of sin; nor can we, unless
we fully knew the majesty and greatness of that God it offends against, the
reason and holiness of that law which it violates, the excellency of that image
of God which it defaceth, the preciousness of that blood which it tramples
under foot, and counts an unholy thing, and the worth of that soul which it
despises and destroys. And we are as partial as we are blind; because we our
selves are concerned in it. And as reasonable is it for an offender and
criminal, to judge the law and the proceedings of the judge, as for sinners to
determine what is just and righteous for God to do in the punishment of sin.
But then, though the act be transient and temporary, the injury and offense is
objectively infinite, (as has been already observed) and such as the offense is
must the demerit be. A permanent guilt may also be contracted by a transient
act. "And, as one has well observed, no government in the world ever though it it a
rule to be observed in punishing, as required by equity and justice, that the
pain and penalty inflicted, should last no longer than that space of time which
the crime took up in the commission of it. Therefore some have been put to
death from whence they can never be restored, and some have been banished or
imprisoned for a long time, perhaps during life, in punishment of crimes which
were committed in a very small space of time, and yet no injustice imputed to
the law or judges".

But that which fully clears the justice and righteousness of God here is, That
the sinner has but his own option and choice, though he suffer everlasting
punishments.

To use here the words of Mr. Baxter, Life and death, says he, felicity and
misery, are set before us in the scriptures: Felicity is annexed to obedience,
misery to disobedience; and God tells us, that accordingly he will judge and
execute; and he offers every man his choice. He therefore that after this
does choose the sin which misery is annexed to, does choose the misery and refuse
the happiness. And therefore it is no wrong to cast him into misery, though
everlasting, as long as he has nothing but what he chose (in the causes of it)
and loses nothing but what he rejected, and that with wilful obstinacy to the
very last. Thus he. And this is but agreeable to what God himself says, Prove. i.
24, -- 31. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand,
and no man regarded. But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none
of my reproof. I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear
comes. When your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a
whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you. Then they shall call upon
me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find
me. For that they bated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. They
would none of my counsel; they despised all my reproof. Therefore shall they
eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.

2. Some will argue against this truth from the goodness and mercy of God, as
if these could not let any of his creatures be everlastingly miserable.

To this it may be replied, Though God is good and merciful, infinitely good and
merciful, yet his goodness and mercy don't work naturally and necessarily, as
these seem to suppose they do. There must always be an act of his will, for the
exercise of his goodness and mercy. God is a free agent, though a good and
merciful being. He has established the order in which these attributes shall be
exercised, which he will not depart from: And he has a sovereign right to choose
the objects thereof. Agreably he has said, I WILL HAVE MERCY, ON WHOM I WILL
HAVE MERCY, Exodus xxxiii. 19. And of some he has said, I WILL NOT PITY THEM.

The goodness and mercy of God will be exercised on the proper objects of it;
but the damned in hell are not the proper objects thereof, and therefore his
mercy may be withheld from them, and he remain merciful all the while. It is a
very just though it I have met with, "Such things as are naturally capable of the
divine goodness, may be legally incapable of it. And this is the case of
condemned sinners in another life. As creatures in misery they are naturally
capable of receiving the divine goodness and mercy, but as obstinate impenitent
sinners, they are legally and judicially incapable to receive them.

We read it is true, That mercy rejoiceth against judgment, James ii. 13. A text
which these sort of persons make much use of against the truth we are upon;
fondly imagining from thence that finally mercy alone will be displayed and
swallow up all in its own embraces. There will indeed be some who shall be
instances of the triumph of mercy, being prepared and qualified to receive it;
in these mercy will rejoice against judgment. But that there shall be no
monuments of justice, as these would carry it, this is far from the meaning of
the text: And indeed the verse out of which it is taken confutes them, and such
an interpretation: For the former part of the verse speaks of some who SHALL
HAVE JUDGMENT WITHOUT MERCY.

3. Some oppose this truth on pretense of advancing the glory of God's grace:
This they say would be mightily displayed, in the final recovery of the whole
apostate race, from their sin and misery into a state of salvation. To this let
me say,

That God certainly best knows in what way his grace will be most gloriously
displayed, and it becomes us to leave this to infinite wisdom, and spare our
own contrivances and projections. But after all, this would lessen and eclipse,
and not greaten and magnify the grace of God, as is pretended. For it is justly
observed, "That the display of the glory of divine grace, does not consist so
much in the extent of favor to a greater number of persons, as it does in its
being free and undeserved, and also special and distinguishing, and therefore
laying the highest obligation on such as are concerned in it; which is the most
known and proper sense of the word grace. Surely the everlasting punishment of
some for their sins, will render the grace of God to others, to the saved
remnant, the more glorious, and give a mighty luster to it. So the rejection of
the Jews, did mightily set off the grace of God in the reception of the
Gentiles. Romans xi. 22. Behold the goodness and severity of God; toward them
severity, but toward thee goodness. Agreably, the discriminating grace of God
in Christ, will be the subject of the song of the redeemed for ever, and be
sounded with the highest notes of praise. The new song, which will never wax
old, is sung by them to the Lamb, as having redeemed them to God, OUT OF every
kindred, and people, and nation, Rev. 5.9. They herein consider themselves as
the objects of distinguishing love and grace, redeemed from among the rest of
mankind; and how could they do this, if all the rest of mankind were saved, or
were to be saved as well as they? And this brings me to consider a fourth
objection or argument against the truth we are asserting and vindicating.

4. And this is taken from the work of redemption, which some will have to be
of an universal extent in the design of it, so as that the whole apostate race
of mankind shall finally have the benefit of it; yea, and the very devils
Origines olim universalem omnium creaturarum rationalium, usque ad ipsos
diabolos, salutem statuens, affirmabat: hujus vestigia, superiori seculo, legit
Francis^us Puccius, Italus, et Samuel Huberus, Helvetius, ex Reformato
Lutheranus; sed ab ips^s Lutheranis, ob enorme placitum, ejectus. Vid. Mastric.
Theolog. lib. 6. cap prim.. 17. And he has some weak disciples in our day, who
would ^ain tamper with the same doctrine.
too: For which end, they fancy the offers of salvation by Christ, will be made
to devils and condemned sinners in hell, which they will embrace, and so obtain
deliverance. A most wild absurdity, that has no foundation in scripture nor
reason; the reciting of which one would think sufficient to explode it: Yet
there is some occasion to return a direct answer to it. I shall therefore now
inquire into these two things, 1. Whether Christ died for all men, and not only
for all men, but for the very devils? Whether God designed the salvation of all
mankind, and of the fallen angels, by the death of Christ; and this shall
finally be accomplished in consequence hereof? And 2. Whether there are any
offers of salvation by Christ, made to devils and condemned sinners in the
place of punishment?

1. Whether Christ died for all men, and for the devils also? There are two
different ranks or orders of fallen creatures concerned in this question, and
so we shall consider them distinctly.

(1.) Let us inquire, Whether Christ died for all men? The question is not
whether the death of Christ was sufficient to redeem the whole world of
mankind, if it had been so intended and accepted by God; this is allowed by
all, and results from the infinite value of it Nor are we here to consider the
doctrine of universal redemption, as it is held by such as are in the arminian
scheme: For though they hold universal redemption, they don't hold universal
salvation; making the purchase of greater extent than the application. How
justly or consistently, I may not now stay to inquire. But would refer the
reader, that is capable, to Turretine, Van Mastricht, and other such authors.
And the english reader, that desires fuller information and better
establishment, to Cole's discourses on the sovereignty of God; our memorable
Mr. Willard's Lectures on the assemblies catechism, in which he shows himself a
great master in systematical and controversial divinity; and also to a late
worthy writer, the reverend Mr. Ridgley, a pious and learned minister in
London, who has wrote upon the assemblies larger catechism, in two volumes in
folio; in the first whereof, the doctrine of universal redemption, as held by
the arminians, is exploded, and the scriptures they bring for it particularly
examined and solidly answered; the opposite doctrine of special redemption
established on scripture foundations, and cleared from the misrepresentations
given of it, and the objections bro't against it, by those on the other side of
the question.
. But whether the salvation of the whole apostate race of mankind was designed
in the death of Christ, and shall finally be obtained in virtue thereof. Now
the scripture, which reveals the mystery of our redemption by Christ, teaches
us quite otherwise. They for whom Christ died, and to whom the benefits of his
redemption are therefore to be applied, are spoken of as a select number under
distinguishing characters. They are called his church. Ephesians. v. 25. Christ loved
the CHURCH, and gave himself for IT. Acts xx. 28. The CHURCH of God which he
has purchased with his own blood. And surely the world and the church are not
of equal extent. The church is a company, called out of the world, and is in it
as a garden enclosed from the common fields, Cant. iv. 12. They are called his
sheep, exclusive of the goats, John x. 15. I lay down my life for the sheep.
And that these are a distinguished number, and that the fruits of the purchase
of his death will be enjoyed by none but these, appears from what he says to
some in verse 26, Ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep. They are
called his seed, Isai. liii. 10. and his children, Heb. ii. 13. to distinguish
them from the seed of the serpent, and the children of this world. In Tit. ii.
14, they are called a peculiar people. And in Rev. v. 19. they are said to be
redeemed by his blood, out of every nation and people; which necessarily
supposes the rest of those nations and people, not to be equally redeemed with
them. And these redeemed ones are styled, the first fruits unto God and the
Lamb, chap. xiv. 4. Which appellation insinuates, that they were separated from
the rest, as the first fruits, the first born under the law were, by God
himself, who took them for his own portion. Numb. iii. 13. and viii. 16. In
fine, Christ died for none that he did not interceed for; and he did not
interceed for the world, but for those only who were given him by the father
out of the world, to redeem and bring to glory. In this strain runs his
intercessory prayer, in the xvii. chap. of John, made a little before he left
the world, and which is a specimen of what he ever lives to make within the
vail. Father! Glorify thy son, that thy son also may glorify thee. As thou
have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as
many as thou have given him. -- Thine they were, and thou gave them me. -- I
pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me,
for they are thine. -- They are not of the world, -- and for their sakes I
sanctify my self. -- Here intercession, which is of equal latitude with
redemption, is limited to a certain number, exclusive of the world.

Indeed, the objects of redemption are sometimes spoken of in scripture, in
such universal terms as these, all men, the world, the whole world. It is
needful therefore to inquire into the meaning, the true and genuine sense of
those places, which seem to assert the universal redemption of the children of
men; and whether diverse restrictions don't properly belong to them. Now, as to
the term all, it is often used in scripture, as well as in common speech, when
but a part, and sometimes by far the lesser part, of the subject spoken of, is
intended. Of this it is easy to give many instances. Take these which follow;
Mat. iii. 5, 6. Then went out to him, (i. e. John) Jerusalem, and all Judea,
and all the region round about Jordan, and were baptized of him. Surely none
will understand this of every individual person in those places, but of a
considerable number only. It is said again, All men held John as a prophet,
Mat. xxi. 26. "Whereas only a number did so; for the scribes and pharisees did
not, and many others who hated and persecuted him. We also read, John xxv^.
that Jesus baptized, and all men came unto him. "By which nothing more is
meant, than that many among the Jews attended on his ministry, which were by
far the smaller part of that nation.

And as to the term world, or the whole world, diverse restrictions belong to
it, and it has various acceptations in scripture. I shall not stay to give you
them all. It is sufficient for our present purpose to say, that by the world,
and the whole world, is frequently meant nothing more than all sorts of
persons, without distinction of sex, nation, estate, quality, or condition.

Thus the pharisees said of Christ, John xii. 19, The world is gone after him,
i. e. all sorts and degrees of persons. And sometimes it is to be understood of
the Gentiles in distinction from the Jews. As, to give one instance, in Romans
xi. 12, the Apostle says, The fall of them, i. e. the Jews, is the riches of
the world, i. e. the Gentiles; as is plain from the next words, which name the
Gentiles in opposition to the Jews. This will help us to understand such places
as that, in 1 John ii. 2, where it is said, Christ is the propitiation for our
sins; and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. By which
the Apostle means nothing more, than that Christ was the propitiation, no^ for
their sins only who were Jews, but for the sins of the believing Gentiles; or
of all that should believe in Christ, of whatever nation, quality, or condition
in the world. And thus upon a due examination of those scriptures upon which
some found the doctrine of universal redemption, and consideration of the
various limitations to which they are subject, it will appear they are by no
means sufficient for the purpose to which they are bro't. I cannot, within my
present limits, enter into a particular examination of them all; nor is it
needful; for what has been already said, may serve as an answer to many of
them. But there are two or three, which I would not pass over, because they are
main texts with such as hold the doctrine of universal redemption, in
opposition to that which is special and particular.

One is that, in 1 Cor. xv. 22. As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all
be made alive. And as parallel to this, they mention Romans v. 18, where it is
said, As by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation,
even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to
justification of life. From hence they argue, That the benefit by Christ is
equal to the damage by Adam; that justification and life by the second Adam, is
as large and extensive as the condemnation and death by the first. And so it
is, but not in their sense. The Apostle runs a parallel between the two Adams;
and makes the first to be a figure, or type (...).
of the other, of him that was to come. And they are alike in many respects.
Thus, Adam is a common head, so is Christ. Hence, as Adam has a natural seed,
so has Christ a spiritual seed. And, as Adam ruined all his seed, so Christ has
redeemed all his. But here is the difference, (the not apprehending of which
leads into the mistake) all the natural seed of Adam are not the spiritual seed
of Christ; but a number selected out of the other. There is a disparity, as
well as a parallel, between the two Adams. This the Apostle allows, saying, as
in verse 15. But not as the offense, so also is the free gift, i. e. there is a
difference between the communication of death by the first, and of life by the
second Adam; and, among others, this is one, The gift of righteousness and life
by the second Adam, does not extend to all the individuals that were ruined by
the offense of the first. So that the comparison is to be thus stated and
explained, Christ as effectually conveys life to all his seed, as Adam did
death to all his.

The other is that in Colos. i. 20. And, (having made peace by the blood of his
cross) by him to reconcile all things unto himself, by him, I say, whether they
be things in earth, or things in heaven. This place is generally looked upon to
be of difficult interpretation, and has pretty much exercised annotators, and
had various senses put upon it; and yet, if I may be allowed with all humility
to show my opinion, it admits of a very plain and easy interpretation, and I am
ready to wonder at the difficulty which has been made about it. To me the
meaning is only this, "That all things which are reconciled to God, are so by
Christ, which things so reconciled by him, are in heaven and in earth". For the
term all is often used to signify only those who are the objects of the thing
done for them. As for instance, when it is said, (Psalm cxlv. 14.) The Lord
upholdeth all that fall, and raises up all those that are bowed down. It cannot
be understood as if God raised up every individual person in the world, that is
bowed down by the weight of trouble and affliction; for some do sink under
their burden: but the meaning is, that all who are raised up when bowed down,
are so by God. Thus, when it is said God has reconciled all things to himself by
Christ; the meaning is not that all things, all creatures that ever offended
him, are actually reconciled; but that all who are made partakers of this
blessed privilege of reconciliation, are so by Christ, who made peace by the
blood of his cross. And these things, these creatures so reconciled, are in
heaven and in earth; one part of them the Apostle considers as being in heaven,
and the other part of them on earth, in their way to it. So that he here means
the whole company of redeemed sinners, who are elsewhere called the family in
heaven, and in earth, Ephesians. iii. 15.

(2.) It may be inquired, Whether Christ died for the sinning angels, or
devils; whether their redemption was at all intended in his death? And there is
nothing in scripture on which to found such an opinion, but the contrary. The
Apostle speaking of Christ (Heb. ii. 16.) says, Verily, He took not on him the
nature of angels: but he tock on him the seed of Abraham. Or, as the margin of
some of our bibles reads it, He takes not hold of angels, but of the seed
Abraham he takes hold. The angels fell, and he let them go, without putting
out the arm of mercy to recover them; and suffers them to lie in their fall
without hope or help. Christ never designed to be the Savior of fallen angels,
and therefore did not assume their nature. He is said to destroy satan by his
death, but not to save him. The 14th verse of that chapter, That through death he
might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil. Satan knew
that he should have no benefit by Christ, and this was what made him so full of
spite, rage and horror when Christ came into the world. What have we to do
with thee, Jesus, thou son of God? Thou art come hither, not to save, but to
torment us before the time, Mat. viii. 29. And therefore it is that he so
opposes Christ's kingdom and interest in the world to this day.

2. The other thing to be inquired into is, Whether there are any offers of
salvation made to the devils, and condemned sinners in the place of punishment?
No, verily! They never had, nor never will have any such offer. The scripture
speaks of the present day of life, as the day of grace and probation, as the
accepted time and day of salvation Heb. iii. 7 xiii. 1. 2 Cor. vi 2. Isai. lv.
6. Luke xiv. 42.
and supposes this to end at death. Isai. xxxviii. 18. The grave cannot praise
thee, death cannot celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit cannot hope
for thy truth. As the gospel which we now have in our hands is the last
dispensation, so the time of life which we now enjoy is the only season of
grace. Yet some would fain have the gospel preached in hell, and try to make
the scriptures say so. The places they bring for this purpose, are especially
two.

One is that, in 1 Pet. iii. 18, 19, 20. For Christ also has once suffered for
sins, the just for the unjust, (that he might bring us to God) being put to
death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit. By which [Spirit] also he went
and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient, when
once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a
preparing --. The meaning of which place is this, That Christ, before his own
coming in the flesh, did send Noah, that preacher of righteousness, and by His
Spirit enabled him to preach to the old world, who were disobedient, and for
their disobedience, their bodies being drowned by the flood, their spirits were
sent to the prison of hell, after the long-suffering of God had waited on them,
while the ark was building. In Noah's time, when they were preached to by the
Spirit of Christ in his ministry, they were on earth, but in Peter's time, when
he wrote of them, they were in hell, and therefore he calls them spirits in
prison; and this preaching to them was while they were on earth, not after they
were in hell. See Genesis vi. 3. and 2 Pet. ii. 5. compared with this place.

The other is that, in 1 Pet. iv. 6. For, for this cause was the gospel
preached to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in
the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit. If by the dead here are
meant such as are naturally dead, by a dissolution of soul and body, it means
the faithful of old, to whom the gospel was preached when alive on earth, but
are now dead in Christ. The words can have no relation to the preaching of the
gospel to any of the dead in Hades, in the separate state, for it is spoken of
as a thing already past and over with them. The text says the gospel was, or
has been, not is, or shall be preached to them that are dead (...),
praedicatum fuit evangelium.
But there is no necessity to understand the dead here spoken of, concerning
such as are naturally dead, and gone out of this world, but rather of such as
are spiritually dead while they live. Of the Gentiles of whom the Apostle is
plainly speaking in the context. To these Gentiles who were alienated from the
life of God, dead in trespasses and sins It was proverbially said by the Jewish
Doctors, Populi terrarum, i. e. Ethnici non vivunt, The Heathens do not live.
Whithy in loc.
, to these was the gospel preached, for two reasons mentioned 1. That they
might be judged according to men in the flesh: might be judged, i. e. condemned
and reproved; as men in the flesh (...). The phrase (...), in the new
testament, signifies to live, speak, or act, after the manner of mere natural
men, not acquainted with the mind of God, or not assisted by his Spirit. See
the Author above.
, or as natural men, i. e. for their former sinful fleshly life, when they
wro't the will of the Gentiles, and lived in lasciviousness, lusts, etc. as in
the 3. verse. And 2. That they might live according to God in the spirit; might
forsake their old sins, and live a new and spiritual life.

But if these interpretations should not give us the true and genuine meaning
of these texts, it makes nothing at all for those who would put such a perverse
sense upon 'em as we are now opposing. For their's cannot be the true meaning,
because it is contrary to the whole current of scripture, and the analogy of
faith. God has been pleased, for wise reasons, to leave some difficulties in
the holy scriptures. There are in them as the Apostle observes, things hard to
be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable, wrest, as they do
also the other scriptures that are plainer, to their own destruction, 2. Pet.
iii. 16. And it is sometimes much easier to say what is not, and cannot be the
meaning, than what is. But for any to ground opinions of dangerous consequence,
contrary to what the church of God, the pillar and ground of truth, has always
held, and against a multitude of other texts, upon one or two dark and doubtful
places, this, to say the least, shows great boldness and presumption. And how
easy a matter is it for such as regard not the analogy of faith, nor the
context of scripture, to prove in their way, even the wildest absurdities?

To conclude this head, The scripture gives us to understand, that when Christ
shall appear in the great day of judgment, his church will be perfected, his
mystical body filled up with all the members that are to be added to it; the
number of his elect completed; and so be presented to his father in such words
as these, Behold, here I am, and the children which thou have given me: and not
one will be missing of all the sons and daughters he was to bring to glory. See
Ephesians. iv. 12, 13. chap. v. 27. Heb. ii. 13. And John xvii. 24. Then his
mediatorial kingdom, which was given him by the father for the good of the
elect, and in order to the bringing them to glory, shall be delivered up, the
end and design of it being fully answered, in the salvation of his people, and
destruction of his enemies. 1 Cor. xv. 24. And the process of this day being
ended, and those who had the sentence of condemnation passed upon them, being
gone into everlasting punishment; and those who had pronounced upon them the
sentence of life, having entered into the kingdom prepared for them, and gone in
with the bridegroom to the marriage, THE DOOR WILL BE SHUT; as to secure those
that are within, so to seclude those that are without. Mat. xxv. 10. And how
does all this agree with new offers, and a second trial?

Thus I have finished the doctrinal part of these discourses, in which I have
studied plainness and brevity. It remains to make a short improvement of them,
1. By way of inference and instruction. 2. By way of counsel and advice.


First USE, by way of inference and instruction.

1. How great and terrible a God is He with whom we have to do! Who is able to
punish with an everlasting destruction, to destroy both soul and body in hell
for ever! Surely this God is great and greatly to be feared. As his favor is
to be valued more than life, so his displeasure is to be dreaded more than
death. With God is terrible majesty, and this a guilty world will find e're
long. Stand in awe therefore, and sin not. Let us have grace, whereby we may
serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear: For our God is a consuming
fire.

2. How great an evil must sin be! Hell is the just demerit of sin. It is sin
that has dug the pit of hell, and filled it with fire and brimstone; that turns
souls into it, and keeps them in it for ever and ever. It must then it self be
a dreadful evil, of a most vile and accursed nature. Since the punishment of
sinners in the next life will be extreme and eternal, sin is certainly another
kind of thing, than is commonly imagined. O! You that have light tho'ts of sin,
look into the place of torments, the bottomless pit; behold the treasures of
wrath that are there prepared to punish the workers of it; hearken to the
groans and cries of those who are there reaping the fruit of their doings: And
then say what is to be though it of sin. We must look into hell to know what sin
is: And even then we shall not fully know what an evil it is. For it may be truly
said of sin, it is deeper than hell, what can thou know?

3. We learn what it is that makes death so formidable a thing. It is this,
That to the wicked, such as die in their sins, hell follows after it. The sting
of death is said to be sin, (1 Cor. xv. 56.) because sin binds over to a
punishment after death. If death was not to most men an introduction to future
endless misery, but only an extinction of their present being, it would not be
the king of terrors. It Is the second death which gives the sting and terror to
the first. It is not this I am afraid of, said a condemned criminal with whom I
went to the place of execution, as he looked up upon the gallows; it is not
this I am afraid of, but the wrath of God after death.

4. We may infer the wisdom of serious religion, and the folly of an
irreligious course of life. By serious religion I mean, the denying all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and the living soberly, righteously, and godly
in the present world; which is the excellent description of a course of piety,
given us in Tit. ii. 12; and which includes in it, faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, repentance toward God, and new obedience. This is the course which
leads from the place of everlasting misery, to the opposite place of endless
joy and happiness, and is therefore the way of wisdom; the way which the wise
walk in, and by walking in which they show that they have a good understanding;
according to that of Solomon, Prove. xv. 24. The way of life is above to the
wise, that he may depart from hell beneath. On the other hand, an irreligious
course, a vain, sensual, ungodly life, leads directly down to this place of
misery. This is the broad way which as certainly leads to destruction, as the
narrow way leads to life. They that live after the flesh shall die eternally.
And are the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season, of so much worth,
that for them we should dwell in everlasting burnings? This is folly in its
exaltation! Folly heightn'd into a frenzy! Eccles. ix. 3. Madness is in their
hearts while they live, and after that they go to the dead.

5. With what thankfulness should we admire and adore the divine patience,
forbearance, and long-suffering toward us, in that we have not been turned
into hell long before now! We may all subscribe to that, Psalm ciii. 8. The
Lord is slow to anger. and verse 10. He has not dealt with us after our sins,
nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. We are all of us the children of
wrath by nature, and have made our selves sevenfold more so than we were
before. How often have we provoked him to cut us off in the multitude of our
transgressions? But he has stayed his hand --. And this when he has made quick
work with others. -- O! what a lesson of thankfulness does this teach us? And
how careful should we be not to turn his grace into wantonness? How thankful
would a damned person be, if God should free him from the misery he is now in,
and place him in the same condition with us now; and should we be less thankful
that we are not bro't into the same condition which they are now in?

6. How thankful should we be for the holy scriptures, wherein we are told of
this place of everlasting misery, and warned not to come into it? This is a
place to us now unseen, it lies out of our sight. But life and immortality are
bro't to light by the gospel. Herein is the wrath of God revealed from heaven
against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men: And this with a
compassionate design that we may be stirred up to flee from the wrath to come.
The light of nature affords some intimations of this, but the gospel clearly
reveals it, so that the matter is no longer doubtful, and they that go into it
will be without excuse. Great is their advantage to escape hell, who have the
oracles of God committed to them. Luke xvi. 27, 28, 29. Then said he, I pray
thee therefore father, that thou would send him to my fathers house: For I
have five brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into
this place of t^rment. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the
prophets; let them hear them. The scriptures are sufficient to keep men out of
hell. How thankful then should we be who enjoy them, when God has not given
them to every people? We should search, believe, and practice them; should take
heed to them as to a light that shines in a dark place; should take them for a
light to our feet, and a lamp unto our path, that so we may depart from the
snares of death, and our steps may not take hold on hell. And as many as walk
according to this rule, peace shall be on them, and mercy, as upon the Israel
of God, Gala^. vi. 16.

7. How happy are they who are in a pardoned justified state? Such are more
than once pronounced blessed by the psalmist, Psalm xxxii. 1, 2. Blessed is he
whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto
whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. This is the blessedness of a pardoned man,
he shall be fav'd from hell, he shall never come under condemnation in the
other world. For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
Romans viii. 1. A pardon bars up the door of the bottomless pit, so that he who
has it shall never be cast down into that. The pardoned soul may sing, as in
Psalm lxxxvi. 12, 13. I will praise thee, O Lord my God with all my heart: and
I will glorify thy name for evermore. For great is thy mercy toward me; and
thou have delivered my soul from the lowest hell. How thankful then should they
be, who have a good hope through grace, that they are in a pardoned state? And
how earnest and diligent should we all be in seeking after this blessedness?
Once more here,

8. How great are the obligations of believers unto JESUS CHRIST? For his blood
is what has quenched the fire of hell, which was burning against them. They are
delivered from wrath through him, by his being made of God redemption to them.
What reason then has the believer to say, "Blessed be God for Jesus Christ!
Thanks be unto God for the unspeakable gift of his son! To use here the apt
words of another, The glorious sun of righteousness having put out this fire,
ought certainly to be the more pleasant to those whom he is risen upon, and who
have experienced the benefit of healing in his wings: There being not one saint
in heaven, or in earth, but what may truly say, All this misery had been my
everlasting lot am^ng the w^rst of sinners, if the eternal s^n of God had not
been made sin and a curse for me.

Second USE, by way of counsel and advice.

1. Let us be firmly persuaded of these awful truths, and admit no suggestion
tending to shake our belief of them. It is an age of infidelity, in which
temptations of this kind do abound; all had need therefore be upon their guard,
especially those who are young. Take the doctrine of future punishments as it
is revealed in the word of God, and be stablish'd in the faith of it as ye have
been taught. The eternity of them is what men are most apt to quarrel with.
But, I think, eno' has been said, to convince and satisfy any one that
believes the word of God, and has not learnt to wrangle away the plainest
truths. And such as will not believe God speaking in his word, neither would
they believe if he should send an angel from heaven to them. For his word might
as well be questioned. An angel can speak but the word of God; and if an angel
was to bring any other gospel, you are not to receive it, but to hold him
accursed. Gal. i. 8.

The denial of the eternity of the punishment of the wicked, is indeed
subversive of practical religion. It takes off from men the highest restraint,
and opens a door to all licentiousness. It takes away that fear in which we
should pass the time of our sojourning in this world, and with which we should
be working out our own salvation. It tends to make men despise the present
offers, and refuse the present calls of the gospel; and to be careless of the
things of their peace in this the day of them. They that give into it then, do
err concerning the truth in a very dangerous point. The doctrines of the gospel
are all of them according to godliness, tending to promote that. Whatever
doctrine is manifestly otherwise, carries with it an evident mark of its
falseness, and proves it self that it can never be of God, and is therefore to
be rejected with abhorrence, and such as would propagate it to be avoided. 1 Timothy vi. 3, 4, 5. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome
words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is
according to godliness, He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about
questions and strifes of words --: From such withdraw thy self.

2. Let us often remember them, and have them much in our tho'ts. Let the
belief of these things produce frequent serious consideration upon them. The
believing realizing consideration of the punishments of hell, if we sometimes
set our selves to it, might, by the blessing of the spirit of (...), have very
good effects. It would help to discover the deceitfulness of sin, and to weaken
the force of temptations: It might serve to awaken us out of carnal security,
and to quicken us in the working out our own salvation. Indeed, the love of God
is the acceptable principle; and is what should restrain us from sin, and
constrain us to duty. Yet we may, and have need to call in and improve the
consideration of the torments of hell. This motive the sinner usually feels the
force of at his first conversion, in the beginning of a religious life; and it
is of use to us through the whole of our christian course, even when we come to
act, in the main, from a higher and better principle. Job was a man of singular
piety, yet was restrained from sin, by this principle: For destruction from God
was a terror to me, chap. xxxi. 23. They that hope for God's salvation, should
yet fear his destruction. "Adam in innocence was awed with a threatening.

3. Let it be the great concern, and most serious endeavor of us all, to
escape the punishments of hell. For this end they are set before us in the word
of God. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, let us be persuaded to break
of our sins by righteousness, and to turn out of the broad way that leads to
destruction! -- Let us cry earnestly to God for mercy, and sue out a pardon at
the throne of grace! -- Let us fly to the Lord Jesus Christ, and take
sanctuary in him by faith! For there is no door of escape open for a guilty
sinner, but in and through Christ; and in him there is a wide and effectual door
opened, to one that is flying from the wrath to come. O for a Christ, or we are
undone for ever! O for that believing covenanting act to make him ours!

And let us do all this speedily and without delay; and not put off the
practicing the counsels of God to the last extremities, lest we bewail our
folly to no purpose, as multitudes are now doing, in a miserable eternity. The
door is open to day, but it may be shut to morrow; and being once shut, it is
shut for ever. Wherefore as the HOLY GHOST says, To day while it is called to
day, harden not your hearts.

Our blessed Savior after he had warned his hearers of the wrath to come, and
thereupon exhorted them to bring forth fruits meet for repentance, enforces all
with this solemn declaration, wherein he lets them know what terms they stood
upon, and what continual danger they were in, The ax is now laid unto the root
of the trees: therefore every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn
down, and cast into the fire, Mat. iii. 10. Professors in the visible church,
are trees in God's vineyard, from whom he expects good fruit, fruits meet for
repentance, the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ to the praise
and glory of God. If they fail his just expectations concerning them, are
barren and ungodly, bringing forth no fruit, or which is worse bad fruit, wild
grapes, the grapes of Sodom, and the clusters of Gomorrow, their ruin is
inevitable, and is speedily coming on. They may every moment expect justice
will strike the fatal blow, cut them down as unworthy to stand any longer in
the vineyard, and cast them as dry stubble into the unquenchable fire of divine
wrath. Take therefore the awful admonition, Jer. xiii. 16. Give glory to the
Lord your God before he cause darkness, and before your fect stumble on the
dark mountains, and while ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of
death, and make it gross darkness.

CONCLUSION.
If any now think the doctrine we have been upon to be harsh and grievous, it is
not ours but God's. And we must speak with his words, whether men will hear, or
whether they will forbear. Should we tell you otherwise, we should but deceive
you with a lie, and hurt our own souls as well as yours. But when we speak as
the oracles of God, it is time for him that has ears, to hear. And surely it is
easier to hear of the punishments of hell than to feel them. If you don't cast
this truth out of your minds by forgetfulness or unbelief, it may, by the
blessing of the Spirit, work to your conversion and salvation. Then you will
have your belief of it confirmed, and it will be so far from being a terror to
you, that it will furnish you with matter of comfort and praise to think, that
through grace, you are delivered from the devouring fire, and from the
everlasting burnings.

However let careless obstinate sinners know to their sorrow, though they may put
this truth out of their minds, they cannot put it out of their bibles; but there
it will stand as a sealed truth, which they shall experimentally know in the
future world, that the wicked SHALL GO AWAY INTO EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT, and
THE SMOKE OF THEIR TORMENT ASCEND FOR EVER AND EVER.

THE END.
Page 55. line 19. for Eternity read Extremity. P. 85. marg. l. 1. r. Origenes.

DIVINE TEACHING to be sought, that we may be led into DIVINE TRUTH.

A SERMON Preached February 27th. 1731, 2.

By William Cooper.

John xviii. 38. Pilate says unto him, WHAT IS TRUTH?

Ephesians. v. 9. The fruit of the Spirit is in all truth.

1 John iv. 6. Hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.

BOSTON, Printed for J. Edwards. 1732.

To the Reader.
THE following short Sermon was preached after those which have been presented
to your View, without the least Though It of its being ever made public. The
Subject indeed is important, and (perhaps) at this present Day not
unseasonable: But it requires a fuller Management. -- However, to gratify some
of my Friends, it now (such as it is) goes abroad; and may the Blessing of
Heaven go along with it!

DIVINE TEACHING to be sought, that we may be led into DIVINE TRUTH.
PSALM XXV. 5. Lead me in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of my
salvation, on thee do I wait all the day.


THESE words are a prayer of holy David; a very needful prayer, sutably and
importunately made; and which we should all learn of him to make for our
selves. In it we may observe, 1. The matter of the prayer, or the blessing
prayed for. 2 The argument of the prayer, or the pleas with which he urges and
enforces his petition.

1. The matter of the prayer, or the blessing prayed for and asked; and this is
divine instruction. A blessing of no small importance, of no less than infinite
concernment: Lead me in thy truth, and teach me. He speaks in the language of
one ignorant, or of one at a loss; of one in danger of being led aside, of
erring and mistaking; of one sensible that if left to himself he should go out
of the way of truth; of one sincerely desirous to be rightly informed, and who
therefore applied himself to a divine instructor. He looks above men, to the
father of lights, from whom comes down every good and perfect gift, whose
Spirit is the spirit of wisdom and revelation: Lead me in thy truth, and teach
me! Let me have a clear understanding of thy mind and will! Enable me to
discern truth from error, and then to embrace it, and to practice according to
it! Leave me not to the natural darkness of my own understanding; but do thou
shine into my mind, and in thy light give me to see light! David was a knowing
intelligent man, yet was sensible he needed God to teach him. He had been
happily taught of God; could say, O God, thou have taught me from my youth; yet
was desirous to be taught more and farther, to be better informed, and better
established.

2. The pleas or reasons with which he urges his petition. 1. For thou art the
God of my salvation. The God on whom he depended for salvation, both temporal
and eternal: Therefore he came to him for that instruction which was necessary
to salvation, for if he was not instructed in the way, he could never attain to
the end. 2. On thee do I wait all the day. This speaks a constant attendance
upon God in the way of duty: He put and kept himself, so far as he could, in
the way of receiving the blessing he so much desired; and he hoped and pleaded
that this would not be in vain.

The DOCTRINE now from the words may be this, DOCT. We should all of us seck of
God his teaching, that we may be led into his truth.

In speaking to this Doctrine, it may be briefly shown, 1. What we are to
understand here by God's truth. 2. What by our being led in this truth. 3. How
God teaches those whom he leads in his truth. And 4. Why we should seek of God
those teachings, whereby we may be led in his truth.


1. To show what we are to understand here by God's truth. By God's truth here
we are to understand his mind and will, as it is revealed in the sacred
scriptures, concerning man's present duty and future happiness. REVEALED
RELIGION, that is God's truth; for it comes from him as the blessed author of
it, contains the counsel of his will, and is the only true religion, the only
way to heaven and happiness. John xvii. 17. Thy word is truth. This contains
two main parts, the one doctrinal, the other practical; and both are God's
truth.

1. The doctrinal part of religion is to be understood by God's truth. This is
what contains things which are most surely to be believed by us. It is called
the faith d liver'd to the saints, as a sacred trust, for them to keep with
care, and defend with earnestness, Jude verse 3. It is also said to be one,
(Ephesians. iv. 1. One faith) because it is what all christians should be united in
the profession of; but it consists of many articles, all of which are precious,
to be received as faithful sayings, and worthy of all acceptance; though some
are of greater moment and importance than other; yea, of such moment that
without the belief of them, we cannot be good christians, or entitled to
salvation. Many of them are incomprehensible by us, above reason though not
contrary to it; and are therefore called mysteries, the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven. Yea, the whole system of gospel truths, is for this reason
called the mystery of faith, 1 Timothy iii. 9. This is the truth which the spirit
leads into, John xvi. 13. And which is said to dwell in believers, and to be
with them for ever, 2 John 2.

2. The practical part of religion is also to be understood here by God's
truth. This contains in it the statutes and commandments of the Lord our God;
and is the rule of our life, as the other is the rule of our faith. Psalm cxix.
142. Thy law is truth. By the former we are to regulate our judgment, by the
latter we are to order our conversation. And the former has a powerful
influence upon the latter; and is therefore called the doctrine which is
according to godliness, 1 Ti^. vi. 3. which tends to promote godliness, to make
men live godly in this present world. This is the truth which we must be led
in, must walk in. Agreably, a life of practical godliness is called a walking
in truth, as we have received a commandment from the father, 2 John 4. But the
former of these, viz. Doctrinal Truth, is what I would be understood chiefly to
intend, and shall principally refer to in the present discourse.

II. To show what we are to understand by our being led in this truth. It means
these two things at least, our being bro't into it, and kept in it.

1. Our being bro't into the truth. This includes knowledge and assent. God
leads those into his truth, whom he helps to understand the truths of the
gospel, with the grounds and reasons of them, and from an inward persuasion of
their verity, openly to own and profess them: To whom he gives a sound
judgment, by which they do discern truth from error, and do accordingly embrace
the one, and reject the other.

2. Our being kept in it. To be led in God's truth, is not only to embrace it,
but to adhere to it, notwithstanding any temptations to relinquish it, or
depart from it. Leading is a continual motion. And it is as much our duty to
continue in the faith, as to own it at first. We have therefore that
exhortation, Heb. x. 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without
wavering. And this is the commendation given by Christ to the church in
Pergamus, Thou hold fast my name, and have not denied my faith, Rev. ii. 13.
And it is the black character of the devil, the grand apostate, that he abode
not in the truth, John viii. 44.

III. To show how God teaches those whom he leads in his truth.

1. Outwardly by his word. This is the standing rule, and the ordinary means.
The scriptures of the old and new testament contain the outward revelation of
God's mind and will; they teach us "what we are to believe concerning God, and
what duty God requires of us. And in them God does as really teach us, as if he
were our immediate monitor. For all scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for
instruction in righteousness, 2 Timothy iii. 16. It was written by holy men of
God, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; and is a perfect revelation, able to
make us wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. And they
that have it in their hands, need not say in their hearts, Who shall go up to
heaven for us, and bring the truth of God to us, that we may hear it and know
it? God has indeed appointed a standing ministry; but the business of that is
to teach Jacob God's judgments, and Israel his law; to open the written word,
and to apply it, not to add to it, or bring another in its room. Ministers are
therefore to study this word, and in their preaching to keep close to it. Isai.
viii. 20. To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them. 2 Timothy ii. 15. Study to show thy
self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth.

2. Inwardly by his Spirit. John xiv. 26. But the comforter which is the Holy
Ghost, whom the father shall send in my name, He shall teach you all things. He
helps to understand the word. The spirit does not ordinarily teach without the
word, never contrary to it. He does not discover new things which have no
foundation in the bible, but helps to discern the things there revealed, by an
internal spiritual illumination. Hence David prays, Psalm cxix. 18, Open thou
mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law. This is what
Christ did for his disciples after his resurrection, Luke xxiv. 45. Then opened
he their understandings to understand the scriptures. We need internal
illumination, as well as an external revelation, in order to our spiritual
discerning gospel truths. The objects indeed are fairly presented in the word,
but the faculty must be prepared to receive them; for since the fall the
understanding of man is unapt to receive the rays of divine light; not that the
faculty of discerning is lost, but weakened, and, more than so, corrupted and
prejudiced. The rational mind may discern the literal sense of the propositions
in the gospel, but the quickening beams of the spirit of truth and holiness,
must help to discern them in their spiritual meaning, excellency, and glory,
and to such a through conviction of their truth and certainty, as heartily to
receive and embrace them. Reading or hearing alone will not let the doctrines
of the gospel into our understandings in their true and proper light. Isai. vi.
9. Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not.
Certainly the knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus, is a different thing
from the knowledge of it as it is in ink and paper. Heavenly things cannot be
seen in their reality and glory, but by a heavenly light. All the torches and
candles we can light up, cannot show us the light of the sun, unless it shed
down its own light upon us: So the humane understanding, though never so much
assisted with outward and rational helps, cannot behold spiritual truths in
their proper light, but by a spiritual irradiation. 1 Cor. ii. 14. The natural
man receives not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness
unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.
Therefore it was the Apostle's desire and prayer in behalf of his beloved
Ephesians, That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of glory, would
give unto them the spirit of wisdom, and revelation, in the knowledge of him,:
that the eyes of their understanding being enlightened, they might know the hope
of his calling, and the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints,
and the exceeding greatness of his power to them ward who believe, Ephesians. i. 17,
18. Thus God teaches those whom he leads into his truth, by his word, and by
his spirit.

IV. We are to say, Why we should seek to God to afford us his teaching, for to
lead us into his truth.

1. We shall never rightly know the truth, if God does not teach us and lead us
into it. Truth is a precious jewel, a pearl of great price, which the mind of
man has a natural desire after, and is in quest of; and that we find it, is of
the last importance to us. For the knowledge of the truth is the foundation of
religion, and is the first step to salvation. 1 Timothy ii. 4. Who will have all
men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. A true christian is
one that believes the doctrines, as well as obeys the precepts of Jesus Christ;
and the former is as necessary as the latter. With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, Romans x. 9. But we shall never know them to a saving purpose,
shall never heartily believe, embrace, acquiesce in, and live upon them,
without a divine teaching. Neither natural reason, nor humane teaching are
sufficient for this; as has been already hinted. Hence the greatest masters of
reason and learning, are many times most ignorant in, or the greatest despisers
of gospel mysteries. Nicodemus, a master in Israel, could not receive Christ's
doctrine of spiritual regeneration. What Christ said to Peter, upon the
profession of his faith in that fundamental article of Christ's divinity, may
be said to every true believer, respecting the same and other doctrines of the
gospel, Mat. xvi. 17. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou,
Simon Barjona; For flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my father
which is in heaven. Without this divine teaching we shall but (as it were)
grope in the dark; be ever learning, but not able come to the knowledge of the
truth: Our knowledge will at best be but dark and confused, our faith weak,
wavering, and ineffectual. The doubleminded man, that is not fixed in his
religious principles, will be unstable in all his ways, James i. 8.

2. The danger we are in of being led into contrary errors, should make us seek
of God to teach us and lead us into his truth. There is truth, and there is
error. Every grace (we say) has its counterfeit, and so every truth has it is
opposite. And error is oftentimes so dressed up by the slight of men, and the
artifice of satan, so colored and varnished, that it looks like truth, and is
taken for such by too many. We had need therefore seek divine teaching, that so
we may discern the things that differ, and may approve only things that are
excellent. Errors in religion are dangerous, though some more than others; and
some of them are fatal and destructive. 2 Pet. ii. 1. Scarce any errors are
purely speculative; they do more or less affect the heart, and influence the
life.

Indeed in this day of abounding errors, no little pains are taken by some, to
persuade men that truth and error are indifferent things; that it is no matter
what opinions a man holds, if he does but lead, what they are pleased to call
(in a sense unevangelical eno') an honest and good life. In this way some late
celebrated Writers, have shown their enmity to orthodoxy, to creeds, and
confessions of faith; and would prepare men to receive their own corrupt
opinions. But if it be such an indifferent thing what opinions men are of, as
these would represent, to what end are so many Epistles written to the churches
to regulate and establish their faith? To what end does the Holy Spirit so
earnestly exhort us not to be deceived; to buy the truth, and not to sell it;
to beware of seducers; to shun philosophy and vain deceit; to hold fast the
form of sound words, to continue in the faith, grounded, and settled; and to
take heed lest being led away with the error of the wicked, we fall from our
own stedfastness; and therefore to prove all things, and to hold fast what is
good. And why did the Apostle so fear for the Corinthians, lest as the serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, their minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ? Surely these things imply a great difference
between truth and error; and are a plain declaration, that doctrines and
opinions are of great concern and moment in our religion, and in the business
of salvation. And are eno' to make us very careful what principles we forsake,
and what we embrace; eno' to make us earnestly seek of God his teaching to lead
us into truth, and to keep us in it.

3. We are encouraged to hope God will teach us, and lead us in his truth, if
we sincerely seek to him and wait upon him. We have therefore that direction,
James i. 5. If any of you lack wisdom, (to guide him in the judgment of things,
as well as in the management of affairs) let him ask of God, who gives to all
liberally upbraiding not. And God is ready to perform that promise, Prove. ii.
3, 4, 5. If thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
understanding; then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God. Divine teaching is included in the gift of the spirit: and
what encouragement have we to seek this blessed gift? Luke xi. 13. If ye then
being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children: how much more shall
your heavenly father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him?

4. There is no such teacher as God is; therefore should we seek of him to
teach us. Who teaches like him? said Elihu to Job, chapter xxxvi. 22. His teaching
are above all other teachings. There are other teachers besides God, or rather
under him, ministerial teachers of his own appointment, with whom he vouchsafes
to work; but there are none like him: and the excellency of the teacher, should
excite us to seek his teachings. Here

(1.) His teachings are the most inward and intimate. They not only inform the
understanding, but reach to the heart; are received into that, affect and move
that. It is truly said, He has his pulpit in heaven, who teaches hearts. This
is God's prerogative. 2 Cor. iv. 6. God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, has shined INTO OUR HEARTS, to give the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. Man's light may shine into the
head, but God's light does shine into the heart. The Psalmist expresses the
intimacy of divine teachings. Psalm li. 6. Behold thou desire truth in the
inward part, and in the hidden part shall thou make me to know wisdom. Psalm.
xvi. 7. I will bless the Lord who has given me counsel, my reins also instruct
me in the night seasons. The reins are the most inward parts of the body, and
the night seasons the most private and retired time: both express the intimacy
of divine teaching.

(2.) His teachings are most plain and clear. These make that plain which the
soul before had but a very confused notion of. The miracle which Christ wrought
on the blind man, in Mark viii. 24, 25, might be designed to teach us this.
Christ put his hands upon him, and asked him if he saw ought. The man looked
up, and said, I see men as trees walking. After that he put his hands again
upon his eyes, and made him look up: and he was restored, and saw every man
clearly. So Christ said to his Disciples, John xvi. 25. These things have I
spoken unto you in proverbs: the time comes when I shall no more speak unto
you in proverbs, but I shall show you plainly of the Father. The soul taught of
God is made to see, which is more than to hear or barely to apprehend;
according to that of J^b, (chap. xlii. 15.) I have heard of thee by the hearing
of the ear, but now mine eye SEES thee. And agreeable to that of the Apostle,
(Ephesians. iii. 9.) And to make all men SEE, what is the fellowship of the mystery
which from the beginning of the world has been bid in God, who created all
things by Jesus Christ.

(3.) His teachings are the most convincing and satisfying. Our Savior
therefore said of the Spirit, (John xvi. 8.) When he is come, he shall convince
the world. Under the teachings of God the soul cannot but yield an unfeigned
assent to what is taught. His teachings bring such clear evidence of truth to
the mind, as sets the soul beyond all peradventure, and gives it a full
assurance. 1 Thessalonians. i. 5. Our Gospel came to you not in word only, but in
Power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance. And, in Col. ii. 2, we
read of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the
mystery of God, and of the father, and of Christ. Man's teaching may prevail to
silence, so that the person may not be able to gainsay or deny, though the
understanding may be doubtful still: but the teachings of God not only silence
but satisfy; the soul freely and sweetly acquiesces in the things taught, and
is fully satisfied that they are the truth and no lie. So David, Psalm. cxix.
75. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right. So the people answered to the
woman of Samaria, John iv. 42. Now we believe, not because of thy saying: for
we have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the
Savior of the world. Divine teachings are so satisfying to the soul, that it
can venture its all upon the truth of what it has ^earn'd of God. So the female
martyr said to her persecutors, Though I cannot dispute for Christ, I can die for
him. Prove. viii. 8, 9. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness, there is
nothing froward or perverse in them. They are all plain to him that
understands, and right to them that find knowledge.

(4.) His teachings are the most powerful and effectual. Men teach in the Name
of God, and by his authority; but it is God only who can give power and
efficacy to his word. 2 Cor. iv. 7. But we have this treasure in earthen
vessels, that the excellency of the power, may be of God, and not of us. It was
remarked concerning Christ's preaching, Mat. vii. 29. That he taught as one
having authority, and not as the scribes. There went a mighty power with his
Doctrine, perceived and felt by those that heard him. The teachings of God can
make their way into the dullest and weakest capacities. Isai. xxxv. 8. An high
way shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of holiness: the
wayfaring men, though fools shall not err therein. Hence some poor illiterate
christians, have had more knowledge and greater illuminations in spiritual and
divine things, than men of good abilities and deep penetration. On this account
our Savior broke forth into those words, Mat. xi. 25. I thank thee, O Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes:

(5) The teachings of God are transforming. They transform the soul into
another image than it had before. God casts those whom he teaches into the very
mould of the truths which he teaches them. Romans vi. 17. Ye were the servants of
sin, but God be thanked ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine
INTO WHICH YE WERE DELIVERED, (so it might rather be read) as into a mould, by
which you receive and represent the shape and figure of it. By the teachings of
God the soul is transformed into the likeness and similitude of the gospel,
answers it, and is conformed to it. 2 Cor. iii. 18. We all with open face,
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image
from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. The glass wherein we have
this sight of the glory of God, is chiefly the word: We are helped to see the
glory of God in this glass by the teachings of his Spirit. The glory into which
we are changed by this sight, is our conformity to that holiness which shines
in the word. And this change is twofold; from sin to grace, which is a degree
of glory; and from glory to glory, i. e. from one degree of glorious grace to
another, till grace here be consummated in glory for ever.

(6.) The teachings of God are abiding. I John ii. 27. But the anointing which
ye have received abides in you. Notional knowledge, where it is no more, is
flitting; and the words of men they vanish from us: But the words of God they
stick in the soul, and the impressions made by his teaching are lasting
Impressions, Psalm cxix. 98. Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser
than mine enemies: for they are EVER WITH ME. And in 93, ver. I will NEVER
FORGET thy precepts; for with them thou have quickened me. What God teaches any
he writes on their hearts; and what is written there remains. Heb. viii. 10. I
will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts. The teachings
of God so abide with the soul, as to cause perseverance in his ways. Psalm
cxix. 33. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it to the
end. He dares promise perseverance, if God will undertake instruction. And
accordingly stedfastness was the fruit of this teaching. Therefore he says
again, ver. 102. I have not departed from thy judgments: for thou have taught
me.

Once more

(7.) Divine teaching is saving. All other teaching cannot save a man from hell:
Let a man have never so much humane learning and notional knowledge, if he has
no other, he will never find the way to heaven, but will lie down in eternal
sorrow. But the teachings of God will make the soul wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy
iii. 15. The soul that has them, will not miss of eternal life: According to
the words of our Savior, John xvii. 2. And this is life eternal, that they
might kn^w thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. They
that have the light of grace, shall have the light of glory: For the light of
grace and glory are of the same kind, though not in the same degree. They that
have this vision shall not perish. This teaching has salvation annexed to, and
connected with it. This therefore the Psalmist makes an argument in our text,
for God to afford him his teaching; Lead me in thy truth, and teach me: for
thou art the God of my salvation.

All the USE I shall make of this Doctrine is, to direct us in seeking to God
for his teaching, that we may be led into his truth. The reasons that have been
given why we should do this, are weighty and cogent, if duly considered. I
shall therefore add nothing further by way of motive, but only by way of
direction, in a few hints of importance to be observed.

Briefly then,

1. Be carnest and importunate in seeking this. A cold wish or two, that God
would teach us his truth, is not answerable to the importance of the thing.
This is a matter of prime importance, of infinite concernment, in which our
salvation is concerned, as is suggested to us in the text; and we should seek
it of God with an answerable impression upon our spirits, with such a deep and
inward concern as is agreeable to the momentous subject. If thou criest after
knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding, then shall thou find the
knowledge of God, Prove. ii. 4, 5.

2 Continue seeking. Continue in prayer and watch in the same with
thanksgiving. Our daily constant prayer should be of this import, Lead me in
thy truth and teach me. One of the pleas with which this petition is urged in
the text, speaks a constant attendance upon God in the way of duty. On thee do
I wait all the day. "It signifies all the day long, and every day.

3. To prayer join the use of other God's appointed means. Study the word of
God, for his word is truth; and use the best helps you can for the right
understanding of it. Understandest thou what thou read? said Phillip to the
Eunuch. He answered, How can I, except some man should guide me? Acts viii. 30,
31. The expositions of holy and learned men, are to be used with thankfulness
and prayer for our better understanding the scriptures. And thus the stated
ministry of the word is also to be attended. It is an apostolical cautionary
direction, 1 These. v. 20. Despise not prophecyings, i.e. ordinary preaching,
the word opened and applied by ministers in christian assemblies. God not only
gave extraordinary officers to his church, but ordinary, pastors and teachers,
for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
edifying the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and
the knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, to the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. iv. 10, 11. These ends being to be
answered now, as well as heretofore, the office continues: And their
ministrations are to be attended on as an ordinance of God. As we should not
rest in the teachings of men, so we should not think our selves above them. For
God is pleased to own and bless them, for the end whereto he has appointed
them. Ministers are workers together with God, as helpers of your faith and
joy. Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers by whom ye believed,
even as the Lord gave to every man? 1 Cor. iii. 5.

4. Indulge nothing that has a tendency to lead you astray from truth; to
bias your judgment, and give a wrong bent to your mind. Beware of all secret
prejudices. Endeavor to mortify pride, self-conceit, and an affectation of
novelty. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God by any sin, lest he be provoked to
leave you to a spirit of delusion.

5, and lastly, Be very careful to live up to what you do know, and profess to
believe. Practical holiness, (as one says,) is an excellent means for the
maintaining of doctrinal orthodoxy. Solomon tells us, it is for the righteous
that God lays up s^und wisdom, Prove. ii. 7. And again, He gives to those
that are good in his sight, wisdom and knowledge, Eccl. ii. 26: And our Saviou^
himself tells us, John vii. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of
the doctrine, whether it of God, or whether I speak of my self. "Such as follow
the guidance of the Spirit in the course of their lives, shall have him to
regulate their judgments: And they that are governed by him as a spirit of
holiness, shall be instructed by him as a spirit of truth".

I shall conclude this discourse, with giving you one short rule, whereby to
try and judge of doctrines whether they be of God. Those doctrines which tend
most to debase and humble man, and to exalt and magnify free grace, are most
likely to be of God. The reason is because this is what God aims at in the
contrivance of fallen man's redemption. To this the whole frame is admirably
fitted, from the first corner stone, to the bringing forth the top stone
thereof. 1 Cor. i. 29, 30, 31. That no flesh should glory in his presence. But
of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: That, according as it is
written, Let him that glories, glory in the Lord. Ephesians. ii. 7, 8, 9. That in
the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his
kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. For by grace are ye saved, through faith;
and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God. Not of works, lest any man
should boast.

An excellent writer, upon that answer which Christ gave to Peter when he had
confessed his divinity, Flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my
father in heaven, has these words which I think worth transcribing, It is no
recommending character of any doctrine, that it is pleasing and suitable to
flesh and blood. We have reason to be jealous that it is no spiritual truth,
which the natural man very readily receives. The doctrines which are promoted
and countenanced by flesh and blood, have the suspicious mark upon them of
accursed doctrines. It Is no argument why I should give credit to this or that
opinion, because it is grateful to nature, but rather an argument against it.
The swift progress of error is owing very much to its smooth concurrence with
the stream of nature. It is ill judging after the flesh, they judge best and
most wisely, that judge contrary to it.

Now may the SPIRIT OF TRUTH lead us into all truth, for His sake who is the
WAY, and the TRUTH, and the LIFE! Page 3. l. 16. for could r. might. P. 10. l.
2. dele the light of.


FINIS.

