THE DECAY OF Love to God in CHURCHES, Offensive and Dangerous SHOWED In a
SERMON Preached before the General Assembly of the Colony of Connecticut, at
Hartford May 14th. 1730.

By William Russel A.M. Pastor of a Church in Middletown.

Rev. ii.5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
the first works or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of his place except thou repent.

N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Green, Printer to the Gov. and Company, 1731.

At a General Assembly held at Hartford, May 14th, 1730.
ORDERED by this Assmbly, That John Hamlin and James Wadsw^^^^, Esqrs. Return
the Thanks of this Assembly to the Reverend Mr. William Russel, for his SERMON
delivered before the Assembly on the Fourteenth Instant; and desire him to
grant a Copy thereof, that it may be Printed.

Hez Wyllys Secr.

THE Decay of Love to GOD in Churches, Offensive and Dangerous.
REVELATION II.4. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have
left thy First Love.
THE Lord JESUS CHRIST, who is in the bosom of the Father, ( Job. 1.18.) was
fully acquainted as God, with all his Decrees and Counsels, being one with him
in them, ( Job. 10.30.) Yet as Man did not know them: But of that day and that
hour, knows no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son,
but the Father, Mark 13.32. Having received the Revelation contained in this
Book from the Father, communicates it by his Angel to his Apostle John, to be
committed to writing and sent to his Churches. The Book is ^^^^ed, The
Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, etc C^^p 1. v.1. (And it
is observed by One, that as Moses the Favorite Prophet began the Scriptures,
so John the Favorite Apostile finisheth them.) In this Book Jesus Chirst is
represented, as carefuly observing his Churches and Ministers here one (...).
He wal^e^h in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, and holds the Stars in
his right hand, He knows their works and also their frames and dispositions.
The Seven particular Epistles which he ordered to be written to the Seven
Churches in Asia, do especially manifest it. For though as some suppose, they may
relate to the whole Church and show its State in several spaces or periods,
from the time they were written to the end of the world, Yet doubtless they
have respect to and show the State of th^se particular Churches in that (...).
The (...) are directed to the (...) of the Churches, i. e. to the Pastor or
(...), As v. 1. Unto the Angel (...) Churches (...) etc Under whose Person
ought to be underst^^d the whole Church. (...)
. To the Minister of that Church, by whom it should be in order produce^ to the
whole Assembly. (...)
And though it may appear (...) probable to them that are in the Episcoped
Scheme, that those Angels were an order of Officers superior to Presbyters;
there seems to be nothing forcible to persuade those of our Opinion, that they
were any other than ordinary Pastors to whom the Epistles were written to be
communicated to the Churches, as what they were concerned in as well as their
Ministers. For the Apostle's first direction was to write and send to the
Churches. Chao. 1. v. 11. And it is manifest from diverse expressions in the
Epistles, and from the conclusion of every one of 'em, that there was respect
had to the Churches in their contents; viz He that has an ear, let him hear
when tha Spirit says unto the Churches -- And indeed in them instruction,
encouragement and warning, is given to the Churches in all succeeding ages. Our
Text is a part of the Epistle written to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, in
which we may take notice,

I. Of the Author, JESUS CHRIST, as appareth by the description in the first
verse. Not exclusive of the other Persons of the Holy Trinity; What Jesus
Christ says here, God says; He speaks to us by his Son: And he that loves
the One loves the Other also, 1 Job. 5.1. And every one that loves him that
Begat, loves him also that is Begotten of him. And we shall use the Names of
GOD and JESUS CHRIST somewhat promiscously in the following discourse.

2. That Jesus Christ takes notice of and mentions several things which were
good and praiseworthy: But faulteth them in the Text, which we shall now
consider only as it has respect to the Church of Ephesus. And in it we may
observe,

(1) The Introduction, Nevertheless, i.e. Notwithstanding those good things
which are in thee, which I do observe and have mentioned to thy praise; I am
not satisfied with thee.

(2) But I have against thee; as it is in the Original, i. e. To accuse thee of
and for which I am offended with thee; there seems to be Moises in the word,
(somewhat) put in by the Translators, i. e. the thing is grievous and I am very
angry with thee; as the severity of the Punishment threatened on impenitence
intimates, viz. And will remove thy Candlestick, etc. I will Un-church thee, I
will remove the Gospel and the Privileges of a Church from thee, I will destroy
thee from being a Church.

(3) The fault or ground of the Offense, viz. Because thou have left thy first
love, Thou art waxen cold and remiss in thy Love to God and one another, thy
former Zeal and warmth in Religion is lost or left.

DOCT. Though there may be good things in Churches; yet if they have left their
First Love, Jesus Chirst is Offended with them.

[ Prop. I. Churches may have left their first love, though there are good things
among 'em.

Prop. II. Jesus Christ is offended with them when it is so.]

PROP. I. Churches may have left their First Love, though there are good things
among them.

I. Love is the great thing that God requires of the Children of men. In Love
to God is summed up all the Duty that we owe to him. This is the first and
great Commandment, Thou shall love the Lord thy God With All thy heart and with
all thy soul and with all thy mind. And to love our Nei'bour is the sum of the
Second Table of the Law. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy
nei'bour as thy self. Mat. 22.37, 38. In loving our Nei'bour is virtually
contained all the duty's we owe him, and therein we fulfill the Law relating to
him. For he that loves another has fulfilled the Law For this thou shall not
commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear
false witness, Thou shall not covet; and if there be any other Commandment, it
is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy nei'bour as
thy self. Love works no ill to his nei'bour, therefore love is the fulfilling
of the law, Rom 13, 8 -- Love to our Nei'bor disposes us to wish well to him,
to discharge all duty's toward him with a respect to his good, and witholdeth
us from doing evil to him. God is good infinitely so, Psalm. 106 1. and
therefore Maxim am^^^^^, most Lovely. The loving God with all the heart, etc.
is the going out of the Soul toward God as the chief good, or the feeling of
the Soul in the 1 king of him as such. Some say what weight is in body's, that
love is in spirits, (...) meum, Aug. To love God with all the heart, etc.
inclines the Soul to him as its Center and resting place, its treasure and
satisfying good. To him are its desires, Psalm. 42.2. Isa. 26.8. In him is its
content, Psalm. 23, and 16.5, 6 and 73.25. And in him is its joy, Psalm. 43.4.
Heb.2.18. And when God Commands (as Exodus 20.3.) Thou shall have no other
gods before me: He requires this Supreme Love. And he often expressly and
explicitly insisted upon it with his People of old. Deuteronomy. 6.4.5. Hear O Israel,
The Lord our God is one Lord. And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. So Deuteronomy. 10.12. And
this is what all Churches and People prosess to do, when they take God to be
their God upon his offer in his word. It is on no other or lower terms, that he
offers Himself to any to be their God to protect and bless them. Deuteronomy. 11.13,
-- And it shall come to pass, if you shall hearken diligently unto my
commandments which I command you this day, to love the Lord your God and to
serve him with all your heart and with all your soul, That I will give you the
rain, etc. So Deuteronomy. 30.15. -- And Josh 23.11, 12. Take Good heed therefore unto
your selves, that you love the Lord your God. Else if you do in any wise go
back, etc. And Jesus Christ does particularly inform us, that unless we love
him above all, we cannot be his Disciples, Luke 14.26.

2. By the first love of Churches, may be understood that love which was in
them at first: When their Members first turned from their Idols and evil Ways
unto the Living God, and were formed into Churches for the carrying on of the
Public Worship of God and exercising Communion among themselves: The love of
their Espousals when they first came into Covenant Relation with God, were
married to him, Fer. 3.14. When persons are first Converted, they are usually
greatly Affected with the goodness of God, Then they are full of love to him
and zeal and life in his ways, and very tender of his glory. And Societies made
up generally of such, will be warm and ^e^l^us for God, and careful to keep
themselves holy and pure. Israel's warm affection in the day of their Espousals
is remembered Jer. 2 2 5^. in the beginning of the Christian Church, they did
with great unity stedfastness and alacrity, attend upon the Worship of God;
they cheerfully denied themselves, and parted with their worldly Possessions to
relieve the Needy and support Religion, therein showing their great warmth of
Love to God and one another. Act. 2.42, -- And they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers; And
all that believed were together, and had all things common; and sold their
possessions and goods and parted them to all men, as every man has need, etc.
And the Ephesians when they first received the Gospel, gave great testimony by
their words and actions, of their love to God and abhorrence of the Sins they
had lived in. The costly Sacrifice they made of their Magical Books was a
notable evidence of their Zeal and Warmth in Religion, Act. 19.18, 19. Or by
Churches first love, may be understood their former love; the love that was in
them here-to-fore, that was discovered by their Members in times past; the word
translated First, is sometimes rendered Former.

Quest. When may Churches be said to have left their first or former love?

Answ. In genesis When the effects and fruits of love are decreased, and the
things that manifest a want of love, or a decay in it, prevail and abound among
them. Love to God is the spring of Obedience; where that is servent, men will
be fruitful in good works, and a slackness in Obedience, argues a languishing
love.

Particularly,

I. When they generally favor of Vanity, Worldliness, Pride, and discover a
forgetfulness of God and an unconcernedness about Religion and his Glory. Such
things show the Heart to be departed from God. Love is of an assimilating
nature. Love to God disposes persons to be like him, to be holy because he is
so. To love God, says one, is to be godly, and have the mind after a fort
Deified. 1. Job. 4.7. And every one that loves is born of God, etc. He has
received an impression of the Divine Image. That discovery of the Excellencies
of God that draws forth this love to him, is transforming. 2 Cor. 3.18. -- Are
changed into the same image. Such a person is made to partake of the Divine
Nature, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 1.4. And therefore will favor the things
that be of God. Si terram ama^ terra es, si Deum amas quidni dietrem Deus es.
Aug. It Also disposes to Humility. The discovery of God's Excellencies takes
down all high tho'ts of themselves. Job. 42.5, 6. Love to God also disposes
persons to have him much in their tho'ts. The Spouse is full of discourse about
her Beloved, Cant. per tot. It also disposes persons to be concerned for the
interest of Religion and tender of God's glory. But when such things as are
contrary to the loving of God, viz. such as have been before mentioned, are
increased in Churches, they manifest that Love is decayed in them, their former
love is left.

2. When a light Esteem of God's Word and Ordinances prevails in them, and
slackness and carelessness in attending the Worship of God and the duties of
Religion Love to God will make persons prize his Word very highly. The Psalmist
says, I love thy commandments above gold, etc. Ps. 119.127. Job says, I have
esteemed the words of his mouth, more than my necessary food, Job. 23.12. It
will make persons esteem God's Ordinances above worldly Advantages. Psalm.
84.10. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in
the tents of wickedness, And it will make persons account the place of Public
Worship very amiable, and long for opportunities of Communion with God there,
and rejoice when they present, Psalm. 84.1, 2. How amiable are thy Tavernacles,
O Lord of hasts! My soul longs, yea, even sainteth for the Courts of the
Lord, etc. And Psalm. 122.1. But when the Word and Ordinances of God are for
light by, and opportunities to Worship God and discharge the Duties of Religion
are with reluctance and displeasure Entertained, and with weariness (...) as a
Burden and Task, Edifying Exercise (...)* others unsteadily, and all (...), and
formally (...) among them, it is manifest Love is wanting; and the prevailing of
these things, show their former Love is left.

3. When there is not in them that Warmth and Zeal in Testifying against Sin,
that there has been. When Profane and Immoral Practices, are more Connived at
and Indulged, either, that such kinds of Sin as were formerly and justly
blamed, are not taken notice of, or such degrees of Sin as were rightly
accounted Scandalous, are overlooked; when a Gallio-like-spirit, with respect
to such things generally prevails (except where men have been Personally
provoked) and each one in their places are loath to be disquieted and at the
trouble of opposing and suppressing Sin, or to Expose themselves any ways to do
it; but choose to sit still and let Iniquity pass, this shows they have left
their Former Love.

4. When a Backwardness and Penuriousness in Supporting and Promoting of
Religion, does generally prevail among them. When they account the necessary
Supports of Religion a burden, and are loath to be at the Cost. Love to God
disposes persons to be Liberal toward him, and not think much of Charge to
promote his Honor; and also to be Charitable to the Needy, especially his. But
where a Selfish, Covetous spirit and Love of this world prevails, there the
love of God decays. The Covetous person is in this respect an Idolater,
because he makes his worldly Possessions the object of that Love which is due
only to God, Ephesians. 5.5. An inordinate Love to the World, is inconsistent with
the Love of God; they cannot be together, Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Mat.
6.24. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 Job.
2.15.

5 When Profaneness and Immorality increase and prevail among them. When the
Name of God and his Ordinances are less Reverenced; when disregard to the
Sabbath, Disobedience, Intemperance, Uncleanness, Unrighteousness. Falseness,
etc. prevail and increase, there the love of God decays. Love disposes to
Obey, and Obedience is a fruit and evidence of it Job. 14.21. He that has my
commandments and keeps them he it is that loves me But whose keeps his
word in him verify is the love of God perfected 1 Job. 2.5.

6. When there are Contentions, Envyings, Evil speakings, etc. prevailing among
them. Such things show a want of love one to another, or a decay in it; and so
a decay in love to God likewise. Love to God is vainly pretended, by them that
hate their nei'bours 1 Job. 4.20 If a man say I love God, and hates his
brother, he is a liar, etc.

2. This may be, Churches may have lost their first love, though there are good
things among them. This is implied in the Text, and was the case of the Church
of Ephesus.

(I) This may be the state of Churches in general; though there may be some
lively Christians in them, that are full of love to and zeal for God, and
steadfast in his Covenant. Thus in Elijah's time, the Children of Israel were
generally and he seems to think Universally Apostalized and turned to Idolatry;
Yet God tells him, I have left me Seven thousand in Israel, etc. 1 King.
19.14, 18. So in Ezekiel's time they were generally Corrupt, Yet there were
some that sighed and cried for all the abominations that were done, and had a
mark set upon them, Ezekiel. 9 4 So in the Church of Sa^d^^, when they were
generally Corrupt and had only a Name that they lived, Yet there were some holy
persons among'em Thou have a few names, even in S^^dis that have not defiled
their garments, Rev. 3 1, 4.

(2) This may be the state of Churches, where there are some good things and
practices, i. e. that are according to the Word of God. This, as it seems, was
the state of the Jewish Church in Abijah's Reign; his heart was not perfect;
There was Idolatry and Sodomy practiced and tolerated. 1 King. 14.22, -- and
Chap. 15.3, 12. Yet they kept up the External Worship of God according to his
Law. 2 Chronicles. 13.10, 11. So in the Prophet Ezekiel's time, they showed an
Outward respect to God and his Prophet, but their heart went after their
Covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31. Churches may retain an Orthodox Consession of Faith,
they may have a Regular Ministry, the Public Worship may be kept up and the
Sacraments may be duly Admini^tred, they may reject some Errors, and bear
Testimony against some Sins and yet it may be manifest form the foregoing and
such like things, that they have left their first or former love.

There is no Inconsistency in the things; though Love be languish'd, it don't
argue that there is nothing good among such a People: Nor does the being of
many such good things argue, that such a People retain their first love.

There is nothing in the Constitution of such Societies, that does secure them
from losing their first Love, nor indeed from total Apostasy. Grace is not
Hereditary. Though Churches may be at first constituted of such as are faithful
in Christ Jesus, as the Apostle styles the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.1. Yet the next
Generation may be Hypocrites or Apostales. The Generation succeeding Joshua and
the Elders, forsook the Lord God of their Fathers, and served Baal and
Ashtaroth, Judge. 2.10, 12. There is nothing in the Covenant God stands related
to them in, to Secure them; No absolute Promises made to particular Churches,
that they shall not totally and finally Apostalize, as there are to particular
Saints.

PROP. II. JESUS CHRIST is Offended with them when it is so; i. e. when they
have left their first Love; though there are good things still among them,
these will not atone or excuse for the want of Love, as our Savior signifies
to the Pharisees. Luk 11.42. But we unto you Pharisees, for ye tithe, mint and
rue, and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God. These
ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. It was very Offensive
in this Church, The Threatening shows great displeasure; Or else I will come
unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of its place, except
thou repent, Context v 5.

There are several Reasons why GOD or JESUS CHRIST is Offended with Churches
when it is so.

1. Because it is very dishonouring to God, when Churches do leave their first
or former Love to him, or decay in it. GOD is the only suitable Object of
supreme Love, He only being an absolute and an infinite Good, There is none
good but one, that is God, Mat 19.17. And to love the Lord our God with all the
heart, etc. is the proper and commanded Acknowlegement of his Excellency and
Goodness. Such a love to God puts the Crown on his head (if we may, so speak.)
It proclaims him the best good, Exalts him above all. And though indeed there
cannot be in a Creature, love to God, proportioned and adequate to the Goodness
and Worthiness of the Object; yet if it be proportioned to the Powers and
Capacities of the Agent, it gives great glory to him. And there are the same
Reasons always remaining and binding persons thus to Praise the Lord. What
reason there ever was for any person to love God with all their hearts, etc.
there is to continue their love to him, in the same degree from day to day and
for ever. He is immutably good, his Excellencies do not decay his Beauties do
not wither. And when persons leave their love to him or decay in it, they treat
him, as though either it was through Mistake they set their love upon him, and
that he was not a Being of such Worth as they did expect he had been; or that
if he was so, yet now those Excellencies were decayed or lost; Either of which
is dishonouring to God and so offensive.

2. Because they who do so, give God's glory to some other. They who do not set
their chief Love upon God, place it on something else. All have their Treasure
their chief good. Some are lovers of Pleasures more than lovers of God, 2 Timothy
3.4. Some bestow that love which is God's due, on their Wealth, and therein are
guilty of Idolatry, Col. 3.5. The god of Epicures is their belly, Phil. 3.19.
And this is offensive to God, who will not endure his glory should be given to
another, nor his praise to any creature.

3. Because it is a transgression of his Command and Law. God's Law extends to
the inner man; And God who is a Spirit and sees the actions of the Soul as
well as those of the Body, does especially insist upon the inner man's being in
subjection to him. Prove. 23.26. My Son, give me thy heart, etc. And, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. That they who leave their love
to God, or decay in it, they transgress the Law; and this being in a main
point, yea the very sum of all it is a virtual transgression of the whole Law,
and justly and greatly offensive to God.

4. Because in withdrawing their Affections from God, they deal Perfidiously
with him. He Requires and Commands that men love him, etc. and that they
cleave to him. He does not offer himself to any to be their God, nor does he
offer to take any to be his People upon any other Terms, than that, They love
him with all their heart, etc. and be his, wholly his, and his for ever. Deuteronomy.
11.22. For if ye shall diligently keep all these commandments which I command
you to do them, to love the Lord your God, to walk in all his ways and to
cleave unto him. And hence they who take God to be their God, they do Engage
this, if they take him as he offers himself: And when they do leave or decay
in their love to God, they deal deceitfully and falsely in his Covenant. This is
the Male in the Flock, which when persons have Vowed, it is persidious to
withold, and turn God off with that which compared therewith, is but mean; yea,
without this is bat a corrupt thing. One faith, External Worship without the
Internal, is little better than Mockery and a solemn Affronting the Divine
Majesty.

Improvement USE, I. For INFORMATION.

1. Hence we may learn that JESUS CHRIST does Observe us in these Churches. He
knows our Works, he takes notice of our Frames, he sees where Love is
decayed and Lukewarmness possesses us, he walks among the Candlesticks, and
observes both Ministers and People, though they, perhaps many of them, may have
reason to say, as Hagar, Genesis 16.13. Have I also here looked after him that
sees me?

2. Hence we must expect no other, but that JESUS CHRIST is Offended with us in
these Churches and in this Government, if we have left our first Love: And if
the Effects of Love that were formerly found with us are decayed, and the
things showing the want of Love are increased among us, they show it is so.
Though these Churches were not constituted of Members newly Converted from
Heathensm; yet they were the first Churches set up in a Heathenish Land, They
were the Candlesticks in which the light of the Gospel of Jesus Christ first
shined in this part of the Earth, which before for Ages unknown had been one of
the dark places of it, full of the habitations of Cruelty. The setting up of
these Churches, was the day of the Espousal of this Land. And the first
Ministers and Members of these Churches, were many of them, such as had passed
th^o' the fire of Persecution, and were purified thereby; The tenderness of
their Consciences occasioned them to repair hither. And they were persons full
of Zeal and Warmth in Religion and Concern for God's Glory; and gave great
Evidence of it, in leaving a pleasant and plentiful Land, (where some of them
had fair Estates and good Friends, and might have lived in Ease and Fullness,
and have hoped for Honor and Preferment, could they have complied with the
Times,) and many worldly Advantages, Exposing themselves to the Dangers of a
vast Ocean, the hardships and miseries of a Wilderness, very destitute then of
the Comforts of Life, and full of bloody and deceitful Heathen; Principally to
enjoy the Gospel in the purity of its institutions. And our falling from the
Zeal and Love that was in the first Founders of these Churches, may be justly
Charged upon us as leaving our first Love. Though there may be good things
among us, they will not atone for the decay of Love. The Spirit speaks to
these Churches, as well as to Ephesus in this Epistle, and lets us know,
that the decay of Love is offensive to God.

USE, II. Of EXAMINATION.

Let us Examine and Enquire, Whether it be not so with us, that our Love is
decayed, and the tokens of it apparent? Don't the generality of Professors
among us favor of Vanity, Worldliness, Pride, and discover great
Unthoughtfulness of God? How little of that Seriousness, Humility and
Heavenly-mindedness, that was in some of our Predecessors? They favored the
things that be of God, were full of Religion in their Discourses, whereby they
Edified one another. They behaved themselves as Strangers and Pilgrims on the
Earth, hat were seeking a better Country, that is an Heavenly. Their Solicitude
was not so much where they might get most and best Land, but to enjoy the
Worship and Ordinances of God and an Edifying Ministry. But, alas now! Is not
the gold become dim? Do not the generality of Professors favor of Earth? Their
Discourses are Vain and Worldly, seldom any thing of Religion in them, or any
thing tending to Edify them as Christians. Do they not discover that their
main Thoughtfulness is about this World? what they shall Eat and Drink and how
they shall get Estates; and that they are but little thoughtful of Eternity, or
concerned about Securing the Kingdom of Heaven, which should be the first
sought, Mat. 6.33. Is not the Word of God set light by? Is there not a great
prevailing of Ignorance in spiritual things? Is not the Bible grown into much
disuse, and but little profit to some that they have it in their own Languange?
Are there not many of good Natural Abilities, that are grossly Ignorant, even in
the great and necessary Things of Religion? The Country improveth in Knowledge
and Skill in Worldly business, but in Religious Knowledge, does it not
manifestly decay? How little ambition does there seem to be or pairs, to be
knowing in Religion? Do not many seem to be for so much Religion only as will
answer their Carnal ends? They will do something in it that they may not lose
their interest with the Religious; but will not be Strict, Thorough and
Zealous, left they should break with the Carnal sort. Are there not many that
Neglect the Worship of God, or are Unsteady in it, in Public in Families, in
Secret, and more that perform it in a formal heartless manner? Don't many
pursue and possess the World as the main thing, and attend Religion as though
they attended it not; having a form of Godliness, but denying the Power of it?
2. Tim. 3.5. Do not many discover a very light regard to Religion and the
Worship and Ordinances of God, in the settling their abodes? The Concern is not
as heretofore to accommodate themselves as to the Worship of God, and get under
an Edifying Ministry; but where they can have most Land, and be under best
advantages to get Money; though it lay them under never so great disadvantages as
to Religion and the good of their Souls.

Is there not much Iniquity prevailing and are not the generality of Professors
easy under it? They can hear men Curse and Swear, take the Name of God in
vain, use filthy Discourse, can see Drunkenness, etc. and it is no burden or
grief to them, as it was to him, Psalm. 119.21. Such filthy Conversation from
day to day, is no exercise or vexation to their Souls, as 'twas to his, 2 Pet.
3.7.8. They have no horror takes hold of them because of the wicked that
forsake Gods Law. But Galliolike they care for none of these things. They
pretend, it may be, that each one must look to themselves, it is none of their
business, or that they be not Grand-jury-men: They neither regard the personal
good of their Nei'bour, though there be a plain Command for it. Lev. 19 17 Thou
shall not hate thy Brother in thy hear: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
Nei'bour, and not suffer Sin upon him. (How many will Backbite, and tell others
Faults, and Blast their Names, but a faithful dealing out of Love, to do them
good, how little of it?) Nor are they concerned for the Public, lest that
should suffer through Sins being tolerated. And if any are Conscientious to deal
with Sinners, and testify against Sin; are not they who are dealt with and
others also, apt to Reproach 'em as Meddling, Precise, Malicious? Do they not
hate him that Rebukes in the Gate? Amos. 5.10. Are there not some Professors
who will resent it, if any speak slightly of themselves, or families, that can
hear the Churches they belong to, and the Religion they Profess, Reproached and
Reviled, and the God they own Dishonored, and his Name taken in Vain, and not
be offended at it, yea Caress them that do it?

Is it not manifest that Covetousness does prevail, and show it self in a
backwardness to be at the Cost of Religion, and those Public things that tend
to Promote it; a Penuriousness toward them? Our Fathers devised liberal Things
in their Troubles, they provided for the Support of Religion for the time to
come, there were liberal Donations to Churches, and to Schools, from particular
Persons, but how little do they of the present Generation that are reaping the
benefit of those things, emulate the generosity of their Predecessors? Though the
Country be increased greatly in Wealth, as the buildings and living of People
generally show; yet how rare are such Instances of Liberality now? (Though they
are needed still, and would greatly ^end to the advancement of Religion and
Learning among us.) Yea are there not many full of Objections against and
murmurings at, the necessary Annual Expense for the Support of Public and
Religious things? And does not Profaneness and Immorality, increase among us?
Does not Iniquity abound? which is an evidence of Love is waxing Cold and also
a cause of it. Mat. 24.12. For evil Communication is Contagious, one Sinner
destroys much good. Do not Drunkenness and Uncleanness, those two Vices which
are said to take away the heart, greatly prevail? Hos 4.11. Whoredom and Wine,
and new Wine take away the Heart.

And is there not abundance of Unrighteousness and Unmercifulness among us?
Injustice in Prices, delays and dishonesty in Payments, Deceit, Falseness, and
Unfaithfulness in Bargains, Contracts and Betrustments, griping Usary, Evading
and Baffling the Laws made for the Security of men form that Oppression? a
multitude of Law Suits, Men ready to take one another by the Throat, saying,
Pay me what thou Owe? Mat. 18.18. (And do not many Debtors seem to look upon
it, as though they were under no Obligations to Justice, but from the humane
Law, and therefore if that can be evaded, that they are discharged?) And taking
advantage of any Circumstantial defects in Ancient doings, whereby not exactly
or completely they were rendered Legal, to overthrow and disanul them, to the
very great damage of others, although they were truly and honestly done in that
day.

And does not Pride greatly prevail, and discover it self many ways among us?
In People's going beyond their Means? in their Haughtiness and Untractableness,
in Families, in Churches, and in the Commonwealth? and in the grievous
Contentions that are among us which generally spring from Pride, and are
continued by it? The wise man says, Only by Pride comes Contention. Prove.
13.10. And how sad is it that there is so much Contention about things that
concern Religion, particularly about Setting of Meeting Houses, and Settling of
Ministers? Many are so far from the Spirit of the Primitive Christians, to be
willing to part with their Houses and Lands to relieve their Brethren and
Promote Religion, that they are unwilling to deny themselves of a little
Convenience, or any thing to cross their own Inclinations, for the good of the
whole; and unless they can be suited, are ready to quarrel, each one esteeming
his own Judgment best, and himself most worthy to be accomodated.

That though there are good things still among us, and we hope many Names that
have not defiled themselves; yet is it not manifest from the abovementioned
and such like things, that we have very much left our First Love? And though we
may not say there is no Truth nor Mercy nor Knowledge of God in the Land: as it
was said of Israel Hos. 4.1. Yet is it not sadly manifest there is much of the
contrary?

USE III. Of EXHORTATION. Which may be Directed,

(1) To this People, or to these Churches; And I shall offer it in the words of
our Context; Remember therefore from whence thou art Fallen and Repent, and do
the first Works Humble your selves before God, and Confess your Sins and
Apostasy to him When a Professing People have departed from their God, he
expects that they acknowledge their Offenses in order to (...) reconciled to
them: Hos. 5.15. I will go and return to my place till they acknowledge their
Offenses. And it is not enough for Persons to own the Sin of the Land in
general, and complain of the prevailing of Iniquity; but let each one Examine
themselves* and search their own way, and acknowledge their own Guilt in this
matter, first Consider the beam that is in thine own eye Mat. 17.3. God finds
fault for want of this, Jer. 8.6. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not
aright: no Man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? Let
each one endeavor to rouse up himself to return to the Lord and love him with
all his heart, etc. Here the Philosophers Rule fails, placing Virtue in a
mediocrity: there can be no excess in love to God.

Consider what you have seen or heard, of the Love that was in your
Predecessors, their warmth and life in Religion; and be not slothful but
followers of them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. Heb.
8.12. Always look upon your selves as the professed Followers of Jesus Christ
and endeavor in Public and Private to behave as such. Let your Conversation
be as becomes his Gospel. Phil. 1.27. They that name the Name of Christ should
be holy, 2. Tim. 2.19. Behave Religioustly in your Families; the foundation o^
all Societies is laid in Families, and the good or ill Government of them, will
be likely ot have Influence into Churches and Common wealth. David said he
would walk within his house with a Perfect heart, Psalm. 101.2. Show your Love
to God, by endeavoring to gain all your Families over to him, and by causing
them to honor him. It was Joshua^s Resolution Chap. 24. v. 15. As for me and
my house, we will serve the Lord Travail in birth for your Children, till
Christ be formed in them, and so they formed for his Glory, and to be
Instruments for the Supporting of Religion in their day. Endeavor to stir up
your fellow Christians and encourage them in the ways of God, Consider one
another to provoke unto Love and to good Works, Heb. 10.34. You are members of
one Body, Romans 12.5. and the members should have the same care one for another,
1 Cor. 12 25. Be faithful to show your selves on the Lords side, in bearing
testimony against Iniquity; do what appertains to you to prevent Public guilt.
b. Complaining, Bearing witness, strengthening the hands of Rulers you should be
with them, Ezra. 10.4. Be subject to and honor your Rulers, accept them as
God's Ministers to your for good; be subject not only for wrath but for
Conscience sake. Romans 13.1 4.5 Know them which Labor among you, and a^^ over
you in the Lord g^d admonish you and esteem them very highly, etc. 1 T^^^.
5.12, 13. By a Cheerful discharge of all duties toward your Rulers, Civil and
Sacred; Encourage them, and Vindicate them when they do well, against the
Aspersions and Reflections of ignorant, ungoverned and evil minded Persons. If
a People by their ill carriage dishearten and weaken their Rulers, it tends to
their own Ruin. Pray earnestly for your Rulers in each Order, that they may
have God's Presence with them, that He will direct and assist them in their
work, that the Ends of their Offices may be attained for your good, 1 Timothy 2.1,
2. There is special reasson why you should pray for them that are in public
Posts. Their work is greater and harder and of more importance to the Public,
than the work of Private persons; and they have as many Corruptions and
Infirmities as private men, and a great many more Temptations.

Be Liberal in supporting Public and Religious things. The continuance and
flourishing of Religion it self, very much depends thereupon. Study and pray
for the Peace of the Government and the Towns and Churches where you dwell The
Peacemakers are pleasing to God, Mat. 5.9. But he hates them that sow discord
among Brethren, Prove. 6.19. To love one another is the Badge of Christ's
Disciples. Job 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if
ye have love one to another. And indeed without love, man is but as a beast
Preying for himself alone. Its impossible to revive your Love to God while you
continue in Hatred and Strife one with another. It Is extremely unbecoming
Christians to live in Contention with one another, 1 Cor. 33. One would think,
what Jesus Christ has said to his Disciples, should be enough to oblige them
to lay all Contentions aside and live in love one with another Job. 13.34. A
new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you,
that ye also love one another. Setting before them his love to them to Excite
thereto. Does it become the followers of the Lamb, to be Wolves one to another?
Contention among Christians, is not only reproachful to Religion, but it is
destructive to it Jam 3.16. Where envying and (...), there is confusion and
every evil work. It tends to weaken and destroy any Society into which it gets
Mat. 12.25. Every kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolation;
and every city or house divided against it self, shall not stand. Gal. 5.15. If
ye bite and devour one another. take (...) that ye be not consumed one of
another. By your Contentions you offend the God of Peace, who commands you to
be at peace among your selves. 1 These 5.13. And you (...) them that with well
to you and the Public; and pl^ase the Enemies of the Government in Church and
State. They will with pleasure behold you weakening and destroying one another,
and make use of your Contentions to reproach your Profession, disparage your
Constitution Civil and Ecclesiastical, and urge a change: And how far they do
influence in causing and blowing up, the contentions that are among us, is
known to Him who sees the depths of Satan and knows what his Instruments do
in the dark.

Finally, Be Exhorted to Reform all those things that show a want of Love and a
decay in it; and let those things which are the fruits and evidences of Love,
abound among you.

Consider ^ God requires you to love him with all your hearts, etc. and is
infinitely worthy of when he requires of you. And though Humane Laws will not
reach and punish the irregularities and transgressions of the Soul or inner
man, the Law of God will. And though you are no Drunkards nor Adulterers, etc.
Yet if you Love not Jesus Christ, a fearful Curse hangs over you, 1 Cor. 16.22.
That it is needful in order to your Personal Acceptance with God, that you each
one conscientiously apply your selves to the discharge of this Duty. Indeed,
there is need the Saints themselves should be roused and put in mind of this
duty, They are apt to fall into cold and dull frames. The wise Virgins slambred
and slept, Mat. 25.5. The Spouse was in a cold frame when she refused Christ's
admittance. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? etc. Cant. 5.3.

2. By neglecting to do what is duty in your several Places, to suppress Sin
and revive languishing Religion and Love, you will become involved in the guilt
of those Decays and Iniquities with the Public, which will become guilty when
Iniquity is tolerated: And with the guilty persons whose Sins you neglect to
use proper Endeavors to reform them from. Lev. 19.17. May be rendered, Thou
shall in any wise rebuke thy nei'bor, so thou shall not bear Sin for him, or
for his sake; Thou shall not make thy self guilty of his Sin, as thou will
assuredly do, if thou do not perform thy duty of Rebuking him, etc. Pool
Annot. in loc.

3. Whatsoever else you set your hearts upon, it unworthy of your Love. All
worldly things are empty and perishing. 1 Job. 2.17. There is none good but
God, none perfectly so: And when you set your Love on any thing else, you rob
God of his due and give his glory to another that is not worthy of it.

4. God has laid this People, or you in these Churches, under great
Obligations to love him, and cleave to him. It is great ingratitude and highly
unreasonable in you to grow cold in and leave your Love to God: He has
distinguished you with the favors peculiar to his own People, Psalm. 147.19,
20. He has given you his Word and Ordinances, which he has not done to many
others. And though there were not such wonderful and amazing Miracles wrought for
You as for Israel, when God led them out of Egypt, Yet God did great things for
you in your beginnings; there were remarkable apprearances and interpositions
of Providence for you, when things looked very dark and threatening. And he has
made this Wilderness a fruitful Land to you, and has caused you to eat of the
increase of the Field, of the fat of kidneys of Wheat, and of the increase of
the Herds and of the Flocks; Yea, He has made you plenteous in good things,
and has blessed you that you are greatly increased, and has been as a wall of
fire about you, and defended you on every side; and his goodness is very great
to you even to this day, You have your Judges as at the first and your
Counselors as at the beginning; i. e. They are of your Brethren chosen by your
selves; You enjoy your Privileges Civil and Sacred, nothwithstanding the many
endeavors there have been, by Your Enemies, to deprive you of them. And
surely, Sirs, the goodness of God should lead you to Repentance, Romans 2.4. And
the Enjoyments of this Day, should indear God to you, who has not dealt with
you according to your Iniquities, Psalm. 103.10. Nor according to the will of
your Enemies; has not suffered them to rejoice over you, but being full of
compassion has spared you hitherto. And Sirs, what ingratitude is it in You to
depart from Him, grow cold in and leave your Love to him, Who has been thus
drawing you with cords of a man and bands of love? Hos. 11.4. Do ye thus
requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy Father that has
bought thee? Has he not made thee and established thee? Deuteronomy. 32.6. Will you
be like Jeshurun of old, who when God plenteously dealt with him, he waxed sat
and kicked, Then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock
of his Salvation, Deuteronomy. 37.15. May it not be said of you as of them, Isa. 5.4.
What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it?
wherefore when I looked that is should bring forth grapes, brought is forth
wild grapes? Does noth such Carriage in you give God cause to Expostulate with
you, much as he did with israel, Jer. 2.5, 31. What iniquity have you found in
me, that your Love toward me is so generally decayed? You act as though you
found some fault in me, what is it? Have I been a wilderness to you? a land of
darkness? Wherefore say. You in your Practices, We are Lords, we will come no
more unto thee?

5. Unless you do Repent, and revive your Love to God, your Sin will prove your
Ruin. If you continue to depart from God, He will depart from you. I may say
to you as Azariah the Son of Oded did to all Judah and Benjamin, The Lord is
with you while ye be with him; and if ye seek him he will be found of you: but
if ye forsake him, he will forsake you, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. If you go on to withdraw
your hearts and love from him, he will remove your Candlesticks; he will take
away the Privileges and Being of a Church from you. There needs no other
Epistle from heaven to assure you of this, than that wherein the Text is, He
that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. Ver. 5.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick
out of his place, except thou repent.

And Sirs, God is not a man that he should lie, neither the Son of man that he
should repent; has he said, and shall he not do it? or has he spoken and
shall he not make it good? Numb. 23.19. The Lord your God is a Holy God and a
Jealous God, He will not forgive you if you persist in this Sin; He will not
bear to be slighted, He will give a Bid of Divorce to such a People, as he did
to backsliding Israel. Jer. 3.8. Don't say this has been the Cry of Ministers
these many Years, that we were Degenerate; that Religion were sunk among us,
that we had left our first Love, and were in danger of God's Wrath and
Judgments: Yet we don't see but that we have been of late and are at present,
as Prosperous as ever, There is Peace and Plenty, and the Country flourishes.

It was foretold, there would be in the last days Scoffers, 2 Pet. 3.3. God
has not been wont speedily to Execute his Threatenings, but to wait and give
opportunity for a Reformation. God waited after the threatening of the Deluge, a
long time, an Hundred and Twenty Years say some; but an Hundred Years at least,
while Noah was preparing the Ark 1 Pet. 3.20. Indeed men are apt to think God
is long, because they are short; and don't consider that with him a Thousand
Years is as One Day, 2 Pet. 3.8. God may lengthen out his Patience toward a
People and spare them for his own Name sake, left that should suffer and be
reproached, and his Enemies carry proudly, Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27. God did not
suddenly destroy the Jews, He corrected and waited for repentance, They were
gradually brought down. And sometimes Sovereign Mercy interposed and they were
spared when they deserved ruin, Psalm. 78.38 Though not one good thing failed,
of what God had promised them, while they were Obedient; Yet many (...) they
were not dealt with (...) Iniquities, They were (...) beyond their deserts. God
has not cut himself off from a liberty of doing sovereign acts of Mercy
toward a sinful People, And to use Mr. OAKES's Phrases, What Prerogative Mercy
may do for us, further to spare us, and pity us, and save us, none can tell;
But if we continue to wax cold and formal in Religion and leave our first Love,
according to common Law, we perish. And it is extremely sinful to abuse the
Patience of God for your hardening. Romans 2.4, 5. Or despisest thou the riches of
his goodness and forbearance and long-suffering, etc. But after thy hardness
and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath, against the day of
wrath, etc. God has made some Examples of his Severity, and we should be
warned by them. Don't flatter your selves that your Fathers were so dear to
God, that he will not cast you off: Nor think your External Privileges will
secure you; Or that you are now so increased in Numbers, Strength and Riches,
that you are out of the reach of ruining Judgments. But consider, the Church of
Ephesus was dear to Jesus Christ, Purhased with his own Blood, Act. 20.28. Yet
the Threatening has been long age awfully fulfilled on it. Go to Shiloh and
see, Jer 7.12 -- 15. i. e. Consider how God for the Iniquity of the Ten Tribes
destroyed and removed them out of their Land. Go to Jerusalem, i.e. Consider
how God has fulfilled his Threatenings upon the Jews. Their Fathers were very
dear to God, He had done great things for them They were vastly more Numerous,
Strong and Wealthy, than You; Yet for (...) departing from God, their Cities
are wast, their goodly House wherein they worshipped God, is destroyed, and
they are perished from of the Land God gave their Fathers, expect some few, who
are in miserable Circumstances under the Turkish Yoke. And you have reason to
expect like Severity, from an immutably holy and jealous God, if you go on to
depart from Him and will not be reclaimed. God's (...) came to and end with
them, and so it will do with you.

6. GOD's Stand has been stretched out against you. Seldom a year passes but
by some Judgment he makes you feel his Dispicasure, and shows you that Wrath
is out against you. Within Three Years past, God has taken off by Death Three
of the A^^^stants, John Had, Esquire; Christopher (...), Esquire; Hezek^ah Brainerd,
Esquire;
Men much improved by the Public, and who did a great deal of Service in it,
and in the midst of their Usefulness. And one of them very lately, viz. John
(...), Esquire. a Person of great Piety and Usefulness (...) and faithful Friend to
Religion and his Country, and our Constitutions Civil and E^^l^^^^stic^l. The
Esteem the People in gener^l had of him, will, I presume, be this Day
manifested, in the full choice they have made of him, to the Post he has
worthily filled for diverse Years past, tho's his Seat here must now be empty,
he shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know him any
more, Job. 7.10.

And within the Year past, God has taken away an Eminent Minister, The
Reverend (...)
A very Learned, Great, and Good man, the Oldest Person of that Order in this
Colony or in the Land, i. e. in Standing, of those that have been Graduated in
the Country, as appears by the Catalogue. And it argues God's Displeasure, when
he takes away the Ancient and the Honorable, the Prophet and the Counselor,
Isa. 3.2, 3.

There was a very great and general Blast the last Year, upon the Wheat; And
now an Infectious and Mortal Disease has got in among us, into some Towns, and
all are threatened: And to be stupid under Correction will be very provoking,
Don't give ground for that Complaint Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they
will not see Isa. 26.11. Don't by a Continuance in Sin, provoke the Lord to
Jealousy, are you stronger than he? You lie open to him, and are at his Mercy
in all respects How dangerous is it to provoke him? How easy is it for Him
further to distress you? The hearts of Kings and Princes are in his hand. He
influenceth them as he pleases, Their determinations concerning their People,
are under the guidance of his Providence, Prove. 29.26. The Land you dwell in is
not like Egypt, watered by the foot, but is a Land of Hills and Valleys, and
drinks water of the Rain of Heaven, a Land which requires the Eye and Care
of the Lord your God always from the beginning even to the end of the Year,
Deuteronomy. 11.10, 11, 12.

7. There is Encouragement, if you Return to the Lord and Love him with all
your heart, etc. That he will not cause his Anger to fall upon you, Jer. 3.12.
but will again Rejoice over you for good, Deuteronomy. 30, 9. To Love God is the
highest Acknowlegement of his Goodness, and is very pleasing to him, and shall
be richly rewarded. Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and those that seek
me early shall find me.

2. The Exhortation may be directed, with all Humility, to the RULERS of this
People. Honorable and Worshipful, Be Entreated and Exhorted to use your utmost
Endeavors to revive languishing Love and Religion among us; and so to prevent
the Ruin of this Exposed People, who are making themselves Naked by departing
from their God. And I hope you will not account me Cenfosious, if I urge you to
Examine, Whether JESUS CHRIST has not ground of this Complaint with respect to
your Order; and whether there is not reason that You should Endeavor to shake
off Remissness, and rouse up Your Affections unto GOD, and Love Him with all
your hearts, etc. Your Exalted Stations don't free you from Corruption; nor in
the least Excuse you from the Duty which all men owe to God: but lay a further
Bond upon you, to Love and Hounour him, and cleave carefully to him. Because
it is He that has Advanced You above your Brethren, and put the Honor upon you
that you have Ps. 75.7. But God is the Judge; He puts down one, and sevteth
up another. God Exalted David, and it was an Aggravation of his Sin, that when
God had been so kind to him, he should so requite Him. 2 Samuel 12.7-9. I
anointed thee, etc. It is but Gratitude in you to be forward, yea Eminent, in
Honoring God, who has put distinguishing Honor upon You.

And because by virtue of your advancement, Your Sins will become more
extensively hurtful, and will bring Public guilt. The Rulers Sins expose the
People to Judgments. Readiness Sin against the Gibeonites, brought a Famine on all
Israel, 2 Samuel 21.1. David's Sin in Numbering the People, brought a Plague on
them. It becomes Rulers to be tenderly concerned for the People they Rule over,
left for their Iniquities, Wrath fall upon them; and out of respect to them, to
walk carefully with God. Endeavor to revive languishing Love and Religion by
your Examples, by living holily your selves in all manner of Conversation. Your
Posts make your Examples more Obeserved, and more Influential. Your favoring
of Religion, being constant and reverent, in attending the Duties of it, the
Public Worship, Sacraments. etc will be likely to stir up and encourage
others; And your Neglect of any Gospel Institution, will tend to discredit
them. Don't fear to be strictly Religious, left you should be reproached and
despised, as Precise, Narrow Soul'd, etc. by them who are for taking a Liberty;
who are not for bowing to Religion, but seem to carry above it, and make that
to stoop to their Humors, Times and Interests.

And vigourously improve your Authority and the Power committed to you, to
punish suppress Profaneness, Drunkenness, Uncleanness and Unrighteousness, etc.
that so Evil may be taken away from the midst of us, viz. that the Public may
not contract guilt, by those Evil things that are done among us. Bear not the
Sword in vain; but as the Ministers of God. execute wrath upon them that do
Evil. Romans 13.4. Direct and Encourage Inserious Officers, And endeavor that
the Law shall (...), to defend and relieve the Innocent and Righteous, and to
detect and punish the Guilty and Evil-doer: And that no wiles shall prevent
right Judgment going forth. Be Eyes to the blind, and Feet to the lame, and a
Defense to the poor and helpless, against them that are too mighty and crafty
for them. Brake the jaws of the wicked, and pluck the spoil out of his teeth.
Job. 29.15, 16. Psalm. 72.12. and 82.3, 4. Take heed what you do, for ye Judge
not for man, but for the Lord; who is with you in the Judgment. Wherefore now,
let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it: for there is no
Iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7.

Don't be discouraged and disheartened, because through the Jealousy and
Untractableness of the People, you cannot do them the good you would; or
because, what you do is not by all gratefully Accepted, but by some is
mis-interpreted, murmured at and faulted. Such things indeed are disquieting
and disheartening. A great Ruler that had justly given him this Character,
That, he was very Meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the
earth, Numb. 12.3. was wearied and put out of temper, with the burden of a
murmuring froward People, Numb. 11.10, 12, 14, 15. But God who has disposed
you in your several Posts, deserves from you a patient Application to the work.
And your Opportunities to show your respect to Him and to Religion, and the
welfare of this People, will be but short. The same Scripture that styles
Rulers Gods, faith they shall Die like men, Psalm. 82, 6, 7. And it is often and
awfully confirmed in Providence, And many times faithful Rulers, though murmured
at while they lived, have been remembered with a great deal of honor after they
were dead. And assuredly a merciful and bountiful GOD, will not wipe out your
good deeds, but will think upon you for good, according to all that you shall
do, for the honor of his Name and the good of this People, Neh. 5.19, and 13,
14.

3. The Exhortation may be directed to my Fathers and Brethren in the MINISTRY.
Let us be Exhorted to observe the languishing State of Religion, and how much
we have left our first Love, and what hazard we are in on that account; and lay
these things to heart. If the Seers see not and the Watchmen slumber, the case
will be exceeding sad. And let us Enquire, Whether JESUS CHRIST may not justly
lay it to our Charge, who are the present Angels of these Churches, That we
have left our first Love? i. e. fall short of that Zeal and Love that was in
our Predecessors the first and former Ministers. Are our Conversations so holy,
and edifying as Theirs were? Do we apply our selves so entirely and painfully
to our Ministerrial Work as they did? Do we Entertain our Hearers with such
Searching and Soul Saving Sermons, as They did? Are we as Concerned for the
Interest of CHRIST and Religion, as They were, Do they lie so much upon our
Hearts, Is there as much Willingness and Forwardness in us to take Pains, Deny
and Expose our selves to serve such Interests, as there was in them? Is there
not in some too much slackness in attending Meetings appointed to serve
Religion, and also backwardness to and shifting off Labor and Pains for CHRIST
and his Churches when we are called thereto? A lothness to leave our own
business and deny our selves? Is there not too much of that Disposition among
us, that there was among the Ministers which the Apostle Paul had with him at
Rome, of whom he complains, Phil. ^.21. For all seek their own, not the things
which are Jesus Christ's.

Let us Labor to strengthen the things which remain that are ready to die. Let
us Endeavor to be possessed our selves with a servent Love to JESUS CHRIST,
strong as Death, that many waters cannot quench, nor the foods drown: That may
be a quickening Principle in us. Exciting diligently and faithfully to Feed his
Sheep, and to Feed his Lambs, Job. 21.15, 16. And that may cause us not to
think much of Difficulties, or be weary of Service for Him, neither to count
our Lives dear, so that we might finish our Course with Jo, and the Ministry
which we have received of the Lord JESUS, Act. 20.24. Let us always Endeavor
that a Savor of Religion may appear in us and that our Conversation and
Communication may be Edifying, not only as becomet. Christians, but Ministers
of Jesus Christ. It is part of the Charge that we have received, and of the
Duty that lies upon us, To be Examples of the Believers, in Word, in
Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity, 1 Timothy 4.12. Let us
be Solicitous for our MASTER, and labor so to set forth his Beauties and
Unsearchable Riches, that we may beget a Respect to him in the Hearts of our
hearers, and Espouse them (...). 2. Cor. 11.2. Let us Uni^edly and B^^^ly
Oppose the growing Vices among us; (...) and not sparing. Lifting up our
Voices, as Trumpets, and showing this People their Transgression and their Sin,
Isa. 58.1. In a time of Revolt, when it was said, Who is in the Lord's side?
The Tribe of Levi showed themselves, Exodus 32.26. It becomes us to be (...) in
promoting a Reformation. Let us not shall to decline all the Counsel of God to
our People; And keep back no Truths (...) them, through fear they will not be
acceptable. Making JESUS CHRIST the Prince of Preachers our Pattern: He freely
and plainly declared to his Hearers, the Difficulties and Self-denials there
were in the way to Happiness; the impotency of Nature and the need of Sovereign
Grace in order to men's Compliance with Gospel, Luke 14.26, 27. Job. 6.44, 45,
65. He did not forbear such Truths, for fear of disaffecting Persons to the way
of Life, or discouraging and disheartning them from using Means, and taking
Pains to obtain Salvation. He wants none of our Policy, or little Arts to carry
on his Work and build up his Kingdom. Let a continual sense of our own
Nothingness and Insufficiency move us, always to have our Eyes to Christ, for
all Supplies. Let us Consider how exceeding Precious Immortal Souls are, and
the Importance of our Work, and take head unto our Selves, and to all the
Flocks, over which the Holy Ghost has made us Bishops, or Overseers, etc. Act.
20.28. And be Faithful to the Interest of Religion, and the Churches, in all
things wherein we are called to be Concered; Looking upon our selves as always
under the Eye of our MASTER, who Walks in the midst of the Candlesticks; and
on Remembering that stroke in his Character, And his Eyes were as a flame of
Fire, Rev. 1.14. And also that we shall not be suffered to continue by reason
of Death, but must shortly give an account of our Stewardship to Him; When
great will be the Happiness of the Faithful Servant, whom his LORD when he
comes shall find so doing; and terrible the Punishment of the Unfaithful. Mat.
24.45, -- 54.

Lastly, Let us all be Exhorted to take with us words and turn to the Lord, Say
unto him take away all Iniquity and receive us graciously, Hos. 14.2. Let it be
our servent and continual Prayer. That the Lord our God will be with Us, as he
was with our Fathers, that he will not leave us nor forsake us, 1 King 8.57.
That he will purify the Sons of Levi and purge them as gold and silver, that
they may offers unto the Lord an Offering in Righteousness, Mat. 3.3. Yea, that
he will Redeem us all from all our Iniquities and purity unto himself a
peculiar People Zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14.

And further to Quicken us unto Faithfulness in our several Relations and
Places, to promote the Glory and Interest of Jesus Christ; Let seriously
Consider, JESUS CHRIST, who now Observes and Inspecteth his Churches and
Ministers, is Expected ever it be long, and will be Personally here, and his
Reward will be with him. Rev. 22.12. And behold I come quickly and my Reward is
with me to (...) every man according, (...) work shall be. And (...) Rev. 1.7.
(...) ^e comes with Clouds, and every Eye shall see Him; and they (...) him.
And the Apperances will be Dreadful! (The World which was once destroyed by
Water for the Act of Lusts, shall be consumed with Fire for the cold (...) of
Love, says One.) But the Day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the Night; in
the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise, and the (...) shall
melt with (...) Heat; the Earth also and the works that are therein shall be
build up, 2 Pet. 3.10. I shall Conclude all, with the same Apostle's
Exhortation in the 14 th. Verse of that Chapter. Wherefore, beloved, seeing
that ye look so such things be diligent that ye may be (...) of him in Peace,
without spot and blameless.

FINIS.

