

Mr. John Bunyan

THE Jerusalem-Sinner Saved: OR, GOOD NEWS FOR THE Vilest of Men, Being a HELP
for DESPAIRING SOULS: SHOWING That Jesus Christ would have Mercy in the First
place offered to the BIGGEST SINNERS.

The Eleventh Edition.

In which is added, an Answer to those Grand Objections that lie in the ways of
them that would believe: For the Comfort of those than fear they have sinned
against the Holy Ghost

By John Bunyan of Bedford.

Boston: Printed for J. Edwards and H. Foster in Cornhill 1733.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
ONE Reason which moved me to write and Print this little Book, was, Because,
though there are many excellent Heart-affecting Discourses in the World, that
tend to convert the Sinner: yet I had a Desire to my this simple Method of
mine; Wherefore I make bold thus to invite and encourage the Worst to come to
Christ for Life.

I have been Vile myself, but have obtained Mercy, and I would have my
Companions in Sin partake of Mercy too, and therefore I have writ this BOOK.

The Nation does swarm with vile Ones now, as ever it did since it was a
Nation. My Book in some places can scarce go from House to House, but twill
find a suitable Subject to spread it self upon. Now since Christ Jesus is
willing to save the vilest, why ^ould they not by Name be somewhat ^cquainted
with it, and bid come to him under that Name?

A great Sinner, when converted seems a Booty to Jesus Christ, he gets by
saving such an one; why then should both Jesus lose his Glory and the Sinner
lose his Soul at once, and that for want of an Invitation?

I have found, through God's Grace, good Success in preaching upon this Subject,
and perhaps so I may, by my writing upon it too: I have, as you see, let down
this Net for a Draught, the Lord catch some great Fishes by it, for the
magnifying of his Truth. There are some most vile in all Men's Eyes, and some
are so in their own Eyes too; but some have the Paintings to shroud Vileness
under, yet they are naked and open unto the Eyes of him with whom we have to
do: And for all these, God has sent a Savior Jesus; and to all these the Door
is opene^

Wherefore prithee profane Man, give ^ little Book the Reading. Come, Pardon ^
Part in Heaven and Glory, cannot b^ hurtful ^ thee, Let not thy Lusts and Folly
drive the^ beyond the Door of Mercy, since it is not locked nor bolted up
against thee. Man^ssah was a bad Man, and Magdalen a bad Woman: To say nothing
of the Thief upon the Cross, or of the Murderers of Christ, yet they obtained
Mercy; Christ willingly received them. And do thou think that those once so
bad, now they are in Heaven, repent them there, because they left their Sins
for Christ when they were in this World? I cannot believe but thou think
they have verily got the best on it ^ why Sinner do thou likewise; Christ at
Heaven Gates says to the, come hither; and the Devil at the Gates of Hell does
call thee to come to him, Sinner what say thou? Whither will thou go? Don't
go into the Fire, where thou will be burned: Don't let Jesus lose his Longing,
since it is for thy Salvation, but come to him and live.

One Word more, and so I have done: Sinner, here thou do hear of Love,
prithee don't provoke it by turning it into Wantoness He that dies for
slighting Love sink deepest into Hell, and will, there be tormented by the
Remembrance of that Evil, more than by the deepest Cogitati^^ of all his other
Sins. Take heed there^^^e do not make Love thy Tormentor ^^^ner.

John Bunyan.

GOOD NEWS For the Vilest of Men: OR A Help for Despairing SOULS.
Luke xxiv 47. Beginning at Jerusalem.


THE whole Verse runs thus ^ And that repentance, and remission of Sins should
be preached in his name among all nations, Beginning at Jerusalem. The words
were spoken by Christ after he rose from the Dead, and they are here rehearsed
after an Historical manner, but do contain in them a formal Commission, with a
special Clause therein. The Commission is as you see for the Preaching of the
Gospel, and is very distinctly inserted in the Holy Record by Matthew and Mark.
Go teach all Nations, etc. Go ye into all the World and preach the Gospel unto
every Creature, Matt. 28.19. Mark 16.15. Only this Clause is in special
mentioned by Luke, who says, That as Christ would have the Doctrine of
Repentance and Remission of Sins preached in his Name among all Nations, so he
would have the People of Jerusalem to have the first proffer thereof, preach
it, says Christ, in all Nations; but begin at Jerusalem.

The Apostles then thought they had a Commission so large as to give them
Warrant to go and preach the Gospel in al^ the World, yet by this Clause they
were limited, as to the beginning of their Ministry; They were to begin this
Work a^ Jerusalem, Beginning at Jerusalem.

Before I proceed to an Observation upon the Words, I must (but briefly) touc^
upon two things: Namely,

1. Show you what Jerusalem now wa^

2 Show you what it was to preach the Gospel to them.

For the first, Jerusalem is to be considere^ of, either,

1. With respect the descent of her People. Or,

2. With respect to her Preference an^ Exaltation. Or,

3. With respect to her present State ^ to her Decays.

First, As to her Descent: She was from Abraham, from the Sons of Jacob, a
People that God singled out from the rest o^ the Nations to set his Love upon
them.

Secondly, As to her Preference or Exaltation, she was the place of God's
Worship, and that which had in and with her the special Tokens and Signs of
God's Favor and Presence, above any other People in the World. Hence the
Tribes went up to Jerusalem to worship, there was God's House; God's High
Priest, God's Sacrifices accepted, and God's Eye, and God's Heart perpetually,
Psalm. 76.1, 2. Psalm. 122.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Kings 9.3. But,

Thirdly, We are to consider Jerusalem also in her Decays; for as she is so
considered, she is the proper Object of our Text, as will be further showed by
and by.

Jerusalem, as I told you, was the place and seat of God's Worship, but now
decayed, degenerated, and apostatized. The Word, the Rule of Worship, was
rejected of them, and in its place they had set up their own Traditions, they
had rejected also the most weighty Ordinances, and put in the room thereof
their own little things ( Mat. 15. Mark 7.) Jerusalem was therefore now greatly
back slidden, and become the place where Truth and true Religion was much
defaced.

It was also now become the very sink of Sin, the seat of Hypocrisy, and the
Gulf where true Religion was drowned: Here also now reigned Presumption and
groundless Confidence in GOD, which is the bane of Souls. Amongst its Rulers,
Doctors and Leaders, Envy, Malice, and Blasphemy vented it self against the
Power of Godliness, in all places where it was espied: As also against the
Promoters of it; yea their Lord and Maker could not escape them.

In a word, Jerusalem was now become the Shambles, the very Slaughter-shop for
Saints. This was the place wherein the Prophets, Christ, and his People, were
most horribly persecuted and murdered. Yea, so hardened at this time was
Jerusalem in her Sins, that she feared not to commit the biggest, and to bind
her self by Wish, under the Guilt and damning Evil of it; saying, when she had
murdered the Son of God, His blood be upon us and our Children.

And though Jesus Christ did both by Doctrine, Miracles, and Holiness of Life,
seek to put a stop to their Villainies; yet they shut their Eyes, stop their
Ears, and rested not, till (as was hinted before) they had driven him out of
the World. Yea that they might, if possible, have extinguished his Name, and
exploded his Doctrine out of the World; they against all Arguments, and in
despite of heaven, its mighty Hand, and undeniable Proof of his Resurrection;
did hire Soldiers to invent a lie, saying, his Disciples stole him away from
the Grave; on purpose that Men might not count him the Savior of the World,
nor trust in him for the Remission of Sins.

They were, says Paul, contrary to all Men: For they did not only shut up the
Door of Life against themselves; but forbid that it should be opened to any
else. Forbidding us, says he, to preach to the Gentiles, that they might be
saved, to fill up their Sin always, Mat. 23.35. Chap. 15 7, 8, 9. Mark 7.6, 7,
8. Matthew. 3. to 9. John 8.33, 41. Matthew. 27.18. Mark 3.30. Luke 2.65. Matthew.
23.37. Luke 13.33, 34. Psalm. 2.22, 23. Psalm. 4.10. Matthew. 27, 25. Chapter 20.11, to
the 15.1 These. 2, 14 15 16.

This is the City, and these are the People, this is their Character, and these
are their Sins. Nor can there be produced their parallel in all this World.
Nay, what World, what People, what Nation, for Sin and Transgression, could, or
can be compared to Jerusalem! Especially if you ioyn to the matter of Fact, the
Light they sinned against, and the Patience which they abused. Infinite was the
Wickedness upon this Account which they committed.

After all their Abusings of wise Men, and Prophets, God sent unto them John
Baptist, to reduce them, and then his Son to redeem them; but they would be
neither reduced nor redeemed, but persecuted both to the Death. Nor did they as
I sa^^, stop here; the Holy Apostles they afterward persecuted also to Death,
even so many as they could, the rest they drove from them unto the utmost
Corners.

Secondly, I come now to show you what it was to preach the Gospel to them. It
was, says Luke, to preach to them Repentance and Remission of Sins in Christ's
Name. Or as Mark has it, to bid them repent and believe the Gospel. Mark 1.15.
Not that Repentance is a Cause of Remission, but a Sign of our hearty Reception
thereof. Repentance is therefore here put to intimate, that no pretended Faith
of the Gospel is good, that is not accompanied wi^h (...) And this he does or
purpose, becau^^ (...) ^ould not have them deceive the (...) For with what
Faith can he exp^ (...) ^mon of Sins in the name of Christ that is not heartily
sor^y for them? O^ ^^w shall a Man be able to give to othe^s a s^^^^factory
Account of his unfeigned Subjection to the Gospel that yet abides in his
Impenitency?

Wherefore Repentance is here ^oined with F^^th in the way of receiving the
Gospel, Faith is that without which it cannot be received at all: And
Repentance, without which it cannot be received unfeignedly. When therefore
Christ says he would have Repentance and Remission of Sins preached in his Name
among all Nations* it is as much as to say, I will that all Men every where be
sorry for their Sins, and accept of Mercy at God's hand, through me, lest they
fa^l under his Wrath in the Judgment. For, as I said, without Repentance what
Pretense soever Men have of Faith, they cannot escape the Wrath to come;
wherefore Paul says, God Commands all Men every where to repent (in order to
their Salvation) because he has appointed a Day in the which he will Judge the
World in Righteousness by that Man whom he has ordained, Acts 17.30.

And now to come to this Clause, Beginning at Jerusalem: That is, that Christ
would have Jerusalem have the first offer of the Gospel.

1. This cannot be so commanded, because they had any more Right for themselves
thereto* than had any of the Nations of the World; for their Sins had divested
them of all Self-deservings.

2. Nor yet, because they stood upon the advance Ground with the worst of the
Sinners of the Nations, Nay, rather the Sinners of the Nations, had the advance
Ground of them: For Jerusalem was long before she had added this Iniquity to
her Sin, worse than the very Nations that God cast out before the Children of
Israel, 2 Chronicles 33.

3. It must therefore follow that the clause begun at Jerusalem was put into
this Commission of mere Grace and Compassion: Even from the overflowing of the
Bowels of Mercy: For indeed they were the worst, and so in the most deplorable
Condition of any People under the Heaven.

Whatever therefore their Relation was to Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob, however
they formerly had been the People among whom God had placed his Name and
Worship; they were now degenerated from God more than the Nations were from
their Idols, and were become Guilty of the highest Sins which the People of the
World were capable of committing. Nay none can be capable of committing of such
unpardonable Sins they committed against their God, when they slew his Son, and
persecuted his Name and Word.

From these Words therefore, thus explained, we gain this Observation,

That Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the first place to the biggest
Sinners.

That these Jerusalem Sinners were the biggest that ever were in the World, I
think none will deny, that believes that Christ was the best Man that ever was
in the World, and also was their Lord God. And that they were to have the first
offer of his Grace, the Text is as clear as the Sun; for it says, Begin at
Jerusalem. Preach, says he, Repentance and Remission of Sins, in the first
place to the Jerusalem Sinners.

One would have thought, since the Jerusalem Sinners were the worst, and
greatest Sinners, Christ's greatest Enemies, and those that not only despised
his Person, Doctrine, and Miracles, but that a little before had had their
Hands up to their Elbows in his Hearts Blood. That he should rather have said,
Go into all the World, and preach Repentance and Remission of Sins among all
Nations, and after that, the same to Jerusalem: Yea, it had been infinite Grace
if he had said so: But what Grace is this? Or what Name shall we give it, when
he Commands that this Repentance and Remission of Sins which is designed to be
preached in all Nations, should first be offered to Jerusalem the worst of
Sinners?

Nor was this the first time that the Grace which was in the Heart of Christ,
thus showed it self to the World. For while he was yet alive, even while He was
yet in Jerusalem, and perceived, even among those Jerusalem Sinners, which was
the most vile amongst them, he still in his preaching did signify that he had
a Desire that the worst of these worst should in the first place come unto him.
The which he shows, where he says to the better sort of them. The Publicans
and Harlots enter into the Kingdom of God before you, Mat. 21.13. Al^^ when he
compared Jerusalem with the Sinners of the Nation he then Commands that the
Jerusalem Sinners should have the Gospel at present confined to them. Go not,
says he, into the way of the Gentiles* and into any of the Cities of the
Samaritans enter ye not: But go rather to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel
Mat. 10.5, 6. Chap. 23.37. But go rather to them, for they were in the most
fearful plight.

These therefore must have the Cream of the Gospel, namely, the first offer
thereof in his Lifetime: Yea, when he departed out of the World, he left this
as part of his last Will with his Preachers, that they also should offer it
first to Jerusalem. He had a mind, as it seems, to privilege the worst of
Sinners with the first offer of Mercy; and to take from among them, a People to
be the first Fruits unto GOD and to the LAMB. The 15th of Luke also is famous
for this, Where the Lord Jesus takes more Care, as appears here by three
Parables, for the lost Sheep, lost Groat, and the Prodigal Son, than for the
other Sheep, the other Pence, or for the Son that said he had never
transgressed. Yea, he shows that there is Joy in Heaven, among the Angels of
GOD, at the Repentance of one Sinner, more than over Ninety and Nine Just
Persons, which need no Repentance, Luke 15.

After this manner therefore the Mind of CHRIST was set on the Salvation of the
biggest Sinners in his Lifetime. But join to this, this Clause, which he
carefully put into the Apostles Commission to preach, when he departed hence to
the Father, and then you shall see that his, Heart was vehemently set upon it;
for these were part of his last Words with them, Preach the Gospel to all
Nations, but see that you do begin at Jerusalem.

Nor did the Apostles overlook this Clause, when their Lord was gone into
Heaven: They went first to them of Jerusalem, and Preached Christ's Gospel to
them. They abode also there for a Season, and preached it to no body else, for
they had regard to the Commandments of their Lord.

And it is to be observed, namely, that the first Sermon which they preached,
was to the very worst of these Jerusalem Sinners; even to those that were the
Murderers of Jesus Christ, Acts 2.23. For these are part of the Sermon: Ye took
him and by wicked Hands have Crucified and slain him. Yea, the three next
Sermons was preached to the self-same Murderers, to the end they might be
saved, Acts 3.14.

But we will return to the first Sermon that was preached to those Jerusalem
Sinners, by which will be manifest more than great Grace, if it be duly
considered.

For after that Peter and the rest of the Apostles, had in their Exhortation
persuaded these Wretches to believe that they had killed the Prince of Life.
And after they had duly fallen under the guilt of their Murder, saying, Men and
Brethren what shall we do? He replies by an universal Tender to them all in
general, considering them as Christ's killers, That if they were sorry for what
they had done, and would be Baptized for the Remission of their Sins in his
Name, they should receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.37, 38.

This he said to them all, though he knew that they were such Sinners: Yea, he
said it without the least Stick, or Stop or Pause of Spirit, as to whether he
had best to say so, or no. Nay, so far of was Peter from making an Objection
against one of them, that by a particular Clause in his Exhortation, he
endeavors that not one of them may escape the Salvation offered. Repent, says
he, and be Baptized every one of you. I shut out never a one of you. For I am
commanded by my Lord to deal with you; as it were one by one, by the Word of
his Salvation. But why speaks he so particularly? Oh! There were Reason for it:
The People with whom the Apostles were now to deal, as they were Murderers of
our Lord, and to be charged in the general with his Blood, so they had their
Various and Particular Acts of Villiany in the Guilt thereof, now lying upon
their Consciences. And the Guilt of these their Various and Particular Acts of
Wickedness, could not perhaps, be preached to a removal thereof, but by this
particular Application. Repent every one of you; be Baptized every one of you
in his Name for the Remission of Sins, and you shall every one of you, receive
the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

Object. But I was one of them that plotted to take away his Life: May I be
saved by him?

Peter. Every one of you.

Object. But I was one of them that bare false Witness against him, Is there
Grace for me?

Peter. For every one of you.

Object. But I was one of them that cried out. Crucify, Crucify him; and that
desired that Barabas the Murderer might live rather than him. What will become
of me think you?

Peter. I am to preach Repentance and Remission of Sins to every one of you
says Peter.

Object. But I was one of them that did spit in his Face when he stood before
his accusers, I also was one that mocked him, when in Anguish he hanged
bleeding on the Tree; Is there room for me?

Peter. For every one of you, says Peter.

Object. But I was one of them that in his Extremity said give him Gall and
Vinegar to drink, why may not I expect the same when Anguish and Guilt is upon
me?

Peter. Repent of these your Wickednesses, here is Remission of Sins for every
one of you.

Object. But I Railed on him, I Reviled him, I hated him, I rejoiced to see him
mocked at by others: Can there be any hopes for me?

Peter. There is for every one of you.

Repent and be Baptized every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ for the
Remission of Sins. And ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost. O! what a
Blessed every one of you, is here! How willing was Peter and his Lord Jesus by
his Ministry, to catch these Murderers with the Word of the Gospel, that they
might be made Monuments of the Grace of GOD! How unwilling, I say was he, that
any of these should escape the Hand of Mercy! Yea, what an amazing Wonder is
it, to think that above all the World, and above every body in it, These should
have the first offer of Mercy, beginning at Jerusalem.

But was there not something of Moment in this Clause of the Commission? Did
not Peter think you see a great deal in it, that he should thus begin with
these Men, and thus offer, so particular, this Grace to each particular Man of
them?

But, as I told you, This is not all, these Jerusalem Sinners must have this
offer again and again? Every one of them must be offered it over and over.
CHRIST would not take the first Rejection for a Denial; nor their second
Repulse for a Denial: But he will have Grace offered once, and twice, and
thrice to these Jerusalem Sinners. Is not this amazing Grace, CHRIST will not
be put off? These are the Sinners that are Sinners indeed. They are Sinners of
the biggest sort, consequently such as CHRIST can, if they Convert and be
saved, best serve his Ends and Designs upon, of which more anon.

But what a pitch of Grace is this? CHRIST is minded to amaze the World, and to
show that he acted not like the Children of Men. This is that which he said of
Old, I will not execute the Fierceness of my Wrath, I will not return to
destroy Ephraim, for I am GOD and not Man, Hos. 11.9. This is not the manner of
Men, Men are shorter winded, Men are soon moved to take Vengence and to right
themselves in a way of Wroth and Indignation; but GOD is full of Grace full of
Patience, ready to forgive and one that delights in Mercy: All this, is seen in
our Text, the biggest Sinners must first be offered Mercy; they must I say,
have the Cream of the Gospel offered unto them.

But we will proceed. In the Third Chapter we find, that they who escaped
converting by the first Sermon, are called upon again to except of Grace and
Forgiveness for their Murder committed upon the Son of God. You have killed;
yea, you have denied the Holy On* and the Just, an I desired the Murderer to be
granted unto you. And killed the Prince of Life. Mark, he falls again upon the
very Men, that actually were, as you have it in the Chapters following, his
very Betrayers and Murderers. Acts 2.14.15. as being loath that they should
escape the Mercy of Forgiveness. And Exhorts them again to repent, that their
Sins may be blotted out, Verse 19, 20.

Again in the fourth Chapter, he charges them afresh with this Murder. Verse
10. But withal tells them, Salvation is in no other than like a heavenly
Decoy, He puts himself also among them, to draw them the better under the Net
of the Gospel, saying, There is none other Name under He even given among Men,
whereby we must be saved, Verse 12.

In the fifth Chapter you find them Railing at him, because he continued
Preaching among them Salvation in the Name of Jesus; but he tells them, that
that very Jesus whom they had slain and hanged on a Tree, him GOD had raised up
and exalted to be Prince, and a Savior, to give Repentance to Israel, and
Forgiveness of Sins, ver. 29, 30, 31. Still insinuating, that though they had
killed him and to this Day rejected him, yet his Business was to bestow upon
them Repentance and Forgiveness of Sins.

It Is true, after they had began to kill again, and when nothing but killing
would serve their turn then they that were scattered abroad, went every where
preaching the Word. Yet even some of them so hankered after the Conversion of
the Jews, that they preached the Gospel only to them. Also the Apostles still
made their Abode at Jerusalem in hopes that they might let down their Net for
another Draught of these Jerusalem Sinners. Neither did Paul and Barnabas, who
were the Ministers of GOD to the Gentiles but offer the Gospel in the first
place to those of them that for their Wickedness were scattered like Vagabonds
among the Nations: Yea, and when they rendered Rebellion and Blasphemy for their
Service and Love; they Replied, It was Necessary that the Word of God should
first have been spoken to them, Acts 1.8. Chapter 13.46, 47.

Nor was this their preaching Unsuccessful among these People: But the Lord
Jesus so wrought with the Word thus spoken, that Thousands of them came
flocking to him for Mercy. Three Thousand of them closed with him at the first
and afterward Two Thousand more; for now they were in Number about Five
Thousand; whereas before these Sermons were preached to these Murderers; the
Number of the Desciples were not above an Hundred and Twenty, Acts 1.15. Chapter
2.41 Chapter 4.4.

Also among these People that thus flocked to him for Mercy, there was a great
Company of the Priests Chap. 6.7. Now the Priests were they that were the
greatest of these biggest Sinners; they were the Ringleaders, they were the
Inventors and Ringleaders in the Mischief. 'Twas they set the People against
the Lord Jesus, and that was the cause why the Uproar increased, until Pilate
had given Sentance upon him. The chief Priests and Elders, says the Text
persuaded (the People) the Multitude, that they should ask Barabas, and destroy
Jesus, Matthew. 27 20. And yet behold the Priests, yea, a great Company of the
Priests, became obedient to the Faith.

Oh! the greatness of the Grace of Christ! That he should be thus in Love with
the Souls of the Jerusalem Sinners; That he should be thus delighted with the
Salvation of the Jerusalem Sinners, that he should not only will that his
Gospel should be offered them, but that it should be offered unto them first,
and before other Sinners were admitted to a hearing of it; Begin at Jerusalem.

Was this Doctrine well believed where would there be place for a Doubt or a
Fear of the Damnation of the Soul, if the Sinner be Penitent, How bad a Life
soever ^e has lived, how many soever in Number are his Sins?

But this Grace is hid from the Eyes of Men, the Devil hides it from them, for
he knows it is alluring? He knows it has an ^ttracting Virtue in it. For this
is it, that above all Argumenes can draw the Soul to God.

I cannot help it, but must let drop another Word: The first Church, the
Jeru^alem Church; from whence the Gospel was to be sent into all the World, was
a Church made up of Jerusalem Sinners. These great Sinner were here the most
^ining Monuments of the exceeding Grace of God.

Thus you see I have pro^^d the Doctrine; and that not only by showing you that
this was the Practice of the Lord Jesus Christ in his Life time; but his las^
Will when he went up to God; saying Begin to preach at Jerusalem.

Yea, it is yet further manifested, in tha^ when his Ministers first began to
preach to others, he joined his Power to the Word, to the converting of
Thousands of his Betrayers and Murderers; and also many o^ the Ring-leading
Priest to the Faith.

I shall now proceed, and shall show you,

1. The Reason of the point.

2. And then make some Application of the whole.

The Observation you know is this, Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the
first place to the biggest Sinners, to the Jerusalem Sinners: Preach Repentance
and Remission of Sins in my Name among a^ Nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

The Reasons of the Point are,

First, Because the biggest Sinners have most need thereof. He that has most
need Reason says, should be helped first: ^ mean, when a helping Hand is
offered, ^ now it is. For the Gospel of the Grace of God is sent to help the
World, Ac^ 16.9. But the biggest Sinner has mo^^ need. Therefore in Reason,
when Merc^ is sent down from Heaven to Men, the worst of Men should have the
first Off^^ of it: Begin at Jerusalem: This is the Reason which the Lord Christ
himself renders, why in his Life time he left the best, and turned him to the
worst; why he sat so loose from the Righteous and stuck so close to the Wicked,
The whole says he, have no need of the Physician, but the sick, I came not to
call the Righteous, but sinners to repentance, Mark 2.15, 16, 17.

Above you read, that the Scribes and Pharisees said to his Disciples: How is
it, that he eats and drinks with Publicans and Sinners? Alas they did not
know the Reason. But the Lord renders them one, and such an one, as is both
natural and cogent; saying, These have need most need. Their great Necessity
requires that I should be most friendly and show my Grace first to them.

Not that the other were Sinless, and so had no need of a Savior: But the
Publicans, and their Companions, were the biggest Sinners, they were, as to
View, worse than the Scribes, and therefore in Reason should be helped first,
because they had most need of a Savior.

Men that are at the Point to die, have more need of the Physician, than they
that are but now and then troubled with an Heart fainting qualm. The Publicans
and Sinners, were, as it were, in the mouth of Death, Death was swallowing of
them down; and therefore the Lord Jesus receives them first, offers them Mercy
first The whole have no need of the Physician, but the Sick. I came not to call
the Righteous but Sinners to Repentance. The Sick, as I said, is the biggest
Sinner, whether he sees his Diseases or not. He is stained from Head to Foot,
from Heart to Life and Conversation: This Man in every Man's Judgment, has the
most need of Mercy* There is nothing attends him from Bed to Board, and from
Board to Bed again, but the visible Characters, and obvious Symptoms of eternal
Damnation. This therefore is the Man that has need, most need, and therefore in
Reason should be helped in the first place. Thus 'twas with the People
concerned in the Text, they were the worst of Sinners, Jerusalem Sinners,
Sinners of the biggest size. And therefore such as had the greatest need,
wherefore they must have Mercy offered to them, before it be offered any where
in the World, Begin at Jerusalem. Offer Mercy first to a Jerusalem Sinner: This
man has most need, he is farthest from God, nearest to Hell, and so one that
has most need. This Man's Sins are in number the most, in cry the loudest, in
weight the heaviest, and consequently will sink him soonest wherefore he has
most need of Mercy: This Man is shut up in Satan's hand, fastest bound in the
cords of his sins; One that Justice is whetting his Sword to cut off, and
therefore has most need, not only of Mercy, but that it should be extended to
him in the first place.

But a little further, to show you the true nature of this Reason, to wit, That
Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the first place to the biggest sinners.

First, Mercy arises from Bowels and Compassion, from Pity, and from a feeling
of the Condition of those in misery. In his Love and in his Pity, he saves us.
And again, The Lord is pitiful, very pitiful, and of tender Mercy, Isa. 63 9.
Jam. 5.11.

Now where Pity and Compassion is, there is yearning of Bowels, and where there
is that, there is a Readiness to help. And, I say again, the more Deplorable
and Dreadful the Condition is, the more directly does Bowels and Compassion
turn themselves to such: And offer Help and Deliverance. All this flows from
our first Scripture Proof, I came to call them that have Need, to call them
first, while the rest look on, and Murmur.

How shall I give thee up Ephraim? Ephraim was a Revolter from God, a Man that
had given himself up to Devilism: a Company of Men, the Ten Tribes that
Worshipped Devils, while Judah kept with his God. But how should I give thee
up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah?
How shall I set thee as Zeboim (and yet thou art worse than they,) nor has
Samaria committed half thy sins, Ezekiel. 16.46 to 51. My Heart is turned within
me, and my Repentings are kindled together, Hos. 11.8

But where do you find that ever the Lord did thus roll in his Bowels for, and
after any Self righteous Man? No, no, they are the Publicans and Harlots,
Idolaters and Jerusalem Sinners, for whom his Bowels thus yearn and tumble
about within him, For, alas poor Worms, they have most Need of Mercy.

Had not that good Samaritan more Compassion for that Man that fell among
Thieves, (though that Fall was occasioned by his going from the place where they
worshipped God, to Jericho, the cursed City) than we read he had for any other
besides? His Wine was for him, his Oil was for him, his Beast for him, his
Penny, his Care, and his Swaddling hands for him; for alas, poor Wretch, he had
most Need, Luke 10.30 to 35.

Zacheus the Publican, the chief of the Publicans, one that had made himself
the richer by wronging of others; the Lord at that time singleth him out from
all the rest of his Brother Publicans, and that in the Face of many Pharisees,
proclaimed in the Audience of them all, That that Day Salvation was come to his
House, Luke 19. 1 to 8.

The Woman also that had been bowed down by Satan for Eighteen Years together,
his Compassion putting him upon it, he loosed her though those that stood by
snarled at him for so doing, Luke 13.11, 12, 13.

And why the Woman of Sarepta, and why Naaman the Syrian, rather than other
Widows and Lepers in Israel, but because their Conditions were more deplorable
(for that) they were most forlorn, and farthest from Help? Luke 4.25.27.

But I say, why all these thus named? Why have we not a Catalogue of some holy
Men that were so in their own Eyes, and in the Judgment of the World? Alas if
at any time any of them are mentioned, how seemingly coldly does the Record of
Scripture present them to us. Nicodemus, a Night Professor, and Simon the
Pharisee with his Fifty Pence, and their great Ignorance of the Methods of
Grace, we have now and then touched upon.

Mercy seems to be out of its proper Channel when it deals with Self righteous
Men; but then it runs with a full Stream, when it extends it self to the
biggest Sinners. As God's Mercy is not regulated by Man's Goodness, nor
obtained by Man's Worthiness so not much set out by saving of any such; but
more of this anon.

And here let me ask my Reader a Question: Suppose, that as thou art walking by
some Pond-side; thou should espy in it, four or five Children all in danger
of drowning, and one in more Danger than all the rest; judge which has most
Need to be helped out first? I know thou will say, he that is nearest drowning;
Why this is the Case: the bigger Sinner, the nearer drowning; therefore the
bigger Sinner, the more need of Mercy: Yea, of help by Mercy in the first
Place. And to this our Text agrees, when it says, Beginning at Jerusalem: Let
the Jerusalem sinner, says Christ, have the first Offer, the first Invitation,
the first tender of my Grace and Mercy, for he is the biggest Sinner, and so
has most Need thereof.

Secondly, Christ Jesus would have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners, because when they or any of them receive it, it redounds most
to the Fame of his Name.

Christ Jesus, as you may perceive, has put himself under the term of a
Physician, a Doctor for curing of Diseases: And you know that Applause and a
Fame, is a thing that Physicians much desire. That is it that helps them to
Patients, and that also that will help their Patients to commit themselves to
their Skill for Cure, with the more confidence and repose of Spirit; and the
way for a Doctor or Physician to get themselves a Name, is in the first place
to take in hand, and cure some such as all others have given off for lost and
dead: Physicians get neither Name nor Fame, by picking of Weeds or picking out
Thisties, or by laying of Plasters to the scratch of a Pin: Every old Woman
can do this: But if they will have a Name and a Fame, if they will have it
quickly they must, as I said, do some great and desperate Cures: Let them fetch
one to Life that was dead, let them recover one to his Wits that was Mad, let
them make one that was born Blind to see, or let them give ripe Wits to a Fool;
these are notable Cures, and he that can do thus, and if he does thus first, he
shall have the Name and Fame he desires, he may lie a Bed till Noon.

Why Christ Jesus forgiveth Sins for a Name, and so begets of himself a good
Report in the Hearts of the Children of Men: And therefore in Reason must be
willing, as also he did command that his Mercy should be offered first to the
biggest sinners.

I will forgive their Sins, Iniquities, and Transgressions, says he, and it
shall turn to me for a Name of Joy, and a Praise, and an Honor, before all the
Nations of the Earth, Jer. 33.8, 9.

And hence it is that at his first appearing, he took upon him to do such
mighty Works; He got a Fame thereby Mat 4 23.

When Christ had cast the Legion of Devils out of the Man of whom you read,
Mark 5. He bid him go home to his Friends and tell it; Go home, says he, to
thy Friends, and tell them how great things God has done for thee; and has had
Compassion on thee, Mark 5.19. Christ Jesus seeks a Name, and desires a Fame
in the World, and, therefore, the better to obtain that, he commands that Mercy
should first be proffered to the biggest Sinners; because by the saving of one
of them he makes all Men marvel. As it is said of the Man last mentioned, whom
Christ cured toward the beginning of his Ministry: And he departed, says the
Text, and began to publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for
him, and all Men did mar^el, Ver. 20.

When John told christ, that they saw one casting out Devils in his Name, and
they forbad him, because he followed not with them: What is the Answer of
Christ Forbid him not, for there is no Man which shall do a Miracle in my Name,
that can lightly sp^^k evil of me. No they will rather cause his Praise to be
heard and his Name to be Magnified, and so put Glory on the Head of Christ.

But we will follow a little our Metaphor, Christ as I said, has put himself
under the Term of a Physician, Consequently he desires that his Fame as to the
Salvation of Sinners may spread abroad, that the World may see what he can do.
And to this end, has not only commanded that the biggest Sinners should have
the first offer of his Mercy; but has, as Physicians do, put out his Bills, and
published his Doings, that things may be read and talked of: Yea, he has
moreover in these his blessed Bills, the holy Scriptures, I mean, inserted in
the very Names of Persons the places of their Abode, and the great Cures, that
by the Means of his Salvation he has wrought upon them to this very end. Here
is Item, such a one by my Grace and redeeming Blood, was made a Monument of
everlasting Life; and such a one by my perfect Obedience, became an Heir of
Glory: And then he produces their Names.

Item, I saved Lot, from the Guilt and Damnation that he had procured to
himself by his Inc^st.

Item, I saved David from the Vengeance that belonged to him for committing of
Adultery and Murder.

Here is also Soloman, Manasseh, Peter, Magdalen, and many others made mention
of in this Book. Yea, here are their Names, their Sins, and their Salvations
recorded together, that you may read and know what a Savior he is; and do him
Honor in the World: For why are these things thus recorded, but to show to
Sinners what he can do, to the Praise and Glory of his Grace.

And it is observable, as I said before, we have but very little of the
Salvation of little Sinners mentioned in God's Book, because that would not
have answered the Design, to wit, to bring Glory and Fame to the Name of the
Son of God.

What should be the Reason think you, why Christ should so easily take a denial
of the great ones, that were the Grandeur of the World, and struggle so hard
for Hedge-creepers and High Way Men, (as the Parable, Luke 14 seems to import
he does) but to show forth the riches of the Glory of his Grace, to his Praise?
This I say, is one Reason to be sure,

They that had their Grounds, their yoke of Oxen, and their Marriage Joys were
invited to come; but they made their Excuse, and that served the turn, But when
he comes to deal with the worst, he says to his Servant, Go ye out and bring
them in hither, Go out quickly and bring in hither the poor, the maimed, the
halt and the blind: And they did so. And he said again, Go out into the high
ways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my House may be filled, Luke
14.19, 23. These poor, lame, maimed, blind hedge-creepers, and highway Men,
must come in, must be forced in: These if saved, will make his Merits shine.

When Christ was crucified and hanged up between the Earth and Heavens, there
were two Thieves crucified with him; and behold, he lays hold of one of them,
and will have him away with him to Glory. Was not this a strange act, and a
display of unthought of Grace? Were there none but Thieves there, or were the
rest of that Company out of his reach? Could he not think you, have stooped
from the Cross to the Ground, and have laid hold on some honester Man if he
would? Yes doubtless: Oh, but then he would not have displayed his Grace, nor
so have pursued his own designs; namely to get himself a praise, and a Name:
But how he has done it to purpose. For, who that shall read this Story, but
must confess that the Son of God is full of Grace? For a proof of the riches
thereof he left behind him when upon the Cross; he took the Thief away with him
to Glory. Nor can this one act of his be buried: It will be talked of to the
end of the World to his Praise, Men shall speak of the might of thy terrible
Acts, and will declare thy Greatness: They shall abundantly utter the Memory of
thy great Goodness, and shall sing of thy Righteousness: They shall speak of
the Glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy Power. To make known to the sons of
Men, his mighty Acts, and the glorious Majesty of his Kingdom, Psalm. 145.6, to
12.

When the Word of God came among the Conjurers and those Soothsayers tha^ you
read of, Acts 19. and had prevailed with some of them, of the Grace of Christ*
the Holy Ghost records it with a boast, for that it would redound to his Praise.

And many of them that use curious Arts, brought their Books together and
burned them before all Men; and counted the Price of them, and found it fifty
Thousand pieces of Silver; so mightily grew the Word of God and prevailed Acts
19.19, 20. It wrenched out of the Clutches of Satan, some of those of whom he
thought himself most sure; so mightily grew the Word of God. It grew mightily,
it incroached upon the Kingdom of the Devil! It pursued him and took the prey:
It forced him to let go his hold: It brought away Captive, as Prisoners taken
by Force of Arms, some of the most valiant of his Army. It fetch back from, as
it were the confines of Hell, some of those that were his trusty Slaves and
that with Hell had been at an Agreement: It made them come and confess their
Deeds, and burn their Books before all Men; so mightily grew the Word of God,
and prevailed.

Thus therefore you s^o why Christ will have Mercy offered in the first place
to the biggest Sinners. They have most need thereof; and this is the most ready
way to extol his Name that rides upon the Heavens, to our Help.

Thirdly, Christ Jesus would have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners, because by their Forgiveness and Salvation, others hearing of
it, will be encouraged the more to come to him for Life.

For the Physician, by curing of the most desperate at the first, does not only
get himself a Name; but begets Encouragement in the minds of other diseased
Folk, to come to him for Help: Hence you read of our Lord, that after through his
tender Mercy, he had cured many of great Diseases, his Fame was spread abroad:
They brought unto him all sick People that were taken with diverse Diseases and
Torments; and those that were possessed with Devils, and those that had the
Palsy, and he healed them; and there followed him a great multitude of People
from Galilee and Decapolis and Jerusalem, and Judea, and from beyond Jordan,
Mat. 4 24, 25.

See here, He first by working gets himself a Fame, a Name, and Renown; and now
Men take Encouragement, and bring from all quarters their Diseased to him,
being helped by what they had heard, to believe that their Diseases should be
healed.

Now, as he did with those outward Cures, so he does in the proffers of his
Grace and Mercy; he proffers that in the first Place to the biggest Sinners,
that others may take Heart to come to be saved. I will give you a Scripture or
two, I mean to show you that Christ by commanding that his Mercy should in the
first place be offered to the biggest of Sinners, has a Design thereby to
encourage and provoke others to come also to him for Mercy.

God, says Paul, who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he loved
us, even when we were dead in our Sins, has quickened us together with Christ
(by Grace ye are saved) and has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. But why did he do all this? That
in the Ages to come, he might show the exceeding Riches of his Grace, in his
Kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2 4, 5, 6, 7.

See here a Design, God lets out his Mercy to Ephesus on Design, even to show
to the Ages to come, the exceeding Riches of his Grave in his Kindness to them
through Christ Jesus; and why to show by these the exceeding Riches of his Grace
to the Ages to come through Christ Jesus? But to allure them and their Children
also to come to him, and to partake of the same Grace through Christ Jesus.

But what was Paul and the Ephesian-sinners? (of Paul we will speak anon.)
These Ephesian sinners, They were Men dead in Sins, Men that walked according
to the Dictates and Motions of the Devil, Worshippers of Diana, that effeminate
Goddess; Men far off from God, Aliens and Stranger to all good Things, such as
were far off from that as I said, and consequently in a most deplorable
Condition; as the Jerusalem sinners, etc Condition; as the Jerusalem sinners
were of the highest Sort among the Jews, so these Ephesian sinners were of the
highest sort among the Ephesians, Gentiles (Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. Acts 19.35.2.11.31.)

Wherefore as by the Jerusalem sinners, in saving them* first, he had a design
to provoke others to come to him for Mercy; so the same Design is here set on
foot again, in his calling and converting the Ephesian-sinners, that in the
Ages to come he might show the exceeding Riches of his Grace! Says he, in his
Kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. There is yet one hint behind. It Is said
that God saved these for his Love: That is, as I think for the setting forth
the Commendations of his Love; for the advance of his Love in the Hearts and
Minds of them that should come after. As who should say, God has had Mercy and
been Gracious to you, that he might show to others for their Encouragement,
that they have ground to come to him to be saved. When God saves one great
Sinner, it is to encourage another great sinner to come to him for Mercy.

He saved the Thief, to encourage Thieves to come to him for Mercy. He saved
Magdalen, to encourage other Magdalens to come to him for Mercy. He saved Saul,
to encourage Saul's to come to him for Mercy; and this Paul himself does say,
For this cause says he I obtained Mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might
show forth all long Suffering, for a Pattern to them which should hereafter
believe on him to Life everlasting, 1 Timothy 1.16.

How plain are the Words? Christ in saving of me, has given to the World a
Pattern of his Grace, that they might see and believe, and come and be saved:
That they that are to be born hereafter, might believe on Jesus Christ to Life
everlasting.

But what was Paul? why he tells you himself, I am says he, the chief of
Sinners; I was says he, a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, an injurious Person: Bat I
obtained Mercy: 1 Timothy 1.14, 15. Ay, that is well for you Paul, but what
Advantage have we thereby? Oh very much says he; For for this cause I obtained
Mercy that in me First, Jesus Christ might show all long suffering for a
pattern to them which shall believe on him to Life everlasting.

Thus there you see this third Reason is of Strength, namely, That Jesus Christ
would have Mercy offered in the first place to the biggest Sinners, because, by
their Forgiveness and Salvation, others hearing of it, will be encouraged the
more to come to him for Mercy.

It may well therefore be said to God, Thou delightest in Mercy, and Mercy
pleases thee, Mich. 7.18.

But who believes that this was God's Design in showing Mercy of old? Namely,
That we that come after, might take Courage to come to him for Mercy; or that
Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the first place to the biggest Sinner,
to stir up others to come to him for Life. This is not the manner of Men! O
God. But David saw this betimes, therefore he makes this one Argument with God,
That he would blot out his Trangressions, that he would forgive his Adultery,
his Murder and horrible Hypocrisy. Do it, O Lord, says he do it, And then will
I teach Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be converted unto thee Psalm.
15.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

He knew that the Conversion of Sinners would be a work highly pleasing to God,
as being that which he had designed before he made Mountains or Hills:
Wherefore he comes, and he says Save me, O Lord; if thou will save me I will
fall in with thy Design, I will help to bring what Sinners to thee I can And
Lord, I am willing to be made a Preacher my self, for that I have been a
horrible Sinner, wherefore if thou will forgive My great Trangressions, I shall
be a fit Man to tell of thy wondrous Grace, to others: Yea, Lord, I dare
promise, that if thou will have Mercy upon me, it shall tend to the Glory of
thy Grace, and also to the increase of thy Kingdom, for I will tell it; and
Sinners will heat on it. And there is nothing so suiteth with the hearing,
Sinner, as Mercy, and to be informed that God is willing to bestow it upon him.
I will teach Transgressors thy way, and Sinners shall be converted unto thee.

Nor will Christ Jesus miss of his Design it profering of Mercy in the first
place to the biggest Sinners. You know what work the Lord by laying hold of the
Woman of Samaria, made among the People there: They knew that she was a
Town-Sinner, an Adulteress, Yea, one that after the most audacious manner lived
in Uncleanness with a Man that was not her Husband. But when she from a turn
upon her Heart, went into the City and said to her Neighbors, Come: Oh how,
how they came, how they flocked out of the City to Jesus Christ! Then they went
out of the City, and came to him, and many of the Samaritans, (People perhaps
as bad as her self) believed on him, for the saying of the Woman, which
testified, saying, He told we all that ever I did, (John 4.39.)

That word, He told me all that ever I did, was a great Argument with them; for
by that they gathered, That that though he knew her to be vile, yet he did not
Despise her, nor refuse to show how willing he was to communicate his Grace
unto her: And this fetched over, first her, then them:

This Woman, as I said, was a Samaritan-sinner, a Sinner of the worst
Complexion: For the Jews abhorred to have ought to do with them (verse 9.)
wherefore none more fit than she to be made one of the Decoys of Heaven, to
bring others of these Samaritan Wild-fowls under the Net of the Grace of
Christ; and she did the work to purpose, and many more of the Samaritans
believed on him, Verse 40, 41, 42. The Heart of Man, though set on Sin, when it
comes to a Persuasion that God is willing to have Mercy upon us, incl^nes to
come to Jesus Christ for Life; witness these turn-aways from God, that you also
read in Jeremiah; for after they heard three or four times over, that God had
Mercy for Back-sliders, they broke out and said, Behold we come unto thee for
thou art the Lord our God. Or as those in Hosea, For in the Fatherless find
Mercy, Jer. 3.22. Hos. 14.1, 2, 3.

Mercy and the revelation thereof is the only Antidote against Sin. It Is of a
thawing Nature, twill loose the Heart that is frozen up in Sin, yea, 'twill
make the Unwilling to come to Jesus Christ for Life.

Wherefore do you think was it that Jesus Christ told the Adulterous Woman, and
that before so many Sinners, that he had not condemned her, but to allure her
with them there present, to hope to find Favor at his Hand? (As he also says
in another place: I came not to judges, but to save the World) for might they
not thence most rationally conclude that if Jesus Christ had rather, save then
damn an Harlot, there was encouragement for them to come to him for Mercy.

I heard once a Story from a Soldier, who with his Company had laid Siege
against a Fort, that so long as the Besieged were persuaded their Foes would
show them no Favor, they fought like Mad men; but when they saw one of their
Fellows taken, and received to Favor, they all came tumbling down from their
Fortress: And delivered themselves into their Enemies Hands.

I am persuaded, did Men believe that there is that Grace and Willingness in
the Heart of Christ to save Sinners, as the Word imports there is, they would
come tumbling into his Arms: But Satan has blinded their Minds, they cannot see
this thing, Howbeit the Lord Jesus has, as I said, that others take Heart and
come to him, given out a Commandment that Mercy should in the first place be
offered to the biggest Sinners. Begin says he, at Jerusalem. And thus I end
the third Reason.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners, Because that is the way if they receive it, most to weaken the
Kingdom of Satan, and to keep it lowest in every Age of the World: The biggest
Sinners they are Satan's Colonels, and Captains, the Leaders of his People, and
they that most stoutly make head against the Son of God. Wherefore let these
first be conquered, and his Kingdom will be weak. When Ishbosheth had lost his
Abner, his Kingdom was made weak, nor did he sit but tottering then upon his
Throne; So when Satan loses his strong Men, them that are mighty to work
Iniquity, and dexterous to manage others in the same, then is his Kingdom weak.
(2 Samuel 3.) Therefore I say, Christ does offer Mercy, in the first place to
such, the more to weaken his Kingdom. Christ Jesus was glad to see Satan fall
like Lightning from Heaven, that is, suddenly or headlong; and it was surely,
by casting of him out of strong Possessions, and by recovering of some
notorious Sinners out of his Clutches, (Luke 1.17, 18, 19.)

Sampson, when he would pull down the Philistians Temple, took hold of the two
main Pillars of it, and breaking them, down came the House. Christ came to
destroy the works of the Devil, and to destroy by converting Grace, as well as
by redeeming Blood. Now Sin swarms, and lies by Legions and whole Armies, in
the Souls of the biggest Sinners, as in Garrisons: Wherefore the way, the most
direct way to destroy it is first to deal with such Sinners, by the Word of his
Gospel, and by the Merits of his Passion.

For Example, though I shall give you but a homely one, Suppose a Family to be
very Lousie, and one or two of the Family to be in chief the Breeders, the way,
the quickest way to clear that Family, or at least to weaken the so swarming of
those Vermin, is in the first place to sweeten the Skin, Head, and Clothes of
chief Breeders. And then, though all the Family should be apt to breed them, the
Number of them and so the greatness of that Plague there will be the more
impaired.

Why there are some People that are in chief the Devils Sin-breeders in the
Towns and places where they live; the Place Town or Family where they live must
needs be horrible Lousie, and as it were eaten up with Vermin; now let the Lord
Jesus in the first place cleanse these great Breeders, and there will be given
a Nip to those swarms of Sins that use to be committed in such places through out
the Town, House, or Family where such Sin-breeding Persons use to be.

I speak by Experience, I was one of those Lousy ones; one of these great
Sin-breeders; I infected all the Youth of the Town, where I was born with all
manner of youthful Vanities. The Neighbors counted me so, my practice proved
me so; Wherefore Christ Jesus took me first, and taking me first, the Contagion
was much allayed all the Town over When God made one sigh, they would hearken,
and inquiringly say, What Is the matter with John? They also gave their various
Opinions of me, but as I said, Sin cooled and failed, as, to its full Carreer;
and when I went out to seek the Bread of Life, some of them would follow, and
the rest be put into a muse at home. Yea, almost the Town. At first, at times I
would go out to hear at the place where I found good: Yea, young and old for a
while had some Reformation on them; also some of them perceiving that God had
Mercy upon me, came crying to him for Mercy too.

But what need I give you an Instance of poor I? I will come to Manasseh the
King: So long as he was a ring leading Sinner, the great Idolater, aad chief
for Devilism, the whole Land flowed with Wickedness; for he made them to sin,
and do worse than the Heathen that dwelt round about them, or that was cast out
from before them. But when God converted him, the whole Land was reformed* Down
went the Groves, the Idols and Alters of Baal, and up went true Religion in
much of the Power and Purity of it. You Will say, The King reformed by Power. I
answer doubtless, and by Example too; For People observe their Leaders as their
Fathers did, so did they, 2 Chronicles 33. 2 Kings 12.41.

This therefore is another Reason, why Jesus would have Mercy offered in the
first place to the biggest Sinners, because that is the best way, if they
receive it, most to weaken the Kingdom of Satan and to keep it poor and low.

And do you not think now, that if God would but take hold of the Hearts of
some of the most notorious in your Town, in your Family, or Country, that this
thing would be verified before your Faces? It would, it would, to the Joy of
you that are godly, to the making of Hell to sigh, to the great suppressing of
Sin, the Glory of Christ, and the Joy of the Angels of God. And Ministers
should therefore, that this work might go on, take Advantages to persuade with
the biggest Sinners to come unto Christ according to my Text, and their
Commissions: Beginning at Jerusalem

Fifthly, Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners. Because such when converted, are usually the best Helps in the
Church against Temptations, and fittest for the Support of the feeble minded
there. Hence usually you have some such in the first Plantation of Churches; or
quickly upon it. Churches would do but sorrily if Christ Jesus did not put such
Converts among them, they are the Monuments and Mirrors of Mercy. The very
sight of such a Sinner in God's House, yea, the very thought of him, where the
sight of him cannot be had, is oft-times greatly for the help of the Faith of
the Feeble.

When the Churches (says Paul) that were in Judea, heard this concerning me,
that he which persecuted them in time past now preached the Faith which once he
destroyed, They glorified God in me, Gal. 1.20 to 24.

( Glorified God) How is that? Why they praised him, and took Courage to
believe the more in the Mercy of God, for that he had Mercy on such a great
Sinner as he, they glorified God (in me) They wondered that Grace should be so
rich, a^ to take hold of such a Wretch as I was; and for my sake believed in
Christ the more.

There are two things that great Sinners are acquainted with, when they come to
divulge to the Saints, that are a great relief to their Faith.

1. The Contests that they usually have with the Devil at their parting with
him.

2. Their Knowledge of his Secrets in his Workings.

For the first, the biggest Sinners have usually great contest with the Devil
at their parting; and this is an help to Satan: For ordinary Saints find
afterward what the vile ones find at first; but when at the opening of Hearts,
the one finds himself to be as the other the one is a Comfort to the other. The
lesser fort of Sinners find but little of this, till after they have been some
time in profession; but the vile Man meets with his at the Beginning. Wherefore
he, when the other is down, is ready to tell that he has met with the same
before. For I say he has had it before. Satan is loath to part with a great
Sinner: What my true Servant (quoth he) my old Servant will thou forsake me
now? Having so often sold thy self to me to work Wickedness, will thou forsake
me now? Thou horrible Wretch does not know, that thou have sinned thy self
beyond the reach of Grace, and do think to find Mercy now? Art not thou a
Murderer, a Thief, a Harlot, a Witch, a Sinner of the greatest size, and do
thou look for Mercy now? Do thou think that Christ will foul his Fingers with
thee?

It Is enough to make Angels blush, says Satan, to see so vile a one knock at
Heavens Gates for Mercy, and will thou be so abominably bold to do it? Thus
Satan dealt with me, says the great Sinner? when at first I came to Jesus
Christ. And what did you reply says the Tempted? Why I granted the whole
Charge to be true, says the other. And what did you despair? or how? No (says
he) I said, I am Magdalen, I am Zacheus, I am the Thief, I am the Harlot, I am
the Publican, I am the Prodigal, and one of Christ's Murderers, yea, worse than
any of these: And yet God was so far off from rejecting of me (as I found
afterward) that there was music and dancing in his House for me, for Joy that
I was come home unto him. Oh blessed be God for grace, (says the other) for
then I hope there is savor for me. Yea, as I told you, such a one is a
continual Spectacle in the Church, ^or every one by to behold God's Grace, and
Wonder!

Secondly, And as for the secrets of Satan, such as Suggestions to question the
Being of God, the Truth of his Word, and to be annoyed with devilish
Blasphemies: None more acquainted with these than the biggest Sinners at their
Conversion; wherefore thus also they are prepared to be helps in the Church, to
relieve and comfort the other.

I might also here tell you of the Contests and Battles that such are engaged
in, wherein they find the Buffetings of Satan, above any other of the Saints.
At which time Satan Assaults the Soul with Darkness* Fears, frightful Thoughts
of Apparitions; now they sweat, pant, cry out, and struggle for Life.

The Angels now come down to behold the sight, and rejoice to see a b^t of Dust
and Ashes to overcome Principalities and Powers, and Dominions. But as I said,
when these come a little to be settled, they are prepared for Help for others,
and are great Comforts unto them. Their great Sins give encouragement to the
Devil to assault them, and by these Temptations Christ takes Advantage to make
them the more helpful to the Churches.

The biggest Sinner, when he is Converted and come into the Church, says to
them all, by his very coming in, Behold me, all you that are Men and Women of a
low and timorous Spirit; you whose hearts are narrow, for that you never had
the advantage to know (because your Sins are few) the largeness of God. Behold
I say, in me the exceeding Riches of his Grace; I am a pattern set forth before
your Faces, on whom you may look and take Heart. This I say, the great Sinner
can say, to the exceeding Comfort of all the rest.

Wherefore as I have hinted before, when God intends to stock a place with
Saints, and to make that Place excellently to flourish with the Riches of his
Grace, he usually begins with the Conversition of some of the most notorious
thereabouts, and lays them as an Example to allure others, and to build them up
when they are converted.

'Twas Paul that must go to the Gentiles, because Paul was the most outrageous
of all the Apostles in the time of his Unregeneration: Yea, Peter must be he
that after his horrible fall, was thought fittest when recovered ag^ (...) to
comfort and strengthen his Brethren. See Luke 22.31, 32.

Some must be Pillars in Gods House; and if they be Pillars of Cedar, they must
stand whilst they are stout and sturdy Sticks in the Forest, before they are
cut down, and planted or placed there.

No Man when he builds his House, makes the principal parts thereof, of weak
and feeble Timber: (For how could such bear up the rest?) but of great and able
Wood. Christ Jesus also goes this way to work, he makes of the biggest
Sinners, Bearers and Supporters to the Rest. This then may serve for another
Reason, why Christ Jesus gives out in Commandment, that Mercy should in the
first place be offered to the biggest sinners, because such when converted, are
usually the best help in Churches against Temptation, and fittest for the
support of the feeble minded there.

Sixthly, Another Reason, why Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the
first place to the biggest Sinners is, Because they when converted* are apt to
love him most.

This agrees both with the Scripture and Reason. Scripture says so. To whom
much is forgiven, the same loves much; to whom little is forgiven, the same
loves little, Luke 7.47. Reason says so. For as it would be the Unreasonablest
thing in the World, to render Hatred for Love, and Contempt for Forgiveness; so
it would be Ridiculous to think that reception of a little kindness, should lay
the same obligations upon the Heart to love, as the reception of a great deal.
I would not disparage the Love of Christ; I know the least dram of it, when it
reaches to Forgiveness is great above all the World; but comparatively, there
is greater extentions of the Love of Christ to one, than to another: He that
has most Sin, if forgiven, is partaker of the greatest Love, of the greatest
Forgiveness.

I know also that there is some, that from this very Doctrine, say, Let us do
Evil that Good may come, and that turn the Grace of our God into Laciviousness.
But! speak not to these: These will neither be ruled by Grace nor Reason; Grace
would Teach them, if they knew it, to deny Ungodly Courses; and so would Reason
to; if it could truly sense the Love of God, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. Rom 11.2.

Does it look like what has any Consistence with Reason or Mercy, for a Man to
abuse his Friend? Because Christ died for Men I shall therefore spit in his
Face? The Bread and Water that was given by Eilsha to his Enemies, that came
into the Land of Israel to take him, had so much influence upon their minds,
tho Heathens that they returned to their homes without hurting him: Yea, it
kept them from coming again, for a long time into the Coasts of Israel 2 Kings
6.19 to 23.

But to forbear to Illustrate till anon* One Reason why Christ Jesus shows
Mercy to Sinners is, that he might obtain their Love, that he may remove their
base Affections, from base Objects, to himself* Now if he loves to be loved
little, he loves to be loved much; but there is not any that are capable of
loving much, save those that have much forgiven them; hence it is said of Paul,
that he labored more than them all, to wit, with a Labor of Love, because he
had been by Sin more vile against Christ, than they all, 1 cor. 15. He it was
that Persecuted the Church o^ God, and wasted it, Gal. 1.12. He o^ them all was
the only raving Bedlam against the Saints: And being exceeding Mad says he
against them, I Persecuted them even to strange Cities, Acts 26.11.

This raving Bedlam, that once was so, is he that now says. I labored more
than them all; more for Christ than them all.

But Paul, what moved thee thus to do? The Love of Christ, says he. It was not
I but the Grace of God that was with me. As who should say; O Grace! 'Twas such
Grace to save me! 'Twas such Marvelous Grace for God to look down from Heaven
upon me, and that secured me from the wrath to come, that I am captivated with
the sense of the Riches of it. Hence I act, hence I labor; for how can I
otherwise do, since God not only separated me from my Sins and Companions, but
separated all the Powers of my Soul and Body to his Service? I am therefore
prompted on by this exceeding Love to labor as I have done; yet not I, but the
Grace of God with me.

Oh! I shall never forget his Love, not the Circumstance under which I was,
when his Love laid hold upon me, I was going to Damascus with Letters from the
High Priest to make Havoc of God's People there, as I had made Havoc of them
in other places. These bloody Letters were not imposed upon me. I went to the
High Priest and desired them of him, Acts 9.1, 2. And yet he saved me! I was
one of the chief Men, that had a hand in the Blood of his Martyr Stephen, yet
he had Mercy on me; When I was at Damascus, I stunk so horribly like a
Bloodsucker, that I became a Terror to all thereabout. Yea, Annanias (good Man)
made intercession to my Lord against me, yet he would have Mercy upon me? Yea,
joined Mercy to Mercy, until he had made me a Monument of Grace. He made a
Saint of me, and persuaded me that my Transgressions were forgiven me.

When I began to Preach those that heard me were amazed; and said, Is not this
he that destroyed them that called on this Name in Jerusalem, and came hither
for that intent, that he might bring them bound to the High Prie^t? Hell does
know that I was a Sinner: The World also knows that I was a Sinner; a Sinner of
the greatest size; but I obtained Mercy, Acts 9.21, 22.

Shall not this lay an Obligation upon me? Is it not Love of the greatest force
to oblige? Is it not strong as Death: cruel as the Grave, and hotter than the
Coals of Juniper? Has it not a most vehement flame? Can the Waters quench it?
Can the Floods drown it? I am under the force of it, and this is my continual
cry; What shall I render unto the Lord for all the Benefits which he has
bestowed upon me? Ay! Paul, this is something thou speak like a Man, like a
Man (...)* and carried away with the Love and Grace of God. Now this sense, and
this affection* and this Labor, gives to Christ the love that he looks for.
But he might have converted twenty little Sinners, and yet not found, for Grace
bestowed, so much love in them all.

I wonder how far a Man might go among the Converted Sinners of the smaller
size, before he could find one that so much as looks any thing this way ward.
Where is he that is thus under Pangs of of Love for the Grace bestowed upon him
by Jesus Christ? Excepting only some few* you may walk to the Worlds end, and
find none: But as I said; some there are, and so there has been in every Age of
the Church, great Sinners, that have had much forgiven them. And they love much
upon this account.

Jesus Christ therefore knows what he does, when he lays hold on the Hearts of
sinners of the biggest size. He knows that such an one will love more than
many, that have not sinned half their sins.

I will tell you a story that I have read of Martha and Mary; the name of the
Book I have forgot, I mean of the book in which I found the Relation; but the
Thing was thus.

Martha says my Author was a very holy Woman, like Lazarus her Brother, but
Mary was a loose and wanton Creature. Martha did seldom miss good ^ermons, and
Lectures, when she could come at them in Jerusalem; but Mary would frequent the
House of Sports, and the Company of the Vilest of Men for lust. And though Martha
had often desired that her Sister would go with her to hear her Preachers; yea,
had often entreated her with Tears to do it, yet could she never prevail; for
still Mary would make her excuse, or reject her with disdain, for her Zeal and
Preciseness in Religion.

After Martha had waited long, tried many ways to bring her Sister to good, and
all proved ineffectual: At last, she comes upon her thus; Sister quoth she, I
pray thee to go with me to the Temple to day, to hear one Preach a Sermon. What
kind of Preacher is he, said she? Martha replied, It is one Jesus of Nazareth,
He is the Handsomest Man that ever you saw with your Eyes; Oh! he shines in
Beauty, and is a most excellent Preacher.

Now wha^ does Mary do, after a little pause, but goes up into her Chamber, and
wi^h her Pins and her Clou^s decks up her self as fine as her fingers could
make her: This done away she goes; not wi^h her Sister Martha, but as much
unobserved as she could to the Sermon, or rather to see the Preacher?

The Hour and Preacher being come and she having observed whereabout the
Preacher would stand, goes and se^s he^ self so in the Temple, that she might
be sure to have the full view of his excellent, Person. So he comes, and she
looks, and he first glimpse of his Person pleased her. Well, Jesus addressed
himself to his Sermon, and she looks earnestly on him.

Now at that time, says my Author, Jesus Preached about the lost Sheep, the
^ost Groat, and the Prodigal Child. And when he came to show what care the
Shepherd took of one lost Sheep, and how the Woman swept to find the piece
which was lost, and what Joy there was at their finding, she began to be taken
by the Ears, and forgot what she came about, musing what the Preacher would
make on it. But when he came to the Application, and showed that by the lost
Sheep, was meant a great Sinner; by the Shepherds care, was meant God's love
for great Sinners; and that by ^he Joy of the Neighbors, was she (...) what
Joy there was among the Ang^ (...) Heaven over one great Sinner that rep^ (...)
^th. She began to be taken by the Hea^ ^ And as he spoke these last Words, she
^hought he pitched his innocent Eyes just upon her, and looked as if he spoke
what was now said, to her. Wherefore her Heart ^egan to Tremble, being shaken
with Af^ection and Fear, then her Eyes run down with Tears space, wherefore she
was for^ed to hide her Face with her Hankerchief, and so sat sobbing and crying
all the rest (...) ^he Sermon.

Sermon being done up she gets, and away she goes; and withal inquired where
that Jesus the ^reacher dined that Day? And one told her at the House or Simon
the Pharisee. So away goes she, first to her Chamber and there strips her self
of her wanton Attire; then falls upon her Knees to ask God forgiveness for her
wicked life. This done, in a modest dress she goes to Simon's House, where she
finds Jesus set at Dinner. So she gets behind him, and weeps, and ^^ops her
Tears upon his Feet, like Rain, and washes them; and wipes them wi^h Hairs of
her Head. he also kissed his Feet with her Lips, and Anointed them with
Ointment. When Simon the Pharisee perceived what the Woman did, and being
ignorant of what it was to be forgiven much (for he never was (...) ^n more
than Fifty pence.) He be^ (...) think within himself, that he had (...)
mistaken about Jesus Christ, because ^e suffered such a Sinner as this Woman
was to touch him surely, quoth he, this Man if he were a Prophet, would not let
this Woman come near him, for she is a Town sinner, (so Ignorant are all Self
Righteous Men of the way of Christ with Sinners) bur least Mary should be
discouraged with the clownish carriage of this Pharisee, and so desert her good
beginnings, and her New steps which she now had began to take ^owards Eternal
Life, Jesus began thus with Simon; Simon says he, I have some what to say unto
thee, and he says Master say on: There was said Jesus, a certain Creditor had
two Debtors, the one owed him Five hundred Pence, and the other Fifty: And when
they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore which
of them will love him most: Simon answered and said, I suppose he to whom he
forgave most. And he said unto him thou have rightly judged. And he turned to
the Woman, and said unto Simon, See thou this Woman? I entered into thy
House, thou gave me no Water for my Feet; but she has washed my Feet with
Tears, and wiped them with the Hairs of her Head: Thou gave me no kiss; but
this Woman since the time I came in has not ceased to kiss my Feet, my Feet
with Oil thou did not anoint; but this Woman has anointed my Feet with
Ointment: wherefore I say unto thee, her sins which are many are forgiven, for
she loves much, but to whom little is forgiven the same loves little. And he
said unto her, thy sins are forgiven, Luke 7.36. to 50

Thus you have the Story, if I com^ ^h^r^ in any Circumstance, I beg Pardon of
those that can correct me. It Is three or four and Twen^y Years since I saw ^he
Book, yet I have as far as my Memory will admit, given you the Relation of the
matter. However, Luke as you see, does here present you with the Substance of
the whole.

Alas! Christ Jesus has but little Thanks for the saving of little Sinners. To
whom little is forgiven, the same loves little. He gets no Water for his Feet
by his saving of dry eyed Christians in the World, and abundance of dry eyed
Duties too; Duties that never were weted with the Tears of contrition and
repentance, nor ever sweetened with the great sinners Box of Ointment. And the
Reason is, such Sinners have no great Sins to be saved from; o^ if they have,
they look upon them in the diminishing Glass of the holy Law of God. But I
rather believe that the Professors of our Days weep a due sense of what they
are; for verily, for the generality of them, both before and since Conversion,
they have been sinners of a lusty size: But i^ their Eyes be holden, if
Convictions ar^ not shown, if the knowledge of their sin^ is but like to the
Eyesight in twilight, the Hear^ cannot be affected with that Grace that has
laid hold on the Man, and so Christ Jesus sows much, and has little coming in.

Wherefore his way is oft-times to step out of the way to Jericho, to Samaria,
to the Country of the Gaddarens, to the Coasts o^ Tire and Sidon, and also
Mount Calvery, that he may lay hold of such kind of Sinners as will love him to
liking, Luke 19.1, to 10. John 4.3, to 10. Mark 5.1, to 20. Matthew. 15.21, to
28. Luke 23.33, to 43.

But thus much for the Sixth Reason, why Christ Jesus would have Mercy offered
in the first place to the biggest Sinners, to wit, because such sinners when
converted, are apt to love him most.

The Jerusalem sinners, were they that out-strip'd when they were conver^ed in
some things, all the Churches of the Gentiles: They were of one Heart and one
Soul, neither said any of them that ought ^f the things that they possessed was
their own* neither was there any among them that lacked; for as many as were
possessors of Lands or Houses, sold them, and brought the Price of the things
that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet, etc. Acts 4 32 to 35.
Now show me such another Pattern if you can. But why did these do thus? Oh they
were Jerusalem-sinners. These were the Men that but a little before had killed
the Prince of Life; and those to whom he did, that notwithstanding sent the
first offer of Grace and Mercy, and the sense of this took them up betwixt
Earth and the Heaven, and, carried them on in such Methods as could never be
trodden by any since. They talk of the Church of Rome, and set her in her
Primitive State as a Pattern, and Mother of Churches; when the Truth is, they
were the Jerusalem-Sinners, when Converts, that out-did all Churches that ever
was.

Seventhly, Christ Jesus would have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners, because Grace when it is received by such, finds matter to
kindle upon more freely such, it finds in other Sinners. Great Sinners are like
great Candles, which burns best, and shines with biggest Light? I lay not this
down, as I did those Reasons before, to show that when great Sinners are
converted, they will be Encouragement to others, though that is true; but to show
that Christ has a delight to see the Grace we receive, to shine. We love to see
things that bear a Gloss, yea we choose to buy such kind of Matter to work upon,
as will if wrought up to what we intend, cast that Luster that we desire.
Candles that burn not bright, we like not; Wood that is green will rather
smother and sputter, and flounce, then cast a brave light and pleasant Heat.
Wherefore great Folks care not much, not so much for such kind of things, as
for them that will better answer their ends.

Hence Christ desires the biggest Sinners, in them there is Matter to work by,
to wit, a great deal of Sin; for as by the Tallow of the Candle, the Fire takes
occasion to burn the brighter; so by the Sin of the Soul, Grace takes occasion
to shine the clearer. Little Candles shine but little, for there wants matter
for the Fire to work upon; but in the great Sinner, here is more matter for
Grace to work by. Faith shines, when it works toward Christ, through the sides
of many and great Transgressors; and so does Love, for that much is forgiven
and what matter can be found in the Soul for Humility to work by, so well as by
a sight, that I have been and am an abominable Sinner? And the same is to be
said of Patience, Meekness, Gentleness and self-denial, or of any other Grace.
Grace takes Occasion by the vileness of the Man to shine the more; even as by
the ruggedness of a very strong Distemper, or Disease, the virtue of the
Medicine is the best made manifest. Where Sin abounds, Grace much more abounds,
Romans 5 20. A black string makes the Neck look whiter; great Sins make Grace
burn clear. Some say when Grace and good Nature meet together, they do make
shining Christians; but I say, when Grace and a great Sinner meets, and when
Grace subdue that great Sinner to it self, and shall operate after its kind in
the Soul of that great Sinner, then we have a shining Christian ^ Witness all
those of whom mention wa^ made before.

Abraham was among the Idolaters when in the Land of Assyria, and served Idols
with his Kindred on the other side of the Flood, Jos. 24 2. Genesis 11.13. but wh^
when called was there in the World, in whom Grace shone so bright as in him*

The Thessalonians were Idolaters, before the Word of God came to them, but
when they had received it, they became example^ to all that did believe in
Macedonia and Achia, 1 These. 1.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

God the Father, and Jesus Christ his Son are for having things seen for having
the Word of Life held forth. They light not a Candle that it might be put under
a Bushel, or under a Bed, but on a Candlestick, that all that come in may see
the Light* Mat. 5.15. Mark 4.12. Luke 8.16. chap. 11.33.

And I say, as I said before in whom is it so like to shine, as in the Souls of
great Sinners?

When the Jewish Pharisees dallied with the Gospel, Christ threatened to take it
from them, and give it to the barbarous Heathens and Idolaters. Why so? For
they says he, will bring forth the Fruits thereof in their Season. Therefore I
say unto you, The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation
bringing forth the Fruits thereof, Mat. 21.41, 43.

I have often marvelled at your Youth, and said in my Heart what should be the
Reason that they should be so generally at this Day debauched as they are! For
they are now profane to Amazement, and sometimes I have thought one thing and
sometimes another: That is, why God should suffer it to be so. And at last I
have thought of this: How if the God whose ways are past finding out, should
suffer it to be so now, that he might make some of them the more glorious
Saints hereafter. I know Sin is of the Devil, but it cannot work in the World
without permission: And if it happens to be as I have thought, it will not be
the first time that God the Lord has caught Satan in his own Design. For my
part I believe that the time is at Hand, that we shall see better Saints in the
Wo^ld, than has been seen in it this many a Day. And this Vileness which does
at present so much swallow up our Youth, is one cause of my thinking so. For
out of them, or from among them, when God sets to his Hand as of old, you shall
see what penitent ones, what trembling ones, and what Admirers of Grace will be
found to profess the Gospel to the Glory of God by Christ.

Alas? We are a Company of worn ou^ Christians, our Moon is in the Wane, we are
much more black than white, more dark than light: We shine but a little; Grace
in the most of us is decayed: But I say when they of these debauched ones that
are to be saved, shall be brought in; when these that look more l^ke Devils
than Men, shall be converted to Christ (and I believe several of them will)
then will Christ be ex^lted, Grace adored, the Word prized, Si^ns ^aths better
trodden, and Men in the pursuit of their own Salvation, to the Amazement of them
that are left behind.

Just before Christ came into the Flesh, the World was degenerared as it is
now; the Generality of the Men in Jerusalem were become either high and famous
for Hypocrisy, or filthy base in their Lives. The Devil also was broke loose
in a hideous manner, and had taken Possession of many: Yea, I believe that
there was never a Generation before nor since, that could produce so many
possessed with Devils, Deformed, Lame, Blind, and infected with monstrous
Diseases, as that Generation could: But what was the Reason thereof? I mean the
Reason from God? Why one, (and we may sum up more in that Answer that Christ
gave to his Disciples concerning him that was born blind) was that the Works of
God might be made manifest in them, and that the Son of God might be glorified
thereby, John 9.2, 3. Chap. 11.4.

Now if these Devils and Diseases, as they possessed Men then, were to make way
and work for an approaching Christ in Person; and for the declaring of his
Power; why may we not think that now, even now also he is ready to come by his
Spirit in the Gospel, to heal many of the Debaucheries of our Age; I cannot
believe that Grace will take them all; for there is but few that are saved. But
it will take some, even some of the worst of Men, and make blessed ones of
them. But O, how these Ring leaders in Vice, will then shine ^n Virtue! They
will be the very Pillars ^n Churches they will be as an Ensign in ^he Land: The
Lord their God shall save them in that Day as the Flock of his People; for they
shall be as the Stones of ^ Crown lift up as an Ensign upon the Land. Zech.
9.16. But who are these? ^dolatrous Ephraim, and backsliding Judah ver. 13.

I know there is ground to fear that the ^niquity of this Generation will be
pursued with heavy Judgments; but that will not ^inder what we have supposed,
that God ^ook him a glorious Church out of the ^loody Jerusalem; yea out of the
chief of the Sinners there, and left the rest to be taken and spoiled, and sold
Thirty for a Penny, in the Nations where they were Captives. The Gospel working
gloriously in a place, to the seizing upon many of the Ring-leading sinners
thereof promising no security to the rest, but rather threatens them with the
heaviest and smartest Judgment; as in the Instance now given, we have a full
Demonstration; but in defending, the Lord will defend his People; and in
saving, he will save his Inheritance.

Nor does this speak any great Comfort to a decayed and back a sliding sort of
Christians; for the next time God rides for ^ with his Gospel, he will leave
such Christians behind him. But I say Christ is resolved to set up his Light in
the World yea, he is delighted to see his Grace shine, and therefore he
commands that his Gospel should to that end, be offered in the first place to
the biggest Sinners; for by great Sins it shines most: therefore h^ says,
Begin at Jerusalem.

Eighthly, and lastly, Christ Jesus will have Mercy offered in the first place
to the biggest Sinners: For by that means the Impenitent that are left behind,
will be a the Judgment, the more left without Excuse.

God's word has two edges, it can c^ back-stroke and fore-stroke. If it does
the no good, it will do thee hurt: It Is the savor of Life unto Life, to those
that will receive it, but of Death unto Death, to them that refuse it, 2 Cor.
2.15, 16. But this is not all, the tender of Grace to the biggest Sinners in
the first place, will not only leave the rest or those that refuse it, in a
deplorable Condition; but will also stop their Mouths, and cut off all Pretense
to excuse at that Day. If I had not come and spoken unto them, says Christ,
they had not had Sin; but now they have no ^l^ke for their Sin, for their Sin
of persevering Impenitence, John 15.22.

But what did he speak to them? Why even that which I have told you; to wit,
That he has in special, a delight in saving the biggest Sinners. He spoke this
in the way of his Doctrine, he spoke this in the way of his practice, even to
the pouring out of his last breath before them, Luke 34.23.

Now since this is so, what can the condemned at the Judgment say for
themselves, why Sentence of Death should not be passed upon them? I say, what
Excuse can they make for themselves, when they shall be asked why they did not
in the Day of Salvation come to Christ to be saved? Will they have ground to
say to the Lord, Thou wast only for saving of little Sinners, and therefore
because they were great ones, they durst not come unto him? Or that thou had
not Compassion for the biggest Sinners, therefore I died in Despair; will these
be Excuses for them as the case now stands with them? Is there not every
where in God's Book a flat Contradiction to this, in multitudes of Promises, of
Invitations, Examples, and the like? Alas, alas there will then be there
Millions of Souls to confute this Plea, ready, I say, to stand up and say, O!
deceive^ World; Heaven swarms with such as when they were in the World, were to
the full as bad as you.

Now this will kill all Plea or Excuse* why they should not Perish in their
Sins* yea, the Text says they shall see them there; there shall be weeping,
when you shall se^ Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, and a^ the Prophets in the
Kingdom of Heaven, and you your selves thrust out: And they shall come from the
East and from the West, an^ from the North and from the South, an^ shall sit
down in the Kingdom of God Luke 13.28, 29. Out of which Company it is easy to
pick such, as sometime were as bad People as any now breathe upon the Face of
the Earth What thin^ you of the first Man, by whose Sins the^ are Millions now
in Hell? And so I m^ say, what think you of ten Thousand mo^ besides?

But if the Word will not stifle and gag them up (I speak not for Amplification
sake) the View of these that are saved shall.

There comes an Incestuous Person to the Bar and pleads that the bigness of
his Sins was a Bar to his receiving the Promise: But will not his Mouth be
stopped as to that, when Lot and the Incestuous Corinthian shall be set before
him, G^n. 19.33 to 36. 1 Cor. 5.1.

There comes a Thief and says, Lord my Sin of Theft I thought was such as could
not be pardoned by thee! But when he shall see the Thief that was saved on the
Cross, stand by, as clothed with beauteous Glory, what further can he be able
to object? Yea, the Lord will produce ten Thousand of his Saints at his coming,
who shall after this manner execute Judgment upon all, and so convince all that
are ungodly among them, of all their hard Speeches which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him, J^^. 15.10 And these are hard Speeches against him, ^o ^y
tha^ he was not able or willing to save Men, because of the greatness (...)
^ins, or ^o say that they were discou^aged by his Word from Repentance, because
of the heinousness of their Offenses.

Th^se things, I say, shall then be confuted: He comes with Ten Thousand of his
Saints to confute them, and to stop their Mouths from making Objections against
their own eternal Damnation.

Here is Adam the destroyer of the world; here is Lot, that lay with both his
Daughters; here is Abraham, that was sometimes an Idolator; and Jacob, that was
a Supplanter; and Reuben, that lay with his Father's Concubine; and Judah, that
lay with his Daughter-in Law; and Levi and Simeon, that wickedly show the
Scehemites; and Aaron that made an Idol to be worshipped, and that proclaimed a
Religious Feast unto it. Here is also Rahab the Harlot, and Bathsheba, that
bare a Bastard unto David. Here is Solomon, that great backslider; and
Manasseh, that Man of Blood; and others that time would fail to tell you of,
as, the Woman of Canaan's Daughter, of Mary Magdalen, of Matthew the Publican,
and of Gideon and Sampson, and many Thousands more.

Alas! alas, I say, what will these Sinners do, that have through their Unbelief
eclipsed the glorious largeness of the Mercy of God, and gave way to despair of
Salvation, because of the bigness of their Sins!

For all those, though now glorious Saints in Light, were sometimes Sinners of
the biggest size, who had Sins that were of a notorious hue: Yet now, I say,
they are in shining and heavenly Robes before the Throne of God and of the
Lamb, blessing for ever and ever, that Son of God for their Salvation, who dyed
for them upon the Tree; admiring that ever it should come into their Hearts,
once to think of coming to God by Christ: But above all, blessing God for
granting of them light to see those Encouragements, in his Testament; without
which, without Doubt they had been daunted, and sunk down under the guilt of
Sin and Despair, as their Fellow Sinners have done.

But now they are all witnesses for God and for his Grace, against an
unbelieving World; for as I said, they shall come to convince the World of
their Speeches, their hard and unbelieving Words, that they have spoken
concerning the Mercy of God and the Merits of the Passion of his blessed Son,
Jesus Christ.

But will it not think you, strangely put to Silence all such Thoughts, and
Words, and Reasonings of the ungodly before the Bar of God: doubtless it will,
yea, and will send them away from his ^resence also, with the greatest Guilt
that possibly can fasten upon the Consciences of Men.

For what will sting like this, I have through mine own foolish, narrow,
unworthy, under-valuing Thoughts of the Love and Ability of Christ to save me,
brought my self to everlasting Ruin; it is true, I was a horrible Sinner, not
one in a Hundred did live so vile a Life as I, but this should not have kept me
from closing with. Jesus Christ: I see now that there are abundance in Glory
that once was as bad as I have been, but they were saved by Faith, and I am
damned by Unbelief.

Wretch that I am! why did not I give Glory to the redeeming Blood of Jesus?
Why did I judge of his Ability to save me by the Line of my shallow Reason, and
the Voice of a Guilty Conscience? Why betook not I my self to the holy Word of
God? Why did not I read and pray, that I might understand, since now I perceive
that God said then, He gives liberally to them that pray, and upbraideth not,
Jam. 1.5.

It Is rational to think that by such Cogitations as these, the unbelieving
World will be torn to pieces before the Judgment of Christ: Especially those
that have lived where they did or might have heard the Gospel of the Grace of
God. Oh that saying, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom at the Judgment than
for them, will be better understood; see Luke 10.8, to 12.

This Reason therefore stands fast, namely, That Christ, by offering Mercy in
the first place to the biggest Sinners now, will stop all Mouths of the
Impenitent at the Day of Judgment, and cut off all Excuse that shall be
attempted to be made (from the thoughts of the greatness of their Sins) why
they came not to him.

I have often thought of the Day of Judgment, and how God will deal with
sinners at that Day; and I believe it will be managed with that Sweetness, with
that Eq^^^^bleness, with that excellent Righteou^^^ss, as to every Sin, and
Circumstance, and Aggravation thereof, that men that a^e damned, before the
Judgment is over, shall receive such Conviction of the righteous Judgment of
God upon them, and their Deserts of Hell fire, that they shall in themselves
conclude, that there is all the Reason in the World that they should be shut
out of Heaven and go into Hell fire: Those shall go away into everlasting Fire,
Mat. 25.46.

Only this will tear, that they have missed of Mercy and Glory, and obtained
everlasting Damnation through their Unbelief. But it will tear but themselves,
but their own Souls; they will gnash upon themselves: For in that Mercy was
offered to the chief of them in the first place, and yet they were damned for
rejecting of it; they were damned for forsaking what they had a Propriety in,
for forsaking their own Mercy.

And thus much for the Reasons. I will c^nclude with a Word or two by way of
Application.

The APLICATION.
First, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the biggest
Sinners, Th^^ this shows us how to make a right Judgment of the heart of Christ
to Men. Indeed we have an Advantage to guess at the goodness of his heart, by
many things as, by his taking our Nature upon him, his dying for us, his
sending his Word and Ministers to us, and all that we might be saved: ^ut this
of beginning to offer Me^cy to Jerusa^em, is that which heightens all the rest,
for this does not only confirm to us, that Love was the cause of his dying for
us, but it shows us yet more the dep^h of that Love: He might have died for us,
and yet have extended the benefit of his Death to a few, as one might call them
of the best conditioned Sinners, to those who (though they were weak, and so
could not but Sin) yet made not a Trade of sinning; to th^se that sinned not
lavishingly. There are in the World as one may call them, the moderate Sinners;
the Sinners that mix Righteousness with their Pollutions; the Sinners, that
though they be Sinners, do what on their part lies, (some that are blind would
think so) that they might be saved. I say, it had been Love, great Love, if he
had died for none but such, and sent his Love to such: But that he should send
out conditions of Peace to the biggest Sinners! yea, that they should be
offered to them first of all! (for so he means when he says Begin at Jerusalem)
This is wonderful, this shows his Heart to purpose, as also the heart of God
his Father who sent him to do thus.

There is nothing more incident to Men that are awake in their Souls, than to
have wrong Thoughts of God: Thoughts that are narrow, and that pinch and pen up
his Mercy to scanty and beggarly conclusions, and ridged legal Conditions;
supposing that it is rude and intrenching upon his Majesty to come ourselves,
or to invite others, un^il we have scraped, and washed, and rubbed off so much
of our Dirt from ^s, as we think is convenient; to make ^s somewhat orderly and
handsome in his sight. Such never kn^w what these Words meant, (...) ^t
Je^usa^em, yea, such in their Hearts, have compared the Father and Son to
^^^^ardly Rich Men, whose ^^ney comes from them like drops of ^l^^d. True, says
such, God has Mercy ^^t (...) is ^oth to part with it, you must ^^ease him well
i^ you get any from him: ^^e is not so free as many suppose, nor is he so
willing to save, as some pretended Gospellers imagine: But I ask such if the
Father and Son be not unspeakably free to show Mercy, why was this Clause put
into our Commission to preach the Gospel? Yea, why did he say, Begin at
Jerusalem? For when Men through the weekness of their Wits, have attempted to
show other Reasons why they should have the first Profer of Mercy, yet I can
prove (by many undeniable Reasons) that they of Jerusa^em (to whom the Apostles
made first offer, according as they were commanded) were the biggest Sinners
that ever brea^h'd upon the Face of the Earth (se^ the unpardonable Sin aside)
upon which my Doctrine stands like a Rock, That Jesus the Son of God would have
Mercy in the first place offered to the biggest Sinners: And if this does not
show the Heart of the Father and the Son to be infinitely free in bestowing
forgiveness of Sins, I confess my self mistaken.

Neither is there, set this aside, another Argument like it, to show us the
Wil^ingness of Christ to save Sinners: For, as was said before, all the rest of
the signs of Christ's Mercifulness might have been limited to Sinners that are
so, and so qualified; but when he says; Begin at Jerusalem, the Line is
stretched out to the utmost, no Man can imagine beyond (...), and it is a Folly
here to pinch and pare, to narrow and seek to bring it within scanty Bounds,
for he plainly says, Begin at Jerusalem. The biggest Sinner is the Jerusalem
Sinner.

It Is true, he says that Repentance and Remission of Sins must go together,
but yet Remission is sent to the chief the Jerusasalem sinner, nor does
Repentance lessen at all the Jerusalem sinner's crimes; it diminishes none of
his Sins, nor causes that there should be hall a one the fewer. It only puts a
stop to the Jerusalem sinner's course, and makes him willing to be saved freely
by Grace, and for time to come to be governed by that blessed Word that has
brought the Tidings of good things to him.

Besides no Man shows himself willing to be saved that repents not of his
Deeds, for he that goes on still in his Trespasses, declares that he is
resolved to pursue his own Damnation further.

Learn then to judge of the largeness of God's Heart, and the Heart of his Son
Jesus Christ, by the Word, judge not thereof by feeling, nor by the Reports of
thy Conscience; Conscience is oftentimes here befooled, and made to go quite
besides the Word: 'Twas judging without the Word that made David say, I am cast
off from God's Eyes, and shall perish one Day by the Hand of Saul, Psalm. 31.22.
1 Samuel 27 1.

The Word had told him another thing, namely, that he should be King in his
stead. Our Text says also, that Jesus Christ bids Preachers, in their preaching
Repentance and Remission of sins, begin first at Jerusalem: Thereby declaring
most truly the infinite largeness of the merciful Heart of God and his Son, to
the sinful Children of Men.

Judge thou, I say, therefore of the Goodness of the Heart of God and his Son,
by this Text and by others of the same import; so shall thou not dishonor the
Grace of God, nor needlessly fright thy self, nor give away thy Faith, nor
gratify the Devil, nor lose the Benefit of his Word; I speak now to weak
Believers.

Secondly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners, to the Jerusalem-sinners? That by this also, you must learn to
judge of the sufficiency of the Merits of Christ; not that the Merits of
Christ; can be comprehended, for that they are beyond the Conceptions of the
whole World, being called, The Unsearchable Riches of Christ. But yet they may
be apprehended to a considerable Degree. Now the way so to apprehend them, is
to consider what offers after his Resurrection, he makes of his Grace to
Sinnners; for to be sure he will not offer beyond the Virtue of his Merits;
because as Grace is the cause of his Merits, so his Merits are the Bias and
Bounds, upon and by which his Grace stands good, and is let out to Sinners.
Does he then command that his Mercy should be offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners? It declares that there is a sufficiency in his Blood to save
the biggest Sinners. The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all Sin. And
again, Be it known unto you Men and Brethren, that through this Man (this Man's
Merits) is preached to you the Forgiveness of Sins; and by him all that believe
are justified from all things, from which they could not be justified by the
Law of Moses, Acts 13.38.

Observe then thy Rule, to make Judgment of the sufficiency of the blessed
Merits of thy Savior; if he had not been able to have reconciled the biggest
Sinners to his Father by his Blood, he would not have sent to them: Have sent
to them in the first place the Doctrine of Remission of Sins: for Remission of
Sins is through Faith in his Blood: We are justified freely by the Grace of God,
through the Redemption that is in the Blood of Christ. Upon the square as I may
call it, of the worthiness of the Blood of Christ, Grace acts and offers
Forgiveness of Sin to Men, Ephesians. 1.7. chap 2 13.14. Colos. 1.20, 21, 22.

Hence therefore we must gather, That the Blood of Christ is of infinite Value,
for that he offers Mercy to the biggest of Sinners: Nay further, since he
offers Mercy in the first place to the biggest Sinners; considering also that
this first act of his, is that which the World will take Notice of and expect
it should be continued unto the end: Also it is a disparagement to a Man that
seeks his own Glory in what he undertakes, to do that for a spurt which he
cannot continue and hold out in. This is our Lord's own Argument, he began to
build, says he, but he was not able to finish, Luke. 14.28, 29, 30.

Should thou hear a Man say, I am resolved to be kind to the Poor, and should
begin giving with handfuls of Guineas, you would conclude that either he is
wonderful rich, or must straighten his Hand, or will soon be at the bottom of
his Riches: Why this is the case, Christ at his Resurrection gave it out that
would be good to the World; and first sends to the biggest Sinners, with an
intent to have Mercy on them. Now the biggest Sinner cannot be saved but by an
abundance of Grace; it is not a little that will save great Sinners, Romans 5.17.
And I say again, since the Lord Jesus amounts thus high at the first, and sends
to the Jerusalem sinners, that they may come at first to partake of his Mercy;
it follows that either he has unsearchable Riches of Grace and worth in
himself, or else he must straighten his Hand; or his Grace and Merits will be
spent before the World's at an end. But let it be believed, as surely as
spoken, he is still as full as ever! He is not a jot the poorer, of all the
Forgiveness that he has given away to great Sinners; also he is still as free
as at first, for he never yet called back this Word, Begin at the Jerusalem
sinners. And as I said since his Grace is extended according to the worth of
his Merits, I conclude that there is the same virtue in his merits to save now,
as there was at the very beginning.

O the Riches of the Grace of Christ! Oh the Riches of the Blood of Christ!

Thirdly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners, then here is Encouragement for you that think, for wicked
Hearts and Lives, you have not your fellows in the World; yet to come to him.

There is a People that therefore fear, least they should be rejected of Jesus
Christ, because of the greatness of their Sins; whenas you see here, such are
sent to by Jesus Christ to come to him for Mercy; Begin at Jerusalem: Never did
one thing answer another more fitly in this World, than this Text fitteth such
kind of Sinners. As Face answers Face in a Glass, so this Text answers the
Necessities of such Sinners. What can a Man say more, but that he stands in
rank of the biggest Sinners? Let him stretch himself whither he can, and think
of himself to the utmost, he can but conclude himself to be one of the biggest
Sinners: And what then? Why the Text mee^s him in the very Face, and says,
Christ offers Mercy to the biggest Sinners; to the very Jerusalem-sinners.
What more can be objected? Nay, he does not only offer to such his Mercy, but
to them it is commanded to be offered in the first place, Begin at Jerusalem.
Preach Repentance and Remission of sins among all Nations, Beginning at
Jerusalem. Is not here Encouragement for those that think, for wicked Hearts
and Lives, they have not their Fellows in the World?

Objection. But I have a Heart as hard as a Rock.

Answer. Well this does but prove thee a biggest Sinner.

Obj^^t. But my Heart continually ^^ets against the Lord.

Answer. Well this does but prove thee a biggest Sinner.

Object. But I have been desperate in sinful courses.

Answ. Well stand thou with the number of the biggest Sinners.

Object. But my gray head is found in the way of Wickedness.

Answ. Well thou art in the Rank of the biggest Sinners.

Object. But I have not only a base Heart, but I have lived a debouch'd Life.

Answ. Stand thou also among those that are called the biggest Sinners. And
what then? Why the Text sweeps you all, you cannot object your selves beyond
the Text: It has a particular Message to the biggest Sinners, I say it sweeps
you all.

Obje^t. But I am a Reprobate.

Answ. Now thou talkest like a Fool, and medlest with what thou understandest
not: No Sin, but the Sin of final Impenitence, can Prove a Man a Reprobate.
An-I am sure thou have not arrived as yet unto that. Therefore thou
understand'st not what thou say, and make groundless* Conclusions against
thy self. Say thou art a Sinner, and I will hold with thee. Say thou art a
great Sinner, and I will say so too. Yea, say thou art one of the biggest
Sinners, and spare not, for the Text yet is beyond thee; is yet betwixt Hell
and the, Begin at Jerusalem, has yet a smile upon thee: And thou talkest as if
thou* wast a Reprobate, and that the greatness of the Sins do prove thee so to
be, when yet they of Jerusalem were not only such, whose Sins I dare say, were
such both for bigness and heinousness, as thou art not capable of committing
beyond them; unless now after thou have received Conviction that the Lord Jesus
is the only Savior of the World, thou should wickedly and despightfully turn
thy self from him, and conclude he is not to be trusted to for life, and so
crucify him for a Cheat afresh. This I must confess will bring a Man under the
Black Rod, and set him in danger of eternal Damnation, Heb. 6 6. Chap. 10.29.
This is trampling under Foot the Son of God, and counting his Blood an unholy
thing. This did they of Jerusalem, but they did it ignorantly in Unbelief, and
so were yet capable of Mercy: But to do this against professed Light, and to
stand to do it, puts a Man beyond the Text indeed, Acts 3.14, to 17. 1 Timothy
1.13.

But I say what is this to him that would fain be saved by Christ? His Sins did
as to Greatness, never yet reach to the Nature of the Sins, that the Sinners
intended by the Text had made themselves guilty of: He that would be saved by
Christ, has an honorable esteem of him? but they of Jerusalem preferred a
murderer before him; but as for him they cried, away, away with him, it is not
fit that he should live. Perhaps thou will object, That thy self have a
Thousand times preferred a stinking Lust before him: answer be it so, it is but
what is common to Men to do, nor does the Lord Jesus make such a foolish Life a
Bar to thee, to forbid thy coming to him, or a Bound to his Grace, that it
might be kept from thee; but admits of thy Repentance, and offers himself
unto thee freely, as thou stand among the Jerusalem sinners.

Take therefore Encouragement, Man, Mercy is by the Text held forth to the
biggest Sinners. Yea, put thy self into the Number of the first, by reckoning
that thou may be one of the first, and may not be put off till the biggest
Sinners are served: For the biggest Sinners are first invited; consequently, if
they come they are like to be the first that shall be served: 'Twas so with
Jerusalem: Jerusalem sinners were they that were first invited; and those of
them that came first, (and there came three thousand of them, the first Day
they were invited, how many came afterward none can tell) they were first
served.

Put in thy Name, Man among the biggest, lest thou art made to wait till they
are served; you have some Men that think themselves very cunning, because they
put up their Names in their Prayers among them that feign it, saying God I
thank thee, I am not so bad as the worst; but believe it, if they be saved at
all, they shall be saved in the last place: The first in their own Eyes shall
be served last, and the last or worst shall be first: The Text insinuates it,
Begin at Jerusalem, and Reason backs it, for they have most need. Behold ye
therefore, how God's ways are above ours; we are for serving the worst last,
God is for serving the worst first. The Man at the Pool that to my thinking was
longest in his Disease, and most Helpless as to his Cure, was first healed,
yea, he only was healed; for we read that Christ healed him; but we read not
then that he healed one more there, John 5.1, to 9.

Wherefore if thou would soonest be served, put in thy Name among the very
worst of Sinners, say, when thou art upon thy Knees, Lord! Here is a Jerusalem
sinner; a Sinner of the biggest size, one whose Burden is of the greatest Bulk
and heaviest Weight, one that cannot stand long without thy supporting Hand, Be
not thou far from me, O Lord; O my strength, have thou to help me.

I say, put in thy name with Magdalen, with Manasseh, thou may fare as the
Magdalen and the Mannasseh-sinners do. The Man in the Gospel, made the
desperate condition of his Child, an argument with Christ to hasten his cure:
Sir come down says he ere my Child die, Joh. 4.49. And Christ regarded his
haste, saying Go thy way thy Son lives, Ver. 50. Haste requires haste, David
was for speed; Deliver me speedily; hear me speedily, answer me speedily, Psalm.
31.2. Psalm 69.17. Ps. 102.2. But why speedily? I am in the Net, I am in
Trouble; my Days consume like smoke, Psalm. 31.4. Psalm. 69.17. Ps. 102 3. Deep
calls unto deep; Necessity calls for Help, great Necessity for present Help.

Wherefore I say be ruled by me in that matter; feign not thy self another Man
If thou have been a filthy Sinner, but go in thy Colors to Jesus Christ, and
put thy self among the most vile, and let him alone to put thee among the
Children, Jer 3 19. Confess all that thou know of thy self, I know thou will
find it hard work to do thus, especially if thy Mind be legal; but do it, least
thou stay and be deferred with the little Sinners, until the great ones have
had their Alms. What do you think David intended when he said, his Wounds stunk
and were corrupted, but to hasten God to have Mercy upon him, and not to defer
his Cure: Lord, says he, I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly. I go mourning
all the Day long. I am Feeble and sore broken, by reason of the Disqui^ment of
my Heart, Psalm. 38.3, to 7.

David knew what he did by all this, ^e knew that his making the worst of his
Case, was the way to speedy Help: And that a feigning and disembling the Matter
with God, was the next way to a demurr, as to his Forgiveness.

I have one thing more to offer for thy Encouragement who deemest thy self one
of the biggest Sinners: And that is, thou art as it were called say thy Name,
in the first place to come in for Mercy. Thou Man of Jerusalem, hearken to thy
Call: Men do so in Courts of Judicature, and presently cry out, Here Sir; and
then they shoulder, and crowd, and say, pray give way, I am called into the
Court. Why, this is thy Case; thou great, thou Jerusalem-sinner be of good
Cheer, he calls thee, Mark 10.46 to 49. Why sit thou still; arise, why
stand thou still? Come Man, thy Call shall give thee Authority to come,
Begin at Jerusalem, is thy Call and Authority to come: Wherefore up and
shoulder it Man; say, Stand away Devil, Christ calls me; Stand away Unbelief,
Christ calls me; Stand away, all ye my discouraging Apprehensions, for my
Savior calls me to him to receive of his Mercy. Men will do thus, as I said,
in Courts below; and why should not thou approach thus to the Court above?
The Jerusalem-sinner is first in Thought, first in Commission, first in the
record of Names, and therefore should give Attendance wi^h Expectation, that he
is first to receive Mercy of God.

Is not this an Encouragement to the big^est Sinners, to make their Application
to Christ for Mercy? Come unto me all ye that ^abour and are heavy laden, does
also con^^rm this thing, that is, that the biggest Sinner, and he that has the
biggest Burden, is he who is first invited. Christ points over ^he heads of
Thousands, as he sits on the Throne of Grace, directly to such a Man; and says,
bring in hither the maimed, the ^alt, and the blind; let the Jerusalem-^inner
that stands there behind, come to ^^e. Wherefore since Christ says come to
^hee, let the Angels make a Lane, and let ^ll Men give Place, that the
Jerusalem-sinner ^ay come to Jesus Christ for Mercy.

Fourthly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy ^y offered in the first place to the
biggest ^inners? Then come thou profane Wretch, and let me a little enter, an
Argument with thee; Why will thou not come to Je^us Christ, since thou art a
Jerusalem-sin^er? How can thou find in thy Heart to ^et thy self against
Grace, against such Grace as offers Mercy to thee, What spirit possesses
thee, and holds thee back ^om a sincere closure with thy Savior. ^ehold, God
groaningly complains of thee, ^ying, But Israel would none of me. When ^ called
none did answer, Psalm. 81.11. Isa. ^6.4.

Shall God enter this Complaint against thee? Why do thou put him off? why
do thou stop thine Ear? Can thou defend thy self, when thou art called to
an Account for thy Neglects of so great Salvation? what can thou answer? Or
do thou think thou shall escape the Judgment? Heb. 2.3.

No more such Christ's: There will be no more such Christ's, Sinner! Oh put not
the Day, the Day of Grace, away from thee; if it be once gone, twill never come
again, Sinner.

But what is it that has got thy Heart, and that keeps it from thy Savior? Who
in the Heavens can be compared unto the Lord? Who among the Sons of the Mighty
can be likened to the Lord? Psalm 89.6. Have thou, think thou, found any
thing so good as Jesus Christ? Is there any among thy sins, thy Companions, and
foolish Delights, that like Christ, can help thee in the Day of thy Distress?
Behold, the greatness of thy sins cannot hinder; let not the Stubborness of thy
Heart hinder thee, sinner.

Objection. I am ashamed.

Answer. Oh don't be ashamed to be saved, Sinner.

Object. But my old companions will mock me.

Answ. Oh! don't be mocked out of eternal Life, Sinner.

Thy Stubbornness affects, afflicts the Heart of thy Savior. Carest thou not
for this? Of old, He beheld the City and wept over it. Can thou hear this and
not be concerned? Luke 19.41, 42. Shall Christ weep to see thy Soul going to
Destruction and will thou sport thy self in that way; Yea, shall Christ, tha^
can be eternally Happy without thee, be more afflicted at the thought of the
loss of thy Soul than thy self, who art certainly eternally miserable if thou
neglectest to come to him.

These things that keep thee and thy Savior on thy part asunder, are but
bubbles; the least prick of an affliction will let out as to thee, what now
thou think is worth the venture of Heaven to enjoy.

Have thou not Reason? Can thou not so much as once soberly think of thy
dying Hour? or of whither thy sinful Life will drive thee then? Have thou no
Conscience! or having one, is it rocked so fast asleep by Sin, or made so weary
with an unsuccessful calling upon thee, that it is laid down, and cares for
thee no more? Poor Man, thy State is to be lamented. Have no Judgment? Art not
able to conclude, that to be saved, is better than to burn in Hell; and that
eternal Life with God's Favor, is better then a temporal Life in God's
Displeasure? Have no Affection but what is brutish? What, none at all? No
Affection for the God that made thee? What none for his loving Son, that has
showed his Love, and died for thee? Is not Heaven worth thy affection? O poor
Man! which is strong'st think thou, God or thee? If thou art not able to
overcome him, thou art a Fool for standing out against him, Mat. 5.25, 26. It
is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the living God. He will gripe
hard, his Fist is stronger than a Lions Paw, take heed of him, he will be angry
if you despise his Son; and will you stand guilty in your Trespasses, when he
offers you his Care and Favor? Exodus 34.6, 7. Heb. 10 29, 30, 31.

Now we come to the Text, Beginning at Jerusalem, this Text, though it be now one
of the brightest Stars that shines in the Bible, because there is in it, as
full if not the fullest offer of Grace that can be imagined, to the Sons of
Men; yet to them that shall perish from under this Word, even this Text will be
to such, one of the hottest Coals in Hell.

This Text therefore will save thee, or sink thee; there is no shifting of it:
If it saves thee; it will set thee high; if it sinks thee, will set thee low,

But I say, why so unconcerned? Have no Soul? Or do think thou may loose
thy Soul, and save thy self? Is it not pity, had it otherwise been the Will of
God that ever thou wast made a Man, for that thou set so little by thy Soul?

Sinner, take the Invitation; thou art called upon to come to Christ: Nor art
thou called upon, but by order from the Son of God, though thou should happen
to be one of the biggest Sinners: For he has bid us offer Mercy, as to all the
World in general, so in the first place, to the Sinners of Jerusalem; or to the
biggest Sinners.

Fifthly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners? Then this shows how unreasonable a thing it is, for Men to
despair of Mercy. For those that presume, I shall say something to them
afterward.

I now speak to them that Despair.

There are four sorts of Despair, there is the Despair of Devils; There is the
Despair of Souls in Hell. There is the Despair that is grounded upon Men's
Deficiency; And there is the Despair that they are perplexed with that are
willing to be saved, but are too strongly born down with the Burden of their
Sins.

The Despair of Devils, the Damned's Despair, and that Despair that a Man has
of attaining of Life, because of his own Deficiency, are all reasonable. Why
should not Devils and damned Souls Despair? Yea, why should not Man Despair of
getting to Heaven by his own Abilities? I therefore am concerned only with the
Fourth sort of Despair, to wit, with the Despair of those that would be saved,
but are too strongly born down with the Burden of their Sins.

I say therefore to thee that art thus, and why Despair? Thy Despair if it was
reasonable, should flow from thee, because found in the Land that is beyond the
Grave, or because thou certainly know that Christ will not or cannot save
thee.

But for the first, thou art yet in the Land of the living, and for the second,
thou have ground ^o believe the quite contrary; Christ is able to save to the
uttermost, them that come to God by him; and if he were not willing, would not
have commanded that Mercy in the first place should be offered to the biggest
Sinners. Besides he has said, And let him that is athirst come, and whosoever
will, let him take the Water of Life freely; that is with all my Heart. What
ground now is here for Despair? I thou say, The Number and Burden of my
Sins. I answer Nay, that is rather a ground for Faith; because such an one
above all others, is invited by Christ to come unto him, yea, promised Rest*
and Forgiveness if they come, Mat. 11.28. What ground to despair? Verily none
at all Thy Despair, then is a thing unreasonable and without footing in the
Word.

But I have no experience of God's love; God has given me no Comfort, or ground
of hope, though I have waited upon him for it many a day.

Thou have experience of God's Love, for that he has opened thine Eyes to see
thy Sins; and for that he has given thee Desires to be saved by Jesus Christ.
For by thy sense of Sin thou art made to see thy Poverty of Spirit, and that
has laid thee under a sure Ground to hope that Heaven shall be thine hereafter.

Also thy Desires to be saved by Christ, has put thee under another Promise, so
there is two to hold thee up in hope; though thy present burden be never so
heavy, Mat. 5.3, 6. As for what thou say as to God's Silence to thee,
perhaps he has spoken to to thee once or twice already, but thou have not
perceived it, J^b 33.14, 15.

However thou have Christ crucified, set forth before thine Eyes in the Bible,
and an Invitation to come unto him, though thou be a Jerusalem-sinner though thou
be a biggest Sinner; and so no ground to despair. What if God will be silent to
thee, is that ground of Despair? Not at all, so long as there is a Promise in
the Bible* that God will in no wise cast away the coming Sinner, and so long as
he invites the Jerusalem-sinner, to come unto him, John 6.37.

Build not therefore Despair upon these things, they are not a sufficient
Foundation for it, such Plenty of Promises being in the Bible, and such a
Discovery of his Mercy to great Sinners of old; especially since we have withal
a clause in the Commission given to Ministers to preach, that they should begin
with the Jerusalem sinners in their offering Mercy to the World.

Besides God says, They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their Strength,
they shall mount up with Wings like Eagles; but perhaps it may be long first, I
waited long says David and did seek the Lord; and at length his cry was heard:
Wherefore he bid his Soul wait on God, and says, for i^ is good so to do,
before thy Sain^s Psalm. 40.1. Psalm. 62.5. Psalm. 51.9.

And what if thou waitest upon God all thy Days? Is it below thee; And what if
God will cross his Book and blot out the hand writing that is against thee, and
not let thee know it as yet? Is it fit to say unto God, Thou art hard hearted?
Despair not: Thou have no ground to Despair so long as thou live in this
World. It Is a Sin to begin to Despair, before one sets his Foot over the
Threshold of Hell-gates. For them that are there, let them Despair and spare
not; but as for thee, thou have no ground to do it. What Despair of Bread, in a
land that is full of Corn! Despair of Mercy, when our God is full of Mercy:
Despair of Mercy, when God goes about by his Ministers, beseeching of Sinners
to be reconciled unto him, 2 Cor. ^, 18.19, 20.

Thou scrupulous Fool, where can thou find that God was ever false to his
Promise, or that he ever deceived the Soul that ventured it upon him? He often
calls upon Sinners to trust him, though they walk in Darkness and have no light,
Isa. 50.10.

They have his Promise and Oath for their Salvation, that f^e for refuge to the
hope set before them, Heb. 6.17, 18.

Despair! When we have a God of Mercy, and a redeeming Christ Alive! For ^hame
forbear: Let them Despair that dwell where there is no God, and that are
confined to those Chambers of Death, which can be reached by no Redemption.

A living Man despair! When he is chi^ for Murmuring and Complaining? Lam.
3.30. Oh* so long as we are where Promises swarm, where Mercy is proclaimed,
where Grace reigns, and where Jerusalem-sinners are privileged with the first
Offer of Mercy, it is a base thing to despair.

Despair undervalues the Promises, undervalues the Invitation, undervalues the
proffer of Grace. Despair undervalues the Ability of God the Father, and the
redeeming Blood of Christ his Son. Oh unreasonable Despair! Despair makes Man
God's Judge; it is a Controller of the Promise, a Contradicte^ of Christ in his
large offer of Mercy, and one that undertakes to make Unbelief the great
manager of our Reason and Judgment, in determining about what God can and will
do for sinners.

Despair! It is the Devil's Fellow, the Devil's Master; yea, the Chain with
which he is captivated and held under darkne^s for ever. And to give way
thereto in a Land, in a State and Time that flows with Milk and Honey, is an
uncomely thing.

I would say to my Soul, O my Soul this is not the place of Despair, this is
not the time to Despair in, as long as mine Eyes can find a Promise in the
Bible, as long as there is the least mention of Grace, as long as there is a
Moment left me of Breath or Life in this World so long will I wait or look for
Mercy; so long will I fight against Unbelief and Despair.

This is the way to honor God and Christ, this is the way to set the Crown on
the Promise, this is the way to welcome the invitation and inviter, and this is
the way to thrust thy self under the shelter and protection of the word of
Grace. Never despair so long as our Text is alive, for that does find it out,
That Mercy by Christ is offered in the first place to the biggest Sinner.

Despair is an unprofitable thing, twill make a Man weary of waiting upon God,
^ Kings 6.23. 'Twill make a Man for^ake God, and seek his Heaven in the good
things of this World, Genesis 4.14 to 17. ^Twill make a Man his own Tormenter, and
flounce and fling like a wild Bull in a Net, Isa. 51.20.

Despair, It drives a Man to the study of his own Ruin, and brings him at last
to be his own Executioner, 2. Sam. 17.23. Mat. 27.3, 4, 5.

Besides I am persuaded also, that Despair is the cause there are so many that
would fain be Atheists in the World: For because they have entertained a
Conceit, that God will never be merciful to them; therefore they labor to
persuade themselves that there is no God at all, as if their Misbelief would
kill God, or cause him to cease to be; a poor Shift for an Immortal Soul, for a
Soul who likes not to retain God in its Knowledge! If this be the best that
Despair can do, let it go Man; and betake thy self to Faith, to Prayer, to wait
for God, and to hope in Despite of ten Thousand Doubts; and for thy
Encouragement, take yet (as an addition to what has already been said) these
following Scriptures: The Lord takes pleasure in them that sear him, in them
that hope in his Mercy, Psalm. 147.11.

Whence note, They fear not God, that hope not in his Mercy. Also, God is angry
with them that hope not in his Mercy; for he only takes pleasure in them that
hope. He that believes or has receiv^^ his Testimony, has set to his Seal
that God is true, John 3.32. But he that receives it not, has made him a
liar, and that is a very unworthy thing, 1 John 5.10, 11. Let the Wicked
forsake his way, and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts: and let him return to
the Lord, and he will have Mercy on him; and to our God, for he will abundantly
multiply pardons, Isa. 55.7. Perhaps thou art weary of thy ways, but art not
weary of thy thoughts, of thy unbelieving and despairing thoughts: now God also
would have thee cast away these thoughts, as such which he deserves not at thy
Hand, for he will have Mercy upon thee, and he will abundantly pardon.

O Fools and slow of Heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken, Luke
24.25. Mark you here, slowness to believe is a piece of Folly. Ay! But say
thou, I do believe some, and I belive what can make against me. Ay, but Sinner,
Christ Jesus here calls thee Fool for not believing all. Believe all, and
despair if thou Can. He that believes all, believes that Text that says,
Christ would have Mercy preached first to the Jerusalem-sinners. He that
believes all, ^elieveth all the Promises and Consolations ^f the Word; and the
Promises and Conso^ations of the Word, weigh heavier than ^o all the Curses and
Threatenings of the ^aw. And Mercy rejoices against Judgment. Wherefore believe
all, and Mercy will (to thy Conscience) weigh Judgment ^own, and so minister
Comfort to thy Soul. The Lord take the Yoke from off thy Jaws, since he has set
Meat before thee Hos. 11.4. And help thee, to remember that he is ^leased in
the first place to offer Mercy to ^he biggest Sinners.

Sixthly, Since Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners, Let Souls see that they lay ^ight hold thereof; least they
notwithstand^ng, indeed come short thereof: Faith on^y knows how to deal with
Mercy, where^f put not in the place thereof Presumption. ^ have observed, that
as there are Herbs and Flowers in our Gardens, so there are their Counterfeits
in the Field; only they ^re distinguished from the other by the name of wild
ones. Why there is Faith and wild faith; and wild Faith is this Presumption: ^
call it wild Faith, because God never pla^ed in it his Garden* his Church, it is
only ^o be found in the field, the World. I also all it wild Faith, because it
only grows ^p, and is nourished where other wild No^^ons abound. Wherefore take
heed of this, and all may be well: For this Presumptuousness is a very heinous
thing in the Eyes of God: The Soul says he, that shall do ought presumptuously
(whether born in the Land, or a Stranger) the same reproacheth the Lord. And
that Soul shall be cut off from among his People, Numb. 15.20.

The thoughts of this made David tremble, and pray that God would hold him back
from Presumptuous Sins, and not suffer them to have Dominion over him, Psalm.
19.31.

Now this Presumption, then puts it self in the place of Faith when it
tampereth with the Promise of Life, while the Soul is a stranger to Repentance:
Wherefore you have in the Text, to prevent doing thus, both Repentance and
Remission of Sins to be offered to Jerusalem, not Remission without Repentance;
for all that repent not shall perish, let them presume on Grace, and the
Promise while they will, Luke 13, 1, 2, 3.

Presumption then is that which severeth Faith and Repentance, concluding that
the Soul shall be saved by Grace, though the Man was never made sorry for his
Sins, nor the love of the Heart turned there from This is to be self willed, as
Peter has it, And this is a despising the Word of the Lord, for that has put
Repentance and Faith together, Mark 1.15. And because he has despised the Word
of the Lord and has broken the Commandment, that Soul shall utterly be cut
off, his Iniquities shall be upon him, Numb. 15.13.

Let such therefore look to it, who yet are and abide in their Sins; for such
if they hope, they are to be saved, presume upon the Grace of God. Wherefore
Presumption and not Harkening to God's word, are put together, Deuteronomy. 17.12.

Again, then Men presume when they are resolved to abide in their Sins, and yet
expect to be saved by God's Grace through Christ: This is as much as to say God
likes of Sin as well as I do, and cares not how Men live, if so be they lean
upon his Son. Of this Sort are they that build up Zion with Blood, and
Jerusalem with Iniquity; that judge for reward, and teach for hire, and divine
for Money, and lean upon the Lord, Mich. 3.10, 11. This is doing things with an
high hand against the Lord our God, and a taking him as it were, at the Catch!
This is, as we may say among Men, to seek to put a trick upon God, as if he had
not sufficiently fortified his Proposals of Grace by his Holy Word, against all
such kind of Fools as these. But look to it,

Such will be found at the Day of God, not among that great Company of
Jerusalem-sinners, that shall be saved by Grace, but among those that have been
the great abusers of the Grace of God, in the World. Those that say, Let us sin
that Grace may abound, and let us do Evil that Good may come, their Damnation
is just; and if so, they are a great way off of that Salvation, that is by
Jesus Christ presented to the Jerusalem-sinners.

I have therefore these things to propound to that Jerusalem-sinner, that would
know if he may be so bold to venture himself upon this Grace.

First, Do thou see thy Sins?

Secondly, Art thou weary of them?

Thirdly, Would thou with all thy Heart be saved by Jesus Christ? I dare say
no less, I dare say no more. But if it be truly thus with thee, how great
soever thy Sins have been, how far soever thou art from thinking that God has
Mercy for thee; thou art the Man, the Jerusalem-sinner, that the Word of God
has conquered, and to whom it offers free Remission of Sins, by the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

When the Jailer cried out, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? The answer was,
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. He that sees his
Sins aright, is brought to his Wits end by them; and he that is so is willing
to part from them and to be saved by the Grace of God.

If this be the Case, fear not, give no way to Despair, thou presumest not, if
thou believe to Life everlasting in Jesus Christ. Yea, Christ is prepared for
such as thou art.

Therefore take good courage and believe. The design of Satan is to tell the
Presumptuous that their presuming on Mercy is good; but to persuade the
Believer, that his believing is impudent bold dealing with God. I never heard a
presumptuous Man in my Life, say that he was afraid that he presumed; but I
have heard many an honest humble Soul say, that they have been afraid that
their Faith has been Presumption. Why should Satan molest those, whose ways he
knows will bring them to him? And who can think that he should be quiet, when
Men take the right course to escape his hellish snares? This therefore is the
Reason why the truly humbled is opposed, while the Presumptuous goes on by Wind
and Tide. The truly humble, Satan hates; but he laughs to see the Foolery of
the other.

Does thy Hand and Heart tremble? Upon thee the Promise smiles, To this Man
will I look, says God, even 'to him that is poor and of a contrite Spirit, and
trembles at my Word, Isa. 66.2.

What therefore I have said of Presumption, concerns not the humble in Spirit
at all: I therefore am for gathering up the Stones, and for taking the
stumbling Blocks out of the way of God's People; and forwarning of them that
they lay the stumbling Block of their Iniquity before their Faces, and that are
for presuming upon God's Mercy; and let them look to themselves, Ezekiel. 14.6, 7,
8.

Also our Text stands firm as ever it did, and our observation is still of
force, That Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners. So then let none Despair, let none Presume: Let none Despair
that are sorry for their Sins, and would be saved by Jesus Christ. Let none
resume that abide in the liking of their Sins; though they seem to know the
exceeding Grace of Christ; for though the Door stand wide open for the reception
of the Penitent, yet it is fast enough barred and bolted against the
presumptuous Sinner. Be not deceived, God is not mocked; whatsoever a Man sows,
that he shall reap. It cannot be that God should be wheadled out of his Mercy,
or prevailed upon by Lips of Dissimulation; He knows them that trust in him*
and that sincerely come to him by Christ for Mercy, Nahum 1.9.

It is then, not the abundance of Sin committed, but the not coming heartily to
God by Christ for Mercy, that shuts Men out of Doors: And though their not coming
heartily may be said to be but a Sin; yet it is such a Sin, as causes that all
the other Sins abide upon the unforgiven.

God complains of this, they have not cried unto me with their Heart; they
turned, but not to the most High. They turned feignedly, Jer 3, 10. Hos.
7.14.16.

Thus doing, his Souls hates; but the penitent, humble, brokenhearted Sinner,
be his Transgressions red as Scarlet, red like Crimson, in number as the sand,
though his Transgressions cry to Heaven against him for Vengeance, and seem there
to cry louder than do his Prayers, or Tears, or Groans, for Mercy; yet he is
safe. To this Man God will look, Isa. 1.18 chapter 66.2.

Seventhly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners? Then here is ground for those that as to practice have not
been such, to come to him for Mercy.

Although there is no Sin little of it self, because it is a Contradiction to the
Nature and Majesty of God; yet we must admit of diverse Numbers, and also of
Aggravations, two Sins are not so many as three; nor are three that are done in
Ignorance so big as one that is done against light, against Knowledge, and
Conscience. Also there is the Child in Sin, and a Man in Sin; that has his Skin
wrinkled for very Age. And we must put a Difference betwixt these Sinners al^o:
For can it be, that a Child of Seven, or ten, or sixteen Years old, should be
such a Sinner; a Sinner so vile in Eye of the Law, as he is who has walked
according to the course of this World, forty, fifty, sixty or seventy Years?
Now the Youth, this stripling, though he is a Sinner, is but a little Sinner,
when compared with such.

Now I say, if there be room for the first sort, for those of the biggest size;
If there be a Door wide enough for a Giant to go in at, there is certainly room
for a Dwarf. If Christ Jesus has Grace enough to save great Sinners, he has
surely Grace enough to save little ones. If he can forgive, five hundred Pence,
for certain he can forgive fifty, Luke 7.41, 42.

But you said before that the little Sinners must stand by, until the great
ones have received their Grace, and that is discouraging!

I answer, There are two sorts of little Sinners, such as are so, and such as
feign themselves so; they are those that feign themselves so, that I intended
there, and not those that are indeed comparatively so. Such as feign themselves
so, may wait long enough before they obtain Forgiveness.

But again, a Sinner may be comparatively a little Sinner, and sensibly a great
one. There is then two sorts of greatness in Sin; greatness by reason of
Number, greatness by reason of throughness of Conviction of the horrible Nature
of Sin. In this last Sense, he that has but one Sin, if such a one could be
found, may in his own Eyes find himself the biggest Sinner in the World. Let
this Man, or this Child therefore put himself among the great Sinners, and
plead with God as great Sinners do, and expect to be saved with the great
Sinners; as soon and as heartily as they.

Yea, a little Sinner, that comparatively is truly so, if he shall graciously
give way to Conviction, and shall in God's light, dilligently weigh the
horrible Nature of his own Sins may yet sooner obtain Forgiveness for them at
the hands of the heavenly Father, than he that has ten times his Sins, and so
cause to cry ten times harder to God for his Mercy.

For the grievousness of the Cry is a great thing with God; for if he will hear
the Widow if she cries at all, how much if she cries most grievously? Exodus
22.22, 23.

It is not the number, but the true sense of the abominable Nature of Sin, that
makes the cry for Pardon Lamentable. He, as I said, that has many Sins may not
cry so loud in the Ears of God as he that has far fewer; he in our present
sense, that is in his own Eyes the biggest Sinner, is he that soonest finds
Mercy.

The offer then is to the biggest Sinner to the biggest Sinner first, and the
Mercy is first obtained, by him that first confesses himself to be such an one.

There are Men that strive at the Throne of Grace for Mercy by pleading the
greatness of their Necessity. Now their Plea, as to the prevalency of it, lies
not in their counting up of the number, but in their sense of the greatness of
their Sins, and in the Vehemence of their Cry for Pardon. And it is observable,
that though the Birthright was Reubens, and for his Foolishness, given to the
Sons of Joseph; yet Judah prevailed before his Brethren, and of him came the
Messiah 1 Chronicles. 5.1, 3.

There is a heavenly Subtilty to be managed in this matter, Thy Brother came
with Subtilty and has taken thy Blessing The Blessing belonged to Esau, but
Jacob by his Diligence made it his own, Genesis 27.35. The offer is to the biggest
Sinner; to the biggest Sinner first, but if he forbears to cry, the Sinner that
is a Sinner less by far than he, both as to the Number and the Nature of
Transgression, may get the Blessing first, if he should have Grace to bestir
himself well, for the loudest cry is heard furthest; and the most lamentable,
pierces soonest.

I therefore urge this Head, not because I would have little Sinners go and
tell God that they are little Sinners, thereby to think to obtain his Mercy;
for verily, so they are never like to have it: For such words declare, that
such a one has no true sense at all of the nature of his Sins.

Sin, as I said, in the Nature of it, is horrible; though it be but one single
sin as to act; ye^, though it be but a sinful thought, and so worthily calls for
the Damnation of the Soul.

The Comparison then, of little and great sinners, is to go for good sense
among Men: But to plead the fewness of thy sins, or the comparative
harmlessness of their quality before God, argues no sound Knowledge of the
Nature of thy sin, and so no true sense of the Nature or Need of Mercy.

Little sinner, when therefore thou go to God, though thou know in thy
Conscience, that thou as to acts are no Thief, no Murderer, no Whore, no Liar,
no false ^wearer, or the like; and in Reason must understand, that then thou
art not so profanely Vile as others; yet when thou go to God for Mercy, know
no Man's sins but thine own, make mention of no Man's sins but thine own. Also
labor not to lessen thy own, but magnify and greaten them by all just
Circumstances, and be as if there was never a sinner in the World but thy self.
Also cry out as if thou wast the only undone Man, and that is the way to obtain
God's Mercy.

It was one of the comliest Lights in the World, to see a little sinner
commenting upon the greatness of his sins; and multiplying them to himself;
till he makes them in his own Eyes bigger and bigger than he sees any other
Man's sins to be in the World; and as base a thing it is to see a Man do
otherwise, and as basely will come on it Luke 18.10, 11, 12, 13.

As therefore I said to the great sinner before, let him take heed lest he
presumes, I say now to the little sinner, let him take heed that he don't
dissemble: For there is as great an Aptness in the little sinner to dissemble,
as there is in the great one. He that hides his sins shall not Prosper, be he
a little sinner or great, Prove. 18 13.

Eighthly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest sinner? Then this shows the true cause why Sa^an makes such head as he
does against him.

The Father and the Holy Spirit are well spoken of by all Deluders and deceived
Persons; Christ only is the Rock of Offense. Behold I lay in Zion a stumbling
Stone and a Rock of Offense, Romans 9.33. Nor that Satan cares for the Father or
the Spirit, more than he cares for the Son; but he can let Men alone with
their Notions of the Father and the Spirit, for he knows they shall never enjoy
the Father, nor the Spirit, if indeed they receive not the Merits of the Son:
He that has the Son has Life, he that has not the Son ^f God has not Life;
however they may ^oast themselves of the Father and the Spirit, 1 John 5.12.
Again, Whosoever ^ransgresseth, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has
not God: He that a^ideth in the Doctrine of Christ, has both the Father and
the Son, 2 John 9.

Christ, and Christ only, is he that can make us capable to enjoy God with Life
and Joy, to all Eternity. Hence he calls himself the way to the Father, the
true and ^iving way, Joh. 14.6. Heb. 10.19, 20. For he cannot come to the
Father but by him: Satan knows this, therefore he hates him: Deluded Persons
are ignorant of ^his, and therefore they are so led up and down ^y Satan, by
the Nose as they are.

There are many things by which Satan has taken Occasion to greaten his Rage
against Jesus Christ.

As first, His Love to Man, and then ^he many Expressions of that Love. He ^ath
taken Man's Nature upon him, he ^a^h in that Nature fulfilled the Law to ^ring
in Righteousness for Man; and has ^ilt his Blood for the reconciling of Man ^o
God; he has broke the Neck of Death, ^ut away sin, destroyed the Work of the
Devil, and got into his own Hands the Key of Death? And all these are heinous
things to Satan. He cannot abide Christ for this. Besides he has eternal Life
in himself, and that to bestow upon us, and we in all likelihood are to possess
the very place from which Satan by Transgression fell, if not places more
Glorious: Wherefore he must needs be angry. And is it not a vexatious thing to
him, that we should be admitted to the Throne of Grace by Christ, while he
stands bound over in Chains of Darkness, to answer for his Rebellions against
God and his Son, at the terrible Day of Judgment? Yea, we poor Dust and Ashes
must become his Judges, and Triumph over him forever; and all this long of
Jesus Christ; for he is the Meritorious Cause of all this. Now though Satan seeks
to be revenged for this, yet he knows it is in vain to attack the Person of
Christ, he has overcome him; therefore he tampers with Company of silly Men,
that we may Villifie him by them, And they, bold Fools as they are, will not
spare to spit in his Face, they will rail at his Person; and deny the very
being of it; they will rail at his Blood, and deny the Merit and worth of it.
They will deny the very end, why he accomplished the Law, and by Jiggs, and
tricks, and quirks which he helped them to, set up son* Names and Images in his
place and give the Glory of a Savior to them. Thus Satan works under the
Name of Christ, and his Ministers under the Name of the Ministers of
Righteousness.

And by his Wiles and Stratagems he undoes a World of Men: But there is a Seed,
and they shall serve him, and it shall be counted to the Lord for a Generation.
These shall see their Sins, and that Christ is the Way to Happiness. These
shall venture themselves both Body and Soul upon his Worthiness.

All this Satan knows, and therefore his Rage is kindled the more. Wherefore
according to his Ability and Allowance, he assaulteth, tempts, abuses, and
stirs up what he can to be hurtful to these poor People; that he may, while his
time shall last, make it as hard and difficult for them to go to eternal Glory
as he can. O^tentimes he Abuses them with wrong Apprehensions of God, and with
wrong Apprehensions of Christ; he also casts them into the mire, to the
reproach of Religion, the shame of their Brethren, the Derision of the World,
and Dishonor of God. He holds our Hands while the World buffets as, he puts
Bear skins upon us, and then sets the Dogs at us. He bedawbeth us with his own
Foam, and then tempts us to ^elieve that that bedawbing comes from our selves.

Oh! the rage and the roaring of this Lion! And the hatred that he manifests
against the Lord Jesus, and against them that are purchased with his Blood! But
yet in the midst of all this, the Lord Jesus sends forth his Herald to proclaim
in the Nations, his Love to the World; and to invite them to come to him for
Life, Yes his Invitation is so large, that he offers his Mercy in the first
place to the biggest sinness of every Age, which Augments the Devils Rage the
more.

Wherefo^e, as I said before, fret he, fume he, the Lord Jesus will divide the
Spoil with the great ones; yea, he shall divide the Spoil with strong, because
he has poured out his Soul unto Death, and was numbered with the Transgressors,
and bare the Sins of many, and made Interession for the Transgressors, Isa.
53.12.

Ninthly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinner? Let the tempted harp upon this string for their Help and
Consolation. The Tempted wherever he dwells, always thinks himself the biggest
Sinner, one most unworthy of Eternal Life.

This is Satan's Master-Argument, Thou art a horrible Sinner, a Hypocrite, one
that has a profane Heart, and one that is an utter stranger to a work of
Grace. I say, this is his Maul, his Club, his Masterpiece: He does with this,
as some do by their most enchanting Songs, sings them every where. I believe
there are but few Saints in the World that have not had this Temptation
sounding in their Ears. But were they but aware, Satan by all this does but
drive them to the Gap, out at which they should go, and so escape his roaring.

Says he, Thou art a great Sinner, a horrible Sinner, a profane hearted
Wretch, one that cannot be matched for a vile one in the Country.

And all this while Christ says to his Ministers, offer Mercy in the first
place to the biggest Sinners. So that this Temptation drives thee directly into
the Arms of Jesus Christ.

Was therefore the Tempted but aware he might say, Ay Satan, for I am, I am a
Sinner of the biggest size, and therefore have most need of Jesus Christ: Yea,
because I am such a wretch? therefore Jesus Christ calls me; yea, he calls me
first: The first proffer of the Gospel is to be made to the Jerusalem-sinner: I
am he, wherefore stand back Satan, make a Lane, my right is first to come to
Jesus Christ.

This now would be like for like. This would foil the Devil: This would make
him say, I must not deal with this Man thus; for then I put a Sword into his
Hand to cut off my Head.

And this is the meaning of Peter, when he says, Resist him steadfast in the
Faith Pet. 5.9. And of Paul, when he says, Take the shield of Faith, wherewith
ye shall be able to quench all the fiery Darts of the Wicked Ephesians. 6.16.

Wherefore it is said, Begin at Jerusalem, if the Jerusalem sinne^ is not to
have the Benefit of it? And if I am to have the Benefit of it? let me call it
to Mind when Satan haunts me with the continual Remembrance of my sins, of my
Jerusalem sins. Satan and my Conscience says, I am the biggest Sinner, Christ
offers Mercy in the first place to the biggest Sinners. Nor is the manner of
the offer other, but such as suiteth with my kind. I am sorry for my Sin; yea,
sorry at my Heart that ever sinful Thought did enter, or find the least
Entertainment in my wicked Mind: And might I obtain my Wish, I would never more
that my Heart should be a place for ought but the Grace, and Spirit, and Faith
of the Lord Jesus.

I speak not this to lessen my Wickedness: I would not for all the World; but
be placed by my own Conscience in the very front of the biggest Sinners, that I
might be one of the first that were beckned by the Gracious Hand of Jesus the
Savior to come to him for Mercy.

Well Sinner, thou now speak like a Christian; but say thus in a strong
Spirit in the hour of Temptation, and then thou will to thy Commendation and
Comfort, quit thy self well.

This improving of Christ in dark Hours, is the Life, through the hardest part of
our Christianity. We should neither stop at Darkness, nor at the raging of our
Lusts; but go in a way of venturing and casting the whole of our Affair for the
next World, at the Foot of Jesus Christ. This is the way to make Darkness
Light, and also to allay the raging of our Corruption.

The first time the Passover was eaten, was in the Night; and when Israel took
Courage to go forward, though the Sea stood in their way like a devouring Gulf,
and the Host of the Egyptians followed them at the Heels; yet the Sea gives
place, and their Enemies were as still as a Stone till they were gone over,
Exodus 12.8. Chap. 14 13, 14, 21.22. Chap. 15.16.

There is nothing like Faith to help at a Pinch, Faith dissolves Doubts, as the
Sun drives away the Mists, and that you may not be put out, know your time as I
said, of believing, is always. There are Times when some Graces may be out of
use, but there is no Time wherein Faith can be said to be so. Wherefore Faith
must be always in Exercise.

Faith is the Eye, is the Mouth is the Hand and one of these is of use all Day
long,, Faith is to see, to receive to work or to eat; and a Christian should be
seeing, or receiving, or working, or feeding all Day long, let it rain, let it
blow, let it thunder, let it lighten; a Christian must still believe: At what
time, said the good Man, I am afraid I will trust in thee, Psalm. 56.23.

Nor can we have better Encouragement to do this, than is by the Text set
before us, even an open Heart for a Jerusalem-sinner, and if for a
Jerusalem-sinner to come, then for such an one when come, if such an one to be
saved, than for such an one that is saved. If such a one to be pardoned his
great Transgressions, then for such a one who has pardoned these, to come daily
to Jesus Christ too, to be cleansed and set free from common Infirmities, and
from the Iniquities of his holy things.

Therefore let the poor Sinner that would be saved, labor for Skill to make
the best Improvement of the Grace of Christ, to help him against the
Temptations of the Devil and his Sins.

Tenthly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners? Let these Men consider this that (have or) may in a Day of
Trial, have spoken or done what their Profession or Conscience told them they
should not; and that bare the guilt and burden thereof upon their Consciences.

Whether a thing be wrong or right, Guilt may pursue him that does contrary to
his Conscience. But suppose a Man should deny his God or his Christ, or
relinquish a good Profession, and be under the real guilt thereof? Shall he
therefore conclude he is gone for ever. Let him come again with Peter's Tears,
and no doubt but he shall obtain Peter's Forgiveness. For the Text includes the
biggest Sinners.

And it is observable, That before this Clause was put into this Commission;
Peter was pardoned his horrible Revolt from his Master. He that Revolteth in
the Day of Trial, if he is not shot quite dead upon the place, but is sensible
of his wound, and calls out for a Chyrurgeon, shall find his Lord at Hand to
pour Wine and Oil into his Wounds, that he may again be healed: And to
encourage him to think that there may be. Mercy for him, besides what we find
recorded of Peter, you read in the Acts, some was through the Violence of their
Trials, compelled to Blaspheme, and yet are called Saints, Acts 26.9, 10, 11.

Hence you have a Promise or two that speaks concerning such a kind of Men, to
encourage us to think that at least some of them shall come back to the Lord
their God. Shall they fall, says he, and not arise? Shall they turn away and
not return? Jer. 8.4. And in that day I will assemble her that halteth, and I
will gather her that was driven out, and her that I have afflicted. And I will
make her that halteth a Remnant, and her that was cast off, a strong Nation;
and the Lord shall Reign over them in Mount Zion for ever. What are we to
understand by her that halteth, is best expressed by the Prophet Eijah, Mich.
4.6, 7. Zeph. 3.19. 1 Kings 18.21.

I will conclude then, that for them that have halted, or may halt, the Lord
has Mercy in Bank, and is willing to accept them, if they return to him again.

Perhaps they may never be after that, of any great Esteem in the House of God;
but if the Lord will admit them to Favor and Forgiveness: O exceeding and
undeserved Mercy! Ezekiel. 44.10 to 14.

Thou then that may be the Man, Remember this, that there is Mercy also for
thee: Return therefore to God and to his Son, who has yet in stone for thee,
and who will do thee good.

But perhaps thou will say he does not save all Revolters, and therefore
perhaps not me.

Answ. Art thou returning to God? If thou art returning, thou art the Man:
Return ye backsliding Children, and I will ^teal your Backsliding, Jer. 3.22.

Some as I said, that Revolt, are shot dead upon the Place; and for them, who
can help them? But for them that cry out of their Wounds, it is a sign they are
yet alive; and if they use the Means in time, doubtless they may be healed.

Christ Jesus has bags of Mercy that were never yet broken up or unsealed.
Hence it is said, he has Goodness laid up; things reserved in Heaven for his.
And if he breaks up one of these Bags, who can tell what he can do!

Hence his Love is said to be such as passes Knowledge, and that his Riches
are unsearchable. He has no body knows what; for no body knows who! He has by
him in store for such as seem in the view of all Men, to be gone beyond
Recovery. For this is the Text in plain, What Man or Angel could have thought
the Je^usalem-sinners had not yet been on this side of Impossibility of
enjoying Life and Mercy? Had thou seen their Actions and what horrible things
they did to the Son of God? Yea, how stoutly they backed what they did, with
Resolves and Endeavors to persevere, when they had killed his Person, against
his Name and Doctrine: And that there was not found among them, all that while,
as we read of, the least Remorse or Regret for these their doings Could thou
have imagined that Mercy would ever take hold of them, at least so soon! Nay
that they should of all the World, be counted those only meet to have it
offered to them in the very first place* For so my Text commands, saying,
Preach Repentance and Remission of Sins among all Nations, Beginning at
Jerusalem.

I tell you the thing is a Wonder, and must for ever stand for a Wonder among
the Sons of Men; It stands also for an everlasting Invitation and Allurement to
the biggest Sinners to come to Christ for Mercy.

Now, since in the Opinion of all Men, the Revolter is such a one; if he has as
I said before, any Life in him, let him take Encouragement to come again, that
he may live by Christ.

Eleventhly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners? Then let God's Ministers tell them so. There is an Incidence
in us, I know not how it does come about, when we are converted, to contemn
them tha^ are left behind. Poor Fools as we are, we forget that we our selves
were so, Tit. 3.2.3. But would it not become us better, since we have tasted
that the Lord is gra^^ous, to carry it toward them so; that we ^ay give them
convincing ground to be^^eve, that we have found that Mercy which ^so sets open
the Door for them to come and partake with us.

Ministers I say should do thus, both by their Doctrine, and in all other
Respects.

Austerity does not become us neither in Doctrine nor in Conversation: We our
^^lves live by Grace; Let us give as we re^eive, and labor to persuade our
Fellow-^^nners which God has left behind us to ^llow after, that they may
partake with us ^f Grace. We are saved by Grace, let us ^^ve like them that are
gracious. Let all ^ur things (to the World) be done in Charity toward them:
Pity them, pray or them, be Familiar with them for their ^ood. Let us lay aside
our foolish, worldly ^arnal Grandeur; let us not walk the ^treets, and have
such Behavour, as signify we are scarce for touching of the poor ^nes that are
left behind, no not with a pair of Tongs. It becomes not Ministers thus to ^o.

Remember your Lord, he was familiar with Publicans and Sinners to a Proverb.
Behold a gluttonous Man, and a Wine-^ibber; a Friend of Publicans and Sinners,
Mat. 11.19. The first part concerning his ^luttonous eating and drinking, to be
sure was an horrible slander; but for the other, nothing was ever spoken truer
of him by the World. Now why should we lay Hands cross on this Text, that is,
choose good Victuals and love the sweet Wine better than the Salvation of the
poor Publican? Why not familiar with Sinners, provided we hate their Spots and
Blemishes, and seek that they may be healed of them.

Why not Fellowly with our Carnal Neighbors, if we take occasion to do so,
that we may drop and be yet distilling some good Doctrine upon their Souls? Why
not go to the poor Man's House, and give him a Penny, and a Scripture to think
upon? Why not send for the poor to fetch away at least the Fragments of thy
Table, that the Bowels of thy Fellow sinner may be refresht as well as thine.

Ministers should be Exemplary: But I am an inferior Man, and must take heed of
too much meddling, But might I, I would meddle with them, with their Wives, and
with their Children too. I mean no^ this of all, but of them that deserve it,
though I may not name them.

But I say, let Ministers follow the steps of their Lord, who by Words and
Deeds showed his Love to the Salvation of the World in such a Carriage, as
declared him to pre^er their Salvation before his own private Concern: For we
are commanded to follow his Steps, who did no Sin neither was Guile sound in
his Mouth.

And as I have said concerning Ministers, ^o I say to all the Brethren, carry
it so, that all the World may see that indeed you ^re the Sons of Love.

Love your Savior; yea, show one to another that you love him, not only by a
^eeming love of Affection but with the Love ^f Duty. Practical Love is best.
Many love Christ with nothing but their Tongue. Alas! Christ Jesus the Lord,
must not be put of thus. He that has any Commandment, and keeps them, says
he he it is that loves me, Joh. 14.11.

Practical Love which stands in self-denial, in Charity to my Neighbor, and a
Patient enduring of Affliction for his Name. This is counted Love.

Right Love to Christ, is that which carries in it a provoking Argument to
others of the Brethren, Heb. 10.24.

Should a Man ask me how he should know that he loved the Chiidren of God? The
best answer I could give him, would be in the Words of the Apostle John; By
this says he, we know we love the Children of God, when we love God and keep
his Commandments, 1 John 5.2.

Love to God and Christ is then shown, when we are tender of his Name, and then
we show our selves tender of his Name, when we are afraid to break any, the
least of his Commandments. And when we are here, then do we show our Love to
our Brother also.

Now we have Obligation sufficient thus to do, for that our Lord loved us, and
gave himself for us, to deliver us from Death, that we might live through him.

The World, when they hear the doctrine that I have asserted and handled in
this little Book, to wit, That Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the
first place to the biggest Sinners; will be apt, because themselves are
Unbelievers, to think that this is a Doctrine that leads to Looseness, and that
gives Liberty to the Flesh; but if you that believe love your Brethren, and
your Neighbors truly, and as you should, you will put to Silence the Ignorance
of such foolish Men, and stop their Mouths from speaking Evil of you.

And I say, Let the love of Christ constrain to this: Who deserves our Heart,
our Mouth, our Life, our Goods so much as Jesus Christ who has bought us to
himself by his Blood, to this very end, that we should be a peculiar People
Zealous of good Works?

There is nothing more seemly in the World, then to see a Christian walk as
becomes the Gospel; nor any thing more unbecoming a reasonable Creature, than
to hear a Man say, I believe in Christ, and yet see in his Life Debauchery and
Profaneness: Such Men should be counted the basest of Men: Such Men should be
counted ^y all, unworthy of the name of a Chris^ian, and should be shunned by
every good Man, as such who are the very Plague of Profession.

For so it is written, we should carry it toward them: Whosoever has a form of
Godliness, and denis the Power thereof, from such we must turn away.

It has oft-times come into my Mind to ask by what Means it is, that the Gospel
Profession should be so haunted with loose and carnal Gospelers? And I could
never arrive to better Satisfaction in the matter than this: Such Men are made
Professors by the Devil, and so by him put among the rest of the Godly. A
certain Man had a fruitless Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard; but by whom was
it planted there? Even him that sowed the Tares, his own Children among the
Wheat, Luke 13.6. Mat. 1.37, to 40. And that was the Devil. But why does the
Devil do thus: Not of love to them, but to make of them Offenses and
stumbling blocks to others. For he knows that a loose professor in the Church,
does more mischief to Religion than ten can do to it that are in the World.

Was it not, think you, the Devil that stirred up the Damsel that you read of
in Acts 16. to cry out, These are the Servants of the most high God that show
unto us the way of Salvation; Yes, it was as is evident, for Paul was grieved
to hear it. But why did the Devil stir up her to cry so? But because that was
the way to blemish the Gospel, to make the World think that it came from the
same hand as did her Sooth-saying and Witchery, v. 16, 17, 18. Holiness O Lord,
becomes thy House for ever.

Let therefore, whoever they be that profess the Name of Christ, take heed that
that scandal not profession which they make of him, since he has so graciously
offered us, as we are Sinners of the biggest size, in the first place his Grace
to save us.

Having thus far spoken of the Riches of the Grace of Christ, and of the the
Freeness of his Heart to embrace the Jerusalem-sinners, it may not be amiss to
give you yet as a Caution, an Intimation of one thing, namely, That this Grace
and Freeness of the Heart is limited to Time and Day, the which whosoever
overstandeth, shall Perish notwithstanding.

For, as a King who of Grace, sends out to his rebellious People, an Offer of
Pardon, if they accept thereof by such a Day, yet beheadeth or hangs, those
that come not in for Mercy until the Day or Time be past. So Christ Jesus has
set the Sinner a Day of Salvation, and acceptable times; but he who stands
out, or goes on in Rebellion beyond that time, is like to come off with the
loss of his Soul. 2 Cor. 6.2. Heb. 3.13, 16 to 19. Chap. 4 7. Luke 19.31.42.

Since therefore things are thus, it may. be convenient here to touch a little
upon these Particulars.

First, That this day or time thus limited when it is considered with Reference
to this or that Man, is oft-times undiscerned by the Person concerned therein;
and always is kept secret as to the shutting up thereof.

And this in the Wisdom of God is thus to the end, no Man when called upon,
should put off turning to God to another time: Now and to Day, is that, and
only that which is revealed in Holy Writ, Psalm. 50.22. Eccles. 12.1. Heb. 3.13,
16.

And this shows us the desperate hazards which those Men run, who when
Invitation or Conviction attends them, put off turning to God to be saved till
another, and a^ they think a more fit Season and time; for many by so doing
defer this to Day, till the Day of God's Patience and long suffering is ended:
and then, for their Prayers and Cries after Mercy, they receive nothing but
Mocks, and are laughed at by the God of Heaven, Prove. 1.20 to 29. Isa. 1.65.12
to 17. Chap. 66.4. Zech. 7.11, 12.13.

Secondly, Another thing to be considered is this, namely, that the Day of
God's Grace with some Men begins sooner, and also sooner ends, than it does
with others. Those at the first Hour of the Day, had their Call sooner than
they who were called upon to turn to God, at the Sixth Hour of the Day; yea,
and they who were hired at the Third Hour, had their Call sooner than they who
were called at the Eleventh, Matthew. 20.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

1. The Day of God's Patience began with Ishmael, and also ended before he was
twenty Years old. At thirteen Years of Age he was Circumcised; and the next
Year after Isaac was born, and then Ishmael was fourteen Years old: Now that
Day that Isaac was weaned, that Day was Ishmael rejected; and suppose that
Isaac was three Years old before he was weaned; that Day was but the
seventeenth Year of Ishmael, wherefore then the Day of God's Grace was ended
with him betimes, Genesis 27.24.25. Chap. 21.2. to 10. Gal. 4.30.

2. Cain's Days ended with him betimes, for after God had rejected him, he
lived to beget many Children, and built a City, and to do many other things.

But alas, all that while he was a Fugative and a Vagabond. Nor carried he any
thing with him after the Day of his Rejection was come, but this doleful
Language in his Conscience, from God's Face shall I be hid. Genesis 4.10 to 14.

3. Esau through his Extravigancies, would needs go sell his Birth right, not
fearing (as other confident Fools) but that yet the Blessing would still be
his, after which he lived many Years, but all of them under the Wrath of God,
as was when time came, made appear to his Destruction; for when be would have
inherited the B^essing, he was rejected, for he found no place of Repentance,
though he sought it carefully with Tears, Heb. 12.14, 15, 16,

Many Instances might be given as to such Tokens of the Displeasure of God,
against such as fool away, as the Wise Man has it, the Prize put into his Hand,
Prove. 17.16.

Let these things therefore be a further Caution to those that fit under the
glorious Sound of the Gospel, and hear of the Riches of the Grace of God in
Christ to poor Sinners.

To slight Grace, to despise Mercy, and to stop the Ear when God speaks, when
he speaks such great th^^gs so much to our Profit, is a great Provocation.

He offers, he calls, he wooes, he invites, he prays, he beseeches us, in
this Day of his Grace to be reconciled to him; yea, and has provided for us the
Means of Reconciliation himself: Now this despised must needs be provoking, and
it is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the living God.

But some Men may say unto me, Fain I would be saved, fain I would be saved by
Christ; But I fear this Day of Grace is past, and that I shall perish,
notwithstanding the exceeding Riches of the Grace of God.

Answer, To this Doubt I would answer several Things.

First, With respect to this Day.

Secondly, With respect to thy Desires.

Thirdly, With respect to thy Fears.

First, With respect to the Day: That is Whether it be ended with a Man or no?

1. Art thou jogged and shaken, and molested at the hearing of the Word? Is thy
Conscience awakened and convinced that thou art at present in perishing State,
and that thou have need to cry to God for Mercy? This is a hopeful Sign that
this Day of Grace is not past with thee. For usually they that are past Grace,
are also in their Conscience past feeling, being seared with a hot Iron, Ephesians.
4.18, 19. 1. Tim. 4.1, 2.

Consequently those past Grace, must be such as are denied the awakening Fruits
of the Word Preached. The Dead that hear, says Christ, shall live, at least
Christ has not quite done with them, the Day of God's Patience is not at an end
with them, Joh. 5.25.

2. Is there in thy more retired Condition, Arguings, Struglings, and Strivings
with thy Spirit, to persuade thee off the Vanity of what vain Things thou
love, and to win thee in thy Soul, to a Choice of Christ Jesus, and his
heavenly things? Take heed and Rebel not, for the Day of God's Grace and
Patience will not be past with thee, till he says, His Spirit shall not strive
no more with thee: For then the Woe comes, when he shall depart from them, and
when he says to the means of Grace, Let them alone, Hos. 4.17. Chap. 9.12.

3. Art thou troubled in the Night Seasons with Dreams about thy State, and
that thou art in Danger of being lost? Have thou Heart-shaking Apprehensions
when dead Sleeps fall upon thee; of Hell, Death and Judgment to come? These are
Signs that God has not wholly left thee, or cast the behind his Back for ever.
For God speaks once, yea twice, yet Man perceives it not, in a Dream, in a
Vision of the Night, when deep Sleep falls upon Man in slumbring upon the Bed;
when he opens the Ears of Men, and seals their Instruction, that he may
withdraw Man from his Purpose, (his sinful Purposes) and hide Pride from Man,
Job 33.14, 15, 16, 17.

All this while God has not left the Sinners, nor is come to the end of his
Patience toward him, but stands at least with the Door of Grace a jar in his
Hand, as being loath as yet to bolt it against him.

4. Art thou followed with Affliction, and do thou hear God's angry Voice in
thy Afflictions? Does he send with the Affliction an Interpreter to show thee
thy Vileness, and why or wherefore the Hand of God is upon thee, and upon what
thou have; to wit, that it is for thy sinning against him, and that thou
might he turned to him? If so, thy Summer is not quite ended, thy Harvest is
not yet quite over and gone, Take heed, stand out no longer, least he cause
Darkness, and least thy Feet stumble upon the dark Mountains; and least while
you look for Light, he turn it into the Shadow of Death, and make it gross
Darkness, Jer. 8.20. Chap. 13.15, 16, 17.

5. Art thou crossed, disappointed, and waylaid, and overthrown in all thy
foolish* Ways and Doings? This is a sign God has not quite left thee, but that
he still waits upon thee to turn thee. Consider I say, has he made a Hedge and
a Wall to stop thee? Has he crossed thee in all thou put thy Hand unto?
Take it as a Call to turn to him, for by his thus doing he shows he has a Mind
to give thee a better Portion. For usually when God gives up Men and resolves
to let them alone in the broad Way, he gives them Rope, and lets them have
their Desires in all hurtful Things, Hos. 2.6 to 14. Psalm. 73.4 to 12. Romans
12.9.

Therefore take heed to this also, that thou strive not against this Hand of
God* but betake thy self to serious Enquiry into the Causes of this Hand of God
upon thee, and incline to think it is because the Lord would have thee look to
that which is better than what thou would satisfy thyself withal. When God
had a Mind to make the Prodigal go Home to his Father, he sent a Famine upon
him, and denied him a Belly full of the Husks which the Swine did eat. And
observe it, now he was in his Strait, betook himself to Consideration of the
Good that there was in his Father's House; yea, he resolved to go Home to his
Father; and his Father dealt well with him, received him with Music and
Dancing, because he had received him safe and sound, Luke 15.

6. Have thou any enticing Touches of the Word of God upon thy Mind? Does as it
were some holy Word of God give a Glance upon thee, cast a Smile upon thee, let
fall, though it be but one Drop of its Favor upon thy Spirit; yea, though it stays
but one Moment with thee? O! then the Day of Grace is not past! The Gate of
Heaven is not shut! nor God's Heart and Bowels withdrawn from thee as yet. Take
heed therefore, and beware that thou make much of the heavenly Gift, and of
that good Word of God, of which he has made thee taste. Beware, I ^ay, and take
heed, there may be a falling ^way for all this; but I say as yet, God has ^ot
lost thee, as yet he has not cast thee off, ^ Heb. ^, 1 to 8.

Secondly, With respect to thy Desires what are they? Would thou be saved?
Would thou be saved with a thoro' Salvation? Would thou be saved from
Guilt and Filth too? Would thou be the Servant of thy Savior? Art thou
indeed weary of the Service of thy old Master the the Devil, Sin and the World?
And has these Desires put thy Soul to the Flight? Have thou through Desires
betaken thy self to thy Heels? Do fly to him that is as a Savior from the
Wrath to come, for Life? If these be thy Desires, and if they be unfeigned,
fear not: Thou art one of those Run-aways which God has commanded our Lord to
receive, and not to send thee back to the Devil thy Master again, but to give
thee a Place in his House, even the Place in his House, which likes the best.
Thou shall not deliver to his Master, says he, the Servant which escaped from
his Master unto thee. He shall dwell with thee, even among you, in that Place
which he shall choose, in one of thy Gates where it likes him best, thou shall
not oppress him, Deuteronomy. 23.15, 16.

This is a Command to the Church, consequently to the Head of the Church, for
all Commands from God come to her through her Head. Whence I conclude, that as
Israel of old was to receive the runaway Servant, who escaped from a neathe^
^^ster to them; and should not dare to ser^^ him back to his Master again: So
Christ's Church now, and consequently Christ himself, may not, will not refuse
that Soul that has made his Escape from Sin, Satan, the World and Hell unto
him; but certainly let him dwell in his House among his Saints, in that Place
which he shall choose even where it likes him best: For he say in another
Place, And him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. In no wise, let
his Crimes be what ^hey will, either for Nature, Multitude, or the Attendance
of aggravating Circumstances.

Wherefore if thy Desires be firm, sound, unfeigned, to become he saved of
Christ, and his Servant: Fear not, he will not, he will in no wise put thee
away, or turn thee over to thy old Master again.

Thirdly, As to thy Fears, whatsoever they are, let that be supposed which is
supposed before, and they are groundless, and so of no weight.

Object. But I am afraid I am not elect or chosen to Salvation, though you called
me Fool a little before, for so fearing.

Ans. Though Election is in order before calling, as to God, yet the Knowledge of
Calling must go before the Belief of my Election, as to my self; wherefore
Souls that doubt of the Truth of their effectual Calling, do but plunge
themselves into a deeper Labrynith of Confusion, that concern themselves with
their Election, I mean while they labor to know it before they prove their
Caning. Make your ca^ling, and so your Election sure, 2. Pet. 1.4 to 10.

Wherefore at present, lay the Thoughts of thy Election by, and ask (...) sel^
these Questions: Do I see my lost Condition? Do I see Salvation is no where but
^n Christ? Would I share in this Salvat^^n by Faith of him? And would I, as was
said before, be thoroughly saved, to wit, from the Filth, as well as from the
Guilt? Do I love Christ, his Father, his Saints, his Word and Ways? This is the
Way to prove we are Elect. Wherefore Sinner, when Satan or thine own Heart seek
to puzzle thee with Election, say thou, I cannot tend to talk of this Point
now, but stay till I know that I am called of God to the Fellowship of his Son,
and then I shall show you that I am Elect, and that my Name is written in the
Book of Life.

If poor distressed Souls would observe this Order, they might save themselves
the trouble of an unprofitable Labor, under these unreasonable and
Soul-sinking Doubts.

Let us therefore, upon the sight of our Wretchedness, fly and venturously leap
into the Arms of Christ, which are now as open to receive us into his Bosom, as
they w^^e when nailed to the Cross. This is coming to Christ for Life aright;
this is right running away from thy Master to him, as was said before. And for
this we have multitudes of Scriptures to support, encourage, and comfort us in
our so doing.

But now let him that does thus be sure to look for it, for Satan will be with
him to Morrow, to see if he can get him again to his old Service, and if he
cannot do that, then will he enter into Dispute with him, to wit, About whether
he be elect to Life, and called indeed to partake (...) this Christ, to whom he
is fled for S^^cour; or whether he comes to him of hi^ own presumptuous Mind:
Therefore w^ are bid, as to come, so to arm our selves with that Arm ^ur which
God has provided* that we may resist, quench, stand against, and withstand all
the fiery Darts of the Devil. Ephesians. 6.11 to 18.

I therefore thou find Satan in this Order to march against thee, remember
that thou had this Item about it; and betake thy self to Faith and good
Courage* and be sober and hope to the End.

O^^^ct. But how if I should have sinned (...) ^n unpardonable, or that Sin
against (...) ^oly Ghost.

Answ. If thou have thou art lost for ever. But yet, before it is concluded by
thee that thou have so sinned, know that they that would be saved by Jesus
Christ through Faith in his Blood, cannot be counted for such.

1. Because of the Promise, for that must not be frustrated: And that says, And
him that comes to Christ, he will in no wise cast out. And again, whosoever
will let him take the Waters of Life freely, John 6 27. Rev. 21.6. Chap. 22.17.

But I say, how can these Scriptures be fulfilled, if he that would indeed be
saved as before, has sinned the Sin unpardonable; the Scriptures must not be
made void, neither must the Truth of them be ^^st to the Ground. Here Is a
Promise, and here is a Sinner; a Promise that says, he shall not be cast out
that comes, and the Sinner comes, wherefore he must be received: Consequently,
he that comes to Christ for Life, has not, cannot have sinned that Sin for
which there is no Forgiveness.

And this might suffice for Answer to any coming Soul, that fears he has sinned
the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

2. But again, he that has sinned, the Sin against the Holy Ghost, cannot com^
has no Heart to come, can by no me^ ^ ^e made willing to come to Jesus C^ ^
Life; for that he has received such a^ Opinion of him, and of his things, as
deters and holds him back.

1. He counts this blessed Person, this Son of God, a Magician a Conjurer ^
Witch; or one that did, when he was ^ ^he World, what he did by the Power and
Spirit of the Devil, Mat. 9 35. Mat. 12 24, 25, etc. Mat. 22. to 30. Now he
that has this Opinion of this Jesus, cannot be willing to cast himself at his
Foot for Life, or to come to him as the only Way to God and to Salvation. And
hence it is said again, that such an one puts him to open Shame, and treads
him under Foot; that is, by contemning, reproaching, villifying, and despising
of him* as if he were the vilest one, o^ the greatest Cheat in the World: An^
has therefore, as his Esteem of him, ^^^ed him accursed; crucified him to
himself, or counted him one hanged, as on^ of the worst Malefactors, Heb. 6.6.
an^ Chap. 10.29. 1 Cor. 12.3.

2. His Blood which is the meritorious Cause of Man's Redemption, even the
Blood of an everlasting Covenant h^ counts the unholy Thing, or that which
has no more Virtue in i^ to save a Soul from Sin, than has the Blo^^ of a Dog,
Heb. 10 29. For when the ^postle says, he counts it an ^nho'^ Thi^^^ he means,
he makes it of le^ Val^^ ^an that of a Sheep or a Crun^ (...) were clean
according to the Law ^ therefore must mean that his Blood, was of no more Worth
to him in ^ Account, than was the Blood of a ^ an Ass or a Swine, which always
was ^ Sacrifices, rejected by the God of Heaven as unholy or unclean.

Now he who has no be^ter Esteem of Jesus Christ, and of his Death and Blood
will not be persuaded to come to him for Salvation.

3. But further, all this must be done against Tokens to prove to the contrary,
or after the shining of Gospel Light upon the Soul, or some considerable
Profession of him, as the Messiah, or that he was the Savior of the World.

1. lt must be done against the manifest Tokens to prove the contrary; and thus
the reprobate Jews committed it, when they saw the Works of God which put forth
themselves in him, and called them the Works of the Devil and Beelzebub.

2. It must be done against some shining Light of the Gospel upon them. And
thus it was with Judas, and with those who after they were enlightened and had
tasted and felt something of the Powers of the World to come, fell away (...)
the Faith of him, and put him to open ^hame (...) Disgrace, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.

3. It must also be done aft^ ^ position to one's own open ^ him. For if after
they have ^ Pollution of the World through the ^ ledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ they are again entangled therein and overcome; the latter end is
worse with them than the Beginning; it had been better for them not to have
known the Way of Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the
holy Commandment (which is the Word of Faith, delivered unto them.

4. All this must be done openly before Witnesses, in the face, sight and view
of the World, by Word and Act: This i^ the Sin that is unpardonable, and he
tha^ has thus done, can never, it is impossible he should be ever renewed ag^ ^
to R^pentance, and that for a double (...) First, such an one does say, he will
(...) and of him God says he shall not have the Benefit of Salvation by him.

Object. But if this b^ the Sin unpardonable, why is it called the Sin against
the Holy Ghost, and not rather the Si^ against the Son of God?

Answ. It is called, the Sin against the Holy Ghost; because such count the
Works he did, which were done by the Spirit of God, the Works of the Spirit the
Devil. Also because all such ^ (...) jesus the Lord, they do (...) (...) that
Testimony which the (...) given of him in the ho^ (...) ^r the Scriptures are
the (...), the Holy Ghost, as in all (...), so in that Testimony they bear of
the Person, of the Works, Sufferings, Resurrection and of Jesus Christ.

Sinner, This is the Sin against the Holy Ghost. What say thou? Have thou
committed it, nay I know thou would be saved by Christ. Yea it is impossible
thou should have done it, if thou would he saved by him: No Man can
desired to be saved by him whom he yet judges to be an Impostor, a Magician, a
Witch. No Man can hope for Redemption by that Blood which he yet count^^^ an
unholy Thing. Nor will God (...) such an one to repent, who (...) after Light
and Profession of him, thus horribly, and Devil like, contemned and trampled
upon him.

It Is true, Words and Wars, and Blasphemies against this Son of Man are
pardonable; but then they must be done ignorantly, and in Unbelief. And all
blasphemous Thoughts, are likewise such as may be passed by, if the Soul
afflicted wi^h them, indeed is sorry for them. Tim. 1.13.14, 15. Mark 3.28.

^^ll but this Sinner, all but (...) ^d had said he will forgive one (...) ^d
been undeserved Grace: But (...) ^e says he will pardon all but one, this is
^race to the height. Nor is that one unpardonable otherwise, but because the
Savior that should save them, is rejected and put away.

Jacob's Ladder, Christ is Jacob's Lad^er that reaches up to Heaven, and he
that refuses to go this Ladder thither, will scarce by other Means get up so
high: There is none other name given under Heaven among Men, whereby we must be
saved. There is none other Sacrifice for Sin than his (...) and he only, i^ the
Mediator that ^econcileth Men to God. And Sinner, if thou would ^e^saved by
him, his Benefit's are thine, yea, though thou art a great
Jerusalem-Transgressor.

FINIS.

