The Declaration, Dying Warning and Advice of Rebekah Chamblit
A Young Woman Aged near Twenty-seven Years, Executed (...) September 27th.
1733. according to the Sentence passed upon her at the Superior Cour^ holden
there for the County of (...), in August last, being th^n found Guilty of
Felony, in concealing the B^rth of her spurious Male Infant, of which she was
Delivered when alone the Eighth Day of May last, and was afterward ^ound Dead,
(...) will more fully appear by the following Declaration, which was carefully
taken from her (...) Mouth.
BEING under the awful App^ehension^ of my Execution now in a few Hours; and
being desirous to do all the Good I can, before I enter the Eternal Worl^, I
now in the fear of GOD, give this Declaration and Warning to the Living.

I Was very tenderly brought up, and well Instruct^d in my Father's House, till
I was Twelve Years of Age; but alas, my Childhood (...) off in vanity.
However, as I grew in Years, my Youth was under very sensible Impressions from
the SPIRIT of GOD; and I was awakened to seek and obtain Baptism, when I was
about Sixteen Years of Age; and lived for some time with a strictness somewhat
a^swerable to the Obligations I was thereby brought under. But within two or
three Years after this, I was led away i^ to the Sin of Uncleannes^, from which
ti^e I think I may d^te my Ruin for this World. After this* I became again more
watchful, and for several Years kep^ my self from the like Pollution^, until
those (...) which I am now to suffer.

And as it (...) be necessary, so do^btless it will be expected of me, that I
give the Wo^ld (...) particular account of that great Sin, with the
aggravations of it, which has brought me to this Shameful Death: And
accordingly in the fear of GOD, at whose awful Tribunal I am immediately to
appear, I solemnly declare as follows*

That on Saturday the Fifth Day of May last, being then something more than
Eight Months gon^ with Child, as I was about my Household Business reaching some
San^ from out of a large Ca^k, I received considerable hurt, which put me into
great Pain, and so I continued till the Tuesday following; in all which time I
am not sensible I ^elt any Life or Motion in the Child within me; when, (...)
the (...) Tuesday the Eighth Day of May, I was D^liver'd when alo^e of a Male
Infa^t; in whom I did not p^rceive Life; but ^^ill uncertain of Life ^n ^t, I
threw it into the Vault about two or three Minutes after it was born; (...), I
say, whether it was a living or dead Child* tho, I confess (...) probable there
was Life in it, and some Circum^^ances seem to (...) it. I therefore own the
Ju^tice of GOD and (...) in my Condemnation, and take Shame to my self, as I
have none but my self to Blame* and am so^ry for any rash Expressions I have at
any time uttered since my Condem^ation; and I am verily pe^swaded there is no
Place ^n the World, where there is a more st^ict ^egard to Justice than in this
Province.

And now as a Sou^ going into Etern^^^, I most earnestly and solemnly Warn all
(...), particularly YOUNG PEOPLE, and more especially those of my own Sex,
(...) the Sins which their Age peculiarly (...) them to; and as the Sin of
Uncleanness has brought me unto these distressing Circumstances, I would with
the greatest Importunity C^^tion and Warn against it, being p^rswaded of the
(...) of that Sin in this Town and Land. I tho^^ht my self as secure, a little
more than a Year ago, as many of you now do; but by woeful Experience I have
found, that Lust when it has conceived bri^geth forth Sin, and Sin when it is
^^nished bringet^ forth Death; it exposes the Soul not only to Temporal, but to
Eternal Death. And therefore as a Dying Person* let me call upon you to forsake
the foolish and live: Do not accompany with those you know to be such* and if
Sinners en^ice you do not cons^nt. I am sensible there are many Houses in this
Town, that may be called Houses of Uncleanness, and Places of dreadful
Temptations to this and all other Sins. O shun them, for they lead down to the
Chambers of Death and Eternal Misery.

My misp^^ce of (...) as a heavy burden upon me; that when I might have gone to
the House of GOD, I have been (...), and suffered a small matter to keep me
from i^* What would I now give, had I better improved the Lord'^ Day! I tell
you, ve^^ly, your (...) Sabbath^ will sit heavy upon you, when you come into
the near prospect of Death and Eternity.

The Sin of Lying I have to bewail, and would earnestly caution against; not
that I have took so great a pleasure in Lying; but I have often done so to
conceal my Sin: Certainly you had be^^er suffer Shame and Disgrace, yea the
greatest Punishment, than to hide and conceal your Sin, by Lying. How much
better had it been for me, to have confessed my Sin, than by h^din^ of it to
provoke a holy GOD, thus to suffer it to find me out. But I hope I heartily
desire to bless GOD, that even in this way, He is th^^ entering into Judgment
with me; for I have often thought, had I been let alone to go on undiscovered
in my Sins, I might have provoked (...) in to leave me to a (...) of Rebellion,
that would have (...) me for a more sudden, and everlasting Destruction; and am
fully convinced of this, that I should have had no solid ^ase or quiet in my
mind, but the Guilt of this ^ndis^over'd Sin lying upon my Conscience, would
have been a (...) Rack unto me all my Days; where ^s ^ow I hope GOD has
discovered to me in some measure the evil of this, and all my oath (...)
enabled me to repent of them in (...) and (...)* and made me earne^tly desire
and plead with (...) for pardon and clea^sing in the p^eci^us Blood of the
REDEEMER of lo^^ and perishing (...): And (...) think I can (...), I have had
mo^e comfort and sat^^faction within the Wall^ of this Prison, than ever I ha^
in the wa^s of Sin among my vain Compa^ion^, and think I wou^d not for a World,
nay for ten Thousand Worlds have my liberty in Sin again, and be in the same
Condition I was in before I came into this Place.

I had (...) advantage of living in several religiou^ Fam^lies; but alas, I
disregarded the Instructions and War^ings I there had, which is now a
bitterness to me; and so it will be to those of you who are thus fa^oured, but
go on unmindful of GOD, and deaf to all the Reproofs and Admonitions that are
given you for the good of your Souls. And I would advise those of my own Sex
especially, to choose to go into religious Families, where the Worship and Fear
of GOD is ma^^tained, and submit your selves to the Orde^^ and Government of
them.

In my younger Years I maintained a constant course of Secret Pray^^ for some
time; but afterward neglecting the ^ame, I found by experience, that upon my
thus leaving GOD, He was provoked to (...) me, and at length suffered me to
fall into that great and (...) Si^ that has brought me to thi^ Death: Mind me,
I first l^ft GOD, and then He (...) me: I therefore sol^mnly call upon YOUNG
PEOPLE to cherish the Convictio^s of GOD's Holy SPIRIT, and be sure keep up a
constant course of fervent Secret Prayer.

And now I am just entering unto the Eternal World, I do in the fear of GOD, and
before Witnesses, call upon our YOUNG PEOPLE in particular, to secure an
Interest in the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and in those precio^^ Benefits He has
purchased for His People; for surely the ^avour of GOD, through CHRIST, is more
worth than a whole World: And O what Comfort will this yield you when you come
to that awful Day and Hour I am now arriving unto. I must tell you the World
appears to me vain and empty, nothing like what it did in my part Life, my Days
of Sin and Vanity, and as doubtless it appears now to you. Will you be
persuaded by me to that which will yield you the best Satisfaction and Pleasure
here, and which will prepare you for the more abundant Pleasu^es of GOD's Right
Hand for evermore.

Signed and Acknowleg'd in the Presence of diverse Witnesses, with a desire that
it may be published to the World, and read at the Place of Execution. Rebekah
Chamblit.
September 26th 1733
BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. (...) and T. (...), ^n Queen Street.


