A LETTER From a Gentleman in New York, to his Friend in London.
SIR,
I Received Your Letter by the way of Boston; You tell me you have seen the
Votes of our Assembly, and their generous Resolution of giving the Governor a
Thousand Pounds for his extraordinary Services: Had all the Votes been
Published as they were Voted (which of right they ought to have been) you would
have also seen, that they Resolved to give him but Seven Hundred and Fifty
Pounds, and I am ashamed to tell you how they came to add the other Two Hundred
and Fifty.

As I am one that wish well to my Countrymen, I Will endeavor to convince you
that they are not so much to blame as you imagine.

The People of this Province have always paid the greatest Regard to His
Majesty's Representative, and I am sorry to say, that they have too often made
concessions not so beneficial to the Country.

Our Governor's great Services in stopping of the Sugar Bill, were set forth
in such a Manner* that I don't see which way they could refrain from drawing
the Purse-strings of their Constituents; They were told, He fetched Lords one
hundred Miles out of the Country to stop the Bill, That he stayed in England
three Months longer than he needed to have done, only for the Benefit of the
Province, That had he come away, the Bill would have Passed, to the entire ruin
of the Country; with many other Things too long to commit to Paper.

He also wisely took care not to communicate the following Instructions, though
he had express Orders so to do, Viz.

Whereas several Inconveniences have arisen to Our Governments in the
Plantations, by Gifts and Presents made to Our Governors by the General
Assemblies: For Prevention whereof for the Future, It is Our express Will and
Pleasure, That neither You Our Governor, nor any Governor, Lieut. Governor,
nor Commander in Chief, or President of the Council of Our said Province of
New York for the time being, do give Your or Their Consent to the passing any
Law or Act, for any Gift or Present to be made to You or Them by the Assembly;
And that neither You nor They do receive any Gift or Present from the Assembly,
or others on any account, or in any manner whatsoever, upon pain of Our highest
Displeasure, and of being recalled from that Our Government.

And the other Instruction is, And We do further Direct and Require, that the
Declaration of Our Royal Will and Pleasure in the foregoing Instruction, be
communicated to the Assembly at their first Meeting after Your arrival in Our
said Province, and entered in the Register of Our Council and Assembly, that
all Persons whom it may concern may govern themselves accordingly.

Now no Man of Person can imagine, if the Assembly had seen these Instructions,
they would ever have offered a Present, when the Accepting of it upon any
terms, must have lost him his Government: Besides if you will observe, the
Assembly have taken care so to Resolve it, that they may be clear of any blame
by leaving of it to the Concurrence of the Council, who without dispute must
know all his Instructions, at least those where their Advice and Consent is
necessary, as it is in this case, as you will observe by the following
Instruction, viz. You are forthwith to communicate unto Our said Council, such
and so many of these Our Instructions wherein their Advice and Consent is
mentioned to be requisite; as likewise all such others from time to time, as
You shall find convenient for Our Service to be imparted; therefore it is hoped
they cannot concur.

Perhaps his present Excellency may not have these Instructions, but I have the
greatest reason to believe he has, because all the former Governors have had
them from the Earl of Clarendon down to Col. Montgomerie.

Some who pretend to be Courtiers, say, That the Governor never designed to
take any Money after that manner, That his reason for ^e^ting of the Assembly
into such a Resolution, was only to show his Friends at Home, that the People
here were of so generous a disposition, as to endeavor to force Money into his
Pocket against the express Orders of the KING his Master.

Thus you see, Sir, we are Honest though Ignorant, and always ready to support
Government, if we can but have the enjoyment of our Liberties and Properties.

As you have been long a Member of the House of Commons, and must know the
Interest of the Nation, I hope the Sugar Bill will meet with all the Opposition
in your Power. According to your Desire, I shall let you know from time to time
how we Act in this part of the World* what relates to the Payment of the
Troops, you shall have a just and true Account of by the next Conveyance, and
in the mean time, I am,

Sir, Your most Humble Servant, P P.

America: Printed in the Year 1733.


