The Opinion and Argument of the Chief Justice of the Province of New York,
concerning the Jurisdiction of the supreme Court of the said Province, to
determine Causes in a Course of Equity.
The Second Edition Corrected and Amended.
To his Excellency WILLIAM COSBY, Esquire Captain, General, and Governor in Chief,
of the Provinces of New York, New-Jersie, and Territories thereon depending in
America, Vice Admiral of the same, and Colonel in his Majesty's Army, etc. May
it please Your Excellency;
IN Obedience to your Commands, by Fredrick Moris Esquire deputy Secretary, to send
you a Copy of what I read in the Supreme Court, concerning its having a
Jurisdiction to determine Causes in a Course of Equity, and, a second Message
by him, to give it under my Hand, -- I send you not only what I read, but what
I said on that Head, as far as I can charge my Memory; what was said was spoken
before a numerous Auditory, among which were the Grand Jury for the City and
County of New York, and several other Persons of Distinction. I have been told
(but how truly I know not) that it has been represented to Your Excellency,
that I would not suffer the King's Council to speak: If such an Account has
been given you? it is not true. Not only the Kings Council, but every Body else
that had an Inclination to speak on that Head, had free Liberty to say what
they thought proper, and a Gentleman that practiced at the Bar adressed
himself to the Court as an Amicus Curioe, though he was then concerned for his
Client, to support the Jurisdiction of the Court in a Course of Equity, which
at that Time was unknown to me. I choose this public Method to prevent as much
as I can any other Misrepresentation, and what I said is as follows, viz.

MY SON some Time since informed me, that in this Case of Van Dam's there was a
Plea to the Jurisdiction of this Court, which I understood to be to its
Jurisdiction of determining Matters in a Course of Equity; upon which I took
some Pains to inquire a little into the Matter: But upon hearing the (...) I
find it to be very different from what I understood it to be. And though from the
Term Plea made use of, it seems contradictory; because ex vi termini, a Plea in
a Court supposes the Persons to whom it is submitted (...) to determine whether
it be good or not, and should rather, I think, come by way of Exception than
Plea; yet this being rather a Dispute about Words than Things; I am not for
over ruling of it without hearing, because I think every Man that applies to
this or any Court has a Right to plead what he thinks most pro^er for his own
Defense* and also a Right to be heard, and offer Arguments in Maintenance of
such Plea. As to the Point which has been spoken to, viz. Whether this Court
has any Jurisdiction to determine in a Course of Equity? There will naturally
arise several Questions, upon the well discussing of which, this Affair may be
put in a tolerable clear Light. But before I state these Questions, we are to
observe.

First, That in the Acts of Assembly establishing a Supreme Court, and in the
Ordinances afterward made by the Governor and Council only, it is said There
shall be held and kept at the City of New York, a supreme Court of Judicature:
Which supreme Court is hereby fully empowered to have Cognizance of all Pleas
civil, criminal and mixed, as fully and amply, to all Intents and (...)
whatsoever, as the Court of King's Bench, Common Pleas and Exchequer within His
Majesty's Kingdom of England have or ought to have. So that our supreme Court
by the Acts when in Force, or by the Ordinance afterward, neither was nor is
three Courts, viz. a Court of King's Bench, a Court of CommonPleas, and a Court
of Exchequer, But one Court, styled a Supreme Court: Which one supreme Court is
by the said Ordinance empowered to have Cognizance of all Pleas, etc. as fully
to all Intents, etc. as the three Courts there mentioned have in England.

Secondly, It will from thence follow, That whatever Judgments are given,
Whether interlocutory or final, must be the Judgments of that one Court, and
ought to be given when that one Court is sitting, or otherwise they cannot be
said, either in Law or propriety of Speech, to be the Judgments of that Court.

Thirdly, Whether that Court is, or is not, rightly constituted; yet, the
Judges in hearing, trying, and determining all Matters before them, are (by
their Commission) to hear, try and determine according to the Laws, Statutes
and Customs of England, and the Laws and Usages of the Provinc of New York, not
being repugnant thereto. So that the Judges (according to their Commissions)
are to have no Regard to the Laws and Usages of the Province of New York
(whatever they be) if they happen to be repugnant to the Laws, Statutes and
Customs of England, and therefore,

Fourthly, If it should be admitted, that the King has Powers and Prerogatives
in America that he has not in England; and could act here contrary (or even
repugnant) to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of England; yet, since he has been
pleased to confine the Judges to determine according to the Laws, etc. of
England, and those here that are not repugnant to them; and has not thought fit
to make use of any such Powers and Prorogatives (if he has them?) or if he
should, has not thought fit to make them the Rules and Measures for the Judges
to determine by; they must (if they will not go beyond their Commissions) judge
and determine as they are by them directed to do. These Things being premised,
the Way seems to be pretty plain before us; and the Questions that naturally
arise upon this Head are these,

First, The Supreme Court being understood to be established by Ordinance of
the Governor and Council, under the Seal of this Province, exclusive of the
General Assembly, as are the Fees for the Practisers in it, the Question is,
Whether according to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of England (according to
which we must by our Commissions judge) the King can by his Letters Patent
erect a Court of Equity and establish Fees?

Second. (...) He has given any power, or (...) intended to give any Power to
His Governor and Council here to (...) Court of Equity, and establish Fees,
exclusive of the General Assembly of this Province?

Third. Whether in Fact according to (the Laws of England, or) any Law, Letters
Patent, or Ordinance now extant here, or that ever was since the Revolution,
there was a Court of Exchequer erected or meant or intended to be erected
(considered as a Court of Equity) in this Colony?

Fourth. Whether any less or other Authority than that of the whole Legislature
can (according to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of England, by which we are to
judge) erect a Court of Equity or establish Fees:

These are short and plain Questions; upon the Determination of them in a Court
of Judicature, especially the Supreme Court of this Province, the Freedom and
Welfare of the Inhabitants of it and their Posterity are, and will be very much
concerned.

As to the first Question, I believe I might safely challenge any Man, to show
any Law or Custom of England, or Book Case of allowed Authority, whereby the
King can solely by His Letters Patent (without being authorized by Act of
Parliament) erect a Court of Equity or establish Fees. The whole Current of all
the Law Cases, where that Matter is any way treated of being to the contrary:
And whenever the Question, Whether the King by His Letters Patent could erect a
Court of Equity, came into Debate (as it has very often) it has as often been
determined by the Judges, That he could not: And that all such Letters Patent
were void.

Though citing Authorities would seem needless on this Head, because, every Man
that has been at the Pains to read any Thing of the Law upon this Subject knows
what I say to be true; I shall however cite several for this Purpose, as

4 th Institute 97. In the Reign of Henry VIII. the Masters of Requests thought
(as they intended) to strengthen their Jurisdiction by Commission to heat and
determine Causes in Equity: But, those Commissions not being warranted by Law (
for no Court of Equity can be raised by Commission) soon vanished; for that it
had neither Act of Parliament not Prescription Time out of Mind to establish
it.

4 th Inst. 87. In the Case of Perrot, 26 and 27 of Eliz. it was resolved by
Wray Chief Justice, and the Court of Kings Bench, That the Queen could not
raise a Court of Equity by Letters Patents, -- and that there could be no Court
of Equity but by Act of Parliament, or by Prescription Time out of Mind of Man:
but the Queen might grant Power Tenere Placita or Conusance de Plea: For all
must judge according to one ordinary Rule of the common Law.

4 th Inst. 163. My Lord Coke speaking of Commissions, says, That Commissions
are like the Kings Writts, such are to be allowed which have Warrant of Law,
and continual Allowance in Courts of Justice: For all Commissions of new
Invention are against Law, until they have Allowance by Act of Parliament. And
he defines a Commission to be a Delegation by Warrant of an Act of Parliament
or others. And adds, Sapientis Judicis est cogitare, tantum sibi esse
permiss^^m, quantum commissium and creditum. And that it is a good Rule for all
Commissioners to hold the like, and ever to keep themselves within their
Commission.

4 th Inst. 248. My Lord Coke says, Note, a Court of Equity may be had by
Prescription, but cannot be raised by (...) as has been said.

4 th Inst. 242. A Commission without an Act of Parliament cannot raise a Court
of Equity, as has been often said before.

4 th Inst. 245. The Commission to the President and Council of the North, in
which were two Clauses, to determine secundum Legem and Consuetudinent (...)
Discretiones vestras audiendum and (...) (...) Debate in the 6th James, and
there clearly resolved those Clauses were against Law. Vid, lib, in Margin.

4 th Inst. 213. Hill. the 11th of James in Chancery, resolved by the Lord
Chancellor and Judges (among other Things) That the King cannot make any
Commission to hear and determine any Matter of Equity, but Matters of Equity
ought to be determined in the Court of Chancery, whose Jurisdiction therein
have had continual Allowance. This Case above of the Earl of Derby is reported
in 12 Coke 114. And though it is often said by my Lord Coke, That no Court of
Equity could be but by Act of Parliament or Prescription Time out Mind beyond
the Memory of Man; yet the having a Court of Equity, even by Prescription, is
made a Doubt of. See Hobarts Reports 63. and 2d Rolls Reports 109. Martin and
Marshal. And God^olt, who reports the same Case fol. 26^ tl. 360. says, It
was holden by the whole Court of Kings Bench, Mich. 13 th of James, That no Man
can hold a Court of Equity, viz. a Court of Chancery, by Prescription: And the
Reason assigned for it is, because, every Prescription is against common Right,
and a Chancery Court is founded upon common Right, and is by the common Law.
And Hobart 63. in the same Case reasoning upon that Point, seems to think the
Word [ Prescription] when used with respect to the High Court of Chancery
misapplyed: For (says the Book) though it be true that the Court of Chancery has
always been, and so in effect stands by a Prescription, yet that is not well
reasoned; for, in pleading any Thing done in Chancery, you do not begin your
Plea with a Prescription, as in the Inferior pretended Courts, but you plead a
Thing done in the Court of Chancery as you do all Things in the Court of Common
Pleas or Kings Bench: The Reason whereof is, that they are fundamental Courts,
as ancient as the Kingdon it self and known to the Laws; for, says he, all
Kingdoms in their Constitutions are with the Power of Justice, both according
to Law and Equity, both which being in the King as Sovereign, were after
settled in several Courts, as the Light being first made by God, was afterward
settled in the Sun and Moon. But (as he very remarkably adds) that Part of
Equity being opposite to regular Law, and in a Manner an arbitrary Disposition,
is still administered by the King himself and his Chancellor in his Name ab
initio, as a special Trust committed to the King, and not by him committed to
any other. This seems to give a Reason (if the Opinion of that great Lawyer be
true) why a Court of Equity cannot be raised by Grant, Commission or Letters
Patent. And what is said in 1st Lilly 370, appears by all the Books to be be an
unquestionable Truth, viz. A Court that holds Plea by Virtue of Letters Patent,
ought to proceed according to the Course of the Common Law; for no Patent ought
to be granted against the Course of the Common Law. And the People of England
have been always so apprehensive of drawing Things from the Common Law to what
they call ad ali^d examen in a Court of Equity, that in the Case of the King
against Standish, 1st Levins, 241, 242. on a Praemunire, it remained a Doubt for
about two Years, whether the Chancery was within the Statute, and it does not
appear that any Determination was made; but that upon the Opinion of Hale Chief
Justice, That the Case was not within the Statute, nothing further was done in
it. If it was a Doubt with respect to the high Court of Chancery in England*
whether a Praemunire lay, will it be a Doubt with respect to any pretended Court
of Equity here, not coaeval with the Government, and not established by Act of
the Legislature? Thus much with respect to the first Part of of the first
Question, with Regard to a Court of Equity; now with relation to the second
Part about Fees.

It seems to be a Point agreed on for Law, That the Erecting any Office (...)
cannot be done without common Assent by Act of Parliament: (...) the King can
lay one Penny upon the Subject without his Consent, he may lay what Sum he
thinks proper. That such Fees are a Tallage, not to be done without Parliament,
for this see 2d Inst. 533. All new Offices with new Fees, or old Offices with
new Fees, is a Tallage upon the Subject, and cannot be done (says the Book)
without common Assent by Act of Parliament. See Chutes Case, 12 Coke 116, 117,
118.

Hardres, 353. If the King had granted an Office with a Fee, it had been Void,
because the King cannot charge his Subject. And I take the Maxim to be true
derivativa Potestas, etc. Neither can a Court establish Fees, the Judge may
think them reasonable, but that is not binding, 1 Salk. 333. Giffords Case. And
indeed one would think after the Arguments in the famous Case of Ship Money and
the Consequents that did attend it, it would seem a superfluous Task at this
Time of Day to prove that a Governor and his Council cannot Tax the Subject
without the Assent of the Assembly here. By what has been said, I think the
Answer to the first Question may be fairly given, viz. That by the Laws and
Customs of England, the King cannot by His Letters Patent erect a Court of
Equity or establish Fees, and consequently, That His Governor and Council here
cannot do it.

The answering this Question goes a great Way to the answering the second, viz.
Whether according to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of England, the King has
given any Power, or ( by any Thing that does appear) meant or intended to give
any Power, to His Governor and Countil here, to erect a Court of Equity and
establish Fees, exclusive of the General Assembly of this Province.

That such a Power has been claimed by the Governors, and always readily
assented to by the Council, and put in Execution, is omnius notum. And it being
as clear as the Sun at Noon Day, that the King himself cannot by His Letters
Patent (I still say according to the Laws of England) erect such a Court and
establish Fees without Parliament; it necessarily follows that He cannot give
such a Power to another: And therefore all the Powers given by the King's
Letters Patent or Instructions (if Instructions can give any) or both, for the
Purpose of erecting Courts and establishing Fees, although they should be
conceived in Words seemingly exclusive of the Assembly, (as they are not) yet
they are not to be taken in that Sense, because that Sense is contrary to Law:
But, the Powers given must be construed to be put in Execution in such Manner
as they lawfully may be put in Execution, and that must be understood to be the
Kings Meaning and Intention, which is the Meaning and Intention of the Law,
according to the Maxim, eadem presumitur Men's Regis qu^ est Juris, and qu^ esse
debet, presertim in dubie^ Hob. 154.

And it is very plain from the Instructions that have been constantly given to
the Governors for many Years past, that the King never meant or intended that
His Governor and Council, exclusive of the Assembly, should establish Courts,
as appears by the Instruction to Mr. Montgomery, viz. You shall not erect any
Court or Office of Judicature not before erected or established, nor dissolve
any Court or Office already erected or established, without our special Order.
By this Instruction the Governors have fancied that the sole Power of erecting
Courts was given to them; but the latter Part of the Instruction shows in what
Manner the King meant His Governors should or should not erect or disolve
Courts, for it goes on in these Words, viz. But in Regard We have been
informed, That there is great Want of a particular Court for determining of
small Causes, You are to recommend it to the Assembly of Our said Province,
that a Law be passed ( if not already done) for the constituting such a Court
or Courts for the Ease of our Subjects there. As plain as it is by this
Instruction that the King never intended, that His Governors should erect this
Court for Trial (...) small (...), (...) should apply to the Assembly of the
Province for a Law (...) be made for that Purpose, yet it is as plain from the
(...) Ordinances extant from the recalling of Col. Fletcher to this Time, that
these Courts for the Trial of small Causes, though formerly erected by Act of the
Legislature, were erected by the Governor for the Time being (not regarding
this Instruction) by the supposed ^^entitude of their own gubernatorial
Authority. So that upon the whole the Answer to this second Question may be
clearly given, viz. That the Governor, neither with nor without the Council,
has any Power given him, or by any Thing that appears, meant or intended to be
given him by the King, exclusive of the Assembly, to erect a Court of Equity,
or indeed any Court, of general Jurisdiction or establish Fees.

I come now to the third Question, viz. Whether (in Fact) according to (the
Laws of England, or) any Law of this Province, or any Letters Patent, or
Ordinance now extant here, or that ever was since the Revolution, there has
been a Court of Exchequer erected, or meant and intended to be erected (
considered as a Court of Equity) in this Province.

Before I entered upon these Questions, I laid it down as a Thing taken
proconfesso, That by the Establishment of the Supreme Court (whether this
Establishment was by Act of Assembly or by Ordinance of the Governor and
Council) there was but one Supreme Court (or one Court, and not three Courts)
established; which one Court was to have Cognizance of all Pleas civil,
criminal and mixed, as fully to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever as the Court
of King's Bench, Common Pleas and Exchequer within His Majesty's Kingdom of
England have or ought to have. And notwithstanding the large and extensive
Signification of these Words [ have or ought to have, to all Intents and
Purposes] made Use of by the Makers of the Acts and Ordinances, I have very
much Reason to believe (having been very well acquainted with every Man of them
that had or pretended to have any Knowledge of the Law) that very few (if any)
of them had a sufficient Knowledge of the Court of Exchequer in England, or the
Methods of Proceeding, in it, and that no more was meant and intended by them
than to give the Supreme Court here a Cognizance of all Matters, intended by
them to be cognizable in this Court here, as fully to all Intents and Purposes,
as each of the three Courts mentioned had in England, or ought to have had of
Maeters cognizable by them there, or as fully as any one Court of Law could
have here and no farther.

If the Words of the Act or Ordinances establishing this Court, are so to be
understood as to erect an Exchequer Court, distinct from the other two; they
are equally to be understood to erect three distinct Courts, viz, a Court of
Kings Bench, a Court of Common Pleas, and a Court of Exchequer, each of them
with the same Powers and Jurisdictions, under the same numerical Judges, as
fully to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever here, as each of these mentioned
Courts have in England, under different Judges there; which is absurd and
impossible, and the Powers there given incompatible in the same Persons
considered as Judges of three such distinct Courts: For, as Judges of the
Common Pleas, they cannot be Judges of the Kings Bench. If they are Judges of
the Kings Bench, their Power immediately determines as Judges of the Common
Pleas. So that these two Courts cannot coexist under the same numerical Judges,
for this see Cases in Point, Dyer 159. a pl. 34. Cro. Cha. Mich. 4th Cha. 9.
Coke 118. Dyer was one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, and whilst
he was so, was made one of the Judges of the Court of King's Bench. And the
Question was, Whether the Force and Effect of the first Letters Patent of the
Justice of the common Bench were not gone and ^^ased by this new Patent? And
agreed, that it was, for Reasons there given.

He takes Notice of a Man's having two several Authorities; and that a (...)
common Pleas has been chief Baron of the Exchequer: But says (...) Cases vary
from the Kings Bench. Afterward in the Time of King Charles the First, when a
like Thing happened to Sir George Coke, all the Judges agreed with the Opinion
given in Dyer: One of the Reasons given, why the former Commission was
determined and the Powers incompatible, was, That it was impertinent for a Man
to reverse his own Judgment, as he would in case of Error brought in Banco
Regis. And in all cases of Error, none of the Judges who gave the Judgment
(notwithstanding a supposed Instance to the contrary) are, by the Laws and
Practice of England, to have any Voice in the affirming or reversing of it. By
the Statute of the 31st of Edward III. Chap. 12. the Lord Chancellor and
Treasurer, with such Justices as they think fit, are to reverse Errors in the
Exchequer, and the Barons of the Exchequer are to be called before them to give
the Reasons of their Judgment. This is in the Law Court of Exchequer, where the
Barons are Judges: For in the Equity Part the Lord Treasurer is one of the
Judges himself. By the Stat. of 27 Eliz. Chap. 8th. If any Errors by the Court
of Kings Bench, they are to be reformed by the Judges of the common Pleas and
Barons of the Exchequer. And, Writs of Error lie in the Kings Bench, for any
Error in the common Pleas.

This I think makes it plain beyond the Power of Contradiction, That there
cannot be three Courts here, one of them with all the Powers of the Kings
Bench, a second with all the Powers of the common Pleas, and a third with all
the Powers of the Exchequer in England, coexisting under the same Judges, and
consequently not one Court invested with three such distinct Powers here, as
fully to all Intents and Purposes as each of the three mentioned have there:
For each of the three Courts there under different Judges have Powers to some
Intents and Purposes, which this Court, whether considered as three Courts, or
one Court under the same Judges, cannot have: Therefore this Court must be
understood to be but one Court, vested with all the Powers given or intended to
be given it here, as full to all Intents and Purposes as the Courts mentioned
are vested with the Powers in them; but was never intended to give the Supreme
Court here the several Powers and Jurisdictions of those three Courts as fully
to every Intent and Purpose as each of the mentioned Courts have them in
England, which no one Court of Law can have, especially in this Country.

The Courts of Kings Bench, common Pleas, and Exchequer in England are three
distinct Courts, under three distinct Setts of Judges: And that of the
Exchequer in England, whether proceeding in a course of Law, by the common Law,
or of Equity, by Virtue of the Statute of the 33d of Henry VIII. Chapter 9th.
before which Statute it is said, That Court had no Jurisdiction in Equity, yet
in both cases it is a Court instituted for the sole Profit and Benefit of the
King, and the Disposition and Management of the Kings Revenues are entirely
under the Direction of that Court, but never was in any case under the
Direction of ours: Therefore, if our Supreme Court here has Jurisdiction to all
Intents and purposes whatsoever, as the Court of Exchequer has in England or
ought to have, and if the Words are to be taken in a different Sense from what
I have explained them to mean, we ought to be very certain in what Sense these
Words [ Court of Exchequer] are to be taken, whether in that large and general
Sense, in which they are understood in England to mean the Seven distinct
Courts mentioned in the 4th Inst. 119. or in a more restrictive Sense, to mean
some one or more of these Courts. And as I take it, that Sense is to be put
upon those Words which the Makers of the Acts and Ordinances establishing this
Court did intend should be put upon them; and what that Sense was, is best and
with most Certainty to be found out from the Words of the Acts and from the
Practice of this Court, immediately upon its Establishment, and from that Time
to this. And first with respect to that (...) which these Word cannot be taken.

Whether the Court of Exchequer be considered as united with the Supreme Court
as one Branch of it under the same Judges? or, as a distinct Court under the
same Judges; it cannot be t^^t called in England, The Court of Exchequer
Chamber, for all the Judges for Matter in Law: Because with us there are no
Judges to consult; unless we take in all the Judges of what are called The
Courts of common Pleas in the Counties, which some People would be very merry
with. Nor can it be a Court of Exchequer Chamber for Errors in the court merry
with. Nor a Court of Exchequer Chamber for Errors in the Kings Bench: Because
in all cases of Error in our Supreme Court (in any of its supposed Forms) they
are to be reformed by the Governor and Council, and always have been so. These
are three of the seven restrictive Senses, and we are sure it can^ be taken in
none of these.

There remains other four, viz, a Court of Pleas, a Court of Accounts, a Court
of Receipts, and a Court of Equity in the Exchequer Chamber.

With Respect to the Court of Accounts and Receipts, two of the four mentioned,
it is plain from the constant Practice of having a Receiver General by Letters
Patent, and accounting with an Auditor or his Deputy; from the constant
Practice of disposing of all the Kings Revenue here by Warrants drawn by the
Governor in Council. From the Instructions or Orders constantly given to the
Governor of this Province, not to permit any Clause whatsoever to be inserted
in any Law for the levying of Money, or the Value of Money, whereby the same
shall not be made liable to be accounted for unto his Majesty in Great Britain,
and to the Commissioners of his Treasury, or high Treasurer for the Time being.
And, That upon Pain of His Majesty's highest Displeasure, fair Books of
Accounts be kept of all Receipts and Payments, and the Truth thereof attested
upon Oath, and transmitted half-yearly, or oftener, to the Commissioners of the
Treasury, or high Treasurer for the Time being. I say from all this it is very
plain, that our Supreme Court is neither the Court of Accounts, nor the Court
of Receipts, nor ever had or every was intended to have any Thing to do any
manner of Ways with the Disposition of the Kings Revenue; either as fully to
all Intents and Purposes as the Kings Court of Exchequer in England had, or to
any Intent and Purpose whatsoever.

We are got over five of the restrictive Senses in which we are sure the Words
[ Court of Exchequer] cannot be taken. There are but two left, viz. A Court of
Pleas, (i. e.) a Court of Law, and a Court of Equity. But how it comes to be a
Court of Equity, and a distinct Court from the Supreme Court? Or, if not a
distinct Court, it will be very difficult if not impossible to account, how the
Supreme Court came to have a Jurisdiction in a Course of Equity? since at none
of the Times of the establishing of the Supreme Court, whether by Acts of
Assembly or by Ordinance, it was ever understood by the Makers of the Acts, or
afterward by the Makers of the Ordinances, or by any Body else, to be a Court
of Equity. An Account of the several Times of the establishing this Court, and
the Method by which it was done will set this Matter in a clear Light.

The first Assembly that I can find any Account of in this Province, began the
7th Day of October, 1683, and ended the 3d of November following. At this Time
there was existing a Court, known by the Name of The general Court of Assizes,
which was held annually: How this Court was established I do not know; but I am
inclined to believe it was established by the Governor and Council, at the
Time of the first settling of the Government, or very near that Time.

It appears by an Act of the General Assembly of this Province, past in the
year 16^4, by which this Court of Assizes was disolv'd, that it was a Court of
Equity, as well as Law: For it is provided by the said Act, That all Actions,
Suites or Complaints now depending in the said Court of Assizes, either by
Bill, Plaint, Declaration, Appeal, Review, by Petition to the Governor and
Council, or any other Ways or Means whatsoever, shall be ended, determined or
finished by the high Court of Chancery. If this was a Court of Law as well as
Equity, it was the only Court of a mixed Jurisdiction that I could learn ever
existed in this Province.

In the first Assembly held in the Year 1683, an Act was passed, entitled, An
Act to settle Courts of Justice; by which Act there was established a Court for
Trial of small Causes of 40 Shillings, and under. Another, for Trial of Causes
civil and criminal arising in each County, styled, a Court of Sessions. A third
called a Court of Oyer and Terminer, and general Goal Delvery. Which third
Court is what we now call the Supreme Court, though at that Time it was not known
by that Name, and was established by the following Words, viz. And that there
may be no Defect of Justice, but that all and every the Inhabitants of this
Province may have and enjoy all proper Ways and Means to recover and have their
just Rights with the same, according to Law, Be it further enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That annually and every Year there shall be within the
said Province, and in each respective County within this Province, within the
same, a Court of Oyer and Terminer and general Goal delivery, which said Court
shall have Power and Jurisdiction to hear, try and determine all Matters,
Causes and Cases, capital, criminal or civil, and Causes tryable at common Law:
In and to which Court all and every Person and Persons, whatsoever, shall or
may, if they see meet, remove any Action or Suit, the Debts or Damages laid in
such Action or Suit being five Pounds or upwards, or shall or may by Warrant,
Writ of Error or Certiorary, remove out of any inferior Court any Judgment,
Information or Indictment there had or depending, and may correct Errors in
Judgment, or reverse the same, if there be any just Cause for it. The Members
of which Court shall be a Judge assisted with four Justices of the Peace of the
County, who shall be commissionated for that Purpose. Then the Times and Places
of Sitting of this Court is appointed, both at New York and the several
Counties of this Province. After this is a providing Clause in these Words,
viz. Provided allways, And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That no Persons Right or Property shall be by this Court determined excepting
where Matters of Fact are either acknowledged by the Parties, or Judgment be
acknowledged or passes by the Defendants Default, for want of Plea or Answer,
unless the Fact be found by the Verdict of twelve Men of the Neighborhood, AS
IT OUGHT OF RIGHT TO BE DONE BY THE LAW.

After the settling this Court of Law, in which there is not the least
Appearance or Color of its having any Jurisdiction in a Course of Equity: The
Act proceeds to Settle a Court of Equity, which it does by the following Words,
viz. Be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be a
Court of Chancery within this Province, which said Court shall have Power to
hear and determine MATTERS OF EQUITY, and shall be esteemed and accounted the
supreme Court of this Province. And be it further enacted, That the Governor
and Council be the said Court of Chancery, and hold and keep the said Court.
And the Governor may depute and nominate in his Stead a Chancellor, and be
assisted with such other Persons as shall by him be thought fit and convenient,
together with all necessary Clerks, and other Clerks as to the said Courts are
needful.

This was an Act of the whole Legislature in this Province, the only legal
Authority that could or can settle and establish Courts of general Jurisdiction
(as I believe) in any Government, at least in any Government according to the
Laws and Customs of England. This was a perpetual Act, by which there were
Courts of Law, and a Court of Chancery for Trials of Matters in Equity erected.

From the above Act, and the Paragraph quoted from the Act made in the Year
1684, dissolving the Court of Assizes, it will appear clearly, without any Room
for Doubt; first, that before this Act made in the Year 1683, and in all
Probability, from the first Settlement of the Government till that Time, there
was a Provision made for Administering Justice to the People in a Course of
Equity as well as Law. Secondly, That by the Act in the Year 1683, (...)
Provision was made for the same Purpose, and a Court of Chancery erect for
Trials of Matters in Equity. Thirdly, That the Court of Oyer and ^^miner
neither had, nor was, by the Makers of the Law, intended to have, any
Jurisdiction in a Couse of Equity. Fourthly, That after the Dissolution of the
Court of Assizes, the Court of Chancery, and no other, had the sole
Jurisdiction in a Course of Equity, and was erected for that Purpose.

The Courts stood upon this Establishment from the Year 1683, till the Year
1691, and by an Assembly which began the 9 th of April, in that Year, an Act
was passed, entitled, An Act for Establishing Courts of Judicature, for the
Ease and Benefit of each respective City Town and County within this Province.
By which Act the supreme Court of this Province was established upon the Foot
it now stands and has stood since that Time with Respect to its Jurisdiction,
and (...) Clause by which it was established is conceived in these Words, viz.

And that their Majesty's Subjects inhabiting within this Province may (...)
all the good, proper and just Ways and Means for the Securing and (...) their
just Rights and Demands within the same: Be it further (...) and it is hereby
enacted and ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That (...) shall be held and
kept a supreme Court of Judicature, which shall be (...) and constantly kept at
the City of New York, and not else where, at the several and respective Times
hereafter mentioned. And that there be five Justices at least appointed and
commissionated to hold the same Court, two whereof, together with one chief
Justice, to be a Quorum. Which supreme Court is hereby empowered and authorized
to have Cognizance of all Pleas, civil criminal and mixed, as fully and amply,
to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever, as the Courts of Kings Bench, common
Pleas, and Exchequer within their Majesty's Kingdom of England, have, or ought
to have. In (...) to which supreme Court, all and every Person and Persons
whatsoever, shall or may, if they shall so see meet, commence or remove any
Action or Suit, being upwards of Twenty Pounds, and not otherwise: Or shall or
may by Warrant, Writ of Error, or Certiorari, remove out of any of the
respective Courts of Mayor and Aldermen, Sessions, and common Pleas, any
Judgment, Information, or Indictment there had and depending, and may correct
Errors in Judgment, or reverse the same, if there be just Cause. Provided
allways, That the Judgments removed shall be upwards of the Value of Twenty
Pounds.

And then the Act proceeds to appoint the Times of sitting, and that the Judges
shall take the Oaths, etc. And then farther enacts, That all and every of the
Justices and Judges of the several Courts before mentioned, be and are hereby
sufficiently empowered to make, order and establish all such Rules and Orders,
for the more orderly practicing and proceeding in their said Courts, as fully
and amply to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever, as all or any of the several
Courts of the Kings Bench, common Pleas and Exechequer in England legally do.

This Clause, in the Opinion of some, vests the Court with Jurisdiction in a
course of Equity: For (say they) how can they make Rules as fully to (...)
Intents and Purposes whatsoever, as the Exchequer in England can, unless the
Court be vested with a Power to determine in a Course of Equity.

But whoever reads this Clause, may observe, that whatever Power is given by
it, is equally given to the Justices or Judgees of the several Courts
established by that Act; and if it can be construed to give any one of them a
Jurisdiction in a Course of Equity, it equally gives it every one of them: And
therefore can (...) no more, than that the Judges in these several Courts have
a Power given them to make Rules and Orders in their several Courts here, for
the more orderly practicing and proceeding in them, as fully to all Intents,
within the Limits of their several Jurisdictions here, as the Judges of the
Kings Bench, common Pleas and Exchequer in England can do, in the Courts of
which they are Judges there.

After this comes the same providing Clause with the Act that was made in the
Year 1683, viz. Provided allways, and be it further enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That no Persons Right or Property shall be by any of the aforesaid
Courts determined, exept where Matters of Fact are either acknowledged, or
passes by the Defendants Fault for want of Plea or Answer, unless the Fact be
formed by the Verdict of twelve Men of the Neighborhood, AS IT OUGHT OF RIGHT
TO BE DONE BY THE LAW. -- This shows that the Makers of this Act never meant or
intended to give the supreme Court hereby established, or any other of the
aforesaid Courts, any Jurisdiction in a Course of Equity, but established
another Court for that very Purpose by the following Words, viz. Be it further
enacted, etc. That there shall be a Court of Chancery within this Province,
which said Court shall have power to hear and determine all Matters of Equity,
and shall be esteemed and accounted the high Court of Chancery of this
Province. And enacted by, etc. That the Governor and Council be the said high
Court of Chancery, and hold and keep the said Court, and that the Governor may
depute, nominate and appoint in his Stead a Chancellor, and be assisted with
such other Persons of the Council as shall by him be thought convenient,
together with all necessary Officers, Clerks and Registers as to the said high
Court of Chancery are needful.

It appears by the above Clause, that the Makers of it conceived there was a
Necessity of having a Court to determine Matters of Equity, and that they had
not made a Provision for it by any of the Courts they had by that Act before
established, and therefore establish a Court with Powers to hear and determine
all Matters of Equity; which shows that the then Legislature intended to vest
the Power of hearing and determing all Matters of Equity (above the vallue of
40 Shillings) solely in that Court which they call the high Court of Chancery,
and in no other Court whatsoever, Expressio unius beingin this Act in this case
Exclusio alterlue.

This Act was temporary, being for two Years, and in October 1692, about six
Months before the Expiration of it, another was made with the same Title, and
nearly the same Words, and as to the Chancery exactly the same: But as by the
former Act the Supreme Court was to sit once in six Months, and no oftener, at
the City of New York, so by this Act it was appointed to sit annually in each
of the several Counties in the Province, and one of the Justices of the Court
was to go the Circuits, and hold the supreme Court, which by that Act was to be
vagrant. And it was enacted, That out of the Office of the Supreme Court at
New York, all Process shall issue out, under the Test of the chief Justice of
the said Court, and to which Office all Returns shall be made.

This Act was also temporary, and to continue two Years after the Expiration of
the former Act, and no longer.

The above Act expired by its own Limitation, and by an Act in the 7 th of King
William was revived and continued for two Years after the Publication, and by
an Act of Assembly passed in the Year 1697, farther continued for one Year
longer, and after that expired by its own Limitation some Time in March or
April, School. And since that Time no Act of Assembly has been made concerning
that or any other Court, that I know of.

So that our Courts, both of Equity and Law, stood upon the Foundation of Acts
of the Legislature from October 1683, till some Time in March or April School,
being between fourteen and fifteen Years: And as no Words contained in any of
the Acts before mentioned can (even by the most strained Construction) be
interpreted to give the supreme Court any Jurisdiction to determine Causes in a
Course of Equity. So the constant Practice during all that Time of determining
Matters of Equity in the high Court of Chancery only, and Matters of Law (and
not Equity) in the supreme Court, shows that neither the Legislature nor any
the Practisers ever understood the supreme Court to have any Jurisdiction to
determine Matters in a Course of Equity.

Whether the Court of Oyer and Terminer and Court of Chancery established by
the perpetual Acts of Assembly in the Year 1683, or the supreme Court and Court
of Chancery established, continued, or new modelled, or differently named, by
the temporary Acts above mentioned, did expire with the Expiration of these
temporary Acts, or did return to the Condition they were put in by the Act made
in the Year 1683, or the supreme Court did continue upon the Foot of it its own
Adjournments entitled to the Name and Increase of Jurisdiction (if any such it
had) given unto it by the said Acts, or whether it was of new established by
the Ordinance of his Excellency the Earl of Bellomont and Council of the 15 th
of May, 1699, and has its Authority solely from the said Ordinance, and the
Ordinances of the Governors and Councils made since that Time, are Questions
that may admit of some Debate. This seems to be certain, that the noble Lord
above mentioned from a Clause in His Majesty's Letters Patents giving him full
Power and Authority, with the Advice and Consent of his Majesty's Council for
this Province, to erect, constitute and establish such and so many Courts of
Judicature and public Justice within the said Province and Territories
depending thereon, as his said Excellency and Council shall think fit and
necessary for the hearing and determing of all Causes as well criminal as
civil, according to Law and Equity, and for awarding Execution thereupon, with
all reasonable and necessary Powers, Authorities, Fees and Previledges
belonging to them, would understand, that this Power was given to him and the
Council, and to be put in Execution by them exclusive of the Assembly; and both
he and the succeeding Governors conceived that the Assemblies had nothing to
do to intermedle in the erecting Courts or establishing Fees, every such
Attempt by them being deemed a flying in the Face of his Majesty's Prerogative,
and accordingly that noble Lord and his Council, by Virtue of a Power which
they conceived to be solely in themselves, exclusive of the Assembly, made an
Ordinance, for the establishing Courts of Judicature, with the same Title and
pretty nigh in the same Words of the Acts made in the Years 1691, and 1692,
excepting that Part relating to the Chancery, about which nothing was mentioned
in that Ordinance. But how exorbitant, illegal and groundless such a Pretense
was I have already sh^wn and need not repeat. So that as I take it, the Courts
neither were nor could be established by that or any other Ordinance, made by
him or any of his Successors, but stood solely upon the Acts of Assembly that
first established them, and upon their own Adjournments and vested with such
Power and only such as was by the said Act or Acts given them, and did not fall
or discontinue by the Expiration of any of the temporary Acts: For according to
the Opinion of the Judges in a Case referred to them by the privy Council in
the Time of King Charles II. relating to a perpetual and temperary Act of
Assembly made in the Island of Jamaica, Raymond 397. th^se temperary Acts did
at most but suspend the perpetual Act, during the Time of their Continuance,
and after their Expiration were as if they never had been made.

If this perpetual Law was in Force and resumed its Vigor upon the Expiration
of the temporary Acts above mentioned (as it did if the Opinion of the Judges
above referred to be Law) then I would ask, 1. whether the Ordinance of the
Governor and Council establishing a Court of Chancery and (...) the Power of
judging solely in the Governor, when the Act of Assembly had placed it jointly
in the Governor and Council, or the Ordinance for the establishing Courts of
Justice, either in the same or a different manner, was not in that Governor
and Council a taking upon themselves not only a Power to dispense with the
Laws, but a Legislative Power to control, abrogate and repeal an Act of
Assembly, and set up an Ordinance of Governor and Council in its Stead. And 2.
Whether this was Governing according to established and known Laws not
repugnant but as near as may be agreeable to the Laws of England? The Answer is
easy.

Whether this Ordinance or any other, did, or did not, establish the Courts, is
not very material to the Matter now in Question, which is not, whether there is
or is not a Court established? or how established? but whether this Court,
which is confessed to have existed now nigh this 50 Years, has a Jurisdiction
to determine Causes in a Course of Equity. That it had not any such
Jurisdiction, by its first or any other of its Establishments, by any Acts of
the Legislature, nor was intended to have it, nor excercised any such at any
Time during the Continuance of these Acts, I think has been clearly and
unanswerably proved; and it is a Matter of Fact incontestably true, That from
the Time of its first Establishment, till the bringing of these Suits, this
Court never exercised or was possesseed of any such Jurisdiction, or ever
pretended to it: And if the Governors and Councils who made these Ordinances
had, at the Time of making of them, intended or understood that by these
Ordinances, a Court of Fquity, either joined with, or distinct from the supreme
Court, was erected: It is not to be imagined, that they did not know what they
intended, and that the Practisers and People of this Province should not in all
that Time have made any Application to this same Court in a Course of Equity,
but constantly have made their Application to the Court of Chancery, as the
only Court of Equity during all that Time existing; and that in the Hands of a
Governor, in whose Hands no Body was fond of having of it, and most People
thought was lodged there contrary to Law.

This makes it clear, that in fact there never was, nor never was intended to
be erected, any Court of Exchequer ( considered as a Court of Equity) in this
Province, by any Act of Assembly, Letters Patent or Ordinance, that now are, or
ever were extant since the Revolution, and therefore no such Court existing.

The 4 th Question is, whether any less or other Authority than that of the
whole Legistature can (according to the Laws and Customs of England) erect so
Court of Equity or establish Fees?

By the Answer to the first Question, and the Authorities there eited, it does
appear, That according to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of England, (the only
Rules by which we are to judge) no less or other Authority than that of the
whole Legislature can erect a Court of Equity, or establish Fees. And therefore
upon the whole it seems plain to me, that we neither have, or ever had, or ever
were intentended to have, any Jurisdiction in a Course of Equity; nor can such
a Jurisdiction by any Letters Patent or Ordinance, not founded on an Act of the
Legislature, be given. And as I take it the giving of a new Jurisdiction in
Equity by Letters Patent to an old Court, that never had such Jurisdiction
before, or Erecting a new Court of Equity by Letters Patent or Ordinance of the
Governor and Council, without Assent of the Legislature, are equally unlawful,
and not a sufficient Warrant to justify this Court to proceed in a Course of
Equity. And therefore by the Grace of God, I, as chief Justice of this
Province, shall not pay any Obedience to them in that Point.

THis, Sir, is the Copy of the Paper I read in Court, and the Substance of what
I said besides on that Head, as far as I can charge my Memory: I have no Reason
to expect that either this or any Thing else I can say, will be at all
grateful or have any weight with your Excellency, after the Answer I received
to a Message I did my self the Honor to send to you concerning an Ordinance
you were about making for Establishing a Court of Equity, in the supreme Court,
as being in my Opinion, contrary to Law, and which I desired might be delayed
till I could be heard on that Head: I thought my self within the Duty of my
Office, in sending this Message, and I hope, do not flatter my self in
thinking, I shall be justified in it by your Superiors as well as mine: The
answer your Excellency was pleased to send by Mr. Joseph Warrel, was, that I
need not give my self any Trouble about that Affair: That you would neither
recieve a Visit or any Message from me: That you could neither rely upon my
Integrity nor depend upon my Judgment or Opinion: That you thought me a Person
not at all fit to be trusted with any Concerns relating to the King. that ever
since your Coming to the Government, I had treated you both as to your own
Person and as the King's Representative, with Slight, Rudeness, and
Impertinence: That you did not desire to see or hear any farther of or from
me. I am heartily sorry, Sir, for your own sake as well as that of the Public,
that the King's Representative should be moved to so great a degree of Warmth
as appears by this Answer which I think could proceed from no other Reason but
my giving my Opinion in a Court of which I was a Judge on a Point of Law that
came before me, and, in which I might be innocently enough mistaken (though I
think I am not) for Judges are no more infallible, than their Superiors are
impeccable: But if Judges are to be intimidated so as not to dare to give any
Opinion but what is pleasing to a Governor, and agreeable to his private Views
the People of this Province, who are verry much concerned both with Respect to
their Lives and Fortunes in the Freedom and Independency of those who are to
Judge of them, may possibly not think themselves so secure in either of them as
the Laws and his Majesty intends they should be. I never had the Houour to be
above Six times in your Company in my Life; One of these Times was when I
delivered the Public Seals of the Province of New-Jersie to you on your
coming to that Government; another on one of the public Days to drink the
Kings Health; a third at your Desire to wait on my Lord Augustus Fitz-Roy with
the Body of the Law, to tell him we were glad to see him at New York: and
Except the first Time, never was above a quarter of an Hour together in your
Company at any one Time; and all the words that Ever I spoke to you except at
that first Time may be containd in a Quarto Side of Paper. I might possibly
have been impertinent, for old Men are too often so; but, as to treating you
with Rudeness and disrespect either in your Public or private Capacity, it is
what I cannot accuse my self of doing, or intending to do, at any of the Times
I was with You. If a Bow awkwardly made, or any Thing of that Kind, or some
Defect in the Ceremonial of addressing you, has occasioned that Remark, I beg
it may be attributed to the Want of a Court and polite Education, or to any
Thing else rather than the Want of Respect to his Majesty's Representative.

As to my Integrity, I have given You no Occasion to call it in Question. I
have been in this Office almost Twenty Years, my Hands were never foul'd with
a Bribe; nor am I conscious to my self, that Power or Poverty has been able to
induce me to be partial in the Favor of either of them. And as I have no
Reason to expect any Favor from you, so I am neither afraid nor ashamed to
stand the Test of the strictest Inquiry you can make, concerning my Conduct. I
have served the Public faithfully and honestly, according to the best of my
Knowledge; and dare and do appeal to them for my Justification: And am

SIR, Your Excellency's most humble Servant LEWIS MORRIS.

NEW YORK, Printed and sold by John Peter Zenger, in Smith Street, 1733.


