A LETTER FROM A Minister of the Church OF ENGLAND TO HIS Dissenting
Parishioners.

CONTAINING A brief Answer to the most material Objections against the
Established Church that are to be found in De Laune's Plea, The Answer to the
Bishop of Derry, The plain Reasons for separating, etc. and others. Together
with plain Reasons for Conformity to the Church of England.

1 Kings 18, 21. How long halt ye between two Opinions.

1 Cor. 14, 40. Let all Things be done decently and in [or according to] Order.

1 Pet. 2, 13. Be subject to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake.

New York, Printed by John Peter Zenger, 1733.

A LETTER FROM A Minister of the Church of England to his dissenting
Parishioners, etc.
My dear, though mistaken Brethren;
MY Hearts Desire and Prayer to God for you and yours, is, That you might be
saved: This likewise has been, and is my earnest and constant Endeavor; for
your Souls are very precious, for whom our dear Redeemer spilt his precious
Blood. I am sorry you will not give me more Opportunity to serve the Interest
of your Souls, which I should gladly do with all my Heart: But you are taught
to keep at a Distance from me, and beware of my Conversation: And all
imaginable Pains have been taken to frighten you from coming within the Doors
of the Church, which, at least, is directly contrary to the Apostle's Advice, 1
These. 5.21. Prove all Things and hold fast that which is good.

HOWEVER, because you will not give me Opportunity to promote the spiritual
Good of your Souls, neither at my Habitation, nor at the House of God, I have
taken this method to wait upon you at your own, and I hope you will not shut
your Eyes against the Light, or be so prejudiced against the Title of this
Paper, as not to read it carefully, and consider it seriously and impartially.

I BEAR you Record, that you have a Zeal for God, but not according to
Knowledge, Romans 10 2. You are, many of you, seriously and religiously disposed,
and heartily concerned to be saved; but, give me Leave to say, you are
unhappily mistaken and misled in sundry weighty Matters of Religion. Did you
rightly understand the true State of Things, did you really know the true
Principles of our Church, and how exactly agreeable her Doctrine, Discipline
and Government are to the holy Scriptures, and the true primitive Church, as
founded by the Apostles, I say, did you understand things as they really are,
you would immediately fly into her Bosom, as into the Ark, and not be contented
a Day out of our Communion.

BUT the Truth is, there are so many Falsehoods and Slanders industriously
spread about, to cast Disgrace on the Church, that, no wonder you are frighted
from her, and afraid to be concerned with her; for it would indeed deeply
grieve any* indifferent, serious and considerate Person, to hear what injurious
Mis-representations, evil Reports and groundless Reproaches she suffers from
some who call themselves Christians, may our Heavenly Father forgive them, and
grant them better Minds, for they know not what they do.

BUT I will observe to you in particular sundry false and groundless Stories,
which you are made to believe concerning the Church of England, by which you
may see how wickedly you are imposed on and we abused.

1. SOME of the wicked Books scattered about among you, would persuade you,
That our Church is little better than Popery, and symbolizes with the Church of
Rome.

Answ. NOTHING can be more false and abusive than this: For those who first
laid the Foundation of our Church, burnt at the Stake because they could not
comply with Popery. And never did any Writers so effectually confute Popery as
ours have, and we have as much Zeal against and Hatred to Popery as you can
have: Nay, if you would give me Opportunity, I could make it appear, That some
of your Principles are nearer a Kin to Popery than any of ours, and that there
is nothing peculiarly taught or practiced in the Church of England, but was
taught and practiced in the Church long before Popery was heard of in the
World. Do we deny you the Scriptures or public Worship in your own Language? Do
we worship Images, or pray to Saints or Angels? Do we teach Transubstantiation,
or deny the Cup to the Laity? Do we teach the Popes Supremacy or Infallibility,
or Pray Souls out of Purgatory? These and the like are the Absurdities of
Popery, which our Church abhors as much as you can do: So that your Delaune and
the rest of them are abominably injurious to us, in endeavoring to fasten
Popery upon us, and by the same Reasons they might as well charge it upon you:
For thus he argues; The Church of England use the Te Deum, the Responses, etc.
so do the Church of Rome. Nay, he goes on, and says, The Church of England use
the Apostles Creed, the Lords Prayer and Ten Commandments, and the Psalms of
David, and so does the Church of Rome. Does this prove them to be Popery? Why
just as much as it proves the two Sacraments to be Popery. And indeed he did
hold Infant Baptism and Sprinkling to be Popery as much as any Thing else in
the Church of England: And therefore his Arguments do as much Prove you to be
Papists as us.

YOU are told, Our Church is a persecuting bloodthirsty Church. I answer. This
is a most abusive Insinuation; for it is easy to prove, that the Church of
England never shed a Drop of any Man's Blood in the World for his Religion. It
is true the civil Government has sometimes imprisoned and fined Persons for
seditious Practices, who pretended Zeal for Religion in what they did: But you
are the most unreasonable People in the World, to talk of Persecution at this
Time of Day, when you know that you have for almost 50 Years enjoyed a free
Liberty and uninterrupted Tolleration. But if you are for looking back,
remember the blessed Days (as some of you call them) of Oliver Cromwell, when
the Dissenters were uppermost, and the Church was suppressed, and her Clergy
sequestered, plundered, imprisoned and barbarously treated, and forbid to perform
the least Part of their Office. Or if you are for looking into Scotland, don't
forget how barbarously the Episcopal Clergy were turned out of Doors and
persecuted, when the Presbyterians got the Upperhand: Instances these are
enough to shut your Mouths, if you had any Modesty: However I have nothing to
say for Persecution, I abhor it as much as you do; only I would suggest, that
we of the Church of England here have but too much Reason to apprehend, from
sundry Instances of the severe oppressive Treatment we have met with from same
of you, that if we were in your Power, there are not a few would persecute us,
at least as much as ever any Dissenters were persecuted in the World.

SOME have been so ridiculous as to try to make you believe, That the Martyrs
in Queen Mary 's Days (and particularly John Rogers) were Presbyterians. I
answer, That nothing can be a more absurd or false Pretense than this; for it
is certain and can be easily made to appear that some of those who were burnt
at the Stake at that Time, were the very Men that composed our Prayer Book, and
sealed their Religion with their Blood, and they all suffered long before the
Presbyterians were heard of in England. And this puts me in mind to observe to
you, how wickedly some impose upon you, in making you believe, That we of the
Church in this Country are not true Churchmen, such as they are in England, and
such as they were from the Beginning of the Reformation. Now this is a most
injurious Slander; for we use constantly those very same Prayers now as were
composed by those old holy Martyrs, and the very same Service here as they do
in England, Word for Word, without the least Variation: But it is insupportably
abusive in any of you, as some do, to charge us with being High-flyers and
Jacobites, when you know in your Consciences, that we constantly pray for our
most Gracious Sovereign King GEORGE, and steddily practice and preach up a
sincere Attachment to his Person and Government. And I challenge you to produce
an Instance of any one Person in these Parts, that ever mentioned the
Pretenders Name but with Abhorrence.

SOME of the wicked Books among you would persuade you, That our Church places
all Religion in mere outward Ceremonies, and holds no Regeneration but Baptism,
no Necessity of the inward Work of the Spirit, etc. I answer, this is all
absolutely false: For though we hold the great Expediency of outward Rites and
Observances for Unity and Uniformity, for Decency and Order in the Worship of
God; yet we don't place all Religion in them: On the contrary, we hold that all
outward Performances without an inward Change of Heart and a good Life, are of
no Account with God. It Is true, we call Baptism External Regeneration,
according to St. Paul, Tit. 3.5. who there calls it the Washing of
Regeneration; but we deny, that Baptism alone can save us without the inward
Regeneration wrought in us, by the mighty Power of the Spirit of God: So that
these vile Books do most falsely misrepresent and wickedly abuse us, and we wish
you therefore to consider seriously, how little those are to be believed or
regarded, who spread such false and scandalous Books among you, to impose upon
you.

5. YOU are told, That we don't hold the Necessity of Conversion and real
Goodness, to qualify us for the Sacrament, and that we receive all without
Distinction. I answer the direct contrary to this is true; for though our Charity
is larger than yours, yet we hold the same Qualifications necessary as you do:
This appears to any one that will read our Exhortations to the Communion. We
hold no Man can come acceptably without Faith, Repentance and new Obedience,
whereas some of your Teachers hold the Sacrament a converting Ordinance, which
the Writers of our Church deny.

6. Some would persuade you, That we take upon us to forgive Sins; whereas we
only declare Gods Forgiveness to all true Penitents. And That we pray for the
Dead, for this wise Reason forsooth, because we pray That God would not
remember against us our Iniquities, nor the Iniquities of our Forefathers. Can
it be that People would dispute such Things as these, were it not purely for
Disputing sake, or dissent for such Reasons, unless merely for Dissenting sake?
Surely they deserve no Reply but that of Pity for poor ignorant People that are
imposed upon by them, and for the poor trifling Disputers that by such means
impose upon them.

MANY Things are objected against us as superstitious, such as the Surplice,
Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism, and the Cross after it, and the Holy
Days, and the like. I put these things together for brevily because I would
make the quicker dispatch. And I answer in the first Place, There are very wise
and good Reasons for the propriety decency and expediency of these Practices;
particularly, as to the Surplice. What can be more proper, than to distinguish
the sacred Services by a peculiar Garment, for which we have the Example of God
himself in the Mosaic Dispensation, which, though not binding upon Christians,
may be a good Precedent to them, in appointing what is decent in public
Worship: Thus in Ezekiel 44 17, it is ordered, That when they come to minister
in the inner Court, they shall be clothed with linen Garments: To which it is
very likely St. John alludes, in Rev. 19 8, even in Gospel Times, when the
Church should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white, for the fine Linen
is [the Emblem of] the Righteousness of Saints. I don't offer these as
Scripture Evidences of the Necessity, but of the Lawfulness, Propriety and
Significancy of this Appointment. And how mean a Thing is it, and how
despicable a Weakness, to dispute and contend about or take Offense at the
Matter, Color or Shape of a Garment? It betrays a Littleness of Mind, and a
mean Narrowness of Soul. And then as to Godfathers and Godmothers, or
Sponsors in Baptism, what can be more proper or expedient, when a Child is
admitted into Covenant by Baptism, than that since the Child cannot answer for
it self, some Body should answer its Part in the Covenant, in its Name? and
that there should be double Security for its Christian Education? You don't
think it unreasonable in your temporal Affairs, to have Bondsmen jointly
engaged with the Person immediately concerned in paying of Money; and can it
then be thought improper, that there should be the like double Security
insisted upon for this more important Matter, the Christian Education of a
Child, in Case of Mortality, Poverty, or any other Inability or Want of Duty in
the Parents? And as to the Sign of the Cross; what can he more proper or
significant, after a Child is baptized into the Faith of a Crucified Savior,
and is publicly declared to be admitted into the Number of Christ's Flock,
than to use this Sign, to intimate to us, that we should be so far from being
ashamed of, that with St. Paul, Gal. 6 14, We should glory in the Cross of
Christ. And this was a Practice that always obtained in the Church from the
earliest Ages, and even several Hundred Years before the Day of Popery, as is
plain from the Testimonies of St Cyprian and Tertullian, within little more
than a Hundred Years of the Apostles, which renders it highly probable that it
was the very thing alluded to in Rev. 7 3. where we read of Sealing the
Servants of God in their Forheads, so far is it from being a Mark of the Beast,
as some opprobriously, and I may say, profanely call it! And lastly, what can
be more properly and wisely done, than to set apart particular Days and Seasons
to commemorate the several Steps which our glorious Redeemer took in
accomplishing our Redemption, and his Apostles in propagating the Knowledge of
it: For by this Means every Minister is obliged once a Year to explain, and the
People have Opportunity as often to hear opened, each Article of the Christian
Faith, and so a lively Sense of every one of them is the better kept up in
their Minds; whereas you may go to Meeting several Years (and perhaps all your
Days) and never hear several Articles of the Christian Faith, such as the
Trinity, the Resurrection or Assension of Christ, or Descent of the Holy Ghost,
once particularly explained or insisted upon, and the Sense of them is in
Danger of being lost.

Object. But you will say, Where has God commanded these Things, and does he
not give this Reason for the Unlawfulness of such Things, that he commanded
them not? Jer. 7 31. I answer no: For that Text don't speak of Things in their
own Nature indifferent, but what is notoriously sinful and idolatrous, building
high places and worshipping Idols, which when he says he had not commanded, the
meaning is he had forbidden them. And it betrays great (not to say wilful)
Ignorance of the Figures used often in Scripture Language, to put such an
Interpretation on this Text. So that the proper Question in these and the like
Cases, is not Where has God commanded them? But Where has he forbidden them?
For it is certain, that we may lawfully do any thing that God has not
forbidden; and I dare challenge you to show one Text, that forbids these or any
Thing else that the Church requires. But then let me ask in my turn, where has
God commanded your Relations as Terms of Communion, or your Form of Church
Covenant, or that you should keep a Fast on the 15th of April (suppose) or a
Thanksgiving on the 9th of November? You have no Rule in Scripture for keeping
these Days. O, you will say, Our Governors command these Day to be observed,
and we are commanded to obey them! Very good; the same say we: Do you justify
your selves in these Matters, and with the same Breath you justify us in every
Thing we plead for: God has no where forbidden us these Practices, and our
Governors both in Church and State have commanded them, and God has commanded
us to submit to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2 13. and to
obey them that have the Rule over us, who watch for our Souls, Heb. 13 17. and
therefore we must observe these Rites and Days in Obedience to him as well as
them.

Object. But you will say, Is not this teaching for Doctrines the Commandments
of Men? Mat. 15 9. I answer, no: For what the Pharisees were there condemned
for, was 1. advancing human Inventions into essential Doctrines, as though they
were Divine and necessary in themselves; whereas we declare these Things still
indifferent in their own Nature. You seem rather guilty of this, in insisting
on your Church Covenant, and (in some Places) Relations, as Terms of Communion,
under the Notion of their being Divine Ordinances, and in making the absolute
Predestination of particular Persons, an essential Doctrine, which really is no
where taught in Scripture. 2. The Pharisees are here accused of justling out
and setting aside Divine Commands, by, and for the sake of human Ordinances:
Thus v. 6. They set aside th fifth Commandment by their Corban, Mark. 7 11.
whereas we challenge you to show one Scripture Doctrine rejected, or one Divine
Law set aside and neglected by the Church of England.

Object. But you say, why will you offend your weak Brethren by these Things?
St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 8 13. Romans 14. he would rather not eat Flesh while he
lived than offend. I answer, I am glad you are sensible that you are but weak
Brethren, as indeed you really are if you take Offense at such innocent
harmless Things. But pray wherein do we offend you? To offend in the Apostles
Sense, is to lay a Stumbling Block before our Brother, so as to cause him to
sin. Now I cannot see wherein the Church is guilty of tempting you into any
sinful Practices; so far from this, that I would wish you to observe, That the
Apostle in those Places is speaking of Things, not only indifferent in
themselves, but those concerning which neither divine nor humane Authority had
interposed to command or forbid, with Respect to which indeed we must become
all things to all Men; but does it hence follow, that we must disobey God, or
even lawful human Authority for Fear of offending? Nay, so far from this, that
we should properly, according to the Apostles Sense, offend, if we should not
conform to the Laws of both Church and State; for then our Example of
Disobedience to Authority would tend to confirm those that dissent from us in
their Disobedience.

Lastly a great Noise and Clamor is raised against us about Arminianism, and
you are told we are Arminians, To this I answer, That we hold no Doctrines now
but what were held and taught in our Church long before Arminius was heard of
as I can make appear from sundry of the Writings of our first Reformers and
Martyrs, Cranmer, Hooper, and Ridley, etc. And if Arminius happened to agree
with them in some of his Notions, I know no Reason however, why we should be
called after his Name. In Short, we have no Business with Arminius, he was a
Dutch Presbyterian, and we are none of his Followers: We call no Man Master
upon Earth, for one is our Master in Heaven, we are Followers of Jesus Christ
and his noble Army of Martyrs, who sealed the Truth with their Blood. In a Word
we hold no Doctrines but what where always held from the Beginning, even in the
purest times of Christianity, none but what the Apostles every where taught,
and are plainly revealed to us in the holy Scriptures, which our Church asserts
to be her only Rule of Faith.

Indeed some would wickedly persuade you, That we lay aside the Scriptures, and
build on human Authority: This as well as all the rest, is a groundless
Slander. It Is true, we make use of the ancient Writers, to help us in finding
out the Sense of Scriptures, and appeal to the certain Facts of the earliest
Ages of the Church, as our best Guides in doubtful Cases, where the Sense of
Scripture is Disputed, to determine the true Meaning of it; but still that is
our Rule both of Faith and Manners. Of the Falsehood of all these Slanders and
Misrepresentations, and the Truth of what I have here asserted, I could yet
further abundantly convince you if I had Opportunity, and should gladly do it;
for while you are thus miserably imposed upon, and led on in Ignorance and
Mistake, I cannot but look on you with the greatest Compassion, and wish you to
consider the Danger there is lest, while the Blind lead the Blind, they both
fall into the Ditch.

But perhaps you would desire to know what I have against you; you think your
Fathers were very good Men, and came here for the sake of Religion and you can
scarcely be persuaded to think they could be mistaken. To this I answer, that I
believe I think as charitably of your Fathers as any of you do; I am ready to
believe that they meant well, and endeavored to please God according to the
best of their Light: But I don't therefore think they were perfect: On the
contrary I am persuaded, they greatly, though I hope ignorantly, erred in some
things; and indeed I suppose you think so too, for you have greatly departed
from them in several Instances, and are ashamed of many of their Notions and
Practices. Nay, your Teachers have in some Cases used the same Arguments
against them as we do, as some of you very well know, and if you think them
wrong in some Things, why may not I think so in others, and at the same Time
have as much Charity for them as you have.

Indeed I own they and you too are right in many Things, nay in most of the
Essentials and Fundamentals of Religion: For you join with us in teaching the
Necessity of Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and a
sober, godly and righteous Life, and of the supernatural Grace of the holy
Spirit, to enable us to repent, believe and obey the Gospel, and that our
Acceptance with God depends wholly on the free Grace of God, and the Merits and
Intercession of Jesus Christ. It is happy that we agree thus far, and so far as
we have attained, let us walk by the same Rule, and mind the same Things. Give
me leave however to observe to you, that there are some very weighty Points of
Religion wherein you grieviously err in separating from us, besides others of
less moment, and to offer them as so many Reasons, why you should return into
the Bosom of the Church and come into our Communion, and you will plainly see
under each Head, how expressly they are founded on the holy Scripture, and that
you have left that holy Rule in departing from us. Particularly,

1. You have cast off the Original Government which Christ, or at least his
Apostles under the Guidance of his holy Spirit, established in his Church, in
the Order of Bishops, and in the Room of it have set up what is next akin to
none, as is evident from the sad Effects of your Constitution, in the many
Disorders, Contentions and Confusions which you miserably see and feel
abounding and daily increasing among you: Indeed, You pretend to retain the
Orders of Elders and Deacons; but as to Deacons, You know that your Ministers
refuse to Ordain them by laying on of Hands, wherein they act directly contrary
to Scripture, Acts 6.6. And as to your Elders, You know that what Ordination
they, many of them, Originally had, were performed by the Brethren mere Laymen,
who were allowed to Ordain in the pure Days of Your Forefathers, as appears by
the Platform agreed upon at Cambridge in the Year 1649. Chap. 9. The like
certainly was never heard of before in the whole Christian Church. But suppose
Your Ministers were Originally Ordained by Bishops; Yet the Bishops that
Ordained them never gave them Power to Ordain others: So that any one Captain
or Justice of the Peace, however lawfully commissioned, might as well take upon
them to give Commissions to others and set up other Captains or Justices of the
Peace as those Ministers, even upon this Supposition, could set up and
commissionate others. But Your Error is aggravated in this, That You set up in
Opposition to Bishops, in Opposition to that Government which was at first
established in the Church, and is through Gods Goodness established in our own
Nation and Mother Country, and this from a wrong Notion of a particular Church,
as is plain from the holy Scriptures, which do not call a particular
Congregation of Christians a particular Church: For the Scripture Notion of a
particular Church comprehended all the Christians in a City and Country
adjacent, however so many Christians or Congregations of Christians were
contained in it. Thus we read of the Church of Jerusalem, the Church of
Ephesus, the Church of Corinth, etc. That the Case was thus with the rest, we
may learn from what we read of the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20, 17. in which one
Church you there see, there were a Numbers of Elders, and consequently
doubtless many Congregations; for the Apostle dad labored there three Years
and an half* and if we may judge of his Success by other Places, Acts 2, 41. --
4, 4. -- where 3000 were converted by one Sermon, 5000 by another, so mightily
grew the Word and prevailed, Acts 19, 20. there must have been many
Congregations, as there were many Elders, in this one Church, and over these
the Apostles afterward appointed Timothy, to exercise Government and
Jurisdiction, as appears by his Epistles to him, and the like of Titus in
Crete, 1 Tit. 5. And that this Government was to continue is evident, in that
30 Years after this, when there must be yet many more Congregations and Elders,
there was still but one Church of Ephesus, and but one Angel, or but one
Ecclesiastical Governor or Bishop there, which was also the Case of the other
six Churches of Asia, as appears from Rev. 2. and 3. So that you plainly see,
these Scripture Churches were not such as they call Churches here in
New England. Thus far the Scriptures speak in this matter, and we are well
assured we don't misunderstand them, because we find plainly from the History
of the Church that this Order of Church Government was established in all the
Churches, and continued down from the Days of the Apostles through all the Ages
of the Church, to which our Bishops have succeeded, and no other was ever though it
of for 1500 Years; so that your Way is but a late invention, that was never
heard of till within those 200 Years; for I challenge all your Instructors to
show one Church in the first and purest Ages of Christianiy that was ever
goverred after the Presbyterian or Congregational manner: So that in casting
off this Order of Bishops, you seem to me to have rejected an Ordinance of God,
and might as well have cast off any other of his Instructions that you do
retain. Nay I am ready to make it appear, that there is at least as much (if
not more) Evidence for Bishops as for Infant Baptism, or the first Day Sabbath,
and that the Anabaptists are rather more excusable some of them in rejecting
the first Day Sabbath, and all in denying Baptism to Infants, than you in
denying Submission to Bishops. But I will be more brief in giving an Account of
the other Reasons I have against you. Therefore,

2. The second Thing I have against you is, (what I have already had Occasion
to mention) that you do not follow the Apostles Rule, to submit to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake. And obey them that have the Rule over you.
1 Pet. 2, 13. Heb. 13, 17. This you are bound to do, because God expressly
commands it, and that not only for Wrath but also for Conscience sake, Romans 13,
5. So that you cannot discharge a good Conscience to God, unless you be
obedient to those he has set over you. There is one Exception to this, and that
is, in Case our Rulers command what is contrary to the Word of God: But you
could never prove that the Church established by King and Parliament commands
any Thing contrary to the Word of God.

3. For this Reason I cannot see how your Separation from us can be justified
or excused, and it is clear to me, that you have broken the Peace of the Body
of Christ, by needless Divisions, and the Apostle requires us, Romans 16, 17. to
mark such as cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine we have
learned, and avoid them. Indeed if we had imposed on you any Doctrine or
Practice contrary to the Word of God, I own we should then be the Schismatics:
But in as much as we require nothing of you that God has forbidden, I don't see
how you can clear your selves from being guilty of Schism.

4. I think you are to be justly faulted that you do not read the Word of God
in your public Worship: This was the Practice of Christ himself, who stood up
to read in the Synagogue, Luke 4, 6. and the Apostles appeal to and approve of
this Practice, Acts 13, 27. that the Writings of the Prophets were read every
Sabbath Day: And Timothy was required 1 Ephesians. 4, 13. to give Attendance to
Reading as well as Exhortation and Doctrine. So that I cannot conceive how you
came to be so conceited of what you call your Gifts, as to justle out the
Reading of Gods holy Word. If you say, you can read it at Home: I answer, you
can also read Sermons and pray at Home, so this Plea equally concludes against
all public Worship.

5. You seem to me to break an express Law of Christ, in that you do not use
the Lords Prayer in your Worship: For he commanded expressly, Luke, 11, 2. When
ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. By which it is plain, he requires that this
Prayer be always used when we address our selves to God, especially in public.
Not indeed that we should use no other Prayer, but however, that this should
not be omitted: And I am sure a better cannot be devised. And what could tempt
you to throw it out of your public Worship, I cannot conceive, unless it were
that you thought yours were better than Christ's.

6. You have laid aside Public Forms of Prayer, and in Room of them have set
up the extempore Way, wherein you depend on the mere Invention of your
Minister, and so you cannot be agreed beforehand what to offer up to God,
because you don't know what it will be; whereas our Savior makes it a
Condition of our being heard That we should be agreed touching any Thing we
would ask, Mat. 18, 19. This we cannot be in your Assembly, unless (like the
Papists) we put an implicit Faith in the Minister. Now we in the Church are
free from this Difficulty; for our Service is taken, at least two Thirds, if
not three Quarters of it, Word for Word, out of the Scripture, and all
conformed to Scripture, and we all know what we are going to do, and so are
prepared to offer up our Address to God unanimously, with the Unity of the
spirit, in the Bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4, 3. and to lift up holy Hands without
Wrath or Doubting, 1 Timothy 2.8. And besides your extempore Way is liable to many
rash and unbecoming Expressions, and therefore directly contrary to the wise
Man's Advice, Eccles. 5. Be not rash with thy Mouth, nor let thy Heart Hasten
to utter any Thing before God, for God is in Heaven and thou upon Earth,
therefore let thy Words be few. For these and the like Reasons all the wise and
holy Men of old, and all ancient Churches, both Jewish and Christian, have ever
used Forms of Prayer carefully composed. Thus David composed many Forms of
Prayer and Praise, and his Psalms were ever used in public Worship, by both
Jews and Christians, and expressly commanded by St. Paul, Ephesians. 5, 19. Col. 3,
16. and Solomon used a Form in the Dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings 8, 22.
Hezekiah, Isai. 37, 15. and 38, 9. and Daniel, 9, 4. used Forms. And our
Savior comPosed a Form, Mat. 6. and used a From, John 17. Mat. 26.44. and so
did the Apostles, Acts 4, 24. Strange it is you should be against Forms, when
you have so many Scripture Rules and Examples for it! Your only Pretense is,
That you pray with the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14, 5. which you vainly pretend is
praying Extempore, as though the Spirit dictated the very Words and Phrases, or
at least the Matter of your Prayers. But if this be the Meaning of it, you must
by the same Rule sing Extempore also, and it will be as much stinting the
Spirit to sing the Psalms, which are Forms, as to use Forms in Prayer: And
indeed if your Prayers were thus inspired as you pretend, I don't see why they
should not be equal to canonical Scripture: But I believe if you could see many
of them written out Word for Word afterward, you would be ashamed to pretend
they were inspired.

7. Another Thing wherein you appear to me to vary from the ancient Examples
and Precedents in holy Scriptures, is, That the People do not bear a Part in
your public Worship. Indeed this is what many of you are prejudiced against,
because you think it is Confusion: But let me assure you, that this is merely
because you are not accustomed to such a Method, which if you were, Experience
would soon convince you, as it does us, that it would be so far from being
Confusion, that it would appear the most awakening, enlivening and every way
the most edifying Way: But I should hope that it would take off this Prejudice,
if you would consider that it was the ancient Scripture-Method of Worship. Thus
the Apostles and Primitive Christians, lift up their Voice with one Accord,
Acts 4, 24. all joining in one Form. And the Apostle requires, Romans 15, 6. That
we should with one Mind and one Mouth glorify our Heavenly Father. And the
Church in Rev. 19, 6. are represented as all praising God together, so that
their Voice was like the Noise of many Waters, which implies not their Singing
but Speaking together: And St. Paul requires not only that we should sing
Psalms, but also that we speak to one another in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual
Songs, Ephesians. 5, 19.

8. I think I have just Reason to except against you in that you do not kneel
in your Prayers and other Services, which is directly contrary to what is
required, Ps. 95, 6. Let us kneel befere the Lord our Maker. And to the Example
of the Apostle, who kneeled down and prayed with them all. Acts 20, 36. You
pretend That bodily Exercise profits little, and that we should worship God
in Spirit and Truth, which, it is true, is of the greatest Importance; but
thence to depretiate or exclude bodily Worship is directly contrary to the
Apostle, who tells us, that since we are [in Body as well as Spirit] bought
with a Price, we should therefore glorify God with our Bodies, as well as our
Spirits, which are his, 1 Cor. 6, 20. You except against our bowing at the Name
of JESUS, which it is strange you should do, when it is expressly said, at the
Name of Jesus let every Knee bow, Phil. 2, 10. which, if it is not to be
understood as an express Command of what we practice, is, I think at least,
sufficient to justify the lawfulness of it, and none methinks but an Arian or
Socinan could find Fault with it. You also except against Kneeling at the
Sacrament: But, pray, why should you? when this is the most solmn Act of
Worship that we can perform; and I have before shown that kneeling is the
proper and Scripture Posture of Worship. You reply, Our Savor and his Apostles
did not kneel. I answer, it does not certainly appear what Posture they used;
but besure it was not sitting, for the Table gesture then was leaning; if
therefore you are bound by his Example precisely, you must lean on one another.
But, supposing the Table-Posture was then admitted, is not the Case now much
altered from what it was then? Does it follow, because he admitted his Apostles
to sit with him then, when he appeared in the Form of a Servant, that therefore
we should not now use the Posture of Adoration on that Occasion, since All
Power in Heaven and Earth is given unto him, Mat. 28, 18. And he is made the
Lord of Angels, who are commanded to worship him, Heb. 1, 6. How scandalously
indecent is it to receive this Seal of our Pardon sitting? And is it not much
more becoming us to perform this most solemn Act of Worship in the ancient
adoring Posture?

9. I cannot but think it a wrong Thing, that the Laity among you are not only
forbid bearing a vocal Part in your Service, but are not allowed even so much
as to say Amen audibly in your Worship, at the End of the Prayers and other
Services: Whereas God requires this, and it was the Practice of the Church of
Old, both Jewish and Christian, as will evidently appear to you if you will
look into Deuteronomy. 27, 15. Ps. 106, 48. 1 Chronicles. 16, 36. 1 Cor. 14, 16. Rev. 5, 4.

10. I will add lastly, as to doctrinal Points, that you seem to me guilty of a
very great Error, in teaching your Children, That God has fore ordained
whatsoever comes to pass. For seeing Sin has come to pass, it is plain, that
you do herein teach them, That God has ordained, that is, willed Sin, and
consequently approves it; which yet we are sure he abhors, Hab. 1, 13. and
therefore could not decree it: And you teach also, That God has absolutely
decreed the eternal Death and Destruction of the greatest Part of Mankind; for
this I take to be the true Sense of your Confession of Faith. Whereas he has
declared with an Oath That he has no Pleasure in the Death of a Sinner, Ezekiel.
33, 11. and therefore he could not absolutely decree it, for he cannot but have
Pleasure in his own Decrees.

MANY Things might be offered further under each Head, but I will add no more
at present. These I hope will be sufficient, if duly considered, both to make
you sensible how much Reason we have, not for want of Charity, but purely in
point of Conscience, to scruple the lawfulness of your Communion, and that it
is your Duty to lay aside your Prejudices, and come over to ours. At least I
hope you will be convinced how injurious your Teachers are, in representing the
Ministers of the Church as grievous Wolves, and false Brethren, as they lately
did deliberatly being convened in Council. They could not, sure, in this, be
governed by the Spirit of the Gospel, which is all Truth, Charity, Meekness and
Moderation: This is the Spirit of Christ, with which such a censorious,
malevolent and uncharitable Spirit is certainly inconsistent, which therefore I
hope you will lay aside, considering, that they which have not the Spirit of
Christ, are none of his, Romans 8, 9.

TO conclude therefore, let me beseech you in the Spirit of Meekness, to give
these Things an unbyassed, candid and serious Consideration; and let nothing
but a pure disinterested Love of Truth and Right influence you in examining the
Weight and Imporance of them: For if you receive not the Love of the Truth, and
do not enquire after it, and embrace it, purely for its own sake, but are
governed only by Vogue, Custom, Fashion and worldly Considerations, and for the
sake of them hold fast deceit, and refuse to let it go, or (which in Effect is
the same Thing) if you lazily or negligently sit down, in a careless
inconsiderateness about it, you may provoke God to send you strong Delusions,
and leave you under the Power of them, to run on into enless Mazes of
Contention and Confusion.

BE not therefore afraid or any Account unwilling to acquaint your selves with
the Church, and examine the Matter fairly on both Sides. This can do you no
harm, and may do you a great Deal of Good: For if upon a fair and impartial
Examination on both sides you find, that, according to the best of your
Judgment, the Truth is on the Dissenting Side, you will then be reasonable, and
at least you would learn to be Charitable Dissenters, and consequently be the
more acceptable in continuing as you are: But if you should find (as I doubt
not but you will; for the Church is not afraid, nay is glad, to stand the Test
of a serious, honest and impartial Examination; I say, if you should find) That
the Truth is on the Side of the Church, you will not repent of your Inquiry:
For I conclude, certainly, if you are Persons of Honesty and Seriousness, you
would rather be on the side of the Church, then not be on the Side of Truth:
For to be deceived or in an Error, in any Case, is to be in a wretched and
unnatural Condition. And if you would thus uprightly enquire, and be thus
impartially determined, you would then Act the Part of reasonable Creatures,
and perform an acceptable because a reasonable Service, and be able to render
to every one a Reason of the Hope that is in you, and which is yet of
infinitely greater Importance, you would then be able at last to give the
better Account of your selves to God. And certainly, if, having an Opporunity
to enquire and inform your selves, to examine and judge for your selves, you
neglect it' and will not put your selves into the Way of being impartially
instructed, but shut your Eyes against the Light, you cannot but have much to
answer for, and which I don't see how you can give an Account of; wherereas, if
you would thus honestly and seriously inquire after the Truth, with a studious
and conscientious Endeavor to find it, that you may be practically governed by
it, you would not fail, by God's Blessing, to find it, and be led by it in the
Way of Peace and Holiness, through Faith, unto Salvation, which is the earnest
Prayer, and shall be the hearty endeavor of

Your sincere Friend, and Wellwisher


