PRAELATICUS TRIUMPHATUS. A Vindication of Presbyterial Ordination and
Government. In Answer to The Scripture-Bishop Examined, And to Eleutherius
Enervatus.

The Scripture-Bishop VINDICATED

A Defense of the Dialogue Between Praelaticus and Eleutherius, Upon The
SCRIPTURE-BISHOP, or The Divine Right of Presbyterian Ordination and
Government: Against The Exceptions of a Pamphlet, Entitled, The
Scripture-Bishop EXAMINED

By ELEUTHERIUS, V.D.M.

In a LETTER to a Friend.

Isai. lxvi. 5. Hear the word of the LORD, ye that tremble at his word; Your
brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake, said, Let the
LORD be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.

BOSTON, New England: Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for D. HENCHMAN in
Cornhill. 1733.

A VINDICATION OF THE DIALOGUE Between Praelaticus and Eleutherius.
In a LETTER to a Friend.
SIR,
I Had the Favor of your obliging Letter, which was the more welcome, for the
Present that accompanied it. I fully concur with you in Opinion, that our Cause
will not receive much prejudice, from the Pamphlet you sent me, entitled, The
Scripture-Bishop examined. For though the Author has entertained us, with a
pompous and plausible Harangue; and (to do him justice) has done as well as the
Subject was capable of; and indeed, made the best Appearance, of any that I
know of, who have publicly espoused the same Cause: Yet I think 'twill appear,
that he has done little more toward a refutation of the Dialogue, than to make
a flourishing Show, by a masterly Air of Contempt, by great Words, bold
Assertions, and weak Arguments. And I should not know what excuse to make, for
his assigning the same Reasons to establish his Cause, as are particularly
refuted in the Dialogue, without taking any notice of such refutation; and for
his wholly overlooking almost all the Arguments in the second Conference, in a
professed Examination of them; had not he himself furnished me with an Apology.
Error has so foul and ugly a Complexion, that it makes it need, and covet a
Vizor, to hide it is Deformity; and can only be set forth with false and
artificial Colors. The People are to be lulled into an undisturbed Security,
and the Errors of the [Prela^y] disguised.

He indeed in his Second Letter tells us, that he does not think himself at all
obliged, to regard my sta^^ng the Questions in Dispute. And I grant, that he
was under no Obligation, to enter upon the Examination of Arguments, that he
could not answer. But if he will assume the Province of an Examiner, the World
justly expects, that he should at least take some notice, of what he pretends
to examine; they will else take liberty to think, notwithstanding his assuming
Mein, and his merry Squ^bs at the Dissenters (as he is pleased to call us) that
the Dialogue yet stands its Ground; and that a new Edition of it would be a
sufficient Reply to his Invectives. However since he is for the shortest and
safest Way, I will endeavor to follow him in his own Path.

I shall not disturb him at present, in his Merriment with the Platform of
Church Discipline, hoping before I have done, to make up that Account with him
once for all; and fully prove to him, the undoubted Claim of a particular
Church, to choose their own Minister; and that though coming under a Separation
to the sacred Service, makes a Man a Minister; yet it gives him no Right to
minister unto a particular Church, without their Consent. I shall therefore
immediately consider, what he has to say in answer to the Dialogue.

And I am first of all to pay him my Acknowledgements, for such an unexampled
Instance of Modesty and Candor, as must not be lightly overlooked; which is
exhibited in the following Words. Script. Bp. Examined, page 3, 4.


He begins his Attack with an endeavor to prejudice his unwary Reader, by
branding a Church remarkable for her Indulgence, to Dissenters of all
Denominations, with the hateful Name of Persecution. -- Is it not however,
astonishing, that any considerate Man, should furnish his Adversary with a
Weapon, wherewith to dispatch himself? This our Author has effectually done:
For has not New England been notorious, for her Barbarities and cruel
Persecutions? Does* she not still continue to persecute honest and well meaning
Christians, Members of the true Church, by robbing them of their Estates,
toward the support of Schismatical Teachers; and does she not yearly imprison
their Bodies, for refusing to comply with her wicked and unjust Demands? Again,
it will not (I hope) be impertinent, to ask (supposing the Truth of the
aforesaid Allegation) if the Dissenters ever did suffer such Persecution from
the Church of England, as she has suffered from them? etc. -- Episcopacy they
abolished, murdered two Archbishops, defaced, abused, demolished Churches. The
Clergy many thousands in Number, they imprisoned, plundered, ejected etc. --
whose Sufferings therefore, must entitle them to the Character of the true
Church?

Here we have the Church of England represented in the brightest Colors, for
her remarkable Indulgence to Dissenters of all Denominations. The Dissenters
are painted as the most black and barbarous Persecutors; and New England
especially, as being notorious for her Barbarities, and cruel Persecutions; and
the Church of England by her unheard of Sufferings, entitled to the Character
of the true Church. But what Proofs does he give us of all this? What Evidence
have we of any one of these Facts, besides the bare Word of a Gentleman, which
he may think it unmannerly, for any one to call into Question? But I think it
would not have been amiss for him, to have considered his own Rule in this
Case, that "unauthorized Assertions deserve no Confutation"

Persecution is such an unmerciful Violation of all the Laws of Humanity and so
diametrically opposite to the Spirit of the Gospel, that nothing can be justly
said in its favor, whosoever are chargeable with it. It cannot be painted in
too black colors, nor rendered too odious to the World. It may therefore be
worth the while, to inquire into the Justice of this Gentleman's Declamation
against the Dissenters, and to consider how much his Cause will gain, by the
Comparison which he provokes us to make.

You cannot expect, that I should give a particular relation of all the
Persecutions we have suffered from the episcopal Party. This would require
several Volumes in Folio. Some brief Hints may be sufficient, to discover the
Modesty of this Gentleman, in the confident Assertions under Consideration.

The first remarkable Persecution in this Cause, fell upon that famous Martyr
Dr. Hooper, who with several other eminent Reformers, and afterward Martyr^
for the Protestant Cause, as Rogers, Latimer, Coverdale, Tailor, Philpot,
Bradford, etc questioned the lawfulness of the Habits, then and ever since,
imposed upon the Clergy of the Church of England; and was therefore (...) into
Prison, and continued there some Months, in expectation of Death, for refusing
a Bishopric, because he could not in Conscience be consecrated in those
Vestments; nor be anointed at his Consecration. Fox, ^atin Book of Martyr^, p.
280. Neal, Hist. of the Puri^an^, p. ^0, 71.


We hear but little more of Persecution in this Cause, during the short
remainder of King Edward's Reign; and one would think 'twere impossible, that
it should enter into the Hearts of Protestants, to worry one another, in the
bloody Marian Reign, when they were all passing through the Furnace of papal Rage
and Fury. But how improbable soever, we have an Instance of it in this Reign
also. Among the Exiles that fled from the Smithfield Flames, a considerable
Congregation settled at Frankford, were by the Magistrates admitted to a
Partnership in the French Church. These agreed upon a further Reformation, left
off the Use of the English Liturgy, chose that most excellent Man Mr. John Knox
for their Pastor, lived quietly, and worshipped God in Peace and Purity; until
Dr. Cox, and some other Bigots for the English Ceremonies, came among them,
strenuously insisted upon the Use of the Service Book, disturbed their public
Worship, and (finding they could compass their ends no other way) accused Mr.
Knox of high Treason against the Emperor, on Account of a Passage in an english
Book of his, printed some years before in England, wherein he truly observed,
that the Emperor was no less an Enemy to Christ, than Nero. By which means Mr.
Knox was banished the Town, the Congregation broke up, and the remaining,
Bigots left to quarrel it out among themselves, till they became a Scandal to
all Men, both Protestants and Papists. Strypes's Life of Grindal, p. 19, 20.
Hist^^^ of the Trouble^ of Frankford, printed 15^5


These Instances give us a Taste of the Lenity of this Party; but the
succeeding Reign of Queen Elizabeth affords a more tragical Story; and gives us
an odd Idea of the remarkable Indulgence to Dissenters of all Denominations,
which our Author boasts of.

Upon the Accession of that Queen to the Throne, all our Divines that truly
hated Popery, were for a further Reformation, as Mr. Pierce proves by many
Authorities. Vindi^. of the Dissenters, p. 43.
But the Queen so loved State and Magnificence in Religion, and was so fond of
the Rites and Ceremonies, in which she had been educated, that she would hear
nothing of it. But in the first year of her Reign, procured the fatal Act of
Uniformity, which proved so destructive to the Peace of the Church, and such an
Engine of Torture, to so many of the best Protestants in the Nation. Many that
were gaping for Promotions, fell in with the Court; but yet such was the
general Aversion against these Remnants of Popery, as they were then justly
called, that four Years after this, Proposals for a further Reformation were
brought into Convocation; and voted by the majority of the Clergy present: but
rejected by the majority of one single Voice of a Proxy. Strype's Annals. p.
337. Neal's Hist. or the P^ri^, p. 18^
From this Time, we are to expect nothing but Impositions and Persecutions, on
account of these scrupled and debated Points.

About a Year after this, Anno 1564, sundry of the Bishops meet in London, the
London-Ministers are convented before them, and required upon pain of
Deprivation, to promise and subscribe Conformity to the Habits, and likewise to
the Rites of the Common Prayer, the XXXIX Articles; and the Queen's
Injunctions. Strype's An^. p. 419.
Many were for Nonconformity suspended and deprived; and themselves and
Families brought to extreme Poverty. Now were two of the most eminent Divines
in the english Church, Sampson Dean of Christ Church, and Humphreys President
of Magdalen College Oxon, convented and imprisoned for Nonconformity, Sampson
deposed, and Humphreys afrighted from returning to Oxford, though his Place was
not at their Dispose. Neal's Hist. of the Purit. p. 208.


The next Year (1565) was there a new Citation of the London Clergy, who were
positively required to subscribe to an absolute Conformity, upon pain of
Contempt. These Ministers cried out for Compassion to themselves and Families,
saying, We shall be killed in our Souls, for this Pollution of ours: but there
could be no Compassion for such Criminals; thirty seven of them are at once
deprived of their Ministry, and many of them reduced to Beggary, though the
Archbishop himself acknowledged them to be some of the best Preachers. Ibid.
p. 211. -- Strype's Annals, p. 463.
Thus are the poor People deprived of the Bread of Life; and a great Part of
the Churches shut up, for want of Preachers.

Two Years after (Anno 1567) a Congregation of about a hundred Persons was
broken up, the most of them taken and committed to the Compter, from thence
brought before the Bishop, examined, and a great part of them sent to Bridewel;
where they were kept in strict Durance above a Year, for absenting from their
Parish Churches, and for maintaining separate Assemblies for Prayer and
Preaching, and Administering the Sacraments. Neal's Hist. of the Purit. p. 242.
-- Cotton's Congreg. Way cleared, p. 4.


The two following Years, the Eyes of the Court, and of the Bishops, were
turned another way. They were alarmed with the Confederacy of the Popish
Princes, to root the Reformation out of Europe; and seem something to overlook
the poor Non-conformists. But in the Year 1570, the penal Laws were executed to
purpose, upon many that were cited to the Spiritual Courts; and after long
Attendance and great Charges, suspended or deprived; among whom was the famous
Mr. Axton, Minister of Morton Cobbet, who was deprived of his Living; and
driven to seek his Bread in another Country: And the memorable Mr. Thomas
Cartwright, B. D. and Fellow of Trinity College Cambridge, who was deprived of
his Fellowship, and expelled the University for Nonconformity. Neal's Hist. of
the Purit. p. 256, and forward.


In the two following Years (1571, 1572.) notwithstanding the several strong
Attempts in Parliament, for a further Reformation, and for putting an End to
these Persecutions, they were continued with a Witness. In June 1571, the
Archbishop summoned about a dozen of the chief remaining Ministers, about
London, that scrupled the Habits and Ceremonies; and suspended them. Ibid. p.
280.
And not long after, were about a hundred other Ministers deprived, for the
same pretended Crime; and two of them were imprisoned a Year and four Months in
Newgate, for presenting a Petition to the Parliament for Relief; and several
others deprived, for speaking favorably of the imprisoned Ministers. Strype's
Ann. p. 187. Neal, from p. 284, to 296.


The very next Year (1573) there was a severe Persecution of the Puritans (as
the Non-conformists were then called) throughout the Kingdom. The Queen
publishes a Proclamation, that all Offenders against the Act of Uniformity,
should be severely punished. In the single Diocese of Norwich, were three
hundred* Ministers suspended: by which we may conjecture what Work was made, in
the rest of the Kingdom. A Number of Ministers were deprived; and four of the
most noted, committed to Newgate, for refusing to declare, that the
Common Prayer Book is, every Part of it, grounded on the Scripture. New Tests
were devised, to ensnare the Consciences both of the Clergy and Laity; by which
means, Numbers of each were committed to Prison, Spies were set upon all that
came to visit the Prisoners, and bring them Relief; and one eminent Minister
(Mr. Robert Johnson) died in Prison, in great Poverty and Want. Ibid. fr. p.
304, to 324.


In the two following Years (1574, 1575) the Puritans had more Rest: and I find
them harassed with no new Persecutions, besides the breaking up of their
Religious Meetings. But the poor Anabaptists had a sad Taste of the Clemency of
the Times. Twenty-seven of these were taken at public Worship, nine of them
banished, and two burnt Neal, p. 340.


In the next Year, were no less than seven Ministers deprived for
Nonconformity, in the City of Norwich; and considerable Numbers elsewhere,
though I cannot find a particular Account of their Number. Ibid. p. 348


In the two following Years (1577, 1578) it appears, that the Persecution had
made such a scarcity of Preachers in England, that in the large and populous
Town of Northampton, there was not so much as one Preacher left. In the County
of Cornwall were 140 Clergymen, not one of which was capable of preaching a
Sermon. By a Petition to the Parliament, from the City of London, it appears,
that one half at least of their Churches, are utterly unfurnished of preaching
Ministers. -- That there is scarce a tenth Man of them, that makes Conscience
to wait upon his Charge. By a Supplication from Cornwall it appears, that there
were above the number of fourscore and ten thousand Souls, that for want of the
Word of God, were in extreme Misery, and ready to perish -- That they had about
160 Churches, the greatest part of which were supplied by Men guilty of the
grossest Sins, some Fornicators, some Adulterers, some Felons bearing the mark
in their Hands for said Offense, some Drunkards, some Gamesters etc. -- That
they had some Ministers, that labored painfully and faithfully in the Lord's
Husbandry: but these Men were not suffered to attend their Callings etc. Ibid.
p. 365, 366.


In the Years 1580, and 1581, the Sufferings of the Non-conformists were not
lessened. The Ministers were shut up in Newgate, the Marshalsea, and other
Prisons in and about London. And a considerable Number of them are elsewhere
imprisoned, upon the same account. Twelve Articles of Impeachment are drawn up
against the Justices of the Quarter Sessions, by the enraged Bishop, because
they had the Courage to move his Lordship, in Favor of the imprisoned
Ministers. Neal, p. 372, 379.


The Case of the Puritan Ministers the two following Years (1582, 1583) may be
seen from a Petition of the Justices of the Peace for the County of Essex, to
the Lords of Council. The painful Ministers of the Word (say they) are
marshelled with the worst Malefactors, presented, indicted, arraigned and
condemned, for Matters, as we presume, of very slender Moment; some for leaving
the Holidays unbidden, some for singing the Psalms -- nunc Dimittis -- in the
Morning; some for turning the Questions concerning Faith, from the Infants, to
the Godfathers, which is but YOU for THOU; some for leaving out the Cross in
Baptism; some for leaving out the Ring in Marriage, etc. Strype's Ann. p. 184.
The Justice of these Complaints is manifest, from the several Instances of
barbarous Severity, transmitted to our Times; particularly the putting to Death
of two Ministers, Mr. Copping and Mr. Thacker, for Nonconformity; and the
suspending no less than two hundred thirty three Ministers for not subscribing
to the Book of Common Prayer, and of the Ordination of Priests and Deacons, as
containing nothing contrary to the Word of God. And a great many others for
other Causes, some of whom were Dignitaries in the Church, most of them
Graduates in the University; of these some were allowed time, but forty nine
were absolutely deprived at once. Ibid. p. 186. Neal's Hist. of the Purit. p.
400.


One would think that this Year's Severity, in executing some, and suspending
and depriving such a vast Number of godly and faithful Ministers, might have
satiated the violent Appetite of the Bishops to Persecution; but such a
dreadful Scene opens the very next Year (1584) as may well strike the Mind with
Horror: and cannot be justly represented, by the brief Hints to which I have
necessarily limited my self, in this Letter. Numbers of Ministers are again
suspended; and notwithstanding their own Petition, the Petition of their
Parishioners, the Petition of the Gentlemen of the several Counties, in their
Favor; and the Petition of the Inhabitants of Malden, representing, that since
their Ministers had been taken from them, -- they had none left, but such as
they could prove unfit for that Office -- Men of Occupation, serving Men, and
the basest of all Sorts, Rioters, Dicers, Drunkards etc. -- and notwithstanding
the Petition of the Inhabitants of Norwich to the same effect; the Archbishop
is so far from mitigating his rigorous Proceedings, that he seeks and obtains a
new ecclesiastical Commission, by which he and his Brethren are authorized to
examine the Ministers upon Oath, of their Opinions and Practices, that the most
inward Sentiments of the Mind, and the most private religious Exercises, may
not be concealed from these Inquisitors. And such merciless Use was made of
this Commission, that the cry of the Sufferers reached up to Heaven. The Lord
Treasurer separately, the Lords of the Queen's Counsel conjunctly, remonstrate
to the Archbishop, against these Proceedings; A Bill passed in the House of
Commons against them: but the Queen stood by the Bishops; and the Persecutions
go on. Multitude of Ministers are every where suspended, no less than thirty
eight by the Bishop of London, in one Visitation. The Archbishop writ to the
Treasurer, that he had rather die, or live in Prison all the Days of his Life,
than relax the rigor of his Proceedings, by showing Favor to one. Neal's
Hist. of the Purit. from p. 404, to 462.


In the two following Years (1585, and1586) the Persecution went on as before,
some are suspended and deprived of their Ministry, some cast into Prison; and
even some chained with Irons, and continued in hard Durance for a long time:
and such a Scarcity of Ministers is by this means procured, that there were but
two thousand Preachers, to serve near ten thousand Parishes. In one County
there were but twelve Preachers, to three hundred thirty five Churches. And in
London it self, but ninety seven Preachers, to a hundred twenty three Churches.
Supplic. of the Purit. to the Parliament.
They that would hear a Sermon, must in some Counties go twenty Miles for it;
and at the same time be fined twelve Pence a Sabbath, for absenting from their
Parish Church. Fenner's Ans. to Dr. Bridges, p. 48.


In the succeeding Year (1587) the Storm continued so heavy from the same
Quarter, that of the ninety seven Preaching Ministers, found last Year in the
City of London, there is now but nineteen resident Preachers, in that great and
populous City.

I had thought to have gone on, in a brief annual Representation of these
terrible Sufferings of the Non-conformists, further to display episcopal
Clemency: but I find the Instances crowd so fast upon me, that I must
necessarily be too voluminous, if I am any thing particular. I shall therefore
content my self, with only laying before you, some of the most horrid and
unmerciful Cruelties of the following Times; and overlook the common Course of
their remarkable Indulgence to the Dissenters of all Denominations, by
suspending the Ministers, and depriving the People of the Ordinances of
Salvation.

The first Instance I shall take notice of, is the unexampled Barbarity used
toward that great Divine and eminent Christian Mr. John Udal, who was accused
of writing a Book, wherein were some just Re^lections upon the Bishops, for
countenancing Profaneness and Impiety; and for afflicting and molesting those
that were truly Religious. For this he is sent to the Gate House, kept close
Prisoner, not suffered to have Pen Ink or Paper, or any Body to speak with him;
not so much as his Wife was suffered to come to him, nor to speak to him but at
a distance. On the 23 of July 1590, he is brought to Croydon in Irons: and though
he never owned, nor could they prove, that he was the Author of the Book; nor
was there any Appearance of Felony in it, whoever was the Author; he is
nevertheless tried and condemned: Sentence of Death was passed upon him, and
Execution openly commanded. And though Execution was a while respited, there was
no means to obtain his Pardon. Neither the earnest Intercession of the King of
Scotland on his Behalf, nor the Entreaty of all his Friends, would prevail for
his Release: But his Death in Prison, by the hard Usage he met with, prevented
a more infamous End. Pi^rce's Vind. p. 129, to 138.
By which you may see what Justice there was, in the Conclusion of his Address
to his Judges: As the Blood of Abel, so the Blood of Udal will cry to God with
a loud Voice; and the righteous Judge of the Land will require it of all that
shall be guilty of it.

In this same Year, the celebrated Mr. Cartwright (who had all this while
passed through a continued Series of Tribulation) falls again into the Clutches
of the High Commission, with fifteen other Ministers. And though all proper
Endeavors were used, to get them set at Liberty, or admitted to Bail; neither
their own Petition, nor the Intercession of the King of Scotland for them,
would prevail. Mr. Cartwright is kept close Prisoner two Years; and the rest
much longer. Neal's Hist. of the Purit. P 519, to 533.


About the same time, a Congregation in London convened for the Worship of God,
being found out, are taken, fifty six of them are committed to several Prisons,
to keep Company with several eminent Ministers, who were there before. It
appears by one of their Petitions, that there were sixty seven thus confined,
besides Women, and besides ten of their Number, that had died of their
Hardships. Their Case was most movingly represented, by their Petition to the
Council, in these words, The Praelates of this Land, have for a long Time dealt
most injuriously with us -- persecuting, imprisoning and detaining at their
Pleasure, our poor Bodies, without any Trial, Release or Bail: and hitherto
without any Cause, either for Error or Crime, directly objected -- Some of us,
they have kept in close Prison four or five Years, with miserable Usage --
others they have cast into Newgate, and laden with as many Irons as they could
bear; others into Dungeons and loathsome Goals, among the most facinorous and
vile Persons, Where it is lamentable to relate, how many have perished within
these five Years; aged Widows, aged Men and young Maidens etc. Where so many as
the Infection has spared, lie in woeful Distress, like to follow their Fellows,
if speedy Redress be not had. Others of us, have been grievously beaten with
Cudgels in Bridewel; and cast into a Place called little Ease, for refusing to
come to their Chapel Services. Some of these were after a long Imprisonment,
released from their intolerable Sufferings, by being sent into Banishment, and
others by being publicly executed as Felons, among whom were Mr. Barrow, a
Gentleman of Gray's Inn; and Mr. John Greenwood, a famous and worthy Minister
of the Gospel, who were both hanged at Tyburn. Neal's Hist. p 545, to 558.
Pierce, Vind. p. 144, etc.


But a very little after this bloody Tradegy, another eminently learned and
pious Minister of the Gospel, Mr. John Penry, was also crowned with Martyrdom,
and joined to the other Souls under the Altar, that are crying with a loud
Voice, How long, Lord, holy and true; do thou not judge and avenge our Blood,
on them that dwell on the Earth. Neal, p. 559, to 567. Pierce, Vind. p. 148.


I might have given you many more Instances of most merciless Cruelties and
horrid Barbarities, in this Reign of Queen Elizabeth: but I Am persuaded you
have by this time a just Idea of the remarkable Indulgence that the Dissenters
of all Denominations met with from the Church of England.

The Nonconformists entertained great Expectations, that their long and
grievous Persecutions under Queen Elizabeth would have* happily terminated, by
the Influence of King James, who had been brought to his Crown, protected,
defended and educated, by the Presbyterians; and who had sundry Times
interceeded for the persecuted Non-conformists, in the Reign of his
Predecessor: but they soon discovered their mistake. For notwithstanding their
Petition, signed by a thousand Hands; and notwithstanding this King's former
Dislike of the Cruelties exercised against them, as well as of the english
Service, which in a Speech to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland,
he called an evil said Mass in English, that wanted nothing of the Mass but the
Liftings; Calderwood's Hist. p. 286.
They met with the same kind of Treatment in his Reign, as in the preceding.

In his Speech to his first Parliament in England, he professes, that the Sect
of the Puritans or Novellists was not to be suffered, in any well governed
Commonwealth -- He acknowleges the Church of Rome to be our Mother Church, though
defiled with some Corruptions; That he would be content for his own Part, to
meet those of the Roman Church in the Midway etc. Ibid. p. 4^8.
This was justly looked upon as a Cloud, that boded a terrible Storm to the
poor Puritans, or Non-conformists, and it accordingly fell on them with a
Witness.

In the second Year (says a learned and faithful Historian of that Time) after
the King's coming into England, three hundred Ministers were either silenced or
deprived of their Benefices, or excommunicated, or cast into Prisons, or forced
to leave their own Country. The Relics of Popery that were much grown out of
Use, before Queen Elizabeth's Death, were now restored. A more grievous
Persecution of the orthodox Faith is not to be met with in History, in any
Prince's Reign. Alt^r. Damas. in Pref.
And as this Prince in the Beginning of his Reign made himself an easy Prey to
the Flattery of the Bishops, so he rather favored than prevented the sad
Series of Persecution, that continued during his Life. Only hearing a Sermon
repeated on the Lord's Day Evening, or being partaker in a Petition to the
Parliament, for relief from these Oppressions, is cause of imprisonment without
Bail or Main-prize. A Declaration is published, giving Liberty for all manner
of Sports on the Lord's Day; and the poor Nonconformist-Ministers, that refused
to read it publicly, or that spoke against that horrible Profanation of the
Sabbath, were every where trodden under Foot; and some of them severely
handled. Pierce's Vind. p. 164, to 167.


In Scotland, their whole Ecclesiastical Constitution is subverted, Episcopacy,
Holidays and Ceremonies obtruded, their godly and faithful Ministers,
Multitudes of them silenced, imprisoned and banished, some of the most noted
and learned called into England; and confined there, that this Change might be
carried on with less Opposition: And in a Word, the whole Church covered with a
dark Cloud of horrible Persecution. Calderwood's Hist from p. 4^3 ad Finem.
The particular Instances of these tragical Persecutions, are too many to be
distinctly enumerated here.

In the following Reign, the Bishops carry their lordly Domination over the
Bodies, Estates and Consciences of all Men, to the utmost Height. All
Opposition to their violent Proceedings, was punished with most extreme
Severity. All Lectures on any Week Day, and Afternoon Sermons on the Lord's
Day, are put down; in the room of these latter, were substituted Games and
Dancing upon the Lord's Day, enjoined by a royal Proclamation, which all
parochial Ministers were required to publish in their Congregations, at their
Peril; whoever refused, were silenced, imprisoned, and cruelly treated. Private
Clergymen set up Images in their Churches, placed their Communion Table
Altar-wise, and forced People to the Idolatry of bowing to 'em; pressed their
People to confess their Sins; and preached up their own Power of absolving
them: if any opposed them, they fell under their Wrath and Fury. Ministers were
silenced, sequestered and deprived; and the Laity excommunicated, plundered and
ruined. A Son was excommunicated, for repeating a Sermon to his own Father.
Rushworth's Collect. Part. 3 p. 181.
Unheard of Punishments were inflicted, for Non compliance with these Things.
Some have their Ears cut off, their Noses slit, unmerciful Fines much beyond
the value of their Estates imposed upon them, their Faces branded with red hot
Irons; and they most barbarously and cruelly whipped, and shut up in the most
afflicting and loathsom^ Dungeons; all which miserable Tortures were the sad
Lot of Dr. Leighton, Dr. Bastwick, Mr. Prin, and Mr. Burton. Pierce's Vindicat.
p. 177, to 194.
Multitudes were taken by their Pursevants, Multitudes censured in their High
Commission Court, Multitudes of Ministers silenced and imprisoned, Multitudes
of all Sorts banished, or forced to fly into other Countries, to escape the
Barbarities designed against them.

NEW ENGLAND is a standing Monument of these Tragedies; which derived it is
Being and first Increase, from the merciless Barbarities of this, and the
foregoing Reign. As Mr. Norton observes; Life of Mr. Colton. p. 18, 19.
The Time being now come, wherein God purposed to superadd unto what had
formerly been, a practical and more notable Testimony against the intermixing
of human Inventions with Institutions Divine, and to the Gospel-Church-Worship
and Polity in their Purity, He in his all-wise Providence transplants many of
his faithful Servants into this Wilderness, as a Place in respect of it is
Remoteness so much fitter for the fuller Inquity after, and free Exercise of,
all his holy Ordinances. -- A Service, of which the Apologetical Brethren (may
we be permitted to transcribe their Apprehensions thereof) speak thus: Last of
all we had the recent and later Example of the Ways and Practices (and those
improved to a better Edition, and greater Refinement, by all the forementioned
Helps) of those Multitudes of godly Men of our own Nation, almost to the Number
of another Nation, among them some as holy and judicious Divines as this
Kingdom has bred; whose Sincerity in their Way has been testified before all
the World, and will be to all Generations to come, by the greatest Undertaking
(but that of our father Abraham out of his own Country, and his Seed after him)
A transplanting themselves Thousands of Miles distance, and that by Sea, into a
Wilderness, merely to worship God more purely; whither to allure them, there
could be no other Invitement.

"Exilium causa ipsa jubet mihi dulce, videri,
"Et desiderium dulce levat patriae.
Beza Eleg 2. And can we, the Posterity of those excellent Persons' who forsook
their Country, Kindred and pleasant Habitations; who crossed the vast Ocean,
came into a howling Wilderness, among innumerable Armies of salvage Pagans; and
encountered so many Difficulties and Deaths, for the Enjoyment of a good
Conscience, and the pure Worship of God; can we (I say) be gulled into a belief
of the remarkable Indulgence of those Times to Dissenters of all Denominations!
Or can we be persuaded to apostatize from the Cause, for which our Fathers so
remarkably suffered; and in which they were so remarkably owned and blessed!
Surely, our only Way to secure the Divine Presence, is to keep close to the
Institutions of our Lord Jesus Christ; as our Forefathers have done at their
Peril; and in that Way we may depend upon it, that he will remember the
Kindness of our Youth, the Love of our Espousals, when we came after him into
the Wilderness, into a Land that was not sown.

I think, Sir, that I have said enough, to give you a just Idea of the clemency
of those Times; and I am sure, a fall Account of these unexampled Cruelties
would fill every good Man with Horror. -- Hear these things represented by my
Lord Digby, one of the greatest Friends to the Church Party, in a Speech in
Parliament, earnestly pleading in their behalf, wherein he is forced upon these
following Concessions.

Methinks, the Vengeance of the Prelates has been so laid, as if 'twere meant,
no Generation, no Degree, no Complexion of Mankind, should escape it.

Was there a Man of nice and tender Conscience? Him they afflicted with Scandal
in adiaphoris, imposing upon him those things as necessary, which he thinks
unlawful; and they themselves know to be indifferent.

Was there a Man of legal Conscience; that m^^e the Establishment by Law, the
measure of his Religion? Him they netled with Innovations, with fresh
Introductions to Popery.

Was there a Man of a meek and humble Spirit? Him they have trampled to dirt in
their Pride.

Was there a Man of a proud and arrogant Nature? Him they have bereft of
Reason, with Indignation at their superlative Insolence about him.

Was there a Man peaceably effected, studious of the Quiet and Tranquillity of
his Country? Their Incendiarships have plagued him. --

Was there a Man of a pretty sturdy Conscience, that would not blanch for a
little? Their pernicious Oath has made him sensible and wounded; or, I fear,
prepared him for the Devil.

Was there a Man that durst mutter against their Insolences? He may enquire
for his Luggs, they have been within the Bishops Visitation: as if they would
not only derive their Brandishment of the spiritual Sword, from St. Peter; but
of the material one too, and the Right to cut off Ears.

If now we turn our Eyes to Scotland, we shall find the same Tragedies acted
there. The Lands formerly belonging to popish Bishops are violently taken from
their right Owners, for the Support of the Bishops, newly obtruded upon them.
The drawing a Petition to the King, for the Regulation of their abuses, is made
a capital Offense; for which the Lord Balm^rinoch is condemned to dye. Their
ecclesiastical Judicatories are subverted, the Liturgy, and a Body of Canons
for the Worship and Government of that Church, violently imposed upon them. All
which was managed (says Bp. Burn^t) by four or five aspiring Bishops. In a
word, the Impositions and Oppressions were such, as alarmed the whole Nation,
who unanimously take up Arms to defend themselves, against their Oppressors and
Persecutors. Bishop Burnet's Hist, of his own Times, Vol. 1. from p. 25, to 39.


Thus these Incendiaries set both Nations on Fire, and gave the sad Occasion to
the civil War with it is direful Consequences, that laid the Nations waste.

Pas^ing over the Time of the Interregnum, when it was put out of the Bishops
Power to persecute: Let us consider the merciful Dispensations of the Church
Party, after the Restoration of King Charles II.

Though that Prince made high Pretenses to Moderation; and showed particular
Favor to some of the Presbyterians, at his first Return to his Kingdoms, he is
quickly brought into the High Church Policy. A Conference is appointed, between
some of the episcopal Clergy, and some of the Non-conformists, where instead of
abating a Whit of their former Rigor, or a Ragg of their Ceremonies, the Terms
of Communion are by the Convocation, immediately succeeding the Conference,
rendered more difficult; and the way paved for the Act of Uniformity, that was
passed soon after, by which every one is deprived of all ecclesiastical
Benefices, that don't before the 24th of August 1662, declare their unfeigned
Assent and Consent to all and every Thing, contained in the Book of Common
Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, according to the Use of the Church
of England. The Book of Common Prayer, with the Alterations and Corrections
newly made in Convocation, was that to which they were to subscribe: the
Impression of that Book ( says Bishop Burnet) went on so slowly, that there
were few Books set out to Sale, when the Day came -- With so much Precipitation
was that matter driven on, that it seemed expected, that the Clergy should
subscribe implicitly to a Book they had never seen; this was done by too many,
as I was informed by some of the Bishops Bishop Burnet's Hist. Vol. 1. p. 3^3.
So that there was in a manner, no Ministry (...) in England, but those, whose
Consciences would allow them to subscribe, and declare their hearty Assent and
Consent, to a Book they had neither seen nor could see, in the limited Time
Above two thousand of the most learned and faithful Ministers in the Nation,
are turned out of their Livings in one Day; and left without any Means of
Subsistence.

But this Severity not being sufficient; a new Act is made the very next Year,
impowring Ju^tices of the Peace, to convict Offenders without Juries. Any
Meeting for religious Worship, at which five were present, more than the
Family, was declared a Conventicle; and every Person above sixteer Years old,
that was present at it, was to lie three Months in Prison, or to pay Five
Pounds for the first Offense: six Months for the second Offense; and to pay
twenty Pounds Fine: and for the third Offense was to be banished to any
Plantation, except New England or Virginia, or to pay an hundred Pounds. Bishop
Burnet's Hist. Vol. I. p. 335.
-- We may easily conclude what terrible Persecutions followed, by the
Execution of this Act: but this was not sufficient, fully to gratify the cruel
Disposition of our Adversaries.

Another Act is made, enjoining all the silenced Ministers to take an Oath, --
that they would not at any time, endeavor an Alteration in the Government of
the Church or State; such as refused this, were not to come within five Miles
of any City Parliament Borough, or of the Church where they had served. By this
means, those two thousand sil^nced Ministers are brought into this sad Dilemma,
that they must either wholly neglect the Ministry committed to them by Christ,
break through their Ordination Vows, and see Multitudes of poor Souls perish
for lack of Vision, while they sit all the day idle; or fall under the heavy
Lash of these severe Laws. Whence, by their Faithfulness in their Master's
Service, great Numbers of 'em are heavily fined; and shut up in the most
uncomfortable Prisons, where some died of the Hardships imposed upon them,
having no outward Relief, but the sad Comfort of having their Hearers share
with 'em in their Fines, Imprisonments, and other Severities.

If the Reader would see a more exact Account of these dark and dreadful Times,
let him read Dr. Calamy's Abridgement and Continuation, in four Volumes; and
he will need no other Evidence of the merciful Disposition of that Church, which
our Author boasts of.

If we look over to Scotland, the most tragical Scene opens there, that ever
was known. Every Body must own, that the Persecution of the Presbyterians in
that Kingdom did in many Circumstances exceed the Spanish Inquisition; and even
come up to the bloodiest Rage of the Heathen Emperors. I venture to challenge
our Author, to pitch upon any single Instance of Barbarity, in the Reigns of
Maximilian or Dioclesian, that cannot be paralleled by the horrible Sufferings
of the Church of Scotland, in that Period.

It is impossible I should in the Compass of this Letter, give you so much as a
Detail of these unmerciful Cruelties: a particular Relation of them in their
several Circumstances, by the Rev. Mr. Wodrow, containing two large Volumes in
Folio.

The Ministry of the Church of Scotland are all turned out; and their Places
supplied with most mean, ignorant, and scandalous Persons. Burnet's Hist. of
his own Times, Vol. I. p. 25^, 258.
If any Presbyterians neglect, if their Wives or Children neglect Attendance
upon the Ministry of these Curates; or if any suffer the Presbyterian Ministers
so preach on their Lands, they are unmercifully fined; oftentimes beyond the
real value of their Estates. Mr. Wodrow in his abovementioned History, has made
a Computation of above three Millions, one hundred seventy four thousand, eight
hundred and nineteen Pounds, thus taken, but from Part of the Kingdom, in about
six Years time. A vast number of Fines, he has here omitted, because elsewhere
mentioned in his History; and he tells us there were far greater Numbers, that
he had no particular Account of. Preface, p. vi.


The Parliament of Scotland passes an Act, that Non-conformist-Ministers should
not live within 20 Miles of their own Parishes, nor within 6 of Edinburgh or
any Cathedral Hist. of Kings of Scotl. p. 242.


An Army of savage Highlanders is quartered upon the Parts, they called most
disaffected, who ravaged, destroyed, and carried away what they pleased. The
Presbyterian Meetings are pursued with armed Forces, and their Blood often
mingled with their Sacrifices. Ibid. p. 250, 253.


Innumerable Multitudes are put into the most vile, unhealthy and loathsome
Prisons throughout the Kingdom: above a hundred are shut up at a Time, in a
horrid Vault, full of Mire Ankle-deep, where they had no room to sit, without
leaning one upon another; nor the least Accommodation for Sitting, Leaning, or
Lying, or Access to ease Nature; stifled for want of Air; and not so much as
allowed a little Water to drink, but what they paid for at an exorbitant Price.
Wodrow, Vol. II. p. 558.


Many are tortured with most inhuman Cruelty, by fixing an Iron Screw upon
their Thumbs, and stretching of it, so as to make their Pain intolerable; by
fixing an iron Boot upon their Legs, and driving in Wedges, till the Flesh and
Bones are broken to Pieces; by tying a small Cord about their Heads; and with
the But-End of a Pistol, twisting it so hard, as to cut the Flesh round to the
Skull; by tying two small Cords to the Thumbs, and by them drawing up the
Sufferers, to the Roof of a House; by laying the miserable Sufferers on their
Backs upon a Form, with their Hands bound down to the foot of the Form, and a
fiery Match put between every Finger of both Hands, by which several had their
Fingers so burnt, that the very Bones were turned to Ashes, and others died of
the Torture; and by several other Engines of Cruelty. Ibid. p. 70, 77, 164,
391, 560 et alibi.


Multitudes are banished, and Multitudes put to Death by their Courts of
Justice: but this proving too tedious and troublesome to the Persecutors, a
shorter Method was taken, to get rid of all those that conscienciously
scrupled, or that were but suspected to dislike, their newly established
Prelacy and Ceremonies. Soldiers are sent about the Country, and authorized to
kill Men in the Fields, in cold Blood; Wodrow's Hist. Vol. II. p. 333, 334.
and vast Numbers are accordingly put to Death in this military Way, many of
them without so much as a previous Examination; for which this was a sufficient
Excuse, They were known to be Whiggs, and they ought to be shot wherever they
can be found. Ibid. p. 446, 447, 451, 460 et alibi.
Several Women are tied down at low Water Mark, till the Water rise upon and
drown them Ibid. p. 506.
. Neither were very Babes and Sucklings exempted from the Cruelties of those
bloody days Dr. Mather's Palm-Beaters; (being Extracts out of Mr. Wodrow's
Hist.) p. 46 etc.
.

The Instances of these Barbarities are numberless. I must therefore content my
self with transcribing a Summary of this matter; as it is represented, by the
Author of the Memoirs of the Church of Scotland, Part 3. p. 290 etc.

In this Persecution, as has been collected from the Accounts both public and
private, above eighteen thousand People have suffered the utmost Extremities,
their Enemies could inflict; of which the following Particulars are a part,
many of which can be proved even to the Names of the Persons, with the Places
of their Abode.

Seventeen hundred have been banished as Slaves to the english Plantations,
besides such as were by order of Council, at the beginning of the Persecution,
ordered on pain of Death to leave their Country, which amounted to eighty
seven; and besides seven hundred and fifty banished to Ze^land, to the Isles of
Lewis, Orkney, and to other remote Places belonging to Scotland; of these two
hundred were wilfully and premeditately murdered, by keeping them under Hatches
till they were drowned, when the Ship was stranded, and there was time for them
to escape.

Eight hundred were outlawed, as we call it in England, about the time of
Pentland affair; by order of the High Commission Court: and fifty five eminent
Persons, were panelled, as the Scots Laws term it -- and were sentenced to be
executed, without further Prosecutions, when they should be taken, as many of
them afterward were; among those were ten or eleven Ministers.

It is impossible to give an Account of those, who perished by unjust and
tedious Confinement in Prisons, by the barbarity of mer^iless Jaylors or
Keepers, Stench of close and horrid Dungeons and Vaults, want of Conveniences
etc. -- They who think they have modestly computed the Number of these (for an
exact Account cannot be had) tell us, they amount to above three thousand, six
hundred. --

Those that have fled from their Country, forced into voluntary Banishment, in
England, Ireland, Holland, Sweden etc. where they were driven into great
distress, -- the Number of these has been esteemed by such as think they have
made a modest Calculation, at above seven thousand.

Besides these, there were abundance of innocent and pious Sufferers, who were
basely murdered by the Soldiers and Persecutors; -- being generally killed in
cold Blood, without any process of Law civil or military, without any visible
Crime, Charge, or Examination; of these, the printed Accounts tell us of
seventy eight murdered by particular Persons; and I am well assured there were
very many more; and I have heard, that a Person whom I have not met with, has
the Names of above four hundred and twenty more: But that Number I dare not
avouch.

The Number really executed in the pretended course of Justice, -- and who died
by the Hangman, is very great; and I am told that three hundred sixty two are
to be found upon the several Books of the Justiciary and Council Courts, upon
Record, besides what were executed by military Laws as they call them, of which
no Record has been kept.

The Number of those who perished through Cold, Hunger, and other Distresses,
contracted in their Flight into Mountains, Wanderings without Shelter or
Harbor, in dreadful Winters etc. -- These were many Thousands, and cannot be
calculated; but will certainly make up more than the Number of eighteen
thousand.

Among these, I say nothing of the Pillage and Spoil of Goods, the turning
Women and Children out into the Fields, in Cold and Nakedness, after devouring
their Food, and tearing off their Clothes from their Backs, of which many
perished for Want, and by the Extremities of the Weather.

Such as these have been the Trials, those of our Profession have passed through
from the Episcopalians, in defense of the divine Institutions, and of a good
Conscience toward God. And can the Gentleman I oppose pretend, that the other
Side have ever met with such like Sufferings from us, as I have mentioned
above, that he should so confidently put us upon making the Comparison? Let the
World judge, whether this ben't a sufficient Vindication, of what was but
occasionally mentioned in the Dialogue, and what causelessly put the Gentleman
into such a Hear.

Though I cannot agree with him in supposing, that the Sufferings of any
Profession necessarily entitle them to the Character of the true Church; nor
would I by ripping up old Faults, create fresh Resentments among Parties: Yet I
think, what I have said upon this Head, will justify my proposing these Things,
as a sufficient Call to look into the Cause, for which so many excellent
Persons have suffered; as well as justly awaken every one, to an Abhorrence of
these execrable Methods of propagating their religious Principles, which I
would hope our Adversaries themselves are by this Time heartily ashamed of.

And now let us consider our Author's particular Charges against us. Has not
New England (says he) been notorious for her Barbarities and cruel
Persecutions? Does she not yet continue to persecute honest and well meaning
Christians, Members of the true Church, by robbing them of their Estates,
toward the Support of Schismatical Teachers? and does she not yearly imprison
their Bodies? etc. To which I answer, if he can make our this Charge by
sufficient Evidences, I shall join with him, in bearing my Testimony against
these things. For I look upon Persecution to be too black and enormous a Crime,
to admit of any Apology; and it is full as bad in New England, as any where
else.

I freely acknowledge, that in the Infancy of New England, they made some
severe Laws against certain Seducers, crowding in among them, who threatened no
less than the Dissolution of their Government. There were some Severities used
in those days, particularly toward a sort of Quakers, that were scarce
justifiable; neither do we go about to justify them: yet, I must observe, that
upon a fair State of the Matter, much might be pleaded to extenuate those
Proceedings, and make them appear abundantly less harsh and rigorous, than they
are by our Adversaries represented to be. But make the worst of them, I believe
the Case can never be made a Parallel with that, our Author would compare it
to. For how widely different is the punishing profane insolent Disturbers of
solemn public Worship, open Deriders and Subverters of the Christian Faith,
and factious Despisers of civil Government; how widely different, I say, is
this Case from that of punishing orthodox peaceable and faithful Christians,
for mere Nonconformity to be established Church in some Points of Ceremony and
Order! -- For it seems, the Sectaries of that Day, against whom those
New England Laws were chiefly sharpened, were a more tumultuous and blasphemous
Generation, than in after times. However, there were but few Prosecutions, upon
those Laws, before the New-Englanders grew sensible of their Error in making
them, and soon went into an entire Toleration of the various Sectaries crept in
amongst them. And when the Revolution came, the Convention (in Massachusetts)
upon that Occasion, unanimously voted, That any Laws, which might seem --
contrary to a due Liberty of Conscience, never should be executed in the
Territory Vindication of N. E. against a late Address of a Faction there, p.
17, 18.
. And since that Time several Laws have been made for the Ease of Quakers,
Anabaptists, and Episcopalians, with Relation to the public Taxes. So that I
know of nothing, that can free our Author (as to the substance of his
Crimination) from the guilt of groundless Slander and Calumny.

It is true, that some former Laws of New England, which have had the royal
Approbation, and are therefore the King's Laws, do entitle the Minister,
elected by the Majority of the Inhabitants within his Parish, to the Salary
agreed upon by them, to be levied by Rate upon 'em all. If the Majority of the
Parish be Episcopalians, their Minister has a legal claim to the Salary: but if
the Majority be of our Persuasion, their Minister in like manner has the Claim.
And what Grounds then can there be for this tragical Outcry? Certainly it is
not over-modest, for a Clergyman of the Church of England, to exclaim after
this manner, when it is notorious, that not only the Tenths of their Income are
paid by all Professions in England, to the established Clergy: but that the
episcopal Clergy every where exact their Salary, from those of other
Persuasions, where they can legally do it. This is exemplified in New York; and
on the West End of Long Island, where the Episcopalians are not above a tenth
Part of the People. And thus it is also in Maryland, Virginia, and Carolina.

But what makes this Crimination the more extravagant is, that such Regard has
been had to the episcopal Clergy amongst us, that in Massachusett and
Connecticut Governments, wherever there is an episcopal Incumbent settled, he is
entitled by Laws not long since made, to that Part of the Tax for the Support
of the Ministry, which is paid by the Members of his own Congregation. And each
episcopal Congregation has power to raise what Tax they please among
themselves, for the Support of their Minister.

And all must acknowledge, that from the Beginning our Treatment of
Episcopalians, coming into these Parts, has been with an exemplary Candor,
Charity and Civility. Many Years passed indeed before the Church of England
Service or Common Prayer was publicly used in the Country: But what was the
Reason? Because there never was all that while a sufficient Number to form a
Congregation, or else they could never find Clergymen to undertake the Cure of
their Souls One or other of these was the true Reason. Not, because the
Government forbad or hindered their Setting up the Episcopal Way. No; They have
always had that Regard to the Law of christian Forbearance, that they never (as
I can learn) gave the least molestation to that Way: although, it is well known
that New England was sought by the first Planters as a Retreat from the
Imposition of some Ceremonies in the Church Service. All along, if any
appearing to be Men fearing, God, have offered to join in Worship with the
Churches here, they have readily been received to Communion in special
Ordinances, notwithstanding their being in Judgment Episcopal. And in later
Times, wherever a number in any Place have been desirous to set up the Way of
the Church of England, no Interruption has been given to their Attempts: save
what is common to their Neighbors of our own Persuasion, in the Case of
setting up a new Congregation.

But let us now turn the Tables, and see how it fared with us, when in an evil
Reign we lost our Charters, and the Government fell into Episcopal Hands. It
may be, our Author, when drawing up his Indictment of New England, was either a
Stranger or inadvertent to that part of our History, which relates to the
doleful Scenes of Confusion, Persecution and Oppression, that New England saw
in the days of Sir Edmund Andross, a Governor of his own Communion: who, with
four or five of his Council (Men of the same Principles) by the most arbitrary
Proceedings harrass'd and enslaved the Country; invading Liberty and Property,
and threatening a Desolation of all our Rights and Privileges Civil and
Ecclesiastical. Armies they levied, Laws they made, Taxes they raised on the
People, and did what else they pleased, without the Advice of an Assembly. Some
worthy Persons, having in an humble Address represented this Proceeding as a
Grievance, were committed to the common Jail for a High Misdemeanour; denied
the Benefit of the Hebeas Corpus Act; tried out of their County; fined
exorbitantly (some 20, 30, 50 l.) and obliged to pay 160 l. for Fees, when the
Prosecution would hardly have cost them so many Shillings under a just
Administration. And when upon their Trial they claimed the Privileges of
Englishmen, they were insulted and scoffingly told, Those things would not
follow them to the Ends of the Earth. -- Their Title to their Lands was
absolutely denied by the Governor and his Creatures, upon trifling Pretenses!
So that they who had fairly purchased their Lands, and held them in quiet
Possession for above fifty Years, were now obliged to accept new Deeds or
Patents from the Governor, and pay for them a third part of their Value, in
order to ascertain their Titles, or otherwise they would be seized for the
Crown. ^ummer's Defense of the N. E. Charters, p. 39 etc.
Oppression rushed in like a Tide, and bore down every thing before it. There
were Standing Forces, to keep the Country in Awe; a Crew, that were ever moving
Tumults, and committing insufferable Riots amongst a quiet and peaceable
People; and that without Redress upon frequent Complaints. The Governor had
said, upon Occasion, That it would be for the Kings's Interest, for this People
to be removed, and another introduced: and there were several Things, which
made it suspected, that Sir E (carrying on secret Intreagues with the Indians)
had conducted 7 or 800 of our Soldiers into the Eastern Wilderness in the depth
of Winter, on purpose to sacrifice them there. Some of the principal Gentlemen
of the Country were imprisoned, bound to the Behavior, and cruelly squeezed by
the Demands of Cormorant Messengers and Officers, and all without any
Accusation, but merely upon a Jealousy that they joined in the common Complaint
of these Grievances. Some of our old Magistrates were put in Jail without any
Fault laid to their Charge, and there kept for several Months. Some of our
Ministers were grievously persecuted; a Process commenced against one for a
Book published long enough before Sir E. arrived in New England. -- Another
accused of seditious Preaching, dragged out of his County to be tried, because
there (where he was best known) a Panel could not be got wicked enough to
ruin him on the single Testimony of one debauched Person, contradicted by he
whole Assembly that heard the Sermon. The scrupled Mode of laying the Hand on
the Bible in taking an Oath was then imposed Willard's Discourse concerning
that Ceremony.
; and many holy and worthy Men suffered for refusing it. The Church-Party
demanding the Keys of the South Meeting House in Boston, and being refused, the
Governor threatened, He would presently seize on that House, and all the
Meeting Houses in the Country, and hinder the People from contributing the
value of Twopence toward the Maintenance of any Nonconformist Minister. He
also bad them consider what Effects the stiffness of the Protestants in France
had, who would not yield in what they might have done, [N.B.] and now (said he)
there is not a Protestant in France. But this not prevailing, the Consequence
was, they thrust themselves into the South Meeting House; and there continued,
until by interrupting that Congregation, often in their Times, sometimes in the
very Parts of their Worship, the whole Town cried Shame upon 'em; them they
though it of building. Some of our People contributed toward it: -- But can the
Townsmen of Boston tell, at whose Charge the Land (part of one of their
Burying-places) was purchased? The People of New England endured these and a
hundred more such Injuries from a little restless Party, who arrogated to
themselves the Name of the Church of England Vindication of N. E. S^pradict. p
4. and passim.
. And had not the ever-memorable REVOLUTION defeated the Purposes of those
unhappy Men, very probably New England had soon been a Stage for the same
bloody Tragedies, to be acted over, as were seen in our Mother Country in those
days of common Distress to Protestant Dissenters. Thus we have balanced the
Account relating to New England.

But our Author goes on, with a more extended Charge, against the Dissenters in
general. Episcopacy they abolished, murdered two Archbishops, defaced, abused,
demolished Churches, the Clergy many thousands in Number, they imprisoned,
plundered, ejected, etc. Let us consider this something particularly. Was
Episcopacy abolished? Let my Lord Digby in his forementioned Speech in the
House of Commons, furnish us with a Reason for that Conduct: I (says that noble
Lord) find my self willing to have them passed by (i. e. the Faults in the
Petitions against the Bishops, then before the House) especially when I
consider, how naturally prone all Mankind is, when it finds it self oppressed
beyond all Patience, to fly into Extremes for Ease; and indeed I do not think
any People has been ever more provoked, than the genera^lty of England of late
years, by the Insolences and Exorbitancies of the Prelates.

But who were the two Archbishops they murdered? I suppose he means Arch
Bishop Laud, and Archbishop Sharp. The first of these was the chief Boute^eu
and Incendiary, in all those horrible Flames of Persecution, by which the
Nation was so severely scorched; on which account, he was impeached and
condemned by the Parliament, for his horrible Barbarities and Oppression; for
his Infraction of all our Liberties and Privileges; and for the violations of
all Laws, divine and humane. I shall not dispute with this Gentleman, the
Justice of his Sentence; nor the Authority by which he fell. But the Dissenters
are no more accountable for his Death, than they are for all the State-Tryals,
that have ever occurred. And as for the second of these Archbishops, the
perfidious and barbarous Persecutor Sharp, he fell a Martyr to his own inhuman
Cruelties, by the Hands of enraged Assassins. But were the Presbyterians guilty
of his Murder? Can this Gentleman prove, that there was so much as one Man,
acknowledged by the Church of Scotland, that was concerned in his Death^? There
were indeed five Presbyterians put to Death, on the Account of this Murder: but
as it was never proved against them, so they in some of the last Words that
ever they spoke, ventured their Eternity upon their Innocence. And who was
guilty of their Murder, God will judge. But this Gentleman has doubtless heard
of Matchiavel's Advice, Fortiter calumniare, aliquid haerebit.

He next charges us with defacing, abusing, and demolishing Churches. By
defacing Churches, he may possibly mean the destroying as Fonts, Organs,
Altars, and the like, so Images, the Scandalous Images, then set up in their
Protestant Churches; such as that at Salisbury, which represented God the
Father, under the Form of an old Man, toward which an old Woman used to make a
Cursey Pierce's Vindic. p. 202.
; and the Roods, that is the Images of Christ upon the Cross, with Mary and
John standing by; as also Images of other Saints, Tutelaries of the Churches,
to which they were dedicated. Ibid. p. 201.
That the Churches were thus defaced, is certain; and the Nonconformists have
no Cause to be ashamed of the Imputation, had it been done by them. And it must
also be acknowleged, that there were other sad Devastations made, in the time
of the Civil Wars; and who could expect any better, from the Heat of military
Fury? But it was as much out of the Power of the Dissenters, as of the
Episcopalians, to prevent this, and all the other amazing Consequences of that
intestine War. Let them thank those that gave Occasion to the War, for all the
Miseries that it brought upon them.

We are also charged with imprisoning, plundering, ejecting the Clergy, many
Thousands in number etc. -- Now the true State of that Case is this. As for the
Archbishops, Bishops, and the Cathedral Clergy, they suffered, as such, upon
the Extirpation of the Hierarchy; which was done by a conformable Parliament;
the Members of which were many of them known to be in their Judgment for the
ancient moderate Episcopacy, and all of them (a very few only excepted) in
Communion with the Church of England Dr. Calamy, Church and Dissenters
compared, as to Persecution, p. 35, 28. Pierce's Vind. p. 204.
. Mr. Baxter testifies, That as far as he could learn by his own Acquaintance,
and the Report of the Members themselves, there was but one known Presbyterian
in the House of Commons, when the Wars began Answer to Dodwell and Sherlock, p.
100.
. And must the Dissenters be forced to answer for the Proceedings of an
Episcopal Parliament! -- Again, The Parochial Clergy, many of them suffered
only as Pluralists, upon the Ordinance against Pluralities and Nonresidences
Calamy, ubi supra, p. 76.
, which had been justly complained of from the beginning of the Reformation
Some that suffered, were restless Adversaries to the Parliament and their Cause
Ibid. p. 74, 38, 57.
: and several were active in the civil Wars, famous for fighting and plundering
the Country Ibid. p. 92.
. Some were scandalous for preaching Divinity subversive of Liberty and
Property Ibid. p. 29, 69.
Some were avowed Romanists, or Papists in Masquerade Ibid. p. 69, 71.
. In fine, a Multitude were cast out for their vile Immoralities, deposed upon
Oath against them, which rendered them unworthy of their Character Ibid. p. 38,
70, 75.
. Hence I believe, it will be found, that (comparatively) few were turned out
merely for their refusing the Covenant: and if any suffered for refusing the
Engagement, it was no more than what some Presbyterians did likewise Calamy,
ubi supra, p. 70, 81.
. I doubt, the Parliament's Committees were too severe in ejecting some honest
Men Ibid. p. 72.
: and though herein they only followed the Example, the Prelatical Party had
before set them, yet we are sorry they imitated them so far as they did. We do
not justify it, but lament it, that several learned and pious Ministers were
then turned out: though they were not so many as is pretended by our Adversaries,
who have lately stretched their Wits and (I fear) their Consciences too, to
increase their Number Pierce's Vind. P. I. p. 214.
. -- Our Author would ^ai^ make us believe indeed, that the Clergy MANY
THOUSANDS in Number, were imprisoned, plundered, ejected etc. -- But certainly
he will find it very difficult to prove, that the Number even of the Ejected
(take in Scandalous and all) was any thing near so great, as he pretends. If
they were Thousands, yet surely not many Thousands. It Is true, Dr. Walker, in
his Attempt to recover the Names and Sufferings of the sequestered Clergy,
guesses that there were Ten Thousand Sufferers on the Church-Side; but after
all his Blustering, his List makes out little more than a fifth part of that
Number: and Dr. Calamy (in his Answer to him Church and Dissenters compared. p.
53 etc.
) by a fair Computation reduces the Number still lower, and makes it probably
fall short of the Number of Nonconformists that suffered by the Act of
Uniformity; instead of so vastly exceeding it, as is often asserted, and so
commonly believed. -- And then as to rigorous Treatment, the Doctor Ibid. p. 57.
observes there is this difference very discernible: that the Severities which
are most complained of on the Church-Side, were the Effects of Civil Discords;
whereas the Sufferings on our side were mostly upon a Religious Account, which
made them the more cutting. The Parliament (says he) dealt severely with many
of the Clergy, it is true: but then they did it not so much because they were
Episcopalians in their Judgments, as because they opposed them in their
Practices, and assisted their bitter Enemies. But still many that showed a
Disposition to live peaceably, remained unmolested. Many went on using the
Liturgy and Ceremonies, notwithstanding the rigor of the Times. -- Many
Episcopal Men held their Livings in all those Times, and were never sequestered
or ejected, though their Livings were of good Value; or if put out of one Living,
they soon got into another as good or better Ibid. p. 44, 68, 71, 81.
. Some met with no small Favors and Respects. Ibid. 67, 77.
Some well known to be Episcopal, had the Hands of Presbyterians to help them
into Livings, and many of their Pulpits were open to them to preach in Barret's
Ans. to Dr. Stillingfleet, p. 51, 52.
The learned and catholic Dr. Tillotson, and Dr. Bates (with others) could
carry on the Morning Exercise together as Brethren Conformist's Plea, p. 54.
. How many of the loyal Clergy were there, who loved Preaching, and cleav'd to
their Flocks, that did not enjoy some Liberty and Encouragement? Conformist's
4th. Plea, p. 110.
-- Indeed I must confess, some few honest and valuable Clergy men met with
rigorous Treatment: Bp. HALL'S hard Measure, written by himself, would make any
Man's Heart bleed that reads it: but as that is dated May 1647, so I suppose,
the hard Measure, that he and others endured, was only or chiefly in the time
of the War and general Confusion. Whereas the Sufferings of the Nonconformists
were in a time of Peace, after the most solemn Assurances, that all things past
should be forgotten; and in Defiance of a Declaration, published by the King
himself, with great Formality, in order to a Settlement of Ecclesiastical
Matters: which Declaration, had it passed into a Law, would have left no room
for future Severity Calamy, Contin. of the Account etc. p. 575.
. And whatever unjustifiable Persecution any underwent, yet there were some
merciful Ingredients in it, which the Dissenters never met with from the
Episcopal Party; and in particular this, that a fifth part of the stated Income
of the sequestered Livings was res;erv'd for the ejected Clergy, to be paid'em
by their Successors: in which the Temper of the Parliament was admirable
Pierce's Vind, P. I. p. 214.
. The Bishops had a Pension allowed them, or else were not dispossessed of
their Bishoprics, and had the Profits of 'em restored to them, after they had
been a little time withheld: and some of them ended their Days in Peace and
Honor Calamy, Church and Dissen. comp. p. 67, 68.
. --

But perhaps it would be more satisfactory and convincing to our Author and his
Party, if I should relate the Sense of two worthy Persons of his own Church
upon the matter The first is the Author of the Conformist's Pleas for the
N^nconformists (said to be Mr. [I suppose, Thomas] Pierce, an Episcopal
Minister, and a Man of good Temper Pierce, ubi supra, p. 230.
) who when the Sufferings of the Royal Party were objected to him, makes this
Return: (1.) It is probable, that many hundred, now ejected, were not Men in
those evil days; therefore not guilty. (2.) There was a Provision of a fifth
part for the Wives of the Ejected then: there is none for these. (3.) Who can
answer for the Violence and Injustice of Actions in a Civil War? Those
Sufferings were in a Time of General Calamity; but these were ejected, not only
in a Time of Peace, but a Time of Joy to all the Land, and after an Act of
Oblivion, when all pretended to be reconciled, and to be made Friends; and to
whose common Rejoicing these suffering Ministers had contributed their earnest
Prayers, and great Endeavors Conformist's 1st. Plea. p. 12, 13
. -- Perhaps no Law (says he) was ever executed with more Violence and
Partiality, or Proceedings with less Success, and more Mistakes and Errors in
Proceedings, more arbitrarily and illegally, than those against Dissenting
Protestants. Let it be judged and resolved soberly, whether this Way be not a
greater Scandal to the Protestant Religion, than the Separation is, as great as
it is 4th Plea, p. 29.
. -- The other gives his Sentiments in these words; I must own (says he) that
in my Judgment, however both sides have been excessively to blame, yet the
Severities used by the Church to Dissenters, are less excusable, than those
used by the Dissenters to the Church. My Reason is, That the former were used
in Times of Peace and a settled Government: whereas the latter were inflicted
in a time of Tumult and Confusion. So that the Plundering and Ravaging endured
by the Church Ministers, were owing (many of them at least) to the Rudeness of
the Soldiers, and the Chances of War. They were plundered, not because they
were Conformists, but Cavaliers and of the King's Party. The Allowance of the
sequestered Ministers a fifth part of their Livings, was a Christian Act; and
what, I confess, I should have been glad to have seen imitated at the
Restoration Mr. Lewis of Margate. -- See Dr. Calamy's Church and Dissenters
compared, as to Persecution, p. 23, 24.
.

Thus, Sir, you have seen, what Grounds our Author had, to draw up this heavy
Impeachment against the Dissenters. And I think you will agree, that we may
safely put the Case upon the Issue proposed by him; and leave it to others to
determine, which Party are entitled to the Character of the true Church, by
their Sufferings; and so conclude this historical Debate in his own Words, Let
the World judge, if I have not fairly detected this Gentleman's Partiality, at
his first setting out.

HAving thus particularly considered his Charge of Persecution, it is Time now
to attend upon what he has further to say, in Answer to the Dialogue.

The Gentleman seems to be startled at the Terms Ceremonies and Impositions;
which, he tells us, are Words of direful Import, being feigned and imaginary
Scarecrows etc. Script. Bp. Exam. p. 4.
But why is he thus frightened with the Words, when so conversant with what is
signified by them? Are there no Ceremonies in the Church of England, imposed as
Terms of Communion? Have there been none kept out of the Church, refused
Admission to sealing Ordinances, and excommunicated ipso Facto, by the Canons
of that Church, for noncompliance with those Ceremonies? What then can he mean
by inquiring, What are those Laws I fix this odious Brand upon, and call by the
Nick Name of Impositions? -- But to satisfy him, I Will tell him what Laws I
refer to. -- That Law, which requires our Acknowlegement of the Common Prayer
Book, as containing nothing in it repugnant to the Scriptures, upon Pain of
Excommunication. Canon IV.
-- That Law, that declares us excommunicated ipso Facto, if we don't
acknowledge, that the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England are such,
as we may with good Conscience approve, use, or subscribe to Can. VI.
-- That Law, that obliges us upon the same Pains, to approv^ of the Government
of the Church of England, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Arch Deacons, and
the rest that bear Office in the same. Can. VII.
-- That Law, that excommunicates us, if we do but pretend to groan under
certain Grievances, imposed upon us by the Church of England Can. X.
. -- That Law, that declares all excommunicated within the Realm, that da^e
allow, that there are any Congregations or Assemblies, besides the Church of
England, that may challenge to themselves, the Name of true and lawful Churches
Can XI
. -- These, and many more such Laws as these (which the Gentleman knows well
enough where to find) I call Impositions; and if they don't deserve that Name,
he will do well to let us know what Impositions mean.

His curious Panegyric, upon these good Orders and Constitutions of the
Church, as he calls 'em, will hardly persuade any rational Man to a good
Opinion of 'em, till he can first show us, by what Authority the Church of
England, or any other Church under Heaven, can assume the Character of that one
Lawgiver, who only can save or destroy; and take from us the Liberty, wherewith
Christ has made us free. Let this Author, if he can, offer one Argument for
these Impositions, that cannot with the same Propriety be urged in favor of the
Spanish Inquisition. He says, that "enough has been said, by our own and
foreign Divines, to remove the Imputation." And I in Answer assert, that enough
has been said, not only by our own, but by all the most noted foreign Divines,
in the beginning of the Reformation, to justify and fix the Imputation
immoveably for ever.

But why are the foreign Divines pressed into his Service? Can they be supposed
to join with him in declaring the nonentity of those unhappy People's Church,
that want episcopal Ordination, Script. Bp. examined, p. 51.
and so unchurch themselves and us together, to gratify this Party? No Sir,
both the Discipline and Ceremonies of the Church of England, were very
disagreable to the most eminent foreign Divines, from the Beginning; as appears
by their declared Sentiments, and by the many Letters to Queen Elizabeth, to
the Bishops and Nobility of England and others, against these Things, written
by Calvin, Gu^lter, Bullinger, Beza, Zan^^y and others; which you may see
fairly represented in Mr. Neal's History of the Puritans. Neal, p. 113, 124,
197, 198, 199, 273, 281, and alibi.
. Emphatical are the Words of Beza and seventeen other Divines, in a Letter
dated October 24 1564. who say, If the Case was theirs, they would not receive
the Ministry upon these Conditions (the Terms imposed by the Church of England)
if it were proferred; much less would they sue for it. As for those who have
hitherto complied, if they are obliged not only to wink at manifest Abuses; but
to approve of those Things that ought to be redressed, what Thing else can we
advise them to, but that they should retire to a private Life. -- As for the
Popish Habits, those Men that are Authors of their being imposed, do deserve
most evil of the Church, and shall verily answer it, at the dreadful Bar of
Christ's Judgment Ibid p. 199.
. By which you may see, what Reason this Gentleman has to quote the foreign
Divines in his Favor; and what Reason, to conclude this remarkable Paragraph,
with a Charge upon us, or continuing and propagating Schism.

I am content, that they bear this Imputation of Schism, to whom it most
properly belongs; whether they, that unchurch all the Protestant Churches but
themselves, for want of episcopal Ordination, and that impose those
unscriptural and (as themselves confess) unnecessary Institutions upon their
Brethren, as Terms of Communion; or they, who peaceably reject these Remnants
of Popery, because they cannot conform to 'em, without wounding their
Consciences, and sinning against God. Whether these things are in themselves
lawful or not, which occasion the Division, is not in the Question. They are
certainly unlawful to us; because against our Consciences.

For this Gentleman's Diversion, I Will venture to entertain him with a short
Story, and leave him to apply it. A serious Gentlewoman was so unhappy, as to
think it unlawful to eat blood Pudding, a Food which her Husband was greatly
delighted in. Her Husband requires her upon Pain of his highest Displeasure, to
eat with him, assuring her that it is lawful, though not necessary, for her to do
it. She desires to be excused, lets him know that it is against her Conscience,
and (she thinks) against the plain Command of God, to eat Blood, promises
Observance in every Thing she can oblige him in, consistent with a good
Conscience toward God. He insists upon her Conformity, threatens to beat out
her Brains; and actually drives her out of the House, for her noncompliance;
and so a sad Schism is made in the Family. I desire to know, which of 'em was
chargeable with the Guilt of this Schism.

If we consider this Case, with a particular Application to our own Country,
who are the Schismatics? They, that have kept close to the first Principles of
the Country; and have maintained the Worship of God in purity and Peace,
agreeable to the Laws of God and the Laws of the Land, without imposing their
Opinions upon any Man's Conscience? Or they, that are not content with the
Liberty of bringing in their unscriptural Innovations; but must needs be
obtruding them as necessary to Salvation, and declaring, with this very
charitable Gentleman, Scripture Bishop examined, p 51, 52.
the Nonentity of our Churches, and that the Difference between us is not a
Difference in Circumstantials; but a Priesthood or no Priesthood, a Church or
no Church? If Schism, implies making of Divisions and Rents in the Church, I
desire this Party would clear themselves of it; or else we must leave the Brat
at the Door of its proper Father.

Before I dismiss this Head, I cannot but take Notice of his so frequently and
satyrically giving us the Appellation of DISSENTERS. But I pray who is it that
dissent from the original and legal Establishment of the Country, they, or we?
It were every whit a^ good Sense, to call the German, Dutch, French, o^ other
foreign Churches Dissenters, as to give us in New England that Denomination.

OUR Author undertakes next (as he tells us p. 5.
) t^ examine the Reasons (in the Dialogue) so choosing Ordination by a
Presbytery, rather than by diocesan Bishop. And he first pretends to an
Examination of this Reason of our Opinion, That ou^ Lord Jesus Christ has
inhibited all Dominion and S^premacy among the Ministers of the Gospel, over
one another etc. But what does he say to this? What Answer does he give, to the
several Scriptures cited i^ the Dialogue, that in express Terms forbid this
impleaded Supremacy among the Ministers of the Go^pel? Not one single Word! He
has left the Arguments as he found them, safe in our Hands, with a^ implicit
Acknowledgement, that their ecclesiastical Supremacy is indefensible.

He proceeds however to manifest his Willingne^^ to wipe off the Imputation, of
Lording it over God's H^ritage, from their Bishops. But I cannot discover a^^
Pertinency in his Reasonings. He tells us, All the Bishops in the World, except
the Pope, do disclaim it. But why is the Pope excepted? Don't he disclaim it
too? Did he ever confess his Guilt? -- But whoever disclaim it, I cannot think
it a sufficient Evidence of Innocence, to plead not Guilty.

He goes on to prove, by a variety of Scriptures, that there is a Power and
Authority belonging to the Rulers of the Church; and that the Exercise of that
Authority is not a Lording it over God's Heritage. But what is this to the
Purpose? Who ever disputed this Authority, or the lawful Exercise of it?

He moreover assures us, that the Power and Authority of our Bishops is falsely
suggested to be Lording it over God's Heritage, they have enacted no Laws of
their own, that exceed their Commission, and the Apostolical Rule, of having
all Things done decently and in Order. This I confess is to the Purpose; and if
he could have given good Evidence of it, 'twould have done our Business
effectually. But I suspect, there will remain nothing but his bare Word to
support his Cause, when thoroughly examined.

Have they enacted no Laws of their own, that exceeded their Commission! But
who gave them Commission, to impose any Laws at all, upon the Subjects of the
Lord Jesus Christ? The Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is
our King. I have already shown, that they have enacted a great Number of severe
Laws, which they have enjoined with the greatest Penalties they could annex to
'em. But I still enquire, by what Authority? If the Lord Jesus Christ has given
Power to his Church to make Laws, every Church have equal Claim to this
legislative Faculty: And how then will this Gentleman justify the Reformation?
May not the Church of Rome use this Authority, given them by Christ, as well as
the Church of England? If he answers to this, that the papal Laws are
unscriptural, and therefore beyond their Commission: I reply, so are the Laws
of the Church of England. Now, who must be Judge in this Case. If we are
referred to the Church for a Decision, Protestantism in general, as well as
Presbytery, must fall before this Trial. And what is worse than this, we must
necessarily submit to the Laws of the Greek Church, of the Armenian, Georgian,
Mingrellian Churches; and in a Word, of all the Churches in the World. For if
the Decision belong to the Church, it belongs to one Church as well as another;
and besure every one will determine in their own Favor. And thus Light and
Darkness, Truth and Error, and the most contradictory Sentiments in the World,
must be blended together; and every Man must be of every Opinion. -- If he
appeals to the Scriptures to determine this Matter, we are ready to join Issue
with him, upon that Foot. But then, who must interpret the Scriptures for us,
in this Case? If we are allowed the Use of our own Understandings, the
Scriptures are on our Side the Question. If the Church may impose her
Interpretations of Scripture, all the forementioned Difficulties recur. For
every Church pretends to found her Authority upon the Scriptures. Nor will it
do, for this Gentleman to plead, that other Churches are in the wrong, and the
Church of England in the Right. For they will retort the Argument, with as much
Justice and as good Assurance, as he can have. His only Way therefore, to avoid
these Consequences, is to produce a Commission for the Church of England,
EXCLUSIVE of all other Churches, to make these Laws, and enforce them;
otherwise all Pretenses to a legislative Authority, will sound very odly, from
those that disclaim Infallibility.

We have this Gentleman's Word for it, that these Injunctions are falsely
suggested, to be Lording it over God's Heritage. To which I answer; They have
often enough heard, that our Consciences tell us (after the best Enquiry we can
make) that they are contrary to the Laws of Christ; and yet they are
nevertheless enjoined with all their Penalties. What then can be done? Here is
the Authority of Christ on the one Hand, and their Authority on the other. By
the best Light we can get, to obey them is to disobey the Lord Jesus Christ. If
they say, our Consciences are weak and erring, it is the same thing: for to him
that esteems any thing unclean, to him it is unclean, Romans xiv. 14. He that
doubts, is damned, if he eat, ver. 23. and by this a weak Conscience is
defiled, 1 Cor. viii. 7. As we can make our appeal to the righteous Judge,
before whom we must finally answer for our Conduct, that we sincerely endeavor
Obedience to him, in the contested Articles; so we cheerfully appeal to the
World, whether it ben't an unjustifiable Lordship, thus to endeavor to destroy
those, for whom Christ died. -- Who empowered them to judge their Brother, or
to set at naught their Brother? (Romans xiv. 10.) Or to put a Stumbling Block, or
Occasion to fall, in their Brother's way? (verse 13.) Is this to bear the
Infirmity of the weak, (as these Engrossers of all Wisdom are pleased to call
as) or is it to please themselves? (Romans xv. 1.) Is this to receive one
another, as Christ also received us, to the Glory of God? (ver. 7.) -- Methinks
better Arguments, or less Assurance, would very well become our Tory Friends,
in the Case before us.

I am next to consider what Grounds this Author has for all his Banter and
Railery Page 6, 7, 8, 9.
at the Dialogue, for asserting it to be a natural Right, for a People to
commit their most important Affairs, to one that they can approve; and that the
Imposing their Ministers upon Congregations is a Lordship, that the Apostles
themselves would not use, in supplying the Vacancy made by the Death of Judas;
and in the Election of Deacons. To which he answers, This Gentleman would do
well to consider, that we are not now in a State of Nature, but of Grace; and
he would find it perhaps no easy Task, to describe his State of Nature, and
what particular Powers Men in that supposed State, have a just Claim to. I
would not willingly overlook this Argument, if I could any ways find out what
the Gentleman would prove by it. I can hardly think he means, that all his
Party are in a State of Grace, in the same sense that the Apostle uses a like
Phrase, in Romans vi. 14. Because I believe that he himself will own, that there
are some few of 'em under the Dominion of Sin. But perhaps he may intend (for I
can but guess at his Meaning) that the Grace of the Gospel has made void the
Law of Nature; and we are no longer to regard the Dictates of it. If thus, he
is so unhappy, as to have the Apostle Paul for his Adversary, in this case,
Romans iii. ^1. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid; yea we
establish the Law. I think all are agreed, that it is the moral Law, or the Law
of Nature, that the Apostle refers to, and I never before heard any one call
into Question that received Maxim, The Law of Nature (...) the Law of God. But
whatever his Meaning may be, I yet insist upon it, that a People have a natural
Right to choose their own Minister. For how ignorant soever he would make us, of
the State of Nature I plead for, I am sure every one must own, that it is one of
the first Dictates of Nature, to take Care of our Selves; and that our Care
should be proportioned to the Weight and Importance of the Concern before us:
Whence it necessarily follows, that as I have a natural Right to choose what
Food shall be provided for my Body, and reject such as is unwholesome or
poisonous, in order to the Preservation of my Life, so am I much more concerned
to take the like care of my Soul, that it be indeed fed with the Food of Life,
and not destroyed o^ rendered unhealthy, by the Ignorance, Errors, Scandals or
other Insufficiency of my Minister. -- Besides, if have a natural Right to
judge for my self, in the affairs of my eternal safety, and must stand or fall
at last by my own Opinion and Conduct, and not by another Man's; I have equally
a natural Right to choose the Means, that I think most conducive to my eternal
well-being, and cannot be determined by any other Person, against my own
Opinion and Conscience. add, if the Power of imposing a Minister upon a People
be allowed to belong to the Superior Officers of any Church, it must be
allowed to belong to the Superior Officers of every Church, and the Church of
Rome may claim it, as well as the Church of England; unless the English Bishops
can show a Commission, exclusive of all but themselves, to impose their
Minister upon a People: and thus they have no Right to refuse Subjection to a
popish Priest as their Minister, who live in popish Countries.

Our Author's Endeavors to prove, that the Apostle Matthias was not chosen by
the Suffrages of the Laity, are altogether impertinent; for who ever pretended
it? I grant, that an Apostle received his Character, not of Man, nor by Men;
but immediately by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the
Dead. And yet, the Suffrage of the whole visible Church then present (which
consisted of but a hundred and twenty Persons, as appears from Acts i. 15.) was
taken, in supplying the Vacancy made by the Death of Judas, not for choosing an
Apostle, but for appointing two qualified Persons; out of which one was to be
set apart, by the immediate Voice of Providence, unto that sacred Character:
and accordingly we are told, that they appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas,
who was Surnamed Justus, and Matthias, Acts i. 23. Though the Character of an
Apostle made it necessary, that he should have an immediate Call to his Office;
yet the whole Christian Church, being concerned and interested in the
Qualifications of this public Officer, they are all consulted in the Case, and
have such a Voice in it, that the Person when appointed, cannot be disagreable
to 'em. This is plain Matter of Fact: and this solemn Transaction in the very
Infancy of the Christian Institution, is a standing Pattern to the Churches,
through all succeeding Ages, in that Respect.

And as to the seven Deacons, if it be possible that any Thing can be fully and
clearly represented by Words, we are certain, that they were chosen by the
Church: Wherefore Brethren (say the Apostles,) lock ye out among you, seven Men
of honest Report, full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom, whom we may appoint over
this Business: and the Saying pleased the whole Multitude; and they CHOSE
Stephen, a Man full of Faith and the Holy Ghost, and Philip, etc. Acts vi. 3,
5. I am surprised to find this Gentleman asserting, that it does not at all
appear, that the Apostles counted this a Privilege of the People; but the
contrary; because the People claimed no such Right; but did it in Obedience to
the Apostles. -- But it is certain, whether the People claimed that Right or
not, it was their Right, a Right allowed them by the Holy Ghost, under whose
Guidance the Apostles were in this their Conduct, and by whom the People were
not indulged in an unjustifiable Usurpation. -- And how does it at all affect
the Case, that the Apostles reserved to themselves the Right of appointing
these Deacons to their Office? The Question is not about the Ordination (which
is all that is meant by the Apostles appointing them, as appears from ver. 3.
compared with ver. 6.) but about the Election, of these Church Officers. They
were chosen by the Multitude, if the sacred Text may be credited; which is all
I plead for. And I mistake, if our Author does not in effect give up the Cause,
when he allows that the nomination of Persons is put on the People, and that
this was the Apostolical Practice. But how he will prove the "practice of the
Church of England consistent with this," I am at a Loss.

I might further observe, if the original of the Text in Acts xiv. 23. were
duly noticed, it will appear, that the People had constantly the Liberty of
choosing their Ministers, allowed them by the Apostles themselves. (...). Which
Beza in his latin Version, justly renders, Quumque ipsi per Suffragia creassent
per singulas Eccl^si^s Presbyteros. And when them had by Votes constituted
Presbyters in every Church. It cannot be denied, that the Greek Word in this
Text, signifies choosing by lifting up of Hands. Whence it is a necessary
Consequence, that this was the Method of choosing Ministers in these Churches,
under the Direction of the Apostles Paul and Barnabas, which therefore ought
yet to be retained, by all that would follow the Divine Pattern. This it seems,
the Translators of our Bibles were convinced of. For as we are told by a very
learned Man, Our English Bibles themselves, until they had undergone Episcopal
Correction, at this Text, put in the Words by Election; and the Margin had this
Note, The Apostles did not thrust Pastors into the Church, through a lordly
Superiority; but chose, and placed them, by the Voice of the Congregation.
Ratio Disciplinae, p. 2^.


To all which I may add, that all who are acquainted with the Fathers and
ancient Councils, must acknowledge, that in the primitive Church the Exercise
of the Ministry depended upon the Election of the People; which was in
Cyprian's Time, esteemed as a divine Tradition: that Father assures us, That
the People has the chief Power of choosing worthy Ministers, and refusing the
unworthy. To which he adds, That it must be received as a divine Tradition, and
an Apostolical Observation; and that it was observed among them, and almost in
all the Provinces, that for the right Performance of Ordination, the
neighboring Bishops meet together with that Congregation or People, for whom a
Ruler is to be ordained; and the Bishop is chosen in the Presence of the
People, who have most perfect Knowledge of the Life of every one, and have
strictly observed their manner of Conversation. Plebs ipsa maxim habet
Potestatem vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes vel indignos recufandi etc. Ep. 68.
It would too much swell this Letter, to multiply Quotations of the like Kind.
And I cannot but flatter my self, that I have already said enough to convince
any one, of the gross mistake of our Author, in his confident, Assertion, that
we want such Precedents, as may support the Right of the People, to choose their
Minister. And yet, I must confess on the other Hand, that our Adversaries do
not want Precedents, to support the Imposing their Minister on a People,
without their Consent, since the papal Usurpations have obtained; though they
might be at a Loss to find any before.

Thus, I think I have fully discharged the Debt, contracted at the Beginning of
this Discourse; and obviated this Author's Fleers at the Platform so Church
Discipline.

But we are told, that we all know that the Rebellion of Corah and his Company,
was occasioned by Aaron's having the High Priesthood conferred upon him, which
Corah endeavored to obtain for himself, by that popular Tumult -- How I pray,
are we affected with this pretty Witticism? Do we pretend to the High
Priesthood, as Corah did? Do we insist that our Ministry is properly
sacerdotal, that our Bishops succeed to the High Priest, our Presbyters to the
Priests, and our Deacons to the Levites? Do we professedly thrust Men into the
sacred Office, without a divine Appointment, to invade the Province of those
Officers, that God himself has appointed in his Church, as Corah would have
done? Does this Gentleman find our Ecclesiastical Affairs put into the Hands of
Suffragans, Arch Deacons, Deans, Chancellors, Commissaries, Proctors,
Apparitors, etc. Officers confessedly not of Divine Right? If he can make out
these Things against us, we will acknowledge the Justice of the Imputation, and
have no Recourse to Novels or Councils, or other human Warrant: but acknowledge
ourselves Corahites, for thrusting Officers into the Church, without a divine
Commission, and committing the Work to them, that belongs to the Ministers of
Christ, by his own Institution.

A like Answer may be made to his Reasoning from 2 Timothy iv. 3, 4. against the
People's Right to choose their own Ministers. The Apostle there plainly points
at the Roman Apostasy, at their heaping up Teachers of their own devising, such
as would best tickle their itching Ears, by forsaking the Truth, and
entertaining them with fabulous Doctrines; which has been remarkably fulfilled
in that Synagogue of Satan. Let them therefore apply this Text to themselves
whose Clergy come nearest to the Roman Hierarchy. If we have been prompted by
our itching Ears, to imitate the Church of Rome, in heaping up to our selves
Lords Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Prebends, Arch Deacons. Vicars, Curates,
and other such Teachers, that the Scriptures know nothing of, we will own the
Gentleman's Charge, that we have no be^^er Precedent, than the Prediction in
the quoted Text. But in the Interim, we may justly despise his groundless
Merriment on this Oocasion.

I Will next try, if I cannot send that Spirit to haunt this Gentleman and his
Party, which (p. 10) he says I have conjured up, and is not in my Power to lay.
The frightful Hobgoblin is this Argument, proposed by Prelaticus in the
Dialogue. -- Ordination by Bishops is certainly of Divine Institution; for
Bishops are Presbyters, if they have no higher Character; and therefore upon
your own Principles, have Power of Ordination: whereas Ordination by Presbyters
is at least questionable; and therefore ours must be allowed ^^be the safest
Side. To which darling Plea of that Party, were several Answers given. They
were first shown, that both the Baptists and the Papists claim equal Advantage
by this Way of arguing. That the Baptis^s plead, we own their [kind of] Baptism
is valid, while they deny that Sorinkling an Infant is any Baptism at all; and
therefore they must be of the safer Side: And that the Papists argue after the
same Manner, that all own, Salvation may be obtained in the Church of Rome; but
they deny the Possibility of the Salvation of Protestants; and therefore the
Papists are of the s^fer Side. Unto this our Author under ^akes (...) answer
particularly; and his first Answer to the Plea of the Baptists, is truly very
remarkable.

And whence pray (says he) received he his Information, that the Church of
England allows the Validity of Baptism, administered by Baptists? No^ from the
Articles, Canons, and Rubricks of the Church; for they declare the Baptism of
Laick^^ to be invalid, I by requiring a Lawful Administrator: and
notwithstanding the great Pains taken to prove the divine Right of Presbyterian
Ordination, I must still for Want of fuller Conviction level dissenting
Teachers of all Denominations, in the same Rank with Laics. -- This, I must
confess, is plain Dealing. The Baptism of Laics is invalid. The dissenting
Teachers of all Denomination (that is, all those that want Episcopal
Ordination) are but Laics: whence it must be the sad State of all the poor
Protestants of France, Holland, Switser land, Geneva, Germany, Transylvania,
Polonia, Bohemia, etc. as well as Scotland and New England, to be unbaptized
Persons, and (as one of this Author's Brethren expresses it Dodwel, Ono
Priesthood, Chap. xiii. Sect 14.
Aliens from God and Christ, Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, and the
Common wealth of Israel. And what makes our Case the more deplorable, is, that
it is remediless. For the foreign Churches have no Ministers, that are
episcopally ordained; and consequently cannot obtain Episcopal Baptism or
Confirmation; and the Circumstances of the most of us in this Country, are bu^
little better; for though we are favored with some few Episcopal Ministers, yet
they are generally such as were (according to this Gentleman's Way of
Reasoning) baptized by Laics, whose Baptism is therefore null, and they
consequently, very unfit to administer the Ordinance to others, who are
unbaptized themselves. Whether this be this Author's own Case, I cannot tell,
he having concealed his Name: but every one knows, that it is the Case of the
most of his Brethren in this Country, who have been baptized zither in Scotland
or New England; And therefore, according to his declared Principles, are not in
the Church themselves; and besure not capable to admit others into it by
Baptism For to use his own Words, (p. 48.) can they baptize, who are not
themselves Christians! They are not only out of the Way of Salvation
themselves; but their miserable Hearers are like to perish with them, through the
Nullity of their Administrations. How much does it therefore concern these
Gentlemen, to seek episcopal Baptism, in order to their being Christians,
before they boast of being the only Ministers in the Country; and before they
cast so many famous Protestant Churches out of the Fold of Christ; when they
themselves are by these damning Principles, in the same unhappy State. Thus you
see, Sir, what a fine Train of Consequences follow from the Gentleman's first
Answer; and who must pass for Scurrilous now!

Let us next consider, whether he has any better Success, in answering the same
Plea of the Roman Catholics. The Argument of the Papists (he tells us) is
this, You acknowledge a Possibility of Salvation in our Church, i. e. that
invincible Ignorance joined with true Sincerity, may be an Apology for the
Errors of many in it, which we do not acknowledge concerning yours. But pray
who is so stupid as not to discover, that this is no Argument, why those who
know the Errors and Superstitions of that Church, should go over to it? -- By
this Gentleman's Leave, I shall venture to retort the Answer. The Argument of
the High Church Party, is this, You acknowledge our Ordination valid, i. e.
that the invincible Mistakes, joined with Sincerity, of those who submit to an
uninstituted Hierarchy, may be an Apology for their Error in it, which we don't
acknowledge concerning yours. But pray who is so stupid as not to discover,
that this is no Argument, why those that know the Usurpations of Prelacy, their
Invasion of the Rights of Presbytery, and their uninstituted Original, should
go over to them? I hope he will not be offended, with the Harshness of the
Language, since it is borrowed from himself; and I think he will be very much put
to it, to make any Reply to this Reasoning, that may not with the same Justice,
be urged in Favor of the popish Argument, which he undertakes to answer. He
tells us indeed, that the Dissenters acknowledge episcopal Ordination lawful,
and considered by itself safe and secure, they ought therefore to submit to it;
because a Deviation from it, cannot be acceptable to Almighty God. -- Which is
so far from Truth, that we all believe, and have often enough proved, that the
only Ordination, either instituted or exemplified in the Scriptures, is by the
Imposition of the Hands of a Presbytery; and that our Deviation from this,
cannot be acceptable to Almighty God. We grant indeed, that their Ordinations
are lawful, if he intends no more by their being lawful, than that they are not
a Nullity; and that their Clergy are thereby authorized to administer sacred
Ordinances. But if he means by their being lawful, that their Episcopal
Ordinations are such, as are according to the divine Pattern and Institution,
we have ever denied it; and it is what they have never been able to prove. But
were even that granted, that Episcopal Ordination is even in this latter sense
lawful, how does that affect the Debate between us? Have we no other Objections
against the Ordinations in the Church of England, that are sufficient to deter
us from going thither for Orders? Were there none such offered in the Dialogue,
that might have convinced him, that we did not esteem these Ordinations safe
and secure for us?

Thus, Sir, you see that we have no more Cause to be frighted with this Spectre
than they have; whoever conjures it up.

I am now to show you, that we have just Cause of the same Objections against
their Episcopal Ordination, as were offered in the Dialogue, notwithstanding
his pretended Answers to 'em. (p. 12-15.) I shall therefore, once more
expostulate the matter with them; and consider his Replies, as I pass along.

Is it the safer Side, to acknowledge and submit to a Hierarchy, not warranted
in the Word of God? To which he answers, No. Well then, he himself being Judge,
it is not safest for us to seek Orders from their Bishops, till we are
convinced of the divine Right of Prelacy. Let him therefore show us, where this
is to be found in the Word of God, and he will effectually silence our
Objections.

Is it the safer Side, for me to solemnly declare at my Ordination, that I am
moved by the Holy Ghost, to take upon me the Office of a Deacon; when I have no
Purpose to serve Tables, for which Deacons were instituted? To which he answers
With Submission, we require better Authority than this Gentleman's Assertion,
that Deacons were instituted barely to serve Tables. Well! he shall have better
Authority, if that will satisfy him, from the very Words of the original
Institution. Acts vi. 2, 3. Then the twelve called the Multitude of the
Disciples unto them; and said, It is not Reason that we should leave the Word
of God, and SERVE TABLES. Wherefore, Brethren, look ye out among you Seven Men
of honest Report, whom we may appoint over THIS BUSINESS. It is possible, that
any Thing can be expressed in plainer Terms? Have Deacons any other business
appointed them, than to serve Tables? Is nor serving of Tables put in direct
Opposition to the Ministry of the Word? -- But he tells us, that "Philip Deacon
preached and baptized" Was Philip no more than a Deacon? Is he not expressly
called an Evangelist, Acts xxi. 8? Nay, does nor our Author himself (in p. 28.)
allow him to be an Evangelist at this very Time? And is it good Reasoning, that
because Philip, who was once a Deacon, did when he became an Evangelist, preach
and baptize, therefore all Deacons have Authority to preach and baptize? -- But
Ignatius (says the Gentleman) full as complete a Judge as this Author, affirms
in his Epistle to the Trallians, that Deacons are not Servants of Meats and
Drinks only; but Ministers of the Church of God. -- I shall not now spend Time
to show the undoubted Evidence, that these pretended Epistles of Ignatius are
the spurious Offspting of some monkish Impostor: but shall only consider,
whether there be any such Thing in his pretended Epistle to the Trallians, as
that "Deacons are not Servants of Meats and Drinks ONLY." no, he plainly says
absolutely, they are not Servants of Meat and Drink; and why is ONLY added by
our Author, but that if his spurious Ignatius had been admitted to speak his
own Lauguage, he had in express Terms contradicted the Scriptures, and thereby
ruined his Credit with those that have a due value for that blessed Book? In
some Copies indeed the negative Particle in Ignatius is left out; which make
him affirm that Deacons are Ministers of Meats and Cups. Vid. Original Draught
-- p. 236.
. But to go on --

Is it the safer Side, to take upon me the Order of Pri^^^h^od, an Order
typical of our Lord Jesus Christ, ful^^ed in him, and abrogated by him? -- Our
Author says It is very safe to take upon me the Order of Priesthood, when duly
called, and authoritatively sent. -- But it is pity, he did not better
understand the Subject he was treating on, when he tells us, Had this Gentleman
been so ingenuous, as to have distinguished, between the Priesthood of the
Aaronical Order, abrogated by our Savior, and the M^lchizedecan, restored in
it is Room, there would be no Difficulty in the Thing. -- That we may set this
Matter in a true Light, it may not be amiss to consider, what was the proper
Work and Business of the Priesthood, wherein the Difference between the
Priesthood of Aaron and of Melchizedec consisted; and in what Respect our Lord
Jesus Christ is a Priest after the Order of Melchizedec, and not after the
Order of Aaron.

We may first then consider, what was the proper Work and Business of the
Priesthood. And this cannot be better described, than in the Apostle's Language,
Heb. v 1. For every high Priest taken from among Men, is ordained for Men, in
Things pertaining to God, that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices for Sins.
And Heb. viii. 3 For every high Priest is ordained to offer Gifts and
Sacrifices. Whence it is most certain, that every Priest, of whatever Order, is
strictly and properly a Sacrificer; that the very End and Design of the
Priesthood, was to offer Gifts and Sacrifices; and that the Terms, Priest and
Sacrificer, are synonymous and reciprocal. Whence, when all true Christians are
allusively called an holy Priesthood, it is on Account of their offering
spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. ii. 5.

And we may consider wherein the Difference between the Priesthood of
Melchizedec and of Aaron consisted. The Distinction between them was not with
Relation to Sacrifices; the Priesthood of both was by these Oblations to lead
the Minds, and direct the Faith and Hope of God's People, unto the promised
Messiah, by whom all the faithful of Adam's Progeny had their only Prospect of
Reconciliation unto God. But it consisted in the special personal
Qualifications, by which Melchizedec had the Preference of Aaron He was
immediately called to the Priesthood, without any external Rites of
Consecration, such as were used at Aaron's Separation. He was a King, as well
as Priest; Aaron had no regal Dignity. His Priesthood was perpetual, as he had
not derived it from any other; and as he had no known Father or Mother,
Beginning of Days, or End of Life. Whereas the Aaronical Priesthood was in a
lineal Descent, and the Priests themselves were not suffered to continue by
reason of Death* He was greater than Abraham: but the Aaronical Priests, as
they were Abraham's Posterity, were his Inferiors. These were the special
Differences, between the Priesthood of Melchizedec and of Aaron. And it was in
these Respects, that the great high Priest of our Profession is said to be
after the Order of Melchizedec, as may be particularly seen, in the viith
Chapter to the Hebrews. The Priesthood of Melchizedec and of Aaron was, in it
self considered, in all Respects the same; in the same Manner referred to our
Lord Jesus Christ, and terminated in him; though there were some peculiar
personal Characters belonging to Melchizedec, more accommodated to the
Priesthood of Christ, than were to be found in the Tribe of Levi: hence our
Lord's Priesthood is said to be after his Order. From all which it necessarily
follows, that unless this Gentleman will join with the Papists, in pleading for
a proper propitiatory Sacrifice, he cannot with any color of Reason pretend as
he does, that their Ministry is properly Sacerdotal

He indeed pretends to reason the Case, and says, Was Jesus Christ a proper
Bishop over his Church, by Commission from his Father; and are the visible
Bishops proper Bishops of it, by Mission and Commission from him? then he
challenges me to give any good Reason, if I can, Why by Mission and Commission
from Christ, the high Priest of our Profession, they are not also proper
Priests. -- To which I answer, one good Reason is, because all the Ministers of
Christ have his Mission and Commission to be Bishops, but none to be Priests.
Let him, if he can, show us any such Commission, and we will yield him the
Cause. Another Reason is, because the Apostle expressly tells us, Heb. vii. 24.
that Christ has a Priesthood that cannot pass from one to another. For so the
original Word (...) signifies; and so it is rendered in the Margin of our
Bibles. And if his Priesthood be of that Kind, that it cannot pass from him to
any other, no Person can be a Sharer in it, nor a Successor to it. To which I
add this further Reason for it, that though Christ has use for Bishops in his
Church, he has none for Priests; there being no proper Sacrifices for such to
offer, since he has offered up himself once for all. -- Thus you see, what
little Reason we have, to leave our Scriptural Ordinations, to take upon us the
Order of Priesthood among them. And so I go on to expostulate with him.

Is it the safer Side, to take upon me the solemn Charge of the Ministry, and
to come under awful Vows to fulfill it; and yet depend upon the Bishop's License
to preach? To which he answers, And pray where is the Inconsistency, of taking
upon one the solemn Charge of the Ministry, and coming under Vows to fulfill it;
and yet depending upon the Bishop's License? Why! Is it no Inconsistency, to be
under the most solemn and sacred Bonds to preach the Gospel, to be instant in
Season and out of Season, and yet to be under contrary Bonds not to preach at
all, but as the Bishop pleases? Is it no Inconsistency, to be authorized by the
Lord Jesus Christ, and by him commanded to the Exercise of the Ministry; and
yet have no Authority to exercise it at all, till the License is sealed and
paid for? In a Word, either Episcopal Ordination authorizes and obliges a
Minister to preach, or it does not. If it does, woe to him if he preach not the
Gospel, whether he has any License or no. If it does not, we have no great
Reason to be fond of such Ordinations: where Authority is given with one hand,
and in a sort taken away with the other.

Is it the safer Side, to acknowledge our Bishops endued with the extraordinary
Power of giving the Holy Ghost, by the Imposition of Hands? It Is certain they
seem to assume that Power, when they say, Receive the Holy Ghost, for the
Office and Work of a Priest in the Church of God now committed to thee, by the
Imposition of our Hands. To which he answers. The Apostles themselves were
never endued with the Power of giving the Holy Ghost. -- And I grant that they
were not endued with Power, authoritatively and efficiently to give the
Holy Ghost. But then he must grant, that the miraculous Gifts did accompany the
Imposition of their Hands; and of their only, wherever they went. And the
Question is Whethen these extraordinary Gifts do now accompany the Imposition
of our Bishops Hands, in Ordination? For we don't see all our Episcopal Clergy
endued with them He answers to this, that he don't think it can be shown in any
one Instance from Scripture, that the Grace of the Spirit is ascribed (...) any
Man, as the Give^ of it; we therefore truth that God of his Goodness will still
convey this Gi^^ through the Prayers, and by the Imposition of the Apostles
Successors Hands, to the End of the World. But he has here quite changed the
Question, which was not about the Grace of the Spirit, but the miraculous Gifts
of the Spirit; which were never received by the Imposition of any Hands, but
the Apostles only. And as for the sanctifying Grace (...) the Spirit,
Imposition of Hands was no institute* Means of obtaining it; nor do we read
that it was ever once communicated by the Imposition of Hand^ So that, take it
in what sense he pleases, the Cla^^ is unwarrantable; and they have neither
Precept Example, nor Promise, to found it upon.

Is it the safer Side, solemnly to promise at my Ordination, reverently to obey
my Ordinary, that is, (...) Bishop; and to swear canonical Obedience to the
Bishop, as you know has been commonly done? When I am taught to call no Man
Master, but Christ, Mat. xxiii. 8, 10. To which it is answered, No Doubt on it,
if you intend to perform your Promise; and that in Conformity to God's Command.
-- But he would have done well to have told us, what Command of God this would
be a Conformity to. I have shown him a Command of our Lord Jesus Christ, not to
call any Man Master, to which he has made no Reply. And I shall only subjoin,
that if not only promising, but swearing, not Scriptural, but canonical
Obedience, he not to call a Man Master, in the sense forbidden in this Text, I
know not what is. Truly, Sir, I desire to keep my Conscience free from ^uch
Shackles.

Is it the safer Side, to be ordained to but a Part of the Ministerial Work;
and to be deprived of the Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction, which belong
to a Gospel-Minister, as such, and which he must account for in the Day of
Christ? He answers, Yes, much the safest, because in acting otherwise, you act
in direct Opposition to the Command of Christ, usurping Powers that in no
measure belong to you. We must wait the Gentleman's Proof of this Assertion.
But I hope in the mean Time, that he and his Brethren will not pretend to be the
only Ministers in the Country, when by his own Confession they have but a Part,
and want (as he tells us p. 27) the much greater Part of the Ministry.

Thus, Sir, you have seen, that how much soever our Author may value himself
upon his Performance, and flatter himself that he has convinced the candid
Reader, that the Reasons in the Dialogue for preferring Presbyterian
Ordination, to Ordination by Bishops, appear ill-natured Suggestions (as he is
pleased to express it) and not Substantial Reasons, they yet stand their
Ground, against all his Exceptions.

You have seen, how they of our Profession have from the Beginning of the
Reformation gone through a most ^elancholy Series of Tribulation and Persecution,
for a good Conscience, and the pure Worship of God and what Multitudes have
Sealed their Profession with their Blood. You have seen some of those
multiplied Reasons we have, to complain of the Bishops imposing their
Ceremonies upon us. You have seen, that their Episcopacy is an Assuming a
Supremacy, absolutely forbidden by our Lord Jesus Christ, among the Ministen of
the Gospel; and that it is a proper Lording it out God's Heritage. You have
also seen, what little Reason they have to triumph, upon the trifling Pretense,
that theirs is the safer Side; unless it be safest to leave the Institutions of
Christ, and submit to the Inventions of Men; to mock the blessed Spirit of God,
in pretending to be moved by him, to take upon me a^ Office, that I never
intend to exercise; to assume the Priesthood, which under the
Gospel Dispensation does incommunicably belong to the Lord Jesus Christ; to
take upon me the most solemn Vows, and depend upon another Man's Pleasure,
whether I shall fulfill o^ violate them; to acknowledge, those extraordinary and
miraculous Apostolical Qualifications reside in o^^ English Bishops, whereof
they are not able to give ^^ the least Evidence; to swear Subjection to the
Bishops, according to the Injunctions of sundry seven uncharitable, and
unscriptural Laws or Canons, where I am commanded to acknowledge no Master, b^^
Christ, in matters of Conscience and Religion: and t^ be ordained to but a Part
of the Ministerial Work, whe^^ I am called by God to the whole, and must
account is the Day of Christ, for the exercise of the whole Ministrys Unless, I
say, these Things make their Side the safest and unless it is the safest,
because most uncharitable, we have no encouraging Motive to go over to the
Church of England: who has made our Separation from help safe and just and
necessary, by imposing unnecessary, unjust, and unsafe Terms of ministerial
Conformity. I Am at length come to the main Question, Whether the Powers of
Ordination and Jurisdiction belong to the Presbyters?

It seems the irresistible Evidence of this in the Dialogue, has given such
Conviction to our Author, as has forced him to quit the most of those strong
Holds, which the Party have constantly endeavored to defend; and has left him
but one only Place of Retreat. I grant, (says he p. 16.) that the Names of
Bishop and Presbyter, are used so promiscuously in the New Testament, as to
leave no Distinction of Office. I grant that there are as many Bishops, in the
first sense of the Word, as Presbyters in the most early Churches. I grant,
that we can find in the New Testament no Presbyter, who was not a Bishop, i. e.
called by that Name. I grant, that the Duties and Qualifications of those
called Bishops in the New Testament and of those called Presbyters, are the
same, because they are the Duties and Qualifications of the same
Church Officer, called by both these Names. -- One would think, here are
concessions enough, to put a perpetual End to this Controversy: and I might
take the Advantage now to turn his own Argument, from the safer Side, against
him. -- Surely he might with as much security to his Cause, have made one
Concession more, and granted that all their Pretenses to a Prelacy in the
Church, and for the Superiority of Episcopacy to Presbytery, are unscriptural
and groundless. However, whether he will make this Concession, or no, we need
not I think be in much Pain about the Issue of the Controversy, after he has
granted, that the New Testament makes no Difference between Bishops and
Presbyters. However, he is resolved to hold fast the Conclusion, though he has
given up the Premises.

But though I have grante all this (says he) yet I hope may, and will maintain,
that the Powers of those called Bishops in the New Testament, were not the
same, with the Powers of those who were called so afterward, in an eminent
Sense: or in other Words, that those Church Officers, who are styled Bishops in
the New Testament, have never received nor exercised the Right of ordaining
others; but that this Right was always in the Hands of Officers, superior to
them. -- But how does all this appear? Can he give us any Evidence of it? He
tells us, It Is evident from the Churches of Corinth, Ephosus, Philippi,
Thessalonica, Crete etc which had in them a Clergy, consisting of several
Ministers And then proceeds with the most scornful Air to inquire, "what Need
there was for the Apostles to run the Hazard of long Journeys, and dangerous
Voyages, for the performing Ordinations in these Churches, if the Elders
already settled there, might have done it without them! -- This, I confess, is a
short and compendious Way of finishing a Dispute. At this Rate, no Adversary
need ever want an Occasion of Triumph. But I must tell this Gentleman, that
here is too much in all Reason taken for granted, without any Proof.

He first takes for granted, that the Apostles found these Churches settled
with Elders or Bishops, when they constituted a Gospel Ministry among them,
which is so far from evident, that it is not so much as possible. -- The only
Account we have of the Apostles constituting Elders, in any of the Gertlle
Churches, was at Lystra, Iconium, Antioch in Pisidia, and (it seems) Derbe.
Acts xiv. 21, 23. And it is certain, at their first Visit to those Citles they
had no Time to instruct and settle a Ministry a^^ng them; but were suddennly
expelled out of their Coasts, by the Persecution raised against them, as
appears from the twelfth and thirteenth Chapters of the Acts. There could
therefore be no Chergy settled, when they ordained Elders there. This Gentleman
should at least have given us a single Instance, of the Ap^siles traveling to
ordain Elders, where there was a Pres^y^ry already settled, before he had
entered upon his Triumphs: but this, I dare say, is what can never be done. But
what Need is there to dispute against such an inconsistent Supposal? Was there
a Clergy consisting of several Ministers (as he asserts) settled in these
Churches; and yet must the Apostles be supposed to run such Hazards, and endure
such Fatigues, to ordain Ministers, where there were enough already ordained;
and where they were not wanted?

He again takes it for granted, that the chief or only Errand of the Apostles
to these Churches, was for ordaining Ministers there. -- But was there ever a
more chimerical Supposal, when in all their Peregrinations, we find but one
Account of their Ordaining Elders, in any particular Churches; and though it be
there said, that they did this in every Church, yet it is plain, that it relates
only to every Church there mentioned, viz Derbe, Lystra, Iconium and Antioch.
As the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. i 17 that Christ sent him not to baptize, but
to preach the Gospel; so may it be likewise said, that Christ sent him not to
ordain, but to preach the Gospel: that is, Preaching was his principal Work It
appears to have been the usual custom of the Apostles, to tarry long enough in
a particular Place, to convince them of the Truth of Christianity, and to
initiate them in the Faith and Profession of the Gospel; and leave behind them,
or send after them the Evangelists, to establish them in the Faith, to baptize
the new Converts, and to settle the Ministry among them. For these Purposes was
Titus left at Crete, (Titus i. 5.) and Timothy sent to most of the Churches
where the Apostle Paul had been, as appears by the several Epistles of that
Apostle. To imagine therefore, that the Apostles visiting the Churches was
peculiarly on the Account of Ordaining Elders, is such a groundless surmise as
deserves no particular Animadversion.

He further takes for granted, that Timothy and Titus were properly Apostles;
and such, had the Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction committed to them. But
does he bring one Word from Scripture to prove it? And may we not therefore (if
I may borrow a Phrase from this Gentleman) place this to the Account of a
strong Imagination.

He tells us indeed (p. 18) that these were then commonly called Apostles, as
Epaphroditus Bishop of Philippi is called by St. Paul himself, Phil. ii. 25.
(...), your Apostle -- But what is this to Timothy and Titus, are they any
where called Apostles? If not, how came they by their ordaining Power, which
our Author makes peculiar to the Apostles?

But was Epaphroditus really Bishop of Philippi? How then came the Apostle to
write an Epistle to the Bishops of that Church by Epaphroditus? It Is manifest
if he was their Bishop, he had a Number of others, that were Partners with him,
in the Episcopal Care of that Church, as appears, Phil. i. ^ -- Does St. Paul
him self call him an Apostle? What is this but trifling with the Word Apostle,
which in its natural and genuine Signification implies any Messenger
whatsoever; and in this Sense was applied to Epaphroditus in the Text before
us, who was the Philippians. Messenger to carry their Bounty to the Apostle
Paul. as appears Chap. iv. ver. 18. And as this Word (...) in a common and
unappropriated Sense is used for o^^sent, or a Messenger in general
(particularly in John xiii. 16. and 2 Cor. viii. 23.) so it is remarkable that
when it is appropriated to the superior Officers in the Church, they are never
called Apostles of any particular Churches; but Apostles of JESUS CHRIST. And
it is necessary from the Nature of the Thing, that they should be so
denominated: for they had their Mission from Christ, were sent by him; and were
therefore HIS Apostles or Messengers; and not the Apostles or Messengers of the
Churches, from whom they derived neither their Mission, nor Commission. They
were Apostles unto the Churches; but not Apostles of them. See 1 Cor. ix 2. To
apply this to the Case of Epaphroditus. If he was the Philippians Apostle or
Messenger, to the highest Office in the Christian Church, I enquire, By what
Authority did they send him, to the Exercise of a sacred Character, de^^ved
only from Christ? But there is no Difficulty to understand, how he might be
their Apostle or Messenger, to carry Money to the Apostle Paul, and to minister
to his Wants. Thus, Sir, you see the Fate of this Gentleman's chief
Cornerstone; he having no other Scripture-Foundation, to build his lofty
Fabric upon.

But if he cannot engage the Scripture in his Service, he will try what Assistance
he can find from Antiquity. If we consult (say he) the ancient Records of the
Church, we shall there find, that James Bishop of Jerusalem, Mark of
Alexandria, Timothy of Ephesus, Titus of Crete, and Clemens of Rome, were all
called Apostles. But he has been so cautious as not to tell us, where these
ancient Records are to be found: this were to submit the Case to Examination;
and that would have spoiled all We are indeed informed, Theodoret observes,
that those which we call Bishops, the primitive Christians called Apostles. But
here also his former Cautiousness is retained; and we are not informed, where
this is to be found in Theodoret But suppose these be Theodoret's Words, what
would he argue from them? I could also tell him, that his darling Ignatius
observes, that the Presbyters are in the Place of the Council of the Apostles,
Ep. to the (...)
and exhorts, to be subject to the Presbyters, as to the Apostles of Jesus
Christ our Hope, Ep. to the Trall.
and to reverence the Presbyters, as the Sanhedrim of God, and College of the
Apostles, Ibid.
and to follow the Presbytery as the Apostles Ep. to the Smyrn.
And Jerome in Gal. i. 1, 19.
observes, that all that had seen the Lord, and preached him afterward, were
named Apostles; and tells us, th^^ there are four sorts of Apostles. which I
hope is a least as good Authority, to prove Presbyters to b^ Apostles, as he
has brought to prove their Bishops such But I think neither of us have any
Thing to boa^ of, from any of these inaccurate Sayings of the A^cient. Names
are often applied by way of Allusi^^ only. Thus among our selves the famous Mr.
Eli^^ has sometimes been called the American Apostle: and Dr. I Mather in his
latter Days usually among h^^ People went under the style of the Old Patriarch
Such analogical Language is common in the World and was so with the Fathers.

I Need not now controvert with this Author, how the Apostles in their ordinary
Capacity were denominated, I shall have particular Occasion to confide this
afterward; nor need I contest his Closs upon 1 Pet. v. 2. since he grants all I
plead for, from tha^ Text. But it may not be amiss, to take some notice (...)
his invincible Argument, to disprove the Authority (...) Presbyters to ordian.
Presbyters (says he, p. 18 have a Title to those Rights only, which were
enjoyed by those Church Officers, who are called Bishops or Overseers in the
New Testament. But the Power of Ordination was never allowed to, or claimed by,
those who are there called Bishops. -- deny his Minor. And will endeavor to
particularly prove, that Ordination did belong to those, that went called
Presbyters, Bishops, or Overseers in the New Testament: And as I pass along,
shall rescue the Arguments used to that purpose in the Dialogue, out o^ his
Hands.

This may be proved, from the Authority given (...) Timothy and Titus to
ordain, 1 Timothy v. 22, and Tit. i. ^. ^f these were not endued with peculiar
Apostolical Power, they are standing Pattern for Presbyterian Ordination. If
they were endued with such Power, his Gentleman would do well, to give us some
Scripture-Evidence of it; which is what I presume he will ever attempt. He tells
us indeed, that they had Power to enforce Presbyters to their Duty, to receive
Accusations against them; and judicially to pass Sentence upon them. -- But
does the Scripture tell us any such Thing? No, it wholly depends upon the
Authority of our Adversaries; who should first prove their own Apostolical
Power, before they take upon 'em to give us a new Bible. If you would see these
Pretenses fully silenced, be pleased to read the Dialogue, p. 45, and forward,
to which this Author has not seen cause to reply.

It is also evident, that the Power of Ordination did belong to those, who were
called Presbyters, Bishops, or Overseers in the New Testament, from 1 Timothy 4
14. Neglect not the Gi^t that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy,
with the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery. Is not this a plain and full
Instance of Ordination by Presbyters? An Instance, that notwithstanding all the
evasive Arts of our Adversaries, to elude the Force of it, will yet be a
continuing Warrant for Presbyterian Ordination. -- But our Author tells us (p.
21.) that it must be remembered, that the Gift that is here affirmed to be
conferred on Timothy, by the Hands of a Presbytery, in another Place is said to
have been given him, by putting on of St. Paul's Hands, 2 Timothy 1.6. This
Objection was particularly answered in the Dialogue. It was there observed,
that the Gift which Timothy received by the Imposition of Paul's Hands, was the
extraordinary Powers of the Holy Ghost, thus conferred upon the generality of
Believers, in the Apostolic Times, by the laying on of the Apostles Hands. To
which he ^^plies, If the Gift in one Text, may signify the miraculous Powers of
the Holy Ghost, why not in the other? I answer, there is this Reason for it:
T^^ extraordinary and miraculous Gifts of the Holy Gho^^ were always received
by the Imposition of an Apostle Hands, and never by the laying on of any other
Hand whatsoever. And therefore the Presbytery could ha^ no Place, in this
miraculous and incommunicable Apostolic Power. Paul's Hands alone would have
been sufficient, for the Communication of the extraordinary Charismata: there
needed no Presbytery to join with him; as appears, Act. xix. 6. nor could any
join with him, without assuming such Powers as never belong to them. It was
therefore agreeable enough to (...) superior Modesty and Humility of that great
Apostle to put Timothy in Remembrance, to stir up the Gift (...) God that was
in him, by putting on of his Hands, (...) was the miraculous Gift of the Holy
Ghost, recei^^ by the Imposition of his Hands only: But if in the last
mentioned Text, the Apostle had referred to b^ joining with the Presbytery, in
laying Hands on Ti^^thy, we may justly retort the Gentleman's own Arg^^ment
upon him (p. 22) that it suits not with (...) Paul's Modesty and Humility, thus
to arrogate^ himself, the sole Power of conferring that Office when the other
Presbyters are equally concerned From all which it is evident, that the two
mentioned Texts refer to two different Things; and the Impositions of Hands
were upon two different Occasion^ the one at Timothy's Ordination, and the
other for (...) receiving the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost.

The same thing is also evident, from the Consideration of the different
Subjects treated on, in the Co^texts. For in 1 Timothy iv. the Apostle is exhortin^
Timothy to the faithful Discharge of his Ministeri^ Duties, in the verses
immediately preceding, ar^ following the Text under Consideration. Till I com^
(says he) give Attendance to Reading, to Exhortati^on, to Doctrine. Neglect not
the Gift etc. Medit^^ upon these Things, give thy self wh^lly to them -- Take
Heed unto thy self, and unto thy Doctrine etc, Whence it is plain, that this
Text must refer to these Ministerial Duties pressed upon him; and must imply
his Separation to those Duties, at his Ordination. But on the contrary, in 2 Timothy i. there are no such Duties treated on: but the very following Words to
the Text, have a direct reference to these extraordinary Gifts of the Holy
Ghost. For God has no (ssays the Apostle) given us the Spirit of Fear; but of
POWER, and of Love etc. Whence it is manifest, that the Imposition of Hands here
spoken of, was for Timothy's receiving these Gifts of the Holy Ghost. -- Please
to look into the Original Text, and perhaps you may be of opinion, that it very
much favors my Interpretation. The word (...), you are sensible, properly
signifies to put new Life into a Fire, or kindle it again. Now this
metaphorical Expression cannot, as I conceive, be so properly applied to the
Gift of the Ministry, as to the Gift of the Holy Ghost. The former is never (as
I remember) compared to a Fire, but rather to a Treasure etc But when Persons
received the latter, they were said to be baptized with Fire, Matthew. iii. 11.
Act. ii. 3. So that we are yet left in the secure Possession of the Text under
Consideration.

It is further argued by this Author (p. 22) As the Word Presbyter is
promiscuously applied to the Apostles themselves, from hence it will follow,
that by the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery here mentioned, may very
well be understood the laying on of the Hands of no other than the Apostles. --
But how will this agree with the Argument we have been just considering? If
there were a Number of Apostles concerned in this Ordination, how can the Gift
that is here affirmed to be conferred by the Presbytery, be in another Place
said to be given by the putting on of St. Paul's Hands? Would it suit with St.
Paul's Modesty and Humility, to arrogate to himself what other Apostles were
equally concerned in? I hope he will give up one of these Arguments, unless he
would establish his Cause by Contradictions. I Will however suppose with this
Gentleman, that the Presbytery were all of them Apostles: he must nevertheless
allow, that they acted in this Affair as a Presbytery; and how then will be
justify their own Ordinations by a single Bishop? Is the Bishop of London a
Presbytery? Supposing him to have the full Power of an Apostle, can he find any
Warrant from this Text o^ any other, to ordain without such a Number of other
Bishops or Apostles, as will make a Presbytery? As for the Presbyters that lay
on Hands with the Bishop they either have the Power of Ordination, or they have
not. If they have, the Dispute is at an End. (...) not, How are Episcopal
Ordinations performed by the Imposition of the Hands of a Presbytery? Let the
World judge, who keep closest to this sacred Pattern; they whose Ordinations
depend upon the Authority of one single Person, or we, who have always the
Imposition of the Hands of a Presbytery, in this solemn Transaction. --
Besides, if this Presbytery are allowed to be Apostles, they acted in this
Affair as Presbyters: and are therefore succeeded by Presbyters, in the Power
of Ordination. To say with this Gentleman, that Presbyters no doubt they were,
and perhaps superior to Presbyters, is but a mean begging the Question. His
Business was to have proved, that it was not only possible, but certain, that
they acted in this Affair in a Character superior to Presbyters, if he would
wrest this Text our of our Hands -- What Reason can be possibly assigned, why
they have here the Denomination of a Presbytery, if they acted in a superior
Character? Was it on Purpose to lead us into a wrong Apprehension in this
Matter? Would our Adversaries have failed of a Triumph from this Text, if this
Ordination had been said to be performed by the Imposition of the Hands of a
Consistory of Bishops, or Officers superior to Presbyters?

I have already proved, that the Gift received by Timothy, by the Imposition of
Paul's Hands, was not his Ordination; and so there is no Room left for the
trifling Criticism, we are entertained with, from the greek Prepositions (...)
and (...). And indeed there is nothing more certain, than that they are
frequently in Scripture used promiscuously, and particularly in an Instance
exactly parrallel to this before us, in Acts xv. 4, 12. where it is (...) in
the 4th, and (...) in the 12th verse; and both intend the same Efficiency, or
rather Instrumentality, in producing the Effect. See also Acts xiv. 27. and
many other Places.

But we are told (p. 23.) that supposing Presbyters peculiarly so called, were
in this Company, (which does not appear, nor will the primitive Fathers at all
allow) it will only follow from hence, that they may assist (with Officers
superior to themselves) at an Ordination: not that they may without such
Officers manage this Affair -- But by this Gentleman's Leave, there is more to
be supposed, than that there were Presbyters in this Company; it is to be
supposed, nay it is certain, even from the very Letter of the Text, that they
were all Presbyters, and acted as such at this Ordination; and there is nothing
but the mere strength of Imagination, to render the contrary Supposal in the
least probable. And are we thus to give up plain Texts of Scripture, because
Men will imagine that they may mean something else, though they themselves know
not what? Is not this to render every Article of Our Religion precarious?
However to gratify him, I Will suppose, that these Presbyters had the Apostle at
their Head, in Timothy's Ordination. But that being granted, I yet demand, what
Business had their Hands upon Timothy, in conferring an Order, that they had no
Authority to communicate, unless the Power of Ordination belongs to 'em? What
can be more ^udic^ous, than to allow to Presbyters all the ordaining Act, and
yet to deny them the ordaining Power? What is Ordination but a solemn
Dedication or Separation of a suitable Person to God for the Ministry, by
Fasting and Prayer, with Imposition of Hands? And did not the Presbyters do all
this, in the Case before us? What could a Bishop do more? Can he confer the
Ministry by a mere Physical Contact? -- It is allowed that Presbyters have
Authority to do every Act, that belongs to Ordination; and yet the Bishop (it
seems) must monopolize the Power of ordaining to himself. Can there be any
Thing more inconsistent!

My Antagonist would fain find some other Business for the Presbyters Hands on
the Head of the Candidate; and therefore tells us, Presbyters may lay on Hands,
for the greater Solemnity of the Action, or to give their Consent or
Approbation. -- But have we any Scriptural Example of Imposition of Hands, for
either of these Purposes? Would it ad^ Solemnity to the Action, for them to
intrude into another Man's Province? Would not their saying Amen to the
Ordination-Prayer, be sufficient to give their Consent or Approbation? In fine,
I would observe, The Apostle evidently lays Stress on the Imposition of the
Hands of the Presbyters, in Timothy's Ordination; he makes mention of it to him
as a matter of Importance and eminent Weight. But what rational Account can be
given of his placing such an Emphasis on the Imposition of their Hands, if
their joining in the Action was of so little Significance, as is pretended by
this Gentleman? I think I have here a fair Occasion, to borrow a Phrase from
our Author: Who would be a Drudge to a Cause, that cannot be supported, without
such pitiful shifts as these?

ANother Evidence, that Ordination did belong to those called Presbyters or
Bishops in Scripture, may be taken from Acts xiii. 1, 3. where we find Paul and
Barnabas set apart to the Exercise of their Ministry among the Gentiles, only
by the Imposition of the Hands of a Presbytery. -- That all the usual Acts and
Rites of Ordination, as Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of Hands, were
performed by these Presbyters; that this was done to separate Paul and
Barnabas, to the Work of their Ministry among the Gentiles; so much is plainly
expressed in the Text. Now I must confess, I know not what Ordination is, if
Separating Men to the Exercise of the Ministry, by Fasting and Prayer, with the
laying on of Hands, be not a proper and formal Ordination. And that these
Ordainers were Presbyters, and neither Apostles nor Diocesan Bishops, is not
only plain from the Text; but what our Adversaries themselves have
acknowledged; and my Antagonist evidently allows it. -- What Reason then can be
given, why this is not a standing Precedent, for Ordination by a Presbytery? --
But our Author is loath to give up his Cause; and must therefore say something.
I deny (says he p. 23.) that this was an Ordination at all; for if this were
the Ordination of St. Paul, it will follow from hence, not only that Presbyters
have a Right to ordain; but also that their Office extended to the ordaining
even Apostles themselves, and to give them the Authority which they had in the
Church. -- I deny his Consequence. For none pretend, that Paul and Barnabas
were now authorized to the Apostolate; they had their immediate and
extraordinary Call before. But being now, first to preach and settle the Gospel
among the Gentiles, they enter upon that special Exercise of their Ministry, at
the ordinary Door of Ordination. Which supposal is so far from an
Inconsistency, that it is not only exactly agreeable to the sacred story in the
Text before us; but is also to be esteemed a Declaration of the Mind of God, as
to the manner of Dedicating Men to the Ministry, among the Gentiles, in all the
succeeding Ages of the Church. And accordingly Dr. Lightfoot justly supposes,
The Reason of this Ordination was, that the Lord hereby might set down a
Platform of ordaining Ministers, to the Church of the Gentiles, to future
Times. Vol. 1. p. 289.


Our Author would fain evade the Force of this Text; and therefore frames
several Imaginations to get clear of it. He imagines that this solemn
Transaction was for the Benediction of these Apostles; and gives Instances of
Imposition of Hands in Benedictions. (p. 24.) -- But then, 1. What becomes of
the Argument in Heb. vii. 7. And without all Contradiction the less is blessed
of the greater. Will this Gentleman allow, that Presbyters are greater than
Apostles! 2. Was Imposition of Hands with Fasting and Prayer used for the
separating Men to the Exercise of the Gospel Ministry, in the Cases he
mentions! How then does it affect the Cause before us? since Paul and Barnabas
were by these solemn Rites separated to that sacred Service, ve^. 2. -- They
were (as all Ministers by Ordination are) recommended to the Grace of God, for
the WORK which they fulfilled. Acts xiv. 26.


He goes on to argue, That this was not a proper Ordination, is manifest from
hence; because this Rite of imposing Hands, whereby other Ministers were
ordained, was never used in making Apostles. It was a distinguishing Part of
their Character, that they were immediately called and ordained by Christ
himself. -- To which I answer, it is generally acknowledged, that it was a
distinguishing Part of the Apostles Character, to be immediately called by
Christ himself, and that they could not be ordained to the Apostolate by the
Imposition of Hands. But what a Pity it is, that this Gentleman could not have
remembered this? It would have saved him all the Trouble and Pains of his
second Letter. For how then, I pray, can there be a Succession in the
Apostolic Office? How come the Bishops to be Apostles, if it be a
distinguishing Part of the Apostles Character, to be called and ordained by
Christ himself? Unless he can make it appear, that the Bishops have this
immediate Call and Ordination. Thus his Arguments have the ill Luck, to cut one
another's Throats; which (to borrow another modest Phrase from this Gentleman)
is no other than usually happens to the Abettors and Maintainers of bad and
erroneous Causes.

But let us see, how this Reasoning affects the present Case. Allowing that
Paul and Barnabas could not be ordained to the Apostolic Office; allowing that
they had an immediate Call to the Apostolate before: yet might not they have a
peculiar Separation, to their Mission among the Gentiles? And was it not most
agreeable, that they should have a most open, and solemn, and known Dedication
to that Business, against which the Jewish Church had such strong and rooted
Prejudices, as appears, Acts xi. 2. and xxi. 20, 25.? -- It is observable, This
Gentleman himself scruples not to talk of Occasional Commissions to execute
Apostolical Offices, conferred on those that were Officers before, such as
Prophets, Evangelists, etc (p. 34) And now I know no Reason why I may not as
well suppose a like fact, the occasional Separation even of those that were
Officers before, such as Apostles, with relation to their new Labors in the
Gentile World: and yet that occasional Separation such, with regard to the
Manner of performing it, as affords a permanent Example to the Church.

The Gentleman has yet a further Answer to give: Suppose (says he, p 25.) that
Paul and Barnabas were now ordained, what Advantage can the Dissenters reap
thereby? This was done by an immediate Command of the Holy Ghost, and
consequently can be no Precedent, for those that are not empowered by such a
Commission. Was there not a full Answer given to this Objection in the
Dialogue? And is it just now to propose it as a new Argument, without taking
any No^ice of the Solution there given to it? This indeed was his easiest and
safest Method: but it will not recommend his Ingenuity, to any observing Person --
I might justly here recommend him to the Dialogue, for an Answer, and make no
other Reply: but that he may not complain of Neglect, I add to what was there
proposed. If it was from the immediate Command of the Holy Ghost, then surely
these Presbyters had a good Warrant for their Conduct; and the Precedent was
well founded. Besides, it was necessary from the Nature of the Thing, that the
first Examples of this Kind must be either by the immediate Direction of the
Holy Ghost, or else mere human Inventions. Let him, he can, give us an Account
of any Ordinations performed in the Apostles Times, that were not directed by
immediate Inspiration of the Holy Ghost. So that, there be any Reasoning from
the Account of these Things given us in the New Testament, we man justly
conclude for Presbyterian Ordination, from the Case before us, as founded on
Scripture-Institution.

ANother Evidence to prove, that Ordination was allowed to and claimed by those
called Presbyters or Bishops in the New Testament, is this. They that have the
principal and chief Parts of the sact^^ Ministry committed to them, have also a
Claim (...) the inferior and subordinate Parts of that Offic^^ And that
Preaching and Baptizing (which all allow to Presbyters) are the principal and
chief Parts (...) the Ministry, appears from the Commission, Mat. xxviii. 1^.
where these are the only Ministerial Duties, expressly committed even to the
Apostles themselve. To which our Author answers, I deny that. The Power of
ordaining and authorizing a Man to execute these Offices is much greater (p.
27.) But wha^ has he to say, to the Argument taken from the Commission? Truly
not one Word! He was told, th^^ either Preaching and Baptizing (the only
Ministeri^^ Duties expressly commanded in the Commission) are the greater Parts
of the Ministerial Work, under which Ordaining, Governing the Church etc as
lesser Parts of a Minister's Work, are included; or else these Duties of
Preaching and Baptizing, are the lesser Parts of a Minister's Work, under which
the greater are included in the Commission: But it is a gross Absurdity, to
suppose the greater included in the less; and therefore it must be
acknowledged, that the less is included in the greater, that is, that the
Presbyters Offices of Preaching and Baptizing, are the principal and superior
Parts of the Ministry. Whence it is a necessary Consequence, that as they have
the greater, they have also the less; as they have the principal and chief,
they have also the subordinate Work of a Gospel Minister, committed to them.
And why did he not see Cause to make some Reply to this Argument? Must we not
look at his Silence as an implicit Acknowledgement, that he knew not what to
say to it? -- But if he cannot answer the Argument, he will try if he cannot raise
some Objections, against what is proved by it. This very Argument (says he) do
the Papists use, to prove the sameness of Bishop and Presbyter as to Order; for
as they say, the highest Act is to make the Body and Blood of Christ present.
-- And what I pray follows from hence? If the Papists don't argue justly from
their Idolatrous Mass, is there therefore no just arguing from this
Scripture-Commission?

But pray (says the Gentleman, p. 28.) could not Philip the Evangelist baptize
and preach, but could not confirm? -- I would entreat him to tell us in the
next what he means by Confirming: for I can find no more about it in the
Scriptures, than about an apostolic Succession. I find indeed, in the eighth
Chapter of the Acts, that Philip did preach to the Samaritans, and baptized
many; but did not pretend to impose Hands upon any in order to their receiving
the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost: this was a Power peculiar to the
Apostles only; for which Reason Peter and John were sent down to them, tha^
they might receive these extraordinary and miraculous Gifts; and accordingly we
read, when the Apostles laid their Hands on them, they received the Holy Ghost.
ver. 17. But what is this to episcopal Confirmation?

He goes on The Presbyters of Ephesus could feed the Flock, in doing of which
no Doubt they preached and baptized: but it is plain they could not authorize
another to do it. If they could, it is amazing to find Persons of a superior
Character sent amongst them, to manage that Affair. The Gentleman was doubtless
very much pleased with this Argument, that it is so often repeated: but was ever
any Thing more chimerical? Who were the Persons sent among them, to manage that
Affair? I^ there the least Foundation for these Suppositions, in the
Scriptures? -- I am ready to suppose, by what I find him saying elsewhere, that
he intends by th^^ that Timothy was the Person of a superior Character sent to
ordain Elders at Ephesus. -- But this is only founded upon his own Imagination.
For the Scriptures are wholly silent about Timothy's apostoli^ Character, as
well as about his being ever concerned, in ordaining Elders at Ephesus. So that
he might well enough have spared his toothless Satyr, upon this Occasion. --
Thus after all he has said, or can say, it yet appears, that Presbyters are in
the Possession of the principal Parts of the Gospel Ministry. They are
authorized by the Commission, no^ only to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel;
which the Apostle Paul esteemed the chief and principal Work, that he was sent
upon. 1 Cor. i. 17.

It was also made evident, that Preaching and Baptizing are the greater Parts
of a Minister's Work and that Ruling and Ordaining must therefore belong to
them, who are authorized to the Exercise of these, from 1 Timothy v. 17. Let the
Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor; especially those
that labor in the Word and Doctrine. From whence it was argued: If they that
labor in the Word and Doctrine are especially worthy of double Honor, more
than they that rule well, then laboring in Word and Doctrine is a Work
superior to Ruling, and the principal Part of the Ministry. To which he
answers The very Elders who ruled the Church; and over and above that Service,
labored in preaching the Word, are the Persons counted worthy of double
Honor. Here is no Preference given to Preaching above Ruling: but Rulers are
commended, for executing the other Parts of the Ministry. -- What! were these
Rulers and Preachers the same sort of Officers? Are the Rulers only commended,
for executing the other Parts of their Ministry? Then the Apostle recommended
such to double Honor, who were under the general Obligation to preach
instantly, in Season and out of Season; and yet did not labor in Word and
Doctrine. And is this credible, that the Apostle should esteem lazy slothful
Ministers, worthy of double Honor, or ^ndeed of any Honor at all? However all
must grant, that such Ministers as both rule well, and are constant Preachers,
are worthy of more Honor, than their non-preaching Bishops. And so I think we
shall ^ose as little in Point of Honor, as we have done ^n Argument, by this
Comment upon the Text.

I shall have further Occasion to consider, who were the proper Successors to
the Apostles, in their ordinary Capacity; and to make it evident against ^ll
this Gentleman's Exceptions, that Presbyters ^ave all the ordinary Powers of
the Apostles, and cannot want Authority for Ordination and Jurisdic^ion. It is
therefore needless, to take Notice of what ^e here says upon that Subject.

THere was this further Argument used in the Dialogue, to prove, that the
Powers both of Ordination and Jurisdiction were inherent in, and claimed by
those called Presbyters or Bishops in the New Testament: They that have the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven committed to 'em, have the Power of Ordination
and Jurisdiction. This Proposition is self-evident, for all allow that
Ordination and Jurisdiction are Exercises of the Power of the Keys. And that
Presbyters have the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven committed to 'em, is what our
Adversaries themselves do also in Effect allow All grant them the Key of
Doctrine, and who the^ can deny them the Key of Order and Jurisdiction since
Christ gave all the Keys together, Matt. xvi. 19^^ and John xx. 23. He did not
give one Key to one and both to another. He gives no single Key (...) any
Person; but Keys, and whatever these Key serve for. Now what Christ has joined
together, M^ may not put asunder. But our Author found this Argument too hard
for him; and therefore prudently passed it over in Silence. And so we are left
in the full and peaceable Possession of the Keys both (...) Doctrine and
Discipline; and how then can b^ disown our Authority for Ordination and
Jurisdiction I appeal to the World, whether his Silence at th^^ Place is not a
fair giving up the Cause. For wh^ did he pass over this Argument, if he did not
find it unanswerable? Unless he though it it impertinent; and in this Case, he
should have given us his Reasons.

IT was further urged in the Dialogue, that the^ who are in Orders themselves,
have according t^^ the apostolical Constitution, Authority to confer Orders
upon others; and consequently, Presbytery have Power to ordain others to the
same Ministry which they themselves have received. This is founded on 1 Timothy
ii. 2. Whence it was enquired, If Timothy had Authority to commit the same
Things which he had received, to other faithful Men, why han't all others in
the Ministry, the same Authority? He answers (p. 29) Because it is not
inconsistent with the Nature of the pastoral Office, or to the Gospel, to
communicate the entire Power to some Officers; and some Branches of it only to
others. This we have his bare Word for; and it is proved as far as the Word of
a Gentleman will go in this Case. But I must needs say, that rational
Scripture-Evidence of this would go further with me, than many such Assertions,
how positive soever. I find nothing in the Scripture, for thus crumbling the
Work of the Ministry into Parts; but on the contrary, we are all required to
take Heed to our Ministry, and fulfill it. But he tells us, We know well that
one Deacon cannot ordain another, consistent with the Dissenters own Scheme. --
But are Deacons themselves in sacred Orders, in the Sense now debated,
according to our own Scheme? What then is this to the Purpose? Yet I cannot help
adding, That if Deacons may by virtue of their Office preach and baptize, and
make their Pulpit Prayers too (according to the Episcopal Practice) I know of
no Impropriety there would be in asserting their Right also to ordain: because
he that may do the greater, may certainly do the lesser, -- as before. And
truly to be free, I should look upon Ordination performed by a Church of
England Deacon, to have Validity, as truly as Ordination by a Prelate. But now
according to our Scheme, the Deacons have no Authority by virtue of their
Office to preach or baptize, or preside and lead in the public Worship. It
would be absurd therefore to suppose a Power in them, of giving Order, when the
performing public Prayers, and administering solemn Oaths and Charges in the
Name of Christ, belong to the Work of Ordination. Whereas there is nothing in
the Nature of the Thing, that necessarily precludes Presbyters from the Right
of Ordaining; who are by their Office authorized to perform the several Actions
that belong to Ordination. This, I doubt not, would appear very plain to our
Opponents, if they could but once disingage themselves from their singular
Fancy about an authoritative external Commission or Delegation of Power, and
consider Ordination in the Light we do, as a ministerial declarative and
dedicating Act. They would then see there is some Weight in Bp. Usher's Maxim,
Ordinis est ordinare. -- In Reply to what I had further argued, our Author
subjoins, Although Bishops do consecrate Archbishops, it will not follow that
Presbyters should ordain Presbyters; and the Reason is plain, because
Presbyters are not at all empowered, in the New Testament, to perform this
Work. -- But he should have remembered, that this is the very Case in Question;
and therefore was it self to be proved, and not brought as an Argument. He, and
I, have both appealed to the World, as to the Truth of this Assertion. The
World is now to judge, whether it is not fully made appear from the New
Testament, that Presbyters are empowered to perform this Work. And I also
appeal to the World, whether this ben't a good Evidence of Presbyters Authority
to ordain, that they have all the Powers committed to them in the New
Testament, that belong to any ordinary Ministers of the Gospel; as I have
already proved, and hope to make further Evident, notwithstanding all he can
say to the contrary. -- He concludes this Head with saying, Neither do we allow
of Inferiors consecrating Superiors, as this Writer would disinginuosly
insinuate: For all Bishops have originally equal Power; though a primacy of Order
is granted to some by general Consent etc. Upon which I must be free to say,
This Gentleman certainly acts the disingenuous part, rather than I: For he
denies, that in the Church of England Inferiors consecrate Superiors, and yet
at the same time in Effect acknowledges it, by confessing that Bishops do
consecrate Archbishops, and that Archbishops have a primacy of Order; which I
think sufficiently speaks them Superiors. -- I said nothing about Imparity of
Power: and yet, I believe our Author would find it difficult to persuade the
World, that Archbishops in England have not a Primacy of Power, as well as
Order; Else why are the Bishops obliged to take an Oath of Canonical Obedience
to them? -- But still it would not hurt my Argument, if I should allow him his
Episcopal Parity. For if Bishops may ordain their Equals, there is the same
Reason to allow Presbyters to do the like. Bishop Stillingfleet tells us
Irenic. p. 306.
, Tertullian makes the Government of the Church to lie in a Consessus Ordinis,
which (says he) I know not otherwise to render, than by a Bench of Presbyters;
because only they were said in ordinem cooptari, who were made Presbyters; and
not those who were promoted to a higher Degree in the Church. By the way (he
adds) we may observe the Original of the name of Holy-Orders in the Church; not
as the Papists, and others following them, as though it noted any thing inherent
by way of (I know not what) Character in the Person; but because the Persons
ordained were thereby admitted in Ordinem, among the number of Church Officers.
So there was Ordo Senatorum, Ordo Sacerdotum etc. among the Romans. -- From
hence the use of the Word came into the Church; and thence Ordination, ex vi
Vocis, imports no more than a solemn Admission into this Order of Presbyters --
And the Collation of Orders (says he Ibid. p. 273.
) does come from the power of Order, and not merely from the power of
Jurisdiction. -- p. 276.
Those that are for Ordinations only by a superior Order in the Church,
acknowledging a radical Power for Ordination in Presbyters, which may be
exercised in Case of Necessity do thereby make it evident, that none who grant
that, do think that any positive Law of God harl forbidden Presbyters the Power
of Ordination; for then it must be wholly unlawful, and so in Case o^ Necessity
it cannot be valid: WHICH Doctrine (says he) I dare with some Confidence assert
to be a STRANGER to our Church of ENGLAND. And this he afterward largely makes
appear. And truly so great stranger was this Doctrine even there from the time
of the Reformation for many Years that the King's 'Professor at Oxford branded
Lard with public Infamy for asserting the Divine Right (...) Episcopacy. -- By
the way then we may learn what Opinion the Reformers would have had of many in
our Times, who boast themselves true Sons of the Church of England, and yet are
Zealots for an is famous unchurching Principle.

I come now to our Author.

HE would in the next Place (p. 30.) insinuate, that all the Churches of the
Ausburg Confession, those of Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Hungary, Transylvania and
Bohemia, are all under Episcopal Government. But were this Representation as
just as it is unjust, what would it be to his Purpose? Is there any one of
these Churches, that derive the Succession of their Ministry, from episcopal
Ordination? Was not the Reformation carried on by Presbyters amongst them all?
And even in tho^^ Countries where they now have nominal Bishops were not their
first Bishops after the Reformation ordained by Presbyters? Did not Bugenhagius
a Presbyter ordain the first seven Superintendents, or Bishops: in Denmark? And
the like may be said of Sweden, who therefore by our Author's Plan are in no
better Case, than if they had no Bishops at all. But the worst on it is, that
this Gentleman's Story is false in Fact. Hear Bishop Stillingfleet upon the
Matter. In Sweeden (says he) there is one Archbishop and seven Bishops; and so
in Denmark, though not with so great Authority. In Holstein, Pomeren,
Mecklenburgh, Brunswick, Lunenburgh, Bremen, Oldenburgh, East Friezland,
Hessen, Saxony, and the upper Parts of Germany, and the Protestant Imperial
Cities, Church Government is in the Hands of Superintendants. In the
Palatinate, they had Inspectores and Praepositi, over which was the
ecclesiastical Consistory -- And so they have their Praepositi in Wetteraw,
Hessen, and Anhalt. In Transylvania, Polonia, and Bohemia, they have their
Seniores, enjoying the same power with ancient Bishops [who, according to this
learned Writer, were but prudential Officers, having only for more convenient
Order a Presidency over the ecclesiastical Senate, or Presbytery in their
respective Churches.] All these (he assures us) acknowledge no such Thing, as
the Divine Right of Episcopacy, but stiffly maintain Jerome's Opinion, of the
primitive Equality of Gospel Ministers. Thus he. Iren. p. 4^^.
[By the way I should be glad our Author would inquire and inform me whether
these Superintendents or Bishops in the foreign Churches at this Day have a
Metropolitan or Episcopal Consecration.] And does not my Antagonist know, that
besides the Church of North Britain, there are a very considerable Number of
our Profession in England and Ireland, and together with these, the Belgic
Churches, the remains of the reformed French Churches, the Churches of Geneva,
and Switzerland, which have no Bishops, neither Name nor Thing. And what is to
become of all these, by this Gentleman's principles? Is it (says he) this
received Principle of the Catholic Church that unchurches foreign Churches; or
do they unchurch themselves, by continuing wilful Transgressors of it? The
positive Laws of God are all Sacrosanct, especially those he has ordained for
Government; and he will in no wise excuse the wilful Neglect of them; but every
such Transgression against the Polity of the Christian Theocracy, let the
Number of the Offenders be never so great, shall receive a just Recompense of
Reward. Thus you see, how he charitably Damns all the foreign Protestant
Churches by the Lump, and consigns them over to eternal Ruin. -- To what
amazing Lengths will High-Church Biggotry carry Men! Here Is Uncharitableness
not to be paralleled, except amongst the most bigoted and bloody Papists. But
we have this Comfort, that we are not to stand or fall at their Tribunal: nor
will their want of Charity, recommend their Principles to any, that are
acquainted with the Spirit of the Gospel. Judge now between me and th^^ Author,
who it is that does most shamefully and innorantly misrepresent the Protestant
World, an^ who is it that is guilty of "at once mocking God, as deceiving the
People."

Thus, Sir, I have at length finished my Remark upon his first Letter; and I
hope have said enough to prove, that his Objections are groundless, his
Reasonings unscriptural; his strong Assertions founded only upon Confidence, or
a warm Imagination, and his Deductions monstrously uncharitable. And so I am
prepared to attend upon what he has further to offer, for the proof of Diocesan
Episcopacy, in his

SECOND LETTER.
I Have hitherto been considering the Gentleman's Answers to our Arguments, for
the divine Right of Presbyterian Ordination: we are now to see, what Evidence
he can bring for Diocesan Episcopacy; and it might reasonably have been
expected, he should have a very strong Foundation to build his Superstructure
upon, since no less than the very Being of the Church and our Eternal Safety do
(according to him) absolutely depend upon it. But when I read this Letter, I am
surprised to find, that he does not so much as pretend to found his Cause upon
Scripture-Evidence; nor offer at any one Argument, that Prelacy was established
in the Church by Christ and his Apostles. His whole Business is, to answer such
Objections, as he is pleased to throw in his own Way, while he professedly
omits particularly Answering the Dialogue, for these Reasons: First, because
Part of it has been already considered; secondly, because (he tells us) I have
placed my Antagonist's Argument in so indifferrent a Light, that he thinks
himself not at all obliged, to regard my stating the Questions in Dispute. p.
31. -- This is a Method truly artful enough, to amuse his Reader; and I think
safe enough for us, let him impute his Neglect of the Dialogue, to what Cause
he pleases.

The Method be proposes to gain his Point by, is to prove four Propositions;
the Performance of which is next under Consideration.

His first Proposition is That the Apostles had properly Successors, in the
Essentials of the apostolic Office. ( p. 32.) Well! suppose this were granted
to him, what Consequence would he draw from it? The Question would still recur,
who are these Successors to the Apostles? Were they Presbyters, or Diocesan
Bishops? -- I shall here take Opportunity, to discharge my Debt to this Author;
and to show him, that notwithstanding his frivolous Objections in his first
Letter, the Apostles in their ordinary Capacity were but Presbyters; and
consequently this Succession (if it be allowed him) is a Succession of
Presbyters. They are Presbyters, and not Dioces^^ Bishops, that are still
vested with the apostolic Character. It is certain that the Ap^stles style^
themselves Presbyters 1 Pet. v. 1. 2 John 1. and 3 John 1. And it is as
certain, that this Examine^ cannot find them (in their Ordinary Capacity)
bearing any other Denomination. If by their immediate Call they were endued
with some extraordinary Powers; yet in their ordinary Capacity, they are never
represented otherwise in the New Testament, than as Presbyters. And let this
Gentlem^n frame what Imaginations he pleases, about this Matters the
Scripture-Account of it is most to be depende^^ upon. He tells us indeed (p.
19) that it do^^ not appear, that they are no other than Presbyters -- For though
a superior Order does frequen^^ presuppose and include all it is relative
in^e^^^^^ Orders; yet in no Case does the contrary Obtain being unnatural, and
so irrational. -- But it do^^ appear, that they were Presbyters; and let him,
he can, make it appear, that they were (in the ordinary Capacity) any more than
so. To suppo^^ it possible, that they might be more than so, is (...) arguing;
but begging the Question. By the far Way of reasoning, I can prove them to be
every (...) a Pope. It is but supposing our Author arguing (...) a Succession
in the Papacy, and the Conclusion wa^ as naturally follow. For why may not a
Papist prove by this Argument, that Peter was the first Pope (...) Rome, from
whom all the Popes have succeeded (...) this Day, as well as our Author prove
what he p^^tends to? It Is true (might a Roman Catholic sa^ Peter calls himself
a Presbyter; but does it he^^ appear, that he was no other than a Presbyter?
(...) though a superior Order does frequently presuppo^^ and include all it is
relative in^eriour Orders; yet in no Case does the Contrary obtain etc. Peter
might be Pope of Rome notwithstanding. -- His Instances of a Doctor in any
Faculty, being a Batchellor, a Sergeant at Law being Barrister, and a Duke a
Marquess, but not vice versa, do but militate against him. For does a Doctor
write himself Batchellor, a Sergeant at Law write himself Barrister, or a Duke
style himself Marquess, as the Apostles write themselves Presbyters in the
quoted Texts? In a Word, the supposal of a Succession in the Apostolic Office
will not serve his Turn, inasmuch as Presbyters have the only just Claim to a
Succession from the Apostles. And if the Apostles had properly Successors, in
the Essentials of the Apostolic Offi^e (as he says they had) they were no
other than Presbyters. He can find no Mention of any others to succed them, in
all the New Testament.

But it is Time to consider, whether there be any Truth in this Proposition,
upon which his whole Cause depends. How does it appear, that the Apostles had
properly Successors in the Essentials of the Apostolic Office? Why, our Author
asserts it, nay he has promised to prove it; and is not that sufficient? At
present, he has Leisure for no more, than to answer some Objections against it:
and we must have Patience to wait for the Proof of it, till some better
Opportunity.

He tells us, All my Adversary's Arguments will be fully considered, if I can
give a clear and satisfactory Answer to this Question. Whether the
extraordinary Privilege of working Miracles, and being Witnesses of the
Resurrection, which the Apostles were blessed with, were Essential to the
Apostolic Office? I deny they were; and my Adversary affirms the contrary. But
by his Leave, I must tell him, that my Arguments are not all answered, till he
has replied to what was urged in the Dialogue, from the unlimited Commission of
(...) Apostles; and reconciled that small inconsistency, of their Bishops
having an universal Charge (as the Apostles had) and yet being fixed Pastors of
a particular Diocese. For this was one Argument, particularly insisted upon, in
the Dialogue. But since he is (as he tells us) for reducing the Debate, into as
short a Compass as possible; and is pleased to neglect what he is not willing
to answer; let us see how he performs what he has undertaken.

He first attempts to help out his Cause by explaining the Question; and tells
us (p. 33.) In order to give a clear Answer to this Question, I will suppose,
that by Essential, this Gentleman understands something that was peculiar to
the Apostolic Office; and what distinguishes it from all others -- But I must
tell him, he has quite Mistaken my Meaning; and given a very wrong Explication
of the Word Essential. It is Essential to a Brute, to have a sensitive Soul;
but then it is not peculiar to a Brute, nor what distinguishes it from all
others: For I think this Gentleman has one too. It is Essential to a Man, to be
a reasonable Creature; but not peculiar to him: there are other rational Beings
in the Creation. It is Essential to a King of Great Britian, that he be a
Protestant; but not peculiar to him. I am willing to believe my Antagonist to
be one too. And a hundred like Instances, might be given him. -- But what I
intend, by these Things being Essential to the Apostolic Office, is, that they
are so necessary, that none could be Apostles without them; not that they were
all of them peculiar to the Apostles. The Apostles were indeed blessed with
some miraculous Gifts, which were peculiar to them; such as the Holy Ghost's
being given by the Imposition of their Hands, which was not only necessary to
every Apostle, upon which Account the Apostle Paul calls these Gifts thus
communicated, the Signs of an Apostle, 2 Cor. xii. 12. but they were also such
Powers, as none but they were ever endued with. The like may be said of the
Apostles being Witnesses of the Resurrection of Christ. For though many others as
well as they, were capable of witnessing to this Fact, yet they were not
peculiarly commissioned, and sent about the World to be Evidences of it: and
therefore are not (I think) in the New Testament denominated WITNESSES of the
Resurrection in such a peculiar Manner as the Apostles are. But it cannot be
said of all the extraordinary Qualifications, that were Essential to the
Apostleship, that they were thus peculiar to the Apostles. It was Essential,
for Instance, to the very Being of an Apostle, that he had a certain Knowledge
of that great Fact, upon which Christianity so much depends; that Christ risen
was what he had heard, what he had seen with his Eyes, what he had looked upon;
and his Hands had handled, 1 John i. 8. Wherefore it was a necessary
Qualification, when an Apostle was chosen in the Place of Judas, that he should
be one, that had companied with the eleven Apostles, all the Time that the Lord
Jesus went in and out amongst them, beginning from the Baptism of John, to the
same Day, that he was taken up from them, in order to his being a Witness with
them of his Resurrection. Acts. i. 21, 22. And in like manner, the Apostle Paul
is caught up to the third Heavens, that he might by a sight of Christ be
furnished for a Witness of his Resurrection, 2 Cor. xii. 2. compared with Gal.
i. 17. and Acts xxii. 17, 18. But then there were five hundred besides these,
that had seen Christ after his Resurrection. 1 Cor. xv. 6. So also it was
Essential to an Apostle, that he should have the miraculous Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, to confirm his Testimony of the Resurrection of Christ, to Jews and
Infidels, who would not receive this for Truth, upon Men's bare Word, without
this Seal of Heaven to confirm it; as is largely proved in the Dialogue: and
yet it is manifest, that the most, if not all the Christians, wherever the
Apostles went, had these miraculous Gifts, as well as they, though not in so
great a Degree.

It is fully sufficient to my Purpose, that these Qualifications were
Essentially necessary to the Apostles, whether they were peculiar to them or
not. It is enough, that they could not be Apostles without them. Let us but see
their Bishops endued with these Qualifications, and thus furnished to be sent
about the World, to be Witnesses of Christ's Resurrection, and I will allow
them to be properly Successors in the Apostolic Office. But in the mean Time,
in vain does this Author plead, that it is evident, that these extraordinary
Gifts we are speaking of, were so far from being peculiar to the Apostles, that
many Men were endued with them, that ^ad no share at all in the Ministry. In
vain does he urge, that if the Essentials of the Apostolic Office consisted in
their being Witnesses of Christ's Resurrection, and the extraordinary
Assistances of the Holy Ghost, then the Seventy Disciples, who had the
extraordinary Assistances of the Holy Ghost and were Witnesses of Christ's
Resurrection, were Apostles; and the five hundred Brethren, by whom he was seen
at one Time, were Apostles. For who ever pretended, that these Things were
peculiar to the Apostles; or that they were the Essentials (...) the Apostolic
Office? It suffices that they were Essential to the Apostleship, which is a
quite different Thing. That was what I undertook to prove, an^ I think have
made abundantly evident, in the Dialogue, to which I refer you for
Satisfaction. But what has my Antagonist advanced against this? Has he said one
Word to prove, that any can be Apostles without this? No! that was to attempt
an Impossiblity. Thus has he stumbled at the Threshold. Thus has he left the
Arguments as he found them, untouched by any Thing he has said. And thus also
would I leave his first Proposition, were it not for one or two Things that
occur under it, that may possibly be thought worthy of Notice. Particularly

He quotes Matthew. xxviii. 20. to prove, that the Apostolic Office was to
continue for ever in the Church. -- But does that Text say any Thing about the
Apostolic Office? That the Apostles were, in their Successors, to continue to
the End of the World, is indeed manifest from that Text. But then the Question
is, how are they succeeded? In their extraordinary, or in their ordinary
Capacity? If the former, let their imaginary Successors show us those
extraordinary Qualifications, that were Essentially necessary to the Apostles;
and we will acknowledge their Apostolic Character. If the latter, I have
already proved, that Presbyters are their proper Successors; and he has not
shown us, nor can be show us, that any but Presbyters, are by divine
Appointment to succeed them, in either Capacity.

Another Thing that I could not lightly pass over, is his evading my Answer to
the Arguments, brought from 1 Cor. xii 28. and Ephesians iv. 11. This Gentleman (says
he) would fain know, how it appears, that Apostles are permanently set in the
Church, and to continue till Christ comes: when Prophets, Evangelists,
Miracles, Gifts of Healing, and Diversity of ^ongues, are confessedly temporary
-- I answer, the these were not so many distinct Offices, they are only several
Denominations, conferred on those Officers, that were in the Church before.
Now, were this granted, what is it to the Purpose? Were not th^se, as well as
Apostles, said to be set in the Church; and given for the perfecting the
Saints, in the Text then under Consideration? Was not the fame Permanence
predicated of these Offices and Gifts, or (if he please) Denominations; as of
the Apostles? Let him therefore show us Prophets and Evangelists; let him show
us Miracles, Gifts of Healing, and Diversity of Tongues, in their Bishops, and
I Will allow 'em to be Apostles. -- But I must nevertheless tell him, that this
Notion of his, that these Gifts and Offices resided in the same Person, and
that (as he too ^oldly asserts) the Work of an Evangelist, Prophet etc. was
common to every Minister, is as false as it is impertinent; and is expressly
contradicted by the Apostle himself, in the very following Words to those now
considered, 1 Cor. xii. 29, 30. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all
Workers of Miracles? Have all the Gifts of Healing? Do all speak with Tongues?
Do all Interpret? No! if we may believe the Apostle in the 27th verse of the
same Chapter, though these all belong to the Body of Christ, they are all Members
in particular. So that either the Apostle Paul or this Gentleman is certainly
in a Mistake.

Thus I have particularly considered his first Proposition, upon which lies all
the Stress of his whole Fabric; and shown that it is neither pertinent to his
Purpose, nor true in Fact: and the rest of his Performance must therefore
necessarily be a Castle in the Air, his Foundation being wholly taken away.

I might indeed have taken a shorter Method with this Gentleman; and put him
upon the utter Subversion of this Proposition with his own Hand. For if it be
(as he tells us it is, in p. 24) a distinguishing Part of an Apostle's
Character, that he be immediately called and ordained by Christ himself, it is
evident to Demonstration, that none can be vested with that Character, but what
have that immediate Call and Ordination. And what then becomes of his
Succession, in the Essentials of the Apostolic Office? unless he pretends,
that their Bishops are thus immediately called, and ordained by Christ himself.
It might be worthy of this Gentleman's Pains, to make Peace between these two
jarring Propositions, That it is a distinguishing Part of an Apostle's
Character, that he be immediately called and ordained by Christ himself: and
yet that the Apostles have properly Successors, in the Essentials of the
Apostolic Office. This certainly deserves Re-consideration.

HIs Second Proposition is ( p. 35.) That it is not contrary to the Nature of
the pastoral Office, or to the Gospel, to communicate the entire Powers to some
Officers; and some Branches of it only to others." -- But how does this appear?
In this Opinion I am confirmed (says the Gentleman) because the Scripture
supposes it may be done; and has left the Communicating the several Gifts, to
the Discretion of the Ordainers, to distribute them, as they find the Persons
to be ordained, qualified to receive them. -- The Scripture appealed to in this
Case, is Romans xii. 6, 7, 8. Where (he tells us) the differing Branches of the
pastoral Office are placed, not in the same, but differing Persons, Prophesying
in one, Teaching in another, Exhorting in a third, Ministering in another,
Ruling in another, according as they are qualified. -- What a pity it is that
this Gentleman has no better Memory? It was but in the very last Page we were
told that the Work of an Evangelist, PROPHET etc. was common to every Minister.
But now, when he has another Turn to serve, The differing Branches of the
pastoral Office are placed, not in the same, but differing Persons; PROPHESYING
in one, TEACHING in another etc. -- But the Truth on it is, that as he greatly
mistook, in the former Part of his Contradiction, so is he in no less a
Mistake, in the Application of the Text before us. For --

In the first Place, what if the Gifts here enumerated, were not any of them,
Branches of the ordinary pastoral Office at all; but Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
extraordinarily, and occasionally communicated, for the Service of the Church
in it is Infant-State? How will it then help his Cause? I think he will not argue
from those extraordinary Dispensations, to the ordinary standing Ministry in
the Church. For those came not by their Authority, from the grand Commission;
but by immediate Inspiration. And that the Text before us did refer to Gifts
thus immediately communicated, seems manifest to me; because we find the very
same Enumeration of Gifts in 1 Cor. xii. 28. where the Apostle is professedly
treating of the extraordinary Charismata, through that and the two immediately
succeeding Chapters. And it is remarkable that in both Places, the Consideration
of these Gifts is introduced in the same Manner; and ^^e^^ed in the same View,
by an Argument from the Members of the Body natural, to these Members of the
mystical Body of Christ: that in neither Case, any Member has Cause to despise
another; because they belong to the same Body. Now then, if it be a good Rule,
to compare Scripture with Scripture; and t^ make the Scripture it is own
Interpreter, this Text it nothing to our Author's Purpose. I may add to this
that one of the Gifts in this Enumeration, (the Gift of Prophecy I mean) is by
all acknowledged, to be by immediate Inspiration; and I can see no Reason, why
the others that are without Distinction joined with it in the Text, are not so
too -- Moreover, there are two of these Gifts, that certainly have no special
Reference to any Office at all, viz. Giving, and Showing Mercy; which cannot be
supposed to be appropriated to any particular Order of Christians: but it is
certain, Men may by immediate Inspiration be excited and inclined to these
Duties, as is exemplified, Acts iv. 32. and then they are properly Gifts, as
called in the Text; but why the rest of these Gifts must necessarily be
distinct and separate Office^ in the Christian Church, when these, that are
without any Distinction, class'd with them in the same Enumeration, have no
Relation to any Office at all, I can see no Color of Reason.

But being willing to oblige this Gentleman as far as I can, I will even
suppose, that these Gifts were not, all of them, given by immediate
Inspiration; and that they were not in the same, but different Persons; he is
not able to prove notwithstanding, above one of these, to belong to the
ordinary pastoral Office. -- Prophesying must be allowed to be an extraordinary
Gift; and why may not the Ministry here mentioned, refer to Deacons, as it is
called in the original the Deaconship? The Teaching refer to Catechists, the
Exhorting to ordinary Pastors, the Ruling* to Ruling Elders? His supposal, that
they all belong to the ordinary pastoral Office, is altogether groundless. And
I think my Interpretation of these Words is much more natural and easy, than
that he has given. -- If any object, against my making the Teachers to be
Catechists, I must observe to 'em, that there certainly was such a sort of
Instructor in the Apostles Times.

Hence that Complaint of the Apostle, that those who for the Time ought to be
TEACHERS, needed to be taught again, which be the first Principles of the
Oracles of God, Heb. v. 12. From which Text it is apparent, that there were such
Teachers in the Church, whose Business was to teach others which be the first
Principles of the Oracles of God; i. e. in other Words, who were Catechists.

He goes on to argue: That our Savior founded his Church in an Imparity, both
of Order and Power, must (I think) be acknowledged, if the twelve Apostles were
superior both in Order and Power, to the seventy Disciples. -- The Gentleman
will be pleased to pardon me, that I cannot se^ his Consequence follow from his
Premises. If it be supposed, that the Apostles were superior both in Order and
Power, to the seventy Disciples, it will not follow, that our Savior founded his
Church upon that Imparity; because the Christian Church was not founded at all,
at the Time when these were sent forth: but the Seventy's Commission expired
before the Christian Church had any Being. The Argument may therefore be justly
inverted. For i^ the twelve Apostles were indeed superior both in Order and
Power, to the seventy Disciples, it appears that our Savior did not found his
Church upon an Imparity of Order and Power; because he did not under the
Gospel Dispensation renew the Commission of the seventy, as he did the
Commission of the Twelve. If it be supposed that there was an Imparity in that
their temporary Mission; yet our Savior did not design that Imparity should
continue after the Christian Church was founded; for the Seventy's Commission
was then wholly dropped, and renewed no more. There was but one of these Orders
continued, as Ministers of the Christian Church.

I have, I think, made it clearly evident in the Dialogue, that there was no
Christian Church existing, when the seventy Disciples were sent upon their
occasional Errand; that our Savior himself and his Disciples, were Members of
the Jewish Church and actually submitted to all the Ordinances of it: but the
Christian Church being founded upon his Resurrection, there could be no
Ministers, nor indeed Members of this Church, before it had a Being, and that
the Aposte assures us, that the New Testament (and certainly then the new
Dispensation therein revealed) depended upon the Death of the Testator, Heb.
ix. 16, 17. For where a Testament is, there m^, of Necessity be the Death of
the Testator; otherwise it is of no Strength at all, while the Testator lives.
To which, my Antagonist has not seen Cause to give any Answer. To this I may
add, that the Christian Church was founded, upon the Subversion of the legal
Dispensation; which was principally to type and shadow forth Christ's Death and
could not therefore be done away, till what was thereby prefigured was
accomplished, in his Resurrection. -- Moreover, by ^^e Gentleman's own
Concession, it is impossible the Seventy could be Ministers of the Christian
Church, without a new Commission: for he himself tells us (p. 36.) that the
seventy were only sent before our Lord's Face, into the Cities and Places,
whither he himself would come, ( Luke x. 1.) to prepare the People for his
Reception. -- Is it so? How then came they to be Ministers in the Christian
Church? Were they only sent before our Lord's Face? Then certainly they had
neither Mission nor Commission, after his Resurrection. Were they only sent
where our Lord himself would come? Then their Mission was over, when he himself
had been in the Places, whither he sent them. And before they could not from
this limited Commission have any Ministry in the Gentile Churches. For this
Author owns that after they Returned to our Lord; and gave him an Account of
their Success, in the Execution of that Office, they were never once mentioned
again.

Though my Antagonist did not think it proper in this Place, to make any
Remarks, upon what was said upon this Subject in the Dialogue; yet before he
has finished his Discourse, he tells us (p. 48.) He cannot help being concerned
for the Author, and his critical Inspectors; and reminds them of John iv. 1, 2.
When therefore the Lord knew, how the Pharisees had heard, that Jesus had made
and baptized more Disciples than John, ( though Jesus himself baptized not; but
his Disciples.) -- Whence he triumphs "What! did they baptize, who were not
themselves Christians? I desire to know, if they were not Members of the
Christian Church, at what Time they were initiated. -- But who ever said, that
they were not themselves Christians? They might be Christians, and savingly
united to Christ, during the continuance of the Jewish Church State, and before
the Christian Church had it is Existence. And as to his second Question, I
answer, they belonged to the Christian Church immediately, as ^oo^ as there was
such a Church; but not before.

Thus you see, that his Argument labors of a no^sequitur, if it be even
supposed that the Apostles were Superior, both in Order and Power, to the
seventy Disciples. But if that also should prove (...) Mistake, what will
become of his Cause? And that it will do so is certain from this Consideration,
th^^ there was no special Business, no peculiar Office, committed to the
Twelve, that distinguished them from the Seventy; and therefore they could not
by that Commission, be Superior in Order and Power This Gentleman undertakes
to prove the contrary But allowing all that he asserts; allowing that the
Twelve were ordained to be with our Lord, and were his constant Attendants;
allowing, that the Twelve were by Commission to preach to all the Jews, the
Seventy only to the Places where ou^ Lord would come; allowing, that the
Inauguration of the Seventy was not so solemn as that of the Twelve; allowing,
that the Twelve were distinguished by the Name of Apostles, the Seventy only
called Disciples: and allowing that the Apostles are constantly called the
Twelve, whereas had they been all equal, they must have been eighty two
allowing, I say, all this (though it be a great deal more than is true) all the
Preference thereby allowed to the Twelve, is only in Honor, not in Order They
have no distinct Office, they have no distinc^ Errand in that Mission. In a
Word, they have n^^ distinct Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction; and
therefore what ever Superiority is supposed, will make nothing to the Purpose.

HE next proceeds, to examine the Reasoning in the Dialogue, from the grand
Ministerial Commission; But has according to his usual Method, discovered his
Prudence, in overlooking the Arguments there offered; and in contesting with
imaginary Objections, of his own framing. Supposing (says he, p 37.) what this
Author contends for, that this was the Commission, by virtue of which the
Apostles ordained their Successors in the Ministry: Supposing (I say) that this
was the full Commission of the Apostles; all the Ends of it might be answered,
by their appointing different Orders, for different Offices in the Church: nor
will it at all follow, that this is the Commission of Presbyters, in such
Sense, as that they are empowered by it to ordain others, because the Apostles
were. -- But he should have carried his Supposals a little further; and not
only supposed, that this was the full Commission of the Apostles: but that it
was the only Commission, by which all the Ministers of the Gospel are
authorized, to the Exercise of their Ministry; and the only Commission by which
the Gospel Ministry is to continue, and Christ's promised Presence secured to
them, unto the End of the World. And then it would follow, that they were
empowered by this Commission, to ordain others, because the Apostles ^ere;
whatever this Author thinks of it. I therefore once more provoke him, to answer
the Arguments in the Dialogue. If Presbyters are not included in the
Commission, whence have they their Existence? If they are included in this only
Commission to the Ministry, whence are their Superiors? Since the Commission
is but one, there can be but one Order by virtue of that Commission. If Bishops
are the Apostles Successors, and have in this Commission the Promise of
Christ's perpetual Presence, there are no Presbyters inferior to them; If
Presbyters are the Subjects of this Promise, there are no Bishops superior to
them: If both are included, they have both the same Order, and have both the
same Authority. He tells us indeed ( p. 38.) that the Apostles by virtue of
this very Commission, might have appointed some Persons to baptize, others only
to teach; and others endued with all these Powers. -- That is, though the Lord
Jesus Christ himself has given all the Powers, committe^ all the Work of the
Gospel Ministry, without Difference or Distinction, to every Minister of the
Gospel yet the Apostles might by virtue of the same Commission, by which this
was done, appoint some to the Exercise of all these Powers; and others to be
Part of them. Or in other Words, they might by virtue of this Commission,
vacate the Commission it sel^ and change the Purport and Tenor of it.

I would gladly know of this Gentleman, whether Presbyters are authorized at
all by this Commission, (...) not. If they are, where is the limiting Clause,
(...) which they are barred the Exercise of all the Powers that are thereby
communicated? If they are not, where is there any Promise of their continued
Succe^sion; or of Christ's gracious Presence with them?

But he insinuates, that there is no Ground to thi^^ that this was the Apostles
full Commission; and tell us, that their Direction and Commission to orda^^
might be given them afterward, by the Holy Ghost. -- And are all his high
Pretenses dw^^dled to this at last, It might be So? He is verily (...) Sanguine
to suppose, that we will allow for Fact, whatever he can imagine might be: some
Evidence of this is therefore wanting, to establish his Cause He desires to
know, by what Commission, S^ Paul and Barnabas did ordain Presbyters. H^ cannot
discover (he tells us) that it was by virtu^ of the grand Commission. And in
Answer, I desire to know also, by what Commission they acted, (...) not by the
grand Commission. If they had any other let him produce it; and that will end
the Debate but if none can be produced, his shortsightedne^^ in making
Discoveries carries no Conviction with (...) But if this Supposal was granted
him, it would be (...) far from serviceable, that it would entirely subvert h^^
whole Scheme. Be it supposed, that the Apostles could not ordain by virtue of
the grand Commission, without the immediate Directions of the Holy Ghost, it
will then necessarily follow, that their Bishops cannot ordain, by virtue of the
grand Commission, without the like Directions of the Holy Ghost; for I think he
will not pretend, that they have greater Authority than the Apostles had. Let 'em
then wait for a new Commission, or for immediate Inspiration, before they
pretend to monopolize the Power of Ordination, to themselves. I cannot foresee,
how he will get clear of this Difficulty.

And now he tells us ( p. 39.) he will give a Solution to the Question, If
Presbyters are not in the Commission, whence have they their Existence? He
answers, from the Will of the Apostles, declared about them. -- And it is as
much for the good of the Christian Church, that the Apostles (who acted by the
same Spirit) should declare the Commission of Presbyters, as that our Lord
himself should. -- But I demand, what is the Will of the Apostles declared
about them? Where is this Commission, that the Apostles have given to
Presbyters? ^s there any Thing any where declared about them, or any Commission
given to 'em, that abridges them ^f the Exercise of all the Powers, granted by
the ^rand Commission? Are they any where considered, (...) an Inferior Order
in the Church? He would have done well to have shown us, where this Decla^^tion
of the Apostles Will might be found. If there ^e any Commission at all, that
secures to Presbyters a ^ontinuance in the Church, distinct from the Commission
under Consideration, I should be glad to know there to find it.

We are next entertained with very diverting In^rrogations. If Presbyters were
empowered by this Commission to ordain, (says the Gentleman) how came they in
several Churches, to be restrained by the Apostles themselves; and denied the
Exercise of this Right, immediately after this Commission was given them? --
Here he is at the old Sport again of proposing his own Imaginations for Matters
of Fact without the least shadow of Proof to support them. But I must tell him,
that I have no Disposition to Philosophise upon the golden Tooth. It Is Time
enough to consider his Questions, when he can prove the Facts. In the Interim,
I hope his Argument^ will be harmless enough, while they are only the Product
of his own Fancy. And the same may be said, with Respect to the constant
disapproving, condemning, and denying the Right of Presbyters t^ ordain, in the
primitive Church. We cannot tak^ his Word in this Case. The contrary to his
Supposals, is notoriously true. And I again challeng^ this Author, to produce
so much as one single clea^ and full Proof, from the first Ages of the Church
that Bishops were then esteemed to be by Divi^^ Right, and Order superior to
Presbyters. But of the more hereafter.

ANd now we are come to his third Proposition, the chief thing intended. ( p.
40.) He is now to prov^ that the Apostles did thus divide the pastoral Offic^
and ordained some to the whole Power, such as w^ now denominate Bishops; others
to Part of it onl^ such as we call Presbyters -- Bishops, were Timot^^ Titus,
Epaphroditus etc. And this (says he) a very remarkable Thing, that when there
we^^ Presbyters already settled at Ephesus and Crete^ and such as no Doubt were
as well qualified (...) ordain, as in latter Ages, that St. Paul should (...)
think fit, to entrust this Affair with them a^^ their Presbyteries: but should
devolve it whol^ upon Timothy and Titus; should appoint the two to that Office,
without mentioning any Rig^^ in the Teachers. -- The old Game still: me^^
Imaginations, without the least Appearance of Pro^^ Does their Cause admit of
no Evidence, that we must always be put off with bare Assertions and
Suppositions? Has he proved, or can he prove, that Timothy ever ordained any
Presbyters at Ephesus at all? I Am sure the Scriptures are altogether silent as
to this Matter. Much less then can he prove, that he did this, when there were
Presbyters already settled there. It is to carry his Imaginations a great deal
too far, to suppose, because Timothy has Directions about ordaining, that
therefore he was to ordain Elders at Ephesus, when it does not appear, that he
was so much as resident at Ephesus On the contrary, it appears manifest to me,
that Timothy never was Bishop of Ephesus, or resident there, from the very Text
commonly brought to prove that he was, 1 Timothy i. 3. For this End, I besought
thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia etc. For why is he
besou^ht to continue there, if it was his Charge, when he could do no
otherwise, without Neglect of his Duty, and without Sinning against God? And
why entreated to ^arry there, only while the Apostle went into Macedonia, if it
was the fixed Place of his Residence? And when we consider the constant
Peregrinations of Timothy, from one Country and Region to another, we have as
much Reason to suppose him fixed at Rome, Corinth, Philippi, Colosse, Judea,
Nicopolis, Dalmatia etc. as at Ephesus; for to all those Places do we find him
going, by the Apostles Directions; as was considered in the Dialogue. -- But
Suppose (for I am willing to make all possible Allowances) that Timothy was
fixed at Ephesus, and was entrusted with ordaining there too, how does it
appear, that the other Presbyters or Bishops did not act with him in a complete
Parity, in performing those Ordinations? Certain it is, that they had the whole
Oversight of the Fl^ck committed to 'em, and if Ordination belongs to the
oversight of the Fl^ck, that also was given them in Trust; for they are under
no Restrictions, in that Charge of the Apostle, Act. xx. 28.

And as to Titus, how is it proved, that there were Presbyters settled at
Crete, before he was left at that Island! All the Evidence of this is, that
this Gentleman supposes it; and therefore it must be so? But why is Titus left
at Crete to ordain Elders in every City, if they had Elders already ordained,
and were already supplied? However, were it even supposed, that Timothy and
Titus were actually improved in ordaining Elders in those Churches, where there
were Presbyters already settled, there might be great Want of the superior
Gifts and Graces of these extraordinary Persons, in that infant State of the
Church; even though the Presbyters were of the same Order and Power, with them.

But since Scripture-Evidence fails, he appeals to Antiquity; and assures us (
p. 41.) that this was the Opinion of the primitive Fathers, who unanimously
agree, that St. Paul made Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Crete. To
prove which, he quotes Eusebius Lib. 3. c. 4. and names St. Jerome, Isidore,
Theodoret, Sedulius etc. He gives us no Advantage to examine the Truth of his
Allegations, excepting only with Respect to his Quotation from Eusebius; and
all that can be found there, is, that Timothy is REPORTED to be the first
Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of the Churches in Crete; but how Eusebius came by
this Report, he tells us not. It is such as cannot be depended on for certain
Tradition. He himself indeed acknowledges, that in his History, he was entering
upon a Desert and unused Way, -- where he could not so much as find the naked
Footsteps of Men, that had trod the same Way before him, -- And that the best
Helps he had, were but as Torches burning afar off. etc. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 1.
Cap. 1.
Eusebius was quite too late, to determine such a Matter of Fact; being not
born till past the middle of the third Century. The like may be said of all the
rest; Jerome not flourishing till past the middle of the fourth Century, and
none of the others until the fifth. And how far is this from proving an
Unanimity, among all the primitive Fathers in this Case, when there is not so
much as one truly primitive Father alleged as a voucher for it? The Gentleman
indeed ( p. 43.) having made a vain repetition of what he before said from
Eusebius, adds a Testimony, which from its Sound some may think truly
primitive. Says he, In the Apostolical Constitutions we are expressly told that
Timothy was ordained Bishop of Ephesus by St. Paul To which I would subjoin,
that we are as expressly told some other things in those Constitutions, which
are certainly false; if we may depend upon the Credit of the learned Du Pin,
who says, It Is there spoken of as the ordination of the Apostles, That the
Gospel according to St. John thou would be read: which was not written till the
37th Year of our Lord, after the the Death of the Apostles; That James the son
of Zebedee is there introduced as present at Jerusalem, after the time of his
Death; That it is there declared that the Constitutions were made in the
presence of St. Paul and the seven Deacons, whereas it is certain that St.
Stephen one of the seven Deacons died before the conversion of St. Paul. Vid.
Du Pin's Eccl. Hist. p. 16. Not. g.
These are such notorious blunders in point of Fact, as justly render this
Testimony, in the case of Timothy, very precarious. I cannot help adding here,
though these Constitutions go under the specious Name of Apostolical, and so a
Testimony hence may seem to carry force in its very sound, yet that they are in
truth the production only of some wretched Impostor, who lived far remote from
the time of the Apostles: as is evident from those gross superstitions and
absurdities, that are so commonly to be met with in them: a particular list of
which, I have in readiness, if the Gentleman shall think it prudent to call for
it.

He goes on in these Words And the Fathers of the Council of Calcedon,
including Timothy in the Number, reckon twenty seven Bishops of Ephesus to
their Time. I have often met with this Testimony; to prove Timothy to have been
Bishop of Ephesus; but I never yet read it without surprise, that any Man
should have the Face to produce it, as the Testimony of the Fathers of this
Council; when nothing is more plain than that it is the Testimony only of
Leontius, a single Member of that, Council, who was actually Convicted of a
gross mistake before this very Council in the main Point for which he offered
these words. Dr. Stillingfleet's Thoughts upon this head are worth
transcribing; but for Brevity I shall only refer you to the Place ( Ireni^um,
page 302.) from whence you will learn that my Antagonist is guilty of a gross
Misrepresentation. I think i^ concerns him to free himself of this Charge, and
if he cannot do it, fairly to retract his Mistake. -- But suppose it the
unanimous voice of Antiquity, that Timothy and Titus were Bishops, the one of
Ephesus, and the other of Crete; will it therefore follow, that the, primitive
Fathers esteemed them superior to Presbyters? Don't this Author grant ( p.
16.) that the Duties and Qualifications of those called Bishops in the New
Testament, and those called Presbyters, are the same. And it is but supposing,
that the primitive Fathers used the Word Bishop, in the same Sense that the
Scriptures do; and all these great Appearances from Antiquity, would vanish
into nothing, had all the Fathers proclaimed it with one Voice. And if we can
find those very Fathers by him cited, speaking as plain as can be expressed by
Words, that a Presbyter is the same with a Bishop by divine Appointment, his
Cause surely cannot be much strengthened, by this appeal to Antiquity. Let him
then read Jerome's Epistle to Evagrius, and his Commentary upon Titus; and he
will find him not only asserting, but largely proving, the Identity of Bishop
and Presbyter. Let him read Primasius upon 1 Timothy iii and he will find him
there asserting, that Bishop and Presbyter are the same Degree. Let him read
Theodoret upon the same Chapter and he will tell him, that of old, they called
the same Men both Bishops and Presbyters. And let him read Sedulius on Tit. i
and he will find him asserting the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters, both
Name and Office. Thus has he been helped out with the Authority of the Fathers.

I have been forced already to outdo my intended Brevity: and shall not spend
Time, in partic^l^rly examining h^ Discourse about the Character of
Evangelists. He agrees, that they were Missionaries, traveling to convert
Infidels; and consequently, that they must be furnished with Gifts, Graces and
Powers, adapted to that Service. He agrees, that Timothy had the Work of an
Evangelist committed to him. And therefore I would fain know, if Timothy was a
Missionary, traveling to convert Infidels (which is his own Description of an
Evangelist) how he could be a fixed Bishop of Ephesus! -- But here is something
of a peculiar Nature asserted by him, viz. that Deacons may be Evangelists; and
yet he owns that it is the Work of an Evangelist to preach the Word, be instant
in Season and out of Season, to reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long
suffering and doctrine. And is this the Work of a Deacon? If we look to their
original Institution it Acts vi. we find them appointed only to serve Tables
(as I observed before) that so others might attend upon the Word of God, and
not be forced to leave it. If we look to the Qualifications, that the Apostle
Paul thought necessary for 'em, in 1 Timothy iii. where he is purposely, and
distinctly describing them, ^here is no Mention of their preaching. How then
may they be Evangelists? or which is all one by this Gentleman's Account of the
Matter, how are they Preachers? Let him, if he can, produce any better Argument
for it, than this: There was one Deacon, who afterward became an Evangelist:
therefore all Deacons, while such, are Evangelists.

I Have already considered the Gentleman's Appeal to Antiquity, to prove the
Episcopacy of Timothy and Titus, (which he comes over with again, p. 43.) and
may therefore securely leave him to erect his Trophies, and carry on his
Triumphs, on Account of his imaginary Victory. For I will allow him, that
Timothy and Titus were Bishops, vested with all the Powers, that he himself
supposes belong to those called Bishops, in the New Testament: I will grant
also, that such Bishops as these were fixed, in more than some of the Churches,
in the Days of the Apostles: But it is his Business to prove, that these
Bishop^ were, according to the primitive Fathers, of an Order superior to
Presbyters, and universally held to be so by Divine Right.

However, the Gentleman perhaps will accuse me of Neglect, if I pass over some
remarkable Passages he has in page 44. -- One is that, And in these (the
primitive Fathers) there is such a constancy and unanimity, that even St. Jerome
himself, (who was born near 250 years after the Apostles, and is the chief
Person in all that time whom the Presbyterians cite for any purpose of theirs)
traces up Episcopacy to the very Apostles; and makes it of their Institution.
This Gentleman surely could not but know, if he ever read any thing on the
Presbyterian side of the Question, that Jerome is not the chief Person they cite
in their Cause. They have much greater dependence upon more primitive Writers,
and as frequently quote Clemens Romanus, Polycarp, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus. And
notwithstanding the Constancy and Unanimity he speaks of, he has not seen good
to bring one passage from either of these Fathers of the first and second
Centuries: nor dare he venture the Controversy upon their Judgment, or Account
of facts. What he here says of Jerome, that he traces up Episcopacy to the very
Apostles, and makes it their Institution, is (to give it the softest) name, a
palpable mistake if we may believe Jerome himself, whose opinion of this matter
I shall give you in his own words. " And before there were parties in Religion
by the Devil's instinct, and it was said among the People, I am of Paul, I am
of Apollos, I of Cephas, the Churches were governed by the common Council of
Presbyters. But after every one though it those he baptized to be rather his, than
Christ's, it was determined in the whole World, that one of the Presbyters
should be set above the rest, to whom all the care of the Church should belong,
and the seeds of Division taken away. If ANY ONE SHOULD THINK IT OUR OPINION
AND NOT THAT OF THE SCRIPTURES, that Bishops and Presbyter are the same, and
that one is the name of Age and the other of Office, let him read etc. -- And
here he quotes most of those very Texts, which are urged by Presbyterians, to
prove it the Doctrine of the Scripture, that Bishop and Presbyter are the same.
Having done which, he adds, " These things are alleged, that we might show
that among the Ancients, the Presbyters were the same with Bishops; but by
LITTLE AND LITTLE the whole care was devolved on one, that the Seeds of
dissension might be plucked up. As therefore the Presbyters know, that BY THE
CUSTOM OF THE CHURCH, they are subject to him who is the President; so let the
BISHOPS KNOW, THAT THEY ARE ABOVE PRESBYTERS MORE BY THE CUSTOM OF THE CHURCH,
THAN THE REAL APPOINTMENT OF THE LORD, and that they ought to rule the Church
in common -- Hieron. Comment. in Tit. Tom 9. page 103. Eras. Edit.
I might fill several pages with quotations of a like import. His whole Epistle
to Evagr^us is a vindication of the Divine Parity of Bishop and Presbyter; nor
does he more fully and plainly express himself in any one thing, than that
Episcopacy was not of Apostolical Institution, but owing to Custom, and come
into upon prudential considerations.

Our Author goes on, And in the very place where he most exalts Presbyters, he
excepts Ordination as a Work always peculiar to Bishops. This is not a fair
Representation. The words are, Quid enim fa^it excepta ordinatione Episcopus,
qu^^ Presbyter nonfaciat? What except Ordination does a Bishop, that a
Presbyter may not do? It Is readily acknowledged, Jerome here speaks of
Ordination as the appropriate work of Bishops: But does he say, it was always
thus? no such thing: so far from it, that in this very Epistle, he mentions
Timothy as a Scripture Instance of Presbyterian Ordination, and argues here
from the parity of Bishops and Presbyters according to Divine Institution. So
that unless we should suppose this learned Father so very forgetful, as to be
guilty of a gross self-contradiction within a few lines, it cannot be imagined
he is here to be understood as meaning, that Ordination was always the peculiar
work of Bishops in distinction from Presbyters. Nay, in the very Paragraph in
which these words are found, ^e speaks of Episcopacy as the Custom of
Aftertimes, and fallen into as a Remedy against Schisin So that when in this
passage he appropriates Ordination to Bishops, he speaks only of the prevailing
Custom in his day, not of any Apostolic Institution; for this is what he had
expressly disclaimed.

Our Author having thus misrepresented the opinion of Jerome, its no wonder, in
the next words, he should do the same by Mr. Baxter. He brings him in owning
thus much at least, that there were fixed Bishops in the days of one of the
Apostles; that neither the Apostles nor any of their Disciples, nor any
Christian or Heretic in the World, spoke or wrote a word against Episcopacy
till long after it was generally settled in the Churches. Words to this
purpose, I grant, are to be found in Mr. Baxter: But here lies the fallacy.
This Gentleman is writing in favor of the Episcopacy of the Church of England,
and would make his Readers believe, Mr. Baxter had asserted the universal
prevalence of this Species of Ecclesiastical Government; Whereas this is so far
from the Truth, that this great Man really though it Diocesan Episcopacy utterly
subversive of Parochial, which he not only affirms to be the only Scriptural
and primitive Episcopacy; but has wrote a large Volume Treatise of Episcopacy.
to prove it, in opposition to that of the Church of England: Nor has his
Treatise upon this Head ever yet received a just Answer, neither do I think it
ever can.

He concludes this Paragraph with a Challenge, to instance any Christian Church
for 1500 Years without Presbyters and Deacons subordinate to their Bishop. In
answer whereto, I pitch upon every Church, within the two first Centuries,
throughout the Christian World, that we know any thing of, as Instances; and
return back the Challenge, defying this Gentleman to produce, within the limits
of this time, upon genuine Authority, one single Church, that had in it
Presbyters in Subordination to their Bishop, after the manner of the Church of
England. And I challenge him yet further, to produce, if he can, only a single
instance, within the same term, of Episcopal Ordination: which I the rather
insist upon, because he makes this essential to the validity of Gospel
Administrations. Nor, unless he be able to bring an instance of this kind of
Ordination, will he have much reason to boast of the unanimity of the primitive
Fathers on this Point: and much less to make any further use of that trite
saying of Vincentius Lirinensis, which without the least appearance of truth,
he cites in his Cause.

ANd now I must submit to be catechized by him, and to answer such Questions as
he is pleased to propose. But I must observe to him, that they are the very
same Questions, upon which the Protestants are challenged by the Papists, the
Change of Character being only supposed; and the same Answer will serve in both
Cases. It is queried; ( p. 44)

1. When the episcopal Usurpation began?

Answ. It began in Diotrephes, and increased as Antichrist grew in Stature.

2. Where it began, whether in a particular Church, or few Churches at first;
or all at once, through the universal Church?

Answ. Just where Antichrist was born, and nourished.

3. If it began in particular Churches, how, or by what Steps, it made it is
Progress all over the Christian Churches?

Answ. It did eat as does a Canker, gradually and insensibly; and the Enemy
scattered the Tares, while Men Slept. -- But what means this Enquiry? Is it
impossible that this should obtain, unless we can tell the particular Steps by
which it advanced? Is it not evident to all the World, that Popery it self did
get the Ascendant, over almost all the Churches? And must we not believe our
Senses in a plain Matter of Fact, unless we can assign the particular Methods,
by which it came to pass?

4. Whether it can be supposed, that the Presbyters then living, could be all,
or most of them, ignorant of the Powers belonging to them of original Right?

Answ. The first Episcopacy was but a classical Presidency, without any
Pretense of Superiority of Order and Power; whence the Encroachments were made
insensibly, and without Observation. This Question is therefore nothing to the
Purpose. And the same Answer serves for the 5th and 6th Question.

7. How can it be accounted for, that there should be no Mention, or fuller
Relation, of so great an Usurpation, to be found in Record, in ecclesiastical
History?

Answ. We have an Account in ecclesiastical History, how from Episcopus
Praeses, there arose Episcopus Princeps; and how from the Moderator of a
Classical Assembly, the Hierarchy advanced by Degrees, till the Pope was
mounted upon the Seven headed Beast. Just as Purgatory, Image Worship, and
Invocation of Saints, were gradually advanced in the Church of Rome.

Upon the whole, I Will transcribe for this Gentleman's Satisfaction, and leave
him to apply, Part of an Answer made to these Demands from the Roman
Catholics. When Arius, Nestorius, and such like Heretics arose, they
violently broke out of the Church; and forsook all Communion. And when Mahomet
came from without, he visibly assaulted all Christianity. But the Papacy bred
silently, as a Gangreen in the Church within; that Cocka^rice was long a
hatching in the Shell, before it did appear. It was a secret Departure from the
Truth, caused by Errors stolen into the Church, sensim sine Sensu, insensibly
and unawares. Whence appears the Difference between open Heresy and clandestine
Apostasy; the one is easy to be known, because it works openly, in the Day; the
other hard to be discovered, because it makes it is approaches only in the
Night. -- Thus I have answered his Questions. And if he' thinks the Answers
bear too hard upon the episcopal Usurpation, I cannot help it; he himself is the
Occasion of it. But it must be remembered, that as he says nothing of Episcopacy
in general in his Questions, neither do I in my Answers. It Is of the
Usurpation, that we are now treating.

I Am now again called upon to consider his Arguments from Antiquity. "Had this
Gentleman (says he, p. 45.) been a little more inquisitive, and not (depending
upon the Authority of others) neglected examining the Epistles of Ignatius, an
Apostolic Father, he might have met with one asserting the Superiority of
Bishops to Presbyters, by divine Right. To omit the plain and manifest
Distinction he makes between them in every one of his Epistles, hear what he
says, in that to the Philadelphians "For as many as are of God, and of Jesus
Christ, are also with their Bishop. Again, There is but one Flesh of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and but one Cup in the Unity of his Blood, one Altar, as also
there is one Bishop. He compares the Bishop to the Father, in his Epistle to
the Trallians. In his Epistle to the Magnesians, he exhorts them to reverence
the Bishop, according to the Power of God the Father. -- Our Author is so quick
Sighted, it seems, as to find Ignatius here asserting the Superiority of
Bishops to Presbyters, by Divine Right. But I think there is nothing more
plainly discoverable than the direct contrary to this, even from those very
Passages, now in view For,

1. If Ignatius intends no more by Bishop, but a Congregational Bishop, or
which is all one, but a mere Presbyter both in Order and Power, I think his
Patronage can be of but little Service to our Adversaries. And this appears
manifest, from this Gentleman's own Concessions. For he grants, that Presbyters
are those Church Officers, that are called Bishops in the New Testament, p. 16.
Now if Ignatius was an Apostolical Father (as he calls him) what Reason can be
given, why he did not use the Word Bishop in the same Sense, that the Apostles
used it? My Antagonist grants that the Duties and Qualifications of those
called Bishops in the New Testament, and of those called Presbyters, are the
same. And why are not the Duties and Qualifications of those called Bishops by
Ignatius, and those called Presbyters, the same? Verily 'twould tempt one to
think so, when we find him speaking of their coming all into one Place;
asserting that he that comes not to the same Place, is proud and condemns
himself; and exhorting all to come together, as into the Temple of God, as unto
one Altar. Ep. to the Ephesians. Voss. Edit.
When we find him asserting, that there is one Altar, as also one Bishop, with
the Presbytery and the Deacons my Fellow Servants. Ep. to the Philad.
Exhorting that none manage any Church-Affair, without the Bishop; and
affirming, that it is not lawful without the Bishop, either to baptize, or to
make love Feasts Ep. to Smyrn.
and also exhorting Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, to keep frequent Congregations,
to enquire after all by Name; and not despise Menservants and Maid Servants.
Ep. to Polycarp.
From all which it is evident to Demonstration, that Ignatius's Bishop had the
Charge of but a single Congregation; and that all sacred Ordinances were
administered by him only. If it be demanded, Who then were the Presbyters, by
him so often mentioned? I answer, They were Ruling Elders. For though they are
often considered in these Epistles, as being concerned in Government, yet never
as having any Authority to preach, or administer the Sacraments. Nay, we are
expressly told, that it is not lawful to baptize without the Bishop, as was
observed before.

2. Suppose after all, that there was in Ignatius's Time, a Difference made
between Bishops and Presbyters: Was it a Difference in Order? Were there any
superior Powers pretended to by Divine Right? Nothing of this is to be found
in all his Epistles. I grant, that the Name Bishop was in the early Ages of the
Church, appropriated to the Chief Presbyter, who was made the Constant
Moderator of their Presbyteries; but without any Pretense of claim to a
superiority of Order or Power, above the other Ministers of the World. And what
is this to the Case in Hand?

I have all along considered these Epistles of Ignatius, as genuine; (which we
have Reason to wish they were;) because I was willing to allow the utmost Force
of this Gentleman's Arguments. Though, it has been abundantly proved by many
learned Men, that they are all spurious, or vilely interpolated: The Evidence
of this is at our Author's Service, when he will be pleased to call for it. And
thus I have passed the Pikes of Ignatius's Epistles; and have given a
sufficient Answer to all this Gentleman's fine Flourishes, about the Necessity
of depending upon the Fathers, is a simple Matter of Fact: For it would have
been soon enough for his pathetical Harangue, when he had first proved from the
truly primitive Fathers, not that there were then Bishops in the Church (this
is acknowledged on both Sides) But that these w^^ superior to Presbyters, in
Order and Power, upon the foot of a Divine Right, universally professed.

However, he has here one Thing more, I will bestow some Observations upon. I
had adduc'd several Canons, agreed on at the 4th, Council of Carthage; Upon
which the Gentleman observes ( p. 47.) And what then? therefore Prebyters can
ordain! no such thing. If he had cast the slightest glance on that part of the
Dialogue, he might have seen, that those Canons were bro't, not to prove
Ordination by Presbyters, but that there was not in that day "so great a
distance between Bishops and Presbyters, as there is now; and that nothing was
done without the mutual concurrence of the Presbyters with their President":
which stands validly collected from those Canons, notwithstanding his remark.
But perhaps my Opponent wanted an Opportunity to introduce that Apostolical
Canon (as it is called) "Let a Bishop be ordained by two or three Bishops, a
Priest by one Bishop, and so likewise a Deacon"; and to let us know that he
though it it, "a very instructive Canon". I Will present him with a few more of those
Canons, and leave it with him to determine, whether they are not full as
Apostolical, if not quite so instructive. Can. 2. If any Bishop or Presbyter,
besides what our Lord has appointed for Sacrifice, shall offer upon the Altar
any other things, as Honey, or Milk etc. let him be deposed. Excepting Ears of
Corn, or Grapes, it is not lawful to offer any thing upon the Altar, save only
Oil for the holy Lamps, and incense in time of divine Oblation. Can. 13. He
that has been twice married after Baptism, or has had a Concubine, cannot be
a Bishop or Presbyter, or at all in the Catalogue of the Priesthood. Can. 19.
Of those who were single Persons, when they were made Clergymen, we command
that only Readers and Singers may take Wives. Can. 23. If any Bishop has made
use of the Princes of this World, and by their influence has got into the
Church, let him be deposed, and all that communicate with him. Can. 64. If any
one of the Clergy or Laity shall take from the holy Church, either Wax or Oil,
let him be separated, and add a fifth part to what he took away. Can. ^0. If
any one has a Devil, he may not be made a Clergyman, nor may he pray with the
faithful, etc. These are all of them as truly Apostolical Canons, as that which
this Gentleman has though it fit to produce; and if he does not think they are
instructive ones, he must allow us to guess at the reason, and choose whether we
will pay any greater regard to that which he calls the first in order among
them.

I shall take leave upon this occasion to desire this Gentleman's Resolution of
one or two Questions, viz. Whether the twenty third among the Apostolical
Canons, be not of as good Authority as the first? And if it be, whether there
be not just the same reason, that all the Bishops in England should at once be
deposed, and all in Communion with them, as that Presbyterians should submit to
Episcopal Ordination? And if the thirteenth and nineteenth Canons are of any
validity, whether most of the Clergy of the established Church, do not stand as
much condemned by them, as others do by the first?

I shall only add, it is a shameful piece of Conduct in those of the Church, who
call upon us to express our Regards to such of those Canons, as they think
favor their Cause; while at the same time they treat most of these very Canons
with the utmost practical Contempt. Let them lead in a punctual observance of
them all, and then we may possibly think them serious, when they recommend some
of them to our Consideration.

WE now come to his last Proposition. ( p. 48.) That, supposing all the
Arguments urged in Defense of Presbyterian Ordination, were incontestably true;
yet modern Presbyterian Ordination must be null and void." In Proof of which he
tells us, It Is too well known to require Proof, that the true state of the
Controversy, between us and the Presbyterians, depends upon the State of the
Ministerial Office, at the Time of the Reformation. -- The Question is not,
whether such as were called Presbyters, in the Times of the New Testament, had
the Power of Ordination: but the Question we are concerned about is this,
whether such as were called Presbyters, at the Time of the Reformation, had the
Power of Ordination. That they had not, he supposes evident; because Bishops
alone were some hundred Years before the Reformation, invested with the Power
of Ordination. But then the Question recurs, What were these Bishops? Were they
by Divine Right superior to Presbyters, or not? If they were, let him prove
it. If they were not, the Power of Ordination was all this while in the
Presbyters, whether they exercised it or not. If these Bishops had the Power of
Ordination themselves, the Presbyters ordained by them received all the
Authority appointed by Christ and his Apostles, to those of their Order: and
consequently had the Power of Ordination, according to the original
Institution, inherent in them; by what Usurpation soever they were kept from
the Exercise of it. Certain it is, that the Papists themselves, among whom was
the Succession of Bishops he pleads for, did not pretend to the divine Right of
Episcopacy; They supposed Bishop and Presbyter to be the same Order by original
Right: and therefore their Presbyters were by their own Principles, ordained to
all the Powers that belonged to Bishops This our Author himself reminds us of,
p. 27. This very Argument (says he) do the Papists use, to prove the Sameness
of Bishops and Presbyters, as to Order. Now then if Presbyters were of the same
Order with Bishops, not only by Divine Institution, but even in the Opinion of
their Ordainers, what will become of the Gentleman's Reasoning under this
Proposition. And this was the Opinion of the Protestant Churches every where,
at the Time of the Reformation: not only the foreign Churches, who carried on
the Reformation without their Bishops; but even in England it self; as may be
seen at large, in the Appendix to the first Volume of Dr. Burnet's History of
the Reformation; and in the eighth Chapter of Dr. Stillingfleet's ^renicum.
Among a Number of Questions proposed by the King, to be answered by some select
Divines, this was one;

"Whether Bishops or Priests were first, and if the Priests were first, then
the Priest made the Bishop? -- To which Archbishop Cranmer made Answer,

The Bishops and Priests were at one Time: and were not two Things; but both
one Office, in the beginning of Christ's Religion. -- And the Bishop of St.
Asaph, Ther^eby, Redman, and Cox, were all of the same Opinion with the
Archbishop. And indeed, this was the constant sense of the Church of England
in this Matter, for a long Time after the Reformation. The first Person, that
ventured publicly to assert the divine Right of Episcopacy, was Dr. Bancroft,
then Chaplain to the Archbishop of Canterbury, in a Sermon at Paul's Cross,
Jan. 12. 1588. He declared, that the Bishops of England were a distinct Order
from Priests, and had Superiority over them Jure Divino, and directly from God.
This made a great Noise, and gave great Offense to many of the Clergy. Sir
Francis Knolles, Treasurer of the Queen's Household, had this much at Heart; and
supposed, that if the Bishops were not under governors, to her Majesty, of the
Clergy, but superior Governors over their Brethren, by God's Ordinance; it
will then follow, that her Majesty is not superior Governors over her Clergy.
He writ to the learned Dr. Raynolds of Oxford, for his Opinion of Bancroft's
Doctrine, who largely and learnedly refuted it. And Archbishop Whitgift
himself (notwithstanding his imperial and lordly Behavior) said, He rather
wished, than believed it to be true ( Neal's Hist of Purit p. 494.) Such an
upstart Doctrine is the divine Right of Episcopacy.

Thus, Sir, I have distinctly considered all the Arguments for Prelacy,
advanced by this Author: and must leave it to your Judgment, whether it be not
a full and sufficient Answer; and whether we have not Cause (notwithstanding
the Inferences of a severe Aspect and harsh Sound, which this Gentleman would
draw from our Ordinations) to comfort our selves, with the Expectation of
Christ's promised Presence with us, in the faithful Discharge of our Ministry;
and of his Blessing upon his Ordinances by us administered.

I am Your most Humble Servant ELEUTHERIUS.

EUSEBIUS INERMATUS.

Just REMARKS On a late BOOK, Entitled, ELEUTHERIUS ENERVATUS, Or an Answer to
a Pamphlet, Entitled, The Divine Right of Presbyterian Ordination etc. argued.
Done by way of Dialogue between Eusebius and Eleutherius; together with two
Letters on this Subject.

By PHILELUTH. BANGOR, V.E.B.

Truth is not afraid of GIANTS. --

CHILLINGW. They define not the Church, by that which the Church essentially
is, but by that wherein they imagine their own more perfect than the rest are.
--

HOOKER. This is the Circle of their Censure: No Church, therefore no
Ministry; and no Ministry, therefore no Church. Unnatural Sons, that spit in
the face of those Spiritual Fathers that begat them, and the Mother that bore
them!

Bp. HALL. Our Enemies themselves being Judges,

Deuteronomy. xxxii. 31. BOSTON: Printed for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhill. MDCCXXXIII.

PREFACE.
IT was some time after the foregoing Piece was in the Printer's hand, that we
were saluted with another Answer to the Dialogue between Prelaticus and
Elutherius, bearing the Title of ELEUTHERIUS ENERVATUS etc. Now indeed I cannot
b^^ be of Opinion, that impartial Judges will apprehend, that Elutherius in the
preceding Vindication has anticipated the greatest part of what is necessary
to be offered in Defense of his Dialogue against this new Assault. However,
that the Gentlemen concerned therein, might not complain of any Neglect, nor
have the Opportunity of glorying (as their manner is) "in a Book never
answered," a little Pains have been bestowed in some Remarks on their
Performance, which are exhibited to the Public in the following Pages.

It was thought convenient, that the Replications to both the Episcopal Answers
should be published under one Cover. But by reason of Elutherius's Distance
from the Press, we could not expect seasonably to receive his Reply to this
other Answer. Therefore The taken the Liberty to stand his Second in this
Polemick Engagement: though conscious, I Have need to make an Apology for my
Officiousness, in appearing (unasked) in the Defense of ONE, who needs no
Assistant.

I hope, the Gentlemen I oppose, will not be offended at the Freedom and Warmth
of Expression I Have sometimes used; since it is but in Imitation of their own
Language. I Have in that Respect chosen to deal with them in their own Way, to
the End they may more readily be convinced of the Abuses and Follies of their
Way of handling the Controversy, and learn to set a better Example for the
future. For if these Episcopal Advocates ever serve Religion, or their Cause,
by the Method and Manner of Writing they have gone into, I shall be one among
ma^y that evil be very greatly mistaken.

Elutheropoli, Dec. 25. 1733 P. B.

An Answer to ELEUTHERIUS ENERVATUS.
PART I. Remarks on the Dialogue between Eusebius. and Eleuth.
Sect. I.THE Compiler (shall I call him?) or the Publisher of this new Work, is
pleased to subscribe himself by the specious Name of PHILALETHES, a Friend to
Truth: and if that be his just Character, we may not be allowed to doubt but
that, when he feels the force of Truth, he will show himself open to
Conviction. Though if we should critically examine the hectoring Preface to his
Performance, I fear whether there would not be found some dark Omens of a
contrary Complexion upon him, in several invidious Turns he has on the Editor
of the Dialogue between Prelaticus and Elutherius, and in the secret History he
gives us of the LAYMAN'S Letters to the supposed Rev. Author. They serve to
give us a Specimen of his Veracity, and a Taste of his Kindness to his Quondam
Friends.

This Gentleman ( page 4.) makes a mighty Stir about an innocent Passage of
Elutherius's, that one would a'tho't lay much out of his Way at present: and
like a zealous Lover of Truth, very decently taxes him of a notorious Falsehood;
appealing to the Layman's Letters for Evidence; which are to be considered in
the Sequel. Observe in the mean time, Elutherius's Words are easily capable of
being reconciled to Truth, by an obvious Distinction. The Passage is in the
54th page of his Dialogue; I Am sure (says he) I have no Eyes, if the truly
primitive Fathers are not all with one Voice in the Presbyterian Scheme. And I
desire any of your Party to bring so much as one of them, that declares
Episcopacy to be of Divine Right and Order superior to Presbytery; within the
first three hundred Years after Christ. This Demand has been often repeated;
but (...) answered. Now the force of the Objection lies against these last
Words: By which, no Person of Candor and Capacity could understand him to mean
any other than that this Demand was never answered really and satisfactorily;
whatever has been attempted or "pretended in Answer to it." And, as it
happened, Elutherius's Observation was backed with the Judgment of two very
learned Antiquaries, Divines of the Church of England: whose Words this
Gentleman here artfully passes over in Silence; doubtless that he might
"bluster with the greater Assurance," and cry out of " notorious Falsehood and
amazing Confidence" with the more Advantage. Verily I suspect this was
"designed for Amusing the Vulgar: " and i^ seems as if he was resolved to
begin, as well as wind up, with Triumph, though at the Expense of his Integrity
and Modesty.

This Gentleman here brings in Mr. SAGE'S Vindication of the Principles of the
Cyprian^ck Age, as a wonderful Performance; which gives me a fair Occasion to
refer the Reader to the several Answers, made to that Author, by Mr. Jameson,
Mr. Lauder etc, and I will take the Opportunity to ^^peat the just Censure
passed on that Book, by an eminent Divine of the Episcopal Communion. It were
not a difficult Task (says he) to show, that there are in the Vindication of
the Principles of the Cyprianick Age a great many FORCED and DISTORTED
Quorations out of ancient and modern Authors, for Episcopacy in his Acception
of it. Dr. EDWARDS; Remains, p. 275.

In the next place, I observe, Philalethes ( p. 5.) brings in Mr. Hooker as a
Champion for Episcopacy. To which it were Answer Enough, to say, if he has a
Richard Hooker to boast of, we have a Thomas Hooker to match him. The Survey of
Church Discipline, wears, for ought I see, as venerable a hoary Head, as the
Ecclesiastical Polity. But what I would especially remark is, That it appears
to me a very odd point of conduct in this Gentleman to allege his Episcopal
HOOKER'S Ecclesiastical Polity, and glory in it as a Book " above an hundred
Years old, yet never answered;" when, if he has ever red it with any Care, he
could not but be sensible, that this his applauded Author never declares
himself for the unalterable Divine Institution of any one particular Form of
Church Government: but holds that all our Forms of Government are equally
practicable; no one being of Divine Right, in that nature as to exclude
another. I acknowledge him a Friend to Episcopacy: but far from being a Patron
of this Gentleman's Cause, the immutable Divine Right and indispensable
Necessity of Prelacy, as a distinct Order superior to Presbytery, and over a
Plurality of Cities and Churches. Here Is surely a stumble at the very
Threshold. An unlucky Accident! -- But that it may not be said I impose on the
credulous Reader, I Will give him the sense of two Episcopal Divines upon the
Politician: The one is Dr. Stillingfleet, who says ( Irenic. p. 394.) They who
will please but to consult the third Book of learned and judicious Mr. Hooker's
Ecclesiastical Polity, may see the MUTABILITY of the Form of Church Government
largely asserted, and fully proved. -- My other Witness is Dr. Edwards, whose
words are ( Remains, p. 257.) The judicious Mr. Hooker holds, that Episcopacy
may be ABROGATED: and consequently is not of Divine and Apostolical Right, but
is the Political Institution of the Church. -- Now, if these be the Principles,
that Mr. Hooker defends (as our Adversary says) with such strength of Reason
and clear Evidence, that nothing but Obstinacy can withstand; I must have Leave
very much to wonder what sort of Metal those Gentleman's Forheads are made of,
that dare in Contradiction to their admired judicious HOOKER, assert Diocesan
Prelacy as the invariable Form of Church Government by Divine Institution. " On
this Account (to allude to this Writer's own Remark) it is justly thought, by
some ingenious Men, a needless Waste of Time and Labor, to give new Answers
and Replies to such Objections, as have been so fully answered -- by
Presbyterians, and so effectually superseded even by that learned Episcoparian.
But yet for the Satisfaction of some, that may be stumbled, upon reading this
doughty Performance of Philalethes, it may be of Service to bestow a few
Remarks upon the principal Contents of the Dialogue he has framed between
Eusebius and Eleutherius.

I pass over his Lady's merry Squibs; as also I shall several other
Impertinencies, in the Course of his Conference, and confine my self chiefly to
matter of Argument.

Sect. II. Whether Elutherius's Inquiry, either into the Scriptures or
Antiquity, has been too superficial, to find out any thing of Truth in the
present Controversy, as Eusebius insinu^^ ( p. 8.) may safely be left to the
Opinion of indifferent Judges, upon their Perusal of his VINDICATION. But I Am
sure this Gentleman shows, that his Inquiry into Antiquity, as well as sacred
History, has been very superficial, when he challenges us, to show that it is
agreeable to the Practice of any good Christians in the first and purest Age of
the Church, is form Parties, and separate Communions etc. He seems is have
forgot there was such a Text in the Bible, as that, Gal ii. 11, -- 14. And did
he never read what Mr Chillingworth h^s observed, ( R^lig. Prot. p. 228.)
Diverse time it has happened, as in the Case of Chrysostom and Epiphanius, th^^
particular Men, and particular Churches, have upon an overvalued Difference,
either renounced Communion ^^tually, or one of them separated from the other;
and yet both have continued Members of the Catholic Church. Or did he never
meet with that Passage in Bp. Hall (Works p. 520.) Let the Malicious prattle
what they will; with some of ours [i. e. our Sects] the Controversy is not
about any solid Limbs of the Christian Faith, but only of the very Skin; with
some others, not about the Skin, but the Garment rather; nor about the Garment
itself neither, but of the very Hem. -- Controversies, that will easily admit
of a Reconciliation. -- Our Differences [i. e. the Di^ among Protestants] are
no greater, than were those of O^d, among the HOLY Fathers of the Church, whose
Quarrels notwithstanding are not so odiously blazoned by Posterity. I let pass
the private Scoldings of the Ancients, not without some unpleasing (I had
almost said misbeseeming) Tar^ness I had rather set before your Eyes (for good
Luck sake) those public Altercations of the Churches and Fathers, which
afterward shut up in a blessed Concord. What Quarrels arose at the Council of
Ephesus between Cyril of Alexandria, and John of Antioch? The Churches under
both stuck not to counter-thunder Anathemaes one against another -- The Flame
of their Rage almost drew the Christian World to Parties. -- Then follows an
Account of a hot Quarrel between the Roman and the Eastern Churches, happily
healed by Athanasius. Whereupon the pious Bishop cries out, Neither would it
speed otherwise with us, if some Athanasius from Heaven would but join our
Hands together. Oh if once -- a Synod were called (as general as might) wherein
both parts freely and modesty might lay forth their Opinions, and -- common
Terms agreed upon --; how easily then, how happily might these grievous Stirs
be quickly pacified? -- This is a sufficient Reply to Eus^hius's De^^^d. And as
for what he says in his warm Declamation against "the despised Party of
Presbyterians, for forming separate Communions" etc. I answer, the Stone which
he hurls, happens not to come out of David's Sling, and will do little
Exe^ution upon us. It Is rather like the Stone that Achilles is said to have
flung at a dead Skull, which rebounding, struck ^ot his own Eye. -- Rediit
lapis ultor ab esse,
Actorisque sui frontem, oculosque petit.
The hard Invective recoils in Eusebius's face. 'Twas his (...) Church, that
really formed the Parties, and the separate Communions; not Nonconformists.
"For (as Bp. Stillingf. observes, in his Rational Account of Prot. Religion, p.
359.) whatever confines, must likewise divide the Church: for by that
Confinement a Separation is made between the Party confined, and the other;
which Separation must be made by the Party so limiting Christian Communion. --
Whatever Church makes some extrinsecal and accidental Things the necessary
Conditions of Communion, so as to cast Men out of the Church, who yield not to
them, is SCHISMATICAL in so doing: and the Separation from it is so far from
Schism, that being cast out of that Church on those Terms, only returns them to
the Communion of the Catholic Church. On which Grounds it appears, that his
Church is the Schismatical Party, a^^ not we. -- But Eusebius personally, is
yet more deeply ^^^olv'd in the Guilt he charges on us: and I take the
Opportunity to tell this Gentleman, that by the same (or as good) Mediums, by
which he will justify the Episcopal Separation in New England, with a
Consonance to his own Principles and Authorities. I doubt not Elutherius will
be able easily to vindicate the Presbyterian Separate Communions here or any
where. Let this Writer take the pains to read judicious HOOKLR'S Ecclesiastical
Polity now: I claim in my Turn to recommend it to him. And let him, if he
pleases, read Bp. STILLINGFLEET'S Unreasonableness of Separation too (to say
nothing of his Irenicum) another Book he gravely " recommends to our Perusal;
which, he says ( p. II.) has to his knowledge convinced more than one of our
dissenting Teachers." Well, however, I commend even this also back to himself,
for a more critical and serious Perusal. And I venture to challenge him, upon
the Principles of these his own applauded Authors, to vindicate his Episcopal
Separation. Surely this Writer exposes the Partiality of his Judgment, or else
shows a very small Attention to the Merits of the Controversy between him and
us, strangely forgetting what Part of the World he is in, while he thus presses
into his Service, in New England, at all Adventures, Books that were evidently
calculated for quite a different Meridian. Ex Vipera Theriacam, is one
remarkable point of Physic: and it may be no less excellent a Method in
Controversy to turn our Adversary's own Authors against himself; as the best
Antidote, sure, that can be, against the Poison he diffuses. And I might
presently prepare a sufficient Potion, to make him heartily sick, and cure him
of his Boasting. It Is manifest, They are chiefly Topical Arguments, those
learned Episcoparian Writers make Use of, against the Presbyterian Separation
in England; and are easily accommodable, to the Service of our Cause, against
the New England Episcopal Separatists. The Foundation-Principle with the
Ecclesiastical Politician is that ( p. 89, 90) The Necessity of Polity and
Regiment in all Churches may be held, without holding ANY ONE certain Form to
be necessary in them all: -- Seeing the general Principles [and Rules of
Scriptures] are such, as do not particularly prescribe any one; but sundry may
EQUALLY be consonant to the general Axioms of the Scripture. -- And Dr.
Stillingfleet is in full Concurrence with him. This is the very Spirit and Soul
of his Irenicum; and however the Doctor might afterward appear to some to have
altered his Judgment, yet in this main Point (as well as some others) I see n^^
that he cary'd at all from himself: nor does he seem willing it should be though it
indeed he had in any Thing contradicted his Irenicum, in his later Writings. So
much seems to me plainly employed in those Words of his, speaking of himself in
the 3d Person, ( Pref. to Unreas. of Sep. Edit. 2. p. 72.) But after all this,
WHEREIN is it that he has thus contradicted himself? Is it in the point of
Separation? -- No. Then he transcribes several Particulars out of his Irenicum,
exactly quadrating with Mr Hooker's Judgment: and subjoyns this approving
Clause; Allow but these three Conclusions, and defend the present Separation if
you can. -- Now the same say I with equal Assurance, unto the Episcopal
Separatists in New England. And I will add in the Words of Dr. STILLINGFLEET (
Ubi supra, p. 77.) If a Council could be called of all the Protestant Churches
in Christendom, we should not doubt of their Determination of the Unlawfulness
of the present Separation, i. e of Eusebius and Company. Upon the whole we see,
these Gentlemen must certainly read Books with a very distorted Eye, who think
it proper to recommend Hooker and Stillingfleet to us in New England; as if
they had made a Coat to fit their Moon in all her Changes, or contrived a Dial
for them to serve all Meridians. And by the way, I cannot help making the
Reflection; how little the Ingenuity of these Gentlemen is to be depended on,
with regard to the Fathers; what poor Encouragement we have to take Things upon
Trust from these Men with Relation to Antiquity: who will venture to vouch
modern Authors at this random-rate; making them speak what they never thought
or dreamt, and espouse a Cause, which by their Scheme of Principles it appears,
must needs have been their Abhorence.

Sect. III. In Return now to what our Reverend Eusebius ^^^ers next ( page 9,
10, and 11.) on the head of Separation still, all I need to do, is to execute
the Lex Talionis upon him, and transcribe his own Words, with a little
different Turn. Indeed I had done it; following his Train of Reasoning, and
adopting much of his Language: which Kind of Answer I thought sufficient -- ad
hominem; and I found the Words run as smoothly from my Pen as his. But for
Brevity I omit the whole; yet think fit to subjoyn this obvious Remark: It must
needs look very simple in this Writer, and make him bear an odd Figure in
Controversy, to use such a way of arguing against Elutherius, which how
specious soever might readily be turned against himself, and that with greater
Advantage! Since Elutherius never was a professed Member of the Church of
England, and so never made a formal Separation from it: whereas the Gentleman,
Eusebius is supposed to personate, was once an ordained Presbyter in one of the
New England Churches, and has in the most open and solemn manner voluntarily
renounced their Communion; which Conduct of his, how he will be able to clear
from the Guilt of Schism, upon the Principles of his admired Authors, I must
confess my self at a Loss. -- I shall add here; Certainly it cannot be thought
but that impartial Men will allow Presbyterian Ordinations in New England to
have as much Validity, as is allowed to Ordinations in the Scottish, and
foreign Churches of the Presbyterian Persuasion, who are without Bishops, both
Name and Thing; and this, of Choice, not of Necessity. I think truly we stand
upon equal Terms with them: and that we have as good Pretensions to the Charity
of our Episcopal Brethren, as they. And if so, I now send this Writer to his
beloved Hooker and Stillingfleet, to learn Charity and Prudence from their
Example; who, I believe, he will never once find so rash as to contest the
Validity of Presbyterian Ordinations in Scotland, or among the Protestants
abroad. Mr. Hooker (p. 122.) having laid down this general Observation, That
Matters of Ecclesiastical Polity, as being of a far (...) Nature and Quality
[i. e. than Things necessary] are not so strictly and everlastingly commanded
in Scripture, but that -- Much which it has taught, may become unrequisite,
sometime because we need not use it, sometimes also because we cannot: -- he
proceeds to say, 'In which respect, for mine own part, although I see that
certain Reformed Churches, the SCOTTISH especially and the FRENCH, have not
that which best agrees with the sacred Scripture, I mean the Government that
is by Bishops, inasmuch as both those Churches are fallen under a different
kind of Regiment, which to remedy, it is for the one altogether too late, and
too soon for the other during their present Affliction, this their De^ect I had
rather lament in such Case, than exagitate, that is, than raise a Dispute and
Disturbance about it. Observe, the want of Bishops, he calls a Defect, and
Imperfection; but does not make it an Essential Defect, a fundamental
Imperfection, such as destroyed the true Church State, and must by all means be
supplied or repaired: No, says he, to remedy it, is ALTOGETHER TOO LATE for the
one, and as much TOO SOON for the other. Now one of these, I doubt, is the true
Case of New England at this Day: and I am inclined to think, Judicious Hooker
would say, it is the former; and judging our Defect, in regard of Bishops, "an
irremediable Error," would determine it best to lament in such Case, rather
than exagitate, as is the manner of his pretended Followers and Admirers. But
verily till they prove our Ecclesiastical Methods "contrary to the Light of
Nature," and "repugnant to the general Axioms of holy Scripture" (which they
can never do) they can plead no Warrant from Mr. Hooker, to exagitate, contend,
and oppose the settled Orders in these Churches. Neither do I think, they can
fetch any Authority or Countenance from Eusebius's other celebrated Author. For
though I find Dr. Stillingfleet (in his Unreas. of Sep.) often mentioning New
England, yet never once that I have observed, does he say any thing that has
the Appearance of condemning our Ordinations as invalid, or our Churches as not
true and good. -- And now as for the Letters annexed to that Treatise of the
Doctor's, wrote by famous Presbyterians abroad, which this Gentleman boasts of
as condemning the English Separatists, let this (to omit all other Remarks) for
the present be accepted as Fact; I however put it to his Conscience, whether he
thinks the Authors of those Letters meant to condemn the Churches in New
England; or whether even the Principles there laid down, will in any manner
reach this End. For my part I gladly appeal to those very Letters, for the
Vindication of our Churches: and I dare this Writer to bring his late
Separation from us upon a Trial by those Letters.

As to Dr. Edwards, let this Gentleman read his Discourse of Episcopacy; where
he may inform himself of the Principle which retained that Excellent Divine in
the Episcopal Communion: and he will find the Doctor's Example of Charity and
Moderation as well operates against him, for "falling in with the Separation"
in New England, as his Arguments make for us, upon the head of Ministerial
Parity; which are such, as this Writer I doubt will never be able to answer.

" The Opinion of the Old Nonconformists in our own Nation" is next bro't
against us ( p. 12) Upon which I need make no other Reply to our Author, but
that I believe the World will think Eusebius had done well to have imitated the
Example of those old honest Nonconformist Ministers (as he calls 'em) in
submitting to Lay-Communion, when he resigned his Cure, rather than to submit
unto Reordination, and run into the Errors of the Separatists. If this sort of
Reasoning has any force, it has as much in my Application of it, as in our
Author's: Or if it be esteemed Cant, and not Arguing, he has taught it me. But
for a just Account of the Opinion and Practice of the Old Nonconformists, and a
full Answer to the Argument bro't on this head, I refer to Dr. RULE'S Rational
Defense, where the Case of the Separation is truly stated, and the Blame laid
where it ought to be, in Answer to Dr. STILLINGFLEET'S Unreasonableness of
Separation, which is there considered Paragraph by Paragraph, and entirely
confuted. -- However I would subjoyn here one Observation; and this is, That if
the old honest Nonconformist Ministers were against the Separation; just as
much, I believe, were the old honest Conformist Puritans (which made the Body
of the Clergy at first) against the unalterable Jus Divinum and absolute
Necessity of the Hierarchy and Ceremonies of the Church of England. -- Jam ergo
sumus pares.

Sect. IV. Eusebius proceeds to some Remarks on the Sufferings of the
Nonconformists. ( p. 13, 14, 15.) And for an Answer, I might commend him to
Elutherius's VINDICATION; where he may find both History and Argument upon this
head, Enough, I hope, to silence his Exclamations for the future.

Though, I cannot but express my Admiration, that this Gentleman should "have
the face" to say that he "might insist on the Guilt of the Sufferers, and the
Justice of the Government;" and to insinuate as if we were for "making Saints
of Malefactors;" and to talk of the Event's proving since, what the Government
then saw of the Tendency of Nonconforming Practices etc. This (by the
Connection) appears designed for a Slur on the way of the old nonconformable
Puritans, or first Dissenters; whose Memory this Gentleman just now expressed
some Respect for, by calling them the old HONEST Nonconformist Ministers. But,
if in this he has spoken otherwise than he thought, and intended nothing but
Palaver and Complement to serve a present Turn, I shall not however say to him,
as he to Elutherius in another Case ( p. 17.) "Pray retract it: " No, but I
patiently let him stand condemned out of his own Mouth, guilty of a palpable
Self-Contradiction. -- And as for his Reflections on the Sufferers after the
Restoration, which are so full of Calumny and Abuse; what other Answer do they
deserve, but that, Increpet te Dominus!

He has raked together all the Instances of Wickedness, he could easily think
of: But who must pass for the Criminals! Was it indeed the nonconforming
Practices, that brought the Nation into the Confusion, he speaks of, with the
Subversion of all Government civil and ecclesiastical! No; it was Tyranny in
the State, and Persecution in the Church, that drove Things to those
Extremities. The Event serves but to prove the Mischief of Impositions, and the
destructive Tendency of Episcopal Bigotry and Rigor, and arbitrary Government.
The inglorious Reign of K. Charles the First is now sufficiently unveiled; they
were his arbitrary and illegal Practices, that bro't on the lamentable Series
of Events, referred to: and the Practices of a Set of Churchmen, who carried
the Ecclesiastical Power extreme high, and had drawn a weak Prince over to
their Interest, these helped to hasten on the fatal Catastrophe. We are told by
Mr. Bennet (Historical Account etc. p. 39. This is to be observed, that the
Bishops and Cathedralists had made themselves so obnoxious to the Parliament
and the People, by their Affectation of Dominion over their Consciences in the
last Convocation; and by the manifest Increase of Superstition, and
encouragement of Superconformity, and a verging toward Popery, under the
Direction of Arch Bp. Laud: that they could not stand their Ground, even in a
Parliament where there was scarce a Man but who was in full Communion with the
Established Church; and all this above a Year before the War was attempted, and
before there was any such thing as a Presbyterian Church in England: And those
who the year after managed the War, and headed the Armies upon the Account of
Liberty, against the tyrannical Incroachment of the King and his Ministers,
were Members of the Established Church; as those were, who made the like noble
Stand at the REVOLUTION. Dr. Burnet tells us, The Duke of Hamilton was
dissatisfied with the Courses some of the Bishops had followed, before the
Troubles began; and could not but impute their first Rise to the Provocations
that had been given by them. ( Memoirs, p. 408.) -- "That many of those who
were for Episcopacy (says Mr. Tongue, Def. of Mr. H's Enquiry, p. 138.) were
highly offended at the Behavior of some of the Bishops, appears by the
Speeches of the Lords Falkland and Digby, both great Royalists: and for my part
(says he) I desire no other Evidence of the intolerable Usurpations of the
Laudensian Party, than what those noble Lords have given us. -- The
Nonconformists indeed generally joined with the Parliament in that cause, which
was doubtless as just and necessary, when first undertaken, as ever was carried
upon the point of a Sword. -- But for the amazing Consequences of that dreadful
War, it was as much out of the Power of the Presbyterians, as of the
Episcoparians, to prevent 'em. Thank the Bishops and those other evil
Counselors about the King, that by fatally misleading him gave Birth and Life
to the War, for all the Mischiefs that ensued upon it. Authorized Oppression,
and Cruelty in Princes (as Seneca justly observes) are a War against Mankind;
to murder whole Nations, is only a more glorious Wickedness; and wicked
Examples (says he) seldom fail of coming home at last to the Authors
themselves. -- But WHO were those our dear Brother paints in such bloody and
horrible Colors, that were guilty of robbing and butchering all honest loyal
Subjects they could lay hands on? "Does he mean those that for above twenty
Years together made a Trade of breaking into the houses of Protestant
Dissenters, taking away their Effects, and casting them into Prisons, and
suffering them to lie and perish there!" -- And WHO were those that were guilty
of demolishing Churches? Does he mean the infamous Sacheverel-Mob, who were
once so busy in pulling down Presbyterian Churches! -- By persecuting the
Clergy in the most cru^^ manner, I would fain know whether he had an Eye to the
barbarous Outrages against honest Nonconformist Ministers in one evil Reign and
another. -- And whether by murdering the King, he means the dethroning K.
James the Second and driving him out of his Kingdom by the terror of Arms taken
up against him (which was virtually a cutting off his head) is left at some
Uncertainty. Further, WHO were those men that were so great Incendiaries in the
troublesome Times, and during the Usurpation promoted the Persecution of the
poor Remains of the Royal and Church Party? Does he point to those Episcopal
Clergymen, that actually bore Arms in the King's Service against the
Parliament, and were (as Dr. Calamy says) famous for fighting and plundering
the Country! or those that (as Dr. Fuller observes) could not forbear printing
and preaching Satyrs on the Times, and provoking the Government to Severity! --
And when he speaks of some who solemnly swore to the League and Covenant, which
horrid Impiety (he says) was truly the Cause of their after-Misery; Does he
allude to those blessed Times (3 or 4 Years before the Civil War) when Arch
bishop Laud was busy in swearing Clergy and Laity to Canonical Obedience and
Superconformity, by the famous E^-^at ra-Oath: the End of which was to support
the Hierarchy, Engaging all Persons in a Vow never to alter it; and the
imposing of which gave such a general Alarm and Disgust to the Nation? Is this
that unlawful Con^ederacy, he roars a-against? And when he tells us of some,
that "through Indignation and Infatuation openly affronted the King, and acted
against the Laws of the Church" etc. who does the Gentleman mean? Does he refer
to the non-juring Schismatics; who by doing those Things " hastened on their
own Ruin and Misery, which they ought to have ascribed to a Divine Vengeance,
pursuing them, "rather than to the Impiety o^ their Governors" persecuting
them. Surely of all Men, these Tory-Separatists seem to be the most possessed
with a Spirit of Infatuation; which God often leaves Men to, when the Time of
their Punishment for their former Wickedness is come. -- "If I have not been so
happy now as to hit upon the Gentleman's true meaning, in any of these
Instances, he must blame himself for sculking so in Generals". But it may be I
have been out, in every one of my Constructions; and the Gentleman was all this
while levelling at the poor Dissenters. Be it so! We are then to understand him
as speaking of the Dissenters, when he tells us (p. 15.) " All of them had the
offer of keeping their Livings, though they were stolen, on Condition they would
swear Fidelity to the King, and Obedience to the Laws, and under Oath renounce
the impious League and Covenant." -- Merciful Dispensation, to suffer the
continuance of those Quondam-Rebels, even all of them, in stolen Livings; and
this, when they had too long already kept the right Owners out, and upon such
^asy Conditions! And if these were all the Conditions offered 'em, it is more
merciful still, and truly very wonderful, that none of those, who had been
irregular Intruders, should be required to submit to Reordination, by Episcopal
Hands! Sure this was far from showing the Church of England to be so rigid in
her Judgment, as some of her Sons represent her: for certainly she would not
have dispensed with her Canons, if she had judged the Mission of those ordained
by mere Presbyters invalid. -- (But I rather fear this Gentleman has forgot
some of the Conditions.) And since the Terms were so easy; "as easy as they
could expect"; how ungrateful, how sordid, how infatuated, must the Men be, to
refuse them! Certainly the Reflection is very shocking! -- And how bold were
they, to go on with their Praying and Preaching for the Saving of Souls, when
they were silenced by the glorious Act of Uniformity! How daring, to venture
(on the most necessary Occasions) within the Limits of any Corporation, or
Place where they had been Ministers, when they were under a merciful Sentence
of Banishment to but five Miles Distance! Was not this to openly affront the
King! Was not this to act against the Laws of the Realm! And how could they
expect any other but by that Means to hasten on their own Ruin and Misery! How
blind, that they could not see a Divine Vengeance following them for their
Wickedness in these things! Amazing Stupidity, that they should ever have the
least Though It or Suspicion of any Impiety of their Governors, in depriving,
crushing and ruining^'em!

I expect, Eusebius will be "put into a Ruffle by this Discourse," which will
all pass for Banter with him: and it may add to his Discomposure, if I mention
the Remark, which I have had running in my mind upon the View of his Pages
under present Censure: This good Gentleman surely would be a bright Hand to
write a Panegyric on the admirably meek and gracious Archbishop LAUD, or the
incomparably tender and humble Lord JEFFRIES! See what an excellent Spirit he
is of! How little has he in him of the Spirit of Bigotry, Imposition, and
Persecution! Which is what the World at this day explodes and readily calls (if
any thing can be so) a Spirit of Infatuation. -- I think fit to observe here,
the History Elutherius has given, of the Treatment our Forefathers met with,
serves to show the true Spirit of High Church; and the Danger attending such,
as upon certain Salvo's to a scrupulous Conscience venture within the
Enclosures of the National Establishment: which is a sufficient Caution to us,
against Conforming; and if we cannot safely conform, we must even continue
Nonconformists.

Sect. V. After the preceding Remark, I will leave Eusebius to enjoy the
Pleasure of his fine Speculations upon Wisdom and Folly (p. 16.) with his
trifling Amusements that follow, about Safety and Danger. Referring him, if he
needs an Answer, to the VINDICATION, where he will meet with a full Reply upon
the head of the safer Side (Page 53, to 64.) Only I would observe; It is
evident to all the wise and impartial World, that the first Planters of New
England, for the body of 'em (I mean now in particular the Clergy) were such as
ran not into the Errors of the Separatists, but were some of those old honest
Nonconformist Ministers; who, when they had long waited for Amendments in the
Ecclesiastical Constitution, whereof Hopes had been given them by many then in
Power, and after all found the Church fixed in those Corruptions, which had so
long been matter of fruitless Complaint, and the Spirit of Imposition and
Persecution gradually advancing, which left no rational Prospect of the desired
Reformation, upon this (I say) they turned their Thoughts to another Point, and
judged it high time to seek a Retreat in some lawful and honorable Way. When
they could no longer enjoy Liberty of Conscience at home, they resolved to
pursue it abroad: Cautious of going into the Brownistical Separation, they made
a peaceable S^cession; leaving the Kingdom, and retiring into this distant
uncultivated part of the World, as those that preferred Heaven and Conscience to
all other Considerations. Here they studiously prosecuted the laudable Design
of a further Reformation, and by the Blessing of God (who was pleased to own
them in their great Undertaking, by many signal Tokens of his gracious
Presence) they made some happy Advances Herein; in which Respects, Our Case
appears to me vastly preferable to that of the National Church: as would, I
think, admit of the easiest Proof, were I at Leisure to run a Comparison They
that desire to know what we are capable of saying upon this head, of the
Advantages we have gained by leaving the Church of England, may see a short
Specimen, in Dr. Calamy's Mod. Nonconf. 3d Part, p. 98. etc.
. -- We had for certain a Right to reform, and vary from the Church of England,
since we are beyond the Limits of the Parliamentary Acts establishing the
Episcopal Hierarchy, and are by Royal Charter constituted distinct Colonies and
Provinces, or Bodies Politic. We may justly claim as much Liberty and
Privilege certainly as any Provincial Churches: and our Adversaries concede,
that the Power of all Provinces is equal Vid. Orig, Draught, p. 151, 2.
. As a Consequence of which, it must be granted, where some general Council or
national Synod has not interposed its Authority, every Provincial Church is
left to regulate their own Affairs according to their best Prudence, without
any Obligation to Uniformity with other Churches in all Ceremonies. As
judicious Hooker observes ( Eccl. Pol. p. 160.) Churches are rather in this
Case like diverse Families, than like diverse Servants of one Family; because
every Church, the state whereof is independent [i. e. as a Church] upon any
other [Church] has Authority to appoint Orders for it self in Things
indifferent, or variable; among which he constantly reckons the Form of
Church Government. Dr. Stillingfleet allows of the Separation or distinct
Communion of whole Churches from each other. And he tells us ( Misch. of Sep.
p. 16 -- 19.) The true Notion of a Church is no more than of a Society of Men
united together for their Order and Government according to the Rules of the
Christian Religion. -- Every Church thus Constituted (says he) we do assert to
have a just Right of governing it self, and of reforming Errors in Doctrine and
Corruptions in Worship. On which Ground, we are acquitted from the Imputation
of Schism, in the Separation from the Roman Church; for we only resume our just
Rights. -- Now the same say I in Defense of New England, with regard to our
Variation from the Episcopal Church. And whereas Dr. Stillingfleet (Unreas. of
Sep. p. 147, 8.) distinguishes and says, By Separation I do not understand a
mere Difference as to the way of Worship, which the Members of the foreign
Churches are here permitted to enjoy: For they do not break off from the
Communion of our Churches; -- They never departed from ours, but only continue
in the Communion of their (...) Churches: The like I say in behalf of the Body
of the People in New England; They don't break off from the Communion of the
Episcopal Church, but only continue in the Communion of their own Churches. We
are therefore, by the avowed Principles of this great Champion of the Church of
England Cause, acquitted from the Guilt of Schism, yea of Separation. For (as
he argue, Ibid. p. 156.) a Man is not said to separate from every Church, where
he f^^bears or ceases to have Communion; but only from that Church, with which
he ^ obliged to hold Communion [being a Member of it] and yet withdraws from
it. -- This now shows at whose Door, according to him, the Charge of Schism and
Separation must lie, whether ours, or our Episcopal Brethren's. And if these
new Separatists have such a Value for this Doctor's Judgment, let them hear how
he concludes upon the Matter ( Ibid. p. 240, 1.) I cannot yet see, by all that
has been said, how those that break the established Order in a Church, wherein
all the Substantials of Religion are acknowledged to be sound, and set up
particular independent Churches in Opposition to it, can acquit themselves from
the Guilt of SCHISM, how great and intolerable soever it be thought. -- Now
it is most evident from the whole Tenor of the Doctor's Writings, that
notwithstanding our particular way of Worship and Form of Church Government, he
holds us in the Roll of the Churches of God, which have all the Substantials of
Religion in them. He often speaks of the New England Churches; and his
Definition of a Church belongs to ours. And the Arguments he makes use of
against Separation, are equally applicable by us against our Episcopal
Separatists. Sure I am, the Unreasonableness of Separation falls heavily upon
these New England Dissenters. For I Am confident, they cannot object to us either
of those Things, which the Doctor says may be the just Reasons of a Separation,
viz. heinous Error in Doctrine, or idolatrous Practice in Worship, or Tyranny
over the Consciences of Men; which yet he observes ( Ibid. p. 221.) may not be
such as to destroy true Baptism, and therefore consistent with the Essentials
of a Church. We are then true Churches, according to him: and pure Churches
too; free from the Causes of a justifiable Separation. I may with the highest
Justice now give our separating Brethren the Doctor's Words ( Ibid p. 217, 8.)
There can be no way left to justify the Separation from our Church, but to
prove, either that our Worship is idolatrous, or that our Doctrine is false, or
that our Ceremonies are made necessary to Salvation: which are all so remote
from any Color of Truth, that none of our Adversaries have yet had the
Hardiness to undertake it. -- And I earnestly desire our Brethren, as they love
their own Souls, and would avoid the Guilt of so great a Sin, impartially and
without Prejudice to consider that Passage of Irenaeus (quoted by the Dr. Ibid.
p. 212, 3.) and how parallel it is with their own Case who separate from us,
and set up other Churches in Opposition to ours, which yet they acknowledge to
be very orthodox, and to agree with them in the same Doctrine and the same
Sacraments.

I might indeed address Eusebius in his own Language (p. 17.) After so much
plainly confessed, of the safety of our Communion, pray justify your self in
leaving it, and using so much Pains to asperse a good and excellent Church, --
and so on to the end of the Paragraph. It is remarkable how unlucky this
Gentleman is continually in the Choice of his Arguments, as well as Authors;
which do but serve in the End to hit himself, and lash his own Error. And all
the Revenge I care at present to take upon him for his hard Speeches, in the
Close of that Paragraph, is this, Medice! cura te ipsum.

Sect. VI. Now for the Presbyterian Objections, relating to Oaths,
Subscriptions, Licenses etc. if (as Eusebius informs us, p. 18.) they have been
solidly answered, especially by Mr. Hooker and Bp. Hoadley, I have this to
remark upon it, that those Objections have been as solidly supported and
defended by Dr. Calamy Mod, Nonconf. in 3 Vol. against Ollyffe and Hoadly.
, and others; who have also largely set forth the Objections that "affect Lay
Communion."

And now since this Gentleman has called in a new Advocate for his Cause, Bp.
Hoadly; I take Leave to put him upon trying how he can justify the Episcopal
Separation in New England, by that Author's Principles, as exhibited in his
Writings, even in his Controversy with Dr. Calamy.

I pass over Eusebius's mean Reflections on Elutherius (p. 19.) which serve
only to give us? Picture of himself, and to point out " the Cause of his own
Misfortune." Mutato Nomine de se Fabula narratur. Sure he had now forgot the
Admonition given him but a little before ( p. ^5.) Attalus told Eusebius, these
Invectives carry nothing of Argument, and it were better to return to the
Purpose.

Upon what he offe^s next ( p. 20, 21.) all I have Occasion to do, is again to
retort, and put him to solve his own Difficulties. This Gentleman's own
Confessions, which I have already remarked, show that he himself does not think
but that there may be HONEST Nonconformist Ministers: and if he might have
remained an HONEST Nonconformist Minister, or a good Christian in the Communion
of our Churches, what could constrain him to desert it? -- The Point of
Subjection to Ecclesiastical Laws, I leave him to dispute with Elutherius, who
sufficiently answers what he has here suggested on that head. VINDIC. p. 41,
45. -- I might go on in our Author's own Language (though it grates me, to repeat
after him the Words of Crimination; I do it not in a way of Charge, but only to
let him see how he likes his own opprobrious Language at second hand) and might
say to him, as he to Elutherius; -- Since you were required to give Adoration
to none but the true God -- etc. what could make you uneasy and discontented,
but your own EVIL, RESTLESS, AMBITIOUS Spirit? The Constitution of our Church
has been sufficiently justified by Men of greater Sense and Abilities than you
or I, and it is enough to refer you to those ingenious and learned Treatises --
But I Am even sick of transcribing such insipid and nauseous Stuff.

I will now relieve the Reader, and my self, with an entertaining and apposite
Passage out of pious Bp. Hall's Works ( p. 516, 7.) It is an heavy Crime (says
he) wherewith we are charged by the Romanists, That we are fallen off from the
Catholic Church, that we have rent the s^emless Coat of Christ; -- whereof if
we were indeed guilty, how unworthy were we to breath in this Air? But we call
Heaven and Earth to Record, how unjustly this Calumny is cast upon us, yea, we
protest before God and Men, that the Envy of this so foul a Crimination lights
most justly upon the Heads of the Accusers. May it please you to hear a short
Apologue: A certain Man invited to a Feast one or two of his Friends;
entertained them bountifully; They sat together lovingly, they are together,
and were merry one with another: In the second Course (as the Custom is) the
Master offers them Wine, sets before them an Apple; now a Worm had somewhat
eaten the Apple, and a Spider by Chance had fallen into the Cup; The GUEST sees
and balks it: The MASTER urges him, Why do you not eat, quoth he, why drink
you not? I dare not, says the OTHER, it is not safe to do either; see thou
not this Vermin in the Cup, and that in the Apple? Tush, says the MASTER,
what so great matter is this? It was I, that set this before thee; it was I,
that began to thee in the other; Drink it, eat it, at least for my sake. But,
suffer me first ( replies the GUEST) to take out this Spider, to cut out this
Worm; the Wine, the Apple likes me well enough; the Spider, the Worm, I
cannot away with. AWAY with such overnice and curious Companions (quoth HE
again) FIE upon thee, thou ungrateful Fellow, that do so little regard my
Friendship, so contemn my Cheer: And with that, in a Rage, throws the Platters
and Pots in the very Face of his Guest, and thrusts him out of doors all
wounded. Tell me now, I beseech you, worthy Auditors, whether of these violates
the Laws of Hospitality? I dare say you have easily applied it before me. -- We
have willingly departed from the Communion of their Errors; from the Communion
of the Church we have not departed. Let them but cast away [the Spider in the
Cup, the Worm in the Apple; what else be they, but Superstition in their
Worship, rotten and unwholesome Traditions --? with out these, the Religion
pleases us well: let them not thrust upon us] their Soul-slaying Traditions,
we will communicate with them in the Right of one and the same Church, and
remain so for ever.

I think now the Bishop's instructive Apologue tallies very well with
Elutherius's diverting Fable of the Blood-Pudding (VINDIC. p. 43.) and serves
to give Countenance to it; however ludicrous an Aspect it may have in so
serious an Argument. The Moral of both is the same, and the Application easy.
This now is sufficient to justify the Nonconformists against "all malepert
Opposers." And what was before offered is full Enough, Eusebius (I give you
back your own Words, p 21.) to show that you was no ways constrained by the
force of rational Arguments, as you pretend, to leave the Communion of the
Church, in which you were once a Pastor, and join with Dissenters: which is as
much as I have undertaken, in order to refute the whole Argument of your
Dialogue.

Sect. VII. A short Interlude happens next. The Debate between Eusebius and
Elutherius being now interrupted, we have Philalethes taking a Turn in the
controversial Conversation ( p. 22, 23.) But I must beg this Gentleman's
Pardon, if I observe, his Head seems, like Eusebius's, to have grown giddy,
upon their Voyage for Episcopal Orders: which makes him stumble too on plain
Ground; he also forgets what Part of the World he is now in, and that all
Arguments don't alike ^ute every Climate.

We'll for once allow him his Plea, That the Church of Christ has Power to make
Orders and Rules, for Regulating its Discipline, and prescribing how her Clergy
shall be admitted etc. But what is this to the present Purpose? Or what
Advantage will he get by it? I beg this Gentleman to inform me, what Church of
Christ it is, that has interposed her Authority to make Rules and Orders for us
in New England. He well knows, that the Act of Uniformity is limited, and does
not extend to the Plantations: So that we lie without the Pale of the
established national Church. He well knows also, that in several of these
Charter-Government, the Civil Powers have given their highest Countenance, by
reasonable Laws and Orders, to the Ministry and Discipline of the New England
Churches: and have not our Province-Laws received the Royal Sanction! If there
be any thing then in his Plea, that affects the Controversy before us, it will
turn out in our favor: and he must be obliged to relinquish the Pretense. I
may borrow some of the Words of Dr. Stillingfleet, and apply them to the
Occasion: This Argument therefore must be quitted; and they who will defend the
present Separation, must return to the old Principles of the Separatists, if
they will justify their own Practices. And so I find Mr. Philalethes is forced
to do: for discerning that the Pretense of" Church Power and Establishments
"would not hold of it self, he adds more Weight to it, and calls in the Help of
Jus Divinum, which comes home to the Business, and brings us to the old Point
of defending the Calling of our Ministry. [Unreas. of Sep. p. 118.] -- The
Gentleman takes Sanctuary in his Jure Divino; the sole Refuge left him: And " a
Couple of LETTERS written by a dear Friend of" Philalethes, which he "seems to
be much charmed with," are here "held out," and applauded, as containing
Wonders, even clear Proofs that the original Government of the Church was
Episcopal, etc. (p. 23.) I shall reserve the Consideration of them to their
proper Place: and must now attend to the Conference between Eusebius and
Elutherius, which revives afresh, and proceeds a little further upon the
Business in hand.

Sect. VIII. Here (p. 24.) we find Eusebius undertaking to examine the most
weighty Arguments of Elutherius in his Dialogue, against the Episcopal
Constitution, and in Justification of of the Presbyterian Scheme.

The first Argument he pitches on, is what Elutherius occasionally suggested (
Dial. p. 5.) That a Prelate at best is but a human Creature, and not of
Christ's Appointing. This indeed was designed more immediately against the
Lordship and Jurisdiction of the Bishops. But Eusebius (p. 26.) says It Is
certain it was designed for a Slur upon Episcopal ORDINATION; and makes a
mighty Improvement of the harmless Passage, insinuating, as if Elutherius
intended to argue, that a Bishop or Prelate can have no Power to Ordain;
because being a mere humane Creature himself, he cannot make a Divine one, i. e.
a Minister of Jesus Christ. Upon which he exclaims, If Eleutherius strikes thus
high, he will UNDO us all, etc.

Now in Answer to these Remarks, I Will attempt two Things --

1. To point out several Senses, in which Elutherius's Proposition may be
safely understood, and in which it must be acknowledged to be true.

Here let it be observed, the Prelate spoken of is of the English Stamp, a
Diocesan Bishop; and now I say, this Prelate at best is but a human Creature,
as deriving his whole Power from human Constitutions, having no external
Jurisdiction but what he derives from the State, and dependent upon the Crown
for his very Being. The Apostle says, We know that an Idol is nothing in the
World: So I may say of Prelacy, We know it is nothing in the World, in point of
Divine Right. Just as our Author (I hope) would say of the Romish Papacy, it is
at best a mere human Creature; so say we of English Prelacy: which is
manifestly founded upon, and directed and limited by the Laws of the Nation.
Some of the best Defenders of Episcopacy have acknowledged, there is no such
Thing as a strictly Diocesan Prelate to be found in Scripture: and if this
Prelatical Power be not from the Laws of God, it must derive from the Civil
Magistrate and Laws of the State. And indeed what is it (as one observes) that
the Civil Magistrate may not do in the making of a Prelate in the Church of
England? He may elect the Person, and does so in Reality; for he nominates
authoritatively. He may multiply Bishops ad libitum; and if he pleases, may
appoint one in every Parish. He may also delegate the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction to whom he pleases: for the Lay-Chancellors, who judicially
excommunicate or absolve, have their Commission to do it from the King, not
from the Bishop; and in some places the Episcopal Jurisdiction is reserved to a
Presbyter, as in the Peculiars, they have in diverse Parts of England: A certain
Proof, that the Bishop's Jurisdiction is only by human Right. Lastly, the Civil
Magistrate may also depose and deprive Bishops, when they see just Cause: and
this Power has been so lately exerted, that it needs no further Proof. I would
fain know whether the deprived Bishops were not divested of all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. That which induces me to mention this is, I find the Defenders of
the Hierarchy confidently assert, that there can be but one Bishop in one
Church at the same time: therefore if the former were not divested of their
Power, I see not how the succeeding Incumbents could have any by their own
Rule; and so their Ordinations would be null, if the others be valid. To say,
that the deprived Prelates had the Power still, but were restrained from the
Exercise of it, would be to confront the Act of Parliament [in the Case of the
Bishops deposed at the Revolution] which says expressly, they are deprived of
their Office, and distinguishes betwixt being suspended from the Exercise of
their Office, and being deprived of the Office it self. -- Upon the whole
matter I think it is clear enough, that the English Prelacy is a mere Creature
of the Civil Magistrate, who may make every Parson of a Parish a Bishop, if he
pleases; their whole Power (as distinct from Presbyters) being founded upon the
Laws of the Land. -- Thus the learned Mr. Tongue, in his ingenious Defense of Mr.
H's Enquiry (p. 53, to 60.) where this grand Point is largely argued, and
Objections answered.

But perhaps it will tend more to Eusebius's Conviction, if I produce one of
his own Authors. This therefore I will do, and I pitch upon Bp. Hoadly; who in
his elaborate. Argument on the Case of the deprived Bishops, upon the glorious
Revolution (see Bp. of Bang^r's PRESERVATIVE, p. 9. etc. p. 33, etc.) furnishes
us with a fair Key (very nigh the same with that of Mr. Tongue) to that mystical
Passage of Elutherius. He has learnedly demonstrated, that the Bishops Right of
executing their Office arises from an human Original, i. e. the Nomination of
the Civil Magistrate. This Nomination (says he) is vested in the Crown by the
Laws: and is ultimately resolved into the supreme Authority of the Nation:
Consequently, therefore, what is given, may be taken away, by the same
Authority etc." And it is remarkable "The words of the Act (says he) declare
them [i. e. the Bishops deprived] to be deprived from their OFFICES, as well as
their Dignities" etc. -- And therefore it was "A total Deprivation, and made
them cease to be Bishops, as to any RIGHT (properly so called) of executing
their Offices. Now my Remark upon it is, That this plainly argues an English
Prelate in Effect to be (in Elutherius's terrible Language) at best but a human
Creature; It shows, that Prelacy is in the Eye of the Civil Magistrate, and in
Fact and Practice, but an accidental human Creation only. This is a Conclusion,
that seems to me to follow from the Premises, as naturally and clearly as Light
from the Sun. However at least it appears evident "beyond the Possibility of a
Reply"(to use a High Church Phrase) that an English Prelate at the worst, that
is, a deprived Bishop, is even at the best but a human Creature; unable, if he
has any latent Power, to put it in Exercise, or perform any regular and (and in
the Eye of the Law) valid Act of Authority, in point of Ordination or
Jurisdiction. And if so, I fear me, this STRIKES HIGH indeed, and casts an
odious Reflection somewhere, even upon Ordinations. Now let Eusebius turn the
Fury of his severe Resentments from Elutherius, and fall foul on his own
Advocate the Bishop, for " designing to cast a SLUR upon Ordinations, upon
Episcopal Ordinations" too (which it verily seems he has done in fact) and that
the blackest of Slurs, upon some of 'em; even "the infamous Blot of Usurpation
without a true Right."

But further I will lay before Eusebius one Consideration, that may serve as an
Argumentum ad hominem, upon the Point we have in hand. I conclude, this
Gentleman himself will confess, that an English Prelate is at best but a mere
human Creature, if it can be proved he has no authentic Episcopal
Consecration; which it will appear, upon his Principles, no Bishop in England
at this day has a just Claim to, if it can be made out, that there has been a
Breach of regular Succession at any time, evident and notorious. Now that there
was in fact such a Breach, even at the Reformation, I vouch in an Episcopal
Author for my Witness; whose Authority, Argument and Advice may have some
Weight with this Gentleman. See a LETTER to the Rev. Mr. PEERS, Vicar of
Faringdon, By a CLERGYMAN ( London, printed Anno 1716.) Of which one informs
us, "It deservedly met with good Acceptance from the World." There you will
find the following Paragraphs. ( p. 43. and onwards.) We have been taught, I
know, to assert the Necessity of Episcopal Ordination, in a Succession from the
Apostles: but if that is to be done at all, it should be done with Caution,
even in our Sermons, but never in Print, because that Succession must be
derived through the Romish Church, which has been divided into great Schisms, and
at last was so corrupted, so changed from the Model of Christ and his Apostles,
that we were forced to separate from her. And when we did so, how was the
Succession preserved! -- Perhaps you have not read this Part of our History,
and therefore I Will set down a Passage or two from Bp. BURNET'S History of the
Reformation, with my own Observations, which you may peruse at your Leisure. I
shall for Brevity leave out the historical Passages he quotes at large, yet
referring to the Places, where he says they may be found; Vol. II. Fol. 378,
396, 402, 403. -- And only give you in Parentheses, what is necessary to clear
the Clergyman's Observations upon 'em, which are these. He says ( p. 48.)
Having quoted Bp. Burnet pretty largely on the Case, you may expect I should
set down his Opinion of it; but truly, his Lordship seems to give up the Point,
and rather excuses it from the Confusion the Church was then in, than offers at
a plain Vindication. However, upon the whole, it is plain, our Reformers were
under some Difficulties in this Affair of the Consecration [viz. of Archbishop
Parker; the Sea of Canterbury being vacant by the Death of Card, Pool, as also
were some other Sees, at Queen Elisabeth's Accession] Otherwise the first
Commission [or Warrant for Parker's Consecration] would not have been directed
to three Bishops, who had forfeited their Sees by an Act of Parliament passed
that very Year, Or (upon their re^using to act) the second, to one quondam
Bishop (whom they never restored Coverdale. He refused it; being disaffected to
be Ceremonies and Habits: and it is remarkable, he attended the Consecration
only (...) a plain black COAT.
) two Bishops elect, and two Suffragans: [the two old Bishops, the only ones,
with Sees, named in the Commission, had no manner of Share in the Consecration;
only one of the Suffragans assisted, who, as the Case then stood (says the Bp.)
I am afraid could have no Power to do it.] Especially, if we further observe,
That in the Letters Patents for the Consecration of the first Bishops, the
QUEEN, for avoiding all Ambiguity, and Questions, that might be objected
against the same; has, by her SUPREME Power and Authority, DISPENSED with all
Causes and doubt of any IMPERFECTION or DISABILITY, that can, or may, be
objected to it. This, as the Statute says, was a Caution which had not been
used in Letters Patents of the same Nature; and therefore may give one Reason
to suspect, that the Legality of the Proceeding was not so clear, as one could
wish it: and this Suspicion is confirmed by the Act of Parliament, which passed
in the Eighth Year of her Reign, Declaring all the Consecrations, that had been
since the Queen's Accession, VALID; any Matter

Thing, that can, or may, be objected to the Contrary, notwithstanding; --
PROVIDED, that no Person etc. -- This Proviso refers to the Statute of the 5th
of Q Eliz. cap. 1. By which, all Archbishops, and Bishops, are empowered to
tender the Oath of Supremacy --. So that the Parliament, though they confirmed
the Bishops in their Sees; yet not confirming, but on the Contrary, excepting,
and vacating those Acts of theirs which regarded the Liberty and Property of a
third Person, have virtually declared, that they did not look upon 'em as good
Bishops before this Act passed; for if they had been, these Tenders of the
Oath, which they made as Bishops, and under the Sanction of an Act of
Parliament, would have been valid.

Besides (as he goes on to observe) if we put our Cause on the Foot of a Divine
Commission, will not the Sectaries retort upon us, That either the Popish
Bishops had a Divine Commission, or they had none: If they had, how could they
be deprived of it, even by an Act of Parliament; and consequently, what Right
had those who succeeded them? If they had not, how came we by it, who claim
under their Consecrations? So that I think, instead of insisting loudly on our
Divine Right, as you and other indiscreet Men have done; we had better let that
Matter pass over in S^lence (unless now and then we introduce it in the Pulpit)
and rest upon our National, Legal Establishment, which will serve our Turn as
well. -- The Clergyman concludes his Letter, with a just Reprehension to Mr.
Peers (which is applicable perhaps to many others of his Brethren) saying, I
could not forbear letting you know, that I think weak Arguments betray the
Cause they are brought to support, and that our Church has suffered (and unless
more Care be taken in the Choice of our Champions, is likely to suffer) more by
the Folly of its Friends, than by the Malice of its Enemies. -- Now, I appeal
to Eusebius, whether the manifest Defect of Canonical Ordination in Parker's
Case, as it is represented by the Clergyman, does not infer a Breach of regular
Succession: and if the Legality of all the following Consecrations depended
entirely on Parker's, who then from a private Clergyman was promoted to the
Archiepiscopal See of Canterbury, I leave Eusebius to draw the Consequence:
Expecting he will cry out, Verily this Gentleman STRIKES HIGH with a Witness, I
had almost said, with a Vengeance: higher still than even Bp. Hoadly; the Bp.
as high as the Revolution, but this Clergyman as high as the very REFORMATION,
and will UNDO us all indeed. -- Ay, that he will, Eusebius, if your darling
Principles be true: but as WE have not so learned Christ, the Reformation
shines yet gloriously in our Eyes, and the Succession is still secure and good.
And truly You must be obliged to Presbyterian Principles, to make out the
Validity of your Episcopal Ordinations: Or I doubt, there remains not a good
Bishop in England; but they must all be voted at the best mere human Creatures,
upon your own Plan. Thus we have seen Elutherius's terrible UNDOING Position
confirmed in two Senses, which it fairly admits of; the one Consideration was
of a Political, the other of an Ecclesiastical Nature

There is another Sense I will now mention, which the Position may also be
taken in, and in which it must be acknowledged undoubtedly true; and that is, a
Prelate, considered RESPECTIVELY, or Relatively, is but a human Creature:
First, respectively to Eusebius himself; Secondly, to us in New England.

Will Eusebius dare to say, A Prelate in Relation to him is any thing more than
a mere human Creature, without all Power to ordain! For how Divine soever a Bp.
be simply in himself, yet Respectively he is at best but a human Creature, and
cannot pretend to work the MIRACLE of transforming an unbaptiz'd Laick into a
Christian Minister. That Is a moral Impossibility!

I take this Opportunity to invite Eusebius, with his Fraternity, to a more
serious Reflection upon their own real State, in point of visible Christianity:
and beg he will for Charity sake give Satisfaction to some Scruples, a solution
to certain Difficulties, arising on that head. -- Sir, I solemnly put the
Question, Can you upon your professed Principles make out an authentic Claim (
foro Ecclesiae) to the Character of Christian? I insist on a generous and
direct Answer. Pray, do your self Justice, upon this Occasion; and let the
Secret come abroad, if you have ever received any other than Lay-Baptism. For
if not, I must have Leave to doubt, the Bishop's Hand has no such miraculous
Virtue, as to supply the ESSENTIAL Defect in that Case. Certainly, my Friend,
if as a Christian Professor you are of a LAY- Extract, you cannot as a Christian
Minister challenge any higher Original. You may well look on your self still,
notwithstanding your Episcopal Orders, but a pretending Laick, as much as
before. Surely you must needs receive Conviction by this, that Respectively to
You, at least a Prelate is at best but a human Creature: for it was impossible
for him to make a Divine one of You; I mean, of one in your Circumstances; a
mere human Creature, without Episcopal Baptism. Read now, and apply to your
self what you find pertinent to your Case, in Romans 2.17 -- 23.

It remains, that we consider the Prelates in Relation to us, the Ministers and
Churches of New England. I premise this Observation, That a Prelate is a
relative Term, and (as one expresses it) always connotes a BISHOPRIC, as his
Charge and Cure. The Prelate's Power is limited, and none is Bishop of another
Man's Diocese, nor can the Bishops display their Power in such Parts even of
England, as are exempted by Law from Prelatical Jurisdiction, and governed by
Courts held by dignified Presbyters. The Bp. (notwithstanding his specious
Title of chief Governor) passes but for a mere human Creature in the Peculiars:
and why should he pass for any other among us in New England, who are at least
as much privileged as they! Certainly the Regal Authority, having the Right of
Nomination, has equal Pretenses to the Right of Suspension: the same Authority
that gives the Power of external Jurisdiction, may lay what Restriction is
thought fit, on the Exercise of it, either total or partial, and exempt any
part of the King's Dominions there from ^ow such has been the ROYAL GRACE to
New England in ^is Particular, that we are indulged with the great and
INESTIMABLE. Privilege of an ENTIRE EXEMPTION from Episcopal Impositions, by
the excellent Establishment, Charter and Laws, we are under. So that although in
a Civil Consideration we are dependent Provinces, and gladly will ever remain
so (loyal to the Crown, and dutiful to the Mother-Kingdom) yet we are (in fact
and right) independent Churches; by the Royal Indulgence, resigned to a perfect
Liberty in Ecclesiastical Regards. Surely the Prelates are all in Effect
DEPRIVED Bishops, as to us; deprived by a most sufficient Authority, to all
Intents and Purposes. But if I am so very unhappy as to have been mistaken, I
desire Eusebius to be so kind, as to set me right, and inform us WHOSE Diocese
we pertain to, that we may be no longer ignorant who is our Bp. Will he
undertake to decide the grand Dispute at this day between the Bp. of London,
and the Archbishop of Canterbury! For my own part, I know of no Act of
Parliament, that vests the Title in the Bp. of London; without which, his Claim
is merely presumptive. But it may be, this Gentleman will think it his wisest
way, to say, we are as yet only subject to the Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction,
like the Peculiars in England. Well, to this it is answered, They are no
otherwise under it (and consequently we are no more under it) than even the
BISHOPS are: and the prelatical Party themselves acknowledge, that Archbishops
are but of Human Institution. We may therefore without all hazard, conclude,
that a Prelate is at best but a human Creature Respectively, and in Relation to
us Whether you look upon him in a Legal or an Ecclesiastical Consideration, he
is unto us, I say, at best a more human Creature.

Upon the whole then, what has this Writer got by his noisy Bustle and Outcry
against that hurtless Passage of Elutherius! Here indeed we have Eusebius's
Master-Objection, and what he values himself most upon; or to allude to a
Phrase of his own, "triumphs upon, as the foundation of the finest Flourishes
in his Dialogues." But I flatter my self, the Flowers are cropped and spoiled,
and his Triumphs at an End.

I come now to the other Thing I had in View.

2. I am to do Justice to Elutherius, in giving the true Sense of the Passage
under Consideration, as intended by him: which alone would have sufficed
presently to dissipate the furious Storm raised upon this slight Occasion.

And as I observed before, this Passage, as it stands in the Dialogue, has
evidently an immediate Relation to the Bishop's Jurisdiction. It Is levelled
against the Constitution, and Frame of the English Hierarchy in general; but
more particularly against the imposing of their Minister (as the manner is)
upon a Congregation, without the People's Consent: which Elutherius thinks an
unsufferable Lordship over them. And therefore says, I care not to be set over
a People in this L^r^^y manner. -- I cannot but complain of the Spiritual
Courts etc. -- Nor do I find any Warrant for the Ecclesiastical Authority
exercised over both Ministers and People in the Bishop's Name. If there be --
show it me; if not, you will allow me to refuse your Hierarchy etc. (Dial. p. 6,
7.) These are his express Words: and you see, they apparently respect Things
consequential to Ordination. And as it unluckily happens, Eusebius himself
brings in the Passage he cavils at, expressly under the head of what Eleutherius
has said against the Episcopal CONSTITUTION, (p. 24) yet quickly forgeting
this, and resolved upon a perverse Comment, he afterward treats the disputed
Sentence as particularly referring to ORDINATION, and has the Front to say to
Elutherius (p. 26.) It is CERTAIN, You designed a Slur upon our Ordination
among your vulgar Readers, by your unfair Insinuation, when you call a Prelate
a human Creature, and your Ordinations such as are according to Christ's
Institution, p. 9. as though ours were not so. This, however, is a Consequence
far fetched, "as any one may see with half an Eye," comparing pages 5th and 9th:
For at that Distance the two Premises stand, from which he makes up his
formidable Conclusion.

Well! Nevertheless, to give him the fairest Play he can desire, I will for
once suppose Elutherius's Words to come in under the head of Ordination, as an
Objection against the Episcopal Way. But what mighty Use will our Adversary be
able to make of this Concession, in Prejudice to the Argument in hand! Why, let
this Gentleman put his own uncouth and ill-natured sense upon the Words so
applied, and then it will furnish out a little Rant upon Elutherius. But
certainly a small Degree of Candor (that friendly Candor we all upon Occasion
need some Assistance from, and none perhaps more than Eusebius and I) would
have taught this Gentleman to pit the favorable Construction, which he knew
well enough the Words would admit of, and could not rationally think a^^ other
was intended. Yet observe, when Elutherius says, "a Prelate is at best but a
human Creature," this Gentleman will have him intend to divest the Bp. of his
whole ministerial Character, and leave him without the common Powers of the
Clergy. Verily He might as well have inferred, that he meant, a Prelate is not a
Christian, any more than a Divine: or truly he might as well have inferred, he
meant to insinuate, that a Bp. is a Fool; for so still he would be a human
Creature. -- But I Am ashamed of his trifling Cavils, and his unfair
Insinuation, which could not be designed for any thing but a SLUR upon
Elutherius, among his vulgar Readers. He well enough knew, however the Words
may sound, Nothing more was really intended by 'em, than that Prelacy it self
is not of Divine Appointment, but of human Invention: and he saw it so
explained by Elutherius himself, in those very Terms. ( Dial. p. 7.) This
Gentleman could have distinguished, if he had pleased, between the Person and
the Character: or rather between the constitutive Character of Minister, and
the accumulative Character of Prelate. The first is from Heaven: the second is
of the Earth. Prelates, as such, Elutherius denies to be of a Divine Make ^ but
yet considered in another Light, i. e. as Ministers, he denies not their being
of Christ's appointing.

Accordingly Eusebius at length does him the Justice, to make a Distinction,
and bring him in saying, I never denied Bishops the power of ordaining as
PRESBYTERS, but only as Prelates. Truly it was a Thing too notorious to be
dissembled, that Elutherius has never once seemed to call in Question the
Validity of a Bishop's Ordination, i. e. of Ordination by a Bishop in
Conjunction with other Presbyters. All that he disputes, is the Necessity of a
Prelate in Ordination, and the Regularity of the English Episcopal Manner of
Ordination, taken in all its Circumstances, as he has set them forth at large.
( Dial. p. 8, 9.) And the very worst he can be supposed to aim at, was (as he
expresses himself, Ibid.) the assigning Reasons why he esteemed Presbyterian
Ordination every way preferable to Ordination by Bishops. Now certainly, so far
as Episcopal Ordination is attended with Circumstances IRREGULAR and
UNSCRIPTURAL, "the want of Christ's Appointment," with respect to those Things,
might fairly be objected in Plea against it, and be assigned as a Reason for
refusing Ordination in that Manner, and " seeking Ordination (as he has
expressed it) where all these Abuses may be regulated." And this the rather,
since in the present agreeable Posture of Affairs, as the Door of public
Liberty stands open to P^otestant Dissenters at home, so the Anti-Prelatical
Way is the primitive and prevailing Way of New England, ESTABLISHED by ancient
Custom, general Agreement, and the Recommendation of Civil Authority; which
gives as good a Sanction to it, as the Episcopal Way has in the Mother Country.
Prelatical Ordination is "a Deviation from a settled Method, ^^^ful in our
Judgment, without a Necessity for such a Deviation." I borrow the Language from
Bp. Hoadly; and if there be any Strength in the Argument, as he applies it
against Dr. Calamy, it must be allowed to have the same Force in my Application
of (...) against Eusebius. I will also borrow a few Words from Dr. Calamy (Mod.
None. P. III. p. 425.) who having spoken of the unwarrantable Clogs attending
Episcopal Ordination, takes Occasion to say; In that respect, I sha^'t stick to
declare, that I no more approve of the Method of the Church of England, than of
the Method even of the Brownists. I no more think, that a Separation to the
Office of the Ministry, with such Clogs superadded, is approved of God,
regular, and warranted by Scripture, than I do, that a Separation to the
Office, without any Concern of Ministers, is so, where their Judgment and Help
can be had. The superadded Engagements on the one side, are as bad as the
Omission on the other: and as little dispensable in our Opinion.

Sect. IX. Eusebius shows a remarkable Confidence (not to say, Baseness) by
insinuating again, notwithstanding the Distinction and Caution before given
him, as if Elutherius really intended to deny the Validity of Episcopal
Ordinations; " Which (says he, p. 26.) you would fain NULL." Verily one would
think, this Gentleman was so possessed with the Nullity of Presbyterian
Ordination, that it has strange Effects upon him; his Brain seems addl'd, and
he talks as if he could not muse upon any thing, but Nullity, NULLITY! The Word
sounds in his Ears continually, in the manner of an Echo; and he fancies he
hears it from all Quarters, on every Occasion. As Ill Will is is always
jealous, he imagins his Opponent must needs be haunted with the same evil
nullifying Spirit, as himself. -- Again, COMMISSION, SUCCESSION,
LAY-DERIVATION, are Ecclesiastical Terms of Art and Cant, favorite and familiar
Terms (I doubt not) with this Gentleman. Upon which I must recall to his Mind a
beautiful and pertinent Period of his own (p. 14) YOU LOVE TO HARP upon those
Things, that you think will move People's Affections to OUTRUN THEIR REASON.

Eusebius (p. 26.) with a formidable Dilemma pushes at us: but we don't feel
our selves at all go^'d by either of its hor^s. As for his Presbyters, let 'em
shift for themselves: Our Concern is to vindicate our own. And we are not so
^ond, we confess, of an uninterrupted Line of Succession, nor much scared at
the Consequences of a Breach in the Chain. We are not afraid of "pretending to
a Commission to begin a new Succession," sufficient to the Purpose, whether it
be immediate or only mediate, if there were Occasion. This Gentleman, I
believe, labors of some Confusion in his Thoughts about the Nature of
Ordination, and has not learned yet the necessary Distinction between
Commission and Investiture; which are certainly very different Things. To help
his Understanding a little, I will illustrate the Matter by a familiar Case of
the like Nature. The Massachusetts Explanatory Charter gives to our House of
Representatives the Power of choosing a SPEAKER, and to the Governor the Power
of approbating him: yet neither the Election nor the Approbation does properly
constitute or make him Speaker; but it is the King, who does this, by the
Charter, as his Instrument. The King appoints the Officer: They only design the
Person. The King gives the Commission: They only the Investiture. The
Commi^sion gives the Power: and the Investiture leads on the regular Exercise
of it. Now it is the same in the Case before us. The People choose, and the
Presbytery approbate by solemn Rites and public Actions: thus the consenting
Candidate becomes regularly invested, and introduced into the Exercise of those
Powers, which are given to Ministers by the Gospel, the fundamental Charter of
the Church. The sacred Scriptures are the Minister's Letters of Credence, which
give him all his Authority. Hence Dr. Stillingfleet observes; The Pastors of
the Church ought to be received but according to that Power and Authority,
which their CREDENTIALS, viz. the Scriptures, do CONVEY to them. ( Rat. Acco.
Prot. Relig. p. 260.) Let Eusebius read also what his judicious Hooker (Eccl.
Pol. p. 331, etc.) has offered in Confutation of the Allegorical Argument taken
from a STOLEN SEAL; which is so commonly bro't against Presbyterian Baptism and
Orders, to prove them null, and us quilty of Forgery and Sacrilege. What will
Eusebius make of those Remarks of the Ecclesiastical Politician; (p. 332.) That
God has committed the Minist^rie of Baptism unto special Men, it is for
ORDER'S sake in his Church, and not to the End that their Authority might give
B^ing or add Force to the Sacrament if self. (p. 333.) The Work of external
Ministry "in Baptism is only a Preeminence of Honor." -- He defines
Ordination ( p. 124.) "a solemn Admittance." And ( p. 435.) he observes, That
the only true and proper Act of Ordination is, to INVEST Men with that Power
which does make them Ministers, by consecrating their Persons to God and his
Service in holy Things. -- They are by virtue thereof bequeathed unto God,
severed and sanctified to be employed in his Service. ( p. 434.) -- Which Men,
thereunto assigned, do hold their Authority from God (Who should give them
their Commission, but HE?) whether they be such as Himself immediately or as
the CHURCH in his Name investeth. (p. 410.) -- And he observes ( p. 322.)
External Cir^umstances, even in the highest and holiest Actions, are but the
lesser Things of the Law (Matthew. 23.23.) whereunto those Actions themselves
being compared are the greater; and therefore as the greater are of such
Importance that they must be done, so in that Extremity before supposed [in
Cases of Necessity] if our Acount of the lesser which are not to be omitted,
should cause Omission of that which is more to be accounted of, were not this
our strict Obedience to Christ's Institution touching Mint and Commin, a
Disobedience to his Institution concerning Love? -- AWAY with these merciless
and bloody Sentences! Let them never be found standing in the Books and
Writings of a Christian Man: They savor not of CHRIST, nor of his most
gracious and me^ke Spirit, but under Color of exact Obedience they nourish
Cruelty and Hardness of Heart. Now let this be applied to the Case we are
upon; and I think it sufficient to solve all the Difficulties about beginning a
new Succession etc. I shall add here that Passage of Mr. Chillingworth (Relig
of Prof. p. 354.) There is no Repugnance in the Terms, but that there might be
a true Church after Luther, though there was none for some Ages before. For it
does not appear (says he) that the Generation of Churches is univocal; that
nothing but a Church can possibly beget a Church. -- For a false Church may
preserve the MEANS -- of raising a true Church; I mean the Integrity and
Authority of the WORD of God with Men.

Eusebius go's on; The most of you indeed have so mingled your Succession from
Episcopacy, with LAY-DERIVATIONS, by uniting with the Independents, that it is
hard to say, what Foundation you now stand upon. Well, what then! Surely we
have no more Reason to be afraid, than himself, of the terrible Consequence of
these Lay-Derivations, which he supposes have been mingled with our Succession
from Episcopacy. I answer him, in his own Words (p. 42) "This would be but a
Gingle, if you did suppose so, and not at all serve you." Eusebius's
LAY-DERIVATIONS make a pleasant Chime with the Bishop's LAY-DEPRIVATIONS, we
heard of before: and as it happens, the Words vary but in one trifling Letter.
Now when this Gentleman will undertake to defend the latter, and ward off its
evil Consequences; I believe I shall be able, on the same or as good Grounds,
easily to defend the former, and hold up a Shield against its formidable Train
of Consequences, how tragically soever they are represented. For, methinks, the
Consequences will come out pretty much the same, and equally affect the
Business of Ordination. -- And if he could prove, that we have in fact so
mingled our Succession from Episcopacy with Lay-Derivations, as he says, the
Gingle would not serve him, nor do I know how it would hurt us. In short, when
Eusebius will undertake to prove, he is a true Christian, notwithstanding his
Lay-Baptism, I will attempt to prove, I am a true Minister of Christ,
notwithstanding any Lay-Derivation, possible in my Case, "by uniting with the
Independents." Truly, I fear, this Gentleman and his Fraternity, have mingled,
shall I say? or defiled their U^ion to Episcopacy, in as bad a sense as we have
our Succession from it, with Lay-Derivations. What a foul Mixture is Lay
Baptism and Apostolical Ordination! Is not this a mingling Heaven and Earth
together! I may return him his own Language, It is hard to say, what Foundation
you now stand on; and you might have justified your selves better upon
INDEPENDENT Principles: but only you are something too late; having all of you
for some time past agreed to set the Laity aside, as having no Part or Lot in
this Affair; so that having asserted the Right of Ordination to be, not in the
People, nor in the Presbytery, but wholly and only in the Bishop, by Christ's
Institution, you have nulled all Lay-Ordinations, and therefore all
Lay-Baptisms; the Consequence of which is, you have fairly nulled your own
Ordination, though done by an Episcopal Hand. For your Lay-Baptism was an Error
in the first Concoction, that could not be mended in the second. The
application of an Episcopal Hand has not yet the virtue of such a sovereign
Alterative, as by any secret Operation, to change your moral Constitution, and
cure your old Distemperature. -- Certainly an unbapti^'d Minister is as odd a
Concrete, as gross a Solecism, as can readily be thought of. You had better
verily have stuck to your Independent Principles: you would then have stood on
a surer Foundation, than the fruitless subsequent Act of Episcopal Ordination,
which cannot confirm a Nullity.

And now, if you would know how we can justify our selves upon INDEPENDENT
Principles, I might refer you to almost all the celebrated Authors, that have
wrote in Defense of the Reformation, Episcopal as well as others; whom you will
find leaning very much to Independent Principles, and defending the Reformation
upon this grand Principle of the Independents. That the Body of the Faithful
have all Ecclesiastical Power lodged with them, in the last Resort, for the
Security and Preservation of the Church. But perhaps it may contribute more to
this Gentleman's Satisfaction and Conviction, if I can produce something to the
purpose out of the Authors he himself has alleged against us in the present
Dispute. Let him please then to consult his own (shall I say? or rather our)
applauded STILLINGFLEET In his Rational Account of the Protestant Religion, he
has many Passages to our Purpose. I shall single out these few. See Page 53,
54. A Church -- is only a Combination of Men together, upon the belief of such
a Doctrine as necessary to Salvation; and for the Performance of those Acts of
Worship which are suitable thereto. -- We must distinguish those Things in the
Catholic Church, which give its Being, from those Things which are the proper
Acts of it, as the Catholic Church. As to this latter, the solemn Worship of
God in the way prescribed by him, is necessary; in order to which there must be
supposed lawful OFFICERS set in the Church, and Sacraments duly administered:
But THESE, I say, are rather the EXERCISE of the COMMUNION of the Catholic
Church^ than that which gives it its BEING; which is, the Belief of that
Religion, whereupon its Substance and Unity depends; and as long as a Church
retains this, it keeps its Being, though the Integrity and Perfection of it
depends upon the due Exercise of all Acts of Communion in it. -- Whatsoever
Church imposes the Belief of OTHER things as necessary to Salvation, which
were not so antecedently necessary to the Being of the Catholic Church, does,
as much as in it lies, BREAK the Unity of it; and those Churches, who desire to
preserve its Unity, are bound thereby not to have Communion with it so long as
it does so. -- These now are right Reformation-Principles: and who does not see
that these are the very Spirit of Independentism! I am one that happens to be
united with the Independents, and should know their Principles. If the Harmony
between the Doctor and us be called upon Trial, I appeal to the Judgment of Mr.
LOWTH, a zealous Episcopalian. "The immediate Result of this arguing, says he
upon these Passages (Letter to Dr. Stillingfleet, p. 67.) is -- That a Man may
be a Christian, and not a Churchmember: That the Being of the Church is not
necessary to Salvation; That the Church is a subsequent Combination for Acts of
Worship: That Church Off^^^rs are not of the Essence of the Church: -- That
Schism, which is a Breach of the Churches Union, does not relate to Church
Officers, in their Church Laws and Canons etc. These are some of the Opinions
he fastens upon the Doctor; and concludes with observing to him, Hereby you
give support and Countenance to the many Sectaries among us. Certainly he does
so to the Independents, whom this his Episcopal Adversary mentions in
particular.

The next Author I shall quote, is judicious HOOKER. Let us first attend his
Description of the Church. Seeing that the Church (says he, Eccl. Pol. p. 367.)
is a Name which Art has given to the Professors of true Religion; as they
which will define a Man, are to pass by those Qualities wherein one Man does
excel another, and to take only those essential Properties, whereby a Man
does differ from Creatures of other kinds: So he that will teach what the
Church is, shall never rightly perform the Work whereabout he goes, till in
Matter of Religion he touch that Difference, which severeth the Churches
Religion from Theirs, who are not the Church. -- Whereupon, because the only
Object, which separa^^^^ ours from other Religions, is Jesus Christ, in whom
none but the Church does believe, and whom none but the Church does worship,
we find that accordingly the Apostles do everywhere distinguish hereby the
Church from Infidels and from Jews; accounting them which call upon the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to be his Church. If we go lower, we shall but add
unto this certain casual and variable Accidents, which are not properly of
the Being, but make only for the happier and better Being of the Church etc.
If I mistake not, a great Deal to our Purpose is comprehended in this
significant Period: but I forbear Remarks. And now I undertake to vindicate our
Ordinations, howsoever we may have "mingled our Succession from Episcopacy with
Lay-derivations," upon the same or as good Principles, as judicious Hooker has
justified Lay-Baptisms upon. It may not be amiss to transcribe a few Passages
of his upon that Head, for the Entertainment of this Gentleman and the
Information of our "Vulgar Readers." (See Eccl. Pol. p. 327 etc.) If Baptism
(says he) seriously be administered in the same Element, and with the same Form
of Words, which Christ's Institution teaches, there is NO OTHER DEFECT in the
World, that can make it frustrate, or deprive it of the Nature of a true
Sacrament. -- Are not many Things FIRM, being done, although in part done
otherwise than positive Rigor and Strictness did require? Nature, as much as
is possible, inclines unto VALIDITIES and Preservations. Dissolutions and
NULLITIES of things done are not only not favored, but hated, when either
urged without Cause, or extended beyond their Reach: if therefore at any time
it come to pass, that in teaching publicly or privately, in delivering this
blessed Sacrament [of Baptism; he might as well by parity of Reason have added,
in delivering the Sacrament of the holy Supper, and in ordaining Persons to the
Ministry] some unsanctified Hand contrary to Christ's supposed Ordinance do
intrude it self to execute that, whereupon the Laws of God and his Church
have deputed others; Which of these two Opinions seems more agreeable with
Equity? OURS, that disallow what is done amiss, yet make NOT the FORCE of the
Word and Sacraments, much less their NATURE and very Substance to DEPEND on
the Minister's AUTHORITY and CALLING; or else THEIRS which def^ate, disannull,
and annihilate both, in respect of that one only personal Defect; there being
not any Law of God, which says, that if the Minister be incompetent [thro'
want of Calling] his Word shall be no Word, his Baptism no Baptism? -- He
adds (speaking of the Separatists) Such are their FUMBLING SHIFTS to enclose
the Minister's VOCATION within the Compass of some essential Part of the
Sacrament. A Thing that CAN NEVER STAND with sound and sincere Construction. --
The Fruit of Baptism depends only on the Covenant which God has made, etc.
I could gladly take the Pains to copy over much more: but this must suffice.
And now I put it to all impartial Readers to say, WHO it is, that in the
Judgment of admired HOOKER "runs into the Error of the Separatists" in the
point of NULLITY, Elutherius, or Eusebius! And in Charity to Eusebius, I once
more beseech him to read and study the Ecclesiastical Polity; not doubting but
he will find very much there, to the Confusion of his darling Scheme, and to
the Reproach of his late unaccountable Separation.

I take Leave now to recommend to him another of his own applauded Authors, I
mean Bp. HOADLY. Pray, let Eusebius consult this learned Prelate's Book before
mentioned; his famous PRESERVATIVE against the Principles and Practices of the
NONJURORS both in Church and State: and if he c^^ meet with nothing there to
confound his Schismatical Scheme, and justify Independent Principles, I will
undertake to cite Enough for the Purpose, when called upon: For I doubt not, a
very Stripling may do somewhat in this Cause, like David's cutting off the
insulting Philistine's head with his own Sword. In the Interim, will he be
pleased to accept of a few select Passages, which may suffice for the present!
And let him try what he can make of 'em. The Bishop, in his Preface, speaking
of the Subject of his following Papers (made up of three parts) says; -- The
Third concerns the very VITALS of true Religion; and is, in Truth, the Cause
between JESUS CHRIST, and Those, who, professing themselves his Followers and
his Ministers, substitute themselves in HIS Place, and assume the Authority of
their great Legislat^^ and Judge. -- The greatest Satisfaction I have -- is, in
declaring to all Christians their Right, to look into the Gospel themselves; to
depend upon CHRIST alone for their Religion, and upon his final Determination
alone, for their Salvation* and, in the mean while, to esteem it a small
Matter, to be judged of Man's Judgment: Well knowing, that NOTHING but THIS
wide and strong Foundation well laid, can effectually guard against those
Schemes, and Platforms, of a SUPERSTITIOUS TYRANNY, which may to some appear
harmless at first; but from which in Truth, the whole Dreadful Fabric of
POP^RY has by Degrees, grown up to its full Strength and Maturity. -- In the
Book it self ( Page 75, to 81.) the Bishop says; I do not love, I confess so
much as to repeat the principal Branches of their beloved Scheme [i. e. of
Church Power, and Sacerdotal Privileges] They are so different (whence soever
they come) from the Voice of the Gospel. -- When they would alarm you (as their
FELLOW LABORERS, the Papists, do) by telling you, that you cannot hope for the
Favor of GOD, but in the strictest Communion with their Church (which is the
true Church of England, governed by Bishops in a Regular Succession) that God
has himself hung your Salvation upon this Nicety; that he dispenses none of
his Favors or Graces, but by the hands of Themselves, and their subordinate
Priests; that you cannot be authoritatively Blessed, or released from your
Sins, but by Them, who are the Regular Priests; that Churches, under other
Bishops [i. e. other than those in a Regular Succession] are Schismatical
Conventicles, made up of Excommunicated Persons, both Clergy and Laity; out of
God's Church, as well as out of his Favor: I say, when such Arguments as these
are urged, you need only have Recourse to a general Answer to this whole Heap
of Scandal and Defamation, upon the Will of God, the Gospel of Christ; and the
Church, of England, in particular? You may tell them securely, that you have
not so understood the Nature of that God, who is your Governor and Judge; that
you have not so learned Christ, or the Design of his Gospel; or, even, the
Foundation of this particular part of his Church, reformed and established in
England. The following Arguments will justify you: which therefore ought to be
frequently in the Thoughts of All, who have any Value for the most important
Points.

God is just, and equal, and good: and, as sure as He is so, He cannot put the
Salvation and Happiness of any Man, upon what He himself has put it out of the
Power of any Man upon Earth, to be entirely satisfied in.

It has not pleased God, in his Providence, to keep up any Proof of the least
Probability, or moral POSSIBILITY, of a Regular Uninterrupted Succession. But
there is a great Appearance, and humanely speaking, a Certainty of the
Contrary; that this Succession has been often interrupted: especially in the
Opinion of THOSE, who maintain all Lay-Baptisms, and all Offices performed by
Persons, that either have been irregularly ordained, or have forged their
Pretensions to Ordination, to be more NULLITIES: there having been certainly a
great Number of such like Instances.

Amongst our selves particularly, the Case will admit of another Argument; --
It is very well known that, ever since the Reformation, there has been a
Regular Succession of Bishops kept up, certainly in Ireland, and probably in
England also, by the Church of ROME. -- It is as well known, that several of
the first Protestant Bishops were named by the Lay-Power, as Successors to
Bishops, who were deprived solely by that Lay-Power. Nor can there be any
Regular Su^^^ssion in the Protestant Churches, but what must come down from
those Bishops; whom yet our Adversaries must deny to have been Bishops, upon
the Account of th^se Lay Deprivations.

Ask our Adversaries therefore, first, What should we have done, upon their
Principles, for any Degree of Reformation? -- To have it from any Hands but
theirs [the Popish Bishops and Clergy] will, I fear, upon their [High Church]
Principles, give a Nullity to the whole: As this cannot be done, without
setting up Altar against Altar, and one Succession of Bishops against another.

Ask them, how we shall decide the Matter (not between our selves and them,
but) between their MUCH DEARER Friends, the Roman Catholics, and Them. -- I
have never heard yet, that this present Popish Church, in England, or Ireland,
has been condemned by our Adversaries, as NO Church, and all its Ordinances
declared NULL; and its Succession, irregular or insignificant. And yet, upon
their Principles, if the Appointment of Romish Bishops here be Regular; there
cannot be Another, in Opposition to it, Regular likewise. If the Popish Church
here, be a Church; then, these new Protestant Churches cannot be truly so, etc.

The Advocates of the Church of Rome, therefore, are so wise, as to turn these
Principles of some professed Protestants to their own Account; and delude many
weak Minds, of such as have been first deluded by our Nonjurors. -- All this
may, methinks (as he goes on, p. 87, 88.) serve to alarm our Adversaries, upon
their own Principles, about the Danger, their own Church of England is in, by
their way of Proceeding. And perhaps They, who seem to have but a very faint
Notion of the Honor of GOD, and the Design of the Gospel, any farther than
they suppose them to go, hand in hand, with their own particular Sect, and
Church, may receive the first. Impression and Suspicion of their being
mistaken, from this manifest Tendency of their own Principles, to unchurch
Themselves; and to reflect back upon their own People and Clergy, that
Excommunication and Damnation, which they are so freely dispensing abroad, all
around them.

And as I am sure (says he, p. 98.) that it is upright and honest, to speak
thus plainly; and to inculcate this upon You: So I am as sure, it is the only
certain Method of preventing, or expelling the POISON of Those, who are gone
out from us, because they were not of us.

Thus the very Bishop, that Eusebius just now made his Appeal to, has turned
all his own Artillery against him and his Party: and verily they had need have
Backs of Steel, as well as Faces of Brass, to bear such a scourge, and stand it
out after so severe a whipping. The Bishop, you see, has laid down Premises,
and drawn Conclusions, which strike as high, and as deep too, as that hated
Passage of Elutherius's; at which this Gentleman started, and made the fearful
Exclamation, " Elutherius will UNDO US ALL." I may surely return him his own
words ( p. 27.) and let him see how he likes them, coming from my hand: You
have NULLED all LAY- Ordinations, and such as DERIVE from them; and pray look
into that Affair a little critically, and see if this be not your OWN Case. --
You see what must be your own Fate; upon submitting the present Dispute to the
Decision of your chosen Episcopal Umpire. Well, I commit Eusebius to the Mercy
of the BISHOP: and if he thinks, that HIS tender Mercies are cruel, let him
blame himself for so ill-judg'd an Appeal; in which his intemperate Zeal
certainly outran his Wit.

In the Language of this celebrated Bishop (who, I must observe by the way,
seems to have altered his Judgment in these Ecclesiastical matters, since he
managed his Controversy with Dr. Calamy, against the Dissenters) I go on, and
under his Authority, I venture to accuse Eusebius and his Party, Not merely of
a Heresy against Charity, as they do the DONATISTS, who had only just the SAME
Uncharitableness, of adhering ^o the Consequences of their own Principles; But,
of a Heresy even against the very Possibility, and Nature of Things; or of
holding that, which throws Men out of the Favor of God, which way soever they
act. But I must resign these anomalous Episcopalians to the Bishop himself, for
the making out this Accusation; which he does at large, in too many Pages to be
here recited. (See PRESERV. p. 89, etc.)

I have dwelt the longer on this Part of Eusebius's Argument; because if he be
spoiled of the main piece of his Armor, we may safely leave him to work all
his other Engines, as he pleases.

I might fairly now withdraw my hand from the Table, and venture the Rest of
our Author's Dialogue, with his Friend's Letters annexed, to try their Fortune.
For, after what has been now offered, let them advance a thousand specious
Pretenses for the immutable Divine Right and absolute perpetual Necessity of
the supreme Order of Bishops; let them quote what Precedents, and Testimonies,
they please, of Men after the Apostles, though never so pious, or great; and let
'em bring what consequential Arguings, they will, from the Example of the
Apostles themselves: their own Bishop HOADLY ( Preserv. p. 93.) has taught us
to say to our Readers, If they amuse you with that POWER, which our Savior
lodged with his APOSTLES, You may answer securely, That it is impossible for
you to depend upon THIS Right, in THEM, as any thing Certain, till they prove
to you, that Every Thing spoken to the Apostles, belongs to Bishops in all Ages
of the Church. It is therefore (says he, p. 101.) your Duty, your Privilege,
and your Interest, to observe Those Passages in the New Testament, in which the
Genius, and great Design, of the Gospel, is purposely expressed; and Those in
which it is purposely and expressly declared, upon what Sort of Things Christ
will acquit, or condemn You, at the last Day. -- These will be your safe and
unmovable Retreat. And whilst you adhere to Them, you will ever be sure, that
not the least Tittle of your Salvation, or Damnation, depends upon the Will of
weak Men; but all upon God and your selves: that Human Benedictions, Human
Absolutions, Human Denunciations, Human Excommunications, have nothing to do
with the Favor or Anger of GOD. -- Therefore, Stand fast in that LIBERTY, with
which God and Christ have made you free. I shall here borrow but one Word more
from the Bishop ( p. 86.) Let this be applied to all LIKE C^ses; and it will be
a CERTAIN Rule to go by. So I leave Eusebius to wrangle it out with his Right
Rev. FATHER, on the present Argument: and pass on to the remaining Parts of the
Dialogue before us

But having so enlarged on what has first offered, I am obliged to make short
Work with the Rest* I had taken the Pains indeed to go through the whole, with
particular and large Remarks on such Passages, as at first appeared to me not
coincident with any Thing in the other Gentleman's Answer, called, The
Scripture-Bishop Examined: But upon a Review of Elutherius's VINDICATION, now
come from the Press, I find that Part of my Performance very much superseded;
and his Vindication will, in most Things that remain, serve for a sufficient
Reply, as well to his new Adversary; being easily applicable, by every
intelligent Reader to that End. In what follows therefore, to avoid Prolixity,
I shall do little more than point the Reader (...) ^he Places, where he may
find Elutherius's Answers to what Eusebius has offered.

Sect. X. For the Case of Timo^^y's Ordination by the Laying (...) of the hands
of the Presbytery, which Eusebius brings under Consideration ( page 27.) I
refer you to the Vindication; where you will find all the Reply, that needs to be
made. See VINDICATION, page 70, to 76, -- Only upon Occasion of a Passage
Eusebius has (in page 30.) I will just offer one Request to him; which is, That
he would please to adjust the affair of Presbyters joining with the Prelate in
Ordination, a little more exactly, and inform us precisely what is the Nature
of that ASSISTANCE, he says, they give him in Ordaining. For not a little may
depend upon the true stating of that critical Point.

So for the Case of Barnabas and Readiness Separation by the Laying on of the
hands of certain Prophets and Teachers, which Eusebius brings next into Debate
( p. 32.) You will find the specious Flourishes here entirely spoiled, if you
look into Elutherius's VINDICATION, where he has given a full Answer to the
Question, " What were they ordained to"? and a Solution to the pretended
"Self-Contradiction." See VINDICATION, page 76, to 80. -- Only, because
Eusebius denies that this was indeed any Ordination at all, I will just give
him the Hint, That in this he contradicts some of the Fathers; St. Chrysostom,
for instance, who asserts, that St. Paul was at Antioch ORDAINED to the
APOSTLESHIP, and that this is the sense of Acts 13. And he as well contradicts
Dr. Hammond, Dr. Lightfoot, and others. Mr. Ollyffe, in his Controversy with
Dr. Calamy, pleads this Text in favor of Reordination: which I wonder Eusebius
for his own sake should forget. -- Bishop Tailor (in his Clerus Domini, p. 54.)
speaking of Paul, says, He had the special Honor to be chosen in an
Extraordinary Way: yet he also had something of the Ordinary too; for in an
extraordinary manner he was sent to be ORDAINED in an ordinary Ministry. --
His Designation was as immediate, as that of the eleven Apostles, though his
ORDINATION was not. -- Saul upon his ORDINATION changed his Name, etc. He is
first called Paul, Act. 13.9. -- Let me add, I would fain have Eusebius give us
one single Reason, why Paul might not be properly ordained, as well as Timothy;
if he supposes there was no essential Difference between them: and if Timothy
was ordained by the Laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, why not as well
any other of the Apostolic Order, by the same hands? But whether he will allow
it to be a proper Ordination, in his peculiar Sense of the matter, or no;
Here Is certainly a Precedent for all that we mean by Ordination. Here Is an
Instance of acknowledged Presbyters separating Persons to the work of the
Ministry, and sending them forth. Now had our Adversaries as plain and evident
a Scriptural Instance of an undisputed Prelate's Separating an Apostle in the
like Case, very probably they would have triumphed in it, as an incontestible
standing Precedent for Episcopal Ordination. In the Consecration of Bishops,
this Fact is alleged as an Example (but how pertinently!) which shows the
Sense of the Church.

Sect. XI. In the next place, we are entertained with a Debate upon the
Identity of Bishops and Presbyters, as inferred from the promif^uous Use of the
Words; ( Page 34, to 38.) But the Cavils and Objections here offered by
Eusebius, were sufficiently obviated in Elutherius's Dialogue; or if not, they
are now fully answered, in his Defense of it. See VINDICATION, page 65, to 70.
And page 91 -- 93.

However, by the way, I will offer a Request to Eusebius: Whereas he observes (
p. 34.) The word Bishop has for more than 1600 years been used in a more
restrained Sense, than in the New Testament; I beg he would please to inform us
of the exact Date of this Restriction, and the precise Degree of it. For a
clear Decision of these two Cases is absolutely necessary to the support of his
Cause; Because too late a Restraint, or a Restraint only of the Name, or of a
little of the Power, will not suffice for the Foundation of a Disparity of Order.

And I observe, whereas he tells us ( p. 35.) At first -- the Imparity was
sufficiently distinguished, by the superior Order's being called by a Name
appropriate thereto, viz. Apostle, which never was used in Common, as the other
Names were; Nevertheless (I say) the Distinction is not sufficiently signified,
if this Name Apostle was never given, in the appropriate Sense of the word, to
some that he supposes to be of that superior Order. The Occasion of my
mentioning this is, It Is remarkable, that Paul and Timothy, joining together in
several Epistles, Paul in the Superscription assumes to himself the style of an
Apostle, but leaves out Timothy's apostolical Character. Now, I pray the
Reason. Must we not fetch it from that Scripture, Are all Apostles? Are all
Evangelists? -- I add, Neither was the Imparity sufficiently distinguished,
although the name Apostle might never be used in Common; BECAUSE the Word
Evangelist was certainly used as little in Common; and yet our Adversaries
plead, that Evangelists were not a distinct Order. Much less will it appear,
that the Imparity was sufficiently notify'd, if the Name Apostle was sometimes
applied in a common Sense, to such as it does not appear were of that superior
Order he speaks of, I mean of the same Class with the Twelve. If Silas be any
where honored with the Title of Apostle, it must be meant only in a common
Sense: for we read, he was only one of the chief Men among the Brethren, and
distinguished from the Apostles, when this Appellation is used in its
appropriate Sense, Acts 15.22. -- If Epaphroditus or Titus are called Apostles,
it is only as they were Messengers of the Churches. And if Timothy was an
Apostle, I demand that Eusebius show us in him the Signs of an Apostle. -- In
fine, I observe We are not sufficiently informed, That what Superiority or
Influence the Apostles, Paul and the Twelve, appear to have had over Pastors
and Churches, was the Result strictly of their Commission-Power, and not rather
of some peculiar inspired Gifts, which gave them a Pre-eminence. So that their
Example is not sufficient to establish the Doctrine of a standing, Imparity.
And then supposing a perpetual Imparity admitted, what must it be? An Imparity
of Order, or of Degree only? It Is observable, Mr. HOOKER ( Pol. p 417.) says,
The whole Body of the Church being divided into Laity and Clergy, the
Clergy are either Presbyters or Deacons. So again (p. 421.) All whom the
Church did ordain, were either to serve as Presbyters or as Deacons. Though he is
of Opinion (as he expresses it, p. 419.) Of Presbyters, some were greater, some
less in power, and that by our Savior's own Appointment. He makes the
Apostles peculiar Charge to be this, to publish the Gospel of Christ unto all
Nations, and to deliver them his Ordinances received by immediate Revelation
from Himself. Which Preeminence excepted (says he) to all other Offices and
Duties incident into their Order, it was in them to ordain and consecrate
whomsoever they thought meet etc. He tells us (p. 421.) Evangelists were
Presbyters of principal Sufficiency, whom the Apostles sent abroad, and used
as Agents in Ecclesiastical Affairs, wheresoever they saw need. Ananias,
Apollos, TIMOTHY were thus employed. -- Finally, Pastors and Teachers, what
other were they than Presbyters also? Howbeit settled in some certain Charge,
and thereby differing from Evangelists. And he uses that peculiar Phrase
elsewhere ( p. 436.) " Bishops, -- and OTHER Presbyters." So that, upon the
whole, it is plain, Mr. Hooker makes them all radically and essentially one
Order; not different Species of Ministers, having essentially diverse Rights,
Powers and Businesses, but fundamentally one and the same Order of Ministers;
though with some. Variation as to Degrees, and Ways of exercising their common
Rights and Powers, yet this merely for Order's sake. The Distinction between
Bishops and other Presbyters, he calls it a "Difference of Pastors": and only
supposes It ought to be, when they grow to any great Multitude, (p. 125. which
implies, that this Difference of Pastors is not absolutely, in all Cases,
necessary. And he has these remarkable words ( p. 124) Where the Clergy are any
great Multitude, ORDER does necessarily require that by DEGREES they be
distinguished. -- Now a mere gradual Difference, in such a Case, between
Ministers for Order's sake, perhaps few Nonconformists would oppose; and it is
certain, the Body of 'em expressed their Consent to this, when they offered to
admit And bishop USHER'S Reduction of Episcopacy. Upon this Occasion I Will give
you the sentiments of the late learned Mr. Simon Brown (Sermon upon
Ordination, p. 59.) speaking of Titus, he says, General Work was his principal
Work; not as an Officer essentially different from other Presbyters, but as an
It^^^rant Minister etc. -- And if such a general Officer were still employed in
Ordinations, and his Work esteemed more honorable than that of fixed Pastors,
and he in that Sense superior to 'em, whilst their Original Power of ordaining,
when chosen out to this Service, were acknowledged, I know None that would so
far run counter to Apostolical Practice, as to quarrel with this Office. -- I
add; So much would be consented to, by the Generality of Nonconformists, I
believe, for Peace-sake at least: although we do not hold a Superiority in some
Ministers over others to be of standing Obligation by any Divine Institution;
nor indeed do we see the same Necessity of it now, as there might be in the
Infancy of the Church; much less of a Superiority in the nature and degree of
that peculiar to the Apostles, the Reasons whereof ceased with their Persons,
and which therefore must be acknowledged purely temporary. A Priority of Order
may be allowed: but a Primacy of Sovereignty we look upon as an intolerable
Usurpation.

Eus^bius has another remarkable Passage ( p. 36.) We have no Reason (says he)
to complain for want of a clear and plain Dispersation in all necessary points
of Fath and Practice: -- and especially in this matter etc. Now here is (1) a
Concession to the Fullness and Perspicuity of Scripture, that supersedes the
Necessity of traditional Light, in matters fundamental; which confounds the
great Argument of the two Letters annexed. (2) Here Is an Implication, that
Episcopacy is one of those fundamental matters; in which he contradicts all his
own Authors. (3) Here Is an Assertion, that in this matter the Truth is
sufficiently clear from the Scripture; which is confuted by the long
Controversy about Episcopacy, between learned and good Men on both sides -- But
he adds a qualifying Proviso, to complete the Farce: "If Men will open their
Eyes." He had even as good have said, If Men would but see with his Eyes. But
then He must lend us his Glasses to help our Sight: Yet alas, such is our
Misfortune, all Men cannot see through the same Spectacles. -- To his Question
(Ibid.) Seeing there was then a superior Order, viz. Apostles, why might not
the Church afterward appropriate the Word -- Bishop -- to that Order etc I
answer (1) They might not do it, because afterward there was in fact no
superior Order, to appropriate it to. If he says, there was, I must observe,
it is gratis dictum, he has not yet proved it. (2) They need not do it, -- upon
the Reason, he assigns.
For I argue; Timothy and Titus had those CRITERIONS of Apostles, which he
mentions (viz. immediate Mission, and other Things peculiar to their Persons,)
or they had not. If not, then how does he prove Them to be of the supreme
Order? (For will he not grant, that immediate Mission was an essential stroke
in the Character of an Apostle!) But if he says they had, the Fact remains to
be proved; nor will it afford any Consequence to his Purpose. I add, It seems
strange to suppose, there should be need of distinguishing the first Planters,
when they were dead, and not when alive. -- It seems strange, that Timothy and
Titus, and others, should be called Apostles, while the Twelve were living, and
yet afterward (as they must do, by his way of representing the matter) lose
that honorable Name, the sole Name appropriate to the superior Order, and sink
down to a Name (that of Bishops) common to the inferior Order -- Eusebius's
Observation ( p. 37.) upon Act. 1.20. is very frivolous and weak; since he
allows the Word Bishop to be used at first in Common. And then, at the same
time the Apostolic Office, it is observable, was called Diaconia, ver. 2^. --
To put any Color on his Argument here, he must first prove, that the Apostles
in Reality had their Successors, in the chief Government of the Church in its
settled State; we shall not quarrel with him about the Name, if he proves the
Thing -- The Fathers using the Name Bishop in a sense distinct from that of
Presbyter, will never prove a superiority of Order; much less such a
superiority Jure Divino. -- Further, as to what he observes on the Word
Imperator (ibid.) it is obvious, that he has here very much misrepresented
Elutherius's Design in his Dialogue, p. 14. The Scope of Elutherius's Argument
there was to prove, that this Example is not a Parallel to the Case under
Consideration. For to make it so, it ought to have had in it two Terms, General
and Monarch, applied promiscuously to two distinct Officers at the same time.
Whereas, says Elutherius (ibid.) There never was, nor could be, without the
Confusion of Language, a promiscuous Use of Monarch and General, AS we find
there was of Bishop and Presbyter. -- And then, in this Case of the single Name
( Imperator, or Commander) though supposed to be at the same time promiscuously
given to a General and a Monarch, there might be an easy Distinction of them
notwithstanding, by reason of the two different Species of Government and
Business, Military and Civil: Whereas in the Case of Bishops and Presbyters,
the sort of Government, as to both, is Ecclesiastical, and indeed their whole
Work the same; which is what Elutherius in his Dialogue proceeds to prove by
several Scripture-Arguments. -- So that Eusebius certainly could have little
Temptation to glory in so small a Criticism, as he has offered: and I think
rather it is his Answer that appears "Shuffling and impertinent." -- In a
following Passage, he gives me Occasion to renew my Demand of the exact Date
abovementioned: Else if we should multiply Instances to our Purpose without
Number, whether out of Scripture or Antiquity, he would still shuffle us off
with that trifling Reply, "Your Instances are all more ancient." Pray let him
tell us what Century, and what Part of that Century, we must fix upon. One
would think, such an important Fact, as that of appropriating a Name, which had
long been applied in Common, especially if it was universal matter of Fact,
done by public agreement, must needs have some famous Witnesses to it in
History (according to the Episcopal way of reasoning) from whence the precise
Year and Day of the remarkable Event might easily be collected. I wish to see a
fair Account of it.

Sect. XII. In the next place ( p. 39.) Eusebius taxes Elutherius's Dialogue of
a "false Representation," with respect to the SOLE Power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction united in the Bishop etc. Now it were enough, for Answer, to refer
him to the Letters our Author himself has published, which make the very same
Representation. See Page 100. where the governing Powers and the Power of
Ordination are put on the same Foot without any Distinction; and governing
Powers are appropriated to the Bishop, in Exclusion of all Partners. But I will
refer him to a greater Authority; I mean Bishop Bilson, who in his Perpetual
Government of Christ's Church (p. 317.) speaks more fully to Elutherius's
Purpose; expressly denying Presbyters the public Use of the Keys, and
affirming, that this the Church of Christ allowed always, and ONLY, to Bishops.
For a further Refutation of Eusebius's Distinction of subordinate and chief
Governments, I refer to the well-known Case of Mr. Ra^tri^k. -- Elutherius
certainly stated the matter right; and this Gentleman has offered nothing but a
fanciful Distinction, without any Authority to support it: so his Charge of
Misrepresentation, by force of its own Weight falls to the Ground, but rebounds
on himself.

Next follows a Dispute about who are Successors to the Apostles, p. 40; to 44.
And here Eusebius has exposed himself by a Complication of unhappy Blunders, as
they appear to me, whereby he has in effect overthrown his whole Cause; which
might easily be shown, but that I am not willing to swell these Papers to a
needless Length. For I think Elutherius has said Enough in Answer to what is
offered here by way of Argument, in his VINDICATION. p. 91 to 103. However I
will present Eusebius with some borrowed Scraps, from Episcopal Hands, for him
to chew upon. The first is a Saying of the excellent Mr. Chillingworth, I have
met with somewhere in his Book of the Religion of Protestants. The Apostles
(says he) by laying the Foundations of the Church, were to be the Foundations
of it: and accordingly are so called in Scripture. And therefore, as in a
Building it is incongruous that Foundations should succeed Foundations; so it
may be in the Church, that any other Apostles should succeed the FIRST. -- To
which I shall add that of pious Bishop HALL ( Works p. 331.) These Tools which
serve for the Foundation, are not of use for the R^o^e. Yea, the great
Master Builder chose those workmen for the first Stones, which he meant not to
employ in the Walls. Do we not see all Christ's first Agents EXTRAORDINARY;
Apostles, Evangelists etc. -- What Church ever since boasted of such Founders?
-- Why should God begin with those He meant not to continue; but to show us we
may not always look for one Face of Things? -- So again (page 552.) We may not
either have or expect now in the Church that Ministry, which Christ set: Where
are our Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists? If we must always look for the very
same Administration of the Church, which our Savior left, why do we not
challenge those extraordinary Functions? Do we not rather think, since it
pleased him to begin with those Offices which should not continue, that herein
he purposely intended to teach us, That if we have the same heavenly Business
done, we should not be too curious in the Circumstances of the Persons? -- I
now leave Eusebius to contest the Point with Bishop Hall, and Mr Chillingworth,
whether there was any proper Succession to the Apostolic Office. Let him laugh
now, if he pleases, at the Apostles double Capacity, which helped those great
Authors to such fine Distinctions: and let him vapor over the Bishop's
Conclusion, as he has done ( p. 30.) over that of Elutherius, "being both
equally ridiculous," and to pass in his Account, no doubt, for "mere Whims of
their own Brain." I shall now add a word or two by way of Request. I desire
this Gentleman to inform me, Whether the Apostles Superintendency did not
extend over all Churches, and over Bishops, as well as Presbyters? And (...)
they be that are their Successors in this universal Superintendency? Or was
this an extraordinary Power, not designed for Continuance? I desire he will be
punctual in answering me to this: for if he says, The Apostles Superintendency,
as universally exercised, was extraordinary, and limited to their Persons, I
would fain have my Turn to laugh at a fine Distinction, that will ruin his
Cause; Or if he chooses to say, without any Distinction, That their universal
Superintendency was an ordinary and continuing Power, I shall still have the
Pleasure of seeing him confound his own Scheme, by setting up a fourth Officer
in the Church, Paramount to the other Three, which can be nothing inferior to a
POPE. -- Another Request I have to make, is this: If Apostolical
Superintendency be the sole Prerogative of Bishops, and such as necessarily
bespeaks them a distinct and superior Order in the Church, then I beg Eusebius,
who is such a mighty Solver of Difficulties, and yet such a Hater of fine
Distinctions, to inform me, How we may reconcile the Practice of his own Church
with this Scheme. Pray, Sir, be so good as to tell me what sacred Order your
Lay-Chancellors belong to; who, though it may be pretended they hold their
spiritual Courts in the Name of the Bishop, yet do receive their Commission
from the King, and act without the Bishop, and can bid Defiance to him upon
Occasion. Bishop Bedel's Case for that. -- And then, pray let me know, whether
those Deans are Apostolical Superintendents; who, especially in the Peculiars,
by Law possess and exercise a separate Jurisdiction over Clergy and Laity,
without the least Subordination to the Bishop. Certainly, Eusebius, I may on
this Occasion with a good Grace return you your own Words, ( p. 43.) and say,
It is your Business to look out a regular Authority for them, independent of
the Bishops; for your All that is dear, depends upon it. Assure your self, so
long as the Usurpations of your Lay-Chancellors and your independent Deans are
continued, it is a vain thing to wrangle about the Imparity of Bishops and
Presbyters. Let your Episcopacy be made the same in Practice, as it is
represented in Theory: Else all your artful Reasonings must pass for
impertinent Paralogisms, and Amusements for the Ignorant. Surely now you must
on your very own Principles acknowledge, that your Prel^y in the practical and
complex Notion of it (in which it should always be considered) as comprehending
those ano^^lous Officers and a Shoal of other inferior Usurpers They that have
the Curiosity to know more particularly the Names Powers and Practices of the
numerous Body of English Ecclesiastics, may consult two Pamphlets published
among us: The one entitled A brief Account of the Revenues, Pomp, and State of
the Bishops and other Clergy in the Church of England; printed Anno 1725. The
other A brief View of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction -- Addressed to Sir N Curzon
Bar. etc. London printed and Boston repr. 1733.
who are integral parts of the Episcopal hierarchy, is at the best but a mere
human Creature.

To use your own Language ( p. 41) Pray contrice now how one and the same
Commission could make the Apostles Superintendents, and their Successors (your
Bishops) not Superintendents. -- I don't wonder you seem puzzled. Consider well
before you answer: and let me beseech you to try if you can reduce the Parallel
you so incomparably speculate upon ( p. 43. etc 44.) "to the Case before us."
Pray, Sir, tell me, Does your LAY-CHANCELLOR, and does your DEAN, receive
Authority to act in Christ's Name, from the Power conferred by Christ upon the
Bishop, for their Work of governing Presbyters? Or do they derive their Power
from human Laws and Customs? If they receive their Commission from any but the
Bishop, you may then apply to these human-Creature-Governors those Words of
yours, in which you designed a Slur upon our Ordinations among your vulgar
Readers, as being performed without a Bishop, even those your Words ( p. 44.)
Without which Power and Authority in the Bishop, the most solemn Ordinations
(or Commissions, if you please, to Lay-Chancellors, etc. given) by unauthorized
Hands, would be of no more Effect, than a formal Commission signed by John of
Styles appointing Tom of Nokes Justice of the Peace So I cry Quittance: and
dismiss you, to enjoy the sweet Satisfaction of your own Speculations.

Sect. XIII. In the next place ( p. 44 to 47.) we have a Dispute about the
State of the Church of Ephesus, whether settled under a Presbyterian Form of
Government, or a Prelatical. But the Sum of what Eusebius offers here is only
Conjectures and Surmises, mere "Whims of his own Brain" His Argument is, Such a
Thing "might be" -- I see nothing that forbids; Therefore it was. Truly if he
takes the Liberty thus to make one Postulate after another, without any
rational Grounds, and to assert what he pleases, he may even conclude what he
lists; Quidlibet ex quolibet. There Is no Bound to such a Disputant. -- All that
I need to do here, is to desire the Reader to turn to the Dialogue, which this
Gentleman pretends to answer, and see whether all his rare Suppositions and
strong Assertions amount to any Thing of a just Reply to Elutherius's
Objections and Reasonings there. Vid. DIAL. page 10, 11, 12. and p. 45, to 48.
-- And then, if you want any further Satisfaction, look into the VINDICATION.
(p. 108, to 113.) Only I must crave Leave to put a Request to the Gentleman,
which is, That he would inform us particularly what he means by that critical
Passage ( p. 47.) "Paul was himself their Bishop or Superintendent;" and show
us what Force he thinks it bears in the present Argument. It looks truly as if
it were like to prove a Bone of Contention between us.

I pass to observe; we have next (from p. 48, to 53) a Debate upon that noted
Text, Matthew. 20.25, 26. which Elutherius in his Dialogue ( p. 6, ^.) had urged,
as carrying in ^ a Prohibition of all Dominion and Supremacy among the
Ministers of the Gospel. -- Now the main Thing, which Eusebius offers in Reply
to this Argument is, That if we will but allow Bishops to have a lawful Claim
to so much Authority, as the Apostles exercised (who it cannot be supposed were
so wicked, as to take upon themselves a forbidden Authority) he will contend
for no more in their behalf as Christ's Ministers. This, says he, will
sufficiently preserve their Supremacy etc -- The Bishops may keep their Mitres,
and all the Authority they now enjoy in our Church. Well, to cut short the
Dispute, I will for once grant this Gentleman the whole of his Demand, viz.
That Bishops shall have as much Authority (and no more) as the Apostles
exercised. But then it will be a Question, What was that Authority the Apostles
exercised? Did they exercise any Coercive Authority in matters of Religion? It
seems they expressly disclaim it, 2 Cor. 1.24 -- Did they exercise a Temporal
Authority, a secular Dominion over their Brethren? It seems they renounce it,
in saying, Our Weapons are not carnal. Did they hold Episcopal Courts, and
practice such Forms of Discipline, as are in the spiritual Courts of this Age?
Where, instead of the Discipline instituted by Christ, the Church-Offender is
carried from Court to Court at intolerable Charges, subjected to heavy Fines,
exorbitant Fees, or Imprisonment etc. These Objections Elutherius's Dialogue
had laid in this Gentleman's way: and I presume he had an Eye to these in that
guarded Expression, So much Authority as the Apostles exercised, we will
contend for no more in the Bishops behalf AS Christ's Ministers. Now I put it
to him to say, whether the Authority of the Prelacy, in those Points
abovementioned, be not more than what the Apostles exercised; and whether such
as exercise this Authority, do not do it as Christ's Ministers: and how they
that as Christ's Ministers do exercise more Authority, than the Apostles did,
can be justified in being so wicked as to take upon themselves a forbidden
Authority: For if this Instruction of our Lord (in Matthew. 20.) was intended (as
he says) to direct the Conduct of his Ministers and if "the Apostles have set
an Example to their Followers;" Then certainly the secular Authority of the
Bishops, and the Authority of the spiritual Courts, is a forbidden Authority;
and they must be wicked, who take it upon them. Now, Eusebius, pray be plain
and honest, and don't shuff^le in your Answer. It is your Business to prove
this a regular Authority, and vindicate the Bishops Temporal Authority and
spiritual Courts: for (to return you your own Words again) your All that is dear
depends upon it. -- Whether that Text forbids all Inequality among Ministers,
or not, this must be acknowledged, it forbids them the use of civil and
temporal Power at least; I say, the Use, as well as the Abuse, of such kind of
Power, is forbidden in those Words of Christ, Among you it shall not be so.

As for Eusebius's Remark ( p. 52.) which he speaks by way of Negation, not
Prohibition, it is a groundless Distinction. For the Apostles in part explained
our Lord's Intention, when they said, It is not Reason, that we should leave
the word of God and serve Tables. Much less Reason is there that Bishops should
leave the word of God, to serve as Lord Treasurers, as some of 'em have done,
or to serve in Parliament, as they all (but one) do. I see no possible means to
reconcile their Practice to that of the Apostles, who gave themselves
continually to Prayer and to the Ministry of the Word: nor is their Conduct
reconcilable to the Duty charged on Bishop TIMOTHY; Neglect not the Gift that
is in Thee; Meditate on these Things; give thy self WHOLLY to them; Preach the
Word, be instant in Season, out of Season. Endure Hardness, as a good Soldier
of Jesus Christ: No Man that warteth, intangleth himself with the Affairs of
this Life. These Divine Precepts and Prohibitions necessarily cashier the
Bishop of his Court-Employments, and secular Lordship. As for their criminal
Lording in Spirituals, I refer to Elutherius's VINDICATION, ( page 4, to 47.)
both for history and argument.

Eusebius's Construction of that Passage, He that is chief etc. is against the
whole Stream of Protestant Writers; who constantly apply this Text in
Opposition to the usurped Supremacy of Rome: Mr. Hooker does so in particular.
But Eusebius's Construction of it ( p. 49.) is fairly reconcilable with Peter's
Supremacy among the Apostles, and makes as much for a Pope, as for a Prelate.
And by his way of arguing in page 52d for ought I see, the Bishop of Rome may
keep his Crown, as well as any other Prelate his Mitre, and all the Authority
spiritual and temporal he now enjoys in the World. If the Bishops of England
are " Lords by the King's Courtesy" (as he observes p. 53.) I subjoyn, the
Bishop of Rome is more than that by the Courtesy of many Kings, and once was so
even of our own for many Ages. In which Remarks, my Aim is to discover this
Gentleman's Mistake by what is called REDUCTIO ad ABSURDUM; and to caution him,
that he be not found at last in the Tents of Rome, whither his Argument has so
palpable and direct a Tendency. -- It puts me in Mind of a remarkable
admonitory Passage in a Letter of Bishop HALL'S to (Archbishop) LAUD: God
cries (says he) with Je^^; WHO is on my Side? Who? Look at last out of your
Window to Him, and in a resolute Courage cast down the Jez^bel, that has
bewitched you.

It Is hardly worth while to make any Observations on Eusebius's learned
Management of the Argument ( page 50, 51.) where he is "trying the matter in
another Light." For as to the Doctrine asserted by Elutherius (Dial. p. 38.)
That the Christian Church being founded on Christ'. Resurrection, there could
be no Ministers nor indeed Members of this Church, before it had a Being; He
has the Happiness to be able to produce good Episcopal Authorities for it. Dr.
Stillingfleet is fully in the Opinion: See Irenicum, p. 210, -- 218 -- So
Bishop Lloyd (Sermon. on Act. 2.42.) tells us, That the Disciples, when Christ
administered the Supper to them, were not then in Orders, but were Laymen; for
(says he) it was before our Lord's Death, and he did not ordain them till after
his Resurrection. -- This is enough to show that Elutherius's Doctrine is no
peculiar Presbyterian Tenet: and therefore whatever Conclusions Eusebius
pretends to draw from it, they can no more be turned to the Prejudice of our
Cause, than of his own.

Thus I have gone through the Dialogue between Eusebius and Elutherius; bestowing
all the Remarks, that could be though it needful: and must say upon the whole, I
believe, every judicious and unprejudiced Reader will easily concur with me in
this Reflection, That Eusebius's Conference has very little answered the Title
given it; for ELUTHERIUS appears as yet in sound Health and Vigor, free from
all perceivable Symptoms of ENERVATION: and need be in no Haste to fly this
redoubted Champion.

Sect. XIV. I observe, Philalethes is sensible (by what he says in the Close,
p. 53.) that Eusebius had made many Omissions in his Examination of
Elutherius's Dialogue (only nibbling at a few Passages here and there) and
therefore for a further Answer to it, refers his Friend Attalus to the LETTERS
he had lent him. -- But what need of those Letters to satisfy Attalus, when
Eusebius's Arguments in the Conference had so satisfactorily solved all his
Scruples, and poured in upon him such irresistible Conviction; as to engage him
instantly in the Resolution of "returning to his Parish Church" without any
more Ado, and to transport him suddenly into the Height of Bigotry! -- Truly
it looks, I must profess, very odd and ridiculous, to make the Conference shut
up with so surprising an Epilogue. Nor would I give a Fig for a Thousand such
hasty and passionate Converts; immediately commencing uncharitable Zealots,
inspired with the narrow and hot Spirit of a Party: although Eusebius (it seems)
thinks his Pains well recompensed by this Resolution of Attalus, his old Friend
-- Well, I leave 'em now to lay their Heads sweetly together, and please
themselves, like true Lovers of Christian Peace and Charity, with railing at
Dissenters, and uniting in the common Cry of the furious Herd, Better a Papist,
than a Presbyterian!

I find but one Thing further, that deserves any Notice; and that is an
OBSERVATION Philalethes merrily suggests by way of Banter ( p 54) which yet
some may think is in part too true to make a Jest of. The Gentleman here seems
indeed to have struck upon one of the cardinal Distempers of his Church's
Constitution; namely, SIMPLE Presbyters, stripped of the useful ministerial
Powers of Ordination and Government, to furnish dignified Officers with an
overgrown Power, of little Significance to the main Ends of the Ministry, and
comparatively useless, as being stretched to an extravagant Extent, "beyond the
Sphere of human Activity," and encumbered too with Abundance of civil
Avocations. Verily we look on this part of the Constitution, SIMPLE Presbyters,
as exceptionable almost as any Thing in the Church of England. For, as to
Bishops, i. e. such in whom those Powers of ordaining Ministers, and governing
the Church, are united; let us but have Plenty enough of 'em (a Bishop to every
Parish, if they will) and we are content: Or if they must be more general
Officers, we could yet submit to them upon Occasion; provided their Episcopacy
be duly limited, so as to be a mere Presidency of Order, and to leave the other
Presbyters in full Possession of the Powers inherent in their Pastoral Office.

Indeed the Prelates, our Adversaries plead for, are quite of a different Cast;
environed with such peculiar Circumstances, as make them obnoxious to great
Exceptions: and truly the whole Model of their beloved Hierarchy appears to me
in such an unproportion'd and disjoynted Condition, as exposes it to just and
insuperable Objections. Suffer me to give you a brief View of it, according to
the best Accounts I can obtain. Without descending to every Particularity, take
these general Hints

You must observe then, in the Church of England, the DEACONS leaving their
proper Work of serving Tables, do for a short Season officiate as a kind of
Half-Priests; being admitted to baptize, as well as preach, by the Bishop's
License, but excluded from consecrating the Eucharist: And the PARISH PRIESTS,
are in point of Power and Practice, little more than Half-Ministers; having no
Hand in the Business of Ordination, subject to the Impositions of Superiors in
matters of Government, and debarred all public and formal Exercise of
Ecclesiastical Discipline.

Again observe, Here the Presbyters are held to be all Jure ^ativo on a Level,
in regard of ministerial Power, as being of one and the same Order: yet there
are RECTORS, or Parsons of Parishes, that have other Presbyters in
Subordination to them, as their Curates or Deputies, who are de facto
controlled by their Masters at pleasure, and allowed to do nothing of
Importance without their Leave. And there are ARCHDEACONS, so called, though not
of the Order of Deacons, but Presbyters, who hold their Courts, and are
Superintendents over the inferior Clergy in their respective Districts.

Observe again, Here the Bishops are asserted to be all of one Order and equal
Authority; yet Two of these, possessing Metropolitan Sees, are named
ARCHBISHOPS, and the rest of the Prelates at their Consecration take a solemn
OATH OF DUE OBEDIENCE to them, in their respective Provinces. One is Primate of
England; the other of all England.

Again, here Bishops and Presbyters are doctrinally held to be two different
Orders: and yet are practically blended togeer in several Respects. For in the
Church of England there are Presbyters having Government over Presbyters; as in
the Case of the Cathedral DEAN who claims and exercises Jurisdictions, in
certain Points, uncontrollable by the Bishops; and in the Case of Archdeacons,
"who act (so Dr. Edwards observes) as Bishops, without Control." Yet neither
of these is of the Order, to which that kind of Government (I mean the
Government of the Clergy) is pretended to be appropriated. -- I omit
subordinate Officials, Commissaries, etc.

Yea, here are Some of the very LAITY exercising Episcopal Powers over the
inferior sacred Orders; and even the Rectors of Parishes, though claiming
something of Pastoral Authority, must with an implicit Faith obey the spiritual
Courts, under the Conduct of those irregular Ecclesiastics: who were never
heard of in Antiquity, about which our Adversaries so loudly din us in the Ear
continually, but are of novel Invention.

Here the BISHOPS have the Honor to be temporal Princes, Members of the House
of Lords; but are scarce any better than mere titular Administrators of
Church Discipline: though pretended to be sole Pastors of large Diocesses, at
least the chief Governors; yet seem really to stand for little more than
Ciphers, in the Ecclesiastical Courts. -- Here are CHANCELLORS, mercinary
Laymen, yet spiritual Lords; having in fact the Power of Excommunication, and
Absolution (two of the most important Branches of Ecclesiastical Judgment)
lodged in their hands; exclusive of the Parochial Clergy, and (as it seems)
unaccountable to their Diocesans: and the Forms of Proceeding in their Courts
are such (so Bishop Burnet complains) as have in a great measure enervated all
Church Discipline. And further here are EXEMPT Presbyters, in the Quality of
Deans, practicing Episcopal Authority (though in Contradiction to their
Principle, says Bishop Burnet) independent on the Bishops, in the P^CULIARS (so
called) which are evidently Imperium in Imperio.

In fine, the KING is according to our English Constitution the sole Fountain
of all Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical: and Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and
other ecclesiastical Persons, have NO MANNER of Jurisdiction, but BY and under
the King's Majesty; who is supreme Head of the Church of England, in
Contradistinction to the Pope of Rome, and is final Judge of Controversies in
all Things and Causes spiritual.

This is a summary, and I think true State of Matters of Fact in the
established National Church. And who now can forbear admiring the goodly Order,
the rare Symmetry, Harmony and Consistence in this Ecclesiastical Economy!
What other than a Golden Foundation must this beautiful and noble
Superstructure be thought to stand upon! No Wonder, we hear the venerable
Hierarchy so often gloried in, as the best constituted in the World. Nor need
any man wonder, that when this incomparable Constitution became well
established and secure, it was thought fit to expunge that remarkable Passage
in some ancient Editions of the Liturgy, as grown an unnecessary and obsol^te
Article of Prayer; which however, because I would not abruptly dismiss our
Episcopal Dialogue, without the Decency of an agreeable Conclusion, and I can
think of none better at present, I shall take Liberty to repeat (as still hope
I may with Propriety, and shall with Seriousness do) on this Occasion: -- From
the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and from all his detestable Enormities, Good
Lord! deliver us.

AMEN.
PART II. Remarks on Two LETTERS, in Defense of the Episcopal Government of the
Church.
Sect. I. WHen I was perusing these Letters, and came to that Marginal Note the
Author gives us ( p. 87.) I could not help admiring at the Conduct of
Philalethes, in palming them on the World, as " written by a LAYMAN": Unless by
a Figure, he intended to transfer this Character to a dear Friend of his, who
doubtless was mightily pleased with that shrewd OBSERVATION in the Close of the
Dialogue (offered as a Consequence upon Elutherius's Argument) That the
Presbyters of the Church must be mere human Creatures, if their Bishops at best
be but such. ( p. 54) -- I take Occasion to say here, That his Flirt at the
Presbyterians (as I take it) in the following Words, Since all their Power is
derived from such Creatures, it must be merely human still, and not of Christ's
appointing; This, I say, being but obscure as to the Reference, and not
expressly levelled at us, it escaped my Notice at first; and I now forgive it,
since he makes so light of a Lay-Character, and appears so willing to share
with us in the Odium of a Lay-Derivation.

I find little of solid Argument, in these Letters, that is new, and not already
obviated in the foregoing Papers. However, that my Rev. Brother Layman may have
no Color for Complaint of being treated as "too contemptible a Person to be
our Adversary in this Controversy," I will consider the principal Contents of
his Letters; which being made public without any particular Direction, every
one may claim a Right to make what Return he thinks fit unto them.

The first Letter, we perceive, had an Answer made unto it by the Gentleman it
was sent to in Manuscript; which, I Am humbly of Opinion, it would have been but
a piece of common Justice in Mr. Layman, to have published at the same time, or
else to have suppressed his second Letter, in Reply thereto. Nevertheless, we
will follow him in his own Path, and even take Things as we find them.

Sect. II. I am glad to find this Gentleman declaring ( p. 5^.) We agreed upon
the holy SCRIPTURES for the RULE, by which this Controversy should be DECIDED:
and cannot but highly approve the Caution he expresses and inculcates, L^st
mistaking that for the SENSE of this Rule, which is NOT, we set up OUR OWN
Schemes and Imaginations, instead of the Divine Appointments. To prevent this,
he lays down two Rules for the right interpreting of Scripture.

His first Rule, i. e. "Comparing one Passage with another" etc. is not only a
very just and reasonable one (as he says) but the most effectual and
satisfactory. This is the Rule with all true Protestants: by this Method the
Reformers confounded the Papists, and in this Way the primitive Fathers were
wont to confute Heretics. And if in this way the Cause of the New England
Churches cannot be supported, we are willing to lose it. Bishop Jewel quotes
Ambrose, saying, Interrogemus Petrum; Interrogemus Paulum; si Verum volumus
invenire Let us hear and compare what Peter and Paul say, if we would find out
the Truth. -- "Scripture is the Interpreter of it self," says Chrysostom. This
was also the Judgment of an older Father than these, I mean Irenaeus, The
lawful and securest Exposition of Scripture, says he, is according to the
Scriptures themselves. (Vid. Dr. Edwards, Remains. p. 131.

Sect. III. As for our Author's other Rule ( p. 58.) That in doubtful Cases we
(...) choose that Interpretation of Scripture, which is most agr^^ble to the
(...) and unanimous Sense and Practice of the (...) of God (...), I shall offer
the following Remarks upon it: which will be a full answer to all th^^ he has
advanced in support thereof.

In the first place, let it be observed: If we are in doubtful Cases to form
our Judgment by the Sense and Practice of the Church from the Beginning, this
second Rule appears to me coincident with the first: for the Beginning must
take in the Times of Christ and his Apostles; which the Scriptures only give us
an authentic and sufficient Account of. There are no Interpretations of
Scripture, out of Scripture, truly from the Beginning, that I know of: and
therefore none necessary to be believed (...) giving us the genuine Sense of
Scripture. If the Beginning ^^st be taken into the Account, we may well stop at
the Scriptures; which deliver to us the fullest and truest Reports of ^^at. Yet
if there be any Tradi^i^e Interpretations of Scripture, let 'em be produced,
and proved to be of Apostolical Derivation: We are ready to receive the Sense
of Scripture, upon the Authority of true Original Tradition. But where is this
to be found, save in the Bible it self! If then we must recur to the Beginning
(without which indeed it were absurd, to pretend to the universal Sense of the
Church) by Consequence we must content our selves with the Scriptures, as the
ONLY Rule to judge by in all Controversies of Religion, arising among such as
believe the Scriptures: and those that cannot thus be ended (i. e. by
Scripture, without the Help of Fathers and Traditions) are not necessary to be
believed, one way or other. So determines the learned Chillingworth. (Relig. of
Prot. p. 102.) And our Reason hereof (says he) is convincing; Because nothing
can challenge our Belief, but what has descended to us from CHRIST by Original
and Universal Tradition: Now NOTHING but Scripture has thus descended to us;
Therefore nothing but Scripture can challenge our Belief.

This now destroys Mr. Layman's specious Pretense of the primitive Church's
being a SAFE WITNESS, in what Sense the Apostles would have themselves to be
understood. For herein He goes upon the Supposition of two Things, neither of
which are to be granted as undoubtedly true.

First, it supposes that the primitive Church certainly know, and unanimously
agreed, in what Sense the Apostles would have the obscure places in their
Writings to be understood. Whereas in fact there appears no such Uniformity of
Judgment among the Ancients, as to the Meaning of Scripture in doubtful places,
nor Harmony of Sense and Practice in many Matters relating to the Church, it is
Worship, Discipline, and Government. Whatever Advantages (as our Author
insinuates) s^^y were under, not to mistake the Apostles Meaning, above us at
this Distance: yet it must be acknowledged, that the Fathers differed among
themselves about the Interpretation of many Texts of Scripture, and in as
important Points as those disputed among Protestants

In this ^ow de^^^ed Point of Episcopacy, if the Fathers be con^^^^^d as (...)
of Scripture, either there was no universal (...), o^ it is manifestly in
favor of Presbyterian Parity. I am free to challenge Mr. Layman, to produce
the universal Consent of ancient Commentaries, for his Doctrine of the Divine
Right of Bishops, a an Order superior to Presbyters, and esteemed a FUNDAMENTAL
of Religion; as ( p. 84) he says it was in those primitive Times: For I Am
persuaded, he will be hard put to it, to advance so much as the Shadow of a
single Testimony to it in any ancient Expositor. So great and absolute a
Stranger is this wild Opinion to all Antiquity.

And if we consider the Fathers as Witnesses to Matters of Practice, though it is
not to be denied, that those who lived in or nigh the Apostles Time, were the
most likely Persons to know the Truth of Facts, and the most proper to report
them, and might as Historians challenge a common Credit with us, in Case it
were evident, that their Care to inform themselves aright was equal to their
Opportunities, and that they agreed in their Reports, and that their Writings
have been delivered down to us, in their original Purity and Integrity, without
material Depravations, Losses and Defects: which is another Supposition, the
Gentleman builds upon; for how else can the primitive Church be pleaded as a
safe Witness! Yet what say judicious Inquirers, on these Heads? We plainly see,
(says Dr. EDWARDS, in his Discourse concerning the Fathers, p. 136.) that some
of the ancient Writers were not diligent enough in enquiring into the true and
exact Accounts of Things; but instead of that contented themselves with a
superficial Notice of them, and were ^areless, and took Things upon Trust.
Wherefore (says he) though there is nothing more common than to make use of the
Fathers Names and Testimonies, yet we have Reason to conclude that nothing is
more uncertain and preca^ious.

This will appear in a more convincing Light, if we consider through whose hands
the Fathers Writings have come down to us; even such as have used their utmost
Art to make them speak the Language of Rome. And therefore none are louder in
boasting of the Fathers, as their Witnesses, than the Popish Doctors; because
having taken such Care to make the Fathers their own, they think they may
safely shroud themselves under their Authority.

Hear those just Remarks of good Bishop HALL ( Works p. ^18*) upon the Grounds
of the Papists Confidence in appealing to the Fathers. -- Our Adversaries (says
he) knowing of themselves (that which Tertul^ian says of all Heresies) That if
Appeal be made to the sacred Bench of Prophets and Apostles, they cannot
stand; remove the Suit of Religion ^ra^tily, into the Court of the Fathers. --
There be two things, that give them heart in this Provocation: One, the
Bastardy of false Fathers; the other, the Corruption of the true. What a
Flourish do they make with usurped Names? Whom would it not amaze, to see the
frequent Citations of the Apostles own Canons, Constitutions, Liturgies,
Masses, -- Epistles decretall, of Clemens, -- and an hundred other Bishop holy
and ancient: Most whereof have crept out of the Vatican or Cloisters: -- that I
may say nothing of those infinite Writings, which either Ignorance, or
Wilfulness, has fathered upon every of the Fathers. -- This Fraud is more
easily avoided. -- Most Danger is in the secret Corruption of the true and
acknowledged Issue of those gracious Parents; whom through dose and crafty
handling, the, have induced to belie those that begot them, and to betray their
Fathers, either with Silence, or false Evidence. Plainly, how are the honored
Volumes of faithful Antiquity, BLURRED, INTERLINED, ALTERED DEPRAVED, by
subtle Treachery; and made to speak what they meant not? -- Hence those
Fathers are some-where not OURS: what Wonder? While they are not THEMSELVES. --
Hinc Origo Mali. Hinc ^e Lachrymae. And now after all the Protestant Labors to
restore the Fathers to their primitive Purity, by conferring various Copies
etc. and notwithstanding all the Fidelity and Care used by our Translators,
that " have taken so much la^dable Pains of late to make 'em speak ENGLISH," it
remains uncertain whether any of those Writings are all-over genuine, and free
from sp^rious Words and Passages: So that here is no possible Sure-Footing.

But admit they be genuine and of good Credit; yet where is the Consent of
Antiquity, so much talked of! Was there a perfect Uniformity of Practi^e, among
the primitive Churches? It appears not in the Histories of those Times. And
what is it Chrysostom says (How. in Ma^th. 49.) He that would know which is the
true Church of Christ, how shall he come to know it in the Similitude of so
GREAT CONFUSION, but only by the Scriptures.

But, again, supposing these ancient Authors in their Accounts of Facts,
reported nothing of a Variety of Principles and Practices in the primitive
Church; yet how does this give us Assurance of an actual Uniformity, or prove
any Tradition Apostolical by the universal and unanimous Suffrage of the Church
of God from the Beginning! For Worthy Bishop HALL complains, not only that the
ancient Witnesses have been corrupted, but some of them purged to DEATH. And
that is the Complaint of Dr CAVE ( Epist. before A^tiq^. Christia.) There are
only some few scattered Handfuls of the primitive Writings left: So fatally
mischievous (says he) was the Carelessness of those, who ought to have been the
Guardians of Books and Learning in their several Ages, in suffering the Records
of the ancient Church to perish. We have been robbed of the Records of the
first Times of Christianity, whereof scarce any Footsteps do remain." And
elsewhere (Pref. to Antiq. Apostol.) he laments " the irreparable Loss of the
primitive Records, which the Injury of Time has deprived us of; the Substance
being gone, and little left us but the SHELL and CARCASS. -- Now if this be the
Case, I cannot but wonder that any Persons of good Sense and Judgment can allow
themselves to talk of the universal Consent of Antiquity, the unanimous
Suffrage of the primitive Church etc. and make that a Standard of Orthodoxy,
which is but a mere U^opian Fancy, a visionary Illusion, and no Reality. The
Suffrage of the primitive Church in any Case must necessarily be very defective
and imperfect, if so much of the ancient Records are lost, that we have nothing
left us but the Shell and Carcass. And here, by the Way, it is a good
Observation of Dr. EDWARDS ( Rem. p. 139.) Perhaps it is by the particular and
overruling Providence of God, that there are so few ancient Writings left,
that thereby the Authority of the holy Scriptures may be more attended to and
relied upon by us. To which I will add that of the eminent Archbishop TILLOTSON
( Rule of Faith, Fol. Vol. I. p. 678.) And that no material Corruptions have
crept into those Books (the holy Scriptures) we know by better Arguments than
Oral Tradition, even by the Assurance we have of God's vigilant Providence; and
from a moral Impossibility in the Thing, that a Book so universally dispersed,
and translated into so many Languages, and constantly read in the Assemblies of
Christians, should have been materially corrupted, so as that all those Copies
and Translations should have agreed in those Corruptions. And this Reason S^.
Austin (Ep. 48) gives of the Preservation of the Scriptures entire, rather than
any other Book; if Mr. S. likes it not, he may call St. Austin to account for
it.

Upon the whole, I cannot but sincerely join with Mr. Layman, in putting my
self under the Conduct of those sacred Texts, Jer 6.16 Cant. 1.8. -- Ask for
the old Paths -- Go thy way forth by the Footsteps of the Flock. But I differ
from him exceedingly, when he thinks, that God seems here to point out his
second Rule to us; i.e. To take the primitive Church for a safe Witness, in
what Sense the Apostles would have themselves to be understood, in doubtful
places of Scripture* For this would be a setting up human Tradition, to
ascertain the Sense of Divine Writ: which is quite opposite to the Scope and
Spirit of those Texts; and sets the Old Testament against the New, which tells
us how our Savior dealt severely with the Scribes and Pharisees on this very
head; their imposing the Traditions of the Elders, and teaching for Doctrines
the Commandments of Men. He corrects their Traditional Interpretations of the
Law, by referring 'em to the original Institution and Practice, as recorded in
Scripture. It was not so from the Beginning, says He: Search the Scriptures. --
That now is asking for the old Paths; Inquiring out God's Ways, published by
Moses and the Prophets. (Compare Jer. 2.17. and 18.15 and Mal 2.8.) That Is
going forth by the Footsteps of the Flock; attending to the Examples of the
holy Patriarchs, and others, graced with honorable Testimonies in
Scripture-Story; and being Followers of them, who through Faith and Patience
inherit the Promises. -- Yet this must be taken with a Limitation: such as that
the Apostle makes in propounding himself for a Pattern; 1 Cor 11.1. Be ye
Followers of me, even as I also am of CHRIST. He adds, Now I praise you,
Brethren, that you remember me (my Doctrine, as well as Example) in all things,
and keep the ORDINANCES, as I delivered them to you. -- For I have received of
the LORD, that which also I delivered unto you. (Compare Chap. 15.2.) Here then
is our Rule, to follow them who follow CHRIST; and they are said to be
Followers of Christ, who keep the Ordinances, which the APOSTLES received of
the Lord, and have delivered unto us, i. e. in their inspired Writings. This is
the true Tradition, which we may safely follow: This, the Standard, to which we
must reduce our Belief and Practice in Religion; and not entertain the Doctrine
or Example of others, whether Ancients or Moderns, without bringing 'em to this
sacred Test, the written Tradition of the Apostles. The Papists indeed are for
an Oral Tradition; and by this Means they stamp all their novel Opinions and
Practices, with the venerable Name of Antiquity. Agreably Bishop JEWEL
observes, There is no Toy so vain and fabulous, but they are able by their
Cunning to bring it lineally, either from Christ, or his Apostles, or from one
or other of the ancient Fathers. Those Traditional Doctors, it is well known,
have been the notorious Corrupt^rs of Religion. Tradition was the grand Cry of
the ancient Heretics: This was the constant Cant of the Pharisees; and has
been the Pretext made use of in every Age, to color over the Whims of those
that would be wise above what is written. I am sorry to hear any Protestants
joining with Pharisees and Papists in this Noise and Din about the Tradition of
the Elders, the Suffrage of the primitive Church; as if the Voice of Antiquiry
were necessary to settle the Sense and supply the Defects of Scripture, and
Orthodoxy were to be determined by Votes. Mr. Layman's Primitive Church a safe
Witness, is but another Phrase for the Popish Oral Tradition; for though it be
written now, it was but Oral a good while: and so the Arguments of Protestants
against that Point of Popery, may in a great measure be turned against him. For
my part, I am not for professing the Protestant Religion upon Popish
Principles: and should be ashamed of any Opinion, that cannot be defended but
upon a Principle, that disgraces the Scripture, reflects on the Wisdom and
Sovereignty of Christ, as Lawgiver to his Church, and tends to overset the main
Pillar of the Reformation; For I look on the Protestant Cause to stand on this
Basis, That the word of Christ is the only Rule of Faith, which every Man is at
Liberty to judge of for himself. And I must freely confess, I had rather
mistake in some Things of lesser Consequence (for I am in no Danger of falling
into any damnable Heresies) in the way of a sincere resolute Adherence to the
Word of Christ as my ONLY Rule; than resign my Reason and Conscience to the
Conduct of ancient Fathers, and receive their Dictates with an implicit Faith
and Obedience, under the fond Notion of their being SAFE Witnesses of the
Apostles meaning in doubtful Cases. The BIBLE is the Religion of Protestants;
If this be the Ground of our Faith, and Model of our Worship and Practice, our
Religion will be Divine, and we shall truly walk in the old Paths, the good
Way, the Way of Safety and Happiness: Whereas, so far as we build on Traditions
of Men, our Faith will be but human, our Religion vain, and our Path full of
Snares. Bishop JEWEL has that excellent Passage in his admirable Answer to the
Jesuit Def. Apol. p. 619.) Therefore we think it better to examine and try
the Grounds of your Religion by the Word of God, that is one, and uniforme, and
endures for ever; than by your Touch of Rome, that is so uncertain, and so
mutable, and so often has deceived us. S Cyprian says, Si ad Divinae
Traditionis Caput and Originem revertamur, cessat Error humanus: If we return
to the Head and Original of the heavenly Tradition (which is the Word of God)
all human Error gives place. And elsewhere ( Ser. on 1 Pet. 4.11.) the Bishop
utters himself in the Language of a true Protestant, in some very pertinent
Observations; which I shall take the Pleasure to transcribe, and are highly
worth the Readers Attention. He observes; Christ says, All Things which I have
heard of my Father, I have delivered unto you: -- and, whereas the Pharisees
and Sadduces had moved the Questions of Divorcement, and the Resurrection, he
never had Recourse unto the RABBINES, but always to the WORD of the Lord. --
Basil does say, That that Man, which dares put to or take away any thing from
the Scriptures of God, is either a feeble Christian, or a notable arrogant
Fellow. To put to the Word of God the Inventions of Men, what other Thing may
it seem, than to mingle new Wine, not with old Wine, but with Wine that is
dead, and with Lees or Dreggs? and to join Light with Darkness, a wild Beast
with a Man, a Man with God? -- For although very much by the Judgment of all
Men is to be given to the Fathers, yet were they Men, and might err. Truly,
to speak nothing else of them, they did oftentimes VERY ill agree among
themselves about VERY great and weighty Matters. But the Word of God is sure
and firm, and certain, and appointed for every Time. -- O if the Word of the
Lord might be heard, among so many ^lamours, and in so great a hurly burly: If
we would suffer God himself to sit as Judge in his own Case, the Matter would
be passed over with less Tumult a great deal, and more easily might we agree
about the whole Matter. Wherefore, if all the Worship of God, all Godliness,
all Religion, be to be sought out of the Word of God: If the Institutions of
Men have miserably PERVERTED all Things in all Times; let us, my Brethren, unto
whom the Office of Teaching is allotted, consider how DANGEROUS a thing it is
to speak more: and let all, who will be, and will have themselves accounted to
be Christians, remember how DANG^ROUS a thing it is to believe MORE. Let us not
be wedded too much to oar own Wit: let us not be wedded too much to the
Fathers and Forefathers. -- When we shall be placed before that dreadful
Judgement-Seate, when all Things shall burn, and the Angels of God shall
tremble, to what Fathers, to what Decrees of our Forefathers, shall we Wretches
then appeal? We shall then have Refuge to CHRIST alone; then shall we use
the Aid and Word of Christ alone. Wherefore let us not be of so secure a Mind
in so great a Matter: Our Life, our Soul, our Salvation, is the Thing in hand.
Thus in the Sermon. And the Bishop in his Defense of it against Dr. Cole's
Exceptions ( Reply, p. 44) addresses himself to him in that pathetick manner: O
Master Doctor, let us lay aside all Self-will and Contention, and have
Recourse only unto the Truth, that God has revealed to us in his holy Word.
For thereby shall ye be able to know whether the Church do right, or no. And
thereby shall ye be able to reform her, if she happen to do amiss. For it is
possible the Church may err; but it is not possible the Scriptures may err.
And the Scriptures of God have Authority to reform the Church; but I never
heard that the Church has Authority to reform the Scriptures. -- To conclude
(says he) like as the Errors of the Clock be revealed by the constant Course
of the Sun; even so the Errors of the Church are revealed by the everlasting
and infallible Word of God.

Mr. Layman gives me Occasion, by what he says ( p. 88.) to inquire of him,
Whether he thinks he can as heartily join with this Rev. Protestant Father, as
I do? And whether he will say, and how he can make it appear, that "These
Passages are not at all inconsistent with his way of Reasoning"? And he gives
me occasion to inquire of him also, Whether he thinks, when Bp. Jewel was for
trying the Protestant Cause only by the Scriptures, and so vehemently declined
the Authority of the Fathers (not without some Reflections on their Memory, as
sometimes very ill agreeing among themselves, and that about very weighty
Matters, etc.) the secret Reason at the Bottom was, "Because he was afraid of
their Authority"? -- That he was not so in Reality, is evident from his
Controversial Pieces, against the Popish Opinions, which are full of Quotations
from the Fathers. The true Reason then must be, not because he distrusted his
Cause, and was afraid, but because he had a mean Opinion, of the Authority of
the Fathers in any important religious Disputes. He was upon Principle against
TRADITION, as a uncertain, unsafe, and dangerous thing, to be set up for a Rule
in interpreting of Scripture. And therefore, when he controverts with the
Popish Doctors on the Foot of Tradition, it is not to be understood as done of
Choice, as thinking it the best Method to issue the Controversy; but only of
Constraint, and with a View to quell their deceitful Vaunts of Antiquity, by
beating them at their own Weapons* Now just the same Principle and the same
View are Protestant Dissenters governed by, in the Episcopal Controversies. If
they decline the Authority of the Fathers, it is because they think it contrary
to the natural Fitness and Reason of Things, to refer a Divine Cause to human
Arbitration, and set up a fallible Judge to determine for them in Matters of
Conscience. However, they have sometimes submitted to contest the Points in
Debate, on the Foot of Tradition, but then their principal View herein has been
to confront their Adversaries, in the way of an Ad^^ss to their avowed
Principles, commonly termed Argumentum (...) h^minem: which is an Argument
drawn from an indirect and insufficient Medium, it the Opinion of him that uses
it, not affecting the Merits of ^he Cause; but designed chiefly to silence; the
Opposer, and ^onvince him that there is a Necessity of putting the Dispute on a
different Issue. -- In this way much has been done, to baffle our Episcopal
Adversaries, by a variety of Hands; who have exerted themselves to good
Purpose, on one Occasion and another: Such as Owen, Baxter, Boyse, Pierce, and
others among the Dissenters; Jameson, Lauder, Anderson, and others among the
Scottish Ministers; with Stillingfleet and Edwards, among the Church of England
Divines: Not to mention any Essays, that have been written in New England. All
which Writers, if they don't prove, that we have the justest Pretensions to
Antiquity for our Hypothesis, yet do demonstrate thus much, That our
Adversaries Boasts of "PLAIN Testimonies to the Divine Right of Episcopacy, as
an Order superior to Presbytery, and of the Government of the Church by a
Succession of Bishops from the Apostles being a NOTORIOUS, UNIVERSAL, and
GLARING matter of Fact," are but vain Boasts of s^^guine Persons, that have not
had Opportunity to ripen their S^^dies in Antiquity, or have never had
Impartiality enough to look into and examine Things as they ought. However, at
least, the numerous Controversial Writings of so many learned and pious Men on
both sides of the Question, must needs be allowed by modest Persons, certainly
to demonstrate this, That it is a difficult Thing to come at the true Sense of
the Fathers, even to an industrious and teachable Inquirer, and that it is next
to impossible for unlearned Men to become acquainted with it; notwithstanding
our Author's Insinuations to the contrary, p. 87. -- This Gentleman observes (
p. 91.) That setting his Postulata aside (which shall be mentioned by'n'by) we
may w^^ngle on upon SCRIPTURE without End: My Design in them (says he, to his
Adversary, p. 92.) was to fix you, that we might come to a fair Stating of the
Case, and bring the Matter to a short Issue: But that would not serve your
Turn; you was of the Mind to play a little longer upon the Identity of Names
and Ambiguity of Words. Now, for my part, I cannot apprebend Mr. Layman could
have any other View himself than this, in diverting the Scent, and carrying us
into the Wood of Antiquity, which is as full of Windings, and Darkness, and
Ambiguity, as he can suppose the Scripture is; and therefore, for ought I see,
he may wrangle on upon Fathers (as he says we may upon Scripture) without End,
and notwithstanding his gla^^ring Pretense of bringing the Matter to a short
Issue by his Postulata, on which (he say) the Life of the Controversy as to
Scripture, and I may add with equal Reason as to Fathers too, depends, he may
wander these seven Years in the Mazes of Antiquity; and be never the nearer his
short Issue. This will appear in the Sequel.

Sect. IV. I propose now, under a distinct Head, to collect and consider the
more specious Pleas Mr. Layman has offered, to justify his Appeal to the
Fathers, and support the Authority of Tradition; which are delivered in the
form of Declamation and Invective.

I observe, this Gentleman once and again makes doleful Outcries against us, as
if by rejecting the Authority of the Fathers in the present Dispute we did a
Thing, that very much weakens the Common Cause of Christianity, destroys all
historical Faith, shocks even the Scriptures themselves, and brings our Bibles
into Contempt; as if therein we joined with all the DEISTS and INFIDELS in the
Kingdom, were serving their Turn, and justifying their Infidelity, or at least
giving them a great Handle against us, to laugh at us, and ridicule our
Religion etc. (Compare page 72, 73, 80, 81.) Thus he sets us out in all the
odious Colors he could think of, and merely riots upon our Infirmities, as if
we were a Company of Knaves, or a Pack of Fools. I am sure, any indifferent
Person with half Eye may see, that herein he treats us injuriously. Have we
(...) just Provocation to retort upon him, in his own Words ( p. 81.) Why
should you thus delight to walk in the Counsel of the Ungodly, and sit in the
Seat of the Scorner! Does Mr. Layman think to run us down with a railing
Accusation, and to gain his Point by mere Dint of Slander! I have ^^^le
Inclination to recriminate: or else I would expostulate with him in his own
Language (mutatis mutandis) How comes it to pass, that PAPISTS are so mightily
pleased to hear the Christian Fathers cried up for Oracles, by those who
pretend to be Protestants? Is it not because you are herein serving their Turn,
and justifying their Conduct in laying aside the Scriptures, and in stead of
them substituting the Fathers for their Guide in matters of Faith; or at least
giving an Handle, to it! Methinks I should not love to be of their Company, in
any thing that should bring the Bible into Disgrace, and undermine it once the
whole Foundation of the reformed Religion, as it seems to me an implicit Faith
in the Fathers, as safe Witnesses, in what Sense the Apostles would have
themselves to be understood, has a Tendency to do. -- But I forbear. And had
rather ^^sign this Gentleman to the Castigations of the learned CHILLINGWORTH,
for whose Judgment he has expressed a profound Respect. The Apostle thought it
the best Expedient in dealing with the Men of Crete, to allege against 'em
their own Poet, whom he calls a Prophet: I propose to take the like Method, and
may justly expect this Gentleman will submit to the Correction of his own
Episcopal Author.

Mr. Layman says to his Adversary ( p. 80.) Si^ ^^^^sure you, that I as
tenaciously adhere to the holy Scriptures for my Rule, and the ONLY Rule of my
Faith, as you or any one of your Persuasion whatsoever." But then he says ( p.
59.) In doubtful Cases, it is my bounden Duty to follow the Footsteps of the
Flock of Christ; that is, taking the primitive Church for a safe Witness, in
what Sense the Apostles, would have themselves understood, to choose her as the
best Guide to lead me to the Sense and Meaning of Scripture. This (says he p.
84.) is what we contend for. And he tells his Adversary ( p. 89.) After all
your Endeavors to deface the Fathers, I cannot part with my Rule; i. e. to
make them his Guide in interpreting doubtful places of Scripture. -- Thus the
Gentleman, I see, has learnt the exact Language of Rome: for that is the Popish
Shibboleth, The Scripture a perfect Rule, yet not excluding Tradition; which
they make come in as an Interpreter of Obscurities in the Faith, and a
necessary Guide to the Sense and Meaning of the Rule. It Is just the Talk of
this Gentleman; The Scriptures his only RULE, and the Fathers his GUIDE in
doubtful Cases.

Now will he hear Mr. Chillingworth, and yield to his Censure! Turn to his
learned Book of the Religion of Protestants ( p. 47.) Where, in Answer to the
Popish Plea aforesaid, he thus delivers his Thoughts. Here we have direct
B^ys-play; a thing given with one hand, and taken away with the other. -- We
acknowledge (say you) Scripture to be a perfect Rule; -- only we deny that it
excludes unwritten Tradition. As if you should have said, We acknowledge it to
be a perfect Rule, -- only we deny it to be a perfect Rule. Either therefore
you must revoke your Acknowledgement, or retract your Retraction of it; for
both cannot possibly stand together. For if you will stand to what you have
granted, That Scripture is a perfect Rule; -- you must then grant it both so
Complete, that it needs no Addition, and so EVIDENT, that it needs no
INTERPRETATION: for both these Properties are requisite to a perfect Rule. --
It follows ( p. 49.) When Protestants affirm against Papists, That Scripture is
a perfect Rule of Faith, -- their Meaning is, that the Scripture to them which
presuppose it Divine, and a Rule of Faith, as Papists and Protestants do,
contains all the material Objects of Faith, is a complete and total, and not
only an imperfect and a partial Rule. In the same page, he condemns the popish
Doctrine of Traditions not excluded, as a DISPARAGEMENT to the Scripture's
being a perfect Rule." -- He has those Passages ( p. 50.) "The Interpretations
of obscure places of Scripture, which without question the Apostles taught the
primitive Christians, are WHOLLY LOST; there remains no Certainty scarce of any
one. -- The Scripture is the only Rule to judge Controversies by. Every Man is
to judge for himself with the Judgment of Discretion etc." He says elsewhere (
p. 102.) We conceive, as the APOSTLES Persons, while they were living, were the
only Judges of Controversies, so THEIR Writings, now they are dead, are the
ONLY Rule for us to judge them by. Observe it, Here lies the Difference between
our Layman and Mr. Chillingworth: The Layman says, The Scriptures are his only
Rule of Faith; but in doubtful Cases the Sense of the primitive Fathers must be
his Guide. Whereas Mr. Chillingworth in direct Opposition plainly says, The
Scripture is the ONLY Rule to judge even CONTROVERSIES by, and that every Man
is to judge for himself. -- What without a Guide! Yes; for so says Mr.
Chillingworth (p. 51.) My Request is, that you will permit Scripture to have
the Properties of a Rule; that is, to be fit to direct every one, that will
make the best Use of it, to that End for which it was ordained: and that is as
much as we need desire. For as, if I were to go a Journey and had a Guide which
could not err, I needed not to know my Way: so on the other side, If I know my
Way, or have a plain Rule to know it, I shall need no Guide.

Well, but Mr. Layman perhaps will say, "This is not at all inconsistent with
my way of reasoning:" for I only speak of doubtful Cases, where we have not a
plain Rule; there, I say, the Fathers must be my Guide. Now hear Mr.
Chillingworth again ( p. 74) If you speak of plain Places (and in such, ALL
Things NECESSARY are contained, says he) we are sufficiently certain of the
Meaning of them, neither need they any Interpreter. If of obscure and difficult
Places, we confess we are uncertain of the Sense of many of them: But then, we
say, there is no Necessity we should be certain. For if God's Will had been we
should have understood him more certainly, He would have spoken more plainly.
-- Upon which the Consequence naturally arises, It never was God's Will, that
we should take the Fathers for safe Witnesses to the Sense of Scripture, or
authentic Interpreters of doubtful Places; and so their Belief and Practice,
an authorized Standard to all Posterity. -- And whereas Mr. Layman says ( p.
59.) I should EXTREMELY ENDANGER my self, if I forsake the ancient Paths, to
follow new Devices, etc. What says Mr. Chillingworth to this? See his Book ( p.
52.) Where the Scriptures (says he) are not plain, there if we, using Diligence
to find the Truth, do yet miss of it and fall into Error; there is NO DANGER in
it: Because those Places contain not Things necessary, neither is Error in them
dangerous. -- And whereas Mr. Layman says (Ibid) "In doubtful C^ses, it is my
bounden DUTY to follow the footsteps of the F^ock of Christ": Hear Mr.
Chillingworth in answer to this; who says ( p. 122.) Our OBLIGATION expressly to
know any Divine Truth must arise from God's manifest revealing of it, and his
revealing to us that he has revealed it, and that his Will is, we should
believe it. Now in the Points controverted among PROTESTANTS, he has not so
dealt with us; therefore he has not laid any such Obligation upon us. The
Major of this Syllog^s^ is evident. -- The Minor also will be evident to him
that considers, That in ALL the Controversies of Protestants there is a seeming
CONFLICT of Scripture with Scripture, Reason with Reason, Authority with
Authority, etc.

Let it be added here: To set up the Fathers for Interpreters of Scripture,
from whose Sense we SHOULD not depart; however Mr. Layman may daub and disguise
the matter by calling 'em only safe Witnesses to the Apostles Meaning; it is
nevertheless in Effect to make their Traditions our Rule of Faith, to make them
the Judges of Controversies in Religion, and advance 'em to the Papal Chair. To
require, that their Interpretations of any Law of Christ should be obeyed, as
the true and genuine, seem they to our Understanding never so dissonant from
it, is to require indeed that their Interpretations should be the LAWS. It Is to
make the Law and the Lawmaker both mere STALES, and to set up the Interpreters
in CHRIST'S stead: it is a Dethroning Christ from his Dominion over Men's
Consciences, and a making our selves the Servants of Men. To receive the
Judgment of the Primitive Church with an implicit Faith, is not to obey the
Gospel of Christ, but "only the Interpreter." This is just as if I should
pretend to submit to the Laws of the King of England, but should indeed resolve
to obey them in that Sense which the King of France should put upon them,
whatsoever it were;" in which Case, "I presume every understanding Man would
say, that I did indeed obey the King of France, and not the King of England.
These are the Thoughts of Mr. CHILLINGWORTH. ( Answ. to Direct. to N. N. Sect.
10.) If then any believe the Divine Right of Episcopacy, upon the Credit of
Antiquity, it is at best but a ^uman Faith: and if they conform in Practice,
from a Reverence to the Authority of the Fathers, it is rather obeying Man,
than God. But now, we know, that the Religion is ^^in, that is taught by the
Precept of Men. Therefore it cannot be matter of DUTY, to take the primitive
Church for our Guide in doubtful Cases: and it must not be said, We SHOULD
c^use this or the other Interpretation of Scripture, merely because it happens
to have the Suffrage of the Fathers. Nor, by Consequence, can there be any
EXTREME DANGER in forsaking ancient Paths, as the Case is tragically
represented by our Lay-writer.

Well, but Mr. Layman perhaps will say; If there be no absolute Obligation to
receive Traditional Interpretations, yet at least you must allow the Fathers to
be the safest and best Guides to the Sense of Scripture in doubtful Cases, as
being under much better Advantages not to mistake, than we at this Distance. I
have said something to this before: But now let Mr. Chillingworth speak. (See
his Book, p. 137.) Who can doubt but the primitive Christians, to whom the
Epistles of the Apostles were written, either of themselves understood, or were
instructed by the Apostles touching the Sense of the obscure places of them?
These TRADITIVE Interpretations, had they been written and dispersed, as the
Scriptures were, had without question been preserved, as the Scriptures are:
But to show how excellent a KEEPER of the Tradition, the Church of Rome has
been, or even the CATHOLIC Church, for want of writing They are ALL LOST, nay,
were lost within a few Ages after Christ: So that if we consult the ANCIENT
Interpreters [N. B.] we shall hardly find ANY TWO of Them AGREE about the Sense
of ANY ONE of them. -- May we venture to take Mr. Chillingworth's Word in this
Case? If so, this at once destroys the Credit of Mr. Layman's SAFE WITNESSES
and BEST GUIDES. And pray, who is it now that reflects on the Catholic Church,
and exposes the good old Fathers, as if there were no Faith in what they say!
Where Is the glorious UNITY, Mr. Layman boasts of, among the primitive Fathers;
and on which the Authority of those venerable Martyrs and Confessors so
depends! You see, they are not only "some of our Persuasion" (as he insinuates,
p. 72.) that undervalue the Authority of ancient Interpretations and
Traditions. No, we have the good Company of some of the Episcopal Persuasion:
the great CHILLINGWORTH, for Instance. And if we should represent the Fathers
as being some of 'em " ignorant Men, or guilty of pious Frauds," neither should
we be alone in this. For hear what the Episcopal Mr. Sprint says, ( Necess. of
Conform. p. 91.) Touching the Fathers and Bishops of the Church, some being
simple, and of small Capacity, and shallow Judgment, as Eusebius says,
received Traditions without any searching of Writings, as out of bare Report.
Such one was Papias, the hearer of St. John, and Companion of Policarp, who in
this Simplicity broached fabulous Doctrine of the Chiliast Error: by whom
Irenaeus, and others which were of the like Opinion, were deceived, namely by
pretending and reverencing of his ANTIQUITY, Eusebius. 3.35. Such were Tertullian
and Lactantius. -- Some were deceived by Heretics; who to cover their
pernicious Heresies, did studiously broach Traditions under the Apostles Names
and Authority. -- Eusebius 5.25. Clemens Strom. lib 7. -- Some are noted to
have ascribed too TOO MUCH unto Traditions: So did Papias, Clemens, Origin, and
they cite Ap^^ryphall Books to countenance them, and commend very sorry
Matters, both of Doctrine and of Practice, to themselves and others. So did
Papias, Clemens, and Origin, and Basil, and Epiphanius; (of which point, look
Chemnitius examp. part. 1. de tradition. Fol. 85, 86, 87.) and what they could
not sound from any true Original, sundry of them did usually ascribe to the
Apostles. -- Some did commend the Traditions, which they liked a^^ fancied
themselves, to their Posterities for Laws, etc. ^^us Mr. Sprint. Hear also
those Remarks of Bp. MORTON ( Prot. Appeal, p. 324) Papias, who was the
Disciple of St. John, did (as Eusebius witnesses) broach many Paradoxes and
exorbitant Doctrines, etc. And shall we think that those purer Times, when
some Ancients not content to keep Regiam Viam, i. e. the rode-way, which is the
written Word of God, but were seduced by presumption of unwritten Traditions,
and erred in points of Doctrine; could be altogether free from some Sprinklings
and Spots of ceremonious Corruptions! It is a known Contention about the
Observation of Easter, which afflicted and vexed the Church of God in the days
of Victor Bishop of Rome, by dividing the East and West Churches; the one Side
pretending a Tradition from St. John and St. Philip; the other presuming of a
supposed Tradition from S. Peter and S. Paul. Whereby was made a Schism and
Rent, not in the Garment only, but even in the Body of Christ, which is his
Church. These two Examples may serve for many, which might be alleged, to give
us more than a Signification of the DANGER and UNCERTAINTY of unwritten
Traditions; which the aftertimes, even of S. Augustine (not to wade deeper
into this POOLE) had more cause to complain of: whom we find bewailing the
Corruptions of his Age, and confessing, That he durst not freely reprehend many
Traditions, whereby the Church was then pestred, and which he calls
PRESUMPTIONS; and consequently, could not agree with the Simplicity of the
Gospel of Christ." -- The same Bishop ( ibid. p. 355) says, Our Adversaries
themselves know right well, that the Fathers Writings are FULL of OBSCURITIES.
-- Some of them had their bypath; -- in some Things did GREATLY err." -- And
he observes, "Their Books, which have been corrupted by Heretics (which also
are confessed to have been very many) are to be esteemed as none of the
Fathers; being by the Art of Arians, Pelagians, -- and other He^eticks,
infected with deadly Corruptions: So that the unexpert Scholar is no otherwise
occupied in turning over the Fathers, than an ignorant Man who is conversant in
an Apothecarie's Shop, where without wary Circumspection he may suck his BANE
out of Boxes, which carry the Title of an Antidote. -- Let the Reader judge
now who they are that represent the Fathers in a Light so hateful to Mr.
Layman. And if our Freedom with the Fathers ^^eds an Apology, I cannot make one
in Words more apposite, ^^an those of the same Bishop MORTON ( ibid. p. 356.)
Which Errors the Protestants have noted, not as the Children of CHAM, pointing
at Deformities to laugh and scorn; but as careful and faithful PILOTS,
discovering Shelves and Sands, for the directing of others in the safest
Course. This, I hope, Mr. Layman will accept as a sufficient Return to his
sarcastical Fling ( p. 81.) where he insinuates as if the Presbyterians derided
the Fathers, and delighted with the accursed HAM to expose and mock at their
Nakedness. Verily this Temper and Design are as distant from us, as from
himself. For, by the way, I must observe, even he takes upon him to use a
pretty deal of Freedom with the good old Fathers, in the midst of his
apologetical Harangue; particularly in conceding, that some of the "erroneous
Tenets" held by them may pass for "VERY BAD Mistakes," and that they might be
MISLED into them;" That they might fall into unjustifiable BROILS and
Contentions about SMALL and circumstantial Matters; That particular Churches
might have DIFFERENT Usages, for which they might ZEALOUSLY and perhaps TRULY
plead Apostolical Tradition etc. ( p. 85, 86) Surely I might now shoot at him
with his own Bow, and turn his own Arrows against him, as a Son of Ham, equally
with us. Alas! if these Things may be supposed, I doubt the Testimony of the
Fathers must in a great measure lose its Credit, and will not be allowed by
unpassionate and disinterested Judges to carry any great Authority with it. --
If the Fathers did sometimes zealously plead Apostolical Tradition on both
Sides of a fierce Controversy, and that so near the Apostles times, in the very
next Age; I Am sure, this tends very much to weaken, if not wholly invalidate,
the Credibility of their boasted Tradition, as fabulous and uncertain; and
reflects on the Fathers as being partial or incompetent Judges. Or if they
might TRULY plead opposite apostolic Traditions to support contrary Practices,
this infers a gross Reflection (as upon the English Act of UNIFORMITY, which at
this rate may pass for an unapostolical and unnecessary Act; so in special) on
those primitive Fathers, who with so much unchristian Heat contended for
Uniformity, in small Matters, even to Excommunication of such as differed from
them. And then, might any of the venerable Fathers fall into VERY BAD Mistakes,
and be MISLED into 'em too; what a Reflection is this upon them, as ignorant
Men, and of weak Capacity! And does not this render their Testimony to any
particular Doctrine, not evident in Scripture, very precarious; since it might,
for ought we know, be one of the very bad Mistakes they were misled into? --
How will Mr. Layman bring himself off now! Or how will he bring off the Fathers
with Honor, and secure the Reputation and Force of his Rule for right
interpreting of Scripture, the Sense and Practice of the primitive Church! Why,
all he can say (I presume) is what he suggests ( p. 85.) Do any of them assert
these or any of these to be the UNIVERSAL Doctrine of the Church in those Days?
Or do they plead for them as ESSENTIAL Doctrines of Christianity? No (says he)
not a Word of this. -- Well, we will try the Justice of this Gentleman's
Remark. 'Twou'd be tedious to go over the several Errors he mentions: and
therefore I will single out one Opinion, he ranks among the Errors of the
Fathers, (to which I shall add another not mentioned) and rest the Cause here.

I fix then on what he calls the CHILIAST Notion, of Christ's personal Reign
with the Saints on Earth, a thousand Years etc. Now, was this asserted by any
of the Fathers to be the UNIVERSAL Doctrine of the Church in these Days? Mr.
Layman answers, No, not a Word of this. But is he sure of his Point! It seems,
some learned Episcopal Antiquaries are of another Mind* For what is that, we
read in Dr. EDWARDS'S Discourse concerning the Fathers! (Remains, p. 28.) The
Tradition concerning the Millennium, i. e. the personal Reigning of Christ upon
Earth a thousand Years etc. was derived from St. John, if we will believe
Papias, one of the Ancients, a Disciple of St. John the Evangelist. And because
this Opinion was grounded on such Authority, it became the GENERAL and
UNIVERSAL Belief of the Christians that came afterward, yea, of the most
EMINENT of the Fathers." -- So Bishop MORTON ( Prot. Appeal. p. 510.) The Error
of the Millenarit (says he) our Adversaries have acknowledged to have been both
ancient and GENERAL, and defended by primitive Fathers, and that without either
notorious Beginning or public Resistance." And he tells us ( p. 664.) "The
Error of the Chiliasts continued THREE HUNDRED Years; that is, successively
from the time of Papias, who was contemporary with the Apostle John. ( Ibid. p.
324.) -- So Archbishop TILLOTSON (Fol. Vol. 1. p. 730.) observes, The Tradition
of the Chiliasts was the Persuasion of ALL orthodox Christians in Justin
Martyr's Time; who flourished in the middle of the 2d Century. -- Now, it may
be, Mr. Layman will return upon me, These Passages give us only the Opinion of
the Moderns on the Case: But my Demand was, Is the Chiliast-Notion asserted by
any of the Fathers themselves to have been the universal Doctrine in those
Days? Well, to this the Answer is still affirmative. The Mouth of two Witnesses
may suffice, for Evidence, both of which lived in the next Age after the
Apostles. I shall take my Account from Mr. CHILLINGWORTH. ( Relig. Prot. p.
309.) It appears manifestly out of this Book of IRENAEUS (Lib. 3. adv Haer.)
that the Doctrine of the Chiliasts was in his Judgment Apostolic Tradition,
as also it was esteemed (for ought appears to the Contrary) by ALL the Doctors,
and Saints and Martyrs of or about his Time; for ALL that spoke of it, or whose
Judgments in the point are any way recorded, are for it: and JUSTIN MARTYR (In
Dial. cum Tryphon.) professes, that ALL good and orthodox Christians of his
Time believed it; and those that did not, he reckons among Heretics. Will any
one now deny, the Doctrine was universal!

But Mr. Layman has another Question behind; Did any of the Fathers plead for
the Chiliast Notion as an ESSENTIAL Doctrine of Christianity? I answer, Judge
you by the Account of Justin above given: He manifestly esteemed it a Doctrine
of such Importance, That those who did not believe it, he reckoned among
HERETICS. I shall add, in the Words of A. Bp. TILLOTSON ( Vol. 1. p. 732.) It
is not material to my Purpose, whether or no Justin looked upon this as a Point
necessary to Salvation, so long as it is evident that he looked upon it as a
Divine Revelation, and Part of the Christian Doctrine. And yet, it seems, he
thought it a Point of more than ordinary Importance, because he joins it with
the Doctrine of the RESURRECTION, and says that it was not disowned by any but
those who also denied the Resurrection. He expressly says of the Disowners of
this Doctrine, Of these who are called indeed Christians, but are atheistical
and impious Heretics, I have showed, that they teach in all Points
blasphemous, atheistical and absurd Things etc. ( Dial. cum. Tryph. p. 306.
Edit. Lut^t. 1615.

Thus it appears, the Doctrine of the Millennium was in Justin's time
Universally believed by the Orthodox, and held to be Apostolical, and such as
denied it deemed Heretical. Upon the whole take this Observation, in the
Archbishop's Words ( p. 730.) If notwithstanding the Persuasion of that Age,
that this Doctrine was descended to them from the Apostles, it was not really
so descended; Then the Persuasion of Christians in any Age, that a Doctrine was
brought down to them from the Apostles, is no Demonstration that it was so. --
The natural Consequence (of the Premises) is this (says he) That the Mistake of
ONE simple and credulous Man may in an Age or two give Occasion to the
universal Entertainment of a Doctrine, as descended down to them from Christ
and his Apostles, when there was no such Matter.

Apply this now to the Point in Controversy, the Case of Episcopacy. Mr. Layman
(p. 90.) says, " he thinks it HARD, if we cannot allow, that the Fathers knew
whether the Church was governed by Bishops, or not." I must confess, it seems
so: but then it must be added, We think it hard too, if we may not be allowed to
judge, whether the Fathers do testify, in fact, the Church was governed by
Bishops, or not. And supposing the Fathers do testify in the Affirmative, we
think it hard again, if we may not be allowed to judge, whether the Bishops of
the primitive Church were of the same Spec^es with those in the modern Church,
or not And if it should appear, that in the 3d or 4th Age they were the same,
yet we think it still hard, we may not be allowed to judge, whether these
Bishops were then held to be of Divine Right, or not: And if of Divine Right,
whether they founded their Opinion upon Scripture, or Tradition. Now if they
built upon Scripture, we think it hard, that their Opinion should be urged as a
Rule to us, and that we may not be allowed to see with our own Eyes, and judge
for our selves on the Sense of Scripture. But, if upon Tradition, then think it
hard again, to be born down with an Authority, that has so many just Prejudices
lying against it. As Dr. STILLINGFLEET says ( Irenic. p. 317.) How can we fix
upon the Testimony of Antiquity, as any thing certain or impartial in this
Case; when it has been found so evidently PARTIAL in a Case of less
Concernment, than this is! A Witness, that has once betrayed his Faithfulness
in the open Court, will HARDLY have his Evidence taken in a Case of Moment,
especially when the Cause must stand or fall according to his single Testimony.
For my part (says the Dr.) I see not how any Man, that would see Reason for
what he does, can adhere to the Church for an unquestionable Tradition received
from the Apostles; WHEN in the Case of keeping Easter (a Case wherein they had
all the Advantages imaginable, in order to knowing the Certainty of the Thing
in question among them) there was yet so much unreasonable Heat showed on both
sides, and such Confidence that on either side their Tradition was Apostolical:
I add, WHEN in the Case of the Chiliast-Notion, there was the fairest
Appearance of an authentic Tradition from the Apostles, some Texts of
Scripture seeming to favor the Opinion, a very early Entertainment of it, an
universal Suffrage for it, and a long Duration thereof through the Course of
Three Centuries (all which flagrantly appears matter of fact) yet all this
while, if we may believe the Church in Ages following (for at present I am not
concerned to deliver my own private Thoughts on the Subject) the Millenary
Opinion was erroneous, and the Tradition has been almost as universally
condemned for Apocryphal, as once it was received for Canonical. Now, why may
not we suppose, the Tradition pleaded in behalf of the distinct Order and the
Divine Right of Episcopacy, has as little of Truth in its Foundation? This
Notion being once started (as Dr. Calamy observes, Mod Non^. I. 181.) the
Fathers may be easily supposed to have taken it from one another, as they did
the Chiliastical Opinion; while yet there might not be any better Ground to
ascribe it to an Apostolical Original, than there was as to that Opinion which
prevailed so generally for several Centuries If Mr. Layman will not allow the
Suffrage of the primitive Church to be a solid Proof in one Case; I think I may
with equal Modesty refuse it in the other: Especially since I find one of his
own Episcopal Authors crying up the Tradition in this Case of Chylias^, and in
one other Case, as being most probable, next to that of the Canon of Scripture,
and this alone excepted, without a Rival. The famous Mr. CHILLINGWORTH ( p.
102.) has these words; The Apostles Writings are the only Rule for us to judge
Controversies by; There being NOTHING unwritten, which can go in upon half so
fair Cards, for the Title of Apostolic Tradition, as these Things, which by
the Confession of both sides are not so: I mean the Doctrine of the
MILLENARIES, and of the Necessity of the Eucharist for Infants. Again, hear
what he says ( p. 136.) To deal ingenuously with You and the World, I am not
such an Idolater of S. Austin, as to think all his Sentences are Oracles; and
particularly in this thing, that whatsoever was practiced or held by the
universal Church of his Time, must needs have come from the Apostles. Though,
considering the Nearness of his Time to the Apostles, I think it a good
probable Way, and therefore am apt enough to follow it, when I see no Reason to
the contrary. Yet, I profess, I must have better Satisfaction, before I can
induce my self to hold it certain; -- because by the Church universal of some
Time, and the Church universal of other Times, I see plain Contradictions held
and practiced: Both which could not come from the Apostles; for then the
Apostles had been Teachers of Falsehood. -- I instance in the Doctrine of the
Millenaries, and the Eucharist's Necessity for Infants: both which Doctrines
have been taught by the CONSENT of the eminent Fathers of some Ages, without
any Opposition from any of their Contemporaries; and were delivered by them,
not as Doctors, but as WITNESSES, not as their own Opinions, but as APOSTOLIC
Traditions: -- And (yet) that the contrary Doctrines were Catholic at some
other Time, I believe you will not think it needful for me to prove.

So again ( p. 261.) Though some Protestants confess some of your Doctrine is
Ancient: yet this is Nothing, so long as it is evident, even by the Confession
of all Sides, that many Errors, I instance in that of the Millenaries, and the
Communicating of Infants, were more ancient. Not any Antiquity therefore,
unless it be Absolute and Primitive, is a certain Sign of true Doctrine. (See
also CHILL. Answ. to Pref. p. 11.)

This now, I think, subverts the Foundation of Mr. Layman's Argument from the
Fathers, in the case of Episcopacy: and particularly invalidates the Argument a
Minori, which he so insists upon in both Letters; I mean, his Objection from
parallel Cases, in which (he says) we plead the Sense and Practice of
Antiquity, to support our Opinion, and yet (says he) the Testimonies of the
primitive Church in those Cases are not so ancient, clear and frequent, as for
interpreting of Scripture in favor of Episcopacy." Particularly he says ( p
69.) " We have much more ancient, clear and frequent Testimonies, in favor of
Episcopacy, than can be produced in the Cause of Infant Baptism: For there is
no Father (says he) that gives a full clear and incontestible Testimony for
Infant Baptism, before St. Cyprian, who lived 150 Years after the Apostles
etc. Well now, supposing this to be Fact, I ask the Gentleman, whether he
thinks the Authority of Cyprian and the Church in his day, to be a sufficient
Ground for interpreting doubtful Texts of Scripture in favor of Infant
Baptism, and for refelling those Arguments against it, to be bro't out of
Scripture, which he says ( p. 68.) are "as strong, as any we can bring against
Episcopacy?" To this, if he will be consistent with himself, he must answer in
the Affirmative. -- But then again I must observe, if he will be still
consistent with himself, he must also think, the Authority of Cyprian and the
Church in his Day is a sufficient Ground for interpreting the Scripture in
favor of Communicating Infants: which yet I trust Mr. Layman will allow to be
an Error, but I hope will not number it among his LITTLE TRIFLING Instances of
Mistakes and Errors.

I think proper to take a particular Notice of it, though he omits it in his
Catalogue of "worst Things." That Infants were admitted to the Lord's Supper in
those early Ages of the Church, is known to all that are acquainted with
Ecclesiastical History, says an anonymous Episcopal Writer. (LIVES of the
primitive Fathers, p. 592.) He adds ( p. 607.) That it was so in the third
Century, appears by the Account St. Cyprian gives us, etc. -- And that this was
not only practiced in St. Austin's time, but also deemed necessary to the
Salvation of Infants, as well as Baptism, is manifest by what he tells us in
his first Book, etc. -- The Practice continued to the Reign of Charles the
Great at the Beginning of the 9th Century; as is proved by Bp. TAILOR, in his
Treatise called, The worthy Communicant. Chapter 3.. 2. -- Bp. MORTON ( Prot.
Appeal. p. 510.) observes, That this Practice continued in the Church for 600
Years; the first Author, or visible Resister whereof (says he) our Adversaries
cannot name in continuance of so many hundred Years. I shall add that of Mr.
CHILLINGWORTH, ( Answ. to Pref. p. 11.) S. Augustine, I am sure, held the
Communicating of Infants as much Apostolic Tradition, as the Baptizing them.
So again, he says ( p. 135.) "It was a Practice of the whole Church in S.
Austine's time, and esteemed an Apostolic Tradition, even by S. Austine
himself, That the E^charist should be administered to Infants: Tell me, Sir, I
beseech you (says he to his Adversary) Had it been insolent Madness to dispute
against this Practice, or had it not? If it had, how insolent and mad are you,
that have not only disputed against it, but utterly abolyshed it? -- I will
supply the other part of the Dilemma, and say; If it had not, then how
intolerably partial and abusive are you, to plead that Authority for
Infant Baptism, or in any Case, which you scruple not your self to reject in
the Case of Infant-Communicating, and in many other Cases? -- How weak and
simple too, to build on an Authority, as a certain or safe Ground for Belief,
which may support Falsehood, as well as Truth? -- If Mr. Layman will not be
tried by Austin's Judgment, who (according to the Episcopal way of arguing)
must needs be allowed to know well enough, what was the Opinion and Practice of
the Church in an Age or two before him, I know not why he should plead the
Authority of Cyprian: Or if he will not submit to the Authority of Cyprian in
one Case, I think he unqualifies himself to plead it in any other. If the
Communicating of Infants was a Custom of the Church in the Cyprianick Age, and
held to be of Apostolic Original, and of necessity to Salvation, as it
certainly was by Austin, and probably by Cyprian, and all the Doctors for those
600 Years in which it is known to have been practiced; How can Mr. Layman,
consistently to himself, disown that ancient Usage! What! (to turn upon him his
own Argument ( p. 86.) Were all those Fathers a Pack of Knaves, that he should
have no Faith in what they say! Would he be willing to be treated so himself!
Nay, Does he treat the Heathen Historians so injuriously! Why then must the
poor Christian Fathers be disbelieved!

Or how can he reject the Chiliast Notion, as an Error, when it was so early
received, as Apostolical, and held as a matter of Faith for the Space of three
Centuries: and yet at the same Time urge those very Considerations in favor of
his beloved Episcopacy! I will return Mr. Layman his own Argument, ( p. 69.)
applied to this Case. If the Fathers of the first and best Ages are on the Side
of the CHILIAST Opinion (as we have been told they are) I cannot with all the
Wits I have, devise, Why the Witness of the Fathers of the primitive Church
should not as well be called in, and be allowed as good Evidence, to justify
our interpreting the Scriptures, in favor of the CHYLIAST Doctrine, as of
Episcopacy; Especially seeing we have much more ancient, clear, and frequent
Testimonies of the primitive Church, for interpreting of Scripture in favor of
Chyliasm, than can be produced in the Cause of the Divine Right and fundamental
Necessity of Episcopacy, as an Order superior to Presbytery: For there is no
Father, that gives a full clear and incontestible Testimony for this, at least
before St. CYPRIAN (if we should allow that he does it) who lived 150 Years
after the Apostles. Whereas how clear and full in the Cause of Chyliasm is
IRENAEUS, who lived in the very next Age to them; and JUSTIN MARTYR, who lived
and wrote an hundred Years before Cyprian, and but fifty after St. John, the
last surviving Apostle; and above all, PAPIAS, who lived in the Apostles Times,
and said he received the Chyliasti^ Tradition from the Mouth of the Apostle
John himself! So full and express is the whole Current of Antiquity, in favor
of Chyliasm, that it seems to me (according to Mr. Layman's way of thinking)
that NO HONEST Man can question, but that it had the universal Witness of the
Church of God, even from the Beginning: and yet ^e ventures to rank this Notion
among the Errors of the Fathers. For which Reason, I cannot help being
persuaded, that there never was a Time in the primitive Church, for some
Centuries after the Apostles, but that if Mr. Layman had lived in it, and
obstinately persisted in his Anti-Chyliast Opinion, he would have been ce^sured
and cast out of the universal Church, for a HERETIC, etc. etc.

Thus I have exactly followed the Gentleman's Train of Reasoning: and now,
whether it be thought Logic, or Sophistry, I Am sure the Argument is as
pertinent to my Case, and as good in my Application of it, as in Mr. Layman's.
Yea, I have not merely quitted with him, but he fal^'s in my Debt: for I have
this great Advantage above him, that the Idea of Chyliasm has been settled and
un^form; whereas the Notion of Episcopacy has been various and indeterminate.
Bishop is an equivocal Word; acknowledged by Mr. Layman to be promiscuously
used in Scripture, and in Clemens, the first Christian Writer: and it is very
disputable, whether it was not so used, by all the Writers of the 2d Century at
least: So that, allowing the Fathers do assert the Divine Right of Bishops, yet
(in them there may be only the Nomen, not the Sensus Neminis, according to
modern Conceptions of Episcopacy; and) the Possibility of their meaning only
Parochial Bishops does exceedingly weaken the Argument from primitive
Testimonies, for the Divine Right of Diocesan Prelates. Whereas now the
Chyliasm of the Ancients has a known fixed and unvarying Idea; So that here the
Fathers Testimonies are in a plain Case: which Consideration must necessarily
cast the Balance in favor of my Point, and give a greater Weight and Force to
Mr. Layman's Argument as I apply it, than as he uses it. The confessed
Ambiguity of the word Bishop, makes his Argument against me possibly a mere
Fallacy: Nevertheless the same Argument, as I use it against him, he must grant
to be certain Demonstration; being in a Case where there is no such Ambiguity
acknowleg'd. But still with what Logic or with what Charity, the harsh
Conclusion, Mr. Layman has dictated to me, may be drawn, I must leave with
indifferent Judges to say. My Design was only an Argumentum ad Hominem; and
it is well if it don't prove an Argumentum ad Ignorantiam, beyond Mr. Layman's
Skill to refute, without destroying his own Cause at the same time.

After all, it may be, our Lay-Adversary will tell me, I have been arguing only
in the Evasive Way, and that he expected I would speak more directly to the
Point, in refuting his grand Charge against us, as joining with DEISTS and
INFIDELS, destroying all historical Faith, and shocking even the Scriptures
themselves, while we reject the Testimony of the Fathers in favor of
Episcopacy, which (as he says) has as good Evidence from human Testimony, as
the CANON OF SCRIPTURE. His Words are ( p. 72.) I know of no external Evidence
of the Canon of the Scriptures, besides the Testimony of the Church. What
Evidence, for Instance, have we, that the Epistle of St. James, or Revelation
of St John, were written by the Apostles, whose Names they bear, and were
received for canonical Scripture, besides the Testimony of those very Men, who
are likewise Witnesses to the Apostolical and Divine Original of Episcopal
Government? -- And (he says p. 81.) " if they are not to be depended upon, when
they bear Testimony to Episcopacy, why should we depend on them, when they bear
Testimony to the Canon of Scripture?

This is the Argument, that emboldened the Gentleman to fall foul of his good
old Friends and Fathers, as joining with all the Deists and Infidels in the
Kingdom, to bring the Bible into Disgrace, by treating the primitive Fathers
with so much Contempt. But, upon the calmest Consideration it appears to me at
best only an Argumentum ad Passiones, an Address to the Readers Passions,
rather than their Judgment; or in Eusebius's Dialect, an Argument adapted to
move People's Affections to outrun their Reason. Mr. Layman, it seems, was
resolved to do Business; and therefore, to alarm Men's Fears, ^e couples
Dissenters and Deists together, and puts Christianity and Episcopacy on the
same foot, both to stand or fall together. If he cannot convince the rational
Inquirer, he will try to stumble the Ignorant, to scare the Credulous, and cheat
the Unwary into his Belief, by terrible and odious Representations of our
Opinion. Sure he has drank at Lesly's Cistern, and ^^ckt up Dodwel's Vomit,
whom Bp. Burnet scrupled not to call the Corrupter of our Faith and Church. His
Declamatory Strains on this Occasion exhibit the true Reveries of those
non-juring Schismatics, that have been wont to supply by Rant, what they
wanted of Reason, and to scatter their spiritual Ter^^s over the Nation, when
they could not by rational Arguments support a sinking Cause. But let us a
little consider the ^^^mendous Objection: and I doubt not, it will appear to
every intelligent Reader transparent Sophistry. The following Remarks may
suffice to guard our Cause against so weak an Attack.

I observe, first, The Gentleman argues upon an Hypothesis, which he knows we
cannot grant him; That the primitive Fathers do, in fact, bear their Testimony
to Episcopacy, in his Acceptance of it. We don't deny (as we judge) the
primitive Episcopacy; but only that of the modern Stamp, which we think a
Stranger to the best and purest Antiquity. Here then Mr. Layman is guilty of
the Sophism, called Petitio Printipii. He charges us as being in a Confederacy
with Deists (to bring the Scriptures into Disgrace, which have no other
external Evidence (says he) but the Testimony of the Fathers) Because we reject
the Testimony which the Fathers bear to Diocesan Episcopacy: Whereas it is one
great Point in Contest, whether the Fathers do give their Attestation to this
Species of Episcopacy. We dispute it: but does our rejecting his Construction
of the Fathers, prove our treating them with Contempt! It Is true, we cannot but
have a hearty Contempt for the Pretended Testimonies from the Fathers, alleged
in the Cause of Diocesan Episcopacy, as wholly impertinent: and yet at the same
time we may highly honor their Real Testimonies to the Canon of Scripture.

But then, admitting the Fathers probably speak of Episcopacy, in Mr. Layman's
Acceptance of it, will he (dare he!) pretend, that the Testimonies in that
Case are as full and unanimous, clear and strong, as for the Canon of
Scripture? Is the Tradition sufficiently testified to be universal, original
and uninterrupted, in one Case, as well as the other? If not, it is no criminal
Partiality, nor any Contempt of the Fathers, to reject a defective Testimony,
while we accept their fuller and clearer Suffrage in another Case.

But then again, supposing that the Fathers had given the fullest and plainest
Testimonies to Episcopacy, as to i^'s Existence in their Day; yet what Evidence
would that afford of an uninterrupted Succession of Bishops to this Day?
Without which, I doubt, our Author's Cause will finally miscarry, and his
Argument signify just nothing. According to the common Doctrine of our
Adversaries, all that are not in the true Li^e of Succession from the Apostles,
are but Lay-Impostors: And now will he pretend, that there is as good Evidence
of an unbroken Line of Bishops, and Presbyters Episcopally ordained, as we have
of genuine and true Scriptures! How easy a matter were it, for particular
Churches to be imposed upon with forged Orders, or uncanonical Consecrations;
whereby the Line would certainly be violated! But how impossible were it, to
obtrude a false Bible on the whole Church of God! And when some have attempted
to forge Books of Scripture and father 'em on some Apostle, how easily has the
Cheat been detected! Now, that in Fact there have been repeated Breaches of
regular Succession, seems to be past all Controversy. Bishop HOADLY ( Preserv.
p. 78.) observes; This regular uninterrupted Succession of Persons qualified
and regularly ordained, is a matter impossible to be proved: Nay, the Contrary
is more than probable, upon all historical Evidence. But that we have the true
Canon of Scripture, I hope, Mr Layman will allow to be capable of Demonstration
by the best historical and rational Evidence A Succession of true Bibles is a
thousand times more evident, than a Succession of true Bishops. And to
insinuate, that we have no surer Evidence of genuine Scriptures, than can be
produced for a right Line of Episcopacy, verily it is one of the s^yest Lib^is
upon Christianity, that can easily be imagined.

But then further, supposing this Line of Succession demonstrable, even up to
the Fathers, and that they are full and clear in their Testimonies for
Episcopacy, as universal matter of Fact in their Times; yet he that argues from
Fact to Right in this Case, is a mere Sophister: For this is to suppose an
Impossibility of Innovations in the primitive Church, or at least a Certainty
of their Freedom from Changes and Corruptions, which is contrary to all
Accounts of those Times, and will appear highly improbable, if we reflect on
the usual Tempers and Prope^sions of Mankind. But then it will be said, The
Fathers testify to the Right, as well as Fact. I reply, This is as easily
denied, as affirmed; and we think, no sufficient Proof has yet appeared.
However, upon Supposition of Proof, ^^l it remains a Doubt, whether mere human
Testimony to the Divine Right of Episcopacy is sufficient to bind it on the
Conscience, as a matter of Necessity to be believed and practiced. The Divine
Right can be inferred only from Scripture: if it be not evident from thence, it
can never be made evident. And if the Divine Institution of Episcopacy must be
fetched from Scripture, then it will be necessary, in the first place, to prove
the Apostolic Original of the Scriptures: without which it will be entirely
out of our Power to prove the Jus Divinum of Episcopacy. But then, when we are
satisfied of the Truth in this great Point, it follows in the Nature and Reason
of Things, that we must now take the Divine Book for our only (...) of Faith.
The universal uncontrolled Tradition, in the Case of the sacred Canon, carries
a rational Probability, that may justly beget in us an Esteem for the Bible,
and put us upon examining its Contents: and when by viewing the internal
Evidences of its Divine Original, we become so satisfied of that, as to take it
for the Word of God; we are now of Consequence to judge and try all other
Traditions, of a religious Reference, by this Rule, and not the Rule by them.
And we must say, when we judge of the Episcopal Tradition, by the Rule of
Scripture, we can discern no evident Characters of Divinity upon it, to
indicate an Apostolic Original; and therefore cannot but vote the Pretense of
Divine Right, a mere Imposture.

In fine, allowing the Divine Right of Bishops to be held by some of the
Fathers, yet (to return Mr Layman a Question or two of his own) " Do any of
them assert this to be the UNIVERSAL Doctrine of the Church in those Days? Or
do they plead for it as an ESSENTIAL Doctrine of Christianity? Perhaps I may
safely answer (as he in another Case) NO, not a word of this. Whereas now, the
Divine Right and the uninterrupted Succession of Episcopacy are fundamental
Points with Men of Mr. Layman's Principles: who tell us, that such as are not
in professed Unity and Communion with their Church, governed by Bishops in a
regular Succession, are out of Christ's Church and out of his Covenant, out of
the Favor of God, and out of the Way to Salvation. Herein, I think, they tour
very high above all the soaring Strains of the most hyperbolical Writer in
Antiquity: or at least they cannot produce the universal Suffrage of the
primitive Fathers, to confirm these wild and rampant Imaginations. Sad would it
be for us, if the Truth of Christianity had no better Evidence, than the Truth
of this strange Doctrine. Will Mr. Layman pretend, that the venerable ancient
Doctors and Confessors, who sealed with their Blood a Testimony to the Gospel
of Christ, have left their Testimony to this high Rant in favor of Episcopacy!
I dare say, though we despise this from our hearts, yet we don't herein reject
the unanimous Suffrage of the primitive Church. Should it appear, that one or
two Fathers have asserted the Divine Right of Episcopacy, as an Essential
Doctrine of Christianity, let this be thrown into the List of " their NOSTRUMS,
or private Opinions, which Mr. Layman (p. 83.) observes, They might have, as
well as other Men:" and in which I hope, we may safely venture to differ from
them. I trust, we are as strictly tenacious, as Mr. Layman, of all those great
Truths, which all Christendom in those days agreed upon to be the Essentials of
Religion: But then, when he ranks Episcopacy among these Essentials, we think
he departs from the current Sense of Antiquity; and that this favorite Tenet of
his is far from being one of those Points, which all Christendom in those days
agreed upon. For ought I see then we may renounce Mr. Layman's ESSENTIAL
Doctrine; and yet retain a sufficient Respect for the primitive Church, and pay
a just Deference to the universal Suffrage of those venerable Martyrs and
Confessors, who are Witnesses to the Divine Original of the holy Oracles. It is
therefore an intolerable Insult, and abusive Sophistry in this Gentleman, to
represent us (first) as treating the primitive Fathers with Contempt, merely
because we slight his pretended Testimonies from Antiquity in relation to
Diocesan Episcopacy: and (then) as joining with DEISTS and ATHEISTS, in
undermining Christianity; because there is no external Evidence of the Canon of
the several Books of Scripture, that he knows of, besides the Testimony of
those good Men, whom (as he will have it) we treat with so much Contempt. This
is the mighty Argument, he urges in Support of his Charge: but there is as
little Reason in his Plea, as of Charity in his Accusation. It seems to me,
there is Abundance of Fallacy in this way of arguing.

I would inquire of Mr. Layman, Whether he will maintain, that God has hung the
Salvation of Men's Souls upon this Nicety of knowing the exact Canonical
Scripture received by the Fathers, or upon our having a complete Set of the
several Books of Scripture? For if not, why does he make such a Stir with his
external Evidence of the Canon of the several Books! Again, I have to inquire
of him, how far he thinks the Testimony of the primitive Fathers may serve as
an external Evidence to satisfy us, that we have pure and genuine Scriptures,
the true and entire Canon, without Mutilation, or Corruption? And how he will
make it appear, that their Testimony is the only external Evidence? Or if so,
whether this external Evidence is absolutely necessary, that no other kind of
Evidence will suffice without this? And whether he thinks, we cannot have a
rational Conviction of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, without any
Regard to, or Knowledge of this Evidence from the Testimony of the Fathers?

I desire Mr. Layman to favor me with a just Reply to these Queries; the
Resolution whereof seems to be of some Importance in the present Controversy. I
am apt to think, it would help to ripen his Studies on these Points, if he
would please to consult the learned CHILLINGWORTH'S Protestant Religion. -- In
special I recommend to him these Parts of the Book, which I have had
particularly in my Eye. CHAP. II. Sect. 24th, and so on to Sect. 92d, passim.
Also Sect. 105, 126, 159. And CHAP. III. Sect. 27, 28, 29, 35, 38, 54. And
CHAP. IV. Sect. 53. -- Whoever reads Mr. Chillingworth, will easily perceive
the Views I had in the foregoing Queries; and how these affect the present
Controversy.

Upon the whole I will only observe; that however sufficient the Evidence for
the Canon of Scripture from universal Tradition may be, yet it is manifest Mr.
Chillingworth denies, there is the same Tradition to be pleaded in favor of
any Interpretation of Scripture in doubtful Cases. Page 102. He says, NOTHING
besides Scripture, comes to us with as full a Stream of Tradition as Scripture;
Scripture ALONE -- having Attestation from Tradition truly universal. --
NOTHING bu^ Scripture has descended to us from Christ, by original and
universal Tradition. -- Page 50. The Interpretations of obscure places of
Scripture, which without question the Apostles taught the primitive Church, are
WHOLLY LOST; there remains no Certainty scarce of ANY ONE. -- Page 75. The
Tradition of this Church, ( viz. the Church of all Ages, up to the Times and
Persons of the Apostles and our Savior himself) you say, must teach us what is
Scripture; and we are willing to believe it. And now, if you make it good unto
us, that the same Tradition, down from the Apostles, has delivered from Age to
Age, and from Hand to Hand, any Intepretation of any Scripture, we are ready to
embrace that also. -- Page 137, 138. These traditive Interpretations are all
LOST. -- Blessed therefore be the Goodness of God, who, seeing that what was
not written, was in such Danger to be lost, took Order, That what was necessary
should be written! St. Chrysosto^'s Counsel therefore, of accounting the
Churches Traditions worthy of Belief, we are willing to obey: And, if you can
of any Thing make it appear, that it is Tradition, we will seek no farther But
this we say withal, that we are persuaded you cannot make this appear in any
thing, but only the Canon of Scripture; and that there is NOTHING now extant,
and to be known by us, which can put in so good a Plea, to be the unwritten
Word of God [ alias, authentic Tradition from the Apostles] as the
unquestioned Books of Scripture, to be the written Word of God. -- The Argument
then from Tradition, however good, as to the Canon of Scripture, yet is not so,
as to any Interpretations pretended to be Apostolical. Consequently we may very
justly oppose the Argument from Tradition, in favor of Episcopacy, without
disarming our selves of the Plea, on the same Head, in behalf of the
Scripture-Canon, or giving any Advantage to Deists and Infidels. Whereas, to
say that there is as good Authority for Episcopacy, as for the Canon of
Scripture, seems to me very much to weaken the common Cause of Christianity,
and give the Atheists and Infidels indeed a great Handle against us, to laugh
at us and ridicule our Religion; since Episcopacy has so precarious a
Foundation, and has no evident universal and original Tradition, to support its
Claim of Divine Right. Of all the Men in the World, I should have thought Mr.
Layman the most unfit to accuse us of joining with Deists: the Charge returns
on himself with greater Justice. How strong a Temptation may it well be to a
Deist, to deride us, and our Religion, when he hears it warmly asserted, That
there is as great Evidence for the Divine Original of Episcopacy, as of
Christianity it self; while he knows how little of Evidence there is in the
Case of Episcopacy, and what Probability that the Tradition of its Divine Right
is supposi^itious, the mere Invention of interested and designing Men to screen
their own Usurpations. That DETESTABLE FALSE Proposition (as one calls it) Mr.
Toland, in his Amyntor, improves from the Non-juror Mr. Dodwell, to the great
disadvantage of the Christian Revelation; and I cannot imagine what any
Free-thinker in the World could say worse. How is the very Foundation of the
Christian Religion hereby Sapped!

And whereas Mr. Layman makes Episcopacy a parallel Case with that of Christ's
Divinity (p. 90, 91.) insinuating, by his way of arguing, as if they were both
DOUBTFUL Cases, in which we must come at the Sense of Scripture, by consulting
the ancient Fathers, as faithful Witnesses to the Matters of Fact, whether the
Church was governed by Bishops or not, and whether the eternal Divinity of the
Son of God was taught or not; I Am sure, this is to give a great Advantage to
Arian Heretics. Is the Case of Christ's Divinity left doubtful in Scripture;
notwithstanding the Apostle John wrote his Gospel with an explicit View to the
^^tablishing this important Point!

Does Mr. Layman think, the TRADITION of the Fathers may be safely depended on,
as the Rule of Faith, or (in other Words) a just measure by which we may judge
what we are assent to, as the Doctrine of Christ, and what not; when the
Apostle in his old Age, after long Experience and Observation, finding how
little the Understandings and Memories of Christians were to be trusted, and
how Tradition was already corrupted in so weighty a Point, as the Divinity of
Christ, though it i^ necessary for him to write, on purpose that they might believe
that Jesus is the Son of God. Joh. 20.31 -- Will Mr. Layman pretend, that the
Doctrine of Christ's Divinity is conveyed down to us by Traditionary
Interpretations in the Books of the Fathers, more plainly and clearly, than it
is in the Apostolical Writings! Did not the orthodox Fathers themselves make
their Appeal to the Scripture^, as containing plain Texts for the Divinity of
Christ! A Bp. TILLOTSON (Vol. I. p. 680.) observes, St. Chrysostom professes
to demonstrate out of Scripture, That the Son is of the same Substance with the
Father; and relies upon Scripture alone for this, without mentioning any other
kind of Argument. ( Hom. 32. de Consubst.) So that it seems St. Chrysostom was
not acquainted with the Insufficiency of Scripture for the Conviction of
Heretics in this Point; and that he was either ignorant of the (infallible)
Way of demonstrating this Point from Oral Tradition, or had no great Opinion of
it. Whereas contrary wise, The Heretics of old made their Appeal to the
Traditions of the Fathers, delivered from hand to hand, as preserving the true
Teaching of the Apostles. The Arian Heresy had once polluted almost all the
Churches, insomuch that the whole World (says Jerome) groaned, and wondered to
see it self turned Arian. "This Heresy was of a long Continuance; for (as Dr.
Tillotson, ibid. p. 704. observes) from it is Rise, which happened in the 20th.
Year of Constantine, it continued two hundred sixty six years" And it was the
manner of those Apostates to defend their Error by the specious Pretense of
Traditionary Interpretations of Scripture, handed down from the Apostles by
uninterrupted Succession. Jerome tells us, That the Heretics were will not to say,
We are the Sons of the WISE, who did from the Beginning deliver down to us the
Apostolical Doctrine: But he adds, That the true Sons of Judah adhere to the
SCRIPTURE. ( Comment. in Isa. c. 19. quoted by Dr. Tillotson.) I shall only add
the Judgment of Constantine, in his Speech to the Council of Nice, with the
Archbishop's Remark upon it ( Ibid. p. 753.) The Books of the Evangelists and
Apostles, and the Oracles of the old Prophets (says he) do EVIDENTLY teach us
what we ought to think of the Divine Majesty. Therefore laying aside all
seditious Contention, let us determine the Matters in question by Testimonies
out of the DIVINE WRITINGS. Not a Word of any other Tradition but Scripture,
which was held evident enough in those days; though now Mr. S. tells us, it is
not sufficient to decide that Controversy about the Divinity of Christ: --
Which Exception, if it were true, would strike at Protestancy, as condemning
the Scriptures of Imperfection, and at Christian Religion, as making one of the
first Principles of it precarious and doubtful: The natural Consequence of
which is, the exposing this sacred Instrument of our Religion, and even
Christianity it self, to the Flours of Deists and Infidels. I think I may be
allowed on this Occasion to repeat that remarkable Expression of Dr.
Tillotson's (Ibid. p. 677.) and with it I shall conclude this long Discourse,
Therefore, to be very plain with Mr. S. and Capt. E. I am heartily sorry to
see, that one of the chief Fruits of their Conversion is to abuse their BIBLE.

Sect. V. After all, supposing we should grant, that the Fathers are safe
Witnesses and the best Guides to the Sense of Scripture in doubtful Cases; yet,
it seems, the Concession will do Mr. Layman's Cause but little Service. For
observe, in order to the Pertinency of this his 2d Rule, in the present Case,
he must allow that he founds his Doctrine, of Episcopacy an ^^^stolick
Institution, upon Doubtful Texts, as expounded by the Fathers: Else I cannot
devise what Business that Rule for right interpreting of Scripture, has in the
Controversy before us. Now, this notwithstanding, the Gentleman advances
Episcopacy to the Dignity of an Article of FAITH: which if it be, I Am sure it
destroys the Foundation of his 2d Rule; For no true Pr^testant ever made
Tradition necessary to support any Article of Faith, nor ever made that an
Article (...) Faith, which has no other than doubtful Texts to countenance it.
Hear that of Archbishop TILLOTSON ( ubi supra, (...) 685.) Our Principle is,
that the Scripture does SUFFICIENTLY interpret it self, i. e. is plain to all
Capacities, in Things NECESSARY to be believed and practiced. -- As for obscure
and more doubtful Texts, we acknowledge the Comments of the Fathers to be a
good Help, but no certain Rule of Interpretation" So ( p. 658, 9) "The Opinion
of the Protestants concerning the Rule of Faith is this in general, That those
Books which we call the Holy Scriptures, are the Means whereby the Christian
Doctrine has been brought down to us. -- That the Books of Scripture are
sufficiently plain, as to all Things necessary etc. Again (p. 665.) Although oral
Tradition be the Means whereby we come to know that these are the Books of
Scripture; Yet these Books are the next and immediate Means whereby we come to
know what is Christ's Doctrine, and consequently what we are to believe. --
Hear also that of Mr. SPRINT ( Necess. of Conf^^m. p. 81.) We are to observe,
that our Church (as other reformed Churches) do teach nothing fundamental,
which is not EXPRESSLY taught in the Word. -- The fundamental Points, and
special Precepts of Christ, She proposes as binding the Conscience under
pain of Condemnation to every wilful and impenitent Transgressor. The
Circumstantialls or Ceremonialls determined by her, out of the general Rules
of the Word, she proposes and enjoyneth as free, not binding the Conscience in
themselves; as variable, not perpetual; as accidental, not necessary. -- If
this be a true Account of the Church of England, then it is plain, that Mr.
Layman departs from the Sense of his own Church, when he proposes Episcopacy as
a fundamental Point, and yet at the same time numbers it among those Cases that
are Doubtful, in which the Judgment of the Fathers is a necessary Help. Or if
that Account be false, and Mr. Layman has the Concurrence of his own Church
with him in asserting Episcopacy, though not Evident in Scripture, to be a
Fundamental of Religion, or a matter of Faith, a Point necessary to be believed
and practiced, Then I say let him and his Church fall under the Lash of that
impartial Sentence passed by the Great CHILLINGWOTH ( Prot. Relig. p. 125.) If
the Church propose, as Matters of FAITH certainly true, such unfundamental
Points, as she is not warranted to propose, by EVIDENT Text of Scripture; she
may well be questioned, Q^O WARRANTO? She builds without a Foundation; and
says, Thus says the LORD, when the Lord does not say so: which cannot be
excused from RASHNESS and high PRESUMTION. And whatever be the Opinion of Mr.
Layman, or his Church, or the Fathers, as to the Divine Right and Necessity of
Episcopacy, I say in the Language of Mr. Chillingworth (p. 363, 4.) Points of
Doctrine (as all other things) are as they are, and not as they are esteemed:
neither can a necessary Point be made unnecessary by being so accounted, nor an
unnecessary Point be made necessary by being overvalued. -- They that believe
all Things plainly delivered in Scripture, believe all Things fundamental: and
are at SUFFICIENT UNITY in Matters of Faith. So then (by the way) according to
this eminent Writer, Presbyterians are in Unity with the primitive Church, as
well as Mr. Layman: at sufficient Unity, notwithstanding we should happen to
differ from her about the Divine Right of Episcopacy; This being not one of the
Things plainly delivered in Scripture, but grounded on doubtful Texts, by the
Gentleman's own (at least implicit) Acknowledgement. -- I have said the less on
this Head now, because I shall have Occasion afterward to make some further
Remarks upon it.

Having thus examined the Force of Mr. Layman's principal Pleas in behalf of
the Authority of the Fathers, as Interpreters of Scripture in doubtful Cases, I
must now lea^e it with the Reader to judge whether I have not entirely
invalidated his 2d Rule for the just interpreting of Scripture, at least as
applied to the present Case: and shall only add this one Reflection, in the
Words of Dr. STILLINGFLEET ( Irenic. p. 319.) If we must stand to the Judgment
of the Fathers, let us stand to it in this, That no TRADITION is any farther to
be embraced, than as it is founded on the WORD of GOD. For which Purpose those
Words of Cyprian are very observable ( Ep. 74.) In Compendio est etc. He
asserts it an easy matter for truly religions and plain-hearted Men to lay
aside their Error, and to find out the Truth; which is by returning to the
Head and Spring of Divine Tradition, viz. the Scriptures. -- And when Stephen
the Bishop of Rome would tedder him to Tradition, Cyprian keeps his Liberty by
this close Question, Unde illa Traditio? Utrumne de Dominica et Evangelica
Auctoritate descendens, an de Apostolorum Mandatis atque Epistolis veniens etc.
We see (says Dr. Stillingfleet upon it) this good Man would not baulke his way
one foot for the great bugbear of Tradition, unless it did bear the Character
of a Divine Truth in it, and could produce the Credentials of Scripture to
testify its Authority to him.

Sect. VI. I proceed now to discharge my Debt with relation to our Author's
POSTULATA, which I promised to consider. He says ( p. 59.) I shall desire you
to grant me these two or three Postulata, or give me Reason why they may not be
admitted. I shall endeavor to gratify the Gentleman, in one or other part of
his disjunctive Desire.

His FIRST Postulatum is, That the same Word may be used in different Senses,
in different Ages: As for Instance, the Word Imperator etc. This, I declare, is
an unlucky Example: the Change of the Sense of that Name, he intimates, came in
with the Alteration of the State; and if Mr. Layman will allow the like Reason
or Occasion for changing the Sense of the Word Bishop, viz. an Alteration of
the Constitution of the Church, much good may do him with his Postulatum! I
will give him full Liberty to make the best use he can of it, to serve his
Cause. However I must observe, there is a Difference between what may possibly,
and what may lawfully be done. -- If we may take Leave to alter the Sense of
Scripture Names, Words and Phrases, at Pleasure, we may at this Rate (to borrow
some of Mr. Layman's Words) interpret away several Articles of the Christian
Faith.

His SECOND Postulatum is, That therefore the promis^uous Use of two Words in
one Age, does not hinder, but that they may be fi^ed in the next Age, to
signify two different Things, which were really different in the former Age,
though under other Denominations; as for Instance, the words KNAVE, and SERVANT
etc. And so it may possibly have been with the words BISHOP and PRESBYTER etc.
I cannot but observe, again, if the Gentleman will have the Case he mentions,
pass for a Parallel, it is certainly a very unlucky one. The word Servant, I
suppose, retains its ancient honest meaning; but Knave is become a Term of
Reproach, an ignominious Character: Now I Am something at a Loss how to apply
this part of the Parallel, whether to his Bishop or his Presbyter; being both
degenerated from their original and innocent Meaning: which makes me inclined
to think his Instance not a fit Parallel. And I think so for another Reason;
Because the words Knave and Servant were never, that I know of, promiscuously
as'd (as he pretends the words Bishop and Presbyter are in Scripture) in an
indifferent Application to two different Sorts of Persons at the same time. --
I observe further, This his second Postularum is founded in an Hypothesis,
which does not appear evidently true, That the Word Bishop changed its Sense in
the Next Age. However I shall not stand at present on a Pr^chronism here; but
will for Argument's sake suppose it a just state of Fact. Nevertheless, the
Question rises, Whether the Fathers held their Bishops, in the new Sense of the
Word, to be of Divine Right? Mr. Layman, I doubt not, will be of Opinion, They
did so. But then unhappily for him it falls out, since Words may vary their
Sense in different Ages, we are consequently left at an Uncertainty what they
meant by a Divine Right. Mr. Layman, I suppose, will understand by it a Right
of Duty or Obligation, by virtue of a positive Institution of Christ: But the
Fathers might mean by it only a Right of lawful Liberty, by virtue of the
Divine Permission (they apprehending no express Prohibition in the Case) and by
virtue of the general Rules of pursuing Peace and Unity, to which Ends they
might think their invented Episcopacy a Means adapted: and it is well known,
they were wont to stamp any thing with the Names of Divine and Apostolical,
that they thought had a Tendency to those excellent Ends. So that these
Phrases, Divine Right and Apostolical Tradition, as used by the Fathers, do
manifestly carry as much Ambiguity with them, as the word Bishop in Scripture.

And then another Difficulty is* what was the new Sense, in which the Fathers
applied the Word Bishop, after the appropriating of the Name to some special
Persons in the Ministry; whether it denoted at first a different Order, or only
a different Degree in the same Order; whether it denoted a Superiority of Power
over the Presbyters, and an Exclusion of them from the Government of the
Church, or only a mere Presidency, a Priority of one for Order's sake above the
rest, still preserving an Equality of Power. I think the latter is more
probably the true State of the Case. But Mr. Layman, looking through the false
Prospective of modern Usage, thinks the Name Bishop meant the same Thing in the
primitive Church, as now in the Church of England: Just as the Papists,
whenever the Word Missa occurs in ancient Fathers, presently imagine it intends
the same Thing, as it now through Custom signifies, since it has been
appropriated to that which they call the Sacrifice of the Altar. Whereas the
Name at first (says Dr. Stillingfleet, Irenic. p. 238) was taken only for the
public Service of the Church, so called from the Dismission of the People
after it with an ^^e, Missa est: but in process of Time the Lord's Supper
engrossed the Name Missa to its self; and when the Sacrifice of the Altar came
up among the Papists, it was appropriated to that: For though they innovated
Things never so much, yet it has been always the Policy of that Church not to
innovate Names, that so the Incautelous might be better deceived with a
Pretense of Antiquity; and thus under the anciently simple name of Missa, lies
at this day couched a Mass of Errors. -- And I find Mr. Chillingworth (p.
261.) making that Observation; They (i. e. among Protestants) that confess some
of your (the Papal) Doctrins to have been the Doctrine of the Fathers, may be
mistaken, being abused by many Words and Phrases of the Fathers, which may have
the Roman Sound, when they are far from the Sense. Some of them I am sure are
so etc. -- Of the same Stamp is the Argument for modern English Episcopacy,
from the Use of the Word (...) or Bishop in Antiquity: for though the Name we ^ay
allow to bear a somewhat different Sense in early Antiquity, from what it does
in Scripture, yet its ancient Sense among the Fathers might differ still more
from the modern Acceptance of it. Though the Name be retained, yet the Nature of
the present Episcopacy may vastly differ from, if not be quite repugnant to,
the ancient Episcopacy. -- I don't therefore at present see how my Cause will
be hurt, though I should grant Mr. Layman his two first Postulata.

His THIRD and last Postulatum is, That we can no more conclude, because the
same Persons in Scripture, were called Bishops and Presbyters, that there was
no such Subordination of Officers, as we contend for; Than we can conclude,
because the same Persons in Scripture were called Apostles, Presbyters, and
Deacons, (as certainly they were) that therefore there was no such
Subordination of Deacons to Presbyters, and of Presbyters to Apostles, as you
allow there was. This Postulatum is founded on several Hypotheses, either of
which will bear a Dispute; and therefore must not pass for a self-evident
Proposition.

1. It supposes, That there was the same Subordination of Pre^byters to
Apostles, as of Deacons to Presbyters: Whereas in the latter Case there was
manifestly a Difference of Order; but whether so in the former, is not clear,
and out of question. The Apostolical Preeminence might result merely from their
inspired Gifts and peculiar Circumstances; without a Superiority of Order, and
Commission-Powers essentially diverse from those of Presbyters.

2. It supposes, That there is in Scripture the same promis^nous Use of the
Words Apostles, Presbyters, and Deacons, as of the Words Bishops and
Presbyters; which I see no Light at present to grant: For though we find the
Apostles of Christ and the Presbyters of the Churches sometimes called Deacons
(this Word in such Case being used in its general Signification, Servants) Yet
where do we find any Persons, that were Deacons (in the restrained Sense of the
Word, as meaning those special Officers so denominated; I say, where do we find
Deacons) in Scripture called Apostles of Christ or Presbyters of the Churches?
Whereas in the Case of Bishops and Presbyters, there was a mutual Interchange:
the Application of the Names was reciprocal. This makes a vast Difference, and
I think quite destroys Mr. Layman's Argument

3. It is here supposed, That those whom aftertimes appropriated the Name
Bishop to, were in fact and right Successors to the Apostles, as an Order
distinct from those called Presbyters and Bishops in Scripture, and having a
Superiority of Power and Government over them. This Mr. Layman affirms: but I
deny; and must wait for his Proofs.

I shall now beg Leave in my Turn to lay down a few Postulatums; which I desire
Mr. Layman to grant me, or else give some Reason why they may not be admitted.

I. That the same Name may happen to signify different Officers in several Ages
As for Instance, the name Governor, in the former times of New England
imported an Officer, acting as President or Moderator, with the power only of a
CASTING Vote, in the General Court: Whereas, since the Change of the
Constitution by a new Charter, the same Name Governor denotes a Person
representing the King's Majesty, and having a NEGATIVE Voice in all Acts of
Assembly.

II. That therefore the Contin^^nce of the Application of a Name, does not
hinder but that the Officer, to whom it is applied (though in appearance the
same, having always been at the head of Affairs) may in Reality be very
different (in regard of an Accumulation of new and essentially diverse Powers)
from what the Officer, going under that Name, was in former Ages. So it may
probably have been with the Name Bishop, in the Christian Church, which is
changed from its ancient Signification, and carries with it a quite different
Idea now, from what (...) had in early Antiquity: as much, it seems, as the
word Missa, Priest, and other Names used by the Church of Rome, ^^ffer in Sense
now, from their original Meaning, when ^^^st introduced in the primitive
Church. Dr. Stillingfleet ^^s that Observation ( Irenic. p. 263.) It is a
common Mistake to think that the Ministers of the Gospel succeed by way of
Correspondence and Analogy to the Priests under the Law; which Mistake has
been the Foundation and Original of many Errors. For when in the primitive
Church, the Name of Priests came to be attributed to Gospel Ministers from a
fair Compliance (as was thought then) of the Christians only to the Name used
both among Jews and Gentiles; in process of time, Corruptions increasing in the
Church, those Names that were used by the Christians by way of Analogy and
Accommodation, brought in the Things themselves primarily intended by those
Names: So by the metaphorical names of Priests and Alt^rs, at last came up the
Sacrifice of the Mass; without which, they thought the names of Pri^st and
Altar were insignificant. -- It is easy to observe (says he, p 237.) that
nothing has been a more fruitful Mother of Mistakes and Errors, than the
looking upon the Practice of the primitive Church through the Glass of our own
Customs: Especially when under the same Name (as it is very often seen)
something very different from what was primarily intended by the use of the
Word, is set forth to us. It were no difficult Task to multiply Examples in
this kind; wherein Men meeting with the same Names, do apprehend the same
Things by them, which they now through Custom signify, without taking notice
of any Alteration in the Things themselves signified by those Names.

III. That we can no more conclude, because there was some Difference made
between Bishops and Presbyters in the primitive Church, after the Apostles
times, that there was such a Subordination between them, as Mr. Layman contends
for; than we can conclude, because some Bishops in Antiquity were distinguished
with an Archiepiscopal Dignity, that therefore there was and ought to be a
Subordination of one Bishop to another; or because the Bishop of Rome was
anciently vested with a Patriarchal Primacy, that therefore there was and ought
to be a Pope, as Christ's Vicar, sitting Monarch in the Church, Lord paramount
to all other Bishops: which are Things, I suppose he will not allow. -- It Is a
pertinent Remark of Dr. Stillingfleet's (Irenic. p. 252.) We read not of any
Command, that in the San^edrin one should have some Peculiarity of Honor above
the rest; this Men's natural Reason would prompt them to, by reason of a
necessary Priority of Order in some above others: But yet all Order is not
Power, nor all Power juridical, nor all juridical Power a sole Power: therefore
it is a mere Paralogism in any, from Order to infer Power; or from a delegated
Power by Consent, to infer a juridical Power by Divine Right; or lastly, from a
Power in common with others, to deduce a Power excluding others. -- All which,
I think, they are guilty of, who would establish modern Episcopacy by
Inferences from the mere Name and Preeminence of Bishops in the primitive
Church, or would defend the Papal Supremacy by Arguments from the ancient
Primacy of Order and honorable Titles, by which the Bishop of Rome was
distinguished among the Fathers. They stand on an equal Foot; therefore I join
the two Cases

My Design in these Postulates is to fix our Lay-writer, who seems very much of
the Mind (notwithstanding his contrary Pretenses) to play upon the Identity of
Names and Ambiguity of Words. He tells us, that we may wrangle on upon
Scripture without End, if we set aside his Postulata: and yet in Defiance to
his Postulata, he carries the impertinent Wrangle into the Traditionary Part of
the Controversy; and has scarce any thing worth mentioning, to offer in his
Cause, out of Antiquity, besides the Use of Names, and Words, and Phrases, that
have the EPISCOPAL Sound, but as used by the Fathers are very distant from the
modern Sense. I may justly return him some of his own Language, adapted to my
purpose ( p. 91, etc.) Here you did mighty well to pass by your own POSTULATA,
because you knew well crouch where the Shoe pinc^es; and that the Life of the
Controver^y as to Fathers depends on them: for set them aside, and you may
WRANGLE on upon Fathers and Traditions without End; whch is what you seem to
delight in, at least as much as we. If you had taken a just Notice of your own
Postulata, it would have spoiled, and perhaps prevented, most of your pretty
Remarks upon Antiquity. Pray, Sir, let us act like Men, and not always be
Children. We must wholly leave contending about Terms.

It Is worthy of Notice, what Dr. Stillingfleet says ( Irenic. p. 239.) Names
and Things then must be accurately distinguished, and the Sense of the Names
must neither be fetched from the Custom now used, nor from the Etimologie of
the Word, but from the undoubted Practice of Apostolical Times, if that can be
made appear what it was. -- And the Dr. observes ( p. 321.) As to matters of
Faith, we have Archimedes his Postulatum granted us for that, a Place to fix
our faith on, though the World be moved out of its place, I mean the undoubted
WORD of God: but as to matters of Fact not clearly revealed in Scripture, no
Certainty can be had of them, from the hovering Light of unconstant TRADITION,
-- in many things repugnant to its self.

Sect. VII. Mr. Layman having gone through his Postulata, upon the Design of
fixing us, that we might come to a fair stating of the Case, and bring the
Matter to a short Issue, proceeds to lay down this COROLLARY upon the whole (
p. 60.) From whence I gather (says he) That we must wholly leave contending
about Terms, and that the QUESTION between us must be this, Whether the
APOSTLES did not appoint in EACH CHURCH, a PRESIDENT or GOVERNOR superior to,
and with Jurisdiction over the PRESBYTERS or BISHOPS and DEACONS, who were
Officers of THAT Church, as well as the PEOPLE under them.

I must profess, the Gentleman took a wise Method, to guard himself, by
prefacing his Question with a Caution against contending about Terms; for he
has, in this pretended fair State of the Case, made use of such ambiguous Terms
and Phrases, as without a distinct Explication of them it is impossible to bring
the Controversy to an Issue, but we must still be entangled with Logomachies.
For my part I desire to understand, and to be understood: I hate, and I scorn a
mere Strife of Words. And did I not think the Merits of the Cause were really
affected by the Ambiguities, I find here, I should be far from picking a
Quarrel with Terms: but I think, some he has used on this Occasion, are of too
doubtful a Signification, to pass without a Definition. To avoid the Appearance
of captious Wrangling. I Will but single out two or three Expressions.

Thus, when he speaks of the Apostles appointing in (...) CHURCH, it is a
Question that enters into the Heart of the Controversy, What CHURCH is here to
be understood? Mr. Layman knows, this Word has various Significations, and is
of as uncertain a Sound, as the Word Bishop. I inquire then, what Notion he has
of the primitive Churches, in each of which he says the Apostles appointed a
President etc. Were they of the Diocesan, or the Parochial Form? By a PAROCHIAL
Church, I suppose, is usually understood, A particular Society or fixed
Congregation of Neighbor-christians, combined for personal Communion, and
mutual Edification, in the Observance of Divine Ordinances, of public Worship
and Discipline, administered by stated Presbyters or Bishops (one or more)
resident among them. But by a DIOCESAN Church I suppose is usually understood,
A Plurality of these Parochial Congregations, united under one General Officer,
of the highest Order in the sacred Ministry, having the sole Power of
Ordination, and Eccl^siastical Government within a certain District. If I
mistake in my Definitions, I shall willingly submit to Correction. Now I desire
the favor of Mr. Layman, to say which of these different Species, he intended
in the Question before us: or if neither, then to give a Third. If he speaks of
the Parochial Church, we shall not be fond of contending with him; provided he
does not make it essential to a Church, to have subordinate Presbyters in it.
But if he speaks of a Diocesan Church, I desire to be resolved in these
Inquiries, Whether it was limited originally by the Apostles to a particular
City; or took a wider Compass, and extended to a Multitude of Cities and Towns,
according to the Model of these Times? And whether he holds this Diocesan
Church to be a Church of the lowest Order; so that Parochial Congregations are
no Churches, but only Parts of the Church individuated by one Diocesan Pastor?

An other Expression I must remark upon, is that, wherein he characterizes the
Officer, in Question: Whether the Apostles did not appoint in each Church a
PRESIDENT, or GOVERNOR superior to, and with JURISDICTION over the Presbyters
etc. The word President is equivocal, serving for very different Notions; and
though, for any thing in the Notation of the Word, it may have the same Idea with
the Term Governor, yet in modern Use it signifies only a chief Manager or
Director, as the President of the King's Council, whose Office is to propose
Business at the Council Table, and report -- Now had Mr. Layman used but this
single Term, I should have thought he meant nothing more than a Moderator in
the Council of Presbyters: And indeed he tells us ( p. 101.) That this is ALL
he contends for, in behalf of Bishops, supposing them fixed in that Office, and
no public Acts of Government be done by the Presbytery without them at the
head of Affairs. But this seems to me, to appear all Jest, when I consider what
follows in the Question, by way of Explanation; -- " a President, or GOVERNOR
(says he) superior to, and having JURISDICTION, over the Presbyters" etc. I
must confess, this looks to me a very odd sort of Moderator! If his President
must be such a Governor, he does (...) amuze us, when he says, a Moderator is
all he contends for. The Gentleman appears plainly to contend for a Governor
with Jurisdiction over Presbyters. The word Jurisdiction sounds high; it may
comprehend all Acts of Government, Legislative, Judicial, and Executive: I know
not whether he meant all; or if not all, which did he mean? If he can soften
down the Words Governor and Jurisdiction, to a Sense consistent with the Idea
of a Moderator, I shall be glad. It Is pity, he could to better define the
Episcopacy he contends for. He leaves it at miserable Uncertainties.

In fine, I observe, Mr. Layman in the Question having mentioned the Presbyters
or Bishops and Deacons, brings in t^ Phrase, " the People UNDER them." Now I
desire to know, in what Sense and how far he will allow the People to be UNDER
the Presbyters or Bishops, by Apostolical Appointment. Have the Parish Priests
in the Church of England the Government of the People, the Power of the
Church-Keys, in the full Degree, as the Apostles left it to the Presbyters of
particular Churches? Did the Apostles leave the Presbyters Assistants in
Discipline, and in possession of a proper Church Government over the People as
Assessors with the Prelates? And are the Parsons in the Church of England
Governors in every Parish, under their respective Diocesans, as Presidents or
Moderators? Or are the Diocesans sole Governors, exclusive of the
Parish-Presbyters? By what Mr. Layman says (p. 100.) The governing Powers and
Power of Ordination are by Divine Appointment vested only in the Prelates,
exclusive of all Partners: When Timothy and Titus are represented as being
invested with them, and no mention is made of any that were PARTNERS with them
(says he) we cannot justly presume, that any where in those Churches had those
Powers. And yet almost in the same breath ( p. 101.) he says, If you will allow
them to have been MODERATORS of the Presbyteries, that is all we contend for
etc. Here seems to me to be a Contradiction in Terms: I shall wish to see how
the Gentleman will reconcile these two Passages, in appearance so inconsistent.
Ti then we cannot possibly understand what it is he contends for and his
Question thus stated leaves us as much in the Dark as ever. I must beg him to
define what the Power of his PRESBYTERS or Bishops is in their respective
Churches, or how the People are under them: whether in any other Sense than as
they are under the DEACONS. And I must entreat him more clearly to define the
Power of his President or Governor, and tell us what is that Jurisdiction over
the Bishops and Deacons, which he attributes to the said Officer.

But after all this, perhaps we have been talking only of a mere Phantasm; a
President that exists but in Imagination: for we must observe, in England it is
not one Prelate, but one Layman, a Chancellor that is eminently this
President, who has in his hand the Power of the Keys, and manages the Business
of Court-trials; the Prelate seldom or not at all meddling with it, and the
Parochial Bishops entirely excluded from it, being but as Criers to publish the
Sentences of the Lay-Chancellor.

And truly I must observe, the Gentleman leaves us at a loss, whether by his
President or Governor over the Presbyters, he does not actually mean this
Lay-Chancellor: for in his Definition he omits telling us, whether the Officer
appointed by the Apostles to exercise Jurisdiction over the Presbyters, was one
so much as in sacred Orders. But if it seem too captions, to except at his
Definition on this Account, and though we should suppose he meant such a
President as is in Orders; yet there is another Exception, which I cannot see how
he will avoid the force of: and this is, That he has left us at Uncertainty
whether his President must be of a superior Order to the Presbyters; and may
not be an Officer in the Nature of an Archbishop, of the same Order with the
Presbyters or Bishops, though above them in Degree: for I hope the Gentleman will
allow an Archbishop in the Church of England to be " a President or Governor
superior to and with Jurisdiction (in some Sense) over the Presbyters or
Bishops," since he has so many transcendent Prerogatives, and the Prelates are
obliged at their Consecration to take an Oath of due OBEDIENCE to him. Or
perhaps Mr. Layman's President may be the Archdeacon (an acknowledged mere
Presbyter) or the Dean (still a Presbyter;) either of which (and the latter
especially, in the Peculiars) is an Officer to whom his Description, said down
in the Question, agrees exactly; -- "a President or Governor superior to and
with Jurisdiction over the Presbyters", etc.

Thus the Gentleman has put us to some Trouble, by his floating so in
Ambiguities, to search out his Meaning. And now if I have been so happy as to
hit upon his true Meaning, in either of the Instances above, I must desire to
be informed how it appears, that the Apostles did appoint in each Church, such
a President or Governor, whether Chancellor, Dean, Archdeacon, or Archbishop.
Was this the State of Things, while the Church was yet in her Embryo and first
Rudiments? Or did Things arrive to this Pass afterward, when the State of the
Church became more ripe and settled? Mr. Layman pretends (p. 61.) to confine
himself, in his Inquiries, to what Intimations we have of the Constitution of
those Churches, which were grown into Form, and seem to have been settled in
Scripture-times. And a dear Friend of his, the Dialogist ( p. 23.) boasts of
these his Letters, as exhibiting clear Proofs, that the SAME FORM of Government
NOW in the Church of ENGLAND, has obtained from the APOSTLES Days. Hence then
we must conclude, if Mr. Layman has proved any thing, he has proved the Divine
Right of Archbishops, Archdeacons, Deans, and Lay-Chancellors, as appointed by
the Apostles, when the Churches were bro't into Form, Presidents or Governors
over the Presbyters; for such they are according to the present Model of the
Church of England, and do as Governors enter as much into the Essence of the
Constitution, for ought I see, as the Diocesan Prelates. For which Reason, if
it should be replied by Mr. Layman, that he pretends not to prove the Divine
Institution of Chancellors, Deans, etc. I cannot help expressing my Astonishment
at the strange Assurance of his Friend, who would bear us in hand, That in
these Letters we shall find clear Pr^^ss, that the Original Government of the
Church was Episcopal (i. e. after the manner of the Church of England; so he
must mean, for it follows) and that the SAME Form we NOW have in our Church,
has obtained in all Ages and Places, from the Apostles Days unto our own
Times." A Saying this, which it will be hard for the greatest Wit to invent a
Parallel to, for the amazing Confidence it betrays; and could I hope by any
means to escape the merciless L^sh of this confident Dialogist (to borrow some
pretty Phrases of his own, p. 3, 4.) I would a^^ too, for the notorious
Falsehood; if a Man of such Fidelity as he can be guilty of such a Crime.

But after all, notwithstanding the Uncertainty of Mr. Layman's Language in the
Question, where by President or Governor appointed by the Apostles in each
Church, may be indifferently understood either of the soremention'd governing
Officers in his Church; yet I am rather prone to conjecture, he intended the
Diocesan Bishop or Prelate: and accordingly I shall de futuro so understand him.

Sect. VIII. Mr. Layman having thus stated the Question, proceeds now to
consider what Light the holy Scriptures, interpreted by the forementioned
Rules, give us for the Resolution of it.

Here the Gentleman premises ( p. 61.) That he shall wholly wave the
Consideration of the State of Things, while Christ was upon Earth, -- and
before the Churches were brought into Form, while they were entirely under the
Guidance of Inspiration. -- And will confine himself to what Intimations we
have of the Constitution of those Churches, which were grown into Form, and
seem to have been settled in Scripture-times.

Well, and what is the Account he has gathered up of these Churches in their
mature and settled State? Truly it appears to me but a jumbl'd Business.
However, I will set his Report in as fair a Light, as I can: and make some
Remarks, but as briefly as well as may be; for the Discussion of the Point,
with relation to Scripture-Arguments, has been done so particularly and fully
by Elutherius in his Vindication, that I have but little Room left me for any
Reflections here. However, I will just offer a few Observations.

1. The Gentleman tells us ( p. 62.) As to PRESBYTERS, We find, that when the
Apostles had converted any considerable Number in a City, they left 'em under
the Guidance of Them; Ordaining ELDERS in every City ( Church, it should be)
Act 14.23. -- What does the Gentleman mean by Guidance? It should seem, he
intends Pastoral Care. Hence he has that Phrase ( p 63.) "They were at first
taken CARE of by Presbyters:" and alleges in Proof that Exhortation to the
Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20.17. Take Heed to the Flock over which the Holy Ghost
has made you Overseers, or Bishops. Now, when the Churches had attained to
this State of Things, methinks they were sufficiently ripened, and grown into
Form; a Form very happy, and which the Churches of New England by long
Experience find as effectual to the good and holy Ends of Church Societies, as
the Diocesan Form ever was, in its most flourishing State. -- And by the way,
we have here a very notable Concession from our Lay-Adversary; That the
A^^stles constituted Presbyters, with an Episcopal Care of the Churches, before
he pretends there were any fixed Prelates appointed by them. Here then we are
agreed, That the Christian Churches were at first under the Guidance and Care
of Presbyters or Bishops, without a fixed President at their head: and now I
might with good Advantage turn against him his own Argument from the safer Side
(p. 114, 15) and in Imitation of him say; He allows Presbyters to have been
appointed by the Apostles, and that the Churches were at first committed to
their Care and Guidance as the Bishops of them, without any fixed President
over them; This he allows: whereas we dispute the Apostolic Appointment of his
fixed PRESIDENT, with Arguments, at least of very considerable Weight. From
this we satisfy our selves, that our Side of the Question is the safer; and in
such a Case (he tells us) the safest Side is to be chosen.

But, to go on,

2. I observe, Mr. Layman tells us ( p. 63.) It seems to be the Case every
where, That the Christians of a CITY were called a CHURCH, how many
Congregations soever they made: and of this he appears to be grown to an
Assurance, by that time he had got to page 94. -- Thus, it seems, we have an
Answer already to one of the Questions, I just now put to him. But the other
Question waits to be resolved: and agreeable to it, I will here indulge my
inquisitive Humor so far as to ask Mr. Layman, Whether when the Christians of
a City were multiplied so as to make several Assemblies under the Care of
stated Rectors, we are now to look on the Church as ripened and grown into
Form? Could it be a proper Church, while under the Guidance of the Presbyters
or Bishops, without a fixed President at the head of Affairs? If so, I think
the Presbyterian Cause (as might easily be shown) will receive no small
Advantage from this Concession. But if not, then I pray what must be the State
of the Liturgick Congregations in New England? At this Rate I see not how it
can be allowed, there is so much as one true Church, among all those of the
Prelatical Persuasion here. Well may they (as they affect to do) call
themselves the Church of ENGLAND: for that they are, if a Church in any Sense.
THERE resides their fixed President; if they have any at all in a special
Relation to them: and there only, if any where, have these new-fangl'd
Separatists their Church-Existence. Mr. Layman's Principle, for ought I see,
destroys the Being of Parish-Churches: for, be there ever so many Parishes in a
Diocese, or Bishopric, they all make but ^one Church. It Is then but by a hard
Cata^hresis, that he can call his Congregation a Parish Church; it being at
best but a part of a Church, and having its essential constitutive Head a
thousand Leagues off. Sad! if the " Head must answer for the Faults of the
Body. p. 66.

And, by the way, if the word Church in Scripture was generally used to signify
the Christians of a CITY; if it was in Scripture-times the Case every where (as
Mr. Layman says) That the Christians of a CITY were called a CHURCH; Then, I
must beseech him to let me know, how he can reconcile the Form and Practice of
his own Church to this Principle. It seems an unconscionable Stretch of the
Line, beyond all Scripture-Bounds, to draw it round a Multitude of Cities and
Towns, as in England; and much more to extend it from thence to the very Ends
of the Earth. In this Respect London, I think, may almost vie with Rome: and
truly it seems to me as consistent with Scripture-Institution, to unite the
universal Church under one Ecumenical Patriarch as to attempt the Coalition of
innumerable Christians in widely distant Countries under one Prelate or
Primate. What Distinction is there, to make this lawful and the other not? --
But I pray, when, how, and by what Rule or Reason was the ALTERATION from the
approved Custom in Scripture-Times bro't about? This mighty Change, from the
Church and Bishop of a City, to the Church and Bishop of a Province, a County,
or large Comp^^^ of Ground, containing many Cities and Towns, and Hundreds of
Congregations, must needs (I conclude) pass with Mr. Layman, if he abide by his
avowed Principles, for an Anti-Scriptural, and therefore an Antichristian
Innovation: And surely he must be able from History to give us some Account of
its Rise and Progress: for, can it be imagined, there should be no visible
Traces left of this Innovation? Could it possibly be introduced (according to
the Episcopal way of reasoning) without much Opposition, and Complaint,
especially from the degraded City-Bishops? Can this be thought, when Government
is so nice and tender a Point with Men? And What! did no Tongue or Pen rise up
in Defense of the City-Churches? Is it to be dreamed, that this Encroachment
upon their fundamental Rights, this Invasion of their undoubted Privileges,
should be tamely submitted to, without any Noise or Contradiction? And however
it came on, it should seem, it must be a comparatively modern Innovation. For
do you judge, it could possibly come up in the Days of Ignatius, or Irenaeus,
or even Cyprian; who must needs have had a clear Knowledge of the original
Constitution of the Christian Churches, and could not be mistaken about it,
since they lived so nigh to Scripture-Times! Surely those good Men, those holy
Martyrs, could never be consenting to so manifest a Deviation from the sacred
Apostolic Model of Church Government. They could never have a Hand in pulling
down the City-Presidents, set up by the Apostles for Conservators of Peace,
Unity, and Order in the City-Churches; when the Presbyters and Congregations
under them must certainly be (...) to fall a Sacrifice to Strife, Debate, and
Disorder, without the Presence of their respective Governor: at the head of
Affairs among them; and when indeed these Presidents themselves, having once
got the humor of Usurpation, would under Color of prudential Reasons for
enlarging their Bishopric, be apt to indulge the Lust of Dominion, and
Monopoly, which is ever insatiable and knows no Bounds: And by this unhappy
Means the Christian World would be filled with continual Animosities and
Emulations, the fruit which is Confusion, most opposite to the grand professed
End of Prelacy. Upon such Considerations as these, I must needs be of Opinion,
That none of the good old Fathers joined in this Conspiracy, to dissolve the
City-Church-State, and abolish that City-Episcopacy, which Mr. Layman says was
settled every where in Scripture-times, and which I suppose it is he speaks of
( p. 112.) where he celebrates Episcopacy as a wise Appointment of the Apostles
under the Guidance of the Holy Ghost, being in the nature of the Thing (says
he) the most likely Form of Government, to prevent Divisions and Disorders: and
adds, It is apparent from the whole face of Ecclesiastical History, that not
Episcopacy [no besure, not this CITY-Episcopacy, much less PARISH-Episcopacy]
but Opposition to it, and USURPATION OVER it, have been the Cause of those
horrid Convulsions, which the Christian World has often groaned under. Happy
were it for Christendom, if all Papal Tyrants and Protestant Usurpers in the
Churches every where had their extended Territories crumbled into just
Divisions, and Episcopacy were reduced within the ancient modest Bounds of a
Town or City at most. Will not Mr. Layman join in the Wish for a Return of
Scripture-Times, when there were City-Churches and City-Bishops every where,
and when therefore a Prelate of modern Figure would have appeared a prodigious
Sight! -- But I must go on to observe,

3. Our Author ( p 63.) says, The Churches were at first taken Care of by
Presbyters, still under the Government of the Apostles, as appears from the
Epistles to the Corinthians

Since he has mentioned the Corinthians, it leads me to make one Observation,
which may perhaps be of some Direction to us in forming a Judgment, as to the
Truth of Mr. Layman's Maxim, That in Scripture-times a Church consisted of all
the Christians of a City, how many Congregations soever they made. Now, if it
be supposed, that there was a Plurality of Christian Congregations in the City
of Corinth, then we may naturally be led to apply to them that Passage in 1
Cor. 14.34. where the Apostle prohibits their Women's speaking in the CHURCHES.
It seems to intimate a Number of Churches in that City, if there be any Weight
in that Observation, That it is not to be thought, he would particularly have
mentioned their Women, (...), if he had not meant the Churches of Corinth,
where they were likest to usurp that Authority. It has been often asserted by
our Adversaries with Confidence, that it does not once fail, That where
Churches are mentioned in the Plural, they are the Churches of a Province; not
of a City: But it seems, here it fails for once.

I will suppose then, that there were Parish-Churches in the City of Corinth:
and I have Mr. Layman's Authority for it, That when the Epistles to them were
written, they were under the Care of Presbyters, without a fixed President.
But, says he, " still under the Government of the APOSTLES" It Is granted, the
Apostles might superintend the Churches every where. The Direction and
Influence of inspired Apostles seemed very needful in the Infant-State of the
Church; and they continually traveled about, doing Good, confirming the Souls
of the Disciples, planting and establishing of Churches. But yet, were the
Churches, that had only Presbyters or Bishops, without a fixed Governor, any
MORE under the Government of the Apostles, than other Churches, where these
fixed Governors are pretended to be in place? Were not these fixed Presidents
as much under their superintendency, as the Presbyters? Mr. Layman says ( p.
65.) I am sure no Bishop in England pretends to more Authority over the Clergy
and People of his Diocese, than the Epistles of St. Paul give to Timothy and
Titus: what Truth there may be in this, I will not stay to examine; though I
believe, the Gentleman would be hard put to it to make it out: However, I must
return him this Observation. That I am sure many a Presbyter in England has no
greater Marks upon him of Subjection to his Bishop, than do appear on Timothy
and Titus to the Apostle Paul: at least these Prelates appear in as much
Subordination to and Dependency upon this Apostle, as the Presbyters of
Corinth; which may easily be made evident, by comparing the several Epistles to
them respectively. But whether they were equally so, or not; yet if Timothy and
Titus, notwithstanding their prelatical Character, were at all "still under the
Government of the Apostles," it suffices to my Purpose, and proves the Vanity
of this Objection in the Case of the Presbyters.

4. I observe, Mr. Layman adds a Limitation, They were at first taken Care of
by Presbyters, TILL such Time as they (i. e. the Apostles) finding their Work
too great, and their Charges too extensive for themselves, appointed fixed
Governors, or Presidents over both Clergy and People of each City, as St. Jerome
says, to prevent Schisms, etc.

Here the Gentleman seems to intimate, that the Apostles kept the Government of
the Churches in their own hands, and managed it themselves, as long as they
could; but at last through the Exigence of the Case, and as a Remedy to Schisms,
not so well prevented by their own Government, they at length threw it up, and
out of Necessity appointed fixed Governors over the Clergy and People in their
own Room. I wish he would give as the Scripture-Account of this Fact; for I
cannot let it pass for a notorious, universal, glaring matter of Fact. Nor can I
let Jerome stand for a Witness to it; methinks he lived too late to be an
Evidence in the Case: neither indeed do I know, that he has pretended to be
one. The Passage out of this Father, alleged by our Author, I Am of Opinion
(notwithstanding what he has offered, p. 9^, 7.) had no Reference to the
Apostles Times: and I think I have very good Reason on my side, when I consider
Dr. Stilling fleet's Arguments on this head ( Irenic. p. 279, 80.) to which I
refer Mr. Layman for a Solution of the main Difficulty he has started.

And as to the Notion of the Apostles appointing fixed Presidents over the
Clergy, in their own Time, will Mr. Layman please to accept Dr. Stilling
fleet's Judgment in the Case, after he had ripened his Studies in Antiquity (
Unreas. of Sep. p. 269.) where he observes; In the Preface before the Book of
Ordination, it is said, That it is evident -- that from the Apostles Time there
have been these Orders etc. What is the Reason that they express it thus, FROM
the Apostles Time, rather than IN the Apostles Time, but that they believed,
while the Apostles LIVED, They managed the Affairs of Government themselves: --
While the Apostles lived, it is probable there were no fixed Bishops, or but
few: But as they went off, so they came to be settled in the several Churches.
-- The Dr. indeed appears for unsetl'd Governors besides the Apostles in their
Lifetime; such as Timothy and Titus: But thinks there were no fixed Bishops,
or but few. So then, it seems, it is doubtful whether during the Apostolic Age
the Churches had any such fixed Governors at all; but continued all that while
under the Guidance of the Presbyters or Parish-Bishops; and Mr. Layman's fixed
Presidents came in after the Apostles time. The Presidency then in
Scripture-times, for ought I can learn, was an unfixed Itinerant Thing; this is
the best, that Scripture-Example can be pleaded for: and over this, it should
seem, there was the Presidency of the Apostles themselves. Surely, whether it
was a fixed or unfixed Presidency, Mr. Layman will allow, that the Apostles
reserved to themselves the same Power of Superintendency they had, while the
Churches were under the Presbyters only. I ask this Gentleman to tell me
plainly, whether his supposed fixed Governors were the Apostles Successors, in
codem Gradu, upon an exact Par with them: or were they their Substitutes,
Delegates, and Representatives? In short, were they supreme Governors, or only
Sub-Governors? A direct Answer to this plain short Question will perhaps go a
great way toward deciding the present Controversy. If he says, they were the
former, I think it will be inconsistent with all the Accounts of Fact we have
in Scripture: and if he says, they were the latter, then I doubt no Argument
can be drawn to his Purpose; for the Deputies, we may rationally think* ceased
with their Principals, and could have no Successors.

In fine, should we allow there were actually fixed Presidents in the Apostles
times, yet it must be remembered, They were but City-Presidents, and fixed
within those narrow Bounds; and where it happened there was but one
Congregation in a City, there could be but a Parish President. And I cannot
devise at present, how any Argument can be drawn from either of these
Presidents, in favor of modern Episcopacy; which, whether it be considered as
National, Provincial, or only Diocesan, is a vast Remove from the ancient
Episcopacy. If we should own Mr. Layman's Presidents, as appointed by the
Apostles; yet a Diocesan over many Cities, an Archbishop over a whole Province,
and a Primate over all England, must be acknowledged to be beside
Scripture-Institution and Example; unless Peter's Supremacy among the Apostles
be pleaded. Here is one Usurpation upon the back of another; the Diocesans
usurp the Rights of the City-Bishops; and the Archbishops usurp again from
them; and for ought I know, the first Primate usurps upon the other; and in
many Episcopal Countries the Pope usurps from Metropolitans and Patriarchs: and
for ought appears, the Pope may watch over his extensive Charge, as easily as
an english Primate or Prelate over his. For, as one observes, "As the Bishop
can do all by the Parochial Clergy, for Word and Sacraments, and by
Chancellors, Archdeacons etc. for his Discipline, such as it is; and as the
Primate can rule a national Church by his and the Bishops Courts: So can the
Pope rule the Church Catholic (whithersoever scattered over the whole Earth)
by Cardinals, Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Bishops, by his Legate, and other
Officers of his Appointment". And I challenge Mr. Layman, to show any essential
Difference in these two Cases.

5. I observe, our Author attempts to illustrate and confirm his preceding
Remarks, by a Variety of Examples, or Instances of particular Churches so
formed and settled, as he had represented the Case, in Scripture-times.

And here ( p. 64) he begins with JERUSALEM, the Mother Church, of which he
will have St. James to be the first Bishop. But it seems to me, to lie as an
insuperable Prejudice against this Opinion, That the Apostles did for a great
number of Years (if Antiquity gives us a true Report) make Jerusalem the place
of their usual Residence, after their Travels resorting thither as their
headquarters; one or other of them generally being on the Spot: So that the
Apostles having that Church almost continually under their own Eye, it
superseded all Occasion for a fixed President, and defeats all Pretenses
therefore of James's being the first Bishop there. However, I will consider
what Mr. Layman has to say upon the head.

I observe, to put a Color on this Notion, he quotes several Scriptures, Act.
15.19. and Chap. 21.18. Yet he pretends not an undoubted Conclusion from
Scripture for it (as he observes to us, p. 98.) but only this, That seeing the
most ancient Writers from the beginning have constantly asserted him to be the
first Bishop of Jerusalem, -- those Texts should be understood in that Sense.
And the Gentleman appears very angry at Elutherius for calling this a Whimsical
Plea, as hereby reflecting upon " all Antiquity, which with one Voice says,
that St. James was the first Bishop of Jerusalem". But I take leave on this
Occasion to remind Mr. Layman of his own Postulate: for if the same Word may be
used in different Senses, in different Ages, he should first have shown us,
that the Word Bishop was used in the same Sense by the Fathers from the
Beginning, as it bears in the present Age: But the Gentleman has with his own
kind hand confounded any Pretense of this nature. For he himself has told us (
p. 68.) That the Word Bishop was but by DEGREES appropriated to the first
Order: and he has fixed the Date of this Fact after the Time of the first
Writer among the Christian Fathers, if I understand him right; for having
quoted Clemens, he says ( p. 106.) The Words, Bishop and Presbyter, were NOT
YET fixed to signify the different Orders. I Am aware indeed, the Gentleman may
reply, That this refers only to the Time of C^^ment's writing his Epistle to
the Corinthians; which he has, perhaps with some artful Design, placed An. Dom.
67. But I am of Opinion, it may as well be applied to the Period of his Life;
and that for this Reason, because if the best Accounts may be credited, that
Father died within about seven, eight, or nine years after his writing this
Epistle: For Chronologists, I suppose generally, place his Death about the
beginning of the second Century; some in the second Year thereof; though others
place it in the last Year of the first Century: And some of the best
Chronological Authors date his Epistle Anno 93, which was but two years after
his being chosen Bishop of Rome. (Compare Calvisius and Isaacson.) We may then
very rationally conclude, that the Synonimous Use of the Words Bishop and
Presbyter continued at least to the End of the first Age.

And from hence I draw this Inference, in Contradiction to Mr. Layman, That if
James was from the Beginning called Bishop of Jerusalem, yet here is a Course of
fifty years (the famous Council at Jerusalem, in which he is represented by our
Author acting as a Governor or Superintendent, being A. D. 52*) in all which
Time James certainly was not called Bishop in the modern Sense of the Word
(which Mr. Layman must intend, when he says, St. James was called Bishop of
Jerusalem; or else he is guilty of the grossest Fallacy) and therefore it is an
abusive Imposition (since the Usus loquendi is of such material Consideration,
in the Construction of Words, which by Tract of Time often lose their original
Sense, that an Argument cannot safely be built merely upon a perpetual Harmony
of Language) I say, it is therefore an Imposition on the Reader, to tell him,
That the most ancient Writers from the BEGINNING have CONSTANTLY asserted St.
James to be the first Bishop of Jerusalem. So that, for ought I see, if
Elutherius called this a chimerical Notion, he did not miscall it; and if he
made himself merry with it, it was far from being (as Mr. Layman would have it)
with every little Reason. I would ask the Gentleman, whether this St. James was
an Apostle, or not? If he affirms; I must needs be of the Opinion, that, an
Apostle a ^^^ed City Bishop, is truly a very ridiculous Chimera, a perfect
Castle in the Air. And if he denies; then it will follow, that (...) who was
not an Apostle, presided in the grand Council at Jerusalem, "giving Sentence
(according to Mr. Layman, p. 64.) and therein acting as a Governor or
Superintendent," over an Assembly of Apostles: and if this be not a Chimerical
Notion, I must confess my self a Stranger to common Sense, and to the meaning
of common Language. -- Further, I observe, Mr. Layman makes St. James a Bishop
with a Presbytery about him. The Apostle Paul (says he, ibid.) returning to
Jerusalem, Acts 21.18. is said, to go in unto James and the Elders, i. e. his
Presbytery being present. It seems then, even after the Church there was grown
into Form, the Presbyters were not excluded from all Interest in consiliary and
judicial Proceedings, but were at least what Ignatius (Ep. ad Trall.) calls
(...), and Jerome calls Senatus Ecclesiae, a Bench of Assistants, and in a Sort
Assessors with the Bishop, assumed in partem Solicitudinis and Regiminis. It
appears too, the Bishop's Diocese was not so big, but that ALL the Elders, or
stated Presbyters (though there were even several Congregations) might
conveniently meet in a Body, for Consultation, and Management of Affairs of
common Concernment, together with their President. Surely one might be tempted
by this Reflection to think, St. James was not really (however nominally) a
Bishop in the hierarchick-Sense, but rather a Congregational Bishop; or at most
but a President of the Classical Stamp, the Moderator of an Assembly of Elders:
The Presbyterians will consent with one Voice, I doubt not, to an Episcopacy of
this kind. But so much for the first Instance of Episcopal Government. Only I
will just observe, it will be worth while for Mr. Layman to inquire how these
Presbyteries (which, I know, even some Episcopalians say, continued in the
Church for above three Centuries) came to be abolished.

The next Instance is CRETE. The Epistle of St. Paul to Titus (says Mr. Layman,
p. 64.) seems plainly to fix him there with governing Powers, -- over the
People of that Church. So again, p. 99. There are very plain Intimations in the
Epistle to Titus, of his being fixed Governor of the Church of Creet: -- a
Matter of Fact seconded with the universal Suffrage of Antiquity. I think
rather, by the Scripture-Account of Ti^^^ which challenges the first
Consideration with us, there is more to be said for his being Bishop of Corinth,
than of Crete. However, to pass that, methinks his being Bishop of Crete must
not pass for a glaring Fact, if we only consider an Observation Mr. Layman
himself has made, which seems to spoil all the Evidence in this second
Instance: for he remarks ( p. 64.) One special part of Titus 's Business was to
ordain Elders in EVERY CITY, Tit. 1.5. I perceive then there were more Cities
than one in Crete: it is indeed the largest and most celebrated Island on the
Coast or Greece, and was in times past a considerable Kingdom; now known by the
name of Candia, but sometimes called Hecato^^polis, from its containing an
hundred Cities. Therefore if (according to what we heard just now from Mr.
Layman) the Christians of a City made a Church, and fixed Presidents or
Governors were appointed over the People of each City; Then it is a rational and
necessary Consequence, that Titus was not one of the fixed Governors, this
Gentleman is contending for, i. e. a City-Bishop: but if Governor at all in
Crete, must be a Provincial Governor, a supreme President over the Bishops of
many Cities (for Titus was to ordain Presbyters or Bishops in every City) which
makes him at least an Archbishop, or P^^mate. This certainly must needs be his
Relation to Crete; if he was in any Sense a fixed Governor there: he could have
no fixed Relation to that Island upon Mr. Layman's Plan of City-Episcopacy. I
desire the Gentleman to solve this Difficulty, in his next. Were the Bishops in
every City subordinate to Titus, as a common Governor over all? Or was he
limited to one City? Or how was it? If he was limited, with what Propriety
could he be called Bishop of Crete? unless there was but one Church in the
whole Island; which indeed is what Mr. Layman supposes, when he uses the Phrase
"That Church", and again " the Church of Creet:" but this is Language, I
believe, he will not find in all Antiquity. Dorotheus calls him only Bishop IN
Crete: but Eusebius speaks of him as " Over the CHURCHES of Crete", (...). And
if he was not limited, but had an extensive and equal Power over all the
Cities, and their Bishops, neither could he in that Case be properly called
Bishop of Crete; for his extensive Power speaks him rather a Metropolitan or
Primate. And truly I believe, there may a much better Show of Argument be
advanced, both out of Scripture and Antiquity, for his being a Provincial
Primate, than a City-Prelate. Hear what the learned Nicolson says to this
purpose ( Apology for Church of Engl. p. 62, 3.) What more decent among
Church Governors, than that some be Superiors, some Subordinate? -- Even
among the Twelve were there not Chief Apostles? -- For Peter, James, and John
are called Pillars. -- Thus it is with their Successors the Bishops: they are
all pares Potestate; in the Power, he that is at Eugubium, is as great as he at
Rome etc. But yet for all this, one Bishop may be set in a higher Degree than
another, and one set over another. -- What was Titus and Timothy? were they not
more than ordinary Bishops? Titus had the Charge over the whole Isle of Crete,
in which there were seven Bishops besides. ( Miraeus lib. 4 de Notitia Episc.
page 181.) This was Paul's Companion, says Chrysostom (Hom. 1. in Titum) that
was approved; otherwise Paul would not have committed unto him an whole Island,
and the Trial and Judgment of so many Bishops. To Timothy, if we believe
Theodoret and other Ancients, was committed all Asia the less; in which were
questionless instituted by the Apostles many Bishops. Of the last Example there
may be some Scruple; of the first there can be no Doubt to any one that lists
not to be contentious. Thus he. -- So then Mr. Layman and his Brother Dialogist
(if I may safely borrow some Words from their Preface or Introduction, p. 3.)
have fair Warning given them, what they must pass for in the Opinion of one of
their own Club, viz CONTENTIOUS Dunces and Bigots, if they presume irreverently
to differ from the learned Nicolson's Judgment. If therefore I might be thought
worthy to be of Council to them, I would humbly advise, That they talk no more
of Titus as a mere Bishop, but as a more than ordinary Bishop, i. e. in
Ecclesiastical Style, an Archbishop or Primate. I doubt not, the Gentlemen
will presently be "aware of my Trap": and I believe, I have 'em pretty fast,
let Titus's Character and Title be "AS what it will."

Mr. Layman's next Instance is EPHESUS; of which Church he pretends Timothy was
the fixed Governor. ( p. 65.) You see, still the Gentleman carries on his
Hypothesis, that the Christians of a CITY made a CHURCH: Well then, let the
Christians at Ephesus, how many Congregations soever they composed, pass for a
Church. But will Mr. Layman say, Timothy was only Bishop of a City-Church?
You Have heard what the aforesaid Episcopal Apologist says, "To Timothy if we
believe Theodoret and other Ancients, was committed all Asia the ^^sse; in
which were many Bishops. I then return Mr. Layman his own words ( p. 68.) That
it was Fact, we have the Witness of Theodoret, an APPROVED ancient Writer. Will
he now accept the Testimony of that approved Writer to this matter of Fact! If
he refuses, with what face can he expect, others should pay any Deference to
that Father's Authority? But if he complies, I doubt it will turn out badly for
his Cause, which I am apt to think must sink and fatally miscarry, if TIMOTHY'S
special Relation to EPHESUS, as fixed President or Bishop thereof, be given up,
which is the grand Plea made use of in Defense of Prelacy. I argue upon it,
Either Timothy was the fixed Governor of the Ephesian City-Church, or he was
not: which will Mr. Layman now upon second Tho'ts choose to do; deny, or affirm?
If the Gentleman, convinced by Theodoret's Testimony, sees fit to retract his
former Opinion, and now denies Timothy's fixed Relation to Ephesus, as Bishop
of that City, he will then spoil the fairest Flourishes in his Letters, on the
Scripture-Argument, and I doubt must never afterward bring the Epistles to
Timothy into this Controversy, which have hitherto been the main Supports of
his Cause. But if he chooses to adhere to his own Opinion, and insists upon
Timothy's Relation to Ephesus, as Bishop of that City only, then I say, still
his Cause seems in equal Danger; for if he presumes to deny a matter of Fact,
witnessed by THEODORET, celebrated by himself as an approved ancient Writer, he
at once confounds the whole Authority of Tradition, and must never more open
his Lips in vain Boasts of glaring Fact, the Sense of the primitive Church, and
Suffrage of the good old Fathers. -- I think, here is S^ylla and Chary^dis: and
I cannot but pity the Gentleman in his critical Situation, while Danger looks
him in the face, which way soever he turns. Let him take Care, that to avoid
the Gulf, he don't run himself on the Rock, and split.

But further, I have a different kind of Argument to offer. Mr. Layman has made
a Concession ( p. 63.) That in the Church at Ephesus there were many Elders or
Bishops; and that at first it was taken Care of by Presbyters (as the Case
seems to be every where else) still under the Government of the Apostles, till
such Time as they saw fit to appoint fixed Governors etc. Now, by all that I
can find in Scripture, the Ephesian Church was never taken out of that first
State; but remained through Scripture-times taken Care of by Presbyters, still
under the Inspection of the Apostle John in particular. There Is a general
Consent of History, that this Apostle had his proper Home at Ephesus, and that
there he died just before the Close of the first, or upon the Commencement of
the second Century, when he was about 90 years old; though some say, he lived to
120, which must bring him nigh 30 years into the ^d Century. Now if that
Apostle usually resided at Ephesus all his days, it superseded the Necessity of
a fixed Governor there; whatever there was elsewhere. Mr. Layman (p. 63.) gives
this as the Reason of the Apostles appointing fixed Governors in any place,
They finding their Work too great, and their Charger too extensive for
themselves. But this is a Reason, that could very little affect the Case of
Ephesus, which the Apostle John could easily superintend, it being his Home. I
find an Episcopal Author observing; When the APOSTLES departed from any Church,
which they had planted, in that then they appointed a Bishop. For while They
remained in or near the Place, there was no such Need; the Apostles supplying
the Wants of those Churches with their Presence, Letters and Messengers. But
when they were finally to forgo those Parts, then they began to provide for the
Necessity and Security of that Church by settling Episcopal Power. ( Nicols.
Apol. p. 57, 8.) Indeed the Apologist makes this Remark in relation to the Case
of Timothy; who, he thinks it probable, was made Bishop, when Paul was at
Miletum. Therefore it follows; St. Paul at this time was to take his Leave of
the Churches at Asia; he says it plainly ( Acts 20.25.) That they should see
his face no more: most probable then it is, that at this time he left Timothy
to supply his place a^ Ephesus. Nay, but verily it seems much more probable, in
my humble Opinion, that he did not leave Timothy to supply his place; there
being manifestly no Occasion for it, in as much as they had the Apostle John so
much among them, and saw his Face very frequently, who was certainly sufficient
to supply the place of the Apostle Paul. If it be Fact, that St. John had his
Residence chiefly at Ephesus, then I presume to turn that Remark of the Bishop
(for so I take him to have been) I say, to turn the Bishop's own Observation
against himself; For (says he) while they (i. e. any of the Apostles) remained
in or near any place, where a Church was planted, there was no such Need for
appointing a Bishop; the Apostles supplying the Wants of those Churches with
their Presence etc. Now according to this, how improbable is it, that Timothy
should be made stated Bishop of Ephesus; when there was no such Need for one
there, and such abundant Occasion for him at the same time in other places, in
or nigh which there was no Apostle remaining! And if the Apostle John's
residing there be a Consideration that argues the Improbability of Timothy's
being fixed Bishop there, during his Life; then it necessarily infers, that
probably he never was so at all, if it be true, what Mr. Layman (p. 103.)
insinuates, That St John outlived Timothy.

I will now briefly compare some of the Probabilities, on either Side of the
present Question. As to Timothy, Mr. Layman observes (p. 65.) The Apostle's
writing to him once and again, as concerned chiefly at Ephesus, plainly
intimates, that there was a fixed Relation between him and that Church. This is
the best he has to say, for Timothy. But there is much more of Probability in
the Apostle John's Case. Chronologists tell us, St. John wrote and published
his Gospel at Ephesus; some dating it A. D. 69. though others much later. Between
the years Eighty and Nin^^y he was banished into Patmos, where (some say, Anno
95*) he penned his Revelation, in which he writes to the Seven Churches of Asia
minor, among whom Ephesus has the Honor of the first Place. They tell us that
after his Return from Exile, he dwelt at Ephesus again, to the Day of his
Death; and that this was the Place of his Sepulcher. These are much plainer
Intimations of John's usual Abode at Ephesus, and special Affection and Care
for the Church there, than any appearing in the Case of Timothy.

I Am aware, it will be objected, that St. John inscribed his Letter for the
Ephesine Church, Unto the ANGEL of the Church of Ephesus. But surely this could
not intend Timothy; if Mr. Layman's Observation be just ( p. 103.) That Timothy
should be living, when the Epistles of St. John were written seems to be a
groundless Guess. Nor need this Angel intend any one of Mr. Layman's fixed
Presidents; as it were easy to make appear, were it worth while to enter into
the Argument. -- I think, the Gentleman has set himself in a very odd Light, by
first introducing his Plea, from these Angels of the Churches, with that Remark
( p. 66.) Who in the Revelations are called Angels, according to the
PROPHETICAL Style of that MYSTERIOUS Book; and then after a warm Debate upon
the Subject, closing up his Reasonings with that sanguine Reflection (p. 6^.)
It seems to me, I must confess, unaccountable, that any should go about to
^lude so PLAIN a Case, etc. Pray now let Mr. Layman, who is so full of his
Boasts of glaring Facts, and the universal Suffrage of Antiquity, before he
talks any more of a ^ain C^se here, settle the Line of Succession in the
Ephe^^ne Church, and tell us who succeeded Timothy in his Bishopric; that we
may know the Name of this Angel, that John wrote to: it may have a happy
Tendency to settle the Dispute. Let us therefore have this plain Case well
attested by the unanimous Suffrage of primitive Writers: for we are as little
disposed, as himself, to be put off with groundless Guesses, or the single
Opinions of private Doctors. Indeed (as Dr. Stillingfleet observes, Irenic p.
321.) The main Difficulty lies in the immediate Succession to the Apostles: --
the main Seat of the Controversy lies there, whether the Apostles upon their
withdrawing from the Government of Churches, did substitute single Persons to
succeed them or no; So that unless that be cleared, the very Deed of Gift is
questioned. And what the Dr. says concerning ROME, that famous City, where one
would think the Succession should be clear, if any where, may, I fear, with
equal Reason be applied to EPHESUS; " Here the Succession is as MUDDY as the
Tiber it self." Let Mr. Layman purge and clarify the foul Stream of Succession;
or we shall make bold to slight his Quotations from Austin and Eusebius (p.
101.) as foreign to the purpose. But thus much for the first Objection.

I Am aware of another Objection against what I have advanced, relating to the
Ephesian Church's remaining through Scripture-times in the Care of Presbyters,
under the Inspection of the Apostle John; It may be said, that St. John as an
Apostle, being obliged to be much in traveling, for the Propagation of the
Gospel, must necessarily be often absent; which made a fixed Governor at
Ephesus absolutely requisite. But to this I answer, (1.) It is to be observed,
that not the occasional Absence, but the final Withdraw of an Apostle from any
Place, is pretended to be the Reason or Occasion of a Prelate or fixed
President's being appointed. And then (2.) I answer, This Objection carries as
much Force in Timothy's Case, as John's: for it is apparent, that Timothy was
an Evangelist, and Mr. Layman acknowledges ( p. 65.) That " Evangelists were
indeed ITINERANT Officers." Now, if Timothy's being an itinerant Officer is
thought not inconsistent with his being a particular fixed Governor of Ephesus;
much less can it be imagined, that John's being an itinerant Officer should be
inconsistent with his retaining a general Apostolical Superintendency over the
Church there, in common with the other Asiatick Churches; which, if we believe
what Antiquity reports, the Apostle John governed to his dying Day.

Indeed it is a common, and I think, a material Objection, brought against
Timothy's being Bishop of Ephesus, That he was an EVANGELIST: But Mr. Layman
(ubi supra) answers, To say this, is to say nothing to the Purpose, because
that Office might be exercised by any Order of Officers, even Deacons: " One of
the 7 Deacons (says he) being an Evangelist." But to say this, I Am sure, is to
say nothing to the Purpose: he himself has given us a Key to that Case, and has
taught us by a following Passage (compared with what he has said, p. 62.) to
argue upon it; What if PHILIP were a Deacon (fixed in that Relation to a
particular Church) this does not at all hinder but that, having stood some time
a Candidate for further Preferment in the Church, and by behaving well in
inferior Affairs purchased to himself a good Degree, he might AT LENGTH be
ordered by the Apostles, to do the Work of an EVANGELIST, and become an
itinerant Officer.

But were Evangelists (as this Gentleman affirms) indeed itinerant Officers?
How then could Timothy be the fixed Governor of a City-Church? An itinerant
Officer, in a fixed Relation to a particular Church, seems to me a palpable
Inconsistency: Here Is "a Combination of Ideas" indeed, which I want Mr.
Layman's Skill to reconcile to the Notions of common Sense. Yet if that must
not pass for an Inconsistency, I Am sure: must, An itinerant Preacher a fixed
Pastor at the same time: But Mr. Layman is confident, Timothy and Titus might
take up a fixed Residence in their respective Churches, and yet withal do the
Work of an Evangelist among the unchristianized People there and in the Places
adjacent. -- I Am as confident then, the Prelates of those Times must have fewer
Encumbrances, notwithstanding their "great Metropolitical Churches," and it
should seem, must have more Zeal, than our modern Prelates: who appear readier
to go upon some Civil Embassy to foreign Courts, than upon the Gospel-Message
to unchristianized People; so far from this (if we are rightly informed) that
they can hardly find the Heart, or seldom get Leisure, to preach the Gospel
even at home, to their own People. Further I observe, the Gentleman says, They
were ORDERED etc. Now it is uncertain whether he does not use this Word in the
same Sense, as his Church does in the Book of Ordination, where the Ordaining
of Ministers is called the ORDERING of them. If so, then I perceive, the Work
of an EVANGELIST is by Apostolical Appointment a Work that Prelates are ordered
or ordained to. I wish truly I could see our English Bishops engaging Heart and
Hand in this part of their Work. So I should hope, they would do their glorious
Master much greater and better Service, than by attending Parliaments and
Court-Affairs. At least If they should send out their Delegates, to gospelize
the Pagan Parts of his Majesty's Dominions, I Am sure, it would be a noble
Attempt, and they might hereby do more Service to the Kingdom of Christ, than
by sending their Missionantes into foreign Parts already gospelized, where they
can find in many places only small Parcels of factious Persons to preach to,
and must spend their Zeal in setting up Liturgical Assemblies on the
Foundations of Schism and Division.

However, as to the Point, that the Office of EVANGELISTS might be exercised by
any Order of Officers, even DEACONS, Mr. Layman happens herein to differ from
his judicious HOOKER, who tells us ( I^^^l. Pol. p. 421.) That Evangelists were
Presbyters; and therefore their Office was incompatible to Deacons, who are
another and lower Order. Yet were they such Presbyters, as ^ou'd not be Pastors
at the same time; which ((...) he) were Presbyters also, howbeit settled in some
certain Charge, and thereby differing from Evangelists; whom the Apostles sent
abroad, and used as Agents in Ecclesiastical Affairs, wheresoever they saw
Need: And it is remarkable, he names Timothy among them who " were THUS
i^p^^yed."

I know not whether Mr. Layman may not be of Opinion, that the Prelates of his
Church are properly Evangelists, as much as Timothy; and will interpret that
Text to the Purpose, He GAVE some Apostles and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, etc. for the Work of the Ministry, TILL we all come in the Unity
of the Faith. -- If this be his Opinion, I will repeat to him that apposite
Passage of his beloved CHILLING WORTH'S ( R^lig. Prot. p. 160.) We that are
willing to leave all Men to their Liberty, provided they will not improve it to
a Tyranny over others, find it no Difficulty to discern between Dedit and
Promisit; he gave at his Ascension, and he promised to the World's End.
Besides, though you whom it most concerns, may happily flatter your selves, that
you have not only Pastors and Doctor, out Prophets, and Apostles, and
Evangelists, and those distinct from the former, in your Church; yet we that
are disinteressed Persons, cannot but smile at these strange Imaginations. But
it may be Mr. Layman will reply, He do^s not pretend, that the Office of an
Evangelist is perpetual, much less that all who are Bishops are obliged to
attend it, but Timothy and Titus's being fixed Governors, and yet ordered to do
withal the Work of Evangelists was an extraordinary Thing in their Case. Well,
if so I desire then to be informed upon what Reasons he suppos^^ that their
Office, as Evangelists, was extraordinary, any more than their Office as
Presidents. For ought I know, he may by such a Concession in the former Case,
take an effectual Method to break the Neck of Episcopa^y; at least, of the
Arguments for it, from the Instances of Timothy and Titus.

In fine, I don't remember, that Mr. Layman all this while has told us, whether
Timothy and Titus, when become fixed* Presidents, were advanced to an ORDER
distinct from and superior to the Presbyters or Bishops. So that, for ought I
can discern, his Presidents may be ranked with Metropolitans, Primates,
Patriarchs; who are acknowledged to be only Gradus in Episcopatu: and I Am
persuaded no Bishop or fixed President in Scripture-times pretended to more
Authority over the Clergy of his Diocese, than Custom gives to Metropolitans
and Patriarchs, over the Prelates in their respective Provinces or Districts;
notwithstanding their Primacy or Patriarchate is founded purely upon View of
Unity and Order. Does Mr. Layman pretend his fixed Presidents in
Scripture-times were superior to, and had Jurisdiction over the Presbyters? I
find Episcopal Writers not scrupling, in the Case of Archbishops, to ascribe to
them. a Metropolitical JURISDICTION; and I find the learned Apologist ( Nicol.
p. 100.) saying It was established from the beginning, that in all Provinces
there should be one CHIEF Bishop, which from the Mother-City was called a
Metropolitan; to whom all the other Bishops should be SUBJECT, and to HIM
accomptable. -- For Discipline can never be well administered among them that
have an equal Power. (It follows, p. 101.) His Office was to call the rest of
the Bishops of the Province to the Synods; -- in which he sat as President, and
the rest might not proceed to do any thing without Consulting him: When they
assembled but once a Year, many Causes that did abide no Delay, were committed
by them to the Metropolitan hearing the Judgment. To him then lay App^ales. The
same Author ( p. 64.) to justify the Right and Pre-eminence of Metropolitans,
afterward called Patriarchs, alleges the 35th of the Apostolical Canons: which
says The Bishops of every Nation must know (...), the Chiefest, the First, the
Primate; and wills him to be (...), as HEAD among the Bishops of that
Province: who in the African Council is called (...). And he informs us ( p.
67.) That those Primates, as they could call Synods through their whole
Province, so could PUNISH any Bishop or Churchman or other under them. I find
Bishop JEWEL ( Reply, p. 111.) observing; Gregory found this fault in the
Bishop of Salonae, that being within the Jurisdiction of his Province, he was
consecrate without his Knowledge; and he writes of the Bishops within his
Charge, in those terms, Episcopi M^I, Episcopi m^^i COMMISSI: My Bishops;
Bishops within my Cure. Thus it seems, the Power of Primates, above the rest of
their Order, ran pretty high; and may I not safely say, there is no Bishop in
England, pretends to more Authority over the Clergy of his Diocese? Or do the
Epistles of St. Paul give more Authority to Timothy and Titus? What though the
Angel of the Church at Ephesus "is represented exercising Jurisdiction there
(as Mr. Layman insinuates, p. 67.) in examining into the Pretensions of those,
Who say they are Apostles, and are not! What if all this can amount to no less,
than that he was ecclesiastical Governor there! Does it necessarily infer, that
Mr. Layman's fixed Presidents are of a superior Order to Presbyters? Verily
there is no such Consequence: for we see, in the Case of Primates, a gradual
Difference between Officers of the same Rank: and that a Jurisdiction over
Prelates, equal perhaps to what Mr. Layman claims for his fixed Presidents, in
point of Government, has existed, without the Primates being of a distinct and
higher Order. Now, why may not the Difference, that Antiquity seems to make
between Presbyters and Prelates, be accounted for in the like manner? Why
may not Prelacy, as well as Primacy, be though it an Advancement, not in Order and
Office, but only in Degree? To this perhaps Mr. Layman will answer, That the
Scriptures make the Difference between fixed Presidents and Presbyters, not
merely gradual, but plainly ESSENTIAL; inasmuch as they tell us, that at
Ephesus and Crete the governing Powers and Power of Ordination were
appropriated to Timothy and Titus: for he argues ( p. 100.) When THEY are
mentioned as being invested with them, and NO MENTION is made of any that were
PARTNERS with them; we cannot justly presume, that any others in those Churches
had those Powers. But to this Objection I reply; It Is easy to solve and
dissipate the seeming Difficulty here, by an impartial View of a parallel Case,
we have in Scripture: I mean that of our Savior's delivering the KEYS to
Peter. Matthew. 16.18, 19. I say unto THEE, That thou art PETER, and upon this
ROCK will I build my Church: -- and I will give unto THEE the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever THOU shall bind etc. Pray let Mr. Layman
consider now: Do not the Keys here imply the governing Power; and the Power of
Ordination? Is not PETER represented as invested with them? And no Mention made
here of any that were Partners with him? But will he argue in this Case, We
therefore cannot justly presume, that any others in the Church had those Powers,
or whatever is meant by the Keys? Surely no rational Protestant could refrain
crying FIE upon his Argument, applied to this parallel Case! However,
Protestants are not backward to allow Peter a Primacy of Order (as it is called)
or rather a Priority for Order's sake. Agreably Bishop JEWEL ( ubi supra, p.
226.) observes, St. Peter in the old Fathers is diversely called, the First, the
Chief, the Top, the high Honor of the Apostles; and in Eusebius and St.
Augustine, (...), and PRINCEPS Apostolorum: the word Princeps (says the Bishop)
is not always taken for Prince, or Governor endued with Power, but often times
for the first Man, or best of the Company. In this Sense Cicero says,
Philosophorum princeps Aristippus. So is St. Peter called Princeps Apostolorum.
Yet, I cannot but think, if Timothy or Titus had been called in Scripture
Princeps Episcoporum, our Lay-Adversary would have produced this, as an
indisputable Evidence of his being a fixed President and having Jurisdiction
over the Presbyters or Bishops -- Nay, had it been said, that to Timothy was
committed the Care of Ephesus, and to Titus the Care of Crete, he would
probably have built a triumphant Argument upon it, for their being sole
Governors of those Places. But I will produce a parallel Case, in which there
may be as much Color for the like Argument; and yet when examined, it will be
found far from carrying uncontrollable Evidence with it. Paul says (Gal. 2.7,
8.) The Gospel of the Uncircumcision was committed unto ME, as the Gospel of
the Circumcision was unto PETER: For he that wrought effectually in Peter to
the Apostleship of the Circumcision, the same was mighty in Me toward the
Gentiles. Shall we now think (however the Text may seem to favor such an
Opinion) that Peter and Paul divided the whole World between them? One being
the Apostle of the Circumcision, and the other of the Uncircumcision. Shall we
understand it Exclusively of others? What! were there no Apostles but Peter and
Paul? Were the rest all dead? Or were they all degraded from their Office, that
none of 'em should be admitted Partners with Peter and Paul? Or had they all
done like Demas, who having loved this present World, forsook Paul, and retired
from public Service? Or did those two Apostles, in Anger at the rest, refuse
their Company, (...) Paul in the Case of Mark? Of whom it is said, Paul thought
(...) good to take him with them, who departed from them from ^amphylia, and
went not with them to the Work. Surely these hypotheses are too absurd, to be
granted; and are a Contradiction to sacred Story. What shall we say then! Had
Peter and Paul in their respective Provinces a Supremacy over the other
Apostles? No such matter. All we can conclude is, that Peter and Paul appeared
generally at the head of Affairs, and were most remarkable for their
extraordinary Labors and Succes^^, the one among the Jews, the other among the
Gentiles: let not so, but that James and John are said (in that very Context)
to be Pillars, as well as Cephas and Paul. Even thus, (...) the Case of Timothy
and Titus, were they expressly, called Bishops the one of Ephesus and the other
of Crete; yet it must have been understood, they were so, not Exclusively, but
Eminently, as being the first in Seniority or in Accom^lishments, and having a
Priority of Order. Why should their being tall'd, one the Bishop of Ephesus,
the other the Bishop of Crete, ar^^e they were sole Bishops in their respective
Churches; any more than Peter's being called the Apostle of the Circumcision,
and Paul the Apostle of the Uncircumcision, argue their being ^he only
Apostles, or having a Supremacy over the rest? Finally, Mr. Layman brings in
the Case of the seven Churches of Asia, ( p. 66.) and prosecutes his Argument
upon it, p. 100. ^ have touched on this before: and shall now only observe ^e
or two Things further. The Gentleman founds his Argument chiefly on a METAPHOR
(" the metaphorical Title of Angel," p. 103.) which he would laugh at in any
body else; and which is the more wonderful in him, because he has tol'd us ( p.
84.) "That every ALLEGORICAL Gloss of a Father is not to (be taken for an
Interpretation." Why then will Mr. Layman himself go to allegorizing, and harp
so much on a metaphorical Title! I may return him his own Reflection ( p. 102.)
"This "sure deserves no Answer, but only shows how necessitous your Case is,
that you are so ready to catch at every Twig." And after all the "Bluster" he
has made with Arguments and Testimonies, for these Angels being single
Governors, Heads, Superintendents, exercising Jurisdiction, etc. he at last
shuts up the Debate in a very modest manner. ( p. 103 first Paragr.) And I
shall not be backward to allow him the whole of the WHAT he contends for, as he
represents it there, if I understand his Terms right: for the Gentleman seems
to delight in an equivocal Style; that I am forced often to guess at his
Meaning. If by "Clergymen" he intends PRESBYTERS or Bishops, and DEACONS, I see
no Harm in conceding, that there might be more than Seven in each Church. If by
the Clergymen's having the CARE of these Churches he intends having the whole
Care belonging to their respective Offices; we are willing to allow, that the
DEACONS had the Secular Care, and the PRESBYTERS the ^piritual and Past^ral
Care. I see no Hurt to my Cause, in granting that the Asian Churches, when the
Apostle John wrote to them, were "taken Care of by Presbyters", or (as his
Expression is p. 62.) " were left under the GUIDANCE of them." And I think, I
may safely indulge him in his Opinion, That ONE had a PREEMINENCE or PRECEDENCE
to the rest provided he affixes the same Ideas to these ambiguous Terms, which
they carry with them when applied in some common Cases; as that of the Parson,
in relation his Curates; and that of the Metropolitan, in relation to the
Bishops of his Province: in both which Cases, Mr. Layman doubtless will hold a
Preeminence or Precedence of one to the rest, yet without a Difference of
Order, or substantially diverse Powers. But if this be all that the Gentleman
contends for, I think in truth he contends to little purpose; unless it be to
the purpose of serving his Adversary's Cause, and betraying his own.

Thus, I have examined (more largely indeed than I at first intended) those
Scripture-Arguments, Mr. Layman has offered in favor of the Episcopal Form of
Government; and which, he says ( p. 68.) he "cannot but esteem incontestible
Evidences." But if any unbias'd judicious Reader will have the same Esteem of
'em, after what has been said in Answer, I shall much wonder.

Sect. IX. Upon the whole, I observe, " The Case of the Episcopacy of TIMOTHY
and TITUS," is what my Lay-brother seems to think the plainest in Scripture,
and here indeed lies his main Strength: But after all he has said, even this is
far from a plain Case. The Gentleman himself appears to have lowered his Esteem
of his own Arguments, on this head, by that time he had writ on to the middle
of his second Letter: For there ( p. 99.) we find him speaking of 'em in more
modest and diffident Terms. The incontestible Evidence now dwindles away to a
"Probability," though (as he thinks) "a very strong" one; Yet still, I observe,
it is but such a Probability "advanced at": And we all know, a very strong
Probability, yea a thousand of the strongest Probabilities, are not
inconsistent with the Possibility, ^ay nor with even some Probabilities too, of
the Contrary; and therefore can never amount to a conclusive Argument.

In the present Case, Mr. Layman himself, as much Noise as ^e makes with his
incontestible Evidences for Episcopacy from Scripture, yet makes a Concession (
p. 90.) That some Texts seem to favor the contrary Opinion. His calling in the
Help of the Fathers indeed shows, he does not think his Scripture-Arguments in
themselves fully demonstrative. Nay, even with their ^elp, in the plainest Case
too, that of Timothy and Titus, he ^^etends not to strict Demonstration. His
Words are ( p. 99.) When a Probability from Scripture, of such a Matter of
Fact, is seconded by the universal Suffrage of Antiquity; it seems to me, to
amount almost to a Demonstration. The Gentleman, I con^ess, is not to be
discommended for his Modesty and Caution ^ere. It only seems to him, to amount
almost to a Demonstration; so that (make the best of it) it amounts but to a
Pro^ability at last. But now surely something more than a faint Demonstration,
or a strong Probability, is requisite to support so heavy a Weight, as this
Gentleman's Doctrine ( p. 84.) where he ranks Episcopacy among the great
ESSENTIALS of Religion, about which there was always a glorious Unity among the
Fathers; nay, and challenges us to Name the Church or Age of those primitive
Times, wherein it was not esteemed a FUNDAMENTAL of Religion. Sure I may
exclaim in the Language of his Brother Dialogist, and with greater Truth and
Justice, ( p. 4.) "O amazing Confidence! to say no worse." Does this Gentleman
consider what a Fundamental is! I advise him to consult the learned
Chillingworth, upon the Doctrine of Fundamentals. (Prot. Relig. passim.) I will
just give a Hint or two of that great Man's Judgment. He lays it down as a
Postulatum, ( p. 133.) That the Knowledge of Fundamentals is drawn from
SCRIPTURE. -- I cannot know (says he) any Doctrine to be a Divine and
supernatural Truth, or a true Part of Christianity, but ONLY Because the
SCRIPTURE says so, which is all true: Therefore, much more can I not know it
to be a Fundamental Truth." He observes ( p. 20.) "Verities in Scripture,
written because they were necessary to believed, are those only, which
constitute the Covenant between God and Man in Christ. But he puts "matters of
Policy and Economy in the rank of Things evidently not intrinsecal to the
Covenant, and not in themselves necessary to be believed, but only by Accident,
because they were written. -- Though all which is necessary, be plain in
Scripture; yet all which is plain, is not therefore written because it was
necessary: for what Necessity, that I should know St. Paul left his Cleak at
Troas! Again ( p. 36.) A sure Note of a Point not necessary is, when Scripture
may, with so great Probability, be alleged on both sides, that Men of honest
and upright Hearts go some one way, and some another. -- So ( Pref. Sect 31,
33.) Those Truths are fundamental, which are EVIDENTLY delivered in Scripture,
and COMMANDED to be preached to all Men: Those not fundamental, which are
obsoure. Now let the learned Layman reduce his Doctrine, of Episcopacy a
Fundamental, to this Standard. Here Is a short plain Test: Is Diocesan
Episcopacy evidently delivered in Scripture? No; for then Mr. Layman could not
with any Propriety have ranked it among those D^ubtful Cases, which need the
Help of his 2d Rule for right interpreting of Scripture, the Sense and Practice
of the primitive Fathers. And if Scripture, even interpreted by the Help of the
Fathers, did afford incontestible Evidences, how comes it, the Point is so
controverted among good Protestants? This is, according to Mr. Chillingworth,
one very sure Criterium of an obscure Point. ( Pref. Sect. 31.) There is no
more certain Sign (says he) that a Point is not evident, than that honest and
understanding and indifferent Men, and such as give themselves Liberty of
Judgment, after a mature Consideration of the Matter, differ about it. And will
any one have the Impudence, to say, That no honest and understanding Men can
differ about this Point of Episcopacy! I now come across that bold and severe
Passage of Mr. Layman (p. 70.) It seems to me (says he) No HONEST Man, who
knows any thing of the matter, CAN question, but that WE have the UNIVERSAL
Witness of the Church of God, in every PLACE, and every AGE of the ancient
Times, even from the Beginning, ENTIRELY on OUR side of the Question. -- Still
I must exclaim, with his Brother Dialogist, "O amazing Confidence! to say no
worse." Pardon me, if I presume to put Mr. Chillingworth's Judgment into the
Scale against Mr. Layman's Opinion. HE (ubi supra) speaking of the obscure and
controverted Questions of Religion, such as may with Probability be disputed on
both sides, immediately subjoyns, SUCH are the Disputes of Protestants; -- GOOD
Men, and LOVERS of TRUTH, of all Sides -- Apply this to the Disputes between
Episcopal and Antiepiscopal Protestants. Behold now the catholic Spirit and
unbias'd Charity of the excellent Chillingworth! According to him there may be
good Men and Lovers of Truth even among Presbyterians. Here Is a just and
generous Return to my Friend Elutherius's handsome Expressions of Charity and
Candor in his Dialogue; where he professes a high Value for the Church of
England as a Protestant Church, and a just Veneration for the Learning and
Piety of some of her Bishops, and shows a Forwardness to embrace Prelaticus, ^n
Episcopal Priest, as a truly Christian Minister, of the same Body of Christ
with himself. But the Spirit, his Adversaries manifest, is quite the Reverse.
All that One of them (Script. Bp examined) has to say upon it, is in that
sarcastical Fleer ( p. 15.). "I am sorry we cannot return the Complement." And
Eusebius (Dial. p. 17.) turns upon him in a manner more ungenteel, fierce, and
boisterous; If you have said too much in professing, you highly value the
Church of England etc. pray RETRACT it; or else, after so much plainly
confessed of the Safety of our Communion, justify your self in leaving it, and
using so much Pains to asperse a good and excellent Church, and such Men. --
Then he falls to chiding and scolding at him for joining with a Party of
Separatists CONDEMNED by God and Man. Finally, comes Mr. Layman on the Stage,
and closes the glorious Scene of Charity; It seems to me (says he) NO HONEST
Man, who knows any thing of the Matter, can question etc. i. e. in short no Man
of Conscience and common Sense can be a Presbyterian. We see then what we must
pass for in his Club, viz. unconscionable Bigots or silly Dunces. Nay, he tells
us ( p. 71.) Had a PRESBYTERIAN lived in primitive Times, and been obstinate in
his Opinion, I cannot help being persuaded, he would have been cast out of the
universal Church for an HERETIC and SCHISMATIC, merely for denying and casting
off episcopal Government I shall not return Railing for Railing: but I desire
the Gentleman patiently to receive his Master's Censure ( Chillingw. Pref.
Sect. 35) Let this be granted (i. e. the Principle, which he calls the chief
Pillar, and the Basis of his Book, viz. That all Things NECESSARY to Salvation
are EVIDENTLY contained in Scripture) and the immediate COROLLARY will be, and
must be, That not WE for rejecting, but YOU for imposing upon the FAITH of
Christians, Doctrines unwritten and unnecessary, and for disturbing the
Church's Peace, and dividing Unity for such Matters, are in a high Degree
PRESUMPTUOUS and SCHISMATICAL. -- I will take Leave further to address him in
the Words of that great Author, adapted to my Purpose by the Addition in the
Parenthesis (Chill p. 93) "Methinks in all Reason, you that Challenge
Privileges" [for your Bishops, as a superior Order to Presbyters, and of
fundamental Consequence] should produce your LETTERS PATENTS from the KING of
Heaven, and show some EXPRESS Warrant. -- Otherwise you know the Rule is, Uli
Contrarium non manifest probatur, praesumitur pro Liberate. We may venture
then to bring a QUO WARRANTO? And if our Adversaries cannot produce Letters
Patents from HEAVEN, to establish the Authority and Divine Right of Episcopacy,
Judgment must be given in our favor, and we be left to enjoy the Liberty, we
claim by Divine Right.

But, says Mr. Layman (p. 99.) Such an Evidence we have as the nature of the
Thing will bear; and as much as we could reasonably expect, supposing it were
so; as much as is sufficient to satisfy a wise and good Man. In a word, as
much at least, as Men generally think sufficient to justify their Belief of a
great many things of this Nature, etc. But I answer, Supposing there were such
Evidence really, as amounts to a fair and strong Probability; yet how does this
infer the indispensable Necessity of Episcopacy, and an Obligation to receive
it as a Fundamental of Christianity? Is a mere Probability Foundation
sufficient to build an Article of Faith upon? Is the Evidence, upon which we
believe a great many things of a trifling Concernment to us, sufficient to
establish a Divine Institution? Or is the Evidence, upon which we may safely
ground our Belief and Practice, in the Circumstantials and Ceremonials of
Religion, as much as is sufficient to justify our Faith and Practice, in the
GREAT ESSENTIALS of Religion, under which head Mr. Layman annumerates
Episcopacy! Is a thing of this Nature (i. e. according to this Gentleman, a
thing necessary, a thing fundamental, a great Essential of Religion) to be
received upon a mere probable Evidence, that will but suffice to justify our
Belief of a great many things of a slight and indifferent Nature! If there be
but a Probability from Scripture, what though it be seconded with the universal
Suffrage of Antiquity! Is this sufficient Evidence for a FUNDAMENTAL of
Religion? or can that be justly esteemed a Fundamental, which has no better
Evidence, no stronger Motives of Credibility attending it? According to Mr.
Chillingworth, there are especially these Requisites to a Fundamental, That it
be a necessary Truth, intrinsecal to the Covenant of Grace, evidently delivered
in Scripture, and commanded to be preached to all Men; as in some Passages
before ci^ed. If this now be the Case, I must entreat our penetrating Layman to
demonstrate to us, that Episcopacy has these Marks of a Fundamental upon it;
and particularly to point us to the Scripture, where his Doctrine of Prelacy
Jure Divino is commanded to be preached to all Men: Or if in all his Researches
into the first and purest Antiquity, ^ie has discovered any Traditional
Evidence of such a Command, I should be glad he would help us to it. Else this wild
and novel Device, of Episcopacy a FUNDAMENTAL, will turn out a mere Trick to
amuze the Unlearned, and deceive the Simple.

In short, when I reflect on this Gentleman's Conduct, I Am sur^riz'd at the
Inconsistency of it. He makes that Pretension ( p. 89.) I build as much (nay
MORE) on my first Rule of Interpreting of Scripture by Scripture, as on this
second of Interpreting Scripture by the Help of the Fathers; and yet
immediately adds (so forgetful is he) But after all your Endeavors to deface
the Fathers, I cannot part with my Rule (as if the Fathers were his only Rule)
but do still think, That the Matters of Fact, which immediately ollow'd AFTER
the Scriptures, are the BEST Guide in coming at the Sense of them in doubtful
Cases: and his management of the Dispute in the present Case, is very much of a
piece with this Declaration; the chief Run of his Arguments being on the foot
of Tradition. He pretends ( p. 58.) to disclaim the sense of the primitive
Church under the Notion of a Rule of Faith; and yet at the same time attempts
formally to prove a Fundamental of Christianity by the Testimonies of the
Fathers; under the Notion indeed of Witnesses to the Meaning of the Rule: but
this, in such a Case, is as much against the Grain, with all true Protestants,
and in particular with Mr. Chillingworth, as is possible. This learned Man says
( Prot. Relig. p. 196.) May it please you now at last, to take Notice, that by
Fundamental, we mean all and only that which is NECESSARY. And the whole
Current of his admirable Book takes its Rise from this one grand Principle,
That all things necessary to Salvation are EVIDENTLY contained in Scripture.
And what he means by this Phrase (evidently contained in Scripture) so often
used by him, we may collect from that Passage ( p. 82.) The Scripture is a
sufficient Rule, for those to judge by, that believe it to be the Word of God,
what they are to believe, and what not; -- I say, sufficiently perfect, and
sufficiently intelligible, in things necessary, to all that have Understanding,
whether they be Learned or Unlearned And my Reason hereof (says he) is
convincing and Demonstrative; because NOTHING is necessary to be believed, but
what is plainly revealed. For to say, that when a place of Scripture, by reason
of ambiguous Terms, lies indifferent between diverse Senses, whereof one is
true, and the other is false, God obliges Men under pain of Damnation, not to
mistake through human Frailty, is to make God a Tyrant; and to say, that like
Pharaoh, he gives no Straw, and requires Brick; that he reaps, where he sows
not etc. -- Nay, but Mr. Layman will say, God has provided us with Guides, even
the Fathers, to interpret to us the Sense of Scripture in doubtful places. To
this I answer again in the Language of Mr. Chillingworth (ibid.) You still run
upon a false Supposition; That God has appointed some Judge of all
Controversies, that may happen among Christians, about the Sense of obscure
Texts of Scripture: whereas He has left every one to his Liberty herein, in
those words of St. Paul, Quisque abundet suo Sensu, etc. And he says ( p. 74)
This we know, that none is fit to pronounce for all the World a judicial
definitive obliging Sentence in Controversies of Religion, but only such a Man,
or such a Society of Men, as is authorized thereto by GOD. But we are able to
demonstrate, that it has not been the Pleasure of God to give any Man, or
Society of Men, any such Authority. And therefore, though we wish heartily that
all Controversies were ended, as we do that all Sin were abolisht, yet we have
little Hope of the one, or the other, till the World be ended: And in the mean
while, think it best to content our selves with, and to persuade others unto an
Unity of Charity, and mutual Toleration; seeing God has authorized no Man to
force all Men to Unity of Opinion. -- Words worthy to be engraven in Letters of
GOLD!

If it be thus, why will Mr. Layman talk so much of the Authority of the
Fathers, and go about to force all Men to Unity of Opinion, by setting up the
unanimous Suffrage of the primitive Church, for a decisive Rule in doubtful
Cases! At least why will he attempt to establish a Fundamental of Religion on
the Credit of their Judgment and Practice! Let our Layman take the Rebuke from
that learned Hand, I have so often turned against him ( Chill. p 242.) You
bring in the Sentence of St. Cyprian; but, Why, in a Controversy of Faith, do
you cite any thing, which is confessed on all hands, not to be a Rule of Faith!
So ( p. 266, 7.) Neither are Optatus his Sayings Rules of Faith, and therefore
not fit to determine Controversies of Faith. -- No Antiquity less than
Apostolical, is a certain Note of Truth. If our Lay Adversary then will have
Episcopacy to be a Matter of Faith, a great Essential of Religion, let him not
refer us to Antiquity and the Fathers for Evidence: Or, if he will adhere to
the Fathers in this Dispute, and cite any thing which is not a Rule of Faith,
and not fit to determine Controversies of Faith (as Mr. Chillingworth says) let
him then renounce his Notion of Episcopacy's being a matter of Faith, a
Fundamental of Religion. I freely leave it to his Option, which to do: and if
he can fairly get clear of this Dilemma, he shall be mihi magnus Apollo.

I Am aware, it may be objected to me; But has not Mr. Chillingworth himself
published, The Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy demonstrated! Yes, Mr.
Layman in his Letters mention's it in this remarkable Passage ( p. 86.) As to
Mr. Chillingworth, if you have any Value for his Judgment, pray read his
Demonstration of Episcopacy, which never yet was answered nor never will. Well,
upon his Motion, I have reviewed that short Work; and I find it nothing at all
to Mr. Layman's Purpose. For what do we read there? Truly not one Word of
Episcopacy a Fundamental of Religion! Not one Word of Episcopacy a distinct
ORDER from Presbyters! Not one Word of Bishops having the sole Power of
Ordination and Government! Not one Word in favor of Episcopal Government, but
upon this Proviso, that it be " abstracted from ALL Accidentals"! And what this
Expression may couch in it, he has resigned to our own Conjectures. Nay, and
when Episcopal Government is stripped of all Accidentals, the upshot of Mr.
Chillingworth's Demonstration, is, That it is not REPUGNANT to the Government
left in the Churches by the Apostles; that it is not FORBIDDEN, that it is not
AGAINST the Apostles Doctrine and the Will of Christ: All which are very lean
and diminutive Expressions; and only import, that he thought some kind of
Episcopacy lawful: which is little (if any thing) more than even Presbyterians
have granted; some of whom have been for Bishops, taken sano Sensu, as well as
he. What an unaccountable Folly then was it, to allege Mr. Chillingworth's
Demonstration, which makes little or nothing for Mr. Layman's Cause!

It Is observable, Mr. Chillingworth might perhaps consistently enough improve
the Fathers in arguing for Episcopacy, because this was not a Fundamental or a
matter of Faith with him, but merely a matter of Opinion, and extrinsecal to
the Covenant of Grace; as he sometimes distinguishes. Whereas Mr. Layman makes
Use of the Fathers to prove a Fundamental of Religion; in which the
Demonstration can be of no possible Service to him.

And now whereas Mr. Layman boasts, It never yet was answered, nor never will
be; I believe we could crack too of Books on our side, that never were
answered, and (to speak modestly) it may be never will: but all the Reffection
I choose to make, is, That he happens in this Assertion to be agregiously
mistaken. For, although that celebrated Piece can be of little Service to the
Cause of Episcopacy Jure Divino, and much less to the English Prelacy, loaded
as it is with a vast Aggregation of ACCIDENTALS, that Mr. Chillingworth would
have thrown away; Yet such Use and such mighty Vaunts have been made of that
small Performance (unworthy of the Author, and very short of its specious
Title) as that several learned Pens have wrote Answers to it. It falls out, I
have two of 'em by me; some Strictures by Dr. Edwards, and a more labored
Reply by Mr. Lander, who has taken the Pains to go through the Demonstration
Paragraph by Paragraph, remarking upon every Line and Word of it, and giving a
complete Confutation to it.

I am obliged now to vindicate Mr. Chillingworth and Elutherius, from a
Misrepresentation of the one, and an Accusation of the other, which Mr. Layman
advances in the Words following the forequoted Passage ( p. 86, 7.) What you
cite from Mr. Chillingworth about some Fathers and Councils contradicting
others, is evidently spoken concerning the latter and corrupt Times of Popery,
and not of the first and purest Ages: and therefore is nothing to your Purpose,
but is fallaciously introduced Sure I am, our Lay-Author never read Mr.
Chillingworth's Religion of Protestants, or else has a very bold Forhead, thus
to play the old Jesuitical Game, by shifting off his Words with a feigned
Distinction of Traditions. Did he imagine, by the thinnest Sophism, to cast a
Mist before our Eyes! No, we have seen, Mr. Chillingworth's Challenge is
indefinite, to Traditions of the first, as well as later Ages, and of the
purest, as well as corrupter Times. Save in that single Point, the Canon of
Scripture, he challenges all Mankind to produce any other Instance of Tradition
truly original, universal, and perpetual. He traces Tradition up to the Times
of the Apostles and our Savior himself (p. 75) and demands, if there be ANY
Interpretation of ANY Scripture, from the Apostles delivered down from hand to
hand, and from age to age And to let us know how fully he was resolved in this
Point, he says to his Adversary ( p. 138.) WE ARE PERSUADED, that you CANNOT of
ANY Thing make it appear, that it is Tradition, but ONLY the Canon of
Scripture. What could be spoken plainer, or uttered more peremptorily!

Had Mr. Layman cited the Place, where we might find the Passages that
Elutherius quoted from Chillingworth, we should be better able to judge upon
the truth of his Charge, That "they are fallaciously introduced." However, I
believe, I can ness pretty nigh whereabouts our Friend was; and in turning over
the Leaves, I fix my Thumb on Page 335th. (Chap. II. Sect. 56.) where he has
these Words; The BIBLE, I say, the Bible ONLY, is the Religion of Protestants!
WHATSOEVER ELSE, besides IT, and the plain, irrefragable, indubitable
Consequences of IT, well may they hold as a matter of OPINION; but as matter of
FAITH and RELIGION, neither CAN they with Coherence to their own Grounds
believe it themselves, nor require the Belief of it of others, without most
high and MOST SCHISMATICAL Presumption. I, for my part, after a long and (as I
verily believe and hope) impartial SEARCH of the true Way to eternal Happiness,
do profess plainly, That I cannot find ANY REST for the Sole of my Foot, but
upon THIS ROCK ONLY. I see plainly and with mine own Eyes, that there are Popes
against Popes, Councels against Councels [and not only so, but as he adds] some
FATHERS against others, the same FATHERS against themselves, a CONSENT of
Fathers of one Age against a CONSENT of Fathers of another Age, the CHURCH of
one Age against the CHURCH of another Age. TRADITIVE INTERPRETATIONS of
Scripture are pretended, but there are few or NONE to be found: No Tradition,
but only of Scripture, can derive it self from the FOUNTAIN; but may be plainly
proved, either to have been brought in, in such an Age AFTER Christ, or that in
such an Age, it was not in. In a word, there is no sufficient Certainty but of
Scripture ONLY, for any CONSIDERING Man to build upon. THIS therefore, and This
ONLY, I have REASON to believe. -- I have thus recited the ^^ssage at large,
that Readers who have not the Book, may ^e capable of giving their Opinion upon
it, and judging be^^een Mr. Layman and Elutherius. I leave it now to every
equal and intelligent Reader, and even to Mr. Layman himself upon second
Thoughts, to say, Whether here is not as absolute a Renunciation of all
Traditions in every Age, and in very Point, save that one of the Canon of
Scripture, as could easily be expressed in human Language! And therefore, I
^hink, this Gentleman is bound now in common Equity, both (...) his Adversary
and to Mr. Chillingworth, to appear in open Court with a humble Retraxit. And
indeed, I think, Justice to his own Reputation too obliges him to confess
himself guilty, both of the Impertinency, and the Fallacy, he has charged
injuriously upon Elutherius.

I acknowledge, Mr. Chillingworth on some Occasions expresses a Reverence for
Antiquity and Tradition: but then it is Antiquity no less than Apostolical; it
is Tradition truly Original, derived through the Church of ALL Ages (says he, p
65.) and that Succession of Christians, which takes in Christ himself and his
Apostles. Prove your Doctrine (says he) by such a Tradition, and we will yield
This truly is (in Mr. Layman's Language, p. 99.) Evidence, as much as is
sufficient to satisfy a wise and good Man. For this originates with the
Scripture, begins at the very first Times of the Church: and if any Tradition
evidently takes its Rise there, we stand ready to receive it; Yea, if that be
the Case, we shall be content without examining into the Monuments of
subsequent Antiquity. As Mr. Chillingworth says ( p. 84.) How shall a Man
possibly be able to know, whether the Church of Rome has had a perpetual
Succession of visible Professors, which held always the same Doctrine which
they now hold, without holding any thing to the contrary: unless he has first
examined, what was the Doctrine of the Church in the FIRST Age, what in the
second etc? And whether this be not a more difficult Work, than to STAY at the
FIRST Age, and to examine the Church by the Conformity of her Doctrine with the
Doctrine of the first Age, every Man of ordinary Understanding may judge. Hear
also what he says, ( p. 80.) Believe then the Consent of Christians, which are
now, and have been ever since Christ in the World, that we ought to believe
CHRIST; but learn of us, what Christ said. (ye) which contradict and damn all
other parts of Christendom. Why, I beseech you? Surely, if they were not at
all, and could not teach me any thing, I would more easily persuade my self,
that I were not to believe in Christ, than that I should learn any thing
concerning him, FROM ANY OTHER than THEM by whom I believed in him: at least,
than that I should learn his Religion from you; who, with forging so many false
Stories, and false Authors, have taken a fair Way to make the faith of all
Stories questionable: -- who make a Profession of corrupting all sorts of
Authors; a ready Course to make it justly questionable whether ANY remain
uncorrupted. For, if you take this Authority upon you, upon the Six Ages last
past, HOW SHALL WE KNOW, that the Church of that Time did not usurp the same
Authority upon the Authors of the Six last Ages BEFORE THEM, and so upwards,
until we come to Christ himself? -- It Is remarkable, what be observes ( p.
261.) Not any Antiquity therefore, unless it be ABSOLUTE and PRIMITIVE, is a
certain Sign of a true Doctrine. For if the Church were obnoxious to
Corruption, as we pretend it was: who can possibly warrant as, that Part of
this Corruption might not get in, and prevail in the 5th or 4th or 3d or 2d
Age? Especially seeing the Apostles assure us, that the Mystery of Iniquity was
working, though more secretly, even in their Times. If any Man ask, How could it
become universal in so short a Time? Let him tell me how the Error of the
Millenaries, and the Communicating of Infants, became so SOON universal: and
then he shall acknowledge, what was done in some, was possible in others.

Here now, I cannot but observe, Mr. Chillingworth has by these few Lines given
a home Thrust to his own Demonstration of Episcopacy. Like Samson, he has
himself crushed the Pillars, this Structure of his leans upon, and shaken it
down on his head. And thus, at one Blast he has torn up the whole Foundation of
Mr. Layman's plausible Discourse ( p. 71, etc.) on Episcopacy an universal
Matter of FACT; it is not being possible the Fathers should mistake about it;
nor imaginable that those holy Martyrs would on purpose transmit a Lie to
Posterity, without any Temptation. I am sure, they had as little Temptation in
the Case of Communicating Infants, as in that of Dioces^n Episcopacy; and it
was as evidently an universal matter of Fact; and being esteemed a Divine
Appointment, it was as much a Doctrinal Article, as Episcopacy. What Mr. Layman
says upon a Comparison of Infant Baptism and Episcopacy ( p. 113.) I may with
greater Truth say of Infant-Communicating and Episcopacy, "I cannot see but that
they stand upon equal Grounds." And I hope Mr. Layman will not call my turning
his Argument against himself impertinent: for I cannot but think it very
pertinent; and if he can find any Salvo at all to offer in Answer to it, I Am
persuaded, it must be an exceeding lame one, a poor Come-off. In short, I think
that the Use I have made of his Reasoning, will remain pertinent, till he can
show, that there are stronger, clearer and earlier Testimonies for the
immutable Divine Right and indispensable Necessity of Episcopacy, as a superior
Order to Presbytery, than of Infant-Communicating: But this I think he cannot be
so vain as to pretend to.

One would expect plain Testimonies in the Case of the Episcopacy of Timothy
and Titus, if in any Case at all. Some Pretists indeed have been so satisfied
of this, as to lay the whole Stress of the Controversy on this single Case: and
it is with a special View to this, Mr. Layman made that Remark, Evidence we
have, as much as is sufficient to satisfy a wise and good Man. We see then by
the way, what Presbyterians must pass for in his Account, Fools or Knaves; but
so must some even of his own Church too, as it happens; for there have been
Episcopalians, that never could be satisfied with the Evidence in this Case. I
shall only instance in the learned Dr. Whithy, who ingenuously gives us his
Thoughts in these Words ( Pref. Com. in Tit) As to the great Controversy,
whether Timothy and Titus were indeed made Bishops, the one of Ephesus, the
other of Crete; I confess, I can find NOTHING of this matter in any Writer of
the first three Centuries, nor any Intimation that they bore that Name." -- He
subjoyns, "I confess, that these two Instances absolutely taken, afford us no
convincing Evidence for a settled Diocesan Episcopacy. -- What Considence then
does it bewray, in Mr. Layman, to bear us in hand, That the Episcopacy of
Timothy and Titus is a matter of Fact, wherein the Probability from Scripture
is secended with the universal Suffrage of Antiquity!

In fine, supposing this Case were ever so clear in Antiquity, and supposing
that Episcopacy was held by the primitive Church a Fundamental of Religion (as
Mr. Layman pretends) yet I say still, what signifies the universal Suffrage of
Antiquity, in relation to the great Essentials of Religion, if the Scripture is
silent or obscure? How bold a Charge of Insufficiency is it, upon the
Scripture, to hold one of the great Essentials of the Gospel not evidently
revealed in the Bible, but depending for its Certainty upon Fathers and
Traditions! It Is a just Remark of Dr. Stillingstret's (Irenic. p. 198.)
Whatever is done with an Opinion of the Necessity of doing it, destroys the
Scripture's Perfection, if it be not contained ( i. e. as he expresses himself
before, " not fully laid down) in it: for that were to make it an imperfect
Rule; and in this Sense every Additio perficiens is Additio corrumpens." -- And
he observes ( p. 114.) "A just Ground of Separation is any thing which either
directly or consequentially does destroy any fundamental Article of Christian
Faith: which may as well be done by adding to fundamental Articles, as by plain
denying them. And my reason is this: because the very Ratio of a fundamental
Article does imply, not only its Necessity to be believed and practiced, but
likewise its Sufficiency as to the End for which it is called fundamental. --
Now he that adds any thing to be believed or done as fundamental, that is,
necessary to Salvation, does thereby destroy the Sufficiency of those former
Articles in order to Salvation; for if they be sufficient, how can any new ones
be necessary? The same learned Hand ^bserves ( p. 152, 3.) Supposing that
Apostolical Practice be sufficiently attested by the following Ages, -- though
the matter of Fact be evidenced, yet the obligatory nature of that Fact must
depend on Scripture. -- And supposing any Form of Government in its self
necessary, and that Necessity not determined by a Law in the Word of God, the
Scripture is thereby apparently argued to be insufficient for its End; for then
deficit in necessarits.

Besides, as Mr. Chillingworth (Relig. of Prot. p. 136.) says, Who can warrant
us, that the universal Traditions of the Church were all Apostolical? Seeing,
in that famous place for Traditions, in Tertullian, Quicunque Traditor, Any
Author whatsoever is Founder good enough for them. And who can secure us that
humane Inventions, and such as came a quocunque Traditore, might not in a short
time gain the Reputation of Apostolic! Seeing the Direction then was,
Pracepta Majorum APOSTOLICAS Traditiones quisque existimat.

Will Mr. Layman, after this, think to establish his Episcopacy upon the Credit
of Apostolic Tradition, confirming and interpreting the Scripture! Let him then
never more allege Mr. Chillingworth, as an Advocate for his Cause: I Am sure,
it is such as that learned Protestant will by no means patronize.

Sect. X. It remains (...), to take some Notice of those Quotations, Mr. Layman
has offered, from the Fathers; which, he thinks, are plain Testimonies to his
Purpose, and give great Light into the present Controversy.

Only I will first offer some Remarks on what he premises, in that occasional
Passage ( p. 105.) As for Dr. Stillingfleet, it is very well known, that when
he wrote his Irenicum, he was but a young Man, and had not ripened his Studies
in Antiquity, and also that long after in his Treatise of the Mischief [I
suppose he meant, The Unreasonableness] of Separation, especially in the
Preface to it, he does in Effect at least, retract what he had written before.
So that you have no Reason so loudly to boast of him. -- As to the Doctor's
writing his Irenicum, when he was but a young Man, take the Remark made by one
of his Contemporaries, the learned and judicious Mr. How (Letter upon Occasion
of the Dr's Mischief of Separation, p. 32.) To say the truth, the Gravity and
Seriousness wherewith that Book was written, appears to have so little of the
Youth in it, in comparison of the Jocularity and sportful Humor of some of his
latter Writings, when he has been discussing the most weighty and important
Cases of Conscience, that it seems as a Prodigy in Nature, and that he began
his Life at the wrong End; that he was old in his Youth, and reserved his
Puerility to his more grown Age. -- Mr. How further says; I conceive, one may
safely take it for granted, his Intention was not to retract the whole Book.
However, his Retractation cannot make that which was true, become false. The
Reason of Things is sullen, and will not alter to serve Men's Conveniences. --
Perhaps indeed the Dr. really had changed his Opinion in some Things: yet I
observe, he himself does not positively affirm he had, but speaks with Caution,
hypothetically ( Pref, Unr. Sep. p. 76.) IF any thing in the following
Treatise, be found different from the Sense of that Book etc. Nevertheless he
appears loath it should be thought, he had altered his Judgment in some of the
most material Points; as appears by that Expression I quoted before, ( Ibid. p.
72.) But after all this, wherein is it that he has contradicted himself? I
must say, if the Dr. had really changed his Opinion in any matters of
Importance, he would have shown more of Ingenuity, by being frank and express
in his Retractations, and descending to Particulars, than he has done, while he
leaves us in the Dark, by lurking in Generals. If he was conscious of any
heterodox (...) pernicious Principles in his Irenicum, he would have acted ^ut
the part of an honest conscientious Man (like St. Austin) in marking them out
plainly to the World, and setting himself to refute them; that honest Men, w^o
thought well of many Things in that Book (and perhaps the same Things which he
afterward disapproved) might not always be deceived by the shows of Reason
that deceived himself, and by which he deceived them. We depend not on his
Authority (says Mr. How) but on the Reasons he alleged, which if they were
fallacious, he should have showed wherein, and answered his own Reasons. -- But
since he has not done this, I rather take it for an Argument, that the Dr.
looked on his Irenicum, in the Substance and main Design of it, to stand good
still; and that in the grand Points his Judgment really continued the same. A
Controversy indeed has been managed in Print, on this very Question, Whether
Dr. Stillingfleet has in his latter Writings given the World sufficient
Evidence of the Change of his Judgment, as to the Points of Church Power in
general, and Episcopacy in particular? between the Doctor, and Mr. Lowth, a
noted Episcopal Divine. It happens, I have by me a large Letter of his to the
Dr. (printed Anno 1687.) therein he professedly examines his latter Writings
(particularly the Unreas. of Sep.) and brings them in for Evidence against him.
He observes, as to one important Point and mother, nearly touching the
Episcopal Controversies ( p. 80.) It appears, that That was not one of those
Points, concerning which Dr. St. saw Reason to alter his Judgment in 20 Years
time. He charges him with making "the Church of England a Parliament-Church:"
and tells him, his Definition of it is much at the same as Socrates defined a
Man, Homo est Animal bipes, implume. Diogenes's Jackdaw was as good a Man, when
he had plucked his Feathers off. He charges him with holding that an Act of
Parliament is sufficient to constitute true Pastors; which (says he) savours
too much of the old Vessel. But to omit other Passages, he concludes with this,
And in the last place, You have made NO Satisfaction at all to the Church of
God, for that Irenicum-Doctrine, which equals the Presbyter with the Bishop.
There is not ANY Thing LIKE Amends for it in ALL your Writings, that I have met
with. It is true, You often speak of Episcopacy, as the most ancient Government
derivable from the Apostles: But you have not any where asserted it in the
Number of those Institutions and Practices Apostolical, which are PERPETUAL and
IMMUTABLE; and until you say THIS, all you can say besides, is to NO Purpose.
The Bishop is notwithstanding, at the Mercy of your Prince or your Presbyters,
when their Prudence sees fit to degrade and depose him: There is no more
Obligation to continue the distinct Order of Bishops, than that Order of
Widows, in the Epistle to Timothy. And thus (Sir) I have showed, that you have
not made due Satisfaction for those Errors in your Irenicum, concerning the
Power of the Church in general, and the Constitution of our Church in
particular. How fitly may I hereupon return Mr. Layman his own Remark! So that
you have no Reason so loudly to boast of Dr. Stillingfleet. For ought I see, he
remains ours, nigh as much as ever: We have Mr. Lowth's Authority for it, That
the Dr. at least has said nothing to the Purpose effectual against us. And I
cannot but look upon it, as reflecting a Luster on the Presbyterial Cause, That
so great a Man, as Dr. Stillingfleet, first wrote very much in favor of it,
when young; and then a long time after, when he had ripened his Studies in
Antiquity, could find Nothing to write in Opposition to it, that a zealous and
penetrating Episcopalian would reckon effectual to the purpose. Besure Dr.
Stillingfleet had more Wit, than to go our Layman's Lengths: nor indeed has he
gone much (if any thing) further, in the point of Episcopacy, than Mr.
Chillingworth, who founds his whole Demonstration on a mere Presumption, and
whose Episcopacy stripped of all Accidentals would be little more than Titular,
or a Presidency of Order.

And now I observe, That if what Dr. Stillingfleet has advanced, might truly be
said to be to no Purpose, then I Am sure, Mr. Layman's Quotations from Antiquity
may modestly enough be called Impertinent: while it appears, they say nothing
determinately of the Diocesan Episcopacy, pleaded for; nor of an original
inviolable Right; much less of a fundamental Necessity, in order to Salvation.
As for my own part, I frankly confess, it would have made but very little
Impression upon me, if every one of his Testimonies had expressly and fully
vouched for such an Episcopacy; since he has been so far from proving from
Scripture its Necessity, or even its Existence in Scripture-times. The mere
Sense or Practice of the primitive Church, without evident Scripture-Authority
to back it, I can never persuade my self, has Weight sufficient to determine my
Belief or Practice of any Thing, as of unalterable Divine Instition, much less
as one of the great Essentials of Religion.

But supposing, Antiquity were an adequate Rule; yet nothing short of the
unanimous or at least general Suffrage of Antiquity is sufficient (even
according to Mr Layman) to satisfy a rational Inquirer: but which Way can we
come at this, with any Certainty! Can we safely trust to the Opinion and Report
of 4 or 5 Fathers living in several distant Ages, be they ever so pious and
learned, concerning Times and Places far remote from them, when we are left
ignorant of their Veuchers, upon the Credit of which the Validity of their
Testimonies depends!

However, supposing that in this Way we could have the universal Sense and
Practice of the primitive Church fully ascertained to us, so as to satisfy
every wise and good Man; yet of what Service will Mr. Layman's Witnesses be to
his Cause, if after all it be found, they say nothing to give Light into the
present Question, or at least nothing decisive, to his Purpose! And I am free
to declare, that according to my best Apprehension there is not a single Hint,
in all his Train of Testimonies, clearly asserting Diocesan Episcopacy, as of
Divine Right, an Order superior to Presbyters, of perpetual and universal
Obligation, a great Essential of Religion, and of fundamental Necessity; much
less proving the Doctrine he advances, to be the genuine Interpretation of
Scripture, in this disputed Case, by the unanimous Suffrage of the primitive
Church: all which really belongs to the Thesis, Mr. Layman has attempted to
defend, though he was pleased very artfully to leave out a great part of it in
his stating of the Question. -- I cannot but wonder how the Gentleman could be
so vain as to pretend DEMONSTRATION, to boast of incontestible Evidences, and
duro Ore to talk of a notorious universal and glaring matter of Fact; when his
Evidences (all laid together) do not amount to so much as a fair and strong
PROBABILITY! Upon a careful Examination of these Testimonies from the Fathers,
I find them either aliene to the Point in hand, or contrary to Mr. Layman's
Side of the Question, or at least unequal to the Design he produces them upon.

No one of his Witnesses singly, nor all of 'em collectively, do so much as
make it appear probable, That Episcopacy of the modern Diocesan Kind (de facto)
universally prevailed in the primitive Church from the Beginning, or even in
their Day; much less, that (de jure) in their Opinion this Form of Government,
and no other, was for ever to be used in the Church; and still much less, that
Episcopacy was esteemed a Fundamental of Religion by every Church and Age of
those primitive Times. I might easily demonstrate this, but that it seems
needless; and I think, since Mr. Layman has handed to us his Quotations so
naked, with little or nothing of Comment or Improvement upon 'em, I may safely
venture to let 'em stand just as they are, without any Remarks of mine upon 'em
Indeed I had taken the Pains to go through a distinct and particular Examination
of them: but upon second Thoughts, for the Reason just hinted, and because I
would not unnecessarily add to the Lenth of this Work (which has run out to an
Extent already very much exceeding my first Intentions) I choose almost wholly
to drop that part of my Performance, as well as the Remarks I Have made on a
Variety of incidental Passages in Mr. Layman's Letters.

Only I will in short observe thus much: That whereas this Gentleman
acknowledges, under his first head of Testimonies, from Glemens (p. 106.) " The
words Bishop and Presbyter were NOT YET fixed to signify the different
ORDERS,"I think he has by this one Concession invalidated, if not all his
Evidences, yet some of the earliest of 'em; I mean those from Ignatius's
Epistles, who was contemporary with Clemens, and wrote much about the same
Time: for which Cause it may justly be presumed, let Ignatius mention Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons, whether 16 or 1600 times, his mentioning those distinct
Names is no Argument that he speaks of three distinct Orders. Mr. Layman tells
us, that Ignatius wrote first after the Scriptures were finished A. D. 101.
Whether he means, that the Scriptures were then finished, or that Ignatius then
wrote, is uncertain. If the latter be his Meaning, it serves to shorten the
Space between Clement's writing, and Ignatius's: or if the former, still we
know, that Ignatius died within a very few Years after Scripture-times, and
therefore the Date of his writing cannot vary much, nor be very distant from
that of Clement's. We read in Eusebius's History ( l. 3. c. 14.) That Clemens
wrote his Epistle from Rome, of which he became Bishop in the 12th Year of
Domitian's Reign: who, as some Chronologists tell us, was created Emperor A. D.
81; though others say, Anno 83. So that we must conclude, Clemens wrote his
Epistle in or after the Year 93. if not after 95. at which time the words
Bishop and Presbyter, it is confessed were not yet fixed to signify the
different Orders. And if this Change was effected at the time of Ignatius's
writing, then it must have been effected either in Clement's Time, or presently
after. But now (to make use of Mr. Chillingworth's way of arguing, in his
Demonstration) between Clemens and this presently after, there was not Time
enough for so great an Alteration: and therefore there was no such Alteration,
as is pretended, in Ignatius's Time. And therefore the words Bishop and
Presbyter, being confessed to remain synonimously used so long in the Church,
must be granted also not to signify different Orders in the Epistles of
Ignatius: Quod erat demonstrandum -- However, since this Gentleman declares his
Opinion ( p. 70.) That St. Ignatius is as CLEAR and FULL for the Episcopal
Government, as Words CAN express, then doubtless he will easily he able to prove
from Ignatius, that Bishops, when advanced above the Order of Presbyters, had a
new Consecration; That they had the sole Power of Ordination; and that they had
such kind of Jurisdiction over Presbyters, as is attributed to our English
Prelacy. Sure I am, It is of great Importance to his Cause, that he inform us
how the "Case stood as to these matters of Fact," in that Father's day, being
"immediately after Scripture-Tines:" and that he give us some Evidence, that
Ignatius held this Episcopacy a Fundamental of Religion. I hope therefore, and
I demand of him, that in his next he will favor us with some of his clear and
full Proofs, under each of these heads. In the mean time, I shall think it no
Presumption, to call his Quotations from Ignatius impertinent, as being
perfectly consistent with the words Bishop and Presbyter not being yet fixed to
signify different ORDERS.

Truly, I believe, Mr. Lyman will find it hard to prove, that his fixed
Presidents or Bishops at first had any more Power over Presbyters, than modern
Parso^s of Parishes in England have over their Curates, who yet are not of a
distinct Order. And though in Process of Time these Parochial Bishops might
extend their Influence beyond the Limits of a single Congregation, and even a
City; yet he will find it difficult to prove, that for several Centuries they
claimed any thing beyond the Metropolitical Preeminence, which imports no other
Superiority but what is held consistent with Episcopal Parity, and an Identity
of Order. And I cannot but observe here, Mr. Layman tells us ( p. 112.)
"Episcopacy was truly appointed a Remedy against Schism": which is a
Concession, that seems to me to give a fatal Wound to his Cause. For if that
was the Case, it must be acknowledged, that as the End of the Appointment
certainly specifies the Nature of the Episcopacy, by Consequence this makes the
ancient Bishop a mere President for Order's sake; not an Ecclesiastical
Monarch, but a Moderator, only Primus inter pares: Such as Peter is supposed to
have been among the Apostles. And if it can be proved, that even Cyprian, the
latest of his 5 Witnesses, meant nothing more by Episcopacy, than this Primacy
of Order, I trust Mr. Layman will freely excuse me from offering any particular
Reflections on his other Testimonies of a prior Date, as being indeed
altogether needless.

Now, among a Variety of other Quotations, that might easily be made from
Cyprian's Writings, I shall single o^^ one remarkable Passage, which is full to
my purpose, and stands in that very Discourse, Mr. Layman (p. 112.) recommends
to us to " read, St. Cyprian's excellent Tract De unitate Ecclesiae." The Words
I refer to, are these: Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum; Ego tibi dico, inquit, quia
tu es Petrus, and super istam Petram etc. Et iterum eidem post Resurrectionem
suam dicit; Pasce Oves meas. Super Unum ^^edifi^at E^cl^siam suam. Et quamvis
Apostolis em^^bus parem Potestatem tribuat, and di^at; Sicut misit me Pater
etc. Tamenut Unitatem manifestaret, Unitatis ejusdem Originem ab Uno
incipi^ntem sua Auctoritate disposuit: Hoc eram utique and caeteri Aposlol^,
quod fuit Petrus, pari Consorti^ praediti and H^zoris and Potestatis; sed
Ex^rdium ab Unitate preficiscitur, us Ecclosia ^^a monstr^tur; etc. Page 77.
Ed. Fell. Amst. 1700.

The Occasion of Cyprian's writing his Discourse of the Unity of the Church,
was the Schisms made by setting up of Anti-Bishops, or one Bishop in Opposition
to another, which Case happened both in Rome and Carthage. The main Drift
hereof (as an Episcopal Author represents it) is to show the horrid Impiety of
rebelling against the duly and canonically Elected and Ordained and Orthodox
Bishop of any particular Church, or separating from him, or setting up as an
Antibishop in Opposition to him: and his first and chiefest Argument is, That
our Lord founded his Church on St. Peter, and thereby instituted Episcopal
Government. -- The Truth is, Cyprian in his Writings very frequently alleges
Peter as the first and great Example of the Episcopal Dignity, and founds the
Subjection of the Presbytery to one Bishop chiefly, if not only, on that
Scripture, Tu es Petrus, etc. He does so particularly in the Passage cited by
Mr. Layman, from Epist. 33. and the Quotation I have made, serves for a
Commentary on that: but I Am confident, neither of them affords any Testimony to
the Cause this Gentleman is defending.

It seems to me, if Cyprian had believed Episcopacy to be by Divine Institution
a Superior Order to Presbytery, he would never have contented himself with
alleging this Scripture, Tu es Petrus; when he was so warmly engaged in
Defense of the Episcopal Honor, against some Presbyters, who he thought had
made a bold Invasion upon it.

In the Passage I Have quoted, we have these Things observed to us.

1. Cyprian says, Our Lord speaks to Peter, I say unto THEE, That thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it. And I will give unto THEE the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven etc. And again to the same Person, he says after his Resurrection, Feed
my S^eep. On ONE Man he builds his Church.

This is Cyprian's great Argument for one Bishop to a Church. The Scope of it,
considered in its relation to the Case he wrote upon, must be this; That, as
among the twelve Apostles Peter was First and Chief, so among the Rulers of
every Church there must be one Chief. He e^idently makes the College of
Apostles, and the Presbytery of a Church, parallel Cases; and ^unds the
Preeminence of one Church-Ruler above the rest, ^on the Example of Peter's
Precedence to the rest of the Apostles. From whence it is obvious, Cyprian's
Judgment was ^is, That all Presbyters, or Pastors and Teachers, are Succes^^s
to the APOSTLES, in those ordinary Powers given them, which would be necessary
for the settled State of the Church: ^^t still, that One among those, in every
Church, should have Precedence to the rest, as Peter among the Twelve.

Now it is well known (as I have observed before) that the old ^athers
attributed a Sort of Primacy to the Apostle Peter, caling him the Chief, the
Top, the high Honor of the Apostles, the (...) (Dux, Praeses) and PRINCEPS
Apostol^^um: And ^appears, Cyprian looked upon Peter, as holding the Primatus,
^he place of President or Chairman among the Apostles; and be Church being
built on the Foundation of the Apostles, among whom Peter was Chief, he seems
to speak of him as in a Sense the Cornerstone; observing, Christ said to him,
Thou art Peter, and on this Rock will I build my Church: He builds his Church
on ONE. We may well think, that Cyprian understood not the Apostles to be the
Foundation, but as made Use of by Christ in building his Church: much less that
he looked ^n Peter to be the sole Foundation, in that Sense, exclusively of the
other Apostles; but only considered him, as the first Stone at the head of the
Corner, as it were, or rather the chief Master Builder. Thus Tertullian
understood those words to Peter (De Pud. c. 21.) In ipso Ecclesia extruct a
est, id est, PER ipsum; The Church was built upon him, that is, by him. -- And
this Eminency of Peter, Cyprian makes the Pattern and Plea for the Episcopal
Dignity, or Precedence of One, to the rest of the Rulers, in every Church. His
words, in the Passage quoted by Mr. Layman, and as translated by him, are
these, Our Lord being about to CONSTITUTE the EPISCOPAL HONOR, and the frame
of his Church, said to Peter, Thou art Peter etc. from which the Ordination of
Bishops, and Constitution of the Church does descend, through the Courses of
Successions and Times; that the Church should be built upon the Bishops, etc.
You see by these Words, Cyprian makes the Episcopal Honor, which he pleads
for, to commence in the Person of the Apostle Peter; Here Is the Origin of the
Episcopal Preeminence, according to (...) that Father. But what did Cyprian
mean by this same Episcopal Honor, which originated in Peter? Shall we
understand it, as the Papists do, of the Romish Supremacy, the universal Empire
of the POPE! Whom they hold Successor to the Apostle Peter in the Sea of Rome,
and Head of all Bishops through the Church Catholic. Or shall we understand
it, as Protestant Prelatist^ do, of Diocesan Episcopacy, the Government of
Prelates ove^ the Clergy in particular Churches! Sure I am, there is as little
Show of Reason for the latter, as the former: both Constructions carry a Load
of Absurdity with them. I desire Mr. Layman to read judicious Hooke^'s Thoughts
on the Popish Plea^ ( Ser. 1. on part of Jude, Sect. 14.) and to let me know
how far, he thinks, that Answer to the Papal Argument fails of being a just
Reply to his own Argument for Prelacy, as grounded on the Words of Cyprian.

This Language of Cyprian, Episcopal Honor, puts me in mind of those Passages
in the Ecclesiastical Polity, where Mr. Hocker observes, That the Work of
external Ministry in Baptism is only a Preeminence of HONOR; and that it is
only for ORDER's sake in his Church, that God has committed the Ministry of
Baptism [he might by parity of Reason have added all other external
Ministeries] "to special Men etc. And if the Episcopal Honor did commence in
Peter, as we know; none but Papists that allow him any thing more than a
Priority of Order among the Apostles; so consequently it must be acknowledged,
the ^piscopal Honor that Cyprian pleads for, can mean nothing different,
nothing transcendent to that. Surely M^ Layman cannot with any face plead
Cyprian's Authority for any other episcopal Honor, than what corresponds to
Peter's Primacy among the Apostles. Plainly, according to this Father, the
Bishop is to his Presbytery, what Peter was to the Apostles; who is by Eusebius
called (...), the Prolocutor among the Apostles; and by other Fathers the Name
(...) is frequently given him, which (says Dr. Stillingfleet, Irenic. p. 214.)
imports no more than Praesultor in Chorea, he that led the Dance among the
Disciples. The Bishops then, whose Honor Cyprian holds to be founded in the
Apostle Peter, were but Coryplai, Archbishops, or leading Presbyters, having a
Priority or Precedence to the rest. This is the utmost we can rationally
suppose intended by Cyprian's Episcopal Honor. Some Resemblances of it there
may be in the Church of England: as in the Dignity of the Parson above his
Curates; in that of the Dean, who is Head of the Chapter in Cathedral Churches;
in that of other Dignitaries, above the inferior Clergy; or in that of the
Metropolitan, who is Ordinary to all the Bishops of his Province. I doubt not,
one or other of these Cases reaches the whole meaning of the Cyprianic
Episcopal Honor; which most certainly was such as that Father ^eld not
destructive of Parity. For we must observe,

2. It follows in my Quotation from Cyprian; Although to all the Apostles Christ
gave EQUAL POWER, when he said, As the Father has sent Me, so send I You,
Receive ye the holy Ghost: If ye remit to any one his Sins, they shall be
remitted, etc. The SAME as Peter was, were even the other Apostles also, being
EQUAL Partners both in Honor and Power.

You see, Cyprian puts all the Apostles on a Level, as of one Order and Office;
and allows no one a Superiority of Power, or essentially diverse Dignity, above
the rest. What shall we make then of the Episcopal Honor, he supposes
constituted, when Christ said, Thou art Peter; from whence by the Turns of
Times and Successions the Appointment of Bishops has run on? It Is most
evident, Cyprian holds the Apostles to be all Pares Apostolatu, equal in
Apostolic Honor and Power; and therefore by the Episcopal Honor instituted in
Peter, he must intend something consistent with the Parity he asserts: and
therefore he must intend a mere Priority, Precedence, or Presidency of Order;
such as is commonly practiced in a Society of Equals, where One has something
of Preeminence allowed him, for the better Regulation of Proceedings, and
avoiding of Confusion I know, Cyprian says, "The Bishop has the sublime Top of
the Priesthood": But this means no more than the Fathers intended, when they
called Peter the Top, the high Honor, and Head of the Apostles: still
asserting an Equality in Power, and Identity of Order; and therefore holding
Peter's Primacy to be but a Presidency, for Unity and Concord's sake. Of this
Nature, by Consequence, very apparently and necessarily must be the Episcopal
Honor, which Cyprian pleads for as descending to future Times. For Peter being
the Example and first Instance of Episcopal Honor, what Prerogative he had
above the rest of the Apostles, THIS and no more may the Bishop claim above the
other Presbyters in his Church. Hence it appears to me demonstrated, beyond the
power of Contradiction, That Cyprian believed the Parity of Bishops and
Presbyters, as alike succeeding to the Apostles; Knowing nothing of a distinct
Order of simple Presbyters (as in the Church of England) subordinate to Bishops
by Divine Institution.

It is the most glaring Absurdity, to suppose that our Lord those Words, Tu es
Petrus, instituted an Imparity of Order mong the Apostles; and if not among the
Apostles, then a (by that Argument) among the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel:
And unless Mr. Layman will fix this Absurdity on Cyprian (which indeed would be
but to expose himself) let him never more attempt to prove Diccesan Episcopacy
from any such Testimonies of that Father. I Am as much mistaken, as possible in
any thing, if the very Quotation he has bro't against us from Cyprian, taken in
a comparative View together with that I Have produced, does not give as dangerous
a Blow to the Prelacy he defends, as almost any thing that can be fetched from
Antiquity, or Scripture. I shall therefore without the least Anxiety, wait to
see what artful Shifts he will invent, to salve a lame and wounded Cause. --
And go on now to observe,

3. Cyprian adds, Yet to declare Unity, the Lord by his Authority disposed the
Original of the same Unity, beginning of One. -- The Beginning proceeds from
Unity, to show the Church One.

This Father urges it as an Argument against Anti-Bishops, That the Church was
at first built on ONE, Tu es Petrus. It Is a celebrated Maxim of his in this
Tract, Episcopatus est unus enjus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. This one
Episcopate he makes to begin in Peter, and from him (it seems) communicated,
and branched forth. He says ( Ep 43. p. 229.) Deus unus, and Christus unus, and
una Ecclesia, and Cathedra una super Petrum Domini voce fundata. God is one,
and Christ is one, and there is one Church, and one Chair founded on Peter by
the Voice of the Lord. From hence he collects, there ought to be but our Bisbop
in a Church. The Beginning arises from Unity, to declare the Church is one: And
by the Tenor of his Discourse De Unitate Ecclesiae, Cyprian thought that one
Episcopate was not only designed as an Emblem of one Church, but also as a
Means to promote Unity, Order and Concord in the Church. His main Scope is,
That for the avoiding of Schisms and Confusions there must be one Bishop in a
Church. With that View, as Peter was set over the rest of the Apostles, so in
every Church there ought to be one Bishop, according to Cyprian. But now to
that End it is sufficient, if the Bishop be only a Moderator, as Peter was: and
therefore at most Cyprian's Bishop can mean no more than a fixed Moderator;
which is reconcilable with Ministerial Parity, and far distant from
Ecclesiastical Monarchy. This is clearly evident from the Analogy of
Difference, between Peter and the Apostles, and the Bisbop and his Presbyters.

I might now illustrate and confirm Cyprian's Testimony, by many similar
Passages in other of the Fathers. But to omit all others, I shall place an
Asterism on a Passage of Jerome that seems very parallel; who though a stiff
Defender of the Equality of Bishops and Presbyters in Scripture-times, yet Mr.
Layman will have it (so he says, p. 9^.) that generally speaking no Father has
STRONGER EXPRESSTONS for the Imparity of them, than he: To which I have a
sufficient Reply made ready to my ^and, in this Observation of his own (p.
112.) It Is very unfair to set a single Passage or unguarded Expression of an
Author, against the general Current of his Writings. Waving all other Remarks,
I come to the Quotation from Jerome, which seems to me a good Illustration upon
that from Cyprian.

His Words are these; At dices, Super PETRUM fundatur Ecclesia: Licet id ipsum
in alio loco super OMNES Apostolos fiat, and cuncti Claves Regni Coclorum
accipiant, and ex aquo super eos Ecclesia fortitudo solidetur: Tamen propterea
inter Duodecim UNUS cligitur, ut CAPITE constituto, SCHISMATIS tellatur
Occasio, etc. (Hieron adv. Jovin. l. 1.) He is in that place hotly contending
for the Honor of the Apostle John, and commends him above the Apostle Peter,
because Peter was a married Man, but John a Virgin. In the Warmth of Debate,
Jerome raises this Objection against himself; "But you will say, The Church is
founded upon Peter": to which he replies; Albeit in another place the very same
is done upon ALL the Apostles, and all receive the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and on them EQUALLY the Firmness of the Church is established:
Nevertheless among the Twelve ONE is chosen out, for this End, That a HEAD
being constituted, Occasion of SCHISM may be taken away. But why was not John,
being a Virgin, chosen? Seniority had the Preeminence given to it; because
Peter was a Man in Years: that a mere Youth, and one but a Boy almost, should
not be preferred above Men advanced in Life Upon which I remark, in the words
of Bishop Jewel (Reply, p. 190.) St. Hierome agrees thoroughly with St. Cyprian,
That for avoiding of Schisms, one high Priest, that is to say, one Bishop, was
by good Policy appointed etc -- To the like purpose St. Hierome writes upon
the Epistle unto Titus (cap. 1.) These Things have I spoken, to the Intent to
show, That in old time Priests and Bishops were all one: but that in Process
and by Degrees the whole Charge was brought unto one Man, that the Occasions of
Dissensions might be rooted out.

Thus, in the Judgment of Bishop Jewel, there was an Agreement of Thoughts,
between Cyprian and Jerome, as to the Rise, Nature, and End of the ancient
Episcopacy. They both make it designed as a politic means for the Prevention
of Schisms and Distensions: they both make one single Person the Subject or
Recipient of it: They both make Peter's Preeminence among the Apostles the
Exemplar, which after-ages took Copy from: Cyprian makes the Bishop but summus
Sacerdos, the Chief of the Order of Priests or Presbyters, and Jerome asserts
the actual Equality of Bishops and Presbyters in old time. And therefore, it is
a rational and necessary Inference upon the whole, That the ancient Episcopacy
was at first, both in Intention and Fact, but a Moderatorship, or Presidency of
Order: and though by Degrees almost the whole Pastoral Charge might come at
Length to be devolved on the Priest, called Episcopus, or Bishop, by way of
Eminence; Yet this was considered only as a lawful Expedient for the Good of
the Church, and never pretended to be founded on a Divine Right in the Bisbop,
by virtue of any distinct Commission, to a Superiority of Power over the
Presbyters, as an inferior Order by Christ's Institution: the Presbyters being
only under a prudential Restriction in the Exercise of those Powers, which Jure
originali they stood entitled to in common with the Bishop. Consider the Case
of Peter, as Head of the Apostles, and it gives you an exact Idea of the
Cyprianic Bishop.

Now, to sum up my Argument: If the Episcopal Honor was instituted in the
Apostle Peter; and Bishops have no Right to any more Power over Presbyters,
than he had over the rest of his Brethren: And if the rest of the Apostles were
the same that Peter was, endued all with equal Fellowship, both of Honor and
Power; but he chosen out, as a President, and appointed the First and Chief,
for Unity and Order's sake; Then it is clearly the Judgment of Cyprian, that
the Difference between Bishops and Presbyters is not specific, but only
gradual, and consistent with the Sameness of Order. And by Consequence Mr.
Layman is guilty of a gross Imposition upon the unlearned Reader, and an equal
Abuse of that good Father; when he vouches him as a Witness in the Cause of
modern Prelacy, which differs from the ancient Episcopacy toto Coelo, the whole
Heavens over. -- Will Mr. Layman pretend to know what was the primitive
Episcopacy, better than Cyprian! who (as himself observes, p. 108.) lived
within 150 Years after the Apostles, A. D. 250. and know as well what they
appointed, as we do what was done in Queen Elisabeth's Days. Will this
Gentleman face down the good old Father, That Bishops are by divine Right a
superior Order to Presbyters, having Jurisdiction over them; and attempt too to
support his Tenet with numerous Arguments from Scripture, and Citations even
from Cyprian himself! when yet that learned Father knew no better
Scripture-Argument for Episcopacy, ^han Tu es Petrus, and evidently makes the
Episcopal Honor nothing more than Peter's Primacy, and therefore only a
Presidency, not subversive of Parity: in which he has the Con^urrence of Jerome,
and I doubt not the general Suffrage of Antiquity. I will then presume to
retort on Mr. Layman, in his own words ( p. 98, 9.) which I may repeat with as
much Truth the delivered them, and they carry as good force of Argument in my
Application of 'em, as in his: All Antiquity with one Voice say, it was so; You
do but say, and not prove, that it was not so: Their Authority is, I think, as
good as yours; and indeed at least as much better, as they lived nearer those
Times than you.

Having thus disarmed our Lay-Adversary of all Pleas from Cyprian, the Witness
he so loudly boasted of, I think I have done enough to abate his Confidence in
Antiquity, and to vindicate my Friend Elutherius from the abusive Charge of
notorious Falsehood bro't against him, in relation thereto, as hinted in the
beginning of these Papers. Cyprian being removed out of the way, Mr. Layman's
Specimen of Collections loses its Strength and Terror: his whole Nubes Testium,
exhaled from Antiquity, dissolves and vanishes, without shooting out any
Lightnings or Arrows to do us Harm.

I should have proceeded now to vindicate the Presbyterian Allegations from
Antiquity, against the Exceptions and Cavils of Mr. Layman. (p. 109, and
alibi.) But after the foregoing Reflections, I think it needless, and am
willing to let them have their Fate: Because, though we had not so much as one
conclusive Argument from Antiquity, still if be can advance none on his side
better, than what he has offered in his small Specimen, out Cause will be in no
great Hazard. Besides, the Onus prohandi lies on the affirmative Side.

I hope Mr. Layman will no more object to us (as in p. 109.) "You produce
Jerome, a comparatively modern Father"; since what I have alleged from him, is
but a parallel Passage to that from Cyprian, which I trust Mr. Layman will
enumerate among "the Testimonies of genuine Antiquity."

I hope too, that Mr. Layman will no more object to us (as in p. 97.) That they
are only "some warm unguarded Expressions, wherein Jerome may seem to degrade
Bishops into a Parity with Presbyters"; since it appears, there was such a
Harmony between that Father and the so much magnified Cyprian, in their
Sentiments about the ancient Episcopacy. It is not Jerome alone, who tells us
that Presbyters are loco Apostolorum, in the Apostles stead: but as Dr.
Stillingfleet observes ( Ir^nic p. 308.) Even Cyprian who pleads so much for
Obedience to the Bishops as they were then constituted in the Church, yet
speaks often of his Compresbyteri (Fellow-Presbyters) and in his Epistle to
Florentius Pupianus who had reproached him, speaking of those words of Christ,
He that hears you, hears me, etc. Qui dicit ad Apostolos, ac per hoe ad
omnes Praepositos qui Apostolis vicaria Ordinatione succedunt (Ep. 69. Ed.
Pamel. s. 4.) where he attributes Apostolical Succession to all that were
Praepositi, which Name [tho' Mr. Layman citing the same Passage, p. 108.
appropriates it to Bisbots, yet Dr. Stillingfleet observes, it) implies not the
Relation to Presbyters as over them, but to the People, and is therefore common
both to Bisbops and Presbyters; for so afterward he speaks, Nec Fraternitas
habuerit Episcopum, nec Plebs Praepositum, etc.

Upon the whole I observe, The Testimony of one single Bishop against the
Imparity of Order between Bishops and Presbyters, by Divine Institution, is of
more Importance and Validity than Ten for it; in as much as it is rational to
suppose, that none will object against the Authority they are in, or detract
from it, but such as make more Conscience of the Truth, than of their own
Honor and Interest.

And (in Mr. Tong's words) I would lay down this, as a just Remark upon these
Proofs out of Antiquity, That one Passage which expressly tell us, what kind of
Superiority Bishops had in primitive times over Presbyters, and how they came
by it, is of more Value in this Controversy, than a Score that barely mention
that Superiority: the one speaks directly to the Question, the other not. We
acknowledge those whom the Fathers call Bishops, had some kind of Superiority,
over those called Presbyters; and it is a vain thing for Persons to sweat and
toil, in proving that which we never deny, but will grant them at the first
Demand, but the Controversy turning upon this very Hinge, whether it was a
Superiority of Order by Divine Institution, those Ancients that speak purposely
to this Point, are the most proper Evidences in this Cause.

Sect. XI. I shall now finish with some Remarks on Mr. Layman's Manner of
concluding his LETTERS; that is, with an Exhortation to Charity, a Vying with
us on that head, and a Testimony against the unreasonably severe and hot
Expressions of uncharitable Writers, on either side. ( p. 76. and 114.)

I heartily join with him in the Recommendation of Charity, Meekness, and
Moderation, which so become Christians. But I wish the Gentleman had been more
consistent with himself: for in the very same Breath, while he applauds and
urges Charity and Moderation, he exposes himself as miserably defective in
these Christian Virtues: and while he pretends to be "sorry if any of the
Church should, at any time, treat any of us with Indecency," he at the same
time falls soul of us, in a most indecent manner, taxing our "Ministry and
Sacraments as at least EXTREMELY irregular" (p. 114.) and implicitly
pronouncing us "HERETICS and SCHISMATICS, worthy to be cast out of the
universal Church" (p. 71.) yet he has the face to boast (p. 76.) We have at
least as much Charity for you, as you have for us; for you think us to be as
much out of the Way, as we think you are: But this the Gentleman himself
confutes, by his own Plea from the safer Side (p. 115.) where he observes, You
allow our Orders to be good, our Bishops being at least Presbyters; whereas we
dispute yours --: and if your Presbyters are not Bisbops, it is certain they
are but LAYMEN, and therefore cannot ordain.

I leave every one to judge, who it is that errs most on the censorious and
damning side. I think truly this Gentleman seems to breath very much the Spirit
of the old Donatists, so infamous in the primitive Church for their stingy
narrow Principles, and the edious Practices of Re-baptizing the Proselytes to
their Party, as being no Christians before, and Re-ordaining of Ministers that
came over to them, as being no Ministers before; Confining the true Church to
their own Communion, and unchurching all the other Churches of the Christian
World. If St. Austin could lift up his Voice from the Grave, how would he
thunder at these Episcopal Donatists! Yet it may be they would not be
persuaded, though one should even rise from the Dead.

I conclude with those excellent Remarks of the catholic and charitable Mr.
Chilling worth. The over-valuing of the Differences among Christians (says he,
Relig. Prot. p. 175.) is one of the greatest Maintainers of the SCHISMS of
Christendom. Again ( p. 177.) Certainly, if Protestants, be faulty in this
matter (i. e. playing the POPE) it is for doing it too much, and not too little.
This presumptuous Imposing of the Senses of Men upon the Words of God, the
special Senses of Men upon the general Words of God, and laying them upon Men's
Consciences together, under the equal Penalty o^ Death and Damnation; This is,
and has been, the ONLY Fountain of all the SCHISMS of the Church, and that
which makes them immortal: the common Incendiary of Christendom, and that which
tears into pieces, not the Coat, but the Bowels, and Members of Christ; Ridente
Turca, rec dolente Judaeo. Take away these Walls of Separation, and all will
quickly be one. Take away this Persecuting, Burning, Cursing, Damning of Men
for not subscribing to the Words of Men, as the Words of God; Require of
Christians only to believe CHRIST, and to call no man Master, but HIM only Let
those leave claiming Infallibility, that have no Title to it and let them that
in their WO^^ disclaim it, disclaim it likewise in their ACTIONS: In a word,
take away Tyranny, which is the DEVIL'S Instrument to support Errors, and
Superstitions, and Inpieties, in the several parts of the World, which could
not otherwise long withstand the power of Truth; I say, take away Tyranny, and
restore Christians to their just and full LIBERTY of captivating their
understanding to SCRIPTURE only; and as Rivers, when they have a free Passage,
run all into the Ocean, so it may well be hoped by God's Blessing that
universal Liberty, thus moderated, may quickly reduce Christendom to Truth and
Unity. These Thoughts of Peace (I am persuaded) may come from the God of Peace,
and to his Blessing I commend them.

AMEN.
ERRATA.
SCr. Bp. Vind. Page 30. lin. 36. read Whenever. -- P. 52. l. 12. r. of. -- P.
65. l. 22. r. Concessions. -- P. 88. l. 11. r. a Stranger. -- P. 115. l. 14. r.
softest Name) -- l. 17. r. Bishop.

Eusch. Inerm. Page 5. l. 3. r. might be agreed. -- l 26. r. Terms only,
returns --. P. 6. l. 12. dele as -- l. 24. r. Scripture --. l 33. r. implied
--. P 8. l. 23. r. Defect and Imperfection --. P. 20. l. 25. r.
Charter-Governments --. P. 12. l. 33. r. and even --. P. ^0 l. 22. r.
Accordingly our Author --. P. 32. l. 38. r. guilty --. P. 57. l. 24. r.
together --. P. 88. l. 42. r. of Reason --.P. 98. l ult. r. Charter in
Massachusetts --. P. 1^0. l. 16. r. of which --. P. 139. l 20. r. his own head
--. P. 140. l. 2. r. Prela^ists.


