THE CHARGE OF The Honorable JAMES DE LANCEY Esquire Chief Justice of the Province
of New York, to the Gentlemen of the GRAND JURY for the City and County of
New York, on Tuesday the 15th Day of January, Annoque Domini. 1733.
Printed at the Request of the GRAND JURY.
The NAMES of the JURORS are as follows, viz.
JOHN CRUGER Esquire Foreman, Mr. Robert Watts, Mr. John Moore, Mr. Phillip French,
Mr. Henry Cuyler, Mr. Enoch Stevenson, Mr. James Searle, Mr. Semeon Senmain,
Mr. Peter Schuyler, Mr. Abraham Van Wych, Mr. Paul Richard, Mr. Jacob Goelet,
Mr. Christopher Bancher, Mr. Anthony Dwane, Mr. Thomas Lynch, Mr. Abraham
Borlen, Mr. Harmanus Rutgers, Mr. David Provoost, Mr. William Hamersley.
Gentlemen of the Grand Jury;

YOU must have observed, that of late there have been several Papers printed,
with a Design and a Tendency to alienate the Affections of His Majesty's
Subjects of this Province from the Persons whom His Majesty has thought it
fitting to set over them; and in particular, some Men with the utmost Vir^^ency
have endeavored to asperse his Excellency and vilify his Administration; they
have spread abroad many seditious Libels, in order to lessen in the People's
Minds the Regard which is due to a Person in his high Station. This malevolent
Practice Gentlemen, has laid me under the Necessity of setting before you the
Law in relation to Libels. And as ye are Gentlemen of Understanding and
Integrity, and who will pay a due Regard to the Oaths ye have taken, I make no
question, but you will take such Notice as becomes you, of the Person who has
had the Presumption to print them. The Authors are not certainly known, and yet
it is an easy Matter to guess who they are, that by making Use of Mr. Van Dam's
Name, have gained some credit among the common People, which they were not wont
to have, and never thought to have deserved.

Every Libel is made either against a private Man or against a Magistrate, or
public Person: If it be against a private Man, it deserves a severe
Punishment, for although the Libel be made against one, yet it incites all
those of the same Family, Kindred or Society to Revenge; and tends by
Consequence to Quarrels and Breach of the Peace, and may be the Cause of
shedding Blood, and of great Inconvenience; which it would be impossible to
restrain by the severest Laws, were there no Redress from public Justice for
Injuries of this Kind, which of all others are most sensibly felt. If the Libel
be against a Magistrate or other public Person, it is a greater Offense; for
it concerns not only the Breach of the Peace, but the Scandal of Government.

AND it is not material whether the Libel be true, or whether the Party be of
good or evil Fame; for in a settled State of Government the Party grieved ought
to complain for every Injury done him in an ordinary Course of Law, and not by
any Means to revenge himself either by the odious Course of libelling or
otherwise.

POISONING is accounted a greater Offense than any open kind of Murder, because
it may be done so secretly, that none can defend himself against it, for which
Cause the Offense is the more dangerous, because the Offender cannot easily be
known; and of such Nature is libelling; it is secret and robs a Man of his good
Name, which ought to be more precious to him than his Life.

LIBELLING a Person in so high a Station as that of the Governor is of the more
dangerous Consequence, because without his Concurrence, (as He is the King's
Representative here) we cannot leave such good and wholesome Laws, as this
Colony stands in need of; and certainly if he be libelled, and Endeavors be
used to vilify his Person and Administration, and the Authors and Publisher be
suffered to go on with impunity in such Practices, we shall scarcely find him
in a suitable Temper to pass such Laws for the public Good as shall be laid
before him.

IT is a difficult Thing to say what some Men would be at, or what it is will
please them; some Particulars of his Excellency's Conduct in this City were
said to have given Offense, upon some of his Friends representing to him what
would be acceptable to the People in general, he made an Alteration in those
Points: And yet this too, is a subject for these Men's Dislike, so that which
way soever he acts, they are resolved to clamor: And in good Truth, now they
have the greatest Reason to be dissatisfied, since they find that his
Excellency is determined to do that which will be agreeable to the People, they
are sensible he will by these Means effectually defeat their Measures and
render all their Schemes abortive.

THE Malice of these Men stopped not here; they have condescended to come a Step
lower, and have been pleased to point out several of the Gentlemen of the
Council, who happen to have Places of Trust under His Majesty in this Province:
I suppose they would suggest by this, they are so mercenary and so abandoned as
to betray the Country and give up the Public for the Sake of them. As for my
own part, I am very easy under these Reproaches; I am assured my Conduct in
that or any other Station can stand the Test of their most malicious Inquiry:
To make their Work complete, the Judges of this Court have also had the Honor
to be the Objects of their Resentment, for surely it cannot be a Dishonor to
an honest Man to meet with the Anger and Ill Will of some Men. They have
endeavored by all kinds of Arts to make the People uneasy at the Court of
Exchequer, and I suppose buoy themselves in their prosperous Mischief; But I am
persuaded, that any Uneasiness, which is conceived at it, will in a little Time
wear off and vanish, as it is altogether owing to the most unjust
Misrepresentation of its Jurisdiction, as if the Exercise thereof in a Court of
Equity would take away that inestimable Privilege of Trials by a Jury. This
Gentlemen, is a wicked Insinuation made use of to inflame the Minds of the
common People, and to render the Persons of the Judges, who gave their Opinions
in support of this Jurisdiction, odious to them. But I depend on it, that the
Force of Truth will in a little Time remove the groundless Jealousies that have
been raised on this Occasion, by the Craft of evil-minded Men, who enraged at
their own Disappointment care not into what Disorders they bring us, to obtain
their Ends.

THE Prejudices conceived against this Court oblige me to say something to
satisfy the Scruples that have industriously been raised in some Men's Minds
concerning it.

THE Court of Exchequer in England, in which the Barons are Judges, is chiefly
a Court for the King's Revenues, and has Cognizance of Pleas at the common Law,
and a Power of determining Causes in a Course of Equity by English Bill; These
are the judicial Powers of the Barons, and have been so Time out of Mind, and
their Authority to determine Causes in Equity does not arise from the Stat. 33.
H. 8. as some hold; this appears in the 4 Inst. 119. We there find, that the
Commons petitioned in 2 H. 4. (which then was the Method used in making Acts of
Parliament) that no Writs or Privy-Seals be sued out of the Chancery,
Exchequer, or other Place to any Man to appear upon Pain, etc. to answer, etc.
contrary to the ordinary Course of the common Law: Whereunto the King answered,
That such Writs should not be granted without Necessity. This Writ To appear
upon Pain, is the Subpaena, which is the leading Process in a Court of Equity.
But this did not pass into a Law. In the third Year of H. 5. the Commons
petitioned, that all Writs of Subpaena and Certes de causis going out of the
Chancery and the Exchequer might be enrolled and not granted of Matters
determinable at the common Law on Pain of Forty Pounds. The King's Answer was,
T^^t he would be advised: Which is denying the Royal Assent to pass it into a
Law. Hence it is evident, that the Court of Exchequer as well as Chancery did
proceed in a Course of Equity above One hundred Years before the making of this
Statute 33 H. 8. which is said to give Birth to this Branch of its
Jurisdiction; so that it must have been Time out of Mind, since as My Lord Coke
observes, 4 Inst. 119. We find no former Act of Parliament that does create and
establish it. Plowd. Com. 321. It is said, the Exchequer has a Chancellor and
Seal, and the Writs usual in the Chancery in the Exchequer to seize Land are
more ancient than the Register or the Treatise of Praerogativa Regis Upon which
My Lord Coke's Observation is this; Hereunto it is collected, that seeing there
has been Time out of Mind of Man, a Chancellor of the Exchequer, that there
should also be in the Exchequer a Court of Equity. For these Reasons we may
conclude, that this Court did not derive its Jurisdiction in Equity from that
Statute, but from the common Law.

AS to the Stat. 33 H. 8. it may be said to consist of two Parts, the one for
the Benefit and Advantage of the King, whereby a new Provision is made for the
levying of the Kings Debt in a more speedy and effectual Manner, than the King
had before: The other Part, is for the Benefit and Advantage of the Subject,
and gives him a Remedy where he had none before, and enables him, if he has any
Matter, in Law, Reason, or good Conscience, to bar or discharge the Kings Debt,
to show or plead the same, which by the common Law he could not do. All which
appears in Sir Tho. Cecil's Case, 7 Rep. 18 b. Where although the Covenant and
Obligation of Sir Thomas was broken and fotfeited by the Rigor of the Common
Law, yet as he had Matter in Reason and good Conscience to discharge himself,
he by exhibiting his English Bill in the Exchequer was relieved against the
Queen's Demand by Virtue of this Statute; so that this Statute gives the
Subject a Remedy in Equity in the Exchequer, which he had not before. And these
were the Ends for which this Statute was made.

AS for the Court of Exchequer here, I shall give you, Gentlemen, the general
Reason upon which it is grounded, without descending into many Particulars; but
before I come to that, it may not be improper to observe, That Courts for the
due Administration of Justice are essential to every Community; No Government
can or ever did subsist long without them; They are of absolute Necessity to
suppress Violence and to be Arbiters of the differences between contending
Parties, That every Man may not become his own Carver, and thereby a Door be
laid open to all manner of Iniquity and Oppression. And in a Constitution like
ours, formed upon the Model and as nearly similar as Circumstances will admit,
to that of England, where Equity makes up a considerable Part of the Law;
Courts of Justice are as necessary here as there; those that proceed in a
Course of Equity as well as those that adhere more rigidly to the strict Rules
of the Common Law: For the Common Law lays it down as a Maxim, Rather to suffer
a Mischief than a general Inconvenience; and the Judges thereof are by their
Oaths tied up to the strict Rules of Law, and are bound to determine according
to the known Customs and Statutes of the Realm, although they are at the same
Time sensible, that in so doing, they are obliged to do an Act of manifest
Injustice; Hence is the Necessity of Courts of Equity, to moderate the Rigor of
the Law in some Cases, to give Relief against Frauds, Accidents and such like,
and to prevent a Failure of Justice, which would otherwise happen by such
adhering to the strict Rules of Law. And this alone is properly the Business of
a Court of Equity, not to take away Trials by Jury, but to give Relief in
Cases, where it is not to be had by the common Law: For Causes triable by
common Law and a Jury are improper for a Court of Equity, Heb. 203.

GENTLEMEN, The general Reason upon which the Court stands here, is this: In
case of an uninhabited Country newly found out by English Subjects, all the
Laws in Force in England, are in Force there. This is the Resolution of My Lord
Holt and the whole Court, and seemed to be agreed at the Bar, Falk. 411. This
is from the Necessity of the Thing: For among a Number of Men, there must
unavoidably arise some Differences and Dissentions; which it is most natural to
think they would determine by such Laws as they were acquainted with, which
must be by the Laws of their Mother Country; and there is the same Necessity
that it should be in such Courts and by such Officers and in such Methods as
were known to them, and in Use in their Mother Country. "For where Officers are
wanting, says my Lord Holt, our Laws can have no Force, Falk. 412. So that if
as Englishmen, We claim the Laws of England as our Birthright, we are most
certainly entitled to the Courts, in which the Laws may be administered, which
Courts are by, and part of the common Law; For where is the Use or Force of
Laws, unless they can be put in Execution? This can only be done by proper
Officers; and to say We have a Right to the Laws, and not to the Administration
of Justice according to those Laws, in such manner as we may reap the Fruit of
them, what is this but a gross Absurdity? So that if the binding Force of the
Laws of England here, is either from a right inherent in us as Englishmen, or
from that Necessity which makes it supposed, that we received the Laws under
which our Ancestors lived before their Settlement here, and agreed to be
governed by them for want of another Law; In either Case, nothing more was
wanting than Judges and other Officers to administer the Laws as in our Mother
Country, and give them their Force; and the Appointment of the Judges and
Officers is Part of the King's Praerogative, or more properly of his Office,
But the Jurisdiction of the Court is from the Law; Judges have accordingly been
appointed, and their Commissions have run for above these Thirty Years past
with only inconsiderable Alterations, as they do now.

AND I find upon perusal of the Minutes of this Court, That so long ago as the
Year 1702. a Court of Exchequer was held before William Atwood Esquire the then
Chief Justice, Abraham De Poyster and Robert Walter Esqrs; in which some
Proceedings were had on the Plea side. I do not find any Proceedings in the
Exchequer from that Time, (though possibly I may have overlooked some) till the
Year 1729. When the Hon. Lewis Morris, Esquire my Predecessor sat alone in Court,
and it was upon the Motion of Mr. Alexander, viz.

At a Supreme Court of Judicature for the Province of New York, on Wednesday
the 2d of December 1729. PRESENT, The Hon. Lewis Morris Esquire Chief Justice.
The King (...) Samuel Heath. WHEREAS it is alleged that Samuel Heath, late
Deputy Weigh-master of his Majesty's Weigh-house, has lately absconded, without
rendering an Account or Payment of the Moneys received by him for His Majesty's
Use, for weighing at His Majesty's Beam, and that its the King's Prerogative to
have Process out of His Exchequer, against the Body, Lands and Goods of His
Debtor or Accountant, and to seize them 'till Account and Payment. It was moved
by James Alexander in Behalf of Cadwalader Colden principal Weigh-master, that
this Court being vested with the Power of the Court of Exchequer, would give
Leave to take the Process thereof to compel the said Samuel Heath by his Body,
Lands and Goods, to render the Account and make the Payment aforesaid. It is
Ordered accordingly.

I hereby certify the above to be a true Copy the same having been compared and
examined with the Entry made in the Minutes of the Supreme Court.

Fred. Morris, D. Secry.
Jan. 15th. 1733.
YOU see, Gentlemen, that by this Motion it is supposed, that this Court is
vested with the Powers of the Court of Exchequer, and so allowed by the Chief
Justice, by granting the Motion, what the Powers of the Court of Exchequer are,
wherein the Barons are Judges, I mentioned before, to wit, Cognizance of Pleas
at the common Law, and a Power of determining Causes in a Course of Equity by
English Bill, and the Writ prayed for by this Motion, issues out of the
Chancery of the Exchequer. And the Writs usual in the Chancery in the Exchequer
to seize the Land in such Cases are more ancient than the Register or the
Treatise of Praerogativa Regis. I meet with no other Proceedings in the
Exchequer until Mr. President Van Dam's Time, when a Bill was filed, which
happened in this Manner. In the Winter 1731. during Mr. Van Dam's
Administration there was held a Weekly meeting of the Judges in Town, and some
of the most considerable Lawyers; at one of these Meetings it was proposed by
one of them to bring the Equity Business into this Court, and a Question
arising, whether the Judges were sufficiently empowered by their Commission to
determine Causes brought by English Bill? My Commission and my Brother
Philipse's were brought and considered, and it was agreed by Us all, to wit,
Messrs. Alexander, Horsemanden, Murray, Chambers, Smith, Jameson and Warrel,
who were present at that Meeting, that the Judges were well empowered, and upon
that they resolved to bring the Business here accordingly; for these and other
Reasons, because the Business in Chancery must be attended with intolerable
Delays; The Governors who act as Chancellors being obliged to be sometimes in
Jersey to meet the Assembly of that Province, and sometimes at Albany to meet
the Indian Nations, besides that, few of them care to be troubled with that
Business, this made Suits in Equity in that Court very tedious and expensive,
and it was thought it could not be disagreeable to the People in general, who
must believe their Properties well secured in the Hands of sworn Judges, whose
Business it is to study the Laws, and whose Estates and Families are in this
Country; It was said that that was the properest Time, when there was no
Governor appointed that we knew of, who perhaps might think that the leaving
his Court and bringing the Equity Business into this, was done out of
Diffidence toward him, and none of the Lawyers would care to be the first to
expose himself to a Governor's Dislike; These were the Reasons among many
others made use of at that Time, to alter the Current of the Practice in
Equity, and turn it into the Channel it now runs in. And accordingly a Bill was
filed in the Exchequer in March Term 1731. long before the Governor's Arrival
here, directed to the Hon. Lewis Morris Esquire Chief Justice, and the rest of the
Justices, and on Motion, Process ordered by him in open Court.

I mention these things, Gentlemen, to remove a mistaken Notion most People
have taken up, I am told, as if this Court were erected by Ordinance in the
present Governor's Time, in order to bring on a Suit, brought by the Attorney
General in his Majesty's Behalf against Mr. Van Dam. I hope the People will in
a little Time be undeceived, both as to this Court and the Men who have
signalized themselves in Opposition to that which they once approved and
promoted; looking a few Years back will open their Eyes, and so defeat and
frustrate the Expectations of such as delight in Confusion.

As to the Ordinance, it was chiefly intended to appoint the Times of the
Sittings (for the Times of holding all our Courts have been always settled by
Ordinances) that the Suits here might not prove so tedious and expensive as
they were found to be in Chancery, where, in a very memorable Case, it was
said, the Charges were run up to many hundred Pounds, though the Case was
determined upon Bill and Answer.

As to the grand Objection that has been made, That the King cannot erect a
Court of Equity, so neither can he erect another Court of Kings Bench or Common
Pleas in England. So that if the Objection hold good, in the sense some would
understand it, We have no Supreme Court at all. The Consequences of which are
very Terrible, and obvious to every considerate Man.

Upon the whole, Gentlemen, although some Men have been exceedingly free with my
Character, I can easily forgive them; I dare say, they have not that ill
Opinion of me themselves, which they would infuse into others; but as I am in
this Station now, and as long as I shall have the Honor to continue in it, I
will support and maintain the Dignity and Authority of this Court, till it be
declared in a regular and legal Way by some higher Court, that we have not
Jurisdiction in Equity. I have often since I gave my Opinion touching the
Jurisdiction of this Court, considered the Reasons, Arguments and Authorities
in Law made use of on both sides, as I can see no reason to Retract my Opinion,
on the contrary I am fully satisfied in my Conscience, that I am in the Right.

Gentlemen, I have detained you a considerable Time; you are sensible of the
necessity there is of clearing up these Matters, which, I hope, I have done to
your Satisfaction. Nothing remains but that in general you are charged to
Present all such Offenses as shall come to your Knowledge, from Treasons down
to Trespasses. I know most of you Personally, and I make no doubt but you will
discharge your Duty.

New York, Printed and Sold by Wm. Bradford, 1733.


