A Short and Easy METHOD WITH THE DEISTS: WHEREIN The Certainty of the
Christian Religion, Is Demonstrated by Infallible Proof, from FOUR RULES, which
are incompatible to any Imposture that ever yet has been, or that can Possibly
be.

In a LETTER to a Friend.

To which is added, A LETTER from the Reverend Mr. Leslie, to a Deist, upon his
Conversion, by reading this Book.

The FIFTH EDITION.

Printed and Sold by WILLIAM PARKS, at his PRINTING-OFFICES, in Williamsburg,
and Annapolis, 1733.

A short and easy METHOD WITH THE DEISTS.
SIR,
I. IN Answer to yours of the Third Instant, I much condole with you your
unhappy Circumstances, of being placed amongst such Company, where, as you say,
you continually hear the Sacred Scriptures, and the Histories therein
contained, particularly of Moses, and of Christ, and all Revealed Religion,
turned into Ridicule, by Men who set up for Sense and Reason. And they say,
That there is no greater Ground to believe in Christ, than in Mahomet; That all
these Pretenses to Revelation are Cheats, and ever have been among Pagans,
Jews, Mahometans, and Christians; That they are all alike Impositions of
Cunning and Designing Men, upon the Credulity, at first, of simple and
unthinking People, till, their Numbers increasing, their Delusions grew
popular, came at last to be established by Laws; and then the Force of
Education, and Custom, gives a Bias to the Judgments of after Ages, till such
Deceits come really to be believed, being received upon Trust, from the Ages
foregoing, without examining into the Original and Bottom of them. Which these
our modern Men of Sense, (as they desire to be esteemed) say, That they only
do, that they only have their Judgments freed from the slavish Authority of
Precedents and Laws, in Matters of Truth, which, they say, ought only to be
decided by Reason; though by a rudent Compliance with Popularity and Laws, they
preserve themselves from Outrage, and legal Penalties; for none of their
Complexion are addicted to Sufferings, or Martyrdom.

Now, Sir, That which you desire from me, is, some short Topic of Reason, if
such can be found, whereby, without running to Authorities, and the intricate
Mazes of Learnning, which breed long Disputes, and which these Men of Reason
deny by wholesale, though they can give no Reason for it; only suppose that
Authors have been Trump'd upon us, Interpolated, and Corrupted, so that no
Stress can be laid upon them, though it cannot be shown wherein they are so
Corrupted; which, in Reason, ought to lie upon them to prove, who allege it;
otherwise it is not only a Precarious, but a Guilty Plea: And the more, that
they refrain not to quote Books on their Side, for whose Authority there are no
better, or not so good Grounds. However, you say, it makes your Disputes
endless, and they go away with Noise and Clamor, and a Boast, That there is
nothing, at least nothing Certain, to be said on the Christian Side. Therefore
you are desirous to find some one Topic of Reason, which should demonstrate the
Truth of the Christian Religion, and at the same Time, distinguish it from the
Impostures of Mahomet, and the old Pagan World: That our Deists may be brought
to this Test, and be either obliged to renounce their Reason, and the common
Reason of Mankind, or to submit to the clear Proof, from Reason, of the
Christian Religion, which must be such a Proof, as no Imposture can pretend to,
otherwise it cannot prove the Christian Religion not to be an Imposture. And,
whether such a Proof, one single Proof (to avoid Confusion) is not to be sound
out, you desire to know from me.

And you say, That you cannot imagine but there must be such a Proof, because
every Truth is in itself Clear, and One; and therefore, that One Reason for it,
if it be the true Reason, must be sufficient; and if sufficient, it is better
than many; for Multiplicity confounds, especially to weak Judgments.

Sir, You have imposed an hard Task upon me; I wish I could perform it: For
though every Truth is One, yet our Sight is so feeble, that we cannot (always)
come to it directly, but by many Inferences, and laying of Things together.

But I think, that in the Case before us, there is such a Proof as You require,
and I will set it down as short and plain as I can.

II. First then, I suppose, that the Truth of the Doctrine of CHRIST, will be
sufficiently evinced, if the Matters of Fact, which are recorded of him in the
Gospels be true; for his Miracles, if true, do vouch the Truth of what he
delivered.

The same is to be said as to Moses. If he brought the Children of Israel
through the Red Sea, in that miraculous Manner, which is related in Exodus, and
did such other wonderful Things as are there told of him, it must necessarily
follow, that he was sent from GOD: These being the strongest Proofs we can
desire, and which every Deist will confess he would acquiesce in, if he saw
them with his Eyes. Therefore the Stress of this Cause will depend upon the
Proof of these Matters of Fact.

1. And the Method I will take, is, First, To lay down such Rules, as to the
Truth of Matters of Fact, in General, that where they All meet, such Matters of
Fact cannot be false. And then, Secondly, To show that all these Rules do meet
in the Matters of Fact, of Moses, and of Christ; and that they do not meet in
the Matters of Fact of Mahomet, of the Heathen Deities, or can possibly meet in
any Imposture whatsoever.

2. The Rules are these. 1st. That the Matters of Fact be such, as that Men's
outward Senses, their Eyes and Ears, may be Judges of it. 2. That it be done
Publicly, in the Face of the World. 3. That not only public Monuments be kept
up in Memory of it, but some outward Actions to be performed. 4. That such
Monuments and such Actions or Observances be instituted, and do commence from
the Time that the Matter of Fact was done.

3. The Two first Rules make it impossible for any such Matter of Fact to be
imposed upon Men, at the Time when such Matter of Fact was said to be done,
because every Man's Eyes and Senses would contradict it. For Example: Suppose
any Man should pretend, that Yesterday he divided the Thames, in Presence of
all the People of London, and carried the whole City, Men, Women, and Children,
over to Southwark, on dry Land, the Waters standing like Walls on both Sides: I
say, it is morally impossible that he could persuade the People of London, that
this was true, when every Man, Woman, and Child, could contradict him, and say,
That this was a notorious Falsehood, for that they had not seen the Thames so
divided, or had gone over on dry Land. Therefore I take it for granted, (and I
suppose, with the Allowance of all the Deists in the World) that no such
Imposition could be put upon Men, at the Time when such public Matter of Fact
was said to be done.

4. Therefore it only remains, that such Matter of Fact might be invented some
Time after, when the Men of that Generation, wherein the Thing was said to be
done, are all past and gone; and the Credulity of after Ages might be imposed
upon, to believe that Things were done in former Ages, which were not.

And for this, the Two last Rules secure us, as much as the Two first Rules, in
the former Case; for whenever such a Matter of Fact came to be invented, if not
only Monuments were said to remain of it, but likewise that public Actions and
Observances were constantly used ever since the Matter of Fact was said to be
done, the Deceit must be detected, by no such Monuments appearing, and by the
Experience of every Man, Woman, and Child, who must know that no such Actions,
or Observances, were ever used by them. For Example, Suppose I should now
invent a Story of such a Thing done a Thousand Years ago, I might, perhaps, get
some to believe it; but if I say, that not only such a Thing was done, but that
from that Day to this, every Man, at the Age of Twelve Years, had a Joint of
his Little Finger cut off; and that every Man in the Nation did want a Joint of
such a Finger; and that this Institution was said to be Part of the Matter of
Fact done so many Years ago, and vouched as a Proof and Confirmation of it, and
as having descended, without Interruption, and been constantly practiced, in
Memory of such Matter of Fact, all along, from the Time that such Matter of
Fact was done: I say, it is impossible I should be believed in such a Case,
because every one could contradict me, as to the Mark of cutting off a Joint of
the Finger; and that being Part of my original Matter of Fact, must demonstrate
the whole to be false.

III. Let us now come to the Second Point, to show, that the Matters of Fact of
Moses, and of Christ, have all these Rules, or Marks before mentioned; and that
neither the Matters of Fact of Mahomet, or what is reported of the Heathen
Deities, have the like; and that no Impostor can have them all.

1. As to Moses, I suppose it will be allowed me, that he could not have
persuaded 600000 Men, that he had brought them out of Egypt, through the Red
Sea, fed them 40 Years without Bread, by miraculous Manna, and the other
Matters of Fact recorded in his Books, if they had not been true. Because every
Man's Senses that were then alive, must have cantradicted it. And therefore he
must have imposed upon all their Senses, if he could have made them believe it,
when it was false, and no such Things done. So that here are the First and
Second of the above mentioned Four Marks.

For the same Reason, it was equally impossible for him to have made them
receive his Five Books, as Truth, and not to have rejected them, as a manifest
Imposture; which told of all these Things as done before their Eyes, if they
had not been so done. See how positively he speaks to them, Deuteronomy. xi. 2. to
Ver. 8. And know you this Day, for I speak not with your Children, which have
not known, and which have not seen the Chastisement of the Lord your God, his
Greatness, his mighty Hand, and his stretched out Arm, and his Miracles, and
his Acts, which he did in the midst of Egypt, unto Pharaoh, the King of
Egypt, and unto all his Land, and what he did unto the Army of Egypt, unto
their Horses, and to their Chariots; how he made the Water of the Red Sea to
overflow them as they pursued after you; and how the Lord has destroyed them
unto this Day: And what he did unto you in the Wilderness, until ye came into
this Place; and what he did unto Dathan and Abiram, the Sons of Eliab, the Son
of Reuben; how the Earth opened her Mouth, and swallowed them up, and their
Households, and their Tents, and all the Substance that was in their Possession,
in the midst of all Israel. But your Eyes have seen all the great Acts of the
Lord, which he did, etc.

From hence we must suppose it impossible that these Books of Moses, (if an
Imposture) could have been invented, and put upon the People, who were then
alive, when all these Things were said to be done.

The utmost therefore that even a Suppose can stretch to, is, that these Books
were wrote in some Age after Moses, and put out in his Name.

And to this, I say, that if it was so, it was impossible that those Books
should have been received as the Books of Moses, in that Age wherein they may
have been supposed to have been first invented. Why? Because they speak of
themselves as delivered by Moses, and kept in the Ark from his Time. And it
came to pass, when Moses had made an End of writing the Words of this Law in a
Book, until they were finished, that Moses commanded the Levites who bare the
Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, saying, take this Book of the Law, and put it
in the Side of the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord your God, that it may be
there for a Witness against thee, Deuteronomy. xxxi. 24, 25, 26. And there was a Copy
of this Book to be left likewise with the King. And it shall be when he sits
upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write him a Copy of this Law in a
Book, out of that which is before the Priests the Levites: And it shall be with
him, and he shall read therein all the Days of his Life; that he may learn to
fear the Lord his God, and keep all the Words of this Law, and these Statutes,
to do them, Deuteronomy. xvii. 18, 19.

Here you see, that this Book of the Law speaks of it self, not only as an
History or Relation of what Things were then done; but as the standing and
municipal Law and Statutes of the Nation of the Jews, binding the King as well
as the People.

Now, in whatever Age after Moses you will suppose this Book to have been
forged, it was impossible it could be received as Truth, because it was not
then to be found, either in the Ark, or with the King, or any where else: For
when first invented, every Body must know, that they had never heard of it
before.

And therefore they could less believe it to be the Book of their Statutes, and
the standing Law of the Land, which they had all along received, and by which
they had been Governed.

Could any Man, now at this Day, invent a Book of Statutes, or Acts of
Parliament for England, and make it pass upon the Nation, as the only Book of
Statutes that ever they had known? As impossible was it for the Books of Moses,
(if they were invented in any Age after Moses) to have been received for what
they declare themselves to be, viz. The Statutes and Municipal Law of the
Nation of the Jews: And to have persuaded the Jews, that they had Owned and
Acknowledged these Books, all along from the Days of Moses, to that Day in
which they were first invented; that is, that they had Owned them before they
had ever so much as Heard of them. Nay more, the whole Nation must, in an
Instant, forget their former Laws and Government, if they could receive these
Books as being their Former Laws. And they could not otherwise receive them,
because they vouched themselves so to be. Let me ask the Deists but this One
short Question: Was there ever a Book of Sham Laws, which were not the Laws of
the Nation, Pam'd upon any People, since the World began? If not, With what
Face can they say this of the Book of Laws of the Jews? Why will they say that
of them, which they confess impossible in any Nation, or among any People?

But they must be yet more unreasonable: For the Books of Moses have a further
Demonstration of their Truth, than even other Law Books have: For they not only
contain the Laws, but give an Historical Account of their Institution, and the
Practice of them from that Time: As of the Passover, in Memory of the Death of
the Firstborn in Egypt: Numbers viii. 17, 18.
And that the same Day all the Firstborn of Israel, both of Man and Beast,
were by a perpetual Law, dedicated to God; and the Levites taken for all the
Firstborn of the Children of Israel. That Aaron's Rod, which hudded, was kept
in the Ark, in Memory of the Rebellion, and wonderful Destruction of ^o^ah,
Dathan, and Abiram; and for the Confirmation of the Priesthood to the Tribe of
Levi. As likewise the Pot of Manna, in Memory of their having been fed with it
40 Years in the Wilderness. That the Brazen Serpent was kept (which remained to
the Days of Hezekiah. 2 Kin. xviii. 4.) in Memory of that wonderful
Deliverance, by only Looking upon it, from the Biting of the Fiery-Serpents.
Number. xxi. 9. The Feast of Pentecost, in Memory of the dreadful Appearance of
God upon Mount Horeb, etc.

And besides these Remembrances of particular Actions and Occurrences, there
were other solemn Institutions, in Memory of their Deliverance out of Egypt,
in the General, which included all the Particnlars. As of the Sabbath, Deuteronomy. v.
15. Their daily Sacrifices, and yearly Expiation; their New Mons, and several
Feasts and Fasts: So that there were Yearly, Monthly, Weekly, Daily
Remembrances, and Recognitions of these Things.

And, not only so, but the Books of the same Moses tell us, that a particular
Tribe (of Levi) was Appointed and Consecrated by God, as his Priests; by whose
Hands, and none other, the Sacrifices of the People were to be offered, and
these solemn Institutions to be celebrated. That it was Death for any other to
approach the Altar: That their High Priest wore a glorious Mitre, and
magnificent Robes of God's own Contrivance, with the miraculous Urim and
Thummim in his Breast Plate, Numbers xxvii. 21.
whence the divine Responses were given: That at his Word, the King and all the
People were to go out, and to come in. That these Levites were likewise the
Chief-Judges, Deuteronomy. xvii. 8, to 13. 1 Chr. xxiii. 4.
even in all Civil Causes, and that it was Death to resist their Sentence. Now
whenever it can be supposed that these Books of Moses were forged, in some Ages
after Moses, it is impossible they could have been received as true, unless the
Forgers could have made the whole Nation believe, that they had received these
Books from their Fathers, had been instructed in them when they were Children,
and had taught them to their Children; moreover, that they had all been
circumcised, and did circumcise their Children, in pursuance (...) what was
commanded in these Books; that E^ey had observed the yearly Passover, the
^^eekly Sabbath, the New Mons, and all ^^nese several Feasts, Fasts, and
Ceremonies, commanded in these Books: That they had never eaten any Swines
Flesh, or other Meats prohibited in these Books: That they had a magnificent
Tabernacle, with a visible Priesthood to Administer in it, which was confined
to the Tribe of Levi; over whom was placed a glorious High Priest, clothed
with great and mighty Prerogatives; whose Death only could deliver those that
were fled to the Cities of Refuge. Number. xxxv. 25, 28.
And that these Priests were their ordinary Judges, even in Civil Matters: I
say, was it possible to have persuaded a whole Nation of Men, that they had
Known and Practiced all these Things, if they had not done it? Or, Secondly, To
have received a Book for Truth, which said they had practiced them, and
appealed to that Practice? So that here are the Third and Fourth of the Marks
abovementioned.

But now let us descend to the utmost Degree of Supposition. viz. That these
Things were Practiced, before these Books of Moses were Forged; and that these
Books did only impose upon the Nation, in making them believe, That they had
kept these Observances in Memory of such and such Things, as were inserted in
those Books.

Well then, let us proceed upon this Supposition, (however groundless) and now,
will not the same Impossibilities occur, as in the former Case? For, First,
This must suppose that the Jews kept all these Observances in Memory of
Nothing, or without knowing any Thing of their Original, or the Reason why they
kept them: Whereas these very Observances did express the Ground and Reason of
their being kept, as the Passover, in Memory of God's Passing over the Children
of the Israelites, in that Night wherein he slew all the Firstborn of Egypt;
and so of the rest.

But, Secondly, Let us suppose, contrary both to Reason, and Matter of Fact,
That the Jews did not know any Reason at all why they kept these Observances;
yet was it possible to put it upon them, That they had kept these Observances
in Memory of what they had never heard of before that Day, whenever you will
suppose that these Books of Moses were first Forged? For Example, Suppose I
should now forge some Romantic Story, of strange Things done 1000 Years ago,
and in Confirmation of this, should endeavor to persuade the Christian World,
That they had all along, from that Day to this, kept the First Day of the Week,
in Memory of such an Hero, an Appollonius, a Barcosbas, or a Mahomet; and had
all been Baptized in his Name; and Swore by his Name, and upon that very Book,
(which I had then forged, and which they never saw before,) in their public
Judicatures; that this Book was their Gospel, and Law, which they had ever
since that Time, these 1000 Years past, universally received and owned, and
none other. I would ask any Deist, whether he thinks it possible, that such a
Cheat could pass, or such a Legend be received as the Gospel of Christians; and
that they could be made believe, that they never had had any other Gospel? The
same Reason is, as to the Books of Moses, and must be, as to every Matter of
Fact, which has all the Four Marks before mentioned: And these Marks secure any
such Matter of Fact as much from being Invented and Imposed in any after Ages,
as at the Time when such Matters of Fact were said to be done.

Let me give one very samiliar Example more, in this Case. There is the
Stonhenge on Salisbury Plain, every Body knows it; and yet none knows the
Reason why those great Stones were set there, or by whom, or in Memory of what.

Now, suppose ^mould write a Book Tomorrow, and tell there, That these Stones
were set up by Hercules, Polyphemus, or Garagantua, in Memory of such and such
of their Actions. And for a further Confirmation of this, should say, in this
Book, That it was wrote at the Time when such Actions were done, and by the
very Actors themselves, or Eyewitnesses. And that this Book had been received
as Truth, and quoted by Authors of the greatest Reputation in all Ages since.
Moreover, That this Book was well known in England, and enjoined by Act of
Parliament to be taught our Children; and that we did teach it to our Children,
and had been taught it our selves wh^^ we were Children. I ask any Deist,
W^^ther he thinks this could pass upon England? And whether, if I, or any other
should insist upon it, we should not, instead of being believed, be sent to
Bedlam?

Now let us compare this with the Stonbenge, as I may call it, or Twelve great
Stones, set up at Gilgal, which is told in the Fourth Chapter of Joshua. There
it is said, Verse 6. That the Reason why they were set up, was, that when their
Children, in after Ages, should ask the Meaning of it, it should be told them.

And the Thing in Memory of which they were set up, was such as could not
possibly be imposed upon that Nation, at that Time, when it was said to be
done, it was as wonderful and miraculous as their Passage through the Red Sea.

And withal, free from a very poor Objection, which the Deists have advanced
against that Miracle of the Red Sea: Thinking to salve it by a Springtide,
with the Concurrence of a strong Wind, happening at the same Time; which left
the Sand so dry, as that the Israelites, being all Foot, might pass through the
Owsey Places, and Holes, which it must be supposed the Sea left behind it: But
that the Egyptians, being all Horse and Chariots, stuck in those Holes, and
were entangled, so as that they could not march so fast as the Israelites: And
that this was all the Meaning o^ its being said, That God took off their ((...)
Egyptians) Chariot Wheels, that they drove them heavily. So that they would
make nothing Extraordinary, at least not Miraculous, in all this Action.

This is advanced in Le Clerk's Dissertations upon Genesis, lately printed in
Holland, and that Part, with others of the like Tendency, endeavoring to
resolve other Miracles, as that of Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. into mere Natural
Causes, are put into English by the well known T. Brown, for the Edification of
the Deists, in England.

But these Gentlemen have forgot, that the Israelites had great Herds of many
Thousand Cattle with them; which would be apter to stray, and fall into those
Holes, and Owsey Places, in the Sand, than Horses, with Riders, who might
direct them.

But such precarious, and silly Supposes, are not worth the Answering. If there
had been no more in this Passage through the Red Sea. ^^^an that of a
Springtide, etc. it had bee^ ^^mpossible for Moses to have made the Isra^^^tes
believe that Relation given of it in Exodu^^^ with so many Particulars, which
Themselves saw, to be true.

And all those Scriptures which magnify this Action, and appeal to it as a full
Demonstration of the miraculous Power of God, must be reputed as Romance or
Legend.

I say this for the Sake of some Christians, who think it no Prejudice to the
Truth of the Holy Bible, but rather an Advantage, as rendering it more easy to
be believed, if they can solve whatever seems Miraculous in it, by the Power of
second Causes; and so to make all, as they speak, Natural and Easy. Wherein, if
they could prevail, the natural and easy Result would be, not to believe one
Word in all those Sacred Oracles. For if Things be not, as they are told in any
Relation, that Relation must be false: And if false in Part, we cannot trust to
it, either in Whole, or in Part.

Here are to be excepted, Mis-Translations, and Errors, either in Copy, or in
Press. But where there is no Room for supposing of these, as where all Copies
do agree; there we must either receive All, or reject All. I mean in any Book
that pretends to be written from the Mouth of God. For in other common
Histories, we may believe Part, and reject Part, as we see Cause.

But to return. The Passage of the Israelites over Jordan, in Memory of which,
those Stones at Gilgal were set up, is free from all those little Carpings
before mentioned, that are made as to the Passage through the Red Sea. For Notice
was given to the Israelites the Day before, of this great Miracle to be done.
Josh. iii. 5. It was done at Noonday, before the whole Nation. And when the
Waters of Jordan were divided, it was not at any Low-Ebb, but at the Time when
that River overflowed all his Banks, ver. 15. And it was done, not by Winds, or
in Length of Time, which Winds must take to do it: But all on the sudden, as
soon as the Feet of the Priests that bare the Ark were dipped in the Brim of
the Water, Then the Waters which came down from above, stood and rose up upon
an Heap, very far from the City Adam, that is beside Zaretan: And those that
came down toward the Sea of the Plain, even the Salt Sea, failed, and were cut
off: And the People passed over, right against Jericho. The Priests stood in
the midst of Jordan, 'til all the Armies of Israel had passed over. And it came
to pass, when the Priests that bare the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, were
come up, out of the Midst of Jordan, and the Soles of the Priests Feet were
lift up upon the dry Land, that the Waters of Jordan returned into their Place,
and flowed over all his Banks, as they did before. And the People came up out
of Jordan, on the Tenth Day of the first Month, and encamped in Gilgal, on the
East Border of Jericho. And those Twelve Stones which they took out of Jordan,
did Joshua pitch in Gilgal. And he spoke unto the Children of Israel, saying,
When your Children shall ask their Fathers in Time to came, saying, what mean
these Stones? Then shall ye let your Children know, saying, Israel came over
this Jordan on dry Land. For the Lord your God dried up the Waters of Jordan
from before you, until ye were passed over; as the Lord your God did to the Red
Sea, which he dried up, from before us, until we were gone over. That all the
People of the Earth might know the Hand of the Lord, that it is Mighty: That ye
might fear the Lord your God for ever. Chap. iv. from ver. 18.

If the Passage over the Red Sea, had been only taking Advantage of a
Springtide, or the like, How would this teach all the People of the Earth,
that the Hand of the Lord was Mighty! How would a Thing no more remarkable,
have been taken Notice of through all the World! How would it have taught Israel
to fear the Lord, when they must know, that notwithstanding, of all these Big
Words, there was so Little in it! How could they have believed, or received a
Book, as Truth, which they knew, told the Matter so far otherwise from what it
was!

But, as I said, This Passage over Jordan, which is here compared to that of
the Red Sea, is free from all those Cavils that are made, as to that of the Red
Sea; and is a further Attestation to it, being said to be done in the same
Manner as was that of the Red Sea.

Now, to form our Argument, Let Us suppose, that there never was any such Thing
as that Passage over Jordan: That these Stones at Gilgal, were set up upon some
other Occasion, in some after Age: And then, that some designing Man invented
this Book of Joshua, and said, that it was wrote by Joshua at that Time; and
gave this Stonage, at Gilgal, for a Testimony of the Truth of it. Would not
every Body say to him, We know the Stonage, at Gilgal; but we never heard
before of this Reason for it? Nor of this Book of Joshua? Where has it been all
this while? And Where, and How came you, after so many Ages, to find it?
Besides, this Book tells Us, that this Passage over Jordan was ordained to be
taught our Children, from Age to Age: And therefore, that they were always to
be instructed in the Meaning of that Stonage at Gilgal, as a Memorial of it.
But we were never taught it when we were Children; nor did ever teach our
Children any such Thing. And it is not likely, That could have been forgotten,
while so remarkable a Stonage did continue; which was set up for that, and no
other End.

And if, for the Reasons before given, no such Imposition could be put upon us,
as to the Stonage in Salisbury-Plain; How much less could it be as to the
Stonage at Gilgal?

And if, where we know not the Reason of a bare naked Monument, such a
Sham-Reason cannot be imposed; how much more is it impossible to impose upon
us, in Actions and Observances, which we celebrate in Memory of particular
Passages? How impossible to make us forget those Passages which we daily
Commemorate; and persuade us, that we had always kept such Institutions in
Memory of what we never heard of before; that is, that we knew it, before we
knew it.

And if we find it thus impossible for an Imposition to be put upon us, even in
some Things, which have not all the Four Marks beforementioned; how much more
impossible is it, that any Deceit should be in that Thing, where all the Four
Marks do meet?

This has been showed in the First Place, as to the Matters of Fact of Moses.

2. Therefore I come now (Secondly) to show, that, as in the Matters of Fact of
Moses, so likewise, all these Four Marks do meet in the Matters of Fact, which
are recorded in the Gospel, of our B. Savior. And my Work herein will be the
shorter, because all that is said before, of Moses, and his Books, is every Way
as applicable to Christ and his Gospel. His Works and Miracles are there said
to be done publicly, in the Face of the World, as he argued to his Accusers, I
spoke openly to the World, and in Secret have I said nothing, John xviii. 20.
It is told, Acts ii. 41. that Three Thousand at one Time; and Acts iv. 4. that
Five Thousand at another Time, were converted, upon Conviction of what
themselves had seen, what had been done publicly before their Eyes, wherein it
was impossible to have imposed upon them: Therefore here were the Two first of
the Rules before mentioned.

Then for the Two Second: Baptism and the Lord's Supper were instituted as
perpetual Memorials of these Things; and they were not instituted in
after-Ages, but at the very Time when these Things were said to be done; and
have been observed without Interruption, in all Ages through the whole Christian
World, down all the Way from that Time to this. And Christ himself did ordain
Apostles, and other Ministers of his Gospel, to Preach, and Administer these
Sacraments; and to Govern His Church; and that always, Matthew. xxviii. 20.
even unto the End of the World. Accordingly they have continued by regular
Succession, to this Day: And, no Doubt, ever shall, while the Earth shall last.
So that the Christian Clergy are as notorious a Matter of Fact, as the Tribe of
Levi among the Jews: And the Gospel is as much a Law to the Christians, as the
Book of Moses to the Jews. And it being Part of the Matters of Fact related in
the Gospel, that such an Order of Men, were appointed by Christ, and to
continue to the End of the World; consequently, if the Gospel was a Fiction,
and invented (as it must be) in some Ages after Christ; then, at that Time,
when it was first invented, there could be no (...) Order of Clergy, as derived
themselves from the Institution of Christ; which must give the Lie to the
Gospel, and demonstrate the whole to be False: And the Matters of Fact of
Christ being pressed to be true, no otherwise than as there was, at that Time
(whenever the Deists will suppose the Gospel to be Forged) not only public
Sacraments of Christ's Institution, but an Order of Clergy, likewise of his
Appointment to Administer them: And it being impossible there could be any such
Things before they were Invented, it is as impossible that they should be
Received when invented. And therefore, by what was said above, it was as
impossible to have imposed upon Mankind in this Matter, by inventing of it in
after-Ages, as at the Time when those Things were ^^^d to be done.

3. The Matters of Fact of Mahomet, or what is Fabled of the Deities, do all
want some of the aforesaid Four Rules whereby the Certainty of Matters of Fact
is demonstrated. First, for Mahomet, he pretended to no Miracles, as he tells
us in his Alcoran, c. 6. etc. and those which are commonly told of him pass
among the Mahometans themselves but as Legendary Fables; and as such, are
rejected by the Wise and Learned among them, as Legends of their Saints are in
the Church of Rome. See Dr. Prideaux his Life of Mahomet, Page 34.

But, in the next Place, those which are told of him, do all want the Two first
Rules beforementioned. For his pretended Converse with the Moon, his Me^sa, or
Night-Journey from Mecca to Jerusalem, and thence to Heaven, etc. were not
performed before any Body. We have only his own Word for them; and they are as
groundless as the Delusions of Fox, or Muggleton, among our selves. The same is
to be said (in the second Place of the Fables of the Heathen Gods,) of
Mercury's stealing Sheep, Jupiter's turning himself into a Bull, and the like;
besides the Folly and Unworthiness of such senseless pretended Miracles. And
moreover, the Wife among the Heathen did reckon no otherwise of these but as
Fables, which had a Mythology, or Mystical Meaning in them; of which several of
them have given us the Rationale, or Explication. And it is plain enough, that
Ovid meant no other by all his Metamorphoses.

It is true, the Heathen Deities had their Priests: Games, and other public
Institutions in Memory of them. But all these want the Fourth Mark, viz. That
such Priesthood and Institutions should Commence from the Time that such
Things as they commemorate, were said to be done; otherwise they cannot secure
after-Ages from the Imposture, by detecting it, at the Time when first
Invented, as has been argued before. But the Bacchanalia, and other Heathen
Feasts, were instituted many Ages after what was reported of these Gods was
said to be done, and therefore can be no Proof of them. And the Priests of
Bacchus, Apollo, etc. were not Ordained by these supposed Gods; but were
appointed by others, in after-Ages, only in Honor to them: And therefore these
Orders of Priests are no Evidence to the Truth of the Matters of Fact, which
are reported of their Gods.

IV. Now to apply what has been said; You may challenge all the Deists in the
World, to show any Action that is Fabulous, which has all the Four Rules, or
Marks beforementioned: No, it is impossible. And (to resume a little what is
spoke to before) the Histories of Exodus, and the Gospel, could never have been
received, if they had not been true; because the Institution of the Priesthood
of Levi, and of Christ, of the Sabbath, the Passover, of Circumcision, of
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, etc. are there related, as descending all the
Way down from those Times, without Interruption. And it is full as impossible
to persuade Men, that they had been Circumcised, Baptized, had Circumcised, or
Baptized their Children, celebrated Passovers, Sabbaths, Sacraments, etc. under
the Government, and Administration of a certain Order of Priests, if they had
done none of these Things, as to make them believe, that they had gone through
Seas upon Dry Land, seen the Dead raised, etc. And without believing of these,
it was impossible, that either the Law, or the Gospel, could have been received.

And the Truth of the Matters of Fact of Exodus and the Gospel, being no
otherwise pressed upon Men, than as they have practiced such public
Institutions; it is appealing to the Senses of Mankind for the Truth of them;
and makes it impossible for any to have invented such Stories in after-Ages,
without a palpable Detection of the Cheat, when first invented; as impossible
as to have imposed upon the Senses of Mankind, at the Time when such public
Matters of Fact were said to be done.

V. I do not say, that every Thing which wants these Four Marks is false; but
that nothing can be False which has them All.

I have no Manner of Doubt, that there was such a Man as Julius Caesar, that he
fought at Pharsalia, was killed in the Senate House; and many other Matters of
Fact of ancient Times, though we keep no public Observances in Memory of them.

But this shows that the Matters of Fact of Moses, and of Christ, have come
down to us better guarded than any other Matters of Fact, how true soever.

And yet our Deists, who would laugh any Man out of the World, as an irrational
Brute, who should offer to deny Caesar or Alexander, Homer or Virgil, their
public Works and Actions, do, at the same Time, value themselves as the only
Men of Wit and Sense, of Free, Generous, and Unbiased Judgments, for
ridiculing the Histories of Moses and Christ, that are infinitely better
attested, and guarded with infallible Marks, which the others want.

VI. Besides that, the Importance of the Subject would oblige all Men to
inquire more narrowly into the one than the other: For, what Consequence is it
to me, or to the World, whether there was such a Man as Caesar, whether he beat
or was beaten at Pharsalia; whether Homer or Virgil wrote such Books; and
whether what is related in the Iliads or Aeneids be True, or False? It is not
Two Pence up or down to any Man in the World: And therefore it is worth no
Man's while to enquire into it, either to oppose or justify the Truth of these
Relations.

But our very Soul and Bodies, both this Life and Eternity are concerned in the
Truth of what is related in the Holy Scriptures; and therefore Men would be
more inquisitive to search into the Truth of these, than of any other Matters
of Fact; examine and sift them narrowly; and find out the Deceit, if any such
could be found: For it concerned them nearly, and was of the last Importance to
them.

How unreasonable then is it to reject these Matters of Fact, so sifted, so
examined, and so attested, as no other Matters of Fact in the World ever were;
and yet to think it the most highly Unreasonable, even to Madness, to deny
other Matters of Fact, which have not the Thousandth Part of their Evidence;
and are of no Consequence at all to Us, whether True or False!

VII. There are several other Topics, from whence the Truth of the Christian
Religion is evinced to all who will judge by Reason, and give themselves leave
to Consider. As the Improbablity that Ten or Twelve poor illiterate Fishermen
should form a Design of converting the whole World to believe their Delusions;
and the Impossibility of their effecting it, without Force of Arms, Learning,
Oratory, or any one visible Thing that could recommend them! And to impose a
Doctrine quite opposite to the Lusts and Pleasures of Men, and all worldly
Advantages, or Enjoyments! And this in an Age of so great Learning and Sagacity
as that wherein the Gospel was first preached! That these Apostles should not
only undergo all the Scorn and Contempt, but the severest Persecutions, and
most cruel Deaths that could be inflicted, in Attestation to what themselves
knew to be a mere Deceit and Forgery of their own Contrving! Some have suffered
for Errors, which they thought to be Truth; but never any for what themselves
knew to be Lies. And the Apostles must know what they taught to be Lies, if it
was so, because they spoke of those Things which Acts iv. 20 they said, they
had both seen and 1 John 1.1 heard, had looked upon, and handled with their
Hands, etc.

Neither can it be said, that they, perhaps, might have proposed some temporal
Advantages to themselves, but missed of them, and met with Sufferings instead
of them: For if it had been so, it is more than probable, that when they saw
their Disappointment, they would have discovered their Conspiracy; especially
when they might not have only saved their Lives, but got great Rewards for
doing of it. That not one of them should ever have been brought to do this!

But this is not all: For they tell us, that their Master bid them expect
nothing but Sufferings in this World. This is the Tenure of all that Gospel
which they taught. And they told the same to all whom they Converted. So that
here was no Disappointment.

For all that were Converted by them, were Converted upon the certain
Expectation of Sufferings, and bidden prepare for it. Christ commanded his
Disciples to take up their Cross daily, and follow him; and told them, that in
the World they should have Tribulation: That whoever did not forsake Father,
Mother, Wife, Children, Lands, and their very Lives, could not be his
Disciples: That he who sought to save his Life in this World, should lose it in
the next.

Now that this despised Doctrine of the Cross should prevail so Universally
against the Allurements of Flesh and Blood, and all the Blandishments of this
World; against the Rage, and Persecution of all the Kings and Powers of the
Earth, must show its Original to be Divine, and its Protector Almighty. What is
it else could Conquer without Arms, persuade without Rhetoric, overcome
Enemies, disarm Tyrants, and subdue Empires, without Opposition!

VIII. We may add to all this, the Testimonies of the most bitter Enemies and
Persecutors of Christianity, both Jews and Gentiles, to the Truth of the Matter
of Fact of Christ, such as Josephus and Tacitus; of which the First flourished
about Forty Years after the Death of Christ, and the other about Seventy Years
after: So that they were capable of examining into the Truth, and wanted not
Prejudice and Malice sufficient to have inclined them to deny the Matter of
Fact it self of Christ: But their Confessing to it, as likewise Lucian, Celsus,
Porphyry, and Julian the Apostate; the Mahometans since, and all other Enemies
of Christianity that have arisen in the World, is an undeniable Attestation to
the Truth of the Matter of Fact.

IX. But there is another Argument more strong and convincing than even this
Matter of Fact. More than the Certainty of what I see with my Eyes. And which
the Apostle Peter called, a more sure Word, that is, Proof, than what he saw
and heard upon the Holy Mount, when our Blessed Savior was Transfigured before
him, and Two other of the Apostles: For having repeated that Passage, as a
Proof of that whereof they were Eye Witnesses, and heard the Voice from Heaven,
giving Attestation to our Lord Christ, 2 Pet. i. 16, 17, 18. He says, Ver. 19.
We have also a more sure Word of Prophesy, for the Proof of this Jesus being
the Messiah, that is the Prophecies which had gone before of Him, from the
Beginning of the World; and All exactly fulfilled in Him.

Men may dispute an Imposition or Delusion upon our outward Senses: But how
that can be False, which has been so long, even from the Beginning of the
World, and so Often by all the Prophets, in several Ages foretold; how can this
be an Imposition, or a Forgery?

This is particularly insisted on, in the Method with the Jews. And even the
Deists must confess, that the Book we call the Old Testament, was in being, in
the Hands of the Jews, long before our Savior came into the World. And if they
will be at the Pains to compare the Prophesies that are there of the Messiah,
with the Fulfilling of them, as to Time, Place, and all other Circumstances, in
the Person, Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Blessed
Savior, will find this Proof what our Apostle here calls it, a Light shining
in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts.
Which God grant. Here is no Possibility of Deceit or Imposture.

Old Prophesies, (and all so agreeing) could not have been contrived to
countenance a new Cheat; and nothing could be a Cheat, that could fulfill all
these.

For this therefore, I refer the Deists to the Method with the Jews.

I desire them likewise to look there Sect. XI. and consider the Prophecies
given so long ago, of which they see the Fulfilling at this Day, with their own
Eyes, of the State of the Jews, for many Ages past, and at present; without a
King, or Priest, or Temple, or Sacrifice, scattered to the Four Winds, Sifted
as with a Sieve, among all Nations, yet preserved; and always so to be, a
district People from all others of the whole Earth, Whereas those mighty
Monarchies which oppressed the Jews, and which commanded the World, in their
Turns, and had the greatest (...) Prospect of Perpetuity, were to be
extingished, as they have been, even that their Names should be blotted out
from under Heaven.

As likewise, That as remarkable of our Blessed Savior, concerning the
Preservation and Progress of the Christian Church, when in her Swaddling
Clothes, consisting only of a few poor Fishermen. Not by the Sword, as that of
Mahomet, but under all the Persecution of Men and Hell; which yet should not
prevail against Her.

But though I offer these, as not to be slighted by the Deists, to which they can
show nothing equal in all profane History; and in which it is impossible any
Cheat can lie; yet I put them not upon the same Foot as the Prophesies before
mentioned, of the Marks and Coming of the Messiah, which have been since the
World began.

And that General Expectation of the whole Earth, at the Time of his Coming,
insisted upon in the Method with the Jews, Sect. V. is greatly to be (...).

But, I say, the foregoing Prophesies of our Savior, are so strong a Proof, as
even Miracles would not be sufficient to break their Authority.

I mean, if it were possible that a True Miracle could be wrought, in
Contradiction to them: For that would be for God to contradict Himself.

But no Sign, or Wonder, that could possibly be solved, should shake this
Evidence.

It is this that keeps the Jews in their Obstinacy: Though they cannot deny the
Matters of Fact done by our Blessed Savior, to be truly Miracles, if so done
as said: Nor can they deny that they were so done, because they have all the
Four Mar^^ before mentioned. Yet they cannot yield! Why? Because they think the
Gospel is in Contradiction to the Law. Which, if it were, the Consequence would
be unavoidable, that Both could not be True. To solve this, is the Business of
the Method with the Jews. But the Contradiction which they suppose, is in their
Comments that they put upon the Law; especially, they expect a Literal
Fulfilling of those Promises of the Restoration of Jerusalem, and outward
Glories of the Church, of which there is such frequent Mention in the Books of
Moses, the Psalms, and all the Prophets. And many Christians do expect the
same; and take those Texts as Literally as the Jews do. We do Believe and Pray
for the Conversion of the Jews. For this End they have been so miraculously
preserved, according to the Prophesies so long before of it. And when that Time
shall come, as they are the most Honorable and Ancient of all the Nations on
the Earth, so will their Church return to be the Mother Christian Church, as
she was at first; and Rome must surrender to Jerusalem Then all Nations will
flow thither: And even Ezekiel's Temple may be Literally Built There, in the
Metropolis of the whole Earth; which Jerusalem must be, when the Fullness of the
Gentiles shall meet with the Conversion of the Jews: For no Nation will then
contend with the Jews, nor Church with Jerusalem, for Supremacy. All Nations
will be ambitious to draw their Original from the Jews, whose are the Fathers,
and from whom, as concerning the Flesh, Christ came.

Then will be fulfilled that outward Grandeur and Restoration of the Jews, and
of Jerusalem, which they expect, pursuant to the Prophesies.

They pretend not that this is limited to any particular Time of the Reign of
the Messiah. They are sure it will not be at the Beginning; for they expect to
go through great Conflicts and Trials with their Messiah, (as the Christian
Church has done) before his Final Conquest, and that they come to Reign with
him. So that this is no Obstruction to their Embracing of Christianity. They
see the same Things fulfilled in us, which they expect themselves; and we
expect the same Things they do.

I tell this to the Deists, lest they may think that the Jews have some
stronger Arguments than they know of, That they are not persuaded by the
Miracles of our Blessed Savior, and by the fulfilling of all the Prophesies in
him, that were made concerning the Messiah.

As I said before, I would not plead even Miracles against these.

And if this is sufficient to persuade a Jew, it is much more so to a Deist,
who labors not under these Objections.

Besides, I would not seem to clash with that (in a sound Sense) reasonable
Caution, used by Christian Writers, not to put the Issue of the Truth wholly
upon Miracles, without this Addition, when not done in Contradiction to the
Revelations already given in the Holy Scriptures.

And they do it upon this Consideration, That though it is impossible to suppose,
that God would work a real Miracle, in Contradiction to what he has already
Reveal^d; yet Men may be imposed upon by False and Seeming Miracles, and
Protended Revelations, (as there are many Examples, especially in the Church of
Rome) and so may be shaken in the Faith, if they keep not to the Holy
Scriptures as their Rule.

We are told, 2 Thessalonians. 11.9. Of him whose Coming is after the Working of Satan,
with all Power, and Signs, and Lying Wonders. And Rev. xiii. 14. xvi. 14. and
xix. 20. of the Devil, and False Prophets working Miracles. But the Word, in
all these Places, is only SEMEIA, Signs, that is, as it is rendered, Matthew.
xxv. 24. which, though sometimes it may be used to signify Real Miracles, yet not
always, not in these Places: For though every Miracle be a Sign and a Wonder, yet
every Sign, or Wonder, is not a Miracle.

X. Here it may be proper to consider a common Topic of the Deists, who, when
they are not able to stand out against the Evidence of Fact, that such and such
Miracles have been done; then turn about, and deny such Things to be Miracles;
at least, That we can never be Sure, whether any wonderful Thing that is shown
to us, be a True or a False Miracle.

And the great Argument they go upon is this, That a Miracle being that which
exceeds the Power of Nature, We cannot know what exceeds it, unless we knew the
utmost Extent of the Power of Nature; and no Man pretends to know that;
therefore, that no Man can certainly know whether any Event be miraculous. And
consequently, he may be cheated in his Judgment betwixt True and False Miracles.

To which I answer, That Men may be so Cheated. And there are many Examples of
it.

But that though we may not always Know when we are Cheated, yet we can certainly
tell, in many Cases, when we are not cheated.

For though we do not know the utmost Extent of the Power of Nature, perhaps, in
any One Thing; yet it does not follow, that we know not the Nature of any
Thing, in some Measure; and that certainly too. For Example, though I do not know
the utmost Extent of the Power of Fire, yet I certainly know, That it is the
Nature of Fire to burn; and, that when proper Fuel is administered to it, it is
contrary to the Nature of Fire not to consume it. Therefore, if I see Three Men
taken off the Street, in their common wearing Apparel, and without any
Preparation, cast into the Midst of a Burning Fiery Furnace; and that the Flame
was so fierce, that it burnt up those Men that drew them in; and yet that these
who were thrown in, should walk up and down in the Bottom of the Furnace, and I
should see a Fourth Person with them of Glorious Appearance, like the Son of
God. And that these Men should come up again out of the Furnace, without any
Harm, or so much as the Smell of Fire upon themselves, or their Clothes, I
could not be deceived, in thinking that there was a Stop put to the Nature of
Fire, as to these Men; and that it had its Effect upon the Men whom it Burned,
at the same Time.

Again, though I cannot tell how Wonderful and Sudden an Increase of Corn might
be produced by the Concurrence of many Causes, as a Warm Climate, the Fertility
of the Soil, etc. Yet this I can certainly know, That there is not that Natural
Force in the Breath of two or three Words spoken, to multiply one small Loaf of
Bread, so fast, in the Breaking of it, as Truly and Really, not only in
Appearance and Show to the Eye, but to fill the Bellies of several Thousand
hungry Persons; and that the Fragments should be much more than the Bread was
at first.

So neither in a Word spoken, to raise the Dead, cure Diseases, etc.

Therefore, though we know not the utmost Extent of the Power of Nature; yet we
can certainly know what is Contrary to the Nature of several such Things as we
do know.

And therefore, though we may be Cheated and imposed upon in many Seeming
Miracles, and Wonders; yet there are some Things, wherein we may be Certain.

But further, the Deists acknowledge a God, of an Almighty Power, who made all
Things.

Yet they would put it out of his Power, to make any Revelation of his Will to
Mankind: For if we cannot be certain of any Miracle, how should we know when
God sent any Thing Extraordinary to us?

Nay, how should we know the Ordinary Power of Nature, if we knew not what
exceeded it? If we know not what is Natural, how do we know there is such a
Thing as Nature? That all is not Supernatural, all Miracles, and so disputable,
till we come to downright Skepticism, and doubt the Certainty of our outward
Senses, whether we See, Hear, or Feel; or all be not a miraculous Illusion!

Which, because I know the Deists are not inclined to do, therefore I will
return to pursue my Argument upon the Conviction of our outward Senses;
desiring only this, That they would allow the Senses of other Men to be as
certain as their own. Which they cannot refuse, since without this, they can
have no Certainty of their own.

XI. Therefore, from what has been said, the Cause is summed up shortly in
this, That though we cannot See what was done before our Time, yet by the Marks
which I have laid down concerning the Certainty of Matters of Fact, done before
our Time, we may be as much assured of the Truth of them, as if we saw them
with our Eyes; because, whatever Matter of Fact has all the Four Marks before
mentioned, could never have been invented and received, but upon the Conviction
of the outward Senses of all those who did receive it, as before is
demonstrated. And therefore this Topic which I have chosen, does stand upon
the Conviction even of Men's outward Senses. And since you have confined me to
One Topic, I have not insisted upon the other, which I have only named.

XII. And now it lies upon the Deists, if they would appear as Men of Reason,
to show some Matter of Fact of former Ages, which they allow to be True, that
has greater Evidence of its Truth, than the Matters of Fact of Moses, and of
Christ; otherwise they cannot, with any Show of Reason, reject the one, and yet
admit of the other.

But I have given them greater Latitude than this; for I have shown such Marks
of the Truth of the Matters of Fact of Moses, and of Christ, as no other
Matters of Fact of those Times, however True, have, but these only: And I put
it upon them, to show any Forgery that has All these Marks.

This is a short Issue: Keep them close to this. This determines the Cause all
at once.

Let them produce their Apollonius Tyanaeus, whose Life was put into English by
the execrable The Hand of that Scorner, which durst write such outrageous
Blasphemy against his Maker, the Divine Vengeance has made his own Executioner.
Which I would not have mentioned, (because the like Judgment has befallen
others,) but that the Theistical Club have set this up as a Principle; and
printed a Vindication of this same Blount, for murdering of himself, by Way of
Justification of Self-murder; which some of them have since, as well as
formerly, horridly practiced upon themselves. Therefore this is no common
Judgment to which they are delivered, but a visible Mark set upon them, to show
how far God has forsaken them; and as a Caution to all Christians, to beware of
them, and not to come near the Tents of these wicked Men, lest they perish in
their Destruction, both of Soul and Body.
Charles Blount, and compared, with all the Wit and Malice he was Master of, to
the Life and Miracles of our Blessed Savior.

Let them take Aid from all the Legends in the Church of Rome, those Pious
Cheats, the sorest Disgraces of Christianity; and which have bid the fairest,
of any one Contrivance, to overturn the Certainty of the Miracles of Christ,
and his Apostles, and whole Truth of the Gospel, by putting them all upon the
same Foot; at least, they are so understood by the Generality of their
Devotees, though disowned and laughed at by the Learned, and Men of Sense among
them.

Let them pick and choose the most probable of all the Fables of the Heathen
Deities, and see if they can find in any of these, the Four Marks
beforementioned.

Otherwise let them submit to the Irrefragab Certainty of the Christian
Religion.

XIII. But if, notwithstanding of all that is said, the Deists will still
contend, That all this is but Priestcraft, the Invention of Priests, for their
own Profit, etc. then they will give us an Idea of Priests, far different from
what they intend: For then, we must look upon these Priests, not only as the
Cunningest and Wisest of Mankind, but we shall be tempted to adore them as
Deities, who have such Power, as to impose, at their Pleasure, upon the Senses
of Mankind, to make them believe, that they had practiced such Public
Institutions, Enacted them by Laws, Taught them to their Children, etc. when
they had never done any of these Things, or ever so much as heard of them
before: And then, upon the Credit of their Believing that they had done such
Things as they never did, to make them further Believe, upon the same
Foundation, whatever they pleased to ^^pose upon them, as to former Ages: I
say, ^^ch a Power as this, must exceed all that is Humane; and consequently,
make us rank these Priests far above the Condition of Mortals.

2. Nay, this were to make them outdo all that has ever been related of the
Infernal Powers: For though their Legerdemain has extended to deceive some unwary
Beholders; and their Power of working some seeming Miracles has been great, yet
it never reached, nor ever was supposed to reach so far, as to deceive the
Senses of all Mankind, in Matters of such Public and Notorious Nature as those
of which we now speak, to make them believe, that they had enacted Laws for
such Public Observances, continually practiced them, taught them to their
Children, and had been instructed in them themselves, from their Childhood, if
they had never Enacted, Practiced, Taught, or been Taught such Things.

3. And as this exceeds all the Power of Hell and Devils, so is it more than
ever God Almighty has done since the Foundation of the World. None of the
Miracles that He has shown, or Belief which He has required to any Thing that
He has Revealed, has ever contradicted the outward Senses of any one Man in the
World, much less of all Mankind together. For Miracles being Appeals to our
outward Senses, if they should overthrow the Certainty of our outward Senses,
must destroy, with it, all their own Certainty, as to us; since we have no
other Way to judge of a Miracle exhibited to our Senses, than upon the
Supposition of the Certainty of our Senses, upon which we give Credit to a
Miracle, that is shown to our Senses.

4. This, by the Way, is a yet unanswered Argument against the Miracle of
Transubstantiation, and shows the Weakness of the Desence which the Church of
Rome offers for it, (from whom the Socinians have licked it up, and, of late,
have Gloried much in it amongst us) That the Doctrines of the Trinity or
Incarnation contain as great seeming Absurdities as that of Transubstantiation:
For I would ask; Which of our Senses is it which the Doctrines of the Trinity
or Incarnation do contradict? Is it our Seeing, Hearing, Feeling, Taste, or
Smell? Whereas Transubstantiation does contradict all these. Therefore the
Comparison is exceedingly short, and out of Purpose. But to Return.

If the Christian Religion be a Cheat, and nothing else but the Invention of
Priests; and carried on by their Craft, it makes their Power and Wisdom greater
than that of Men, Angels, or Devils; and more than God himself ever yet showed
or expressed, to Deceive and Impose upon the Senses of Mankind, in such Public
and Notorious Matters of Fact.

XIV. And this Miracle, which the Deists must run into to avoid these recorded
of Moses and Christ, is much greater, and more astonishing than all the
Scriptures tell of them.

So that these Men, who laugh at all Miracles, are now obliged to account for
the greatest of all, how the Senses of Mankind could be imposed upon in such
public Matters of Fact.

And how then can they make the Priests the most contemptible of all Mankind,
since they make Them the sole Authors of this the greatest of Miracles?

XV. And since the Deists, (these Men of Sense and Reason) have so vile and
mean an Idea of the Priests of all Religions, why do they not recover the World
out of the Possession and Government of such Blockheads? Why do they suffer
Kings and States to be led by Them? To establish their Deceits by Laws, and
inflict Penalties upon the Opposers of them? Let the Deists try their Hands;
they have been trying, and are now busy about it. And free Liberty they have.
Yet they have not prevailed, nor ever did yet prevail in any Civilized or
Generous Nation. And though they have some Inroads among the Hottentots, and some
other the most Brutal Part of Mankind, yet they are still exploded, and Priests
have and do prevail against them, among not only the Greatest, but Rest Part of
the World, and the most Glorious for Arts, Learning, and War.

XVI. For as the Devil does ape God, in His Institutions of Religion, His
Feasts, Sacrifices, etc. so likewise in his Priests, without whom, no Religion,
whether True or False, can stand. False Religion is but a Corruption of the
True: The True was before it; though it be followed close upon the Heels.

The Revelation made to Moses, is elder than any History extant in the Heathen
World. The Heathens, in Imitation of him, pretended, likewise, to their
Revelations: But I have given those Marks which distinguish them from the True:
None of them have those Four Marks beforementioned.

Now the Deists think all Revelations to he equally Pretended, and a Cheat; and
the Priests of all Religions to be the same Contrivers and Juglers; and
therefore they proclaim War equally against all, and are equally engaged to
bear the Brunt of all.

And if the Contest be only betwixt the Deists and the Priests, which of them
are the Men of the greatest Parts and Sense, let the Effects determine it; and
let the Deists yield the Victory to their Conquerors, who by their own
Confession, carry all the World before them.

XVII. If the Deists say, That this is because all the World are Blockheads, as
well as those Priests who govern them; that all are Blockheads, except the
Deists, who vote themselves only to be Men of Sense. This (besides the Modesty
of it) will spoil their great and beloved Topic, in Behalf of what they call
Natural Religion, against the Revealed, viz. appealing to the Common Reason of
Mankind: This they set up against Revelation; think this to be sufficient for
all the Uses of Men, here or hereafter, (if there be any after State,) and
therefore that there is no Use of Revelation: This Common Reason they advance
as Infallible, at least, as the surest Guide, yet now cry out upon it, when it
turns against them; when this Common Reason runs after Revelation, (as it
always has done) then Common Reason is a Beast, and we must look for Reason,
not from the Common Sentiments of Mankind, but only among the Beaux, the Deists.

XVIII. Therefore, if the Deists would avoid the Mortification, (which will be
very uneasy to them,) to yield and submit to be Subdued and Hewed down before
the Priests, whom of all Mankind they Hate and Despise; if they would avoid
this, let them confess, as the Truth is, That Religion is no Invention of
Priests, but of Divine Original: That Priests were Instituted by the same
Author of Religion; and that their Order is a Perpetual and Living Monument of
the Matters of Fact of their Religion, Instituted from the Time that such
Matters of Fact were said to be done, as the Levites from Moses, the Apostles,
and succeeding Clergy, from Christ, to this Day. That no Heathen Priests can
say the same: They were not appointed by the Gods whom they served, but by
others in after Ages: They cannot stand the Test of the Four Rules before
mentioned, which the Christian Priests can do, and they only. Now the Christian
Priesthood, as Instituted by Christ Himself, and continued by Succession to
this Day, being as Impregnable and Flagrant a Testimony to the Truth of the
Matters of Fact of Christ, as the Sacraments, or any other public
Institutions: Besides that, if the Priesthood were taken away, the Sacraments,
and other public Institutions, which are administered by their Hands, must fall
with them: Therefore the Devil has been most busy, and bent his greatest Force,
in all Ages, against the Priesthood, knowing, that if That goes down, All goes
with it.

XIX. With the Deists, in this Cause, are joined the Quakers, and other of our
Dissenters, who throw off the Succession of our Priesthood, (by which only it
can be demonstrated,) together with the Sacraments and public Festivals. And
if the Devil could have prevailed to have these dropped, the Christian Religion
would lose the most Undeniable and Demonstrative Proof for the Truth of the
Matter of Fact of our Savior, upon which the Truth of his Doctrine does
depend. Therefore we may see the Artifice and Malice of the Devil, in all these
Attempts. And let those wretched Instruments, whom he Ignorantly, (and some by
a misguided Zeal) has deluded thus to undermine Christianity, now at last look
back, and see the Snare in which they have been taken: For if they had
prevailed, or ever should, Christianity dies with them; at least, it will be
rendered precarious, as a Thing of which no Certain Proof can be given.
Therefore let those of them who have any Zeal for the Truth, bless God that
they have not prevailed; and quickly leave them; and let all others be aware of
them.

And let us Consider and Honor the Priesthood, Sacraments, and other Public
Institutions of Christ, not only as Means of Grace, and Helps to Devotion, but
as the Great Evidences of the Christian Religion.

Such Evidences as no pretended Revelation ever had, or can have. Such as do
plainly distinguish it from all foolish Legends and Impostures whatsoever.

XX. And now, last of all, if one Word of Advice would not be lost, upon Men
who think so unmeasurably of themselves as the Deists, you may represent to
them, what a Condition they are in, who spend that Life and Sense which God has
given them, in Ridiculing the Greatest of his Blessings, His Revelations of
Christ, and by Christ, to Redeem those from Eternal Misery, who shall Believe
in Him, and Obey His Laws: And that God, in His wonderful Mercy and Wisdom, has
so guarded his Revelations, as that it is past the Power of Men or Devils to
Counterfeit: And that there is no Denying of them, unless we will be so absurd,
as to deny not only the Reason, but the Certainty of the outward Senses, not
only of One, Two, or Three, but of Mankind in General. That this Case is so
very plain, that nothing but Want of Thought can hinder any to discover it.
That they must yield it to be so plain, unless they can show some Forgery,
which has all the Four Marks before set down. But if they cannot do this, they
must quit their Cause, and yield a happy Victory over themselves; or else sit
down under all that Ignominy, with which they have loaded the Priests, of being
not only the most Pernicious, but (what will gall them more) the most
Inconsiderate and Inconsiderable of Mankind.

Therefore, let them not think it an Undervaluing of their Worthiness, that
their whole Cause is comprised within so narrow a Compass; and no more Time
bestowed upon it than it is worth.

But let them rather reflect, how far they have been all this Time from
Christianity; whose Rudiments they are yet to learn! How far from the Way of
Salvation! How far the Race of their Lives is run, before they have set one
Step in the Road to Heaven! And therefore, how much Diligence they ought to
use, to redeem that Time they have lost, lest they lose themselves for ever;
and be convinced, by a dreadful Experience, when it is too late, That the
Gospel is a Truth, and of the last Consequence.

A LETTER FROM The Author of the Short Method with the Deists and Jews.
SIR, I have read over your Papers with great Satisfaction, and I heartily
^less God with you, and for you, that He has had Mercy upon you, and opened
your Eyes, to see the wondrous Things of his Law, to convince you of those
irrefragrable Proofs He has afforded for the Truth and Authority of the Holy
Scriptures; such as no other Writings upon Earth can pretend to, and which are
incompatible with any Forgery or Deceit. He has given you likewise that True
Spirit of Repentance to bring forth the Fruits thereof; that is, to make what
Satisfaction you can for the Injuries you have done to Religion, by answering
what has been published formerly by your self against it, and being converted,
you endeavor to Strengthen your Brethren.

I. Creation.
You have laid the true Foundation of the Being of God, against the Atheist; of
His Creation of the World, and Providence, against the Asserters of blind
Chance. If all be Chance, then their Thoughts are so too, and there is no
Reasoning or Argument in the World.

Others, because they know not what to say, suppose the World, and all Things
in it, to have been from Eternity, and to have gone on, as now, in a constant
Succession, of Men begetting Men, Trees springing from Trees, etc. without any
Beginning.

But if it was always as it is now, then every Thing had a Beginning, every
Man, Bird, Beast, Tree, etc. And what has a Beginning, cannot be without a
Beginning.

Therefore, as it is evident, that nothing can make it self, it is equally
evident, that a Succession of Things made, must have a Beginning. A Succession
of Beginnings cannot be without a Beginning; for that would be literally a
Beginning without a Beginning, which is a Contradiction in Terms.

II. Providence.
And to deny Providence in the first Cause, is the denying of a God: Whence had
we our Providence? For we find we have a Providence to forecast and contrive
how to preserve and govern that which we make or acquire: Therefore there must
be a Providence much more eminently in God, to preserve and govern all the
Works which He has made. He that made the Eye, does he not see? And He who put
Providence into the Heart of Man, has He none Himself?

And the Glory of his Wisdom and Power seems greater to us, in the Acts of His
Providence, than even in those of Creation; especially in His Governing the
Actions of Free-Agents, without taking from them the Freedom of their Will to
do as they list, and turning their very Evil into Good, by the Almightiness of
His Wisdom. We see great Part of this every Day before our Eyes, in His turning
the Counsels of the Wise into Foolishness, and trapping the Wicked in the Works
of their own Hands. This strikes us more sensibly, and is nearer to us, than
the making of a Tree, or a Star; and we feel that overruling Power in His
Providence, which we contemplate in His Creation.

When the Sins of Men are increased to provoke God to take Vengeance, He
permits the Spirit of Fury to incline their Wills to War, and Destruction of
each other, and Nation rises up against Nation; and when in His Mercy, He
thinks the Punishment is sufficient, He calms their Rage, like the Roaring of
the Sea, and there is Peace. And they are so Free Agents in all this, that they
think it is all their own doing; and so really it is, though under the unseen
Direction of a Superior Power.

But not only in the Public Transactions of the World, His Providence is
observable; there is no Man, who has taken Notice of his own Life, but must
find it as to his very private Affairs, a Thought sometimes darting into his
Mind, to rid him out of a Difficulty, or show him an Advantage, which he could
not find in much Considering before. At other Times, a Man's Mind is so
clouded, as if his Eyes were shut that he cannot see his Way: Again, several
Events which he thought most Funest, and his utter Ruin, he finds afterward to
be for the best, and that he had been undone, if that had not happened which he
feared. On the other Hand, many Things which he thought for his great Benefit,
he has found to be for his Hurt. This shows a Providence, which sees further
than we can, and disposes all our Actions, though done in the full Freedom of our
own Will, to what Events, either Good or Bad for us, as He pleases.

III. Revelation.
But these Considerations, from the Creation and Providence, though Admirable and
Glorious, are within the Oracles of Reason, and are but Earthly Things, in
Comparison of those Heavenly Things, which God has revealed to Man at sundry
Times, and in diverse Manners, and are recorded in the Holy Scriptures, and
which otherwise it was impossible for Man to have known. For what Man is he
that can know the Counsel of God? Or who can think what the Will of the Lord
is? Wisd. iv. 13, 14 15, 16.
For the Thoughts of mortal Men are miserable, and our Devices are but
uncertain; for the corruptible Body presses down the Soul, and the earthly
Tabernacle weighs down the Mind, that museth upon many Things; and hardly do
we guess aright at Things that are upon Earth, and with Labor do we find the
Things that are before us: But the Things that are in Heaven, who has searched
out?

This then must be purely the Subject of Revelation; but when the Deist is come
thus far, he is entered into a wide Field; for all Religions, Jewish, Heathen,
Christian, and Mohammedan, pretend to Revelation for their Original.

To clear this Point, was the Design of the Short Method with the Deists, which
gave the first Opportunity to our Conversation.

The Heathen and Mohammedan Religions not only want those Marks (there set down)
which Ascertain the Truth of Fact, but their Morals and Worship are impure, and
inconsistent with the Attributes of God; as the Indulgence of Fornication, and
Uncleanness, among the Heathen, and their Humane Sacrifices, (most abhorrent to
the God of Holiness and Mercy,) and the filthy Obscenity of their very Sacra;
besides the great Defect of their Morals, which knew no such Thing as Humility,
Forgiveness of Injuries, Loving their Enemies, and returning Good for Evil.
Some of their Philosophers spoke against Revenging of Injuries, as bringing
greater Injury to ourselves, or not worth the While; but not upon the Account
of Humanity and Love to our Brethren, and doing them Good, though they did Evil
to us; and by the Word Humilitas, they meant only a Lowness and Dejection of
Mind, which is a Vice; but they had no Notion of it as a Virtue, in having a
low Opinion of One's self, and in Honor prefering others before us: This they
thought a Vice, and Abjection of Spirits. You may see Pride and Self-Conceit
run through all their Philosophy, besides their Principle of increasing their
Empire, by Conquering other Countries who did them no Harm, whom they called
Barbarians.

Into this Class comes likewise the Sensual Paradise proposed by Mahomet, and
his Principle of propagating his Religion by the Sword.

The Jewish Religion has all the Certainty of Fact, and its Morals are Good;
but because of the Hardness of their Hearts, they came not up to the Primitive
Purity, as in Case of Polygamy and Divorce, wherein our Blessed Savior reduces
them to the Original, That from the Beginning it was not so; and in several
other Cases mentioned in his Sermon upon the Mount.

Therefore the Perfection of Morals, and of the true Knowledge of God, was
reserved for the Christian Religion, which has, in more abundant Manner, than
even the Jewish, the infallible Marks of the Truth of the Facts, in the
Multitude and Notoriety of the Mi^acles wrought by our Blessed Savior, beyond
those of Moses. Which fully answers the Objection of the Jews, that Christ
wrought his Miracles by Beelzebub: For then, as he said to them, By whom do
your Children cast out Devils? Was it by the Spirit of God, or Beelzebub, that
Moses and the Prophets wrought their Miracles?

Then from the Purity and Heavenliness of his Doctrine, all levelled to destroy
the Kingdom of Satan, those wicked Principles, and idolatrous Worship which he
had set up in the World; the other Answer of our Blessed Savior concludes
demonstratively, of a Kingdom divided against it self, That it Satan cast out
Satan, to promote that Doctrine which Christ taught, we must alter our Notion
of the Devil, and suppose him to be Good, and his Kingdom must then be at an
End; which we see not yet done; for Wickedness still Reigns in the World.

IV. Object. As to the Holy Trinity.
Against these Things Reason has nothing to object; but then Prejudices are
raised up against what is Revealed, as being of Things that are above our
Reason, and out of its Reach; as chiefly the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity.

In answer to which, we may consider, that if such Things were not above our
Reason, there needed no Revelation of them, but only a bare Proposal of them to
our Reason, made by any Body, without any Authority, and their own Evidence
would carry them through.

In the next Place, we must acknowledge, that there are many Things in the
Divine Nature far out of the Reach of our Reason. That it must be so: For how
can Finite comprehend Infinite? Who can think what Eternity is? A Duration
without Beginning, or Succession of Parts or Time! Who can so much as imagine,
or frame any Idea of a Being, neither made by it self, nor by any other? Of
Omnipresence? Of a boundless Immensity, etc.

Yet all this Reason obliges us to allow, as the necessary Consequences of a
First Cause.

And where any Thing is established upon the Full Proof of Reason, there Ten
Thousand Objections, or Difficulties, though we cannot Answer them, are of no
Force at all to overthrow it. Nothing can do that, but to refute those Reasons
upon which it is Established; 'til when, the Truth and Certainty of the Thing
remains Unshaken, though we cannot Explain it, nor solve the Difficulties that
arise from it.

And if it is so, upon the Point of Reason, much more upon that of Revelation,
where the Subject Matter is above our Reason, and could never have been found
out by it.

All to be done in that Case is, to satisfy our selves of the Truth of the
Fact, that such Things were Revealed of God, and are no Imposture. This is
done, as to the Holy Scriptures, by the Four Marks before mentioned.

And as to the Contradiction alleged in Three being One, it is no
Contradiction, unless it be said, that Three are One, in the selfsame Respect:
For in diverse Respects, there is no Sort of Difficulty, that One may be Three,
or Three Thousand; as One Army may consist of many Thousands, and yet it is but
One Army: There is but One Human Nature, and yet there are Multitudes of
Persons who partake of that Nature.

Now it is not said, that the Three Persons in the Divine Nature are One
Person; that would be a Contradiction: But it is said, that the Three Persons
are One Nature. They are not Three and One, in the same Respect; they are Three
as to Persons, and One as to Nature. Here is no Contradiction.

Again, that may be a Contradiction in one Nature, which is not so in another:
For Example, it is a Contradiction, that a Man can go two Yards or Miles, as
soon as One, because Two is but One and another One: Yet this is no
Contradiction to Sight, which can reach a Star, as soon as the Top of a
Chimney; and the Sun darts his Rays in one Instant from Heaven to Earth: But
more than all these is the Motion of Thought, to which no Distance of Place is
any Interruption; which can arrive at Japan as soon as at a Yard's Distance;
and can run into the Immensity of Possibilities.

Now there are no Words possible, whereby to give any Notion or Idea of Sight
or Eight to a Man born blind; and consequently, to reconcile the Progress of
Sight or Light to him, from being an absolute Contradiction; because he can
measure it no otherwise than according to the Motion of Legs or Arms; for he
knows none other: Therefore we cannot charge that as a Contradiction in one
Nature, which is so in another, unless we understand both Natures perfectly
well: And therefore we cannot charge that as a Contradiction in the
Incomprehensible Nature of being Three and One, though we found it to be so in
our Nature; which we do not, because, as before said, they are not Three and
One in the same Respect.

Now, let us consider further, that though there is no Comparison between Finite
and Infinite, yet we have nearer Resemblances of the Three and One in God, than
there is of Sight to a Man born blind: For there is nothing in any of the other
four Senses that has any Resemblance at all to that of Seeing, or that can give
such a Man any Notion whatever of it.

But we find in our own Nature, which is said to be made after the Image of
God, a very near Resemblance of His Holy Trinity, and of the different
Operations of each of the Divine Persons.

For Example; to know a Thing present, and to remember what is past, and to
love or hate, are different Operations of our Mind, and performed by different
Faculties of it. Of these, the Understanding is the Father Faculty, and gives
Being to Things, as to Us; for what we know not, is to Us as if it were not:
This answers to Creation. From this Faculty proceeds the Second, that of
Memory; which is a Preserving of what the Understanding has Created to Us. Then
the Third Faculty, that of the Will, which loves or hates, proceeds from Both
the Other; for we cannot love or hate what is not first Created by the
Understanding, and Preserved to Us by the Memory.

And though these are different Faculties, and their Operations different, that
the Second proceeds from the First, or is Begotten by it; and the Third
proceeds from the First and Second in Conjunction; so that one is before the
other, in Order of Nature, yet not in Time; for they are all Congenial, and one
is as soon in the Soul as the other; and yet they make not Three Souls, but One
Soul. And though their Operations are Different, and the one proceeds from the
other, yet no one can act without the other, and they all concur to every Act
of each; for in Underslanding and Remembering, there is a concurrent Act of the
Will, to consent to such Underslanding or Remembering; so that no one can Act
without the other; in which Sense, none is Before or After the other; nor can
any of them Be, or Exist, without the other.

But what we call Faculties in the Soul, we call Persons in the Godhead;
because there are Personal Actions attributed to Each of them; as that of
Sending, and being Sent, to take Flesh, and be Born, etc.

And we have no other Word, whereby to Express it; we speak it after the Manner
of Men; nor could we understand, if we heard any of those Unspeakable Words,
which express the Divine Nature in its proper Essence; therefore we must make
Allowances, and Great ones, when we apply Words of our Nature, to the Infinite
and Eternal Being. We must not argue Strictly and Philosphically from them,
more than from God's being said to Repent, to be Angry, etc. They are Words ad
Captum, in Condescension to our weak Capacities, and without which we could not
understand.

But this I say, That there are nearer Resemblances afforded to us of this
ineffable Mystery of the Holy Trinity, than there is betwixt one of our outward
Senses and another; than the^ is to a blind Man of Colors, or of the Motion of
Light, or Sight: And a Contradiction in the one will not infer a Contradiction
in the other; though it is impossible to be solved, as in the Instance before
given of a Man born blind, 'til we come to Know both Natures dislinctly.

And if we had not the Experience of the different Faculties of our Mind, the
Contradiction would appear irreconcilable to all our Philosophy, how Three
could be One, each distinct from the other, yet but one Soul; One proceeding
from, or being Begot by the other; and yet all coeval, and none before or after
the other: And as to the Difference betwixt Faculties and Persons, Subslance
and Subsistence, it is a puzling Piece of Philosophy. And though we give not a
distinct Subsistence to a Faculty, it has an Existence; and one Faculty can no
more be another, than one Person can be another: So that the Case seems to be
alike in both, as to what concerns our present Difficulty of Three and One;
besides what before is said, That by the Word Person, when applied to God, for
Want of a proper Word whereby to express it, we must mean something infinitely
different from Personality among Men. And therefore from a Contradiction in the
one, (suppose it granted) we cannot charge a Contradiction in the other, unless
we Understand it as well as the other; for how else can we draw the Parallel?

What a vain Thing is our Philosophy, when we would Measure the
Incomprehensible Nature by it! When we find it non-plust in our own Nature, and
that in many Instances. If I am All in one Room, is it not a Contradiction,
that any Part of me should be in another Room? Yet it was a common Saying among
Philosophers, that the Soul is All in All, and All in every Part of the Body:
How is the same Individual Soul Present, at one and the same Time, to Actuate
the distant Members of the Body, without either Multiplication or Division of
the Soul? Is there any Thing in Body can bear any Resemblance to this, without
a manifest Contradiction? Nay, even as to Bodies, is any Thing more a
self-evident Principle, than that the Cause must be before the Effect? Yet the
Light and Heat of the Sun are as old as the Sun; and supposing the Sun to be
eternal, they would be as eternal.

And as Light and Heat are of the Nature of the Sun, and as the Three Faculties
before mentioned are of the Nature of the Soul, so that the Soul could not be a
Soul, if it wanted any of them; so may we, from small Things to great,
apprehend without any Contradiction, that the Three Persons are of the very
Nature and Essence of the Deity; and so of the same Substance with it; and though
one proceeding from the other, (as the Faculties of the Soul do,) yet that all
Three are Consubstantial, Coeternal, and of necessary Existence as God is; for
that these Three are God, and God is these Three. As Understanding, Memory, and
Will are a Soul, and a Soul is Understanding, Memory, and Will.

I intend (God willing) to Treat of this Subject more largely by it self; but I
have said thus much here, to clear the Way from that Objection of Rejecting
Revelation, (though we are Infallibly sure of the Fact) because of the supposed
Contradiction to our Reason, in comparing it with our Earthly Things.

V. Of the Differences among Christians.
But now, that from all the Proofs of the Certainty of the Revelation we are
come to Fix in Christianity, our Labor is not yet at an End: For here you see
Multiplicity of Sects and Divisions, which our Blessed Savior foretold should
come, for the Probation of the Elect; as some Canaanites were lest in the Land,
to teach the Israelites the Use of War, lest by too profound a Peace, they
might gr^w Lazy and Stupid, and become an easy Prey to their Enemies. So might
Christianity be lost among us; if we had nothing to do, it would Dwindle and
Decay, and Corrupt by Degrees, as Water Stagnates by standing still: But when
we are put to Contend Earnestly for the Faith, it Quickens our Zeal, keeps Us
upon our Guard, Trims our Lamp, and Furbishes the Sword of the Spirit, which
might otherwise Rust in its Scabbard. And it gives great Opportunity to show
the wonderful Providence and Protection of GOD over his Church, in Preserving
Her against a visibly unequal Force. And in this Contest, to some this High
Privilege is granted in the Behalf of Christ, Phil. 1.29.
not only to believe on him, but to suffer for His Sake. These go to make up
the Noble Army of Martyrs, and Confessors, for ever Triumphant in Heaven.
Others Conquer even here on Earth, that God's Wonderful Doings may be known to
the Children of Men.

But as he who builds a Tower, ought first to compute the Expense, and he who
goes to War, to consider his Strength; so our Blessed Savior has instructed
us, That he who will be his Disciple, must resolve beforehand to take up his
Cross Daily, to forsake Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Lands,
and Life it self, when he cannot keep them with the Truth and Sincerity of the
Gospel. Therefore we must put on the whole Armor of God, that we may be able
to stand in the evil Day, and having overcome all, to stand; for we wrestle not
against Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities, against Powers, against
the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, against wicked Spirits in high Places.

And what is it we Wrestle for? For the Great Mystery of Godliness, God
manifest in the Flesh, etc.

VI. The Doctrine of Satisfaction.
Here is the Foundation of the Christian Religion, That when Man had Sinned,
and was utterly unable to make any Satisfaction for his Sin, God sent his own
Son to take upon him our Flesh, and in the same Nature that Offended, to make
full Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World by his perfect Obedience, and
the Sacrifice of Himself upon the Cross.

Some say, What need any Satisfaction? Might not God forgive without it? It
would show greater Mercy. But these Men consider not, that God is not only
Just, but He is Justice it self; Justice in the Abstract; He is Essential
Justice, and Justice by its Nature, must exact to the utmost Farthing, else it
were not Justice: To Remit is Mercy, it is not Justice: And the Attributes of
God must not Fight and Oppose each other; they must all stand Infinite and
Complete. You may say then, How can God forgive at all? How can Infinite Mercy
and Justice stand together?

This Question could never have been answered, if God Himself had not showed it
to Us in the wonderful OEcconomy of our Redemption: For here is His Justice
satisfied to the least Jota, by the perfect Obedience and Passion of Christ,
who is God, in the same Humane Nature that Offended. Here is Infinite Wisdom
expressed in this Means found out for our Salvation; and Infinite Mercy in
affording it to us. Thus all his Attributes are Satisfied, and Filled up to the
Brim: They Contradict not, but Exalt each other. His Mercy Exalts and Magnifies
His Justice, His Justice Exalts His Mercy, and both His Infinite Wisdom.

Here is a View of God, beyond what all the Oracles of Reason could ever have
found out, from His Works of Creation, or Common Providence! These show his
Works, but this his Nature! It is Himself! The very Face of God! Before which
the Angels veil their Faces, and desire to look into this Abyss of Goodness,
and Power, and Wisdom; which they will never be able to Fathom, but still Feed
upon, and Search farther and farther into it, with Adoration, to Eternity! And
they Worship our Manhood thus taken into God! And Rejoice to be Ministering
Spirits to us, while upon Earth.

This you and I have talked over at large; and this I gave you as the Sum and
Substance, the Alpha and Omega of the Christian Religion* And now I repeat it,
as the surest Criterion to guide a Man in the Difficulty before us; that is, in
the Choice of a Church, in the midst of all that Variety there is among
Christians. Whoever hold not this Doctrine, join not with them, nor bid them
God Speed.

VII. The Socinians.
This will save you from the Socinians, or the Unitarians, as they now call
themselves in England, who expressly Deny this Doctrine: For they Deny the
Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, and the Divinity of Christ, upon which it is
founded. They consider Christ no otherwise than a mere Man; and propose Him
only as a Teacher, and Good Example to Us. But then they are confounded, with
all their Pretense to Wit and Reason, to give any Account for his Death, which
was not necessary to Teaching, or being an Example: That an Angel, or a Prophet
might have been. Then they say, That he Died, to Confirm the Truth of his
Doctrine: But set this Doctrine of Satisfaction aside, and he taught nothing
New, except the Improvement of some Morals. Besides, Dying does not Confirm the
Truth of any Doctrine; it only shows, That he who Dies for it, does himself
Believe it. Some have Died for Errors; and the Socinian Doctrine affords no
Comfort, no Assurance to us. For if we consider Christ only as a Teacher, or
Example, we have not followed his Precepts, nor Example: Here is nothing but
Matter of Condemnation to us. But if we look upon him as our Surety, who has
paid our Debt, as our Sacrifice, Atonement, and Propitiation for our Sins, and
that we are Saved by his Blood, (which is the Language of the Holy Scriptures,
of which the Socinians kn^w no Meaning,) this is a Rock, and Infallible
Assurance.

VIII. The Church of Rome.
As the Socinians have totally rejected this Doctrine, so the Church of Rome
has greatly Vitiated and Depressed it, by their Doctrine of Merit, and their
own Satisfaction, which they make Part of their Sacrament of Penance. On this
is founded their Purgatory, wherein Souls who had not made full Satisfaction
upon Earth, must Complete it there. They deny not the Satisfaction of Christ,
but join their own with it, as if it were not Sufficient.

IX. The Dissenters.
On the other Hand, our Dissenters run to the contrary Extreme: And because our
good Works must have no Share in the Satisfaction for Sin, which they cannot,
as being Unworthy, and mixed with our Infirmities, and our Sin; therefore they
make them not necessary, nor of any Effect toward our Salvation. They say,
that Christ did not Die for any but the Elect, in whom he sees no Sin, let them
live never so wickedly. They Damn the far greatest Part of the World, by
Irreversible Decrees of Reprobation, and say, That their Good Works are hateful
to God, and that it is not possibly in their Power to be Saved, let them
Believe as they will, and Live never so Religiously. They take away Free Will
in Man, and make him a perfect Machine. They make God the Author of Sin, to
Create Men on Purpose to Damn them; and to Punish them Eternally for not Doing
what was not in their Power to Do, and for Doing what He had made Impossible
for them not to Do. They make his Promises and Threatenings to be of no Effect;
nay, to be a Sort of Burlesquing, and Insulting those whom He has made
Miserable; which is an hideous Blasphemy.

For a Solution in this Matter, both as to Faith and Works, I refer you to the
Homilies of Faith, and Salvation, and of Good Works, where you will find the
True Christian Doctrine set forth clearly and solidly.

I will not Anticipate what you design for your Second Part, by entering into
other Disputes there are among Christians; only this will be exceeding
necessary, to settle well the Notion of the Church of Christ, to which all do
pretend in various Manners.

X. The true Notion of the Church.
First therefore, the Church must be considered not only as a Sect; that is a
Company of People Believing such and such Tenets, like the several Sects of the
Heathen Philosophers; but as a Society under Government, with Governors
appointed by Christ, invested with such Powers and Authority, to Admit into,
and Exclude out of the Society, and Govern the Affairs of the Body.

This Power was Delegated by Christ to His Apostles, and their Successors, to
the End of the World: Accordingly the Apostles did ordain Bishops in all the
Churches which they planted throughout the whole World, as the Supreme
Governors, and Center of Unity, each in his own Church. These were obliged to
keep Unity and Communion with one another; which is therefore called the
Catholic Church; as the several Nations of the Earth are called the World.

XI. Of an Universal Bishop.
And Christ appointed no Universal Bishop over His Church, more than an
Universal Monarch over the World. No such Thing was known in the Primitive
Church, 'til it was set up first by John, Bishop of Constantinople, then by the
Bishop of Rome in the Seventh Century. And as the whole World is one Kingdom to
God, as it is written, His Kingdom rules over All, so the several Churches of
the World are One Church to Christ. And the Church of Rome's saying that She is
that One Church, or show Us another, which can dispute it with Us, in
Universality, Antiquity, etc. is the same as if France (for Example,) should
say, Who can compare with me? Therefore I am the Universal, or Monarch, show me
another. The Thing appears Ridiculous at the first Proposal; for it must be
said to Rome, or to France, that if you were ten Times greater than you are,
you are yet but a Part of the Whole. And to say, Who else pretends to it? Why
none. And it would be Nonsense in any who did pretend to it: One Part may be
bigger than another; but One Part can never be the Whole. And all results in
this, whether Christ did appoint an Universal Bishop over all the Churches in
the World? And we are willing to leave the Issue to that, if it can appear
either from Scripture, or Antiquity. Besides, the Reason of the Thing; for as
Gregory the Great urged against John of Constantinople, if there was an
Universal Bishop, the Universal Church must fall, if that one Universal Bishop
fell; and so all must come to Center in One Poor, Fa^^ible, Mortal Man.

This obliged the Pope to run into another monstrous Extreme, and set up for
Infallibility in his own Person, as the only Successor of St. Peter, and Heir
of those Promises made to Him, super hanc Petram, etc. This was the Current
Doctrine of the Divines in the Church of Rome, in former Ages, as you may see
in BELLARMIN, de Romans Pontis. lib. 4. Cap. 5. Where he carries this so high, as
to assert, That if the Pope did command the Practice of Vice, and forbid
Virtue, the Church were bound to believe, that Virtue was Vice, and that Vice
was Virtue. And in his Preface, he calls this absolute Supremacy of the Pope,
the Summa Rei Christianae, the Sum and Foundation of the Christian Religion.
And that to deny it, was not only a Simple Error, but a Pernicious Herely.

This was Old Popery: But now it is generally Decry'd by the Papists
themselves; yet no Pope has been brought to Renounce it, they will not quit
Claim.

When they departed from the Infallibility of the Pope, they sought to place it
in their General Councils: But these are not always in Being; and so their
Infallibility must drop for several Ages together, which will not consist with
their Argument, That God is obliged by His Goodness, to afford always an
outward and living Judge and Guide to His Church. Besides that, Instances are
found, where those Councils they call General, have contradicted one another.

For which Reasons, others of them place the Infallibility in the Church
Diffusive: But this upon their Scheme is Indefinite, and the Judge of
Controversy must be sought among numberless Individuals, of whom no One is the
Judge or Guide.

XII. Of Infallibility in the Church.
But there is an Infallibility in the Church, not Personal in any One, or All
of Christians put together; for Millions of Fallibles can never make an
Infallible. But the Infallibility consists in the Nature of the Evidence, which
having all the Four Marks mentioned in The Short Method with the Deists, cannot
possibly be false. As you and I believe there is such a Town as Constantinople,
that there was such a Man as Henry VIII. as much as if we had seen them with
our Eyes: Not from the Credit of any Historian, or Traveller, all of whom are
Fallible; but from the Nature of the Evidence, wherein it is Impossible for Men
to have conspired and carried it on without Contradiction, if it were False.

Thus, whatever Doctrine has been taught in the Church, (according to the Rule
of Vincentius Lirinensis,) semper, ubique, and ab omnibus, is the Christian
Doctrine; for in this Case, such Doctrine is a Fact, and having the foresaid
Marks, must be a true Fact, viz. That such Doctrine was so taught and received.

This was the Method taken in the Council called at Alexandria, against Arius;
it was asked by Alexander, the Archbishop, who presided, Quis unquam talia
audivit? Who ever heard of this Doctrine before? And it being answered by all
the Bishops there assembled in the Negative, it was concluded a Novel Doctrine,
and contrary to what had been Universally received in the Christian Church.
Thus every Doctrine may be reduced to Fact; for it is purely Fact, whether such
Doctrine was received, or not.

And a Council assembled upon such an Occasion, stand as Evidences of the Fact,
not as Judges of the Faith; which they cannot alter by their Votes or Authority.

A Council has Authority in Matters of Discipline in the Church; but in Matters
of Faith, what is called their Authority, is their Attestation to the Truth of
Fact; which, if it has the Marks before mentioned, must be Infallibly true: Not
from the Infallibility of any or all of the Persons, but from the Nature of the
Evidence, as before is said.

And this is the surest Rule, whereby to Judge of Doc^rines, and to know what
the Catholic Church has Believed and Taught, as Received from the Apostles.

And they who refuse to be Tried by this Rule, who say, we care not what was
believed by the Catholic Church, either in former Ages, or now; we think our
own Interpretations or Criticisms upon such a Text, of as great Authority as
theirs; these are justly to be suspected, nay, it is evident, that they are
Broaching some Novel Doctrines, which cannot stand this Test. Besides the
monstrous Arrogance in such a Pretense, these overthrow the Foundation of that
sure and infallible Evidence upon which Christianity it self does stand; and
reduce all to a blind Enthusiasm.

XIII. Of Episcopacy.
But further, Sir, in your Search after a Church, you must not only consider
the Doctrine, but the Government; that is, as I said before, you must consider
the Church, not only as a Sect, but as a Society: For though every Society
sounded upon the Belief of such Tenets, may be called a Sect, yet every Sect is
not a Society. Now a Society cannot be without Government; for it is that which
makes a Society: And a Government cannot be without Governors. The Apostles
were instituted by Christ, the first Governors of his Church; and with them and
their Successors He has promised to be to the End of the World. The Apostles
did ord^in Bishops, as Governors, in the Churches which they planted throughout
the whole World; and these Bishops were esteemed the Successors of the
Apostles, (...) his own Church, from the Beginning (...) Day. This was the
Current Notion and Language of Antiquity. Omnes Apostolorum Successores sunt.
That all Bishops were the Successors of the Apostles; as St. Jerome speaks,
Epist. ad Evag. And St. Ignatius, who was constituted by the Apostles Bishop of
Antioch, salutes the Church of the Trallians, In the Plenitude of the
Apostolical Character. Thus it continued from the Days of the Apostles, to
those of John Calvin. In all which Time there was not any one Church in the
whole Christian World that was not Episcopal. But now it is said by our
Dissenters, That there is no Need of Succession from the Apostles, or those
Bishops instituted by them; that they can make Governors over themselves whom
they list: And what signifies the Government of the Church, so the Doctrine be
pure? But this totally dissolves the Church as a Society; the Government of
which consists in the Right and Title of the Governor. And, as the Apostle
says, No Man takes this Honor to himself, Heb. 5.4.
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. And the Dispute betwixt him and
Korah was not as to any Point either of Doctrine or Worship, but merely upon
that of Church Government. And St. Jude, ver. 11. brings down the same Case to
that of the Christian Church; and Reason carries it to all Societies. They who
will not obey the lawful Governor, but set up another in Opposition to him, are
no longer of the Society, but Enemies to it, and justly forfeit all the Rights
and Privileges of it.

Now Considering that all the Promises in the Gospel, are made to the Church,
what a dreadful Thing must it be, to be Excluded from all these!

Besides, the Church is called the Pillar and Ground of the Truth, as being a
Society instituted by Christ, for the Support and Preservation of the Faith.
This no particular Church can attribute to it self, otherwise than as being a
Part of the Whole: And therefore, as St. Cyprian says, Christ made the College
of Bishops numerous, that if one proved Heretical, or sought to devour the
Flock, the rest might interpose for the Saving of it. This is equally against
letting the whole depend upon one Universal Bishop, and against throwing off
the whole Epis^opate; that is, all the Bishops in the World; which would be a
total Dissolution of the Church as a Society, by leaving no Governors in it; or
which is the same, setting up Governors of our own Head, without any Authority
or Succession from the Apostles; which is rendering the whole precarious, and
without any Foundation. And it is a supposing that Providence is more obliged
to stand by a Church set up in direct Opposition to his Institution, than by
that Church which Christ Himself has founde^, and promised to be with it to the
End of the World. And though he has permitted Errors and Heresies to overspread
several Parts of it, at several Times, for the Probation of the Elect, like the
Waining of the Moon, yet has He not lest Himself without Witness, and has
rescor'd ^ight to Her, purs^^ant to His Promise, That the Gates of Hell should
not prevail against Her* And this by the Means of his Servants and Substitutes,
the Bishops of his Church, whom He has not deserted. All of whom, through the
whole World always did, and still do maintain and own the Apostolic Creed. And
wherein some, as the Arians, have perverted the Sense of some Articles, that
lasted but a short Time; and the Truth has been more confirmed by it, in the
unanimous Consent and Testimony of the whole Episcopal College, to the
Primitive Doctrine which they had received from Beginning. God healed these
Heresies in his own Way, by the Bishops and Governors of His Church, whom He
had appointed, and without any Infraction upon his own Institution.

And it is observable, That these Heresies began by Infraction which Men made
upon His Institution of Bisheps; as Arius, an ambitious Presbyter, first rose
up against his Bishop, before he was given up to that vile Heresy, which he
vented afterward by Degrees, to gain a Party after him, thereby to maintain
the Opposition which he had made against his Bishop: And by a just Judgment, be
Fell from one Error to another, 'till he at last completed that detestable
Heresy which bears his Name.

And in all the Annals of the Church, whether under the Law, or the Gospel,
there is not one Instance of a Schism against the Priesthood, which God had
appointed, but great Errors in Doctrine and Worship did follow it. Thus the
Priesthood, which Micah set up of his own Head, and that which Jeroboam set up
in Opposition to that of Aaron, both ended in Idolatry. Thus the Novitians and
Donatists, who made Schisms against their Bishops, fell into grievous Errors,
though they did not renounce the Faith.

And into what gross Errors, both as to Doctrine and Worship, has the Church of
Rome fallen, since her Bishop set up for Universality, and thereby Commenced
that Grand Schism against all the Bishops of the Earth, whom he sought to
Depress under him; but while he would thrust other Churches from him, he thrust
himself from the Catholic Church.

What Hydra Heresies, and Monstrous Sects, (Fifty or Sixty at one Time, of
which we have the Names,) flowed like a Torrent into England, in the Times of
Forty One, after Episcopacy was thrown down.

So evident is that Saying, That the Church is the Pillar and Ground of the
Truth, that we can hardly find any Error which has come into the Church, but
upon an Infraction made upon the Episcopal Authority.

XIV. An Infallible Demonstration of Episcopacy.
For which this is to be said, That it has all the Four Marks before mentioned,
to ascertain any Fact, in the concurrent Testimony of all Churches, at all
Times; and therefore must Infallibly be the Government which the Apostles left
upon the Earth. To which we must adhere, 'til a greater Authority than Theirs
shall alter it,

I doubt not but all this will determine you to the Church of England, and keep
you firm to Episcopacy, as a Matter not Indifferent.

And I pray God, that He who has begun a Good Work in you, may perfect it
until the Day of JESUS CHRIST. Amen.

July 17, 1704.

