Les;sons of Caution to Young Sinners. A SERMON Preached on Lord's Day Sept.
23. 1733. Upon the affecting Occasion OF An unhappy Young Woman present in the
Assembly under Sentence of DEATH.

By Thomas Foxcroft, M. A. Pastor to the Old Church in Boston.

With a PREFACE by Mr. COOPER. And Mr. BYLES's CONFERENCE with the Prisoner as
she walked to the Place of Execution.

Deuteronomy. 22. 21. They shall bring out the Damsel, and stone her with Stones, that
she die, because she has wrought Folly in Israel: So shall thou put away Evil
from among you. Isai. 42. 23. Who among you will give Ear to this? Who will
hearken, and hear for the Time to come? BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by S.
KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queen Street. MDCCXXXIII.

BOSTON, October 1. 1733.
ON Thursday last Rebekah Chamblit was Executed here, according to a Sentence
passed upon her at the Superior Court holden here for the County of Suffolk in
August last, being then found Guilty of Felony, in concealing the Birth of
(...) spurious Infant, which she was delivered of when alone, and was
afterward found dead; which Fact is a plain violation of a good and wholesome
Law of this Province: Which Law is here inserted, for further spreading the
Knowledge of it, and to prevent Lives being lost through Ignorance thereof.

An Act to prevent the Destroying and Murdering of Bastard Children.
WHEREAS many Lewd Women, that have been Delivereed of Bastard Children, to
avoid their Shame, and to escape Punishment do secretly Bury or Conceal the
Death of their Children; and after, if the Child be found Dead, the said Women
do allege that the said Child was born dead; whereas it falls out sometimes
(although hardly it is to be proved) that the said Child or Children were
Murdered by the said Women their Lewd Mothers, or by their Assent or
Procurement.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General assembly, and by the authority of the
same, That if any Woman be Delivered of any Issue of her Body, Male or Female,
which if it were born Alive, should by Law be a Bastard; and that she endeavor
privately, either by Drowning or secret Burying thereof, or any other way;
either by her self, or the procuring of others so to conceal the Death thereof,
that it may not come to light, whether it were Born Alive or not, but be
concealed: In every such case the Mother so Offending, shall suffer Death, as
in case of Murder. Except such Mother can make proof by One Witness at the
least, that the Child whose Death was by her so intended to be concealed, was
born Dead.

TO THE YOUNG READERS.
YOU have now in your Hands a very serious and pathetical SERMON, preached on a
solemn and awful Occasion, which it is wished and hoped may, by the Efficacy of
the Spirit of Grace, prove a means of Awakening, of Restraint, and of
Conversion to many of you.

It is to be taken Notice of, That of the many Malefactors which have suffered
Death among us within the Space of Sixteen Years past, not above one of them
was born in this Country. But now our GOD has humbled us by leaving a Child of
the Town, one under the sacred Bonds of the Covenant, to those Iniquities, more
especially the repeated Crimes of Unchastity, which have ripened her for the
Vengeance of a Capital Execution; in which God has set her forth for an Example
to the Children of New England, to warn them not to Sin away their Convictions
and Awakenings, and by rebelling against His Holy Spirit, provoke Him to take
off His Restraints, and so leave them to those Courses that shall undo and
destroy them.

It may be there is no Place in the World, where such Pains are taken with
condemned Criminals to prepare them for their Death; that in the Destruction of
the Flesh, the Spirit may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. The
compassionate Judges always allow a considerable Time (commonly a Month at
least) after the Sentence is pronounced, before the Execution is proceeded in.
All this while they are visited, it may be every Day, by some or other of the
Ministers of the Town, to instruct them, direct them, and pray with them. They
have also the Liberty to attend in our public Assemblies, on Lecture-Days and
on Lord's Days, that they may have the Benefit of those Ordinances which CHRIST
has appointed, and by the Working of His Spirit makes to be the effectual Means
of the Conversion and Salvation of Sinners; when both the Prayers and Sermons
are adapted to their particular Case and Circumstances, while it is at the same
time endeavored to improve the Providence for the Benefit of the numerous
Concourse of People, especially of the Younger Sort, which usually appear on
such an Occasion

It was on the last Sabbath of her Life, that this poor Dau'ter of Death, and
the great Assembly present, were entertained with the following Discourse, on a
Subject very sutably chosen, studiously calculated, not to gratify an itching
Ear, but to reach the Heart and awaken the Conscience; and therefore drawn up
very much in Scripture Language, which carries a peculiar Force and Pungency
with it; and is now published with advantageous Enlargements in some Parts of
the Application. The poor Creature her self afterward spoke of it, and of the
publishing it, in such a Manner as gives some Reason to hope, it came with
Power upon her Soul.

To this is added the Conference had with her in the Way to her Execution, by
our worthy Brother who to gratify her own Desire attended her thither; and has
now recollected the Substance of what occurred in that Conversation, to gratify
some of his Friends who requested it of him; by which it appears the last, and
therefore most precious Minutes of her Life, were improved to the best
Advantage. Her Answers indeed were but short; as she never used to say much
when we discoursed with her. But the Questions were the most proper and suitable
that could be, leading her, by a studied and regular, yet easy and familiar
Train of Though It, into those grand Points, in which is the Life of our Spirit.
Many will be pleased, and I hope profited, to see them. The Reader may place
himself in the View of Death, and then put them to his own Soul, till he feels
the Impression of them.

It appeared to me one of the best Symptoms upon this poor Criminal, that she
seemed desirous her Example might be a Warning to others. She did therefore, of
her own Accord, desire some of the Ministers, solemnly to caution Young People,
not to have their Life, as hers had been, among the Unclean. So that in this
Publication we do but come to you with a Message from the dead; Or, She her
self does, as it were, come from the dead to warn you: though, if you hear not
Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, and his ordinary Ministers,
neither would you be persuaded though one should indeed come from the dead and
speak unto you. However that might terrify you, it of it self would not, could
no convert you, unless the Holy Spirit set in with His Almighty Influences,
which are most likely to be afforded in the Use of those Means which are of his
own Appointment.

How fit a Word is this, which GOD has directed his Servant to, wherewith to
address the Young Sinner, the vain and lewd Youth? If this will not awaken your
Fears, to hear of the Wrath of Almighty GOD which is incensed against you, and
of that Stroke of his powerful Vengeance to which you are every Moment exposed,
and which, when it is once given, will send you into that Place of Misery, from
which there is no Redemption, no, not throughout the endless Ages of Eternity; if
this, I say, will not alarm your Fears, and awaken in you a most sollicitous
Concern how to escape the dreadful Danger you are in, and provide for the
safety of your never-dying Soul, what will? If you can read such a Sermon as
this, and still continue fearless and careless, and indulge your self in
criminal Courses, in those Impurities which the Holy One of Israel cannot look
upon without the utmost Abhorrence; may it not justly be feared, that God has
in a judicial way, poured out upon you the Spirit of deep Sleep, and given you
up to your own Hearts Lusts till by filling up the measure of your Sin, you
become prepared for that amazing Stroke, in which these awful Words will be
again fulfilled, and which will make you a Warning to others, as others have
been to you?

I know there is in your Hearts a cursed Principle of Infidelity, that will
suggest to you, "I shall have Peace, though I walk in the Imagination of my
Heart, and add Iniquity to Iniquity." You may be ready to think your selves as
secure of your Lives, as if you had made a Bargain with Death, not to come till
you send for him; not to take you away with a Stroke, but to let you stand till
old Age gradually consumes you. So there were some of old who lulled themselves
asleep in carnal Security, saying, "We have made a Covenant with Death, and
with Hell we are at Agreement; when the overflowing Scourge shall pass through,
it shall not come unto us." But they had this Answer from the Lord God, "Your
Covenant with Death shall be disannulled, and your Agreement with Hell shall
not stand; when the overflowing Scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be
trodden down by it." Isai. 28. 15, 18.
Don't then make Lies your Refuge, or seek to cover your selves in hiding
Places of Deceit. Has not the Justice of God, made quick Work with other
Sinners? When they have cried, Peace, Peace; sudden Destruction has overtaken
them. You see here, It was an Observation in the Days of Elihu, "They die in
Youth, whose Lives are among the Unclean". And has not the Observation been
verified all along, from that Day to this? For the Scripture is continually
fulfilling in Providence.

I could my self tell you of a Youth whom I knew that was once of very
Promising Hopes, but as he grew to Manhood sadly disappointed the Expectations
of those who before that beholding him loved him. Being asked by a religious
Friend who was grieved to see such an Alteration in him, "How he had laid out
his Life, and intended to spend it"? He answered to this Purpose, "In ^^sting
the Pleasures of it as much as he could" Upon which being seasonably put in
Mind, That the Time of his Life might be shorter than he was aware of; He made
this Reply. "That he doubted not but he should see fourscore Years at least."
But within that Number of Days, he was taken away with the stroke of a sudden
and immature Death, in such a Way as made the Ears of all that heard it to
tingle. Behold now the Severity and goodness of God! Toward them who have been
taken away by His Stroke, Righteous Severity; but toward thee, who art still
spared and warned, Goodness, if thou do not continue to despise and abuse it.

I have two Things to request of you before you read this Sermon, and then I Will
no longer detain you. The one is, That you would pray over it before you read
it; that God would accompany the Reading of it with the Effectual Operation of
his Spirit, without which the most Powerful Words Man can use, will be but as a
dead Letter, altogether ineffectual to Convert and Sanctify you.

The other is, That after you have read it, You would allow your self Time to
think on what you have read, and enter into a solemn Debate with your own Soul
thereupon. Seriously ask your self then, "Whether you can think it safe to
continue in your sinful Courses one Day longer?" "Whether it is not the Madness
of Folly in you, to loose your Soul, your precious and immortal Soul, rather
than part with a base Lust"? "Whether you had not better forego the Company of
Sinners now, than have your Soul gathered with them hereafter"? If any of you
should still say, "I have loved Strangers, and after them I will go". "I must
indulge my Lusts and enjoy my sinful Companions, though I forfeit the Favor of
God, and expose my self to his Vengeance for ever". Then, Know it, You wilfully
damn your own Soul: You choose Death in the Causes of it. Your Part must be with
the Unbelieving, and the Abominable, in the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone, which is the second Death. You shall go when you die, and that will
be very soon, to the Generation of your Fathers, the unclean Sinners that have
died before you, and are shut up in the Prison of Darkness; You shall never see
Light: So shall thy Doom be, Thou thy self have decided it.

But that God may bless this Discourse to every one of you that shall read it,
to preserve the Virtuous Youth, reclaim the Vicious, and establish the Pious;
and so make the Preaching and Publishing it serve to heighten the Author's Joy,
and brighten his Crown in the Day of CHRIST, is the hearty Prayer of

Your compassionate, Soul's Friend, W. Cooper.

A Lesson of Caution TO YOUNG SINNERS.
JOB XXXVI. 14, and 18. They die in Youth, and their Life is among the Unclean.
Because there is Wrath, beware lest He take thee away with his Stroke: then a
great Ransom cannot deliver thee.
THE Text is very awful and affecting; deserves the serious Tho'ts of all, but
especially challenges a more intense Consideration from our Young People. He
that has an Ear to hear, let him hear. Let these sayings sink down into your
Ears, and be written on your Hearts. By discoursing on the Text, may I be so
happy, by the Blessing of GOD, as to prevent the fulfilling of it among our
Young People! Of whom I see so numerous a Concourse on the present solemn
Occasion.

They are the words of Elihu, who having undertaken to speak on God's behalf,
in Vindication of his dealings with Job, first gives him (as in the preceding
Context) a brief account of the various methods of Providence toward the
Children of Men, suited to their different Tempers and Carriages toward God;
and then gives him agreeable Counsels and Admonitions thereupon. Elihu observes
to him the design of God in bringing Men under the Bonds of Affliction; that it
is with a view to their spiritual Benefit, for the good of their Souls, ver. 8,
9, 10. -- In the next place he observes the different Issue of a right
Improvement of Divine Corrections, and of Impenitence under the Hand of God,
ver. 11, 12. He further amplifies on the Case of impenitent Sinners, in the two
next Verses, ver. 13, 14.

And then, after having made some particular Remarks on Job's case, he proceeds
to give him that solemn Caution, in the 18 th. verse, not to make light of
God's Wrath, but to fear lest he should fall a Sacrifice to the Divine
Vengeance. Even good Men have enough amiss in 'em, to expose them to God's
Wrath, if He should enter into Judgment with them. It was therefore a proper
and seasonable Caution: and if so holy and good a Man, as Job, needed such a
Caution, surely impenitent Sinners much more have need of this solemn Warning.
It is a Word more especially fit to address secure Sinners withal: though it is
also applicable to all others, good as well as bad; young and old.

It Is the proper Use and Application of the Hint given in the 14 th verse,
concerning the miserable End of Impenitents: and therefore I Have connected these
two Verses, for the Subject of my present Discourse. They die in Youth, and
their Life is among the Unclean: Because there is Wrath, etc.

I shall speak to the Words under these Three distinct Heads.

1. Mankind are sometimes taken out of the World by an early Death, even in the
days of their Youth.

2. Of those, who die in Youth, many there be, whose Life is among the Unclean.

3. These Reflections should awaken all, and particularly young People, to a
Fear and Concern, lest God in his Wrath should take them away with a stroke,
leaving them no Hope of Relief.

DOCT. I. Mankind are often taken out of the World by an Early and untimely
Death. -- It Is the Case of many, They die in Youth, a premature Death.

I am aware, That some take Youth here in a figurative sense, and understand
the Text to mean, They die in Ignorance and Folly. For he that has not yet
learned to live as he ought, seems to die prematurely: and he that dies
prematurely, seems to die as an Infant, that cannot discern its right hand and
its left. The old Man, that is a late Penitent, dies a very Child: and the
Impenitent, though he may have been an hundred Years in the World, yet he has
not truly lived so much as one day, if he at last dies in his Sins.

But others take the Word in a proper sense, as intending the Age of Youth, the
Morning of Life. Nor see I any Occasion to depart from the literal Construction.

It is an obvious Truth, that Multitudes are taken out of the World by an early
Death. There are Multitudes, who perish in the Womb, and never see the Light:
Multitudes that die in Infancy; having breathed a few days or months, they
expire and vanish: Multitudes, that die in Childhood and Youth. Many are taken
away in the midst of their Days; and many attain not to this; they scarce live
out half their Days.

The longest Liver in these times may be said to die in Youth, if compared with
those in the first Ages of the World. Many in primitive times attained to nigh
a Thousand Years. But there has since been a wonderful Abbreviation of the Life
of Man; -- of which no Philosophical Account has yet been given, to the
satisfaction of rational Inquirers: but we are obliged to content ourselves
with Theological Reasons, and must resolve this mysterious Event into the
sovereign Pleasure and Providence of God. -- From Moses's time the extent of
human Life in general has been but about Seventy or Eighty Years. Psalm. 90. 10.
This is the common Boundary, which few exceed, and Multitudes fall short of.

Vast Numbers (as I said) are taken away in the midst of their Days, and yet
more in the Beginning of their Years. The Dispensation of early Death is common
both to the Just and Unjust.

The early Death of the Righteous is a mysterious Dispensation, of which scarce
any other Account can be given but that, Even so, Father, because it has
seemed good in thy sight! -- However, many Things might be said to justify the
Providence of God herein; and particularly this, that although God shortens the
days of such in this World, yet he gives them length of Days and Life
everlasting in a better: So that the Curse is turned into a Blessing, as to
them. Untimely Death is in itself evil, and a fruit of the Curse: but to one in
Christ, it becomes a surprising Mercy; for it turns to his Salvation, and
hastens his eternal Happiness and Glory.

But to the Wicked this Dispensation is in Judgment. Shortness of Days is often
threatened in Scripture, as a Punishment of Sin. Prove. 10. 27. The Years of the
Wicked shall be shortened. So Eccl. 8. 13. It shall not be well with the Wicked;
neither shall he prolong his Days, which are as a shadow, because he fears
not before God. -- And Psalm. 55. 23. Thou, O God, shall bring them down into
the Pit of Destruction: bloody and deceitful Men shall not live out half their
Days, i. e. not half the ordinary Age of Man, not half so long as they might
live in the usual Course of Nature.

But whether they be righteous or wicked, whether it be in Mercy or in
Judgment, we often see very affecting Instances of early Death. How many are in
their Youth cut off by pining Sickness How many by fatal Casualties! When God
commissions Death to arrest any, he regards not the Beauty or the Vigor of
Youth: that cannot bribe, nor this resist him. When the Death-Warrant is
signed, the King of Terrors becomes inexorable, and spares not the ruddy Youth,
any more than the hoary Head. He minds not Age or Quality, Sex or Rank: but
every one, when his Hour is come, falls by the impartial Hand of this common
Devourer. By the Greatness of his strength shall none prevail: nor will the
pitiable Tenderness of any obtain a Reprieve for them. The Children and
Sucklings he makes to pour out their Soul into their Mother's Bosom: He crushes
the Young Men with a Rod of Iron, and treads the Daughters of Zion, as in a
Wine Press. In how many Instances do we see that fulfilled, Job 21. 23, 24. One
dies in his full strength being wholly at ease and quiet, his Breasts full of
Milk, and his Bones moistened with Marrow. -- Them that bid fairest for long
Life, how often do we see cut off by the stroke of Death: Some in the way of
Nature, by a fatal Distemper; others in the way of Violence, by a sudden
Accident, by the Hand of Malice, or the Sword of Justice.

Herein is the Sovereignty of God displayed: and his Righteousness is herein
exalted. For every Death is an Execution of the primitive Curse, and an
Exercise of the Divine Dominion over the Life of Man: and in particular early
Death is eminently so. There is also the Wisdom of God to be seen in his
ordering Death unto Mankind in all Periods and Ages of Life; inasmuch as their
being at an Uncertainty about the Time of their dying, and not knowing but that
they may die in Youth, tends to excite in 'em a Care of early Preparation for
Death.

In a word, while we behold the severity of God to some in cutting them off by
an untimely Death, We that survive should be more deeply affected with a sense
of the distinguishing goodness of God to us, in preserving us hitherto;
especially since we have forfeited our Lives by innumerable Provocations. We
have been exposed to the same Perils, as others; we are by Nature Children of
Wrath, even as others; our Childhood and Youth has been Vanity, full of Sin and
Folly, even more perhaps than many others were guilty of, that have been taken
away before us. -- And shall not these Considerations strike our Hearts; fill
us with Admiration of the Divine Patience toward us, and lead us to
Repentance! O let us devote our reprieved Lives to the Honor of God; by whose
Visitation out Spirits have been preserved. Let him have the Service of our
adult and advanced Age, to whose Mercy it is owing that we did not die in Youth
or Infancy. Let that be the Though It of our Heart, our Resolution and our Petition
continually, Psalm. 56. 12, 13. Thy vows are upon me, O God: I will render
praises unto thee. For thou have delivered my soul from death: wilt not thou
deliver my feet from falling, that I may walk before God is the light of the
living!

But I pass now to another Observation,

DOCT. II. Of those that die in Youth, many there be, whose Life is amongst the
Unclean.

There are different Constructions of this Passage: Some refer it to the
present Life, and others to that which is to come.

(1.) We may take it as respecting the present Life. The Word [ is] not being
in the Hebrew Text, our Translators have supplied the Vacancy with that; as
perhaps understanding Elihu to speak here of the Life future. But if it be
understood of the Life, which now is, there may other Suppletives be made use
of; and accordingly, various Glosses may be made on the Words

1. Thus, it may be read, Their Life is seen to have been among the Unclean.
However they may have hid their Wickedness heretofore; yet now, when they come
to die, they are detected, or confess; the Mask is pulled or thrown off, and it
appears they were but whited Sepulchers, fair without, but foul within. Now the
Mouths of Men are opened to speak what they know of their wicked Lives; the
Providence of God strangely brings to Light their hidden Iniquities; or
Conscience compels them to a Confession. The Hypocrite's Hope perishes in
Death, and many times vanishes at the Apprehension of Death approaching; so
that the false Professor, though perhaps he formerly appeared to have a sacred
Heat of Love and Grace in his Soul, yet now confesses himself to have been
under the power of a fatal Cold in divine Things, and to have possessed no
other Heat than that of fleshly Lusts, which war against the Soul: and he now
numbers himself among the Unclean, calls himself a spiritual Adulterer, who
made Pretensions of Love to Christ, as the Guide of his Youth, but yet only
flattered him with his Mouth, while in Reality his Heart went a whoring after
the World, led away with diverse Lusts.

2. Again, the Text may be read, Their Life is found among the Unclean, that
is, they are found living in Uncleanness, when Death comes and takes them away.
In a State of Sin, and it may be in the Act of Sin, Death surprises 'em, and
drives them away in their Wickedness. I might instance in wicked Er and Onan,
those Brethren in Iniquity, whom the Lord slew for their abominable Filthiness,
that they died before their Time. So Nadab and Abihu, who profaned the Worship
of God, there went out Fire from the Lord and devoured them, and they died
before the Lord. So Korah and his Company, Wickedness was amongst them and in
their Dwellings, and the Earth opened her Mouth, and swallowed them up, and
they went down alive into the Pit. -- Many are thus cut off by the more
immediate hand of God. Others have been slain in Battle, or been cut off by the
Sword of the civil Magistrate, who is a Revenger to execute Wrath upon them
that do Evil. (...) smote Zimri and Cozhi in the very Act of Lewdness. -- Joab
slew Absalom in the midst of his Rebellions. -- Others again have been
judicially abandoned of God, so as to lay violent Hands on themselves; as
Judas, who not being able to bear the Shame and Guilt he had bro't on himself,
went to the Halter for Relief. Ahitophel did the same before him.

3. Again, The Text may be read, Their Life is taken away among the Unclean, i.
e. in Company with them, or by a Death ignominious as theirs. They are in their
Death numbered among the Transgressors: Cut off for their Sins, by a shameful
Execution, as Criminals. They are cut off after the manner of unclean Persons,
by an infamous Death. The original Word in our Text, for the Unclean, is in
other places frequently rendered Sodomites: and some read it, Their Life is cut
off after the same Manner as Sodomites are cut off, that are most hatefully
unclean, abominably wicked, i. e. by a vile and shameful Death. As if it had
been said, They die in Youth, and come to an ignominious End.

4. Finally, If we read it thus, Their Life is taken away among the Unclean, it
may intend, they die like the worst of Sinners, as to their Frame and Carriage.
The Hypocrites in heart, of whom Elihu had been speaking, often make as poor a
figure in the Approaches of Death, as the openly Profane: they behave no better
than the most foul and scandalous Sinners; either dying under the power of
brutish Stupidity, or else in hellish Despair. Balaam's Wish was wont to be
theirs, That they might die the Death of the Righteous: but alas! how often do
we see, that the Hypocrite dies as the Fool dies, either in sottish Security,
or in miserable Anguish and desponding Rage?

Having thus considered the Words in various Lights, as they are understood to
refer unto the present Life; I come now

(2) To give you another Gloss upon the Text, which refers the Life here spoken
of unto the future State. And I find some of the most judicious Expositors
understanding it in this Sense: Their Life is among the Unclean, i. e. their
future Life is so: the Life of their Souls in the separate State is, and the
Life of their Bodies in the Resurrection-State shall be, among the Unclean;
among Sodomites, in the everlasting Fire The filthy Sinners of Sodom who gave
themselves over to Fornication, and went after strange Flesh, are said ( Jude 7
th) to be set forth for an Example, suffering the Vengeance of eternal Fire.

The vain and lewd Youth, that dies in his Sins, yea the most moral and
virtuous Youth, that dies out of Christ, unpardoned and unrenew'd in the Spirit
of his mind, must have his Portion with the unclean Spirits in Hell. When he
gives up the Ghost, where is he? Whither does he go? Not to Paradise, but to a
Prison. We read of the Spirits in Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19. It means damned Souls
in Hell. -- Heaven is a holy Place; and there shall in no wise enter into it
any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works Abomination, or makes a
Lie, Rev. 21. 27. Hell is the only fit Receptacle of impure Souls: thither,
when such depart from the Body, they go, as to their own place, their proper
Center. Act. 1. 25. Now among them that die in Youth, as well as in other Ages
of Life there are many that die in their Sins, and their Life afterward is
among the Unclean. They lie down in Sorrow; and in Hell they lift up their
Eyes, being in Torments. -- There they bear the Reproach of their Youth. God in
Anger now writes bitter Things indeed against them, and makes them to possess
the Iniquities of their Youth: these, which once were as sweet Morsels in their
Mouth, are as the Gall of Asps to them now. Bitter, bitter are their
Reflections on lost Time, on the Misspence of Youth, the golden Opportunity of
Life, and the only Opportunity (as it proved) to them. Conscience now lashes
terribly, and reads the most doleful Lessons to them. They see an amazing
ETERNITY before 'em, and have a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and
fiery Indignation to devour them for ever and ever. They were cut down out of
Time (as the Phrase is Job. 22. 16) their Life was soon cut off, and their
Souls flew away: But alas! the days that were wanting on Earth, are made up in
Hell. He that dies in Youth, with his Sins unpardoned and unrepented of, enters
immediately upon a never-expiring State of Woe and Misery, Sorrow and Despair.
His short Life of Sin here is followed with a long (long) Eternity of
Sufferings and Torment. And in proportion to their Guilt, is the future
Punishment of Sinners greater or less. They that have perished from under the
Gospel, shall have a more intolerable Damnation, than even the Sinners of Sodom
and the heathen World. And such under the Gospel as have contracted the
greatest Degrees of Guilt, shall have the most aggravated Punishment. They that
carry out of the World with them most of the Temper and Complexion of Hell,
shall have the greatest share of the Pains and Torments of Hell. The Sentence
passed on the Scarlet Whore, the Mother of Harlots, will be the Language of the
great Day, in regard to some Sinners, Rev. 18. 5, 6, 7 Her sins have reached
unto heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities. Reward her even as she
rewarded you, and double unto her double, according to her works: in the cup
which she has filled, fill to her double. How much she has glorified her
self, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her.

O let us all realise it, that when ever we shall die, whether in Youth or Age,
if we be found in our Sins, if we go out of the World unpardoned and
impenitent, our Life in the future State must be among the Unclean, among
filthy and abhorred Spirits, in a State of Punishment to everlasting. Devils
and Unclean Spirits only will be fit Companions for us: Hell only will be a fit
Habitation for us: -- And the most horrid Abodes there will be assigned unto
us, as being the Chief of Sinners.

And now being warned, shall we not be moved with Fear, and be in Concern of
Soul that this may not be our miserable Lot, when we die, to have our Life
among the Unclean! O let us be persuaded by the Terrors of the Lord, and hasten
our Flight from impending Vengeance. -- But to excite and direct your Care and
Endeavor, in this Regard, will be my Business under the last Observation;
which therefore I now come to. --

DOCT. III. These Reflections should awaken all, and in particular Young
People, to a just Fear and Care, left GOD in Wrath should take them away with
his Stroke, beyond hope of Relief.

They die in Youth, and their Life is among the Unclean: Because there is
Wrath, beware lest he take thee away etc. q. d. Because you see the Wrath of
God signalized in terrible Judgments on others, cutting them down by Death, and
sending them into the Pit; and because you have reason to apprehend the Wrath
of God kindled against you, by his present afflictive Dispensations: O beware,
lest he proceed to cut you down also by an awful Death, and so you appear to
die and perish, even as the vilest Sinner by the hand of Vengeance. -- Or it
may mean, Because there is a Wrath to come, Treasures of Wrath reserved in Hell
for impenitent Sinners; Beware that you be not found in this unhappy Number,
and so when you die, your Lot be among the Unclean.

Beware lest God in Wrath cut you off with his Stroke, in a Day that you look
not for it, in an Hour that you are not aware of. Don't be crying Peace and
Safety to your self, lest sudden Destruction come upon you, as Travail upon a
Woman with Child, and there be no Escaping. Boast not thy self of to morrow;
for thou know not what a Day may bring forth.

And as a further Motive of Fear, consider, if God should cut you off with his
Stroke, there will be no Hope of Relief; Then a great Ransom cannot deliver
thee: which may refer, either to a Recovery from the Grave, or a Redemption
from Hell. When Men are once dead, there is no returning into this Life and
World: Do with Might therefore what your Hand finds to do, lest Death
surprise you in an unprepared State, and that Night come upon you unawares, in
which no Man can work. -- And when Sinners have once shot the Gulf and are
shut up in Hell, there is no Escaping, no Discharge for ever. O what shall a Man
give in Exchange for his Soul? Had you the whole World at your Command, it
would not be a sufficient Price for the Ransom of your Soul. Neither will all
your Tears, Cries and Promises avail any thing: Divine Justice will be
inexorable to you. Neither will you have any Advocate to plead for you: He who
is the only prevailing Advocate with the Father, will then be turned against
you; His Blood, which now speaks better Things than the Blood of Abel, will
then plead against you, and loudly imprecate divine Vengeance upon you to all
Eternity.

Now is the accepted Time; Now is the Day of Salvation: O see that you refuse
it not. How will you escape, if you neglect so great Salvation! -- Tremble,
lest God should cut you off with his Stroke, while you are delaying to accept
this Salvation. Then a great Ransom cannot deliver you: Even the great and the
only valuable Ransom, that which Christ paid down for the Redemption of Souls,
will then be of no Benefit to you: for its saving Virtue is applicable only in
this World; it reaches not to the Prison of Hell. Not that it is not in it self
sufficient; for it has an infinite intrinsecal Value and Virtue: but in the
Application it is limited by the Wisdom and Sovereignty of God, who has made
this transient Life the Season of Probation for a future everlasting State.

Surely then it is a matter of infinite Concernment to us, that we now use the
utmost Care to secure to our selves eternal Salvation, and make sure of being
delivered from the Wrath to come. We should work out our Salvation with Fear
and Trembling. It may well be our fear, lest a Promise being left us of entering
into Rest, we should after all come short of it.

I might say here, -- We should beware of carnal Security and Presumption, and
of every Thing that tends to nourish a careless Temper or false Hopes, which
will hinder us in preparing for the future State.

We should beware of criminal Courses, and Ways of Sin and Wickedness, which
tend to kindle the Anger of God against us, and provoke him to bring
everlasting Destruction upon us.

We should beware of Hypocrisy in Religion; which will make us a Loathing to
the holy Heart-searching God, and provoke him to spue us out of his Mouth with
Indignation.

In a Word, Whatever we do, we must be careful to secure an Interest in Christ,
who only saves from the Wrath to come; and therefore beware of an evil Heart of
Unbelief. By reason of Sin, we are by nature Children of Wrath: and if ever we
be reconciled to God, his Wrath must be appeased toward us, by an Application
of the Blood of Christ, which cleanses from all Unrighteousness: and this
Application is through Faith. Hence then we must make it our Care to get and
exercise Faith in Christ. We must beware, that we don't miss of Life through
Unbelief; beware that we don't deceive our selves with a dead Faith; beware of
carnal Prejudices against Christ, and the way of Salvation by him. We must
realise our Need of a Savior, and the infinite Sufficiency and gracious
Willingness of Christ to be our Savior: We must submit to and entertain him in
all his Offices; Commit our Souls into his redeeming Hands, to be clothed with
his Righteousness, and adorned with his Image, to be washed, justified and
sanctified, and saved for ever. So shall we find Christ a Refuge for us in the
day of Death, a Security from the Wrath to come. For whosoever believes in the
Son, has everlasting Life: Whereas he that believes not, shall not see Life,
but the Wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3. 36.

I come now to the APPLICATION.

And here,

USE I. Is it so, that many die in Youth, whose Life is among the Unclean? O
with what Astonishment should old Sinners reflect on the sparing Goodness of
God to them: and what need have they to hasten their Repentance and Turning to
God!

Are there not some of you, who may be rightly called (in respect of corrupt
Practice, as well as a vitiated Nature) Transgressors from the Womb! Who have a
Childhood and Youth to look back upon, that were full of Vanity, Sin and Folly;
and as if this were not enough, have spent your maturer Years in Sin, and are
even still going on in your Trespasses; Increasing in Sin, as you increase in
Age. Are there not many Sins, which you have to reflect on; heinous Sins, Sins
against the Light, against Warnings and Convictions, against Vows and
Resolutions; Sins often repeated, long continued in, and dreadfully aggravated:
And yet God has spared you hitherto! You have seen many fall on your right Hand
and on your left: and still you have been reprieved. You may well wonder, and be
astonished, that you are as yet on this side the Grave, and out of Hell. Why
did not you die, even as many others, in Youth! Is it not a merciful of God,
that has made you to differ! O the Riches of Divine Patience toward you! Admire
and magnify it: be affected with it, and improve it to Repentance, lest ere
long abused Mercy turn into enraged Justice. The longest Liver surely must die
at last: and think thou this, O Man that art an old Practitioner in Sin,
that thou shall escape the Judgment of God? Or despisest thou the Riches of his
Goodness and Forbearance; not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to
Repentance? O do not after thy Hardness and impenitent Heart persist in
Rebellions against God, and Neglects of thy Soul; treasuring up Wrath against
the Day of Wrath. Hear that Divine Reproof and Warning, Eccl. 8. 11, -- 13.
Because Sentence against an evil Work is not executed speedily, therefore the
Heart of the Sons of men is fully set in them to do Evil: But though a Sinner do
Evil an hundred times, and his Days be prolonged; yet surely it shall not be
well with the Wicked in the End. -- Eccl. 6. 3. If a man live many years, and
his Soul be not filled with Good, I say that an untimely Birth is better than
he. It is an awful Threatening, in Isai. 65. 20. The Sinner being an hundred
years old, shall be accursed. O that this Word might strike an Awe and fasten
upon the Heart of every foolish One, whose hoary Head is a Shame to him, being
found in the way of Unrighteousness! Flatter not your self with the Thought of
finding-Mercy and dying in Peace, though you go on a little longer in your Sins.
Because there is Wrath, Treasures of Wrath heaped up by your long Life of Sin,
beware lest God take you away with his Stroke: then a great Ransom cannot
deliver you. But his Anger will smoke against you, and all the Curses of his
violated Law be poured on your guilty Head. If impenitent Sinners, dying in
Youth, have their Life among the Unclean; where shall the old Sinner appear?
Can you expect any better Doom? Verily if you at last die impenitent, full of
Days, and full of Sins, you will be of all Men the most miserable: the day of
Death will be a day of Wrath, and the day of Judgment, a day of terrible
Vengeance, unto you above all others. O consider, before it be too late. It is
high time to awake out of Sleep. Give glory to God, before your Feet stumble
upon the dark Mountains. It is the Admonition of Heaven to you, Eccl. 11. 8. If
a Man live many days, and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember the days of
Darkness; for they shall be many. -- O take Heed lest that come upon you, Job
20. 11, and 27. His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie
down with him in the dust. The heaven shall reveal his iniquity: and the earth
shall rise up against him.

USE II. Do many die in Youth, whose Life is among the Unclean? Here then is a
moving Argument to awaken Parents unto an early Care and fervent Prayer for
their Children, that they may be converted betimes: and no Wonder, pious
Parents are full of Sorrow and Fear, when they see their Children hardening
their Hearts and growing in Sin, as they grow in Years, notwithstanding all
their Pains and Prayers for and with them.

God has put into Parents a natural Affection to the Fruit of their own Body;
so that they are tenderly concerned for the Welfare of their Children. Though
they be evil, they know how to give good Gifts to their Children: to nourish
their Bodies, to defend 'em from Harms, and provide for 'em a Portion in this
Life. -- But now let me mind you, that are Parents, of the Duty you owe to the
Souls of your dear Children. O let not all your Concern for 'em terminate on
the outward Man, and center on the low and mean Things of this transitory
World. Remember, your Children are Children of Death, and Children of Wrath by
Nature; They are bound for another World; They may die in Youth: They may, if
let alone to go on in their Sins, come to an infamous End, and bring you to
Shame: and if they die in their natural State, their Life in another World will
be among the Unclean; not among the Saints in Light, not among the pure and
blessed Spirits in Heaven, but among the filthy accursed Spirits in a miserable
Hell. -- And can you bear the Though It of this! Do not your Bowels now yearn
within you for 'em! Will not a Father pity his Children, or can a Mother forget
to have Compassion on the Son of her Womb! -- O pity the perishing Souls of
your poor Children. Fear the Sin and Doom of Eli; who, when his Sons made
themselves vile, restrained them not, and God judged his House by cutting off
all the Increase of it in the Flower of their Age. O save your Children with
fear: plucking them as Brands out of the Fire. Mourn their Sins: mourn their
guilty, polluted, miserable and exposed State by Nature. Realise their Need of
a sanctifying Change: and let it be your first and great Care for them, that
they may be born again; without which they can never see the Kingdom of Heaven.
Let it be your Heart's Desire and Prayer to God for them, and your continual
Endeavor, in the use of appointed Means, that they may be converted betimes.
Begin early with them, and follow 'em incessantly with your pious Instructions,
Counsels, Reproofs, and Warnings. Charge 'em, as David did his Son Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and
serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind; for the Lord searches
all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the tho'ts: if thou seek
him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off
for ever. Set an holy Example before 'em; walking in your House with a perfect
Heart. -- And to enforce Means and Endeavors, Offer up fervent Prayers to the
God of all Grace, that he would by his Spirit beget your Children to a new and
divine Life. -- Thus Abraham prayed, O that Ishmael might live in thy sight!
Genesis 17. 18. So David, 1 Chronicles. 29. 19. Give unto Solomon my son a perfect
heart to keep thy commandments. And if you obtain this for 'em, you will have
Joy in them, supposing they live to mature Years: or if they die in Youth, you
will have this for your Consolation, the Hope that their Life in the World of
Spirits, is not among the Unclean, but among the Perfected in Glory.

And as to you, who have Children adult or growing up, but cannot see them
under any hopeful Impressions; no Wonder, if you are bowed down with Sorrow for
them and go mourning all the day. Ah! Your Hearts may well meditate Terror,
when you think what miserable Circumstances they may bring themselves by Sin
into even here, and that if they should die in Youth, unconverted and
unpardoned, they must be undone, for ever undone; must have their Life among
the Unclean in a future State, and become a Prey to the worst of all Devourers.
How can your Minds but be in Pain! How can you but be full of Anxiety and
Anguish; to see your Children hardening their Hearts in Sin, careless of their
Souls, and taking Methods to hasten on themselves Destruction without a Remedy!
Alas, What tender and serious Parent can see this without a weeping Eye, and
bleeding Heart! -- Yet let your Sorrow and your Fear be kept within due Bounds,
and under a holy Regulation. Duty is yours; the Event is God's. Whatever your
Fears are, don't slacken your Pains or Prayers. I propound that Example of a
devout and watchful Parent to you, Job. 1. 5. And it was so, when the days of
their feasting were gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up
early in the morning, and offered burnt-offerings according to the number of
them all: for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in
their hearts. Thus did Job continually.

USE III. Is it so, that many die in Youth, whose Life is among the Unclean?
How astonishing is the Stupidity and Security of wicked and profane Young
People! How foolish and mad their present Mirth and Jollity in ways of Sin!
Sure I am, they have little Reason to rejoice in Iniquity.

Sin is the most unprofitable Thing in the World; yea, the most dangerous and
injurious. It tends to wound the Name, ruin the Estate, destroy the Body, and
damn the Soul. -- However Fools may make a mock at Sin, and put far away the
evil Day; however it may be an Abomination to Fools to depart from their wicked
ways: yet surely Evil pursues Sinners, and Woe to them that are at Ease in
Zion. Woe to you that laugh now; for ye shall mourn at the last. The Pleasures
of Sin are but for a Season: they are short in their Duration, brutish in their
Nature, and baneful in their Consequence. How often do we see the Wicked fall
by their own wickedness; the Backslider in Heart filled with his own Ways, and
Transgressors taken in their own Naughtiness! Oh how often do we see the Lamp
of the wicked put out! the Simple pass on and are punished. How many lose their
Lives in the Pursuit of sinful Pleasures! How many lose their Souls! How many
by this means bring Shame and Ruin on themselves in this World, and everlasting
Contempt and Misery in the future!

And yet notwithstanding the Warnings given by others Harms; notwithstanding
the Admonitions given by God in his Providence, and in his Word; alas! Are
there not many of our young People that have fellowship with the unfruitful
Works of Darkness, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures? O the Folly you are
guilty of! We mourn your Folly: We pity you as Children void of Wisdom. You are
your own Enemies: you are destroying yourselves, Soul and Body. You seem to
love Death, and court Destruction. You are taking the surest Methods to shorten
your Days in this World, and to hasten your Damnation in the next. And yet
(amazing!) you dwell at Ease, as if you were in no Hazard. You appear lost to
the Reflections of reasonable Creatures. Surely you have not the Understanding
of Men: but may justly be compared to the Brutes, that have no Knowledge. Prove.
7^ 22, 23. He goes after her straightway, as an ox goes to the slaughter, or
as a fool to the correction of the stocks, Till a dart strike through his
liver, as a bird hastes to the snare, and knows not that it is for his life.
That Is the Censure passed upon secure Impenitents, Eccl. 9. 3. The heart of the
sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and
after that they go to the dead. They bring themselves to a miserable End; often
to an untimely and ignominious Death: But that is not all; they throw
themselves into a burning Hell; they bring everlasting Destruction on their
Souls. Prove. 9. 17, 18. Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is
pleasant. But he knows not that the dead are there; and that her guests are
in the depths of hell. Surely Madness is in their Heart while they live, who to
enjoy the Pleasures of Sin, will expose their Souls, their precious and
immortal Souls, to the Hazard of being gathered with Sinners in Hell, when they
die.

How can you now think of this, and not be afraid! Or are you more brutish than
the Beasts that perish! Be astonished, O Heavens, at this! Be horribly afraid,
O Earth!

USE IV. From what has been said, we may infer the Happiness, and the Wisdom of
such as are cleansing their way and fearing God in their Youth.

Through the Grace of Christ, we trust, there is a Number of Young People of this
Character among us: -- though (alas) but a small Remnant. And to such I would
bring this day the Consolations of God, after the Lessons of Terror that have
been uttered.

Know it then, such of you as are indeed seeking God and following after
Righteousness, you are taking a happy method to obtain long Life in this World,
and eternal Life in the next. -- You are the most likely to live long on the
Earth: for as we read Prove. 10. 27. The Fear of the Lord prolongeth Days. It
has a natural Tendency to do so, Chap 11. 19. Righteousness tends to Life.
And Godliness has the Promise of the Life, which now is. Prove. 14. 10. Receive
my Sayings, and the Years of thy Life shall be many. -- Chap 9. 10, 11. The
Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom: -- for by me thy Days shall be
multiplied, and the Years of thy Life shall be increased. -- However, if God
should see good to take you away in Youth, you will be able by his Grace to
resign cheerfully to his Will; having overcome the World by Faith, you will be
satisfied with Life, whether longer or shorter. And the earlier you die, you
will but the sooner get to your Reward in Heaven. If you do but give Diligence
in the Work of God, you may live long in a little Time: and though in respect of
Age, you may die a very Child, yet in respect of spiritual Seize, you may
be said to die an hundred years old. (Isa. 65. 20.) And the Promise of long
Life shall be gloriously accomplished to you in a better World. When you die,
you shall enter into Life; Life eternal; a Life as happy, as long: Not among
the Unclean; but amidst holy Angels and glorified Saints in Heaven: a Life of
Communion with the blessed God in fullness of Joy for evermore. O the
Consolation, that this should be to you now, under all the Troubles of this
mutable World, and under the Apprehensions of hastening Death and Judgment! And
the Wisdom of your present Conduct from hence abundantly appears. We read,
Prove. 28 7. Whosoever keeps the Law is a wise son. He is truly a wise Child, that
fears God, that seeks Christ betimes; whose Loving Kindness is better than
Life. Such a Youth minds the one Thing needful; regards his truest Interest;
has the best End in View, and the best Means in Use. He takes the surest Method
to promote his own Usefulness and Comfort in the present, and secure his
eternal Happiness in the coming World. Surely the Knowledge of the Holy is
Understanding. Better is a poor and wise Child, than an old and foolish King,
however great and rich. O what Praises are due to the Grace of God in Christ,
who has made you to differ, made you to excel! By his Grace alone it is, that
you are what you are, in respect of every good thing found in you, toward the
Lord your God. -- And he expects singular Returns from you in ways of
Gratitude, Love, and Obedience. Be much in meditating and admiring the
Distinction, sovereign Divine Mercy has put upon you; that while thousands of
others are made Pillars of Salt for the glory of vindictive Justice, you are
among the bright Monuments of saving Grace, and belong to that happy Number, in
whom Christ, when he comes, shall be glorified, and admired for ever. Let it be
your solicitous Study now to bring all possible Honor to Christ, in a way of
Obedience to his Gospel. Ye were sometimes Darkness, but now are Light in the
Lord: walk as Children of Light. See that you walk circumspectly, not as Fools,
but as wise. Beware that the way of Truth be not evil spoken of on your
account: let not that worthy Name, by which you are called, be blasphemed through
you at any time. Remember how David sinned in the matter of Uriah, by which he
gave Occasion to the Enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, and for which God was
displeased with him. Take Warning from his Example: Watch and pray, that ye
enter not into Temptation. Falls into Sin will cost you a bitter Repentance,
and may draw down heavy Corrections upon you, in order to bring you to
Repentance, that you may not be condemned with the World. Let the Life you now
live in the flesh, be by the Faith of the Son of God: Trust in him to keep you
from the Evil; and you may hope to be delivered from every evil Work, and
preserved to his heavenly Kingdom.

I pass now to another Head.

USE V. Let it be a word of Warning and Exhortation to all our Young People,
that they beware of those dangerous and provoking Evils, which have so often
been the Means of bringing others to an untimely End; lest they also die in
Youth, and their Life be among the Unclean.

Attend to the solemn Caveat in our Text: Because there is Wrath, beware lest
God take thee away with his Stroke; then a great Ransom cannot deliver thee.
There is Wrath secret, in his holy Breast; he is angry with the Wicked every
day. There is Wrath revealed, in his Word and Providence. There is present
Wrath in this World: and a Wrath to come in the eternal World. The Threatenings
and the Judgments of God proclaim his Indignation against Sin, and speak Terror
to Sinners. The Wrath of God is truly tremendous: Who knows the power of his
Anger? Who can stand before him, when once he is angry? O beware then of the
Wrath of God: beware of every Thing that tends to kindle against you this
consuming Fire.

You should be afraid of humane Justice, the Wrath of the civil Magistrate. For
Rulers are a Terror, not to good Works, but to evil: will thou then not be
afraid of the Power? If thou do that which is evil, be afraid: for he bears
not the Sword in vain: for he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute
Wrath upon him that does Evil, Romans 13 3, 4.

But you should above all be afraid of Divine Justice, the Wrath of the supreme
Ruler: into whose Hands it is a most fearful thing for any to fall. Job 19 29.
Be ye afraid of the Sword; for Wrath brings the Punishments of the Sword,
that ye may know there is a Judgment. It was the saying of Job, God knows the
Way that I take; when I consider, I am afraid of him And David said, My Flesh
trembles for Fear of God; I am afraid of his Judgments. And will not you be
afraid? Will not you tremble at the Presence of an holy God, who are in danger
of the Judgment, in danger of Hellfire! O consider, and beware. Because there
is Wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his Stroke. Beware of every
grievous and provoking Evil: beware of undoing Ignorance and Error, of Impiety
and Profaneness, of Immorality and Vice, of carnal Security and Hypocrisy! Upon
each of these Heads distinctly I shall now give some short and solemn Lectures
of Caution: to which, in the Name of God, I demand an awakened Attention.

1. Beware of undoing Ignorance and Error.

These are Snares of the Devil, by which many Souls are captivated, and held
under the Power of Satan, until the Arrows of Death dispatch 'em out of the
World, and send 'em down to the Chains of Darkness in Hell, without a Remedy. O
be upon your Guard, study and watch and pray, that your Souls be not ensnared
and undone by fatal Ignorance or Error.

Beware of undoing Ignorance. As you love your Souls, and would save them from
Destruction, be careful to get necessary Knowledge; I mean, in Things spiritual
and Divine. That the Soul be without Knowledge, it is not good; it is not safe.
Grossly ignorant Souls are capable of doing but little Good, and of getting but
little Good. They are exposed to innumerable Evils, and fall an easy Prey to
the subtle Adversary of Souls. It was GOD's Complaint in old time, My People
are destroyed for lack of Knowledge. Take heed that this be not your Ruin. It
may be you think there is little danger of it, in this Land of Light: perhaps
you are puffed up with a vain Conceit of your Seize in Divine Knowledge.
But I would mind you of that of the Apostle, If any man think that he knows
any thing, he knows nothing yet, as he ought to know it. And may it not be
complained as to many, When for the Time, and the Advantages you have had, ye
might be qualified to be Teachers, ye have Need that one teach you again which
be the first Principles of the Oracles of God! Some have not the Knowledge of
God: I speak this to your Shame. O take heed, lest ye be found worshipping ye
know not what. Take heed, lest as concerning one Gospel Truth or Precept and
another, that Charge lie against you, Of this ye are willingly ignorant. If you
would escape the Pollutions of the World, it must be through the Knowledge of
God and our Savior Jesus Christ. He that is blind, cannot see afar off, to
espy and avoid Dangers. He that walks in Darkness, knows not whither he
goes, nor how to shun the Stumbling Blocks before him. Through Knowledge shall
the Just be delivered: but he that hates Knowledge, is brutish; and no wonder
if the brutish Person perish. How often is shame the Promotion of Fools, and a
miserable Death the Wages of affected Ignorance! O do not despise your Souls,
by refusing Instruction; lest it be your awful Punishment to die without
Instruction, and go into Blackness of Darkness for ever. How long, ye simple
ones, will ye love Simplicity, and Fools hate Knowledge? Be ye not as the Horse
and the Mule, without Understanding: lest you be left in the greatness of your
Folly to go astray, and run blindfold to an untimely Death and eternal
Destruction; as the Ox goes to the Slaughter, or as a Bird hastneth to the
Snare, and knows not that it is for his Life.

I would earnestly caution you also against the dangerous Snare of Errors and
false Opinions in Religion. You may be Masters of a great deal of Knowledge
(Science, falsely so called) and yet have very wrong Notions, in divine matters
of the greatest Importance. There are Errors, that strike at the Vitals of
Christianity, and sap the Foundations of Religion: mortal and damning Errors,
which many, even under the Light of the glorious Gospel, give an easy
Entertainment to; being calculated to gratify the Pride, or indulge the
Sensuality of corrupt Nature. None can be such a Stranger in Israel, as not to
know that in this day of abounding Errors, some of the most Soul-concerning
Truths are by many called in Question, yea exploded with Derision: and the
contrary ungodly Principles eagerly embraced and zealously disseminated; even
such as may well make our Ears tingle to hear them. O beware that ye be not led
away with the Errors of the Wicked, and make Shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience. I am jealous over you, O our Young People, in this giddy Period of
your Life and in these Times of growing Infidelity and Heresy; I fear lest by
any means as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his Subtilty, so your Minds should
be corrupted from the Simplicity that is in Christ, and be removed to another
Gospel; which yet is not another: -- for some are already turned aside after
Satan, and they lie in wait to seduce others, to beguile unstable Souls. O take
Heed, and let no Man deceive you with vain Words. Be not Children, tossed to
and fro, and carried about with every Wind of Doctrine, by the slight of Men,
and cunning Stratagems, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Whatever Flouts
you may hear at Orthodoxy, as a matter of no Significance; yet realise it,
that, it is through Sanctification of the Spirit and Belief of the Truth, we are
chosen to Salvation. Realise it, there are Doctrines of Devils, hellish Errors,
impious, profane and malignant; which eat as does a Canker, have a corrupt
Influence into the Heart and Life, and are of fatal Consequence. Be exhorted
then to take Heed of Seducers; mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses
contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, the Doctrine of Christ, the
Faith once delivered to the Saints; mark such, and avoid them. -- Be not soon
shaken in Mind, by the perverse disputings of Men of corrupt Minds. Beware lest
any Man spoil you through Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Wisdom of this
World, and not after Christ. Beware of indulging your selves in carnal
Reasonings against the Mysteries of Divine Revelation, however
incomprehensible: Beware of indulging a secret Enmity to Gospel Truths, however
humbling and mortifying to Flesh and Blood, and however unreputable in an Age
of prevailing Infidelity and Vice. Take heed that worldly Interest, or Applause
with Men, do not bribe you in favor of any Error, when it is become
fashionable or popular. Take heed, that you don't run into any Error grateful
to a proud or worldly and sensual Mind, for the easing a wounded Conscience,
and stifling of Convictions. In a Word, Beware of grieving the Holy Spirit by
practically denying the Faith, lest He be provoked to give you up to a Spirit
of Error; leave you to fall into damnable Heresies; and bring on your selves
swift Destruction. As it is written, They received not the Love of the Truth,
that they might be saved: and for this cause God shall send them strong
Delusion, that they should believe a Lie; that they all might be damned, who
believed not the Truth, but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness. Take Heed lest
that come upon you; Even as they did not like to retain God in their Knowledge,
but became vain in their Imaginations, God gave them over to a reprobate Mind,
and unto vile Affections, to do those things which are worthy of Death. O our
young People, as you would avoid the ways of Death, as you would shun the paths
of the Destroyer, beware that you be not found walking in the paths of Error
and Ignorance. -- This was the first Caution.

2. Beware of all Profanity, and Irreligion.

Take good Heed unto your selves that ye love the Lord your God; that ye be
Worshippers of God, and confess Christ before Men. However orthodox and knowing
in Religion you may be; yet take Care that you do not satisfy yourselves with a
mere speculative Belief of the Truth; separate from agreeable Impressions on the
Heart and practical Acknowledgments in the Life. Take heed lest that be
fulfilled in you; They are without Excuse, because that when they knew God,
they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful. Take heed that you do not
cast off Fear, and restrain Prayer before God; that you don't neglect secret
Prayer in particular, and so live as without God in the World. Beware of those
growing Sins of the Times, profane Swearing and taking the Name of God in vain,
Sabbath-breaking, despising the Gospel of Christ, neglecting the Public
Worship of God, mocking at the Messengers of the Lord, deriding serious
Devotion and a tender Conscience, and turning Sacramental Mysteries into
Banter. O be ye not Mockers, lest your Bands be made strong; lest you provoke a
holy God to lead you forth with the Workers of Iniquity, and hang you up in
Chains, as Monuments of his just Severity. Take heed lest any of you be profane
Persons, as Esau, and miss the Blessing. Beware lest a terrible and jealous God
come forth in Indignation to plead the Cause of his despised Name, and smite
you, as he did profane Nadab and Abihu, by Fire from Heaven; lest he tear you
in pieces by wild Beasts, as he did the Children that mocked Elisha; or lest he
drown you in perdition, as he did the Scoffers of the old World; making them an
Ensample unto all that after should live ungodly. -- Do you not often hear
Malefactors, under Sentence of Death, confessing and bewailing their
Profaneness, as what led the way to all their fatal Wickedness? And will you
not take Warning from their Example, to deny all Ungodliness, lest it be your
Ruin in the end for both Worlds! Beware lest that come upon you, which is
spoken of in the Prophets, Behold, ye Despisers, and wonder, and perish. Hear
this, O ye that say, When will the Sabbath be over, that we may sell Corn, may
return to Business or Diversion? that say, What a Weariness is it? that snuff
at God's Altar, and call his Table contemptible: Behold, He will cut off the
man that does this. The Lord has sworn by the Excellency of Jacob, Surely I
will not forget any of their Works. Shall not I visit for these Things, says
the Lord, and shall not my Soul be avenged on such as do these things!

3. Beware of all Sensuality and Vice, and every criminal Course.

You must not only deny Ungodliness, but worldly Lusts, and live soberly and
righteously, as well as godlily in this present World, if you wou' descape the
Wrath of God in the next. His Wrath is revealed from Heaven, as against all
Ungodliness, so against all Unrighteousness of Men. What will it profit you, to
have a Form of Godliness, if you deny the Power of it, by living in Vice? Thus
says the Lord, Trust ye not in lying Words, crying, The Temple of the Lord!
Will ye steal, and murder, and commit Adultery; and come and stand before me,
and say, We are delivered to do all these Abominations! Behold, ye trust in
lying Words, that cannot profit! Will ye provoke me to Anger, says the Lord?
Will it not be to the Confusion of your own faces? Let not him that is
deceived, trust in Vanity; for Vanity shall be his Recompense: it shall be
accomplished before his time, and his Branch shall not be green.

O our young People, hear that Divine Warning, Eccl 7. 17. Be not overmuch
wicked, neither be thou foolish: Why should thou die before thy Time! There
are many heinous Vices and Immoralities, and one of which if you indulge
yourselves in, and besure then if in a Variety of them, you may be said to be
wicked overmuch; may justly be ranked among the Fools in Israel; and will be in
danger of dying before your Time. Beware of these Things, as you would not die
in Youth, and come to a miserable End of a scandalous Life. O see that you flee
youthful Lusts. These will but kindle the Fire of Hell in your Bosom, and
prepare you for the everlasting Burnings: and how often do they bring down the
Wrath of God on the Children of Disobedience, taking them away with a stroke,
and sending 'em to the place of Torments, from whence a great Ransom cannot
deliver them!

I would caution you particularly in a few Words.

1 Beware of Disobedience to your Parents; whether natural, civil, or
spiritual. -- It Is the Fifth Commandment in the sacred Decalogue, Honor thy
Father and Mother, that it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long
on the Earth. It implies a Curse upon the Disobedient, that they shall soon be
cut off: And the Word of God expressly threatens, That the Eye which mocketh at
his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall
pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it: -- i. e such shall come to the
Gallows, be hung up in Gibbets, and their Carcases become Food for the Birds of
the Air. And how often do we see this is the miserable End of undutiful
Children, of heady unruly Servants, and rebellious Subjects! O our Children,
take heed that you do not walk in the paths of Disobedience; lest the Curse of
the Fifth Commandment cut you off, as it did Absalom (the Son of David) who
rose up in Rebellion against his Father, and was thrust out of the World as an
Execration.

2. Beware of the Sin of Pride.

This is a lust that very early discovers itself in young ones; has a peculiar
Power over them; and being not checked in its Beginnings, quickly grows rampant
in many, brings them into Mischief, and produces fatal Effects. It is written,
God resists the Proud: and very often in his overruling Providence he brings
strange Punishments upon them. How frequently do we see that Proverb sadly
verified in Young People; Pride goes before Destruction, and a haughty Spirit
before a Fall! Pride has made many Youths impatient of Family-Government, and
by an Affectation of lawless Liberty bro't them into a Snare and Ruin. Pride,
working by Envy or Resentment, has tempted many a young Man, to make or accept
a Challenge to some bloody Duel, in which he has fallen by the Sword; or else
has killed his Brother, and so made way for his own ignominious Execution by
the Halter. So Pride has tempted many a young Woman to destroy the Fruit of her
own Body, that she might avoid the Scandal of a spurious Child; and the
monstrous Fact being detected, has brought her to yet greater Shame, by an
infamous Execution, as a Murderer.

Hear ye then, O our Sons and Daughters, hear ye, and be not proud. Be not
high-minded, but fear. Be ye clothed with Humility: let this be your Ornament
and Guard. Let our Sons take Warning from that wicked Haman, whom Pride bro't
to the Gallows. And let our young Women be admonished by those Words of the
Prophet; Moreover the Lord says, Because the Daughters of Zion are haughty,
and walk with stretched forth Necks, and want a Eyes; therefore the Lord will
smite with a Scab the Crown of the Head of the Daughters of Zion: and it shall
come to pass, that instead of sweet Smell there shall be Stink; and instead of
a Girdle, a Rent; and instead of well set Hair, Baldness; and instead of a
Stomacher, a girding of Sackcloth; and Burning, in stead of Beauty. -- Remember
also the Words of Solomon; Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vain. How many
that proudly valued themselves upon it, have been exposed by it to such
Temptations, as have been the Ruin of their Virtue, robbed 'em of their Honor,
cost 'em their Lives in the End, and destroyed their precious Souls! Let every
proud one look in Jezebel's painted face; and take warning from her miserable
Fall and Ruin. Go, see now this cursed Woman, said Jehu, and bury her. I would
say, Go see her, and in her see the End of a haughty Spirit; see the Folly, the
Sin and Danger of Pride: and take Warning from this Example, which was put on
Record for your Admonition.

3. Beware of the Sin of Lying.

Among the seven Things, which Solomon reckons up, as an Abomination to the
Lord, those two stand in the front, A proud look, and a lying Tongue. But alas!
how does this Sin of Lying abound among us! It Is one of the earliest Sins of
Youth. They go astray as soon as they be born, speaking Lies. And the evil
Habit grows on many, as they advance in Years and Cunning.

But be warned, O our Children, to flee this youthful Lust; and beware lest
lying Lips be the Snare of your Souls, the Ruin of your good Name, and the Loss
of your precious Lives in the End.

Are you tempted to tell Lies for Diversion; making yourselves and others Merry
with false Stories, as with slanderous Reports, or the like? Remember, Truth is
too sacred a Thing to be trifled with; and the Reputation of your Neighbor too
valuable to be treated in so ludicrous and abusive a manner. Will you, as
Madmen, cast about Firebrands, Arrows and Death? and say, Am I not in Sport!
Such Mirth surely it is mad. It is often as the piercings of a Sword to the
abused Party: And what bloody Revenges do these merry Revilings often produce!
He that sportfully rolleth a Stone, often finds it return upon him to his Cost.

Or are you tempted to tell Lies for Flattery; speaking fair with the Mouth,
while perhaps there are seven Abominations in the Heart? Take heed lest a
flattering Tongue work Ruin to your selves, as well as your Neighbor. The
Kisses of an Enemy are deceitful, and provoking: and often have no other Return
but Hatred and Indignation. -- The Lord has threatened to cut off all
flattering Lips. He has said, Whose Hatred is covered by Deceit, his Wickedness
shall be showed before the whole Congregation. -- And how do you know, while
you hide Hatred with lying Lips, and let Anger rest in your Bosom, but that
before you are aware the smothered Fire may break out, beyond Control, in Fury
and Mischief, that shall prepare the way for your Infamy and Ruin!

Or, again, are you tempted to tell Lies for Profit; in matters of Trade
speaking falsely, to get Gain by cheating others? O take heed that you deal not
Treacherously, lest the Sin of your Mouth bring you into undoing Snares.
Remember that Word; The getting of Treasures by a lying Tongue is a Vanity
tossed to and fro of them that seek Death: the Robbery of the Wicked shall
destroy them: They that make no Conscience of telling a Lie, when there is
anything to be got by it, do expose themselves to the Envy and ill Will of Men,
and to the Wrath and Curse of God. You had as good pick a Man's Pocket, as
cheat him by a Lie: And as this leads to that, take heed lest you be punished
for one by being left to the other, and so proceed from Evil to Evil, till you
be undone, as to Name, Estate, and Life, and destroy your Soul for ever.

In a word, Are you tempted to Lying, from a Fear of Punishment; inventing
Falsehoods to hide some Fault you have been guilty of? Remember, this is but to
make two faults of one, and will expose you to double Punishment upon the
Discovery. And then consider, this is an unhappy Method to harden you in your
Sin, and tends to draw you into a Snare by tempting you to other Sins. If once
the Spirit of Lying takes possession of you, and especially if you find it a
successful Means, in repeated Instances, to conceal your Faults, and screen you
from Punishment; it will prepare you and tempt you to other Sins, which there is
any Hope of covering by a Lie. A Habit of Lying has a fatal Tendency to blind
and stupify Conscience: It drives away the holy Spirit: it gratifies the Devil,
the Father of Lies, and emboldens him to tempt you to the worst of Crimes,
until you fill up the measure of your Iniquity. O take Heed lest by this Snare
he ruin your Soul: fear to indulge yourselves in Lying, lest Satan draw you on
from this Sin to others; from Lying to Perjury; from Lying to profane Swearing
and Cursing; to Blasphemy; to such Crimes as will bring the greatest Scandal,
and perhaps a shameful and untimely Death; but besure (without Repentance) an
eternal Punishment.

Let the Fear of God restrain you from this Sin: for he has said, The mouth of
Liars shall be stopped; and that all Liars have their part in the Lake, which
burns with fire and brimstone. Will you not then put away Lying! O see you be
Children that will not lie, as you would not ripen yourselves for a dreadful
Vengeance.

4. Beware of rash Anger, Envy, Malice, and a Spirit of Revenge.

Study to get your Passions mortified, and guard against all exorbitant
Resentments. Be ye angry, and sin not; let not the Sun go down upon your Wrath:
neither give place to the Devil, when he tempts you to malicious and vindictive
Designs. Be not overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil with Good. Dearly beloved,
avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto Wrath; not rendering Evil for
Evil, Railing for Railing, and Blow for Blow. He that is of a hasty Spirit
exalts Folly: and where Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion and every
evil Work. Wrath is cruel, and Anger is outrageous: but who is able to stand
before Envy? O my Soul, come not thou into their Secret (said Jacob concerning
his two Sons Simeon and Levi) unto their Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou
united: for in their Anger they slew a Man, and in their Self-will they dug
down a Wall. Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce; and their Wrath, for it
was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. --
Ungoverned Passion and Contention has led on many a horrid Murder; and this has
bro't the guilty Actor to a shameful and untimely Death by the hand of Justice.
Many a hot young Man has been killed, like Asa^el, in a bold and bloody
Adventure: or been cut off by civil Revenge for his murderous Deeds, and not
lived out half his days. Had Zimri peace, who slew his Master? Or, Cain, who
for Envy slew his Brother? It Is though it he fell by the hand of Lame^h. O let all
Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and evil Speaking, be put away
from you, with all Malice. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye
be not consumed one of another. He that hates his Brother is a Murderer: and
no Murderer has eternal Life; neither does Vengeance often suffer such to live
long in the World.

5. Beware of sullen Discontent.

This makes Men Devils incarnate, and has tempted many (as Ahithophel and
Judas) to the most unnatural and monstrous Act of Self-Murder. Or it has so
distracted their Minds, as to put them upon the barbarous Murder of others
about 'em, even their dearest Friends: and so bro't them to die before their
time by the civil Sword. Otherwise it has put them upon desperate Courses of
Living, in pursuit of which they have met with fatal Accidents, or been thrown
into mortal Distempers; that they have died in Youth and come to an untimely End.
Beware therefore of sullen Discontent: Why should thou destroy thy self?
Neither murmur ye, as some have done, and were destroyed of the Destroyer? But
I pass to say, in the next place,

6. Beware of Covetousness, and a worldly Mind. The Love of Money is the Root
of all Evil: it is an evil Disease, that has slain its Thousands. They that will
be rich, fall into Temptation and a Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful
Lusts, which often end in Destruction. This has made many to be Murderers of
Fathers and Mothers, and Murderers of Brethren, that they might the sooner come
to the Inheritance or possess it alone: but how often have they hereby bro't
themselves under the Wrath of Man, as well as the Curse of God, which has cut
them off with a stroke, and turned 'em at once out of the possession of their
Estates and their Souls. Thus God rendered the Wickedness of Abimeleck, the Son
of Jerubbaal, on his own head; the Wickedness he did unto his Father, in
slaying his Seventy Brethren, that he might reign alone: and upon him came the
Curse of Jotham. -- How many have by Greediness after Gain, been tempted to
dishonest Practices, to vicious Gaming, to Robbery, to Piracy, or the like; and
it has happened to 'em according to the true Proverb, He that gets Riches
and not by Right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end
shall be a Fool. Surely in such ways Men lurk privily for their own Lives. Take
Heed then and beware of Covetousness. Remember Achan's Folly and the untimely
and accursed Death it bro't him to: and take Warning, that worldly Lusts be not
your Ruin. Surely Whosoever is Partner with a Thief, hates his own Soul. Whosoever
robs his Father or his Mother, his Master or his Mistress, and says, It is
no Transgression, the same is the Companion of a Destroyer; is a Son that
causes Shame, and brings Reproach, and is in danger of having his Lamp put
out in obscure Darkness. So are the Ways of every one that is greedy of Gain:
which takes away the Life of the Owners thereof.

7. Beware of Lasciviousness, and all Uncleanness. This Sin of Unchastity is
what the Heat of Youth will particularly dispose you to: but let it not be once
named amongst you, as becomes Saints: for this ye know, that no Whoremonger,
nor unclean Person (no unclean Person of any kind, whether Fornicator, or
Adulterer, or Effeminate, and Abusers of themselves) have any Inheritance in
the Kingdom of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of
these Things comes the Wrath of God on the Children of Disobedience. Be ye not
therefore partakers with them: lest you give your Years to the Cruel, and you
mourn at the last, when your Flesh is consumed, and your Soul destroyed. Let
our Sons remember and take Warning from the awful Death of abominable O^an, the
wretched Exit of adulterous Hophni and Phinehas, and of incestuous Amnon, and
the dreadful Overthrow of the accursed Sodomites. And let our Daughters
remember and take Warning from the tragical Story of the Damsel of
Bethlehem-Judah, who played the Whore, and was abused to Death by certain Sons
of Belial. -- O let our young People beware of indulging an unclean Spirit, and
resist it in its very minutest Beginnings: for Lust, when it has conceived,
brings forth Sin; and Sin, when it is finished, brings forth Death, as you
see this day. Take Heed, lest a sovereign God say concerning you, He that is
filthy, let him be filthy still: until you become hot as an Oven, and your
Wickedness burn as the Fire, and consume you. O take Heed: lest it happen that
you bring forth Children to the Murderer; and it be said of thee, In thy Skirts
is found the Blood of the Souls of the poor Innocents. Or, lest God in his Fury
smite thee, that thou perish in thy Filthiness. Will our young People be
persuaded to take Direction and Warning from an inspired Apostle! 1 Cor. 7. 2,
5. To avoid Fornication, let every Man have his own Wife, and let every Woman
have her own Husband: -- that Satan tempt you not for your Incontinency. So 1 Timothy 5. 14, 15. I will that young Persons marry, -- and give none Occasion to
the Adversary to speak reproachfully: for some are already turned aside after
Satan. And he tells you, Heb. 13. 4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed
undefiled: but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. -- Whoremongers,
that is, Persons in the single Life committing Fornication; and Adulterers, i.
e. Persons in the married Life committing Impurities with strange Flesh; All
such God will judge: Either in this World, by their own Consciences, bringing
them to a bitter Repentance; or by his Providence, bringing them to Shame and
Punishment among Men; Or if Impenitent, most certainly in another World,
casting them away from his Presence, to have their Life among unclean Devils
for ever. -- Hear also that of the Wise Man, Prove. 5. 18. -- Rejoice with the
Wife of thy Youth, and be thou satisfied always with her Love. Why will thou,
my Son, embrace the Bosom of a Stranger? For the Ways of Man are before the
Eyes of the LORD, and he pondereth all his Goings. His own Iniquities shall
take the Wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the Cords of his Sins. He
shall die without Instruction, and in the greatness of his Folly he shall go
astray. -- Surely whosoever has Eyes full of Adultery, lacks understanding; and
every unclean Person sins against his own Body; yea, they that walk after
the Lusts of the Flesh, destroy their own Soul. -- Read Matthew. 5. 27, to 30.
and 1 These. 4. 1, to 7. Turn to those Scriptures, and think sadly upon 'em: and
cease, my Son, to hear the Instruction, that causes to err from the Words of
Knowledge.

8. Beware of Intemperance, Gluttony and Drunkenness.

Intemperance has slain its ten Thousands (perhaps more than ever the Sword
devoured) and has bro't Multitudes even of young Persons to an untimely and
miserable End. Hear thou, my Son, and be wise, be not among Wine-bibbers,
amongst riotous Eaters of Flesh: for the Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to
Poverty, be clothed with Rags, live despised, and die in Ignominy. Who has
Woe? Who has Sorrow? Who has Contentions? Who has Wounds without Cause? And
who dies before his Time? None so often as they that tarry long at the Wine;
who feast themselves without Fear, and drink without Restraint; whose god is
their Belly, and who often make very Beasts of themselves by intemperate Cups.
They drink and forget the Law; and lay themselves open to all manner of
Temptations, and to all manner of Evils. At such a time they are as a Man that
lies down in the midst of the Sea, or as he that lies upon the Top of a Mast;
exposed to the greatest Hazards. And how often do the Intemperate drown
themselves in Perdition! How often do they come to tragical Ends! Remember what
a miserable Exit drunken Nabal, that Son of Belial, came to and how the Lord
slew Belshazzar in the Night of his Pleasure, when his Heart had been merry
with Wine. And forget not Elah, the Son of Baas^a, whom his own Servant
conspired against, and slew him as he was in Tir^ah drinking himself drunk in
the house of his Friend. From these Examples do you take Warning: and put a
Knife to thy Throat, if thou art one given to Appetite, a Lover of Wine. Look
not on the Wine, when it gives it is pleasing Color in the Glass: for at last
it bites like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. Consider this, and watch,
as you would to shun any such venomous Creature. -- Beware (says our Savior)
lest at any time your Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness;
and that Day come upon you unawares. And the Apostle exhorts; Be not drunk with
Wine, wherein is Excess [Intemperance virtually contains all manner of vile
Enormities, and seldom goes alone] but be ye filled with the Spirit: This will
give you true Joy, Courage, and Vigor; which things you vainly expect that
Wine should inspire you with. The Works of the Flesh (says he) are manifest,
which are these, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like: of the which I
forewarn you, as I have also done in time past, that they which do such things,
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Whereas the Fruit of the Spirit is Love,
Joy, Peace, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance: against which there is no
Law, no Prohibition of God or Man, no Curse or Penalty. But Drunkards are a
Reproach among Men, and the Abhorred of the Lord. Has he not said, Woe to the
Drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious Beauty is a fading Flower, and as the
hasty Fruit before the Summer. O our Children, be persuaded to refrain from all
sensual Excesses: lest that Word be fulfilled in you, as in Myriads of others;
They shall be as the Morning-Cloud that passes away, as the Chaff that is
driven with a Whirlwind out of the Floor, and as the Smoke out of the Chimney,
which is soon dissipated and disappears.

I add now in the last place under the third general Head, --

9. Beware of Idleness, and evil Fellowship.

These Sins and Snares are seldom separate, and therefore I put 'em together.
The one leads to the other, and they both have a pernicious Influence to draw
unwary Youths into a thousand other Snares and Sins.

Idleness, behold this was the Iniquity of thy Sister Sodom: Abundance of
Idleness was in her, and in her Sons and Daughters. It is very much a City-Sin,
and a Sin of Youth. The Apostle remarks it of young Persons, They learn to be
idle, wandering about from house to house, and not only idle, but Tatlers also,
and Busy-bodies, speaking Things which they ought not. -- Idleness is a common
Inlet to many other Sins: it is seldom that those who are idle, are only idle:
they are at Leisure to attend the Devil's Motions, and often go of his Errands.

Let our young People, whose glory is their strength, be ashamed to eat the
Bread of Idleness. Some seem to fancy it a piece of Gentility, the Sign of a
polite Education, to be always at Leisure and above Business; and therefore
affect an idle Life: But I would mind them of that Passage in the heathen Poet,
quoted by the Apostle, The Cretians are evil Beasts, slew Bellies: and of that
of Solomon, Go to the Ant, thou Sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise: learn
of her to redeem your Time.

And be afraid, lest by indulging a Humor for Idleness, which so leads to
Wantonness and Debauchery, you fall into Reproach, and the Snare of the Devil.
Be not ignorant of his Devices, lest he get an Advantage against you, to draw
you on to wretched and hellish Business, worse than simple Idleness: and so
bring you, with the Sinners of Sodom, to a miserable End before your time. O
fear, lest with the slothful and unprofitable Servant, you be doomed at last to
be bound hand and foot, and cast into the Dungeon of Hell.

Beware also of bad Company-keeping. Take Care how you contract unnecessary
friendship and intimacy or partnership with vain Persons, lest you get a Snare
to your Soul, and learn their Ways; be enticed into Sin, and hardened in Vice,
by evil Counsels and ill Examples: which have a peculiar force upon the giddy
tho'tless Age of Childhood and Youth. He that walks with the Wise, shall be
wise: but a Companion of Fools shall be destroyed; his religious Principles
shocked, his Virtue ruined, his Honor lost, and his Estate consumed, his Life
perhaps cut short, and which is worse, his Soul undone for ever. For how
naturally does evil and foolish Company lead to and cherish the Vices of
Idleness and Extravagance, of Gaming, and Drinking, and Whoring? And how
inevitably do these things work Death and Misery, to Body and Soul! Will you
not then, my Children, forsake the Foolish, and live. Depart, I pray you, from
the Tents of these wicked Men, lest ye be consumed in all their Sins. O save
your selves from this untoward, this adulterous and voluptuous Generation.

Enter not into the path of the Wicked: avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it,
and pass away. Let our young Women remember what came of unhappy Dinah's
Gadding, when she went out to see the Daughters of the Land, to get
Acquaintance with the Canaanites; and take Warning, that Diversion and Company
do not betray you into the Snares of Lust and Folly. The Apostle would have the
young women taught to be sober, discreet, Chaste, Keepers at home, that the word
of God be not blasphemed. -- And let our young Men be admonished and take
Warning from the tremendous Example of Ahaziah (the Son of Jehoshaphat) who was
ruined by ungodly Company. It Is said of him, He did Evil in the sight of the
Lord, like the house of Ahab; for they were his Counselors, after the death of
his Father, unto his Destruction.

Dear Children, if you would not have your Souls gathered with Sinners in
another World, abhor and fly their Company in this. Come out from among them,
says the Lord, and be ye separate, i. e. in respect of Affection, Imitation,
and familiar Society: and I will receive you, and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

We proceed now to the other general Head of Caution.

4. Beware of carnal Security, and Hypocrisy; of indulging any Sins under the
notion of their being Little, and of living in secret Sins under a Cloak of
visible Religion and external Sobriety.

Beware of sottish Security, and of every thing that tends to nourish spiritual
Sloth, a Fearlesness of Death and Hell, and a Presumptuous Hope of Heaven; lest
if God should take you away with his Stroke, you be found in a Christless
graceless Condition, and have your future Life among the Unclean. O beware of
flattering yourselves in your own Eyes, and deceiving your Souls by resting in
a dead Faith, a legal Repentance, and unregenerate Morality; in a partial
Reformation of Manners; in a formal Round of religious Duties; in a Spirit of
Bigottry for certain Superstitions, or an empty noisy Zeal for Divine
Institutions: as if such things entitled you to the favor of God, and would
engage the Protection and Smiles of Heaven upon you. -- Beware of imbibing
loose Principles in Religion, or taking up light Thoughts of Sin: beware of
indulging a vain Dependence on pious Parentage and Covenant-Privileges; or a
proud Conceit of your own Sufficiency, and Self-Righteousness; or undervaluing
Tho'ts of spiritual Blessings, and an immoderate Opinion of this present World;
or the fond Dream of a long Life on Earth: -- Which things are often the fatal
Impediments to Sinners Conversion, the Means of their hardening now, and
perishing hereafter. God has denounced, WOE to them that are at Ease in Zion.
Let us then not sleep, as do others, lest God awaken us with the Terrors of his
Indignation; lest sudden Destruction arise, and break in upon us, as upon
Laish, a People that were secure, and dwelt carelessly: or as on the Sinners of
the Old World, who knew not till the Flood came and destroyed them.

Beware of indulging yourselves in seemingly little Follies. No Sin indeed is
absolutely little: but it is one Wile of the Devil to tempt unto some Sins by a
pretense of their being small ones; and hereby he deceives many Souls into
Ruin. But consider, the least Sin indulged tends to harden the Heart, is
malignant in its Nature, and is provoking to God; who often in righteous
Displeasure gives Men up, when they will not be reformed, to commit greater
Sins, heinous Crimes, with the same Security. O then resist every Lust in its
smallest Beginnings, and never allow yourselves, as the manner of some is, to
live in any Sin under a vain Imagination of its being a little venial
Infirmity, that may safely be indulged.

And beware you be not tempted to commit grosser Sins by the delusive hope of
Secrecy: which is another hellish Snare, by which Satan captivates Multitudes,
especially of young People. It is a shame (as the Apostle observes) even to
speak of those things that are done of them in Secret; even by many, who in the
open Light and View of the World appear virtuous and modest. But beware, young
ones, lest that Word be fulfilled in you; The Iniquity of Ephraim is bound up;
his Sin is hid: The Sorrows of a traveling Woman shall come upon him; he is an
unwise Son. Take heed, for Instance, that you do not dishonor your own Bodies
by unnatural and impure Abuses; lest from solitary Filthiness you be left to
pass on unto social; and from secret Fornications to secret Murders; and at
length come to an untimely and shameful Death. -- Let it be considered; Secret
Sins bewray the dreadful Atheism of your Minds; and when covered over with a
specious Show of Piety, argue the wretched Hypocrisy of your Profession. These
secret Sins have a fatal Tendency in their nature, by blinding and searing the
Conscience: and as they are a practical denying of the God that is above, whose
Eyes pierce into the darkest Corner, and who reveals secrets, such Sins are a
high Provocation to him, to call away his striving Spirit, and take off the
Restraints of common Grace; the inevitable fruit of which is the Sinner's
growing bold in Sin, and his Corruptions breaking forth into heinous Crimes In
a holy Indignation at that Atheism and that Hypocrisy, the secret Sinner is
guilty of, (...) often leaves him to turn a scandalous Apostate; gives him up
to work all Uncleanness with Greediness; and sometimes leaves him to fall into
capital Crimes, Iniquities to be punished by the Judge. -- Beware then of
secret Sins; of Pilfering and secret Frauds and Falsehoods, of secret
Impurities, of secret Profanities: lest a provoked God lay open your Sin before
the World to your shameful Confusion, and avenge the Quarrel of his holy
Covenant upon you, by terrible Things in Righteousness, in the ordinary Course
of his Providence; or else smite you for your horrible Hypocrisy by his
immediate Hand, as he did Ananias and Sapphira. -- It was our Savior's
repeated Caution to his Disciples, Beware of Hypocrisy. Beware ye of the Leaven
of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy: for there is nothing covered, that shall
not be revealed; neither hid, that shall not be known Whatsoever ye have spoken
or done in Darkness, shall appear in the Light; and that which ye have said or
done in the Closet, shall be proclaimed upon the Housetop. -- It was a
terrible Word to David, from the Mouth of the Lord, after he had sinned in the
matter of Uriah; Behold, I will raise up Evil against thee: thou did it
secretly; but I will do this Thing before all Israel, and before the Sun. And
if even good Men may have their secret Sins and Hypocrisies thus exposed and
punished; What will a Heart-searching and Sin-hating God do to false
Professors, under the reigning power of Hypocrisy! What will he do to a Saul,
that boasts of his Obedience, and yet spares an Agag, and saves the Fatlings
under a show of Sacrificing to the Lord! -- What, to an Absalom, that under the
pretext of Vows and Devotions, is only pursuing dark Designs of Ambition and
Rebellion! To a Jehu, that boasts a Zeal for the Lord, only to color over
intrigues of Malice and Envy! To a Judas, that betrays his Lord with a Kiss,
and is secretly a Thief under a Cloak of Compassion to the Poor! -- Surely, as
is said in the Verse preceding my Text, The Hypocrites in Heart heap up Wrath:
hence no Wonder it follows, They die in Youth, and their future Life is among
the Unclean.

Take Heed then lest there be in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief, covered
with specious Shows of Piety and Virtue. Fear lest it be said to you at last,
as to the Young Man in the Gospel, One thing thou lackest. O mind Religion in
Earnest. See that you have Truth in the inward Parts; and so remember now your
Creator in the days of your Youth, as that you may escape those evil Days of
Wrath, which carnal Hypocrites must and shall see, either in this or in a worse
World.

USE VI. Let it be a Word of Exhortation to such of our Young People, as have
already committed horrible Evils, and been walking after their own Lusts in the
Paths of the Destroyer: O repent and turn ye now, lest a Sin-revenging God take
you away with his Stroke, and thrust you down to Hell among the Unclean,
without a Remedy.

It may be some of you have dreadfully polluted your Youth with the grossest
Vices, even with Capital Crimes; which, had the Eye of Man seen them, and
Justice been done you, would have bro't you to be hung up before the Lord. O
admire the Divine Forbearance toward you: and hasten your Repentance and
Reformation, lest your Iniquity find you out, and bring you to Die before your
time. -- You have perhaps already felt something of God's Wrath, in
Afflictions, or in Terrors of Conscience: O sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto you: Even that, God shall cast upon him, and not spare: Men shall
clap their hands at him, and hiss him out of his place. You are ready, it may
be, to say as Agag, when Saul had reprieved him, Surely the Bitterness of Death
is past: But take heed, lest in a little time, like that unhappy Man, you be
hewed in pieces before the Lord. I pray you, read and ponder upon those awful
Scriptures, Eccl. 11. 9. Prove. 29. 1. and Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. with Psalm. 50. 16,
to 22.

However, through the Grace of God, there is yet Room for Hope of a Pardon upon
your Repentance: and those are the compassionate Calls from Heaven to you this
day, Turn and live; turn ye, turn ye; why will ye die! -- Kiss the Son, lest he
be angry, and ye perish from the Way. -- Acquaint now thy self with him;
thereby Good shall come unto thee. -- Turn you at my Reproof; Behold, I will
pour out my Spirit upon you. -- Ask and it shall be given you.

O Cry then to a merciful God, that he would give you his holy Spirit, to renew
you, unto saving Repentance and Faith. Plead with him your absolute Necessity,
the Merits of Christ, and the Glory of Divine Grace. And be frequent in your
Essays of active Conversion, with an entire dependence on a supernatural Power
to effect it. O try, try to stretch out the withered Arm. Strive to enter in at
the strait Gate. And never give over your Prayers and Efforts, until you
happily experience a sensible Energy of the holy Spirit upon your Heart,
working in you Repentance toward God and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. --
And so, being justified by Faith in his Righteousness, you shall have Peace
with God in this World, and Life eternal in the next.

I would now (as doubtless it is expected from the I should) apply the
Exhortation more particularly to the unhappy Condemned Woman, at this time in
the Presence of God with us, and in a few days to be cut off from among the
Living.

Hearken, O Woman, to the Word of the Lord, and let it sink down into your
Ears. Hear, and your Soul shall live. O seek the Lord, while he may be found:
call upon him, while he is near. You have had your Life among the Unclean (I
speak it not with any Delight to upbraid you; for we pity and mourn for you:
but still in Faithfulness we admonish you) and for your being wicked overmuch
you are to die in Youth, to die before your time. O tremble and be afraid, lest
also in the coming World your Life be among the Unclean, even among filthy
Devils in the burning Lake.

Surely it becomes you to look back on your past Life with the deepest Shame
and Regret. Has not that word been fulfilled in you, 1 Timothy 5 6. She that lives
in Pleasure* is dead while she lives! O reflect with Grief and Blushing on all
your Gratifications of fleshly Lusts: and consider your Sins in all their
aggravating Circumstances; as committed against the Light of Nature and the
known Commands of God in holy Scripture; against the Advantages of a pious
Education; against the Bonds of holy Baptism and a personal Profession of
Religion; against the Warnings of Providence, and Checks of the Holy Spirit;
against your own repeated Vows and Resolutions, the Reproofs of Friends, and
the Calls and Admonitions of the Word of Christ; against the Riches of Divine
Goodness and Patience, the Bounty of the Creator, and the Mercies of the
Redeemer. -- O look upon your Sins in all these and other their Aggravations:
Realise the infinite Evil of all Sin, as it dishonours and displeases God, as
well as wrongs the Soul of Man; and see the dreadful Malignity of your own Sins
in particular, which have been very heinous in their Nature, and the Guilt of
them amazingly heightened by the Circumstances attending them. Of your self
guilty and polluted, exceedingly so; and while you meditate your Sinfulness,
let not your Thoughts stop at external Life and Practice, but carry them up to
the black Original, and see the secret Springs of all in an apostate guilty
State of Soul, as you are a Child of fallen Adam. ( Psalm 51. 5.) O see how
guilty you are by Nature and Practice; and loath your self in your own Sight,
repenting in Dust and Ashes.

When you consider the deplorable Condition Sin has reduced you to, surely you
cannot but blush and tremble. I may say to you, as in Jer. 2. 17, and 19 Have
thou not procured this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy
God? Know therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou
have forsaken the Lord. I may appeal to you, as in Romans 6. 21. What Fruit had
you in those things, whereof you are now ashamed? For the End of those things
is Death -- Thou have consulted Shame to thy House, and sinned against thine
own Soul. Thou have sinned away thy precious Life; and have found by doleful
Experience (as to Ruin for this World) the Truth of those awful Threatenings, A
Companion of Fools shall be destroyed; And Whosoever pursues Evil, pursues it to
his own Death. O adore the Patience of a merciful God, who has long been
waiting that he might be gracious. You may well wonder, when you call to mind
your crying Sins, and abuses of the Divine Patience, that a provoked God did
not by his own immediate Hand cut you off with a Stroke, in the acting of your
Abominations. Give him the glory of his sparing Goodness; and affect your Heart
with Reflections upon it, that you may thereby be led to Repentance.
Acknowledge the Justice of God (as also of Man) in bringing you into your
present Circumstances of Shame and Misery: and accept the Punishment of your
Iniquity, without murmuring against Man, or repining against God, whose
overruling Hand has been signally evident in bringing out your Guilt and a
Sentence of Death against you -- Yet you have Reason to stand amazed at the Mercy
of God in laying an Arrest upon you, and stopping you in your Carreer to Hell;
though it was by so dreadful Means. O beg that it may prove indeed in Mercy to
you, and turn to your eternal Salvation. O that that Word may be fulfilled in
you: that wonderful Word, in our Context, Job 36. 8, etc If they be bound in
Fetters, and holden in Cords of Affliction; then GOD shows them their work,
and their transgressions that they have exceeded. He opens also their ear to
discipline, and commands that they return from iniquity. God has been
indulging you (though under terrible outward Circumstances) with a precious
Season of Grace; such as he has denied to Thousands of others, no worse Sinners
than you: O take heed that you improve aright your short remaining Opportunity;
lest that be your Condemnation from the Mouth of your just and holy Judge, when
you (as in a little time you must) appear before his dread Tribunal, Rev. 2.
21, 22. I gave her a Space to repent of her Fornication, and she repented not:
Behold, I will cast her into a Bed Ah! not a Bed of Lust and Pleasure, but of
Travail and Pain, a Bed of Fire and Torment, without Deliverance for ever.

O with what Concern of Soul, with what Anxiety and Fear, does it become you to
be looking forward to that eternal World you are hastening into! With what
Diligence, with what awakened Application of your whole Thought and Heart,
should you be getting ready to die: since the Time is short, and the Work great
and difficult, and unless now done, must ever remain undone, and your Soul lost
without a Remedy. O fear and tremble, lest when the fatal Stroke is given, you
perish under the Wrath of an unreconciled God, and with your Lusts unmortify'd
go down to Hell, to have your Life for ever among unclean Spirits, and amidst
Flames never to be quenched. Unhappy Creature, take heed, lest from hopes of
Heaven you fall into the Flames of Hell,* without Recovery! I say not this,
unnecessarily to terrify you, but out of a tender Compassion to your Soul; I
would persuade you by the Terrors of the Lord, to beware you do not put a fatal
Cheat upon your self by a presumptuous and delusive Confidence of the good
Estate of your Soul. It is a great Truth, Though genuine sincere Repentance be
never too late, yet late Repentance is seldom sincere and genuine; is seldom
free, and resulting from Evangelical Principles, but commonly forced and legal,
no better than the Repentance of Judas. And the sudden Hopes of late Penitents
are therefore very warily to be encouraged. We are sure from the Word of God,
there are many that rest their Souls on a false Bottom, which in the Storms of
Death and Judgment* fail and sink from under them. Some self-deceiving
Hypocrites, it may be, hold their Confidence to the End, and have no Bands in
their Death; they die secure of Heaven in their own Conceit: but alas! to their
dreadful Disappointment receive that Doom, Depart from me, I know you not. --
Will you therefore, O Daughter of Death, be jealous over yourself, and fear
lest you should be deceived by rash Hopes into eternal Despair. You have
formerly had your Convictions, which wro't some good Effects upon you: but in
time they utterly wore off, and you returned to Folly. And how know you that
now you have any better Work wro't on you, than was then! O cry to God, that he
would search you; that he would open your State in a true Light before you, and
save you from miscarrying in Conversion by undoing Mistakes. And be you very
much in solemn Self-Examination day and night. Commune with your own Heart, and
make diligent search into the State of your Soul: taking Heed, that you do not
try your self by false Rules, nor rashly conclude by hopeful Signs. You may (in
a sense) be in Charity with all Men, and seem to love God; may have at times
your Affections in Duty, your Convictions of Sin, your good Resolutions, your
earnest Prayers, and your Hopes of Heaven too: but know it, for a sad Truth,
Every Grace has it is Counterseit, and Satan often subtly imposes upon the
unwary Sinner, drawing him into rash Conclusions of his good Estate by
deceiving Appearances of Grace in Exercise. Read and tremble at that Scripture,
Luke 11. 24, 25, 26. The Parable of the unclean Spirit going out, etc. Know it,
the unclean Spirit may make a show of going out, under a common Work of
Conviction: but unless he be cast out, by a special and saving Work of
Conversion, which is the work of Christ, your last State will be worse than the
first, the day of your Death worse than the day of your Birth, or any the worst
day you ever saw in this World. -- O realise it, Nothing, Nothing short of a
through Work of Conversion, nothing short of the Washing of Regeneration, will
stand you in any stead, when you come to die, and appear before the Judgment
Seat of Christ. Think solemnly of those Words of Christ, your Judge (I commend
them particularly to your Consideration) and look upon 'em as spoken to you,
Joh. 13 8 If I wash thee not, thou have no Part with me. O Realise the
Necessity of your being washed (that is, sanctified and justified) by Christ:
and go to Christ by unceasing Prayer, begging that He would bestow this
spiritual Washing upon you; that He would wash you from your Sins with his own
Blood; that he would by his holy Spirit cleanse you from all your Filthiness,
and purge your Conscience from dead Works, to serve the living God, the few
days you have to tarry in this World, and to make you meet for the Inheritance
of the Saints in Light. Believe thou that he is able to do this great thing
for thee? O hear him calling to you, as in Hos. 13. 9. Thou have destroyed thy
self, but in me is thy Help. Hear him inviting you, as in Isa. 45 22. Look unto
Me, and be saved. O then be thou looking unto JESUS, a once crucified, and now
glorified Jesus. Look to him, whom you have pierced by your Sins, and mourn as a
Woman for the Loss of her first born. Look unto him, as the Lord your
Righteousness and your Strength: and fly for Refuge to him: Blessed are all
they, that with Faith unfeigned put their Trust in Him See that you trust not
in your Tears and Sorrows, Confessions and Resolutions; they cannot atone for
Sin, nor cleanse the Soul It Is only the Blood of Christ, and the Spirit of
Christ, that can do this. And lo, his Grace is sufficient for the chief of
Sinners. Read (both for your Awakening and Encouragement) 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11
-- O put in for a Share in the Benefit of that precious Blood, which cleanses
from all Sin, and has washed some of the foulest Sinners whiter than the Snow.
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and according to his Mercy he will save you.
Yet this you cannot do as of yourself: You must be begotten to it by the Spirit
of Christ. O beg, and cease not begging at the Throne of Grace, for an
Experience of the New Birth. -- And know it, if you are born of the Spirit, you
shall certainly see the Kingdom of Heaven: if Christ wash you here, you shall
partake with him in Glory for ever. -- I shall only add, though you may be well
ashamed to meet Death in those inglorious Circumstances, in which you are to
die; yet remember, that just one the Lord Jesus Christ himself, was hanged on a
Tree, died an accursed Death, not indeed for his own Sins, but for the Sins of
his People: and so has sanctified all manner of Deaths, even the most
ignominious, to them which believe on his Name. O be looking to Jesus, by an
Eye of Faith: and so doing, you may lift up your Head, at the Approach of Death
in its most hideous Shape and infamous Circumstances, with a humble hope of
finding Mercy with him, through whose Mercy Rahab the Harlot perished not, and
through whose Mercy Mary Magdalen had her many Sins forgiven her. -- O give Glory
to the Lord, before you die, by making Confession to God, and giving Warnings
to Men. Be unto the last committing your Soul, your never dying Soul, into the
hands of a merciful Savior, who knows how to have Compassion upon the Ignorant
and the Unworthy.

We have been praying for you, and shall not cease doing it, so long as you are
a Subject of Prayer; That Christ would receive your Spirit into his Custody and
Presence, into his Kingdom of Grace here and of Glory hereafter.

With Tears and Prayers and Faith unfeigned (...) your own Soul to Christ
continually: Live and die calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my
Spirit. -- And we pray God have Mercy on your Soul!

May the distressed Relatives have all needed Supports under this dark
Dispensation, and be enabled to make a wise and holy Improvement of it!

And may the Spirit of God reach the Hearts of this Woman's Companions in
Wickedness, and sanctify his awful Dealings with her for their Awakening and
Conversion!

I now turn me to the Congregation in a short Address on this affecting
Occasion.

O let us see to it that we sanctify the Lord in such amazing Dispensations.
The sorrowful Spectacle before us should make us all reflect most seriously on
our own vile Nature; which the Falls of others are but a Comment upon: and
should excite us to humble ourselves under a sense of the Corruption of our
Hearts, which are naturally as bad as the worst. Matthew. 15. 19 -- Let us admire
the restraining Grace of God, whereby we have deen distinguished. Let us take
Warning, and though now we think we stand, let us take heed lest we fall. God in
his Judgments upon others sounds in our Ears an awful Alarm, in such Language
as that, Luk 13. 4, 5. Think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt
in Jerusalem? I tell you nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish. Sinners cut off by divine Judgments are designed as Examples ( Jude 5,
6, 7.) not for Imitation, but Caution and Admonition. 1 Cor. 10. 6, 11, 12. --
The (...) holy Severity against Jezebel, and her adulterous Lovers, is for
Instruction to all the Churches, Rev. 2. 22, 23. So Christ warns Us, Luke 17.
32. Remember Lot's Wife. -- God has appointed the Execution of Justice on
capital Offenders, with this View, that they may be Ensamples and Warnings unto
others, to deter them from the like Sins. ( Deuteronomy. 17. 12, 13.) Smite a Scorner,
says Solomon, and the Simple will beware. The Righteous shall see the Fall of
the Wicked, and adore God's Goodness to themselves, his rectoral Holiness and
Faithfulness to his Threatenings, learn Humility, and receive Instruction: and
Sinners should hear fear and do no more so wickedly.

In the present Case, the Warning of Providence is particularly pointed to the
DAUGHTERS of Zion. The loud Call of God to you is in that Language, Isa. 32. 9,
11. Rise up, ye women that are at ease, hear my voice, ye careless daughters,
give ear unto my speech. Tremble, ye women that are at ease, be troubled ye
careless ones: strip ye and make ye bare, and gird sackcloth on your loins. O
let it not be complained of any of you, as in Isa. 47. 7. Thou said, I shall
be a lady for ever: so that thou did not lay these things to thy heart,
neither did remember the latter end thereof. Your Obstinacy in evil Courses,
after such awful Warnings, will aggravate the Sorrow of your anxious Friends,
and be an humbling Consideration to us your Ministers. 2 Cor. 12. 21. I fear
lest when I come again, my God will humble me among you, and that I shall
bewail many that have sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanness,
and fornication, and lasciviousness which they have committed. But what should
most of all affect you is, that you will greatly provoke God, by disappointing
his just Expecta^^^^^. The Meaning of Heaven in this Dispensation (...) to call
you to Repentance and Reformation; (...) to warn all by this Example, that they
flee youthful Lusts. So the Providence is expounded, Ezekiel. 23. 48. Thus will I
cause lewdness to cease out of the land, that all Women may be taught not to do
after your lewdness. -- O that this may be the blessed Effect! And that we may
see the Fulfilling of that, Isa. 4. 4, 5. When the Lord shall have washed away
the filth of the daughters of Zion, -- He will create upon every dwelling place
a Cloud by day, and a Fire by night: for upon all the Glory there shall be a
Defense.

The END of the SERMON.
Some Account of the DISCOURSE of a MINISTER with the Prisoner Walking to her
Execution.
MINISTER. POOR Prisoner, I am come, at your desire, to accompany you to your
death. I should have been glad could I have persuaded you to have excused me
from so sad an office, for which many circumstances besides my natural temper,
render me very unqualified. However, to satisfy you at your repeated
importunities, and (...) minister to your Salvation, I have overcome (...) my
reluctances, and now readily attend you.


PRISONER. O Sir, I am glad to see you; I thank you.


MINISTER. You are now walking to a dismal Execution! I need not ask how you
feel as you travel onward every step to Death and Eternity. My own heart feels
for you, and trembles, and melts at your sorrows. -- But O! what can I say to
instruct and comfort you in these dreadful moments! Fain would I contribute to
enlighten you in all things necessary for a dying person to know: and fain
would I administer some relief to your bitter affliction, and bring you, upon
good grounds, to meet the king of terrors with profound submission, and in
settled peace, attended, as it is, with all these horrors. This great thing, by
the blessing of GOD, may be attained.


PRISONER. O Sir; I desire to submit to the will of GOD: to have my will
swallowed up in his.


MINISTER. Are you sensible, that in a state of nature, you are ruined, for
ever ruined: lost for both worlds, in guilt and misery. Guilty in your father
Adam, do you feel your self a slave to sin and lust, and having no power of
your own to mortify your raging corruptions, to conquer your vicious habits;
and no merit of your own, to procure your pardon from GOD?


PRISONER. I feel I am in a miserable condition: and I can do nothing, of my
self, to please GOD.


MINISTER. Do you see how justly GOD may refuse (...) cry to Him now for mercy,
who have so (...) refused His call to you to repent, and (...) to Him?


PRISONER. Yes Sir, GOD might justly refuse to hear me.


MINISTER. Then you see, and feel, and own it, that you have nothing in your
self to recommend you to GOD; and all the hope you can have is, his free,
sovereign, unbounded grace?


PRISONER. Yes Sir, all my hope is in the infinite mercy of GOD through JESUS
CHRIST.


MINISTER. I am glad to hear you beforehand with me. You are then convinced
that the holy GOD is as just as he is gracious; and that therefore his justice
must be satisfied for the injuries your Sins have offered him, before you can
reasonably expect he should show mercy to you. Do you therefore see your need
of a SAVIOR: an Almighty Mediator, to stand between you, and an offended GOD?
Do you receive the LORD JESUS CHRIST as this all-compleat Mediator?


PRISONER. Yes Sir, O I do it with all my heart and soul.


MINISTER. Frighted and in agony as you are, why, poor Criminal, should not you
hope in this free grace of GOD in CHRIST, as well as any Sinner in the World?


PRISONER. Oh! I Am afraid, I Am afraid.


MINISTER. (...) not, for I bring you good tidings of great (...) GOD is
infinitely ready to pardon you, (...) Repentance, and Faith in CHRIST.


PRISONER. Alas, I Have been a dreadful Sinner.


MINISTER. And yet, what should hinder that you should not hope for a pardon? I
pray you hearken to me, as if you heard the great GOD himself speaking to you.
I shall say nothing but what He says in express words. You say you are a
Sinner: Hear what the blessed Savior says, Mat. IX. 13. I came not to call the
righteous, but SINNERS to repentance. You have been a dreadful Sinner, you say:
Hear what the blessed GOD says, 1 Timothy I. 15. This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptance, that JESUS CHRIST came into the world to save
sinners, even the CHIEF of them. You own you have committed Abundance of Sin:
Hear the word of the Lord, Isai. LV. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his tho'ts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have
mercy on him, and to our God, for he will ABUNDANTLY pardon. Your sins have
been repeated with the greatest malignity and aggravation: Hear the blessed GOD
speaking, Isai. I. 18. Come now, let us reason together, says the Lord, Though
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though they be read like
CRIMSON, they shall be as wool; if ye be willing and obedient. You have
continued in sin to this day; yet TO DAY, after so long a time, to Day if you
will hear his voice, harden not your heart: For behold NOW is the accepted
time, behold NOW is the day of salvation. Do you understand what I say to you?
Do you take the force of it?


PRISONER. Yes, Sir.


MINISTER. Recollect then, what GOD has, by my (...) said to you, and think, if
you can, of any reason why you should not expect mercy at his hands, through your
great SAVIOR.


PRISONER. Ah! If I could but repent and believe in CHRIST.


MINISTER. Aye, there lies all the danger in the obstinacy of your wicked
heart. If you see this, one good step is advanced toward your Salvation. Carry
this heart to your SAVIOR, wicked as it is Pray for the HOLY SPIRIT of GOD to
soften it and change it for you. Of this too, you may have abundant hope. They
are the words of a gracious GOD still: (the Lord help you to apply them) Ezekiel.
XXXVI. 26, 37. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you an heart of flesh. Thus says the Lord GOD, I will yet be enquired of
by the house of Israel, to do it for them.


PRISONER. O if GOD would do this for me I could be happy. The Death I am to
suffer in this World is nothing: All I fear is the second Death.


MINISTER. Believe on the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and thou shall be saved. -- What
is it to believe on JESUS CHRIST? Do you well understand what it is?


PRISONER. Faith in JESUS CHRIST is a saving Grace, (...) we receive, and (...)
upon Him alone for (...) as he is offered to us in the Gospel:


MINISTER. (...) have well answered. And can you find your Soul now thus acting
and relying on your only SAVIOR? -- Do you thus heartily consent, that He
should exercise all his Offices for you, as you have often been instructed in
your Prison? Say, O JESUS, my Prophet, teach me what thou would have me to
do. Say, O JESUS, my King, enable me to do all my Duty. Say, O JESUS, my
High Priest, let thy Sacrifice and merits atone for me: and O be my
Intercessor with the Father. -- These are the actings of a lively Faith: Thus
are you to receive and rest upon CHRIST for Salvation. Can you do this? -- Can
you now resolve, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him?


PRISONER. I think, as far as I know my own heart, I do. I think I can submit
to the will of GOD. I desire, I desire to do so. I feel the love of GOD flame
in my Soul! -- But O what if I should be deceived!


MINISTER. All I can say here is, watch and pray, and keep fast hold on your
blessed SAVIOR: Go up out of the wilderness leaning on your Beloved.


PRISONER. Lord JESUS have pity on me.


MINISTER. But O now prepare -- Arm your self with all your courage and
submission. Lift up your eyes, and see the place -- [ The Gallows here opened
to view.]
But O lift up your eyes to GOD for his SPIRIT to help you in this most
necessitous season.


PRISONER. Lord JESUS, am I come to this! -- Lord, whither am I going!


MINISTER. O remember the love of that SAVIOR, who was executed as a
Malefactor; who was led away with swords and staves, among the crowd, and
suffered without the gates, to sweeten this affliction to you, and purchase
eternal glories for you.


PRISONER. Lord JESUS, pity me!


MINISTER. Suppose the blessed JESUS was now upon Earth, walking, as he used to
do, among the crowds, and you should go trembling to him, and cast your self at
his feet, for pardon, and a new heart, do you think he would refuse you, and
cast you out?


PRISONER. I cannot think he would.


MINISTER. And Oh, think then, is he less powerful, or less merciful now he is
in Heaven! -- Remember the Malefactor executed with him; how he prayed, and how
he was heard.


PRISONER. Lord JESUS, remember me!


After this the Prisoner grew disordered and faint, and not capable of
attending further to continued discourse. -- Only short words of encouragement
were now and then spoken to compose and animate her, till she arrived at the
place of Execution. -- After a loud Prayer for her in the midst of a most
numerous Concourse of Spectators, the Minister took his leave and withdrew.

The END.
The Declaration, DYING Warnings and Advice OF Rebekah Chamblit, A Young Woman
aged near Twenty-seven Years, Executed at Boston, September 27th. 1733.
BEING under the awful Apprehensions of my Execution now in a few Hours; and
being desirous to do all the Good I can, before I enter the Eternal World, I
now in the fear of GOD, give this Declaration and Warning to the Living.

I Was very tenderly brought up, and well Instructed in my Father's House, till
I was Twelve Years of Age; but alas, my Childhood wore off in vanity. However,
as I grew in Years, my Youth was under very sensible Impressions from the
SPIRIT of GOD; and I was awakened to seek and obtain Baptism, when I was about
Sixteen Years of Age; and lived for some time with a strictness somewhat
answerable to the Obligations I was thereby brought under. But within two or
three Years after this, I was led away into the Sin of Uncleanness, from which
time I think I may date my Ruin for this World. After this, I became again more
watchful, and for several Years kept my self from the like Pollutions, until
those for which I am now to suffer.

And as it may be necessary, so doubtless it will be expected of me, that I
give the World a particular account of that great Sin, with the aggravations of
it, which has brought me to this Shameful Death: And accordingly in the fear of
GOD, at whose awful Tribunal I am immediately to appear, I solemnly declare as
follows;

That on Saturday the Fifth Day of May last, being then something more than
Eight Months gone with Child, as I was about my Household Business reaching some
Sand from out of a large Cask, I received considerable hurt, which put me into
great Pain, and so I continued till the Tuesday following; in all which time I
am not sensible I felt any Life or Motion in the Child within me; when, on the
said Tuesday the Eighth Day of May, I was Delivered when alone of a Male
Infant; in whom I did not perceive Life; but still uncertain of Life in it, I
threw it into the Vault about two or three Minutes after it was born; uncertain
I say, whether it was a living or dead Child; though, I confess its probable
there was Life in it, and some Circumstances seem to confirm it. I therefore
own the Justice of GOD and Man in my Condemnation, and take Shame to my self,
as I have none but my self to Blame; and am sorry for any rash Expressions I
have at any time uttered since my Condemnation; and I am verily persuaded there
is no Place in the World, where there is a more strict regard to Justice than
in this Province.

And now as a Soul going into Eternity, I most earnestly and solemnly Warn all
Persons, particularly YOUNG PEOPLE, and more especially those of my own Sex,
against the Sins which their Age peculiarly exposes them to; and as the Sin of
Uncleanness has brought me into these distressing Circumstances, I would with
the greatest Importunity Caution and Warn against it, being persuaded of the
abounding of that Sin in this Town and Land. I thought my self as secure, a
little more than a Year ago, as many of you now do; but by woeful Experience I
have found, that Lust when it has conceived brings forth Sin, and Sin when it
is finished brings forth Death; it exposes the Soul not only to Temporal, but
to Eternal Death. And therefore as a Dying Person, let me call upon you to
forsake the foolish and live: Do not accompany with those you know to be such,
and if Sinners entice you do not consent. I am sensible there are many Houses
in this Town, that may be called Houses of Uncleanness, and Places of dreadful
Temptations to this and all other Sins. O shun them, for they lead down to the
Chambers of Death and Eternal Misery.

My mispending of precious Sabbaths, lies as a heavy burden upon me; that when
I might have gone to the House of GOD, I have been ^^different, and suffered a
small matter to keep me from it. What would I wow give, had I better improved
the Lord's Day. I tell you, verily, your lost Sabbaths will sit heavy upon you,
when you come into the near prospect of Death and Eternity.

The Sin of Lying I have to bewail, and would earnestly caution against; not
that I have took so great a pleasure in Lying; but I have often done so to
conceal my Sin: Certainly you had better suffer Shame and Disgrace, yea the
greatest Punishment, than to hide and conceal your Sin, by Lying. How much
better had it been for me, to have confessed my Sin, than by hiding of it to
provoke a holy GOD, thus to suffer it to find me out! But I hope I heartily
desire to bless GOD, that even in this way, He is thus entering into Judgment
with me; for I have often thought, had I been let alone to go on undiscovered
in my Sins, I might have provoked Him to leave me to a course of Rebellion,
that would have ripened me for a more sudden and everlasting Destruction; and
am fully convinced of this, that I should have had no solid ease or quiet in my
mind, but the Guilt of this undiscovered Sin lying upon my Conscience, would
have been a tormenting Rack unto me all my Days; whereas now I hope GOD has
discovered to me in some measure the evil of this, and all my other Sins, and
enabled me to repent of them in Dust and Ashes; and made me earnestly desire
and plead with Him for pardon and cleansing in the precious Blood of the
REDEEMER of lost and perishing Sinners: And I think I can say, I have had more
comfort and satisfaction within the Walls of this Prison, than ever I had in
the ways of Sin among my vain Companions, and think I would not for a World,
nay for ten Thousand Worlds have my liberty in Sin again, and be in the same
Condition I was in before I came into this Place.

I had the advantage of living in several religious Families: but alas, I
disregarded the Instructions and Warnings I there had, which is now a
bitterness to me; and so it will be to those of you who are thus favored, but
go on unmindful of GOD, and deaf to all the Reproofs and Admonitions that are
given you for the good of your Souls. And I would advise those of my own Sex
especially, to choose to go into religious Families, where the Worship and Fear
of GOD is maintained, and submit your selves to the Orders and Government of
them.

In my younger Years I maintained a constant course of Secret Prayer for some
time; but afterward neglecting the same, I found by experience, that upon my
thus leaving GOD, He was provoked to forsake me, and at length suffered me to
fall into that great and complicated Sin that has (...) this Death: Mind me, I
first left GOD, and then he left me: I therefore solemnly call upon YOUNG
PEOPLE to cherish the Convictions of GOD's Holy SPIRIT, and be sure keep up a
constant course of fervent Secret Prayer.

And now I am just entering into the Eternal World, I do in the fear of GOD, and
before Witnesses, call upon our YOUNG PEOPLE in particular, to secure an
Interest in the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and in those precious Benefits He has
purchased for His People; for surely the favor of GOD, through CHRIST, is more
worth than a whole World: And O what Comfort will this yield you when you come
to that awful Day and Hour I am now arriving unto. I must tell you, the World
appears to me vain and empty, nothing like what it did in my past Life, my Days
of Sin and Vanity, and as doubtless it appears now to you. Will you be
persuaded by me to that which will yield you the best Satisfaction and Pleasure
here, and which will prepare you for the more abundant Pleasures of GOD's Right
Hand for evermore?

Rebekah Chamblit.
Boston, September. 26 th. 1733. The above Declaration etc. at the desire of the
said Prisoner was for the Substance thereof taken from her own mouth, and
carefully drawn up as near as possible in her own words, by me,

Samuel Kneeland, Printer.


N. B. In the Presence of many Witnesses she Acknowleg'd and Signed it, with an
express and solemn desire that it might be Published to the World.



FINIS.

