A Testimony Against that Antichristian Practice Of making Slaves of Men.

Wherein it is showed to be contrary to the Dispensation of the Law and Time of
the Gospel, and very opposite both to Grace and Nature.

By Elihu Coleman.

Mat. 7. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto
you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. Printed in
the Year, 1733.

To the READER.
BEfore I speak of the Unlawfulness of this Practice of making Slaves, it is in
my Mind to give a Relation how, and after what Manner I came to understand it
so; and (...) why, and for what Reason I now speak against it. After I had
arrived to the Years of a Man, I was very desirous that I might come to know
the Lord for my self: For although I did believe I was educated or taught the
right way, yet upon serious Consideration, I came to see that the Religion of a
Man's Education, ^as not the Religion of his, but of them that educated him:
And therefore I was very desirous to know him for my self; for I read in
Scripture, that when Destruction came upon the City, that if Daniel, Noah and
Job were in it, they by their Righteousness could save none but their own
Souls. And although I might live in the midst of a righteous People, I saw that
it would not avail any thing to me. And as I was thus concerned, it pleased the
Lord in his own Time to manifest himself to me, in some small Degree and
Measure, so that then I could discern Things aright in some degree; and after I
had considered the Principles of those my Friends called Quakers, I did, and
now do believe that they are undeniably good, and that those that keep close to
them. I do believe that there can never any Weapon be formed that shall prevail
against them. And as I considered thereon, I found a Necessity in my self to
join with those People, whose principles were so good: Yet notwithstanding I
must confess, (and for that Reason I now write) that as I knew a Necessity to
join with them in that which was good; the same Necessity I now find to speak
against that which is evil, although it may be in some of them. For the Lord made
me sensible in that convincing Day, that he would not allow of Sin, although it
might be in Jacob, and that Transgression in Israel should not go unpunished,
and that he would yet again search Jerusalem as with Candles, and bring to
Light the hidden Things of Dishonesty.

And now, although some may think it hard to have this Practice spoken against,
that has been carried on so long pretty much in Silence; I may let such know,
that I have found it hard to write against it; yet nevertheless believing it to
be my Duty so to do, I have written according to the Understanding I have had
thereof. And although I have written but little, and in a very plain Way, yet I
hope that those Remarks I have made thereon, may serve as a Text for some to
preach to themselves upon. I am not unthoughtful of the Ferment or Stir that
such Discourse as this may make among some, who (like Demetrius of old) may
say, By this Craft have we our Wealth, which caused the People to cry out with
one Voice, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, whom all Asia and the World
worship. Therefore leaving such to worship what they will, I will also say,
that there is many sober Men that has spoken against this Practice, both by
Writing and in their public Assemblies, whom I could Name, but choosing to be
brief, I will only observe to the Reader, what I my self have observed, and
that is, that those People that dwell nearest the Truth, and are most engaged
in it, and are more concerned for the spreading of it, than for any thing in
this World beside, cannot allow of this Practice, they seeing it to be
Oppression and Cruelty.

Now I having spoken something of the Reason why I have wrote this, I will
conclude this my Preface, wishing the Reader an impartial Judgment.

A TESTIMONY Against that Antichristian Practice of Making Slaves of Men.
SUCH has been the Love and Goodness of God to Men, that in all Ages of the
Word he has had a People, Family or Church whom he has called and also chosen,
to bear a Testimony to his Name and Truth: Yet it may be observed by them that
read the holy Scriptures, that those People whom he had called, and favored
above all the Families of the Earth, and had wrought Signs and Wonders for
them, and had exalted them in the Sight of their Enemies; that those People in
Times of Liberty and Ease, grew forgetful of God. This aptness to forget God in
a Time of Ease, the Apostle Paul well knew, after that he had a Thorn in the
Flesh, or the Messenger of Satan to buffet him (as he calls it) for before he
was afflicted he went astray, therefore he knew Chastisement or Affliction to
be profitable for him, and could then say, I take Pleasure in Infirmities, in
Reproaches, in Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses for Christ's sake:
For when I am Weak, then am I Strong. 2 Corin. 12. 10. It may be also observed
by them who read the Book of Martyrs or Sufferings of the People of God, from
the Time our Lord was crucified, down to the Reign of the bloody Queen Mary,
(which History I do believe is believed to be true by most Protestants) that in
all that Length of Time, God had a People whom he had called out of the
Worship, Ways and Customs of the World, who were a suffering People, and that
in the midst of their greatest Sufferings, they were the most immediately
upheld by the Divine Power of God; so that they could even Rejoice in the
Flames. But when it pleased God that a good King or Emperor came to Rule, so
that they were not persecuted or oppressed, that they grew forgetful of God,
and some of them became Oppressors themselves. Now I do believe that God
sometimes afflicts outwardly, and sometimes inwardly, who best knows the Rod
that is suitable to chastize with. We may observe also how it has been with
our elder Friends, who were a harmless and suffering People, who did not only
bear Te^^^mony (...) Word, but in Practice also, against all outward and carnal
Weapons; which our Friend Robert Barclay observing, said, that it was their
innocent Lives and Conversations that convinced him, before ever he inspected
into their Principles. He did not see them in this Practice of making Slaves of
their Fellow Creatures, which Practice is upheld by the carnal Sword only* but
he bore a Testimony against the carnal Sword, and would not allow of it to be
used, although it were in Self-Preservation. Such Innocence was in that worthy
Man, as well as many others in that Day, that they would not allow of this
Practice, having more regard to that Command of Christ's, (to do to others as
we would they should do to us) than to any outward Advantage in this World. And
after our Friend George Fox had traveled in the Island of Barbados in the
West Indies, where he saw this Practice of making Slaves, even to that degree,
that their Houses were black with them, that he bore open Testimony against it,
when he got home he wrote a little Book to them, wherein I find these Words,
And if thy Brother, an Hebrew Man, or an Hebrew Woman, be sold unto thee, and
serve thee six Years, then in the seventh Year thou shall let him go free from
thee. And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shall not let him go
away empty: Thou shall furnish him liberally out of thy Flock, and out of thy
Floor, and out of thy Wine Press, of that wherewith the Lord thy God has
blessed thee, thou shall give it to him. And remember that thou wast a Bond man
in the Land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee: Therefore I command
thee this Thing to day. Deuteronomy. 15* 12, 13, 14, 15. See here this was to be done
by the Jews to such as were of their own People; and indeed this will very well
become Christians, Masters, Governors and Rulers of Families here in this
Island or elsewhere, who should outstrip the Jews to deal so (as the Lord
commanded) with their Servants and Apprentices, that were of their own Nation
or People: And to close up all, let me tell you, it will doubtless be very
acceptable to the Lord, if so be that Masters of Families here would deal so
with their Servants the Negroes and Blacks whom they have bought with their
Money, to let them go free after a considerable Term of Years, if they have
served them faithfully: And when they go and are made free, let them not go
away empty handed. This I say will be very acceptable to the Lord, whose
Servants we are, and who rewards us plentifully for our Service done not
suffering us to go away empty. For who is there even among you (faith the Lord)
that will shut the Doors for naught? neither do ye kindle a Fire on mine Altar
for naught. Mal. 1. 10. So now you, I say, that are Christians, that are
redeemed out of the spiritual Egypt; for as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7. 22. He
that is called in the Lord being a Servant, is the Lord's Freeman. That is,
set free from Sin, and Spiritual Bondage. Be ye holy, as your heavenly Father
is holy; and be ye merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful; as is
commanded you in Luke 6. 36. And this is the way to have the lost Image of God
restored and renewed in us; therefore I say, you spiritual Jews, you must
exceed the outward Jews in this, who are come to Christ, who is a merciful and
faithful High Priest, who is the Savior of all Men, and who tasted Death for
all Men, Heb. 2. 17. And let not your Families of Whites and Blacks be like
Sodom and gomorrah, like Zebo^m, Zepharuim, and the rest of the Cities of the
Plain, or like the Canaanites; lest sudden Destruction come upon you, and the
Lord root you out, as he did them. Let not I say, your Servants under your
Command, and such as are born in your Houses, and bred up in your Families, and
such as you have bought with Money, suffer them not (I say) to take Husbands
and Wives at their Pleasure, and then leave them again when they please, and
then take others again as fast and suddenly as they will, and then leave them,
this is not well, this may bring the Judgments of God upon you; yea, this
manifests your Families to be unclean and adulterated Families.

Now by these Words (though but a small part of what he wrote) we may see that he
was against making Slaves of Men. Now I do believe if Men were ingenuous to
acknowledge to the Truth, even as their Consciences bear them Witness, I need
not go any farther for a Proof against this Practice: But because they be not,
I will turn also to the holy Scriptures, that so they that are in this Practice
may be condemned by both.

First, we may observe, when God had created Man, that he gave him a free Will,
and would not compel the Will of Man, no not to that which was Good, much less
to that which was Evil; therefore we ought not to compel our Fellow Creatures.

Objection, But had not God's People Bond-Servants in all Ages of the World,
bought with their Money? To which I Answer, that in (...) the Time of the Law
they had Bond-Servants bought with their Money; but the Apostle such, The
Servant abides not in the House ever. Now the Word Servant I understand to be
but for a Time, but the Word Slave for ever. And those that merchandiz'd in
Slaves we may find were Babilon's Merchants, Rev. 18. 13. And those that had
Bond-Servants under the Law, were commanded to let them go free after some Time
of Service, and they were not to let them go empty handed neither, which some
of them not observing, the Lord complained by the Prophet Jeremiah, that they
have not hearkened unto me, in proclaiming Liberty every one to has Brother,
and every Man to his Neighbor: Behold, I proclaim a Liberty for you, says the
Lord, to the Sword, to the Pestilence, and to the Famine, and I will make you
to be removed into all the Kingdoms of the Earth. Jer. 34. 17.

Objection, But they were of their own Nation that the Command was against; now
these Negroes are not of our own Nation, but are mere Infidels and Strangers.
To which Objection I Will Answer as it is written in Exodus 22. 21. Ye shall
neither vex a Stranger, nor oppress him, for ye were Strangers in the Land of
Egypt. And Exodus 23. 9. Also thou shall not oppress a Stranger, for ye know the
Heart of a Stranger, seeing ye were Strangers in the Land of Egypt. Now I do
not find that it is any more allowable to make a Slave of an Unbeliever, than a
Believer, seeing we are commanded, Mat. 7. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever
ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law
and the Prophets. Now we may see that this was not only a Command of Christ's,
but was the Law and the Prophets also; and those that comes to observe that
Command, even fulfill both Tables at once. Now I have often considered how
earnestly some Men will search into the Etemology or Original of some Things
that may be but small, and in the mean while omit the greater. Now in my
Judgment every thing ought to be looked upon according to the Importance,
Weight or Value of the Thing; for to be very zealous in a small Thing, and to
pass lightly over a greater, that Zeal may be properer called Superstition than
good Zeal, which should be grounded upon Knowledge. Now I would have all to
consider of this Practice of making Slaves of Negroes, or others that we can
get the Mastery over, to see upon what Foundation it stands, or to see what is
the Original of it, whether or no Pride and Idleness was not the first rise of
it, that they might go with white Hands, and that their Wives might ( Jezebel
like) paint and adorn themselves, and their Sons and Daughters be brought up in
Idleness, which may be very well termed the Mother of all Vice; for it is
generally the richest sort of People that have them, that could do best without
them, for the Poor are not so able to get them.

But some may object, as I my self have heard them, that there was a Mark set
upon Cain, and they do believe that these Negroes are the Posterity of Cain,
because of their Hair, and their being so black, differing from all others, and
that Canaan was to be a Servant of Servants to his Brethren, whom they take to
be of the same Lineage: But if we do but observe, and read in the Genealogy of
Cain, we may find that they were all drowned in the old World, and that Canaan
was of the Line of Seth. And although it was (...) the Will of God that the World
was drowned, because of their great Wickedness; yet we may observe also, that
there was unclean Beasts went into the Ark, as well as clean, and that it was
the Will or Permission of God, that there should be a Ham, as well as a Shem
and Japhet: By which we may see that God suffers wicked Men to live as well as
Righteous, and we find that the Sun shines on the Evil as well as on the Good,
and that the Rain falls on the Unjust as well as the Just, and that Christ
forbids his Followers to meddle with the Tares lest they hurt the Wheat;
therefore none can have any Plea for making of them Slaves, for their being
either ignorant or wicked; for if that Plea would do, I do believe they need
not go so far for Slaves as now they do.

And although Canaan was to be a Servant of Servants to his Brethren, yet the
Lord afterward spoke by the Prophets, that the Son should not bear the
Iniquity of the Father, nor the Father should not bear the Iniquity of the Son,
but the Soul that sins should die. Then the Posterity of Canaan, or of Ham,
do not bear their Sins: And the Apostle Peter says, Now I perceive of a Truth
that God is no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he that fears God
and works Righteousness, is accepted of him. Now although the Negroes might not
have the Understanding that some other Nations have, then I do believe there is
the less required, and if they do but as well as they know, I do believe it is
well with them. For John the Divine faith in the Revelations, that he saw them
that were sealed in their Foreheads, of the Tribes of Israel, of each Tribe
Twelve Thousand, which made an Hundred and Forty and Four Thousand: And after
this I beheld (said he) and lo a great Multitude which no Man could Number, of
all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, stood before the Throne,
and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their Hands, and
they cried with a loud Voice, saying, Salvation to our God, which sits upon
the Throne, and unto the Lamb, Rev. 7. 9, 10. Now if there was of all Nations,
Kindreds, Tongues and People, then there was some of the Negroes.

Now although the Turks make Slaves of those they can catch, that are not of
their Religion, yet (as History relates) as soon as any embraces the Mahomitan
Religion, they are no longer kept Slaves, but are quickly set free, and for the
most part put to some place of Preferment; so zealous are they for Proselites
and their own Religion. Now if many among those called Christians, would but
consider how far they fall short of the Turks in this Particular, it would be
well; for they tell the Negroes that they must believe in Christ, and receive
the Christian Faith, and that they must receive the Sacrament, and be baptized,
and so they do; but still they keep them Slaves for all this. Now how partial
are those that can judge a Negro that should run away from his Master to
deserve beating, and if one called a Christian (although it may be no better
Christian than the other) should run away from the Turks, they can judge him to
be a good Fellow, and to have done well. Now I look upon this Practice of
making Slaves to be so great a Sin, that even Men whose Principles will allow
of killing Men in their own Defense, will not allow of making Slaves; for they
counting it better to deprive them of Life that rise up against them, than to
deprive those of Liberty that have done them no Harm.

Now if any one should ask one of the Negroes Masters that had a Negro Child
and a Child of his own, what Harm the one had done, that it should be made a
Slave more than the other* that they would not I believe be able to answer it;
and if they have done us no Harm, (as it is evident they have not) then it is
very contrary to Scripture, and even to Nature, to make them suffer. Now if we
will but look back into the Original of this Practice, which ought to be most
looked into, and spoken against; for until the Cause is removed, I know not how
the Effect should cease; we shall find that they were stolen in the first
place either by them that fetched them, or they carrying such Goods as induced
some of their own Nation to steal them; and they standing ready to receive
them, which is as bad as if they had stolen them themselves.

Now we may find that Man-stealing and Man-slaying were joined together, and
there was the same Punishment for the one as for the other. See Exodus* 21* 12,
13, 14, 15, 16. And he that smites a Man, so that he die, shall surely be put
to Death. And he that steals a Man, and sells him, or if he be found in his
Hands, he shall surely be put to Death. We may find it also in the New
Testament joined with the worst of Murderers, as such as were Murderers of
Fathers and Murderers of Mothers, and Man-stealers, 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10. The
Prohibition is general, he that steals away Man, a Brother or a Stranger, or
Heathen, or any Man, the Punishment is Capital; for he that killed was to be
put to Death, because it was the Image of God, Genesis 9. 6. So he that robs a
Man of his Freedom, which only makes Knowledge useful, seems to deface the
Image of God, and therefore is punished with Death.

Objection, But how can this Practice of making Slaves be so great a Sin, when
it is so generally practiced among all the Societies of People? For let them
differ about what they will else, they pretty generally agree about this. To
which Objection I Answer, That if they did but as well agree about all other
Points as they do about this, they might almost if not altogether be termed one
Community, yet I cannot find this to be a Proof: For I take it for a Maxim,
that in a general way, the Negroes are cruelly used; and therefore I do not
find, that their Agreement in making Slaves can be an Example for us, any more
than their using them cruelly. Therefore if we would but consider the Thing
rightly, we shall not find that to be a Proof, because it is so general a
Practice. For we may observe how it was when our Lord was crucified, that there
was diverse Sects of People, and of very differing Minds, yet in putting him to
Death they could generally agree; and though they were so much at Variance, that
as the Proverb is, they were at Daggers drawing, yet the Text has it, that the
same Day Pilate and Herod were made Friends. Yet some that have Annotated
thereon* have not scrupled to call that a cursed Friendship, that was
contracted by putting to Death our Lord, that came in Love to their Souls. But
I have a further Reply to make to what I have said before, of the general
Agreement of making Slaves, namely, That there is some of all Persuasions, I do
believe, that cannot allow of this Practice: For they seeing it to be contrary
to Christ's Command, and even to Nature: For I have made this Observation my
self, (though but young in Years) that those that dwell nearest the Truth, and
contend most for it, cannot allow of this Practice, for they see it to be
Oppression and Cruelty. But it may be objected, that there has some spoken
against this Practice, and they have come to nothing, or have not prospered in
it. To which I Answer, That a good Cause may be badly managed, and by sad
Experience we often see it is so. Now I do believe by what has already been
said, that all that have not concluded beforehand that they would not see, may
see this Practice of making Slaves to be Antichristian; for it cannot be of
Christ, because contrary to his Command; therefore of Antichrist.

Now I have heard some Men say, that they believe they did wrong in getting
Negroes, but that they did not know what to do with them now they had got them;
for if they let them go free after some Time, if any Mishap betel them, their
Estates were obliged to maintain them. And though they seem to acknowledge the
Wrong done to them, yet they seem to be very much afraid left they should be
forced to help them a little, and to seem to rest contented.

Now, suppose that to give the Negroes their Times, or let them go free here in
this Country, was wrong, which I do not believe would be wrong, after they had
served them some time* but if it were wrong to let them go free, whether or no
those that see they did wrong in getting them, ought not to bear a Testimony
against it? For their keeping them and being silent, encourages others to get
them. For Instance, the Apostle Paul's Advice to the Believers, not to join
themselves in Marriage a Believer with an Unbeliever, for he counted it wrong,
even so do I: But if a Believer had got a Wife that was an Unbeliever, I do not
think that he should put her away, yet notwithstanding the Practice was wrong,
and ought to be spoken against. Now I can truly say, that this Practice of
making Slaves of Men, appears to be so great an Evil to me, that for all the
Riches and Glory of this World, I would not be guilty of so great a Sin as this
seems to be. And I do believe many would see it so, were they not blinded by
Self-Interest. Now as I said in the beginning, how apt Men were to forget God
in a Time of Liberty, as we now seem to have, which if rightly considered, we
ought the more to remember him, and to prise his Favor therein. For I do
believe it Persecution was on Foot again, and People were haled to Prisons, as
they have been in Times past, that many would have more regard to their own
Practices than now they have. For this Practice of making Slaves tends to many
Evils, as parting Man and Wife, and Children from them both, and thereby
causing them to commit Aduitery with others, and so their Children cannot come
to honor them. And all this is done by Violence, which is forbidden in the
Scriptures; for there we are commanded to do Violence to no Man. And lastly, it
is a hinderance to the spreading of the Gospel among those poor Creatures, for
whom (as well as others) our Lord came and laid down his Life, and also has
said, that his Gospel should be preached unto all Nations. But some may object,
as I have heard them, that by this Means they come to hear the Gospel preached,
and they believed this was the Way our Lord intended that Nation should have
the Gospel preached to them, viz. to be brought Slaves here. To which I Will say,
the Reader may quickly suppose what People these are, for it must be them that
buy the Gospel pretty dear themselves, or else they would not think that the
Negroes should be Bondslaves, and their Children after them, for the Knowledge
of the Gospel. But I do not find that the Gospel was either bought or sold for
Money; neither do we find that God compelled any to receive it, but only
entreated them or advised them to choose Life, and live. Now by this Practice
they hate the Name of a Christian; for all of us they can get (say they) they
make Slaves of* and even Nature it self tells them that it is wrong.

Now I would have all seriously to consider, that loves their own Souls, and do
believe that they must give an Account for the Deeds done in the Body, to look
into their own Practices, to see upon what Foundation they stand; for God will
not forgive, what is in our Power to help.

Now I having shown by Scripture the Unlawfulness of this Practice, as it is
now in Use, both in the Old Testament and in the New* And now, I would have all
to turn their Minds inward, to that Divine Monitor or Counselor, placed in the
Heart of Man, which is as agreeable to the holy Scriptures (I do believe) as
any internal Thing can be to an external one; to which I Will leave my Reader,
even to that ever blessed Spirit, One with the Father.

Nantucket, the 20th of the 11th Mo. 1729-30. Elihu Coleman.


