Mr. Chauncy's SERMON On the DEATH OF Judge BYFIELD.

NATHANAEL's Character displayed.

A SERMON, Preached The LORD's Day after the Funeral of the HONORABLE
Nathanael Byfield Esquire Late Judge of the Vice-Admiralty, And One of His
Majesty's Council for this Province. Who died at his House in BOSTON, on the 6
th of June, I733. In the 80 th Year of his Age.

By Charles Chauncy, M. A. One of the Pastors of the Old Church.

Isaiah iii. 1 -- 3. For behold, the LORD, the LORD of Hosts, does take away
from JERUSALEM and from JUDAH, the Judge -- and the Prudent, and the Ancient --
and the Honorable Man -- and the Counselor -- and the Eloquent Orator.
Printed in the Year I733.

Preface.
THE following Sermon being preached by my worthy Brother and Colleague on
occasion of the Decease of an honorable and most valuable aged Person, whose
excellent Conduct, both in private and public Life, through a long Series of
Years, has made him shine as an uncommon Light in this degenerate Age; I
cannot but take a Pleasure in the Hope, that as a lasting Honor will be done
to the Name of our deceased Friend and Father, so the Glory of GOD, the Credit
of Religion, and the Benefit of Survivors will be promoted by the Publication
of it; especially in that a double Pattern is here exhibited, eminently amiable
and reverend, and meriting universal Imitation.

The Words of the Text relating to the Scripture-Nathanael (who, it is probably
though it was the same with the Apostle Bartholomew) appeared so justly applicable
to our deceased Nathanael, as pointing out the particular Genius and reigning
Temper of his Soul, that they often occurred to my Thoughts, when conversing
with him in his Life; as they immediately did to my Rev. Brother on his Death:
and they certainly afforded a very proper Theme for a Funeral-Discourse upon
this Occasion.

I must acknowledge, Col. Byfield's known superior Worth loudly bespake all the
Honors to his Memory proper to come from the sacred Desk: and though some
peculiar Reasons have for these later Years very much restrained me from
bringing Funeral-Characters into the Pulpit, and may perhaps influence me for
the future to be very sparing on this Head; yet I can hardly excuse my self,
upon a cool Reflection, that I have in this particular extraordinary Case so
much indulged my Inclination to Silence on such Occasions. He himself (if I
mistake not) had an Aversion to pompous Descriptions in Funeral-Sermons: and it
must be confessed, they often carry too much the appearance of fulsome
Panegyric; adapted rather to display the Powers of the Orator, than the Merits
of the Subject. However, in the present Case, where such a Variety of excellent
Gifts and Accomplishments, where so conspicuous a Pattern of real Sanctity, and
so long a Run of public Service and Reputation concurred, to furnish out a very
lovely and illustrious Character; it might be thought, by such as have a just
sense of his Value, a Wrong to the World, and an Injury to Religion, as well as
Injustice to the memory of the Deceased, if his Ministers had forborne to drop a
Tear over his Grave, and publicly recommend his Example. -- I willingly now
take this opportunity to join with my Brother in doing it.

When I view the excellent and venerable Person, whose Death we are lamenting,
and reflect on the several Parts of his genuine Character, he appears to me to
have been very happy in rare Endowments both of Nature and Grace, as well as
singularly honored by many eminent Distinctions in Providence.

He is acknowledged to have possessed a distinguished Furniture for the
important Provinces he was called to act in: and steadily conducted himself in
them, as much I believe as any man, by the dictates of his Reason and
Conscience, and a well-weigh'd Experience; and he was usually satisfied in his
own deliberate Judgment: which ever preserved to him a peaceful Breast.

He had a Greatness of Soul, that made him scorn the mean Tricks of Crast,
detest the little arts of Flattery, and hate a Bribe.

He was an admirer of Order and Decorum, and a proper Regimen in all Things: A
shining Pattern of Sobriety and strict Virtue; of Industry; of punctual
Veracity and Honesty; and of Liberality on various Occasions, for which he kept
himself prepared by constantly devoting a certain Proportion of his annual
Increase to pious and charitable Uses. One instance in particular (for its
noble nature) deserves to be remembered; It is not long since he was at the
Expense of an Impression of the Assembly's Catechism, which (to the number of
Ten Thousand) he dispersed in the Country Towns, where they might be most
needed.

He was an Instance of early Piety: and his first Love continued and visibly
grew through the succeeding Coarse of his long Life. He was a Man of Prayer, and
much in Communion with GOD; which they may deride, that are unacquainted with
it. He was a careful Redeemer of his Morning and EveningHours for Divine
Contemplation and Devotion in the Closet; a steady maintainer of good Economy
and religious Duties in the Family; a constant and seasonable Attender of the
public Worship; a conscientious keeper of the Sabbath; a diligent Reader of
the holy Bible; a wise observer of Divine Providence; a Promoter of serious and
profitable Communication; a faithful Reprover of Sin; a servent Lover of Zion;
a great Example of Patience and pious Fortitude under afflictive Trials, and
always breathing the Faith and Hope and Humility of an improved Saint on a Sick
Bed. -- Having had his Conversation in Heaven, and being satisfied with Life,
he desired to depart and be with Christ: and at length finished his Course with
Joy, triumphing in the near view and believing expectation of a blessed endless
Futurity.

It remains only to ask the Prayers of all the Friends of our Zion, that GOD
would pour out his Spirit, and be the Repairer of the Breaches made upon us, in
the Deaths of pious and useful Persons; and to recommend the following valuable
Discourse to the Divine Blessing, that it may be of use to all into whose bands
it may come, to promote in them that Sincerity, which is here represented and
exemplified, and which will secure to them the Approbation of GOD in this
World, and a glorious Reward in the next. Boston, N. E. June 23, I733. Tho:
Foxcrost.


A Funeral SERMON.
JOHN I.47. JESUS saw NATHANAEL coming to him, and faith of him, Behold an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.
IF we take a view of those holy men of old, of whom we have an account in the
inspired writings, we shall find a great diversity in their several characters.
They are all represented as truly excellent persons: yet they shine with a
differing luster: some in a higher, and others in a lower degree of brightness;
some in the glory of one virtue; and others in the glory of another: according
to the various turns of their natural temper and genius, and the gifts of
almighty GOD diversely conferred on them.

THE distinguishing glory of Nathanael, seems to have been his undisguised,
sincerely open temper and conduct, both toward GOD and man. His character upon
other accounts, no doubt, was considerable: but this being one of the most
eminent and observable strokes in it, our SAVIOR singles it out to be a
standing pattern, worthy of universal imitation.

NOTHING that I remember, is any were in the bible recorded of this Nathanael,
save only the place where he lived Which appears to have been Cana in Galilee,
see John 2I.2
; besides what we find in the passage of history, of which my text is a part:
upon which account, we are at a loss to determine who he was; from what
particular family he descended; what station he filled, or civil figure he made
in the world.

ONE thing my context mentions worthy our remark; That at the time, when our
SAVIOR bestowed upon him this commendation, he was so far from being a
believer in CHRIST, that he labored of a very unhappy mistake with relation to
his Messiahship. For when Philip addressed him in that language, Verse 45
we have found him of whom Moses in the law, and prophets did write, JESUS OF
NAZARETH: I say when he was thus addressed, the common notion that then prevailed
among the Jews, was the reply he had ready at hand, can there any good thing
come out of Nazareth? This was certainly a very great and dangerous mistake;
and if Philip, who was himself convinced that JESUS was the CHRIST, had been of
a warm temper, and inclined to harsh judgment, he might have censured him as
one that had rejected CHRIST, and was void of all sincerity and real goodness.
But if he had done thus, he would have been greatly to blame; for at that very
time, our SAVIOR, who knew the hearts of all men, pronounced him an Israelite
indeed. He was satisfied the mistake he was under, did not proceed from
prevailing corruption; but want of light: the evidence of his Messiahship,
having not yet been laid before him. He therefore allows him to be a real
saint; and speaks very honorably of him: which I take this notice of, to teach
us moderation and charity; and restrain us from attributing any mistakes or
errors, whither of faith or practice, to the badness of men's hearts, which for
all any thing we know, may be consistent with sincerity, and GOD's knowing them
to be real saints. But to return.

MY text presents us with a very fair and beautiful character: which may be
depended on as an exact representation; since it came from one of insallable
skill and judgment. And there is this extraordinary circumstance in it; Our
SAVIOR spoke thus of Nathanael without any previous acquaintance; instantly
upon the very first sight of him. A sure indication of his being more than a
man! And it probably had it is influence upon Nathanael in producing that
confession from him Verse 49.
, Rabbi, thou art the son of God, thou art the king of Israel. He was sensible
our SAVIOR had no knowledge of him: and yet was conscious to himself, he had
given the exact portraiture of his soul. And therefore rightly argues upon it,
thou art the son of God. And from this time he became a true Christian, as
before he was a real Saint.

TWO things are here said of Nathanael, in which his character is summed up.

I. THAT he was an Israelite indeed. And

II. AN Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.

ACCORDINGLY there are the two beads, under which I shall with all possible
brevity, open to you this character: which when I have done, I shall more
largely apply it in the best manner I am able.

I. HE was an Israelite indeed.

THERE is a twofold application of the name Israelite. It Is sometimes used to
signify a natural defendant of Jacob, who was afterward called Israel. So the
Jewish nation are frequently called Israelites: and the most common name for
any one of the stock of Israel was that, an Israelite. And in this sense, its
likely Nathanael was an Israelite indeed. i. e. A true son, the genuine
offspring of Israel; as immediately proceeding from him by natural generation.

But there is a far better and more excellent sense of this word. It often
stands to specify the spritual posterity of Israel, i.e. his children by
resemblance, or participation of the same likeness of piety and goodness. Hence
that of the Apostle Romans 9.6.
they are not all Israel, which are of Israel. He plainly distinguishes between
Israelites, and allows the appellation in its special and best sense, only to
those, who like their father Israel, are the subjects of real holiness.

AND it is in this sense Nathanael is here called an Isrealite. And he is said
to be an Israelite indeed. The meaning of the phrase put into literal english
is obviously this, that he was a real good man; a true Saint and faithful
servant of the most high.

NOT that he was perfectly and indefectively so. In such a sense, there is not
a just man upon earth, that does good and sins not. He was therefore a man
of like passions with others; had his faults and failings. But they were only
the spots of GOD's children. He had notwithstanding a prevailing awe and
reverence for the blessed GOD; an habitual love to virtue: and made it his
careful endeavor to follow after it.

HE had upon his mind a realising conviction of future and invisible things:
and it had a governing influence upon his heart and life. He was afraid of sin,
and dare not knowingly allow himself in the commission of it. And if through
mistake, or the prevailing strength of corruption or temptation, he was at any
time led aside, we must suppose it only in here and there an instance: his
general course being at the same time, in some good measure conformed to the
great rule of duty.

THE principles of grace were certainly predominant in his soul; the reigning
bent of his mind on the side of virtue: and such his manner of life, that he
had the approbation of his conscience for his rejoicing; and could address the
holy GOD in the language of Hezekiah Isaiah 38.3.
, Remember O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight! Yet must
we look upon him as deeply humbled and abased, when he considered how far he
had fallen short of what might in strictness have been exacted of him; and as
having his hope not in himself, but the mere mercy of a most gracious GOD,
through the promised Messiah and savior.

THUS was he a good man, a true Saint. And O how beautiful does he appear in
this view! His greatest glory was his being an Israelite indeed.

POSSIBLY he was clothed with civil honor; possessed large intellectual
endowments and lived in flowing outward circumstances: but 'twas his being a
real holy man that rendered him far more great and noble: as he hereby
resembled the infinitely glorious GOD, was conformed to the Image of the lovely
JESUS, and became a temple of the HOLY GHOST. And O the inconceivable advantage
of his being a saint of the most high! By this means he became the delight of
his maker, an actual possessor of that divine loving kindness, which is better
than even life itself, and an heir to all the great and invaluable promises of
the sure and well-ordered covenant. -- The great GOD was his GOD; his guide
through life; his support in death; and when his flesh and heart failed him his
unchangeable friend and portion.

BUT,

II. HE was an Israelite indeed, in whom was no guile. An Israelite indeed was
his general character, wherein he agreed with good men in common: but that more
special glory of a good man, his being without guile, seems to have been that
wherein he excelled.

HE was without guile, the phrase must not be taken absolutely: for in such a
sense, it can be applied to none but the perfectly holy JESUS, of whom it is
testified, that he did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. But the
meaning of it is, that guile had not a predominant reigning influence over his
heart or life: and not only so, but it may be expressive of the peculiar turn
of his mind as open, plain and sincere; without deceit, craft and hypocrisy:
which natural temper as sanctified and improved by divine grace, he was enabled
to exercise upon religious principles and views, and in an uncommon degree,
both toward GOD and man.

HE was without guile in regard of the blessed GOD. That is to say, he was a
man of undissembled piety; a true worshipper of the true GOD; sincere in his
profession of religion, and in reality what he pretended to be. Deceit and
hypocrisy were contrary to the very bent of his mind, and above all things
abhorrent to him, as terminated upon the heart searching GOD. He did not take
up religion as an outward form; he did not put it on for a cloak or disguise;
he did not practice it out of mere fashion, to fall in with the custom of the
people among whom he lived: but he had a real regard for the honor of GOD, and
was heartily concerned to recommend himself to the divine savor.

HIS chief aim was not to make a splendid outward show, to appear externally
religious, while he was inwardly full of hypocrisy and iniquity: but he was one
that sincerely loved the day, the house and worship of GOD; and was a constant,
diligent and exemplary attendant on it; and this we may suppose not only in
public, in the more open view of men; but more privately in his family,
statedly serving the LORD with his household; and secretly in his closet, when
he had no witness but GOD and his own soul.

NOR did he satisfy himself with mere outward expressions of piety and
devotion. He was chiefly concerned about the inward frame of his mind; and
accordingly was one who: heartily loved and feared GOD: His trust in him; his
belief of him; his dependence upon him; his resignation and submission to him,
were all unaffected and without disimulation

THUS was he a man of real piety; without disguise or deceit; of no prevailing
guile respecting his maker.

HE was also without guile in regard of man. By which we are to understand "
The singleness of his heart, discovering itself in a constant plainness and
honest openness of speech and behavior".

DECEIT and flattery were an abomination to him. He dealt not in empty
compliments; mere pretenses of love and friendship, cheating those he converted
with, with a show of kindness, when he realy intended none toward him; but his
professions in this kind were sincere, and might with safety be depended upon.
He was not an enemy in his heart; yet a fawning, deceitful flatterer with his
tongue: and what is not so very common, it might be known by his words and
actions, whom he vallued, when he was a friend, and to how great a degree

He was not given to craft; and made no use of little tricks and fetches, to
deceive others, and lead them into a wrong judgment of him. He formed no design
he took pains to misrepresent; he engaged in no affair, he made use of secret
managements to conceal, or deceitful disguises to put a good gloss upon: but
his actions were plain and above board; his conduct without intreigue, and
those winding cunning devices, that often render men's behavior obscure and
unintelligable.

HE was an implacable enemy to all lying, equivocating, and crastily imposing
either upon the credulity or weakness of others, to the misleading or abusing
them; was true to his promise, punctual to his engagements; and in one word,
never lived under disguise; never walked in an empty show, making a false
appearance of what he was not: but realy was what he pretended to be; did what
he professed to do; and constantly took care to make his words and actions, and
their true meaning, keep peace with each other.

AND if from the freedom and openness of his temper, he sometimes disclosed
those intentions craft might have concealed: or did those things in the open
light, cunning might have kept hid from the view of men; he herein acted like a
sincerely fair, and plainhearted man: which is infinitely better in itself, as
well as more honorary to him, than if he had managed with that sort of policy,
which is evidently a fruit of darkness.

ALL which if put together, how charming is the character? how lovely and
beautiful the possessor of it? and who can forbear saying? he was so far one
of the excellent ones of the earth.

BUT I proceed,

II. TO make some application of this character, in two words, for our own use
and benefit.

AND,

I. I may with propriety, take occasion herefrom, to advise and admonish those
who are wanting in the great point of sincerity toward GOD and man. And this,
not only because they are herein unlike Nathanael in that very thing, for which
he is chiefly commended by our SAVIOR; but because of the infinite importance
of freedom from guile: it is absolute necessity in order to solid comfort here,
and complete blessedness in the future state and world.

I. I may reason a little with those who are wanting in the great point of
sincerity toward GOD. And may it not be justly feared, this is the case of
many? And perhaps there are those, who are so evidently leavened with guile
respecting their maker, that they have no need of much time or pains, in order
to satisfy themselves it is so; but can at once determine against themselves.
They appear, it may be, in the habit of religious persons; they outwardly live
as righteous men; they are exact and punctual in their regard to the externals
of duty; attend the worship, and observe the institutions of the LORD JESUS;
and this with external signs of devotion, reverence and affection: but yet,
their own consciences assure them, it is all form and complement; mere show and
lifeless appearance. They know they have no real value for the honor of GOD;
but their view is to recommend themselves to men: they have no design to serve
their maker, but use religion as a cloak to serve themselves.

TO such I cannot help saying,

O consider! seriously consider the dreadful solly of thus treating the
infinitely holy GOD! He sees not as man sees! but his eyes are like a flame
of fire, piercing into the inmost recesses of the heart: nor is there a thought
there, but lo! he knows it altogether. -- Our very souls are as visible to
him, as our bodies; -- and he constantly views them, and is perfectly
acquainted with their most inward frame and temper; with all their views and
purposes, their motions and tendencies. That Is the style in which the glorious
GOD is spoken of in the scriptures, the LORD searches all hearts I Chron. 28.9.
. Yea, he himself speaks of an inspection into humane hearts, as a glory that
distinguishingly belongs to him, I the LORD search the heart, I try the reins
Jer. I7.I0.
. What stupidity then is it to please ourselves with the thought of cheating
our Maker with guile and hypocrisy? Surely our GOD is not a man that we can
impose upon him! We are all open and naked before him, and let the mask we have
on be what it will, he nevertheless beholds us as we really are. And while we
are flattering him with our lips, or deceiving him with a false show, should
not the thought, that he has secret casement into our breast, through which
every thing appears in its true light, dreadfully shock and abase us? If we
would allow our selves only to realise this, hypocrisy would appear the height
of folly; and of all Persons we should be the most ashamed of ourselves, and
covered with confusion, when we have dealt deceitfully with GOD.

BUT it may be our aim is, to gain a reputation among men, for our piety and
devotion: all our works we do, for to be seen of men; to be applauded and
commended by them. But suppose we should compass this design; what is it more
than pleasing our selves with vanity, if we are gratified with others speaking
well of us, while at the same time we are conscious to our selves, it is beside
what we deserve. Others applauding our piety cannot alter our real character: we
shall notwithstanding remain the same persons. And if when we are commended for
our sincerity, we know in our own hearts that we are full of hypocrisy and
guile, what have we to value our selves for? And instead of being pleased, have
we not rather infinite reason for blushing, to think of our having mocked GOD,
to impose upon men?

AND the folly we are chargeable with, is exceedingly aggravated, if we
consider the pains we must be at, to obtain this end, which has really nothing
of worth in it. We must do every thing, at least in appearance, which a good
man does; must attend the worship and ordinances of the gospel; must show
respect to the day and house of GOD; must be exact in the performance of all
the external duties of religion: and not only so, but must have a constant
guard upon ourselves, lest we let drop our mask and discover our hypocrisy. And
in the doing of this, what pains must we be at? perhaps much greater than need
be used by men of real sincerity: for they are prompted to all they do, from a
principle of love to GOD and his service; which makes every thing natural, and
so easy and pleasant. Whereas what we do being counterfeit, every thing is a
burden; and we must be in perpetual use of caution, or our guile will disclose
itself.

NOW what greater argument of folly, than our putting our selves to so much
pains and trouble, to so little purpose? especially if it be added, that the
same pains if rightly managed, would in all probability, turn to our
unspeakable advantage; the eternal salvation of our souls. For it is a most
certain truth, that a person would be under the most hopeful prospect of
getting to heaven, if he took as much pains for it, as some men do to make a
mere show of being religious.

BUT if nothing else will, O let the miserable end of hypocrisy convince us of
it is folly! No sin is more odious in the sight of a holy GOD; nor will any one
receive a heavier doom; a more severe punishment. Hypocrites are the persons
whose portion it will be so to dwell with devouring fire, to dwell with
everlasting burnings Isaiah 33 I4
: -- It Is against this kind of sinners that our SAVIOR has said, Woe unto you;
-- for ye shall receive the greater damnation Matt. 23 I4.
. -- Hypocrites seem to be marked out in scripture, for a most amazing
destruction: their punishment represented, as it were, the standard of that
full weight of misery, GOD will measure out to the greatest among sinners. And
shall cut him asunder, and APPOINT HIM HIS PORTION WITH HYPOCRITES: there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth Matt. 24 5I.
.

O consider this, ye that use deceit with your maker in the great business of
religion! Let destruction from his presence be a terror to you. -- Deceive not
your selves, GOD will not be mocked. -- If you go on carrying it toward him with
guile, this shall ye receive of his hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow. Ye shall
have no hope, when GOD takes away your soul: neither will GOD hear, when
trouble comes upon you. Yea though your excellency mount up to the heavens,
and your head reach to the clouds; yet shall ye perish forever like your own
dung. --

2. SUCH also may be admonished, who are wanting in the necessary duty of
sincerity toward man. Alas! that this is so common a fault in this day of
prevailing guile. It Is just matter of complaint, "that sincerity and plainness
are almost out of fashion; and that the greatest part of the conversation of
mankind, and of their intercourse with one another, is little else but driving
a trade of dissimulation". How common are the sins of flattery and deceit;
discovered in the most lavish pretensions to love, and friendship, and a
distinguishing respect, when there is little or nothing in the heart to answer
the true intent of our words; insomuch that "our language is running into a
lie, the use of speech almost perverted, and words made to signify nothing".
What tricking is made use of? what crafty, underhand, fly, insinuating
managements, in our trade and commerce with each other? And how often is there
a contradiction between our hearts and tongues in our engagements to one
another? How many allow themselves in making promises, they have no intention
to perform? and that they forget as soon as they have made?

BUT certainly it is a vile shame it should be thus. Let us remember; the GOD
that made us, and to whom we are accountable, is a GOD of truth. He never made
use of guile toward his creatures, in any of his dealings with them, or
declarations to them: but has always been plain and open; treating us with
perfect sincerity, an absolute freedom from deceit. And as we are herein
capable, in some good measure, of imitating the copy he has set us; so it is his
expectation that we do so. And 'twill be an eternal reproach to us, if we are
unlike him, practicing dissimulation, falsehood and guile. Nor in this case,
may we call ourselves his children. For those that are born again, not of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of GOD; are his children by
resemblance of him, in this moral part of his glory. And it is a sad mark of our
being the children of another father, even the father of guile and deceit, if
this wicked disposition of his rule in us; and we make it our practice to act
contrary to the great law of integrity, in our treatment of one another.

AND as we call our selves christians, how ill does it become us to allow our
selves in the exercise of deceit and guile? to flatter and cajole? and make use
of the base arts of fraud and cunning in our dealings with each other? how
contrary is this, to the temper and conduct of the sincere Jesus, in whose
mouth was no guile. And with what impropriety, in this case are we called after
his name, and denominated his disciples?

IN fine, the scriptures frequently mention this sin of guile toward men, and
discourage the practice of it. -- A special mark is set upon it, as a sin
abominated by GOD. The LORD will abhor the deceitful man Psalm 5.6.
. -- It Is a sin, good men complain of, and imprecate the vengeance of GOD upon.
There is no faithfulness in their mouth; -- they flatter with their tongue.
Destroy thou them, O GOD! It Is a sin particularly threatened with divine curses:
some of which, that they may make the deeper impression on us, I shall read to
you in the words of the HOLY GHOST. Psalm. 55.2I, 23. The words of his mouth
were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart: his words were softer than
oil, yet were they drawn swords. -- But thou, O GOD, shall bring them down into
the pit of destruction: -- deceitful men shall not live out half their days.
Psalm. 12.2, 3, 4. They speak vanity, every one with his neighbor: with
flattering lips, and with a double heart do they speak. The Lord shall cut off
all flattering lips; who have said, with our tongue will we prevail, our lips
are our own: who is lord over us? Psalm. 52.2, 4, 5. Thy tongue devises
mischiefs, like a sharp rasour, working deceitfully. -- Thou love all
devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue. GOD shall likewise destroy thee for
ever, he shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy dewlling place, verse
9.I0.
and root thee out of the land of the living.

BUT it is time I now proceed,

II. TO call upon us all to see to it, that we be men of sincerity; free from
guile, both toward GOD and Man.

I. LET us be sincere toward GOD: making conscience of keeping our selves, as
much as possible, free from that dissembling with the Almighty; which is so
common in the world; and what we are all prone to, and apt to make too light of.

In order whereto,

LET us beware of taking more pains to seem to be religious, then to be really
so. Thus it is with the Hypocrite. His concern is not so much to be truly godly,
as to appear to be so: and therefore his pains in religion are chiefly
calculated to this end; which if he can but obtain, he desires nothing more.
But let us on the contrary, as we would approve ourselves men of sincerity, be
concerned to be in truth pious toward GOD, and not merely to make others think
we are. Let us be careful to keep iniquity out of our hearts, as well as to
hide it from the view of men. And let our pains in religion be chiefly
intended, to please GOD and recommend ourselves to his favor, and not
terminate in gaining credit among our fellow creatures --.

ALSO, let us take heed of minding only the outside of duty, not regarding our
inward sense and feeling in the performance of it. The man of guile concerns
himself only with the externals of piety, not at all regarding his heart. He
worships GOD outwardly, but has no inward reverence or esteem for him. If the
duty be but done, no matter how, or in what manner. Let us therefore, if we
would have upon ourselves the symptoms of sincerity, regard our hearts, as well
as the external performance of duty. Let us, when we engage in the outward part
of religion, take care that our souls be sutably affected; and not make it a
matter of mere form and ceremony. Let us inwardly honor GOD, when we outwardly
worship him, not suffering our hearts to be removed far away from him. And let
it be our great concern, when we pray to GOD, or do any other duty more
immediately relating to him, to experience with in ourselves the workings of
love, fear, hope, faith or joy; not contenting ourselves, unless we have some
motion of soul toward him.

MOREOVER, let us beware of restraining ourselves, in the observance of the
duties of piety, to those only that are to be performed before others. This is
the way of the Hypocrite: He limits his regards to those observances that may
be seen of men; neglecting those that are secret, and to be performed only
between GOD and his own soul. But let us as an evidence of our sincerity,
extend our care to the whole of duty; observing those parts of it that are
secret, as well as those that are more open. Let us do the duties of the
closet, as well as those of the family, and house of GOD; and universally make
conscience of those performances that are hid from men, as well as those that
are most within their view.

IN fine, let us take heed of being governed in our piety; by carnal views and
motives; making use of religion like the hypocrite, as a cloak for our
coveteousness, or some how or other, basely to serve our selves: But let us
engage in it upon suitable motives; an inward feeling of the beauty and
loveliness of it; -- a real regard for the honor of GOD; -- an over-powering
sense of the divine authority, and the inviolable bonds of love and gratitude,
we are under to GOD and the Redeemer. -- And let our aims be true gospel ones.
Let us have a view to our selves, i.e. our own truest interest, the future
glorious recompense of reward. -- But above all, let us eye the glory of GOD;
making that the ruling ultimate end of all that we do in religion.

THUS let us be sincere with GOD. It Is what he really desires at our hands.
Psalm. 5I.6. Thou desire truth in the inward parts. It Is what he highly
approves of, and will be peculiarly well pleased with. I Cron. 29.I7. Thou
triest the heart, and have pleasure in uprightness. Yea, it is what he
peremptorily requires, and insists upon, and will not be turned off without.
Joshua 22.5. But take diligent heed -- to serve him (the LORD) with all your
heart, and with all your soul. And in one word, it is the very life and soul of
all religion; a fundamental disposition, that must run through all the service we
do for GOD: nor else shall we be accepted of him, or rewarded by him. Psalm.
I5.I, 2. LORD, Who shall abide in thy tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy
hill? He that walks uprightly; he that speaks the truth from his heart.

2. LET us be without guile in regard of men; strictly keeping ourselves within
the bounds of undisguised plainness. Let it be our care to put on simplicity
and uprightness. Let us be men of truth; of an unfeigned heart and open
conduct. And at all times let us be sincere in our professions; without fraud
or cunning in our dealings: upon all cccasions discovering a true generous
openness of nature, and integrity of disposition.

NOTHING will render us more lovely and beautiful. The man that is fair and
open; of downright plain sincerity, both in word and action; How desirable is
his character? How honorable his name? Who better beloved? Who more generally
esteemed?

NOR will any thing more tend to our present benefit, than the constant
practice of sincerity. Craft may serve a present turn; but as the wise man
observes, a lying tongue is but for a moment Prove. 12.19.
. Persons are seldom able to practice deceit long without a discovery: and then
they at once forfeit their reputation, to their lasting disadvantage. This may
be one thing implied in those proverbs of Solomon, Bread of deceit is sweet to
a man, but afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel Prove. 20.17
. A flattering tongue works ruin ibid 26.28.
. Whereas no one need fear any inconvenience by the practice of sincerity. For
the more a man discovers of un upright heart, in a constant course of plain
undisguised dealing, the more ready are the world to place their dependnace on
him, and to entrust their affairs in his hands: nor is any person under better
circumstances to promote his own interest. Upon which account, a great man very
pertinently expresses himself Dr Tillorson, Vol. 2 page (...)
, I have often though it that GOD has in great wisdom hid from men of false and
dishonest minds, the wonderful advantages of truth and integrity, to the
prosperity even of our worldly affairs! These men are so blinded by their
coveteousness and ambition, that they cannot look beyond a present advanttage,
nor forbear to seize upon it, though by ways never so indirect; they cannot see
so far as to the remote consequences of a steady integrity, and the vast
benefit and advantages, it will bring a man at last. Were but this sort of men
wise and clear-sighted enough to discern this, they would be honest out of very
knavery, not out of any love to honesty or virtue, but with a crasty design to
promote and advance more effectually their own interests: and therefore the
justice of divine providence has hid this truest point of wisdom from their
eyes, that bad men might not be upon equal terms with the just and upright, and
serve their a own wicked designs by lawful and honest means.

MOREOVER, sincerity is of easy practice- It is always consistent with itself,
and needs nothing to help it out: it is always near at hand, and sits upon our
lips, and is ready to drop out before we are aware. There is no trouble in the
exercise of it. -- It needs no contrivance, no pains to disguise or conceal it.
-- We have nothing to do, but to act according to the real sentiments of our
minds. --

IN fine, the constant practice of this virtue will give us boldness before the
SON of MAN, in that day, when every disguise shall be plucked off, and every
man appear just as he is: when the secrets of men shall be judged; and GOD will
bring every work into judgment, and every secret thing, whether it be good, or
whether it be evil.

NOTHING now remains, but to take some proper notice of the occasion, of my
bringing you such a discourse at this time: the Death of that Aged and
Honorable person, whose Funeral, we were, the last week, called to attend.

IT would be a great incongruity, just after a solemn discourse against guile
and insincerity, if I should allow myself, in saying any thing, either to
flatter the dead, or deceive the living: and I think, I so far know myself, as
to be assured, while thus standing in the presence of a holy GOD, I dare not
attempt a representation, I had reason to believe was not true and faithful.

I do not speak of him, as free from infirmities. For who among men can pretend
to be without fault? If thou, O LORD should mark iniquities: O Lord, who
shall stand? The very best of us have reason, to make that acknowledgment, Who
can understand his errors? And to breath out the following prayer, Cleanse thou
me from secret faults. YET I may with all freedom say, He was an Israelite
indeed; a good Man, a real Christian. Nor will it be denied, that freedom from
guile was one thing, for which he was distinguished In regard of the blessed
GOD, his piety was undissembled: which he discovered in a flaming zeal for his
honor; a constant exemplary regard to his worship both in the closet, the
family, and the place of GOD's presence: where he set a good pattern of
unaffected devotion, in his observance of all the institutions of the LORD
JESUS. And in regard of men, few had their conversation more free, from that
winding of the serpent; that flattery and deceit; that craft, shuffling and
double dealing, that is so common among men. -- But I have no need to insist
here, not doubting, your tho'ts were upon our NATHANAEL, while I was
representing the character in the text: the application was so easy and
obvious; and I would hope, unexceptionable: having carefully avoided saying any
thing, but what I though it in justice belonged to him.

BUT though his open temper, and sincerely plain and undisguised manner of life,
was that wherein he excelled: yet were there other things in him, which ought
not to be passed over in silence.

THE Father of Sprits was pleased to form within him a soul, much beyond the
common size: furnished with large capacities; a good understanding, a quick
apprehension, a solid judgment: all which being joined with a happy turn of
mind, well fitted him for the many posts of honor, heaven designed him for,
and he was afterward, in the several periods of his life, fixed in.

HE was of an extraordinary active, vigorous spirit; and of such great natural
courage that he never feared taking upon him, any service, he was called to in
providence: and such was the firmness of his mind, that no man could better
bare up under difficulties and discouragements. They scarce made any impression
upon him; till they came to lie so heavy, as to sink the spirits of most other
men.

HE was well formed for government: his speech, his behavior, his very looks;
especially as joined with a happy talent of turning them this way, were adapted
to command respect and reverence. He had himself a great veneration for
authority, and a strong disposedness to promote the same in others: was a lover
of good order; in maintaining of which, his zeal and care were particularly
commendable, in the Economy of his family: where every thing was managed with
the nicest exactness; every one moving in a known sphere, with a becoming
decency and regularity: more especially in that part of his life, when his
business required a numerous train of servants.

He was one of good elocution: could speak well; with propriety and fluency.
And perhaps few, on a sudden, could express themselves with more pertinency;
greater freedom, connection or clearness.

HE was of a catholic spirit: not confined in his charity within the limits of
a party; but heartily loved and honored all good men, however differing from
him in matters of less importance. He greatly desired the establishment of
these churches, and their abounding in the fruits of righteousness; as being of
their professed principles, and preferring their manner of worship: yet was he
far from placing religion in any particular form, either of worship or
discipline; believing with the great Apostle, that the kingdom of GOD is not
meat and drink; but righteousness and peace, and joy in the HOLY GHOST.

HE was upon principle, a man of charity; had seriously weighed the obligations
to this duty, and the proper measure in which it ought to be exercised: and
according to his best judgment had formed a rule to himself, which for forty
years, he inviolably kept to: constantly paying (for that was the phrase he was
wont to use) such a proportion out of his estate; which whatever it was
ordinarily, it once happened, within my knowledge, in the course of one year,
to amount to some hundreds of pounds: with which, together with his other
distributions, he often times refreshed both the souls and bodies of many, that
were in want. 'Twas his principle to do what he did, this way, in the time of
his life; and therefore if he has not by his last will, made many charitable
donations, he herein only acted according to his known settled Judgment.

HE had upon his mind an uncommon conviction of the reality of invisible
things, and a future state. Nor did I ever see the man, that was more free from
the remains of unbelief; that had a more uniform, steady and unshaken faith, in
the Gospel Revelation. He never seemed to waver or doubt; but was possessed of a
constant, firm belief of the things of GOD and another world. And he had the
comfort of it, in the various changes and passages of his life; but especially
at the time of his death: in the view of which, he was under no manner of fear;
but seemed perfectly resigned to his Maker: free and willing, at GOD's call, to
go away into eternity. And the testimony of a good conscience, was what
supported him; a lively hope in the mercy of GOD, through a glorious Redeemer:
And in the strong exercise of this hope and faith, his body fell asleep in
JESUS, while his spirit, we trust, was received to the spirits of just men made
perfect.

WE now heartily join, in lifting up our prayer to the GOD who dwells in the
heavens, that showers of divine blessings may descend upon the children's
children! -- And may you sincerely choose your father's and grand-father's GOD,
for your GOD! So will he be your never-failing friend and all-sufficient
portion. --

AND may the breaches which a righteous GOD is making in this church of our
LORD JESUS, whereby he is thinning our glory, and weakening our strength, be
happily repaired! And let there be no reason for that complaint, the righteous
perishes, and no man lays it to heart. --

AND as our aged venerable fathers go off the stage, O holy LORD GOD, pour out
thy spirit from on high, upon the Sons of NEW ENGLAND, that they may be
qualified to adorn and fill up their places! -- that we may have our Judges as
at the first, and our Councillors as at the beginning; all our Officers peace,
and our Exactors righteousness. --

O revive thy work in the midst of these declining years! that we may do that
which is right in the sight of the LORD, according to all that our fathers have
done before us. -- Let us yet remain thy people! -- So shall glory dwell in our
land.

AMEN.
AN ACCOUNT of the DECEASED.
From the Weekly News-Letter, No. 1533. With Amendment.
BOSTON June 14. 1733.
ON the 6th of this Instant, between the hours of 1 and 2 in the Morning, died
at his House here, after about a Month's Languishment, the Honorable NATHANAEL
BYFIELD Esquire in the 80th year of his Age: Having long been a great Ornament both
of our Church and State.

His immediate Descent was from the Rev. Mr. RICHARD BYFIELD, the laborious
faithful Pastor of Long-Ditton, in Surrey, and one of the Divines in the famous
Westminister-Assembly From Dr. Calamy it appears, He was one of the ejected
Ministers, and the oldest, in that County in which he lived, that was ejected;
that he afterward retired to Mortlack, where he usually preached twice every
LORD's Day, in his own Family, and did so the very LORD's Day before his Death.
-- He further speaks of him as a Man, of great Piety, Zeal and exemplary
Holiness of Conversation; and as falling asleep in the LORD, in December I664,
Aetat. 67. I may add to this account, that the Living he was turned out of, was
worth 400 a yearSterling: His leaving of which, for ease to his Conscience, was
a good sign of his having a real honest Heart.
: His Mother being of the noted Family of the JUXON's. He was the youngest of
one and twenty Children; and one of the sixteen that have sometimes followed
their pious Father to the Place of public Worship. He was born in I653;
arrived at BOSTON in New England in I674; and conceiving a Love to this
Country, resolved to settle here: and accordingly married the following Year to
Mrs. DEBORAH CLARKE, by whom he had five children: three whereof died in
Infancy, the other two lived to be Married, the youngest to the late Honorable
Lieutenant Governor TAILER, who quickly departed without Issue; the other to
EDWARD LYDE, Esquire by whom she had five Children: Two of whom dying young, three
only are now surviving, a Son and two Daughters.

He was formerly a noted Merchant in this Place; and soon after PHILLIPS's War,
had the Honor to be One of the four Proprietors, and the principal Settler of
the Town of Bristol; where he lived their Head and Glory 'till the Year 1724;
when his advancing Age put him upon returning back to BOSTON, the Place of his
first Settlement; and where he remained 'till he died.

Few have passed through a greater variety of Scenes in public Life. In the
Field he quickly arrived to One of the highest Places of Power. In the State,
he was Honored with many Betrustments; was in Commission for the Peace, and
Judge of Probates; was several Times chosen Speaker in the Honorable House of
Representatives; fat CHIEF thirty eight years in the Court of General Sessions
of the Peace, and Common Pleas for the County of Bristol, as afterward he did
two years for the County of Sussolk; was One of His MAJESTY'S Council for this
Province a great Number of years; and had the Honor of receiving five several
Commissions for Judge of the Vice-Admiralty, from three Crowned Heads, from
King WILLIAM in 1697, from Queen ANNE in the years 1702, 1703, and 1709, and
from King GEORGE the Second, in 1728. He was the first Judge under our present
Charter; and never Once had a Decree reversed upon an Appeal Home.

For his Character. -- Justice to his Memory requires it should be said, -- He
was greatly valued and honored by those acquainted with him, for his superior
Genius and Abilities; his great natural Courage, Vigor and Activity; his
plain, unaffected, shearful and instructive way of Conversation; his catholic
Spirit; his real Integrity, and unquestionable Faithfulness and Honesty; his
Zeal against Sin, and to maintain public Peace and good Order; his strict
Regard to the Worship of GOD, and constant, devout and exemplary Attendance on
it, both in Public and Private; and in one word, his love to the Ministry, the
Churches, and Civil and Religious Interests of this People: All which being
United in the same Person, and in an eminent Degree, as it rendered his Life an
extensive Blessing, so his Death just matter of general Lamentation.

He lived with the Wife of his Youth 'till 1717, upwards of forty Years; and
the following Year Married Mrs. SARAH LEVERETT, youngest Daughter to the
Honorable Governor LEVERETT, with whom he lived 'till 1730: when he was again
left a sorrowful Widower. He died with great inward Peace and Serenity of Soul:
and was honorably interred last Monday, a Funeral-Prayer being first made by
the elder Pastor of the Old Church, to whose Communion he belonged. He has left
his Grandson, BYFIELD LYDE Esquire (Son in Law to his Excellency Governor BELCHER)
Heir to the Bulk of his Estate.

FINIS.

