Dr. Colman's SERMON On the ROYALTY of GOD. Preached on the Lord's Day, May
13th. 1733.

GOD is a GREAT KING.

A SERMON Preached (in part) at Boston May 13. 1733. And now published at the
Desire of a Reverend Person then present, and at the Expense of his Friends, to
whom he recommended it: Unto Whom it is therefore now presented and dedicated,

By Benjamin Colman, D. D. Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Psalm XLVII. 6, 7 Sing praises to our GOD, sing praises: Sing praises to our
KING, sing praises: For GOD is the KING of all the Earth, sing ye praises with
understanding.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for T. HANCOCK at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Ann street. MDCCXXXIII.

GOD is a GREAT KING.
MALACHI 1.14 For I am a GREAT KING, says the LORD OF HOSTS.


THE Words are few, but very awful, and awfully to be regarded. Let us consider
with great Reverence and Attention, Who it is that here speaks, who is spoken
of, what is said, to whom and on what Occasion.

1. It is the LORD GOD OF HOSTS speaking of Himself. Let the Earth be moved,
and all that dwell on it be silent and attentive.

The Style of the true and living GOD, the Lord JEHOVAH, the GOD of Israel, is
this -- "His Name is the LORD OF HOSTS. The true GOD must be so; and HE that is
the LORD of all Hosts must be the true GOD. For the Style speaks and affirms
supreme, universal and absolute Dominion over all Worlds, and over all Things
in Heaven and Earth. Isal. xxxvii. 16. O LORD GOD of Hosts, GOD of Israel, Thou
art the GOD, even thou alone. It is the appropriate and incommunicable Name of
the eternal, infinite, almighty and incomprehensible GODHEAD: And after the
Name JEHOVAH there is none by which GOD has pleased to make Himself known, that
is more Magnificent than this, THE LORD OF HOSTS. 1 Chronicles. xvii. 24. That thy
Name may be magnified for ever, saying, The LORD OF HOSTS is the GOD of Israel
even a GOD to Israel.

This mighty LORD, the blessed and only Potentate, here speaks of Himself:
Himself the Speaker and Himself the Subject. He cannot speak of a Greater, and
He only is fit to speak of Himself, who only comprehends Himself. For the
things of God knows no Man (nor Angel) out the SPIRIT OF GOD: As He pleases
to reveal concerning Himself unto his Creatures. Job xxxvii. 19. Teach us what
we shall say, for we cannot order our Speech by reason of Darkness.

2. Words worthy of Himself, truly great and glorious, are here spoken: I am a
GREAT KING says the LORD OF HOSTS.

He is a KING: that is the least that can be said of Him, though Kings are the
greatest and highest Things we have on Earth: And because we have none greater
here below, therefore are Kings the shadows to us of the DIVINE MAJESTY.

But the LORD is a GREAT KING. How Great cannot be said. The Potentates of this
World are little parcels of Dust, and Worms before HIM. It is a small thing to
say of the great GOD, He is higher than the Kings of the Earth. He is the great
King of Heaven, the King of Glory. His Hests speak best how great his Dominion
is: Psalm. xxiv. 10. The Lord of Hosts, He is the King of Glory. Jerem. xlvii.
18. As I live, says the KING, whose Name is the LORD OF HOSTS.

3. To whom, and upon what Occasion, spoke the Great GOD these Words of
Himself? It was to his worshipping People, and to his Pricsts, the Ministers of
Religion among them. It was to strike them with an awful Apprehension of his
own Majesty and Greatness. It was to reprove them for and convince them of,
their profane and contemptuous Carriage toward Him, in their pretended Worship.
It was to arraign, terrify and humble a wicked, hypocritical, formal,
professing People; to admonish them of his Power, Justice and Wrath, and that
he was coming near unto them in Judgment. Cursed be the Deceiver that has in
his Flock a Male, and ^oweth and sacrifices to the LORD, a corrupt thing: For
I am a GREAT KING, says the LORD OF HOSTS, and my Name is dreadful. Psalm.
xlvii. 2. For the LORD, most High, is nerrible; He is a great King over all the
Earth.

I. GOD is a KING. He condescends to take this Style to Himself. It is
necessary and essential to Him to be King of the World: King over all his Works
and unto all, for his own Glory and their Good His is the Kingdom, the Power
and the Glory, by a natural unalienable Right, Propriety and absolute
Authority. The CREATOR of all things must have the Sovereign and inconcestible
Dominion over all, and the Great PRESERVER of all things must exercise
Government and Rule over all.

1. As a King GOD gives Laws to his Creatures. Isai. xxxiii. 22. The LORD is
our Lawgiver, the LORD is our King. He has written his Law in Man, and he has
published it to him. He has passed it with Royal Majesty, "I am the LORD. He
came down from Heaven in great Glory, and proclaimed it with Sound of Trumpet,
and a Discharge of the Artillery of Heaven. He gives Laws to Angels that are
higher than we, and they do his Will, harkening to the Voice of his Word. He
has given his Law to the mighty Frame of the Universe, even to all the vast
Globes in all their various Circles; and they continue this day in their
excellent Order and wonderful Motion, according to his Ordinance, for all are
his Servants. In our lower Regions, Fire, Hail and Snow, Vapor and stormy Wind
fulfill his Word. This is a Kingly Part to give Laws and Orders unto all, and to
be obeyed.

2. As more than a King, He sustains and upholds all things in Being. He is the
Breath of our Nostrils: Our Life and the length of our Days. In Him we live and
move and have our Being. He preserves Man and Beast. In his Hand is the Soul
of every living thing, and the breath of all Mankind. How much more is this
than the Protection, Defense or Maintenance, that Princes and Governments on
Earth can afford their Subjects. Should God remove his sustaining Hand, all
Flesh would perish together, and all Worlds would fall into Ruin and
Confusion. The Orbs of the Universe would dosh one against another, and run
into their original Chaos, and Darkness would cover the Desolation for ever and
ever* GOD hears up the Pillars of the Earth, or it and its Inhabitants would
dissolve together, Psalm. lxxv. 3.

3. More than Princely or Kingly is his Royal Bounty and Munificence. He keeps
the Table and Feast of a King. He feeds all his Creatures. He gives Food to
all Flesh. All Eyes wait on Him, and he gives them their Meat in due Season.
He fills 'em with Good, he satisfies the Desire of every living thing. The
Earth is full of his Riches. All things come of Him, and it is of his own that
we make our Returns to Him. This is more than Royal: it is a Glory truly
Divine: 1 Chronicles. xxix. 11. Thine O Lord is the Greatness, and the Power, and
the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty! for all that is in the Heaven and
on the Earth is thine; thine is the Kingdom, O LORD, and Thou art exalted Head
above all. Earthly Kings are supported in their Magnificence by their Subjects,
but the Divine MAJESTY supplies all his Dominions with all they have, and gives
them all things richly to enjoy. ver. 16. O LORD our GOD, all this store comes
of thy Hand, and it is all thine own.

4 As a King GOD judges, rewards and punishes. He does Judgment and Justice.
These are the Habitation of his Throne. He reigns and rules in Righteousness.
He is the just LORD in the midst of us. He governs by Law; just and right is
He. He loves Righteousness, and executes Judgment in the Earth: He is
excellent in Judgment, and in plenty of Justice: Holy in all his Ways and
Works. There is no Iniquity with the LORD our GOD, nor Respect of Persons.

1. As a King he rewards the Good. His Countenance beholds the Upright. Verily
there is a Reward for the Righteous. These He delights to honor; He dignifies
and enobles them. He rewards like a King with a munificent Hand. Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive
the things which GOD has prepared for them that love him. The LORD will render
to every Man his Righteousness and Faithfulness; He will recompense his Work,
and a full Reward shall be given him. He blesses indeed, with all spiritual
Blessings, in heavenly Places. The LORD will give Grace and Glory, and no good
thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. He has Crowns and
Kingdoms to give; the Crown of Life, a Crown of Glory that fades not away. 2.
As a King He punishes the Wicked, the Enemies of his Crown and Dignity. He will
not hold them guiltless. He will render Vengeance to his Enemies, and destroy
them that hate Him. He is able to save and to destroy. The wicked shall not go
unpunished. His Power and his Wrath are against them that forsake Him. He sees
Wickedness, and will not acquit. He has appointed a Day, in which he will Judge
the World in Righteousness. Then his Enemies, who would not have him to reign
over them, shall be brought forth and slain before Him. They shall be turned
into Hell, and all the Nations that forget GOD. Thus the LORD is our KING, the
LORD is our JUDGE. He judges Men now, he will judge them in the last and great
Day. His Reward is with Him.
5. As a King he leads his Armies to War, and fights his Battles. He has
Enemies in War against Him; and his Kingdom, People and Cause to defend. He is
the GOD of Armies, the LORD strong and mighty, the LORD mighty in Battle. He
comes down to fight for Mount Zion, and for the Hill thereof. He musters the
Hosts of Angels, and covers the Mountains with invisible Chariots and Horses of
Fire. He commands the Stars in their Courses to fight against Sisera, and the
Clouds to fire and thunder upon the Philistines. Again, He (the most Mighty)
girds his Sword upon his Thigh, with his Glory and his Majesty; and in his
Majesty rides prosperously because of Truth and Meekness and Righteousness; and
his right Hand does terrible Things; His Arrows are sharp in the hearts of his
Enemies, and the People fall under Him. He takes hold of Shield and Buckler,
and stands up for the Help of his People; He draws out the Spear and stops the
Way against their Persecutors. He presides over the great Events of War and
Battles, and there is no King saved by the Multitude of an Host, a mighty Man
is not delivered by his much Strength. He gives Salvation unto Kings, and
delivers his Servants from the hurtful Sword.

6. As a King He has Princes under Him, and sends his Envoys and Ambassadors on
Treaties of Peace, or to denounce War and Death; Or to promise Succor to the
Distressed, and Salvation to them that are ready to perish.

He has his mighty Angels that stand in his Presence, and go on his Messages,
and arm at his Word. They are his Glory and Court above; and are they not
ministering Spirits sent forth to the World below? Whether they be Thrones, or
Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, they are alike his Ministers of Mercy
or of Judgment, according to the Orders they receive from Him. Gabriel flies
down to David on the Wings of Love, and Another draws on the Assyrian Host and
slays an Army in a Night.

Kings on Earth are his Substitutes here below, their Hearts are in his Hand,
and he turns 'em like the Rivers of Water, which wind through the Earth and
enrich and adorn it. They propose and project, but GOD disposes, to Events
contrary to their Intentions. He makes them his Rod and Sword, which He breaks
or burns as soon as he has used The Pillars of the Earth are his, and he has
set the World upon them.

He has a peculiar Order of Men, whom He Calls and separates unto and for
Himself, to be his Ministers and Messengers to a wicked World. Such were his
Prophets in the Days of the Old Testament, and the Apostles of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST afterward: Such were the Levites under the Law to Israel, and such are
Pastors and Teachers, the Gifts of the Ascended SAVIOR to his Church unto the
End of the World His Commission to them is that, Matt. xxviii. 19. Go, teach
all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the FATHER, and of the SON, and of
the HOLY GHOST; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have Commanded
you, etc. And the Diguity herein put on them is that, 2 Corinthians. v. 20. New
then we are Ambassadors from CHRIST, as though GOD did beseech you by us, we pray
you in CHRIST's stead, Be ye reconciled to GOD. These Men of GOD come to us in
the Name of the Great King of Heaven, clothed with his Authority, with his Word
in their Mouth, and they say to Zion, Thy GOD reigns!, thy KING comes,
bringing Salvation. They bring the Alarm of War, and Denunciation of Wrath
against the wicked and ungodly: And they bring Messages of Peace, a
Proclamation of Pardon and Grace unto penitent believing Sinners. They come
upon the most honorable and momentous Concern that can be, the Salvation of
lost Souls; and how beautiful should their Feet be unto all to whom they are
sent?

7. And lastly, As a King He receives Petitions, and claims Tribute, Worship
and Obedience. He sits upon a Throne of Grace, with his golden Scepter in his
hand, and to them that approach him with a loyal Heart he holds it forth; for
them to kneel down and kiss it. He is the rightful King that has justly
forbidden Men to make Petition unto any God beside Him. He receives our Prayers
by the Hand of his own SON, in whose Name he has bid us ask of Him. He says to
the humble Petitioner, What is thy Request and it shall be given thee, even to
a Kingdom? We have a Right through Grace, a Liberty of Access through CHRIST, to go
and cry to the King: Psalm. xx. 9. Save LORD! let the King hear us when we call.

He claims a Tribute of Duty, Honor and Service from us. Such as we have to
give, which also we receive from Him, he accepts at our Hands. We are His, and
all that we have. He requires us to present our Selves, Soul and Body, a living
Sacrifice, which is our reasonable Service. We must love Him with all our
Hearts, laud Him with our Lips, and glorify Him in our Lives. We must govern
our Though It, Words and Actions by his holy Law. We must regard his Will, act for
his Glory, study his Pleasure, prize his Favor, consult his Honor and
Interest, fear to offend Him, and humble our selves in deep Repentance, with
Sorrow Fear and Shame, for every Sin whereby we have dishonored and offended
Him. We must believe in HIM whom GOD has sent, looking for the Mercy of our
LORD JESUS CHRIST unto Eternal Life. In all this we must show ourselves his
faithful Subjects. Deuteronomy. x. 12, 13, 14. And now Israel, what does the LORD thy
GOD require of thee? but to fear the LORD thy GOD, to walk in all his Ways, and
to love Him, and to serve the LORD thy GOD with all thy Heart, and with all thy
Soul; to keep the Commandments of the LORD, and his Statutes which I command
thee this day for thy Good: ver. 20. Thou shall therefore fear the LORD thy GOD
Him shall thou serve and to Him shall thou cleave, and shall swear by his Name,
for He is thy Praise. This Oath of Allegiance we have taken to the KING of
Heaven, and this is the Tribute of Praise and Obedience that He has laid on us,
and these are the Vows which we must be daily performing to Him, in
Acknowledgment of his Majesty and Dominion.

II. GOD is a GREAT KING. I am a Great King. says the LORD OF HOSTS. GREATNESS
is one of the High Attributes of GOD. Jerem. xxxii. 18. The Great, the Mighty
GOD, the LORD of Hosts is his Name. Deuteronomy. x. 17. For the LORD your GOD is a
GREAT GOD, a mighty and terrible. Isai. xii. 6. GREAT is the Holy One of Israel.

1. All that is in GOD is Great. He is Infinite, Immense in all Excellency and
Perfection. Great is our LORD, and of great Power. Psalm. cxlvii. 5. He is
GREAT in Counsel and excellent in Working. Jerem. xxxii. 19. Great is his
Faithfulness. Lamen. iii. 23. Very great are his Mercies 1 Chronicles. xxi. 13. And
great is his Wrath. 2 King. xxii. 13.


2. The Works of the Lord are Great, and do declare his Greatness. He has made
this great World which we behold: Made the Earth by his Power, and stretched
forth the Heavens by his Wisdom. And his Providence which upholds and governs
all declares Him to be very Great: Psalm. cxxxv. 5.6. For I know that the LORD
is great, and that our GOD is above all Gods; Whatsoever the LORD pleases that
does He in Heaven, on Earth, in the Seas and in all deep Places: He causes the
Vapors to ascend from the Ends of the Earth, He makes Lightnings for the
Rain, He brings the Wind out of his Treasuries. Dan. iv. 3. How Great are his
Signs! and how mighty his Wonders! As the Heavens for Height, and as the Earth
for Depth, so is the Greatness of this King unsearchable.

1. He is the Great King, for He is the King eternal, and immortal. This is the
Glory ascribed to Him, 1 Timothy i. 17. And a great Glory it is, and declares Him
to be a great King. Kings on Earth were born but the other day, and they die to
morrow. They were Infants and Babes at the Breast but a few days ago. They have
their Ancestors and Predecessors that have been before them, and they glory in
their Line that are long since dead, and are proud of their Successors,
descending from them; that their Family are like to reign after them. Ah poor
and (...) Glory of mortal Princes, which shall not descend with them! Be they
called Gods on Earth, yet they shall die like other Men, and a Grace among the
Kings is their last Honor.

How Great would an Earthly King account Himself could he purchase for Himself
Immortality upon his Throne! The Princes of this World do vainly dream of and
aspire after an immortal Name, immortal Fame; build Pillars for Themselves
while they live, and desolate Places for their dead Bodies.

But GOD only has Immortality! He is King for ever and ever! He ever was so,
is and will be so; He is without Beginning of Days, or End of Years! His
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion is from Generation to
Generation. So Nebuchadnezzar, the great King of Babylon, spoke of the MOST
HIGH GOD, unto all People, Nations and Languages that dwell on the Face of the
whole Earth: And so said Darius of the GOD of Daniel. Dan. iv. 3. I blessed the
most High, and praised and honored Him that lives for ever and ever. vi. 26.
He is the living GOD and steadfast for ever: His Kingdom is that which shall not
be destroyed, and his Dominion shall be even unto the End.

The dying Kings of the Earth need the Prayers of their Subjects to the GOD of
Heaven for their Life: And in a limited Sense it may be a pious Prayer for
Them, " O King live for Ever! But it cannot be, how much soever it may
sometimes be desired. They are gathered to their Fathers and see Corruption.
Even the House of David was so. There is a Moan written on the Wall against
every Kingdom and Empire in the World; God has numbered thy Kingdom and
finished it. But GOD is the Everlasting King. This is his Greatness. What
greater thing can be said of HIM? " I am the first and the last! I am He that
lives! I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End! which was, and which
is, and which is to come! the same yesterday, to day and forever.

2. God is the Great King, for He is the Supreme Being, the MOST HIGH. There
are that are called Gods many, and Lords many; and they are great Names among
the Creatures of GOD; they may be Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and
Powers, some in Heaven and some on the Earth; But all these are subject to GOD
and infinitely below Him. His Title is, KING of Kings and LORD of Lords. 1 Timothy
vi. 15. How great a King is HE, by Whom Kings reign and Princes decree
Judgment! and Whom all Dominion and Power serves and obeys!

When any of the Princes of this World conquer their Neighbor Kings, and add
to Themselves their Dominions, then they account themselves Great, having
Princes under them, and Kings doing them Homage. So the Assyrian when he had
extended his Empire, and triumphed in many Victories over the Nations and their
Gods, which were no Gods, then he assumed the Style of the Great King. 2 Kings
xviii 19. But who gave Him his Greatness, and took it away again? the same GOD
OF HEAVEN, who afterward gave a Kingdom, Power, Strength and Glory to
Nebuchadnezzar, and made Him a King of Kings: Dan. ii. 37. HE rules in the
Kingdoms of Men, and gives 'em to whom he will, and sometimes to the basest of
Men. He puts down one and sets up another. The Powers that be are ordained by
Him. All the Kings of the Earth should fear His Glory, and kiss THE SON, HIS
CHRIST, who is Higher than the Kings of the Earth; and there is given Him the
Dominion, that all People, Nations and Languages should serve Him.

3. GOD is a great King, for He is the Universal King. This necessarily results
from his Supremacy. His Kingdom rules over all. It is extended every where. It
has no Bounds. Heaven is his Throne and the Earth his Footstool. Now the Extent
of Empires makes Kings great. In the Multitude of People is the Kings Honor.
This was the Persian Pride and Grandeur: Esther i. 1. This is Ahasuerus which
reigned from India even to Ethiopia, over an hundred and seven and twenty
Provinces. How Great was this Man in his own Eyes, and in the eyes of the
World! but GOD is infinitely greater in the Sight of Angels and Saints: 2
Kings. xix. 15. Hezekiah prayed before the LORD, and said, O LORD GOD of
Israel, Thou, even Thou alone, art GOD of all the Kingdoms of the Earth.
Genesis xiv. 22. I have lifted up my Hand unto the LORD, the most High GOD, the
Possessor of Heaven and Earth. 1 Chronicles. xxix. 11. For all that is in the Heaven
and on the Earth is thine! thine is the Kingdom O LORD, and Thou art exalted
GOD above all.

4. GOD is the Great King, for He is Independent and Absolute. Kings, on Earth
depend on GOD, from whom they derive their Being and their Power. Yea they
depend on Others for their Exercise of Power and Rule. The King is served of
the Field. He depends on the Husbandman for his sumptuous Table.

Kings are also limited by GOD both as to the Extent and Exercise of their
Power. They may not act as they list, or do what they will. GOD is the only
absolute Lord and Sovereign. Job. xxxiv. 13. Who has given Him a Charge over
the whole Earth? who has disposed the whole World? who has enjoined Him his
Way? or to whom gives He any Account of his Matters? Kings reign by Contract
and Covenant with their People! but God's Right is in Himself, eternal and
unalienable, and his Power is irresistible. Daniel iv 35. He does according to
his Will in the Armies of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth! and
none can stay his Hand, or say unto Him "What do thou? Absolute Power is the
true and real Greatness of Dominion, but can belong to ONE only, which is GOD.
No Creature may pretend to it, or can be fit for it. It would be impious
Insolence and Arrogance in the best and first of Angels to aspire after it. The
Pride which was the Condemnation of the Devil was, it may be, something akin to
this. It is yet less Sufferable in Dust and Ashes to say, I will be like the
most HIGH. It is not for Kings to say absolutely, I will. The Reason is because
they are imperfect in Knowledge and Virtue, and may err and sin.

What a woeful World would an Absolute Sinner make? Such a one as Pharaoh," I
will pursue, I will satisfy my Lust, etc. Or like the Assyrian, the Rod of
God's Anger and Executioner of his Indignation, in whose Heart it was to
destroy and cut off Nations not a few; and He said "Are not my Princes
altogether Kings? shall I not do as I have done? Isai. x. 8, 10. This is for
the Ax to boast it self against Him that heweth therewith, or for the Saw to
magnify it self against him that saketh it. There neither can nor ought to be
but one only Absolute Being, Isai. xlvi. 10. I am GOD, and there is none like
me, I say, my Counsel shall stand and I will do all my Pleasure; I have spoken
it and I will bring it to pass; I have purposed and also will do it. None may
speak after this manner but only the GREAT KING, the One absolute Sovereign of
Heaven and Earth.

5. GOD is the Great King, for He is the most perfect Being. And therefore is
He indeed the Absolute LORD and Supreme, because He is Perfect. For absolute
Power should not be lodged in any Hand but His who is perfect. And it is the
only Security, Felicity and Safety, of the Universe to have it lodged in his
Hand; for He cannot err or do wrong.

It is a wise and celebrated Saying of an Ancient, "That if we could find One
Man far excelling all others in Wisdom and Goodness, He ought to have the
Government". To be sure true Greatness lies in the Perfection of the Soul. From
thence only may we look for a perfect Administration. Vice and Folly set in
high Dignity are but the more mischeivous and the more exposed. God made Meses
Great for Wisdom, Piety, Goodness and Justice, and set him at the Head of
Israel Samuel's Name shines for ever, while Readiness imprudent and irreligious
Conduct sunk him below the meanest Israclite. But our Eyes behold the KING in
his Grandeur and Beauty, while we meditate the perfect Goodness and
Righteousness, the infinite Wisdom of GOD.

1. GOD is Great in Wisdom, and therefore is the Great King. This princely
Qualification makes Kings truly great. Solomon asked this of GOD, and He gave
him a wise and understanding Heart, to do judgment and Justice. It made him
Great in the Eyes of the Nations round about Him, and his Name great to the End
of the World. The greatest Princes reverenced Him, and came from far to hear
his Wisdom. But a Greater than Solomon is before us, the Only wise GOD. Wisdom
and Strength are His. He gives to good and great Kings their Largeness of
Heart. It was a high Compliment to such a Prince, 'There is nothing hidden from
my Lord the King, and he is wise as an Angel of GOD. But the wise and great GOD
charges his very Angels with Folly. His Understanding is infinite, and
therefore is He the Universal King. Known to Him are all his Works, all his
Dominions, from the Beginning of the World. He looks to the Ends of the
Earth, and sees under the whole Heaven. His Eyes are in every Place beholding
the Evil and the Good. He puts Wisdom in Man's inward Parts, and gives
Understanding to the Heart. He gives Knowledge to them that know Understanding.
This was the Spirit of GOD in Daniel, Light and Understanding and excellent
Wisdom.

2. GOD is the Great King, for he is Great in Justice and Righteousness. Job.
xxxvii. 23. Touching the ALMIGHTY we cannot find Him cut; He is excellent in
Judgment and in Plenty of Justice. Psalm lxxxix. 14. Justice and Judgment are
the Habitation of his Throne. This makes Kings great: Prove. xvi. 12. The Throne
is established by Righteousness. This is the Glory of the SON of GOD, Psalm.
xlv. 6. The Sceptor of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter. Therefore is GOD Great
in Zion, and High above all, Because the Kings strength leveth Judgment, he
establishes Equity, he executes Righteousness in Jacob: Exalt ye the LORD OUR
GOD and worship at his Footstool, for the LORD OUR GOD is holy. Psalm xcix.

Readiness Injustice made him little: Why should the King sin against his Servant?
and whom did the King of Israel pursue after in the Wilderness? was it after a
Flea? So much did he debase himself But Justice magnifies a Prince, as
Solomon's Judgment magnified him: 1 Kings iii. 28. And all Israel heard of the
Judgment which the King had judged, and they feared the King, for they saw that
the Wisdom of GOD was in him, to do Judgment. This Prayer is therefore put into
our Mouths for Kings and Princes, Psalm. lxxii. 1. Give the King thy Judgments,
O GOD! and thy Righteousness to the Kings Son. If this be given, it will make a
great King, a great Prince.

This is the Glory of the MESSIAH, as it was of Hezekiah a worthy Type of him,
Isai. xxxii. 1. Behold a King shall reign in Righteousness, and Princes shall
rule in Judgment, and a MAN shall be a hiding place from the wind, and a Covert
from the Tempest, and as Rivers of Waters in a dry Land, and as the shadow of a
great Rock in a weary Land. Behold this admirable Work of GOD says the Prophet;
admire this rare and great Thing in the Earth, this great Blessing to the World.

Such is the GREAT GOD to his Creatures, and such His Government over them. He
loves Righteousness and executes Judgment in the Earth. Just and true are thy
Ways, O King of Saints! There is none Holy as the LORD, for there is none
beside HIM.

3. GOD is the Great King, for He is perfect in Goodness and Mercy. This is his
GLORY. Thus he showed his Face to Moses, and thus He proclaimed his Name: Exodus
xxxiv. 6. The LORD, the LORD GOD, merciful and gracious and abundant in
Goodness. How great is a good King! Great in the eyes of God and Men! So an
Archangel would fill a Throne! so They shine upon their Thrones above.

Mercy and Truth adorn and preserve Kings, uphold and blazen their Thrones.
These render 'em God like. And all that is great and excellent in the Kingdom
of Nature is but a meet Comparison, whereby to illustrate their high
Excellency. 2 Samuel xxiii. 4. And he shall be like the Light of the Morning, and
as the clear shining after Rain.

GOD exercises Loving Kindness and Mercy in the Earth. His Goodness endures
continually. Every good and perfect Gift comes down from Him, the Father of
Lights. There is none Good beside Him. How great is the Goodness which he has
laid up for them that fear him, which he has wrought for them that trust in
him! His Pardon is out to all the Traitors against his Government, Crown and
Dignity. He forgiveth Iniquity, Transgression and Sin: He keeps Mercy for
Thousands. None are excepted, but all invited to repent. He waits to be
gracious, and is a Long-suffering GOD. Dan. ix 9. To the LORD our GOD belong
Mercies and Forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against Him. Micah. vii. 18.
Who is a GOD like unto Thee, that pardonest Iniquity, and passest by
Transgression, and delightest in Mercy.

Thus we have contemplated the Greatness of the LORD OUR GOD in his being the
most perfect It is Wisdom Justice and Goodness that make Persons great, be They
on higher Seats or lower Forms. But set the most perfect Man upon a Throne, and
how would he Shine? Even the devant would be ready to fall down and worship
this lively living Image of the DEITY. Or rather, They could not help admiring
the GREAT GOD in him. 2 Samuel vii. 3. And Nathan said to the King, Go, do all
that is in thy Heart, for GOD is with thee.

There can be but ONE most perfect, and how much Greater must HE be than all
other, that are finite and imperfect! Matthew. v. ult. Our Father in Heaven is
perfect. His therefore is the GREATNESS, and the Glory and the Majesty. Here
therefore I will break off my Contemplation of the GREAT KING: For what can be
added to that which is PERFECT? the Greatness of his Kingdom cannot be justly
celebrated in any Words below those of David, in his royal Psalm of Praise,
cxlv.

I might add many more Words to what has been said of the Greatness of GOD's
Dominion, and might well begin anew and cast the Argument into a various
Method; GOD is great in the Kingdom of Nature and Providence, great in the
Kingdom of his Grace, and greater yet in the Kingdom of his Glory: so Great
that all things are little and as nothing before Him. But I must come to the
USE.

1. Is GOD a KING, and a GREAT KING? He is therefore greatly to be feared and
had in Reverence in the Assembly of his Worshippers. Psalm. lxxxix. 7.

This is the Argument in our Context, which arraigns the Worshippers of GOD for
their Irreverence toward Him.

Earthly Kings expect to be always treated with utmost Regard and Respect; to
be approached, spoken to and heard with great Reverence. Offer less to thy
Governor will he be pleased with thee or accept thy Person? And shall the
GREAT KING demand or accept less from us. Levit. x. 3. I will be sanctified by
them that draw nigh me. Psalm xcv. 3, 6. For the LORD is a great GOD, and a
great KING above all God O come, let us worship and bow down, let us kneel
before the Lord our Maker. Hebrews xii. 24. Let us find Grace, whereby we may
serve GOD acceptably with Reverence and godly Fear.

1. In all our Prayers and Supplications. If we had a Petition to present to
our Earthly Prince, and might be admited to the Royal Presence to offer it;
with what an awful Care should we do it? More especially if it were to cry to
Him for our Life, or the Lives of our People* as when Esther had her Request to
make. With like and greater Apprehensions of the Majesty of GOD, should we pray
to HIM in secret or in public. We should think with our Selves, "Whom am I
going to speak unto? and for what? -- Is it to to the most High GOD, the King
of Glory? for my Soul, and it is everlasting Interests? Wherewithal shall I come
before the LORD? and bow my self before the most High GOD? O let not the LORD
be angry that Dust and Ashes take upon them to speak unto Him.

2. This great King is fearful in Praises. The LORD is Great and greatly to be
praised, He is to be seared above all Gods. Neither Angels, nor Saints can
praise Him according to his excellent Greatness. Kings are commanded to serve
Him with Fear and to rejoice with Trembling The glorified Spirits that know his
Greatness cover their Faces and fall down before the Throne, while they give
him the Glory of His Holiness and Grace. Sec Isai. 1.1, -- 5. Rev. iv. ^, -- 11.

3. The Word and Law of this Great King must be read, preached and heard with
great Reverence. Where the Word of a King is there is Power. When Kings speak,
how are they listened to! The Voice of the LORD is full of Majesty. I will hear
what GOD the LORD will say. Listen ye Isles from far.

He once spoke by Angels, and the People quaked beneath the shaking Mountain.
He came down that his Fear might fall on them, and He promited 'em from that
Day to speak by the Mouth of Men. But what a great Thing is it to speak from
the Great GOD, or to be spoken to in his Name? Preaching and Hearing are
therefore awful Parts of Divine Worship. It should be to us as GOD Himself, the
Great King, speaking from the excellent Glory. 1 Thessalonians. ii. 13. Not as the Word
of Men, but as it is indeed the Word of GOD.

4. The Positive Laws and Institutions of the Great KING should be carefully
and reverently observed. These are the Statutes of our GOD, respecting his
public Worship. In his Majesty, Wisdom, Holiness and Grace He has enjoined
them. They are few and of great Significance and Importance, for the Glory of
God and the Benefit of Souls.

1. In Honor of the Great KING of Heaven, and in Obedience to Him, we must
religiously keep his Sabbaths. There is a Portion of Time which He has
separated to Himself, from the Creation of Man upon the Earth. There is no
proper Reverence of Him as our Creator Redeemer and Sanctifier without the
reverend Observation hereof. Levi. xxvi. 2. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and
reverence my Sanctuary, I am the LORD Exodus xxxi. 13. Verily my Sabbaths ye
shall keep, for it is a Sign between Me and You throughout your Generations that
I am the LORD that does Sanctify you. It is a weekly Act of Homage to GOD as
the Great King and Governor of the World. Kings are required thus to honor
the KING of all the Earth. Ezekiel. xlvi. 2, 4 The Burnt-offering which the Prince
shall offer upon the Sabbath Day shall be six Lambs without Blemish. He must
bring a princely Offering, and give a royal Example to all his Subjects. The
first Sabbath-breaker in the Camp of Israel died as a Traitor against the LORD
his King. It was High Treason against the MAJESTY on High. He has no Birthday
for us to keep in Honor to his Name! but there is the Birthday of this World
of ours, and of Man upon it, and there is a Day wherein He raised up the SON OF
MAN, the Prince of Life from the dead; and in solemn Remembrance of These He
commands us to spend one Day in seven in Prayers and Praises to the Author of
our Being, the GOD of our Salvation. Thus it is that the Kingdom of our GOD,
and the Power of His CHRIST is perpetuated and made glorious on Earth. Thus it
is that we obey and answer to that Divine Call to us, Psalm xxiv. ult. Lft up
your Heads, O ye Gates, and he ye lift up ye Everlasting Doors, that the KING
OF GLORY may come in.

2. In Reverence to GOD as the Great King of his Church, we awfully observe the
holy Ordinance of Baptism. He may enjoin us what He will. Of old He gave to
Abraham the Sign of Circumcision, and that day he circumcised Himself, his Son,
and all the Men of his House. His Covenant was in their Flesh for an
everlasting Covenant. When the Will of GOD was once declared, it had been high
Presumption, a Contempt of His Majesty and Grace, to have disobeyed, though it
was a humbling and painful Institution. Excision from God and from his People
was the Penalty incurred. It was of special spiritual Significancy to 'em;
Deuteronomy. x. 16. Circumcise the Foreskin of your Hearts. xxx. 6. And the LORD will
circumcise the Heart of your Seed to love Him, that thou may live. In like
manner, the sacred Sacramental Washing with Water is significant of a Soul
sprinkled from an evil Conscience. They are the Circumcision who worship GOD in
the Spirit. Baptism is now the Livery of the Great King, which his Servants
wear to signify their Relation to Him, and Dedication to his Service. Matthew.
xxviii. ult. Go teach all Nations baptizing them. The KING of the Church was
Himself baptized, and the Heavens opened on the illustrious Occasion, and the
SPIRIT descended as a Dove upon Him. The Mission of John was witnessed to from
Heaven by the FATHER and the SPIRIT, and by the SON on Earth, He, the Elias of
the New Testament came baptizing with Water. It is a Solemnity much to be
reverenced in the Christian Church to the End of the World. CHRIST'S Yoke
herein is light, a Law of easy and pleasant Observation; and he must be very
unreasonable who like Naaman the Leper thinks much of the Injunction were it to
wash seven times. 2 Kings v. 13.

In Baptism we recognize our Seed as Subjects of CHRIST'S Kingdom. Did our
Earthly King summon us to inrol our Names, and those of our Children, that He
might know Us and Them as Candidates for the Honors and Preferments of His
Court, we should crowd it may be to enter our Names. Or should He send us a
Garter to wear in Token of his Favor and Grace to us, we should be proud to
put it on. With like Gratitude should Christians think of their Baptism, and
bring their Offspring to the Waters.

3. In Reverence and Obedience to the GREAT KING of the Church, we should be
very careful in our Observation of the Lord's Supper. It is the Memorial of our
CRUCIFIED KING, for so ran the Inscription over his Cross, "JESUS of Nazareth
King of the Jews Him has GOD set KING upon his holy Hill. He is LORD to the
Glory of the FATHER. And as he went to his Cross he left us this Law, " This do
ye in Remembrance of Me.

The same GOD and KING that required of old the Ordinance of the Passover, has
appointed now this of the Supper; to give Him the Glory of his Redeeming Love,
and to receive from Him a public Token and Pledge of it. Shall we refuse? And
say as in our Context," The Table of the Lord is contemptible! GOD fo bid. Is
the Table of a great King so accounted among Men? Do or dare Men refuse to wait
there, when required to do so? Or do they not think it a great Honor and
Pleasure to be called up to it? And with what Reverence do they behave, who
stand about their Princes Table? How do they dress and prepare on such
Occasion? Yet in Religion Men too often are the Reverse of all this. The Case
and Crime is justly represented in the Parable of the KING that made a Marriage
Supper for his SON, Matthew. xxii. Init. But those that were bidden made their
paltry and criminal Excuses, till the King was wroth and protested they should
never taste of his Feast. We read again of His coming in to see his Guests, and
how He challenged him that came without a Wedding Garment, and cast him out
into utter Darkness. It teaches us the equal Irreverence of those that neglect
and those that profane the Ordinance of the Supper. Many wont come at all at
the Call of their KING, and too many come carelessly and without Reverence and
Fear. The Institutions of our GOD may be prostituted by Humane Laws, and many
an unfit polluted Soul find himself under an evil kind of Constraint to
approach them for carnal and filthy Ends: For the sake of their daily Bread
they may sometimes unwillingly eat of the Bread of their GOD and drink of his
Cup. And as long as partaking of the Sacrament is made a Test of Loyalty to our
Earthly King, and a Qualification for Offices in Fleets and Armies, it will in
this wicked World be necessarily profaned to the Dishonor of the KING OF
GLORY. HE has made it an Oath of our Allegiance to Himself, and we must take
and make it with godly Fear; Swearing to Him in Truth, in Righteousness and in
Judgment. Has our GREAT KING said to us, " Do this in Remembrance of Me! And
shall we not do it? And He has said, Do it not unworthily! lest ye eat and
drink Judgment to your Selves. We should be equally deterred from the Neglect,
and from the careless Performance of the Duty.

But this for the first Use, which answers to the mighty Reason of the Words as
they ly in our Context: Is GOD a Great KING? then with what Reverence and godly
Fear is HE to be worshipped in one Ordinance of his House and in another? I
shall be shorter in the remaining Inferences.

2. Is GOD a Great King? how great is the Evil of the least Sin! We must ever
estimate the Evil of Sin from the Greatness of the DIVINE MAJESTY. David's
Heart smote him for cutting off Saul's Skirt, so should our Hearts smite us for
the least Appearance of Sinning against the LORD our King. In every wilful Act
of sin we are guilty of stretching forth our Hand against the KING of Heaven,
and striking at his Crown and Government. Shall not Shimei die (said faithful
Abishai) that has railed at and cursed my Lord the King? We in Effect do this
to the KING of Glory, and cast Stones at Him, in every sin we commit against
the LORD OUR GOD. Shall a dead Dog do this and live! Sinners are no better
before that BLESSED BEING whom their Sins bark at and blaspheme. A light
Repentance can never suffice for the least sin against the Divine Majesty. 1 Samuel ii. 25. If a Man sin against the LORD who can entreat for Him? What
Atonement can be made for an infinite Offense? We read of some, who being
doubly damned, do curse their GOD and KING, and look upward. Isai. viii. ult.

3. If GOD be a great King, He can greatly Pardon. And it is therefore a great
Thing for Him to pardon the least Sin. He cannot lightly pardon the
Transgression of his royal and perfect Law. The glorious Honor of his Kingdom
forbids it. He cannot de^^ Himself. But saving the Rights of his own Wisdom,
Justice and Holiness, what cannot the Great King do? Moses well prayed, Numb.
xiv. 17. Let the POWER of my LORD be great according as Thou have said, the
LORD is Long-suffering and of great Mercy, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression
and Sin. Abishai wondered at David's forgiving Shimei. But what was David's
Throne if compared with GOD'S. To the LORD our GOD, belong Forgivenesses. This
is the Glory wherein he passes before us Sinners.

4. What a great thing is it, for the GREAT KING of Heaven, to give his OWN SON
to save us! His Only-begotten and Eternal SON! the Brightness of his Glory, and
the express Image of his Person! by Whom He made the World, and by Him all
things consist. What manner of Love and Grace is this to Rebel dust and ashes!
Had all the Angels in Heaven, and all the Kings upon Earth, been offered up in
one Sacrifice, these glorious Lives had been as nothing in Comparison of that
single Life of the SON OF GOD in our Nature. A LIFE worth all these ten
thousand times over.

It was accepted as a great thing by the GREAT GOD, when Abraham offered up his
beloved Isaac to Him, at his Word, for a Burnt-Offering. But may we name it
here? by no means. It was a more surprising thing and horrible, when the King
of Moah driven to Despair by the victorious Arms of Israel, took his Eldest Son
that should have reigned after him, and slew him on the Wall of the City. A
salvage and brutish. Act! from Rage at his powerful Enemies, and worthy of
their Detestation. But the Love of GOD in giving his Dear Son, to save his
Enemies, is worthy of the Adorations of Angels and Men, while Devils gnash
their Teeth and melt away.

5. What perfect Obedience is due from us to the Laws of the GREAT KING, and
what Submission to Him in all his Providence! GOD is absolutely to be obeyed
and submitted to in all things. He is so in Heaven and it should be so on
Earth. " Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven. It was a wise and
righteous Order, given by the Greatest Man on Earth, Ezra vii. 23, 26.
Whatsoever is commanded by the GOD of Heaven, let diligently be done; for why
should there be Wrath against us? GOD's Judgments must be resigned to with a
perfect Acquiescence. As Shimei answered to Solomon, "The saying is good: As my
Lord the King has said, so will thy sevant do. We are happy under a perfect
Government. As for GOD, his Work is perfect. This is enough to keep us always
easy, thankful, joyful. Shall he that hates Right govern, or is there
Wickedness in the MOST HIGH? What Right have I (said injured Mephibesheth) to
cry to the King? Our Times and Lives are in GOD's Hand. It is the LORD! let Him
do what seems him good.

6. Is GOD a Great King? to him let us swear and to Him perform our Vows.
Because He is the Greatest we swear by his Name, and He swears by Himself.
Jerem. iv. 2. Thou shall swear, "the LORD lives! in Truth and Righteousness:
and the Nations shall bless themselves in Him, and in Him they shall glory. We
must swear Allegiance and Fidelity to GOD, because He is our King. So we have
done in our Baptism, and so we do as often as we eat of his Bread and drink of
his Cup. The Sacraments of Religion are Oaths of Loyalty and Subjection to
CHRIST. And in all our solemn Prayers and Professions, and occasional Vows, we
bind our Souls, as by Oath, to GOD. " O my Soul, thou have said unto the LORD,
Thou art my LORD. This is the Demand of the GREAT KING, and his Glory requires
it: Isai. xlv. 23 I have sworn by MY SELF, that unto Me every Knee shall bow,
every Tongue shall swear.

7. Is GOD a Great King? there is certainly a Tribute due to Him out of all
that we are and have: from our Minds and Hearts, from our Lips and Hands, out
of our Estates, and according to our Endowments and respective Stations. GOD is
the King of Souls, and it is the Homage of the Heart that He requires and
values. He gives us also our Wealth and claims an Offering out of that. "
Honor the LORD with thy Substance, and with the First Fruits of all thine
Increase. Kings are thus served, yea supported by their Subjects, and their
Greatness depends on it. But the GREAT KING receives but of His own from us,
and what He first gives to us. This, as was said before, is the Greatness and
Glory and Majesty of His Kingdom, and His Exaltation above all: Both Riches and
Honor come of Him, and in His Hand it is to make Great and to give Strength
unto all! David therefore spoke before the LORD, in the Day when He and his
Princes made their princely Offerings toward the Temple; But who am I, or what
is my People that We should offer any thing to the GREAT GOD? for all things
come of Thee and of thine own have we given Thee.

8. Let us pray for, rejoice in, and every way we can contribute unto the Glory
of GOD'S Kingdom. AS CHRIST has taught us to pray, " Father in Heaven thy
Kingdom come! and to ascribe the Kingdom Power and Glory to GOD. O what an
Honor and Glory, Comfort and Joy will it be to us, if we may serve to advance
the Kingdom of CHRIST in this World and a better, Now and for Evermore!
Ministers in His Churches, ministering to the Conversion of Souls, and to their
Subjection to the Gospel; to the everlasting Glory of GOD, in their Eternal
Salvation: Christians in their private Relations, in their Neighbourhoods, and
more especially in their own Families: that the Souls under their Care may come
into the Kingdom of GOD'S Grace, into his Church, and that the GREAT KING of
the World may have Honor and Service from us and ours; a Revenue of Praise and
Obedience through Time and Eternity.

Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed be the Kingdom of our LORD JESUS! Peace
in Heaven and Glory in the Highest!

FINIS.

