Mr. Appleton's SERMON TO THE Honorable Artillery Company, At their Election
of Officers, June 4. 1733.

The Origin of War examined and applied, IN A SERMON Preached at the Desire of
the Honorable Artillery Company In Boston, June 4. 1733. Being the Day of
their Election of Officers.

By Nathanael Appleton, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Cambridge.

Romans 7. 23. But I see another Law in my Members warring against the Law of my
Mind, and bringing me into Captivity to the Law of Sin. Gal. 5. 19 -- 22. Now
the Works of the Flesh are manifest, which are these -- Hatred, Varience,
Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, -- Envyings, Murders, -- But the Fruit of
the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace --. BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for Daniel
Henchman, over against the Brick Meeting House in Cornhill, 1733.

The Lusts of Men the Cause of Wars.
James IV. I. From whence come Wars and Fightings among you? come they not
hence, even of your Lusts that war in your Members?
THERE is no one Subject that has taken up so much Room in the many Histories
of the World in general, or of Nations in particular, as the Wars and Fightings
that have been either among themselves, or against one another. Nor has there
any thing given Occasion for so many Men to signalize themselves by their
Conduct and Valor, and transmit their Names with Honor to future Generations,
and even to the latest Posterity, as their remarkable Achievements in Military
Enterprises.

But now in order to regulate our Apprehensions of war in general, and to judge
when and how far it is lawful or unlawful; in order also to adjust our Ideas of
those Men of War, whose Names sound great in History, for their martial Genius
and mighty Conquests; and to distinguish between those who have been famous for
a generous Zeal, and an heroic Courage in maintaining and defending their just
Rights against their invading Foes, and those who have been no less infamous
for their Oppression and Violence, Tyranny and Cruelty: And lastly, in order to
our understanding with what Views any should be seeking Military Skill, and
with what Spirit they should enter upon and go forth to War; it is highly
requisite to trace the Subject up to its Fountain Head, and consider the Origin
of all the Wars and Fightings that are or have been in the World.

And here we shall find that the World in its primitive Innocence and
Perfection knew no such Thing. For the wise Creator of the Universe disposed
every thing into such wonderful Order and exact Harmony, that there was not the
least Jar or Schism, nor the least Opposition or Discord in the natural or
moral World.

And therefore it must needs be our falling from the original Rectitude of our
Nature, and the suffering Sin and Lust to enter into our Hearts, that has given
Birth to all the Contentions and Confusions, the Wars and Bloodsheds that have
been among the Children of Men. And this is what the inspired Author of this
Epistle gives us an Account, or at least leads us into the Apprehension of.
From whence come Wars and Fightings among you? come they not hence even of your
Lusts that war in your Members? This Epistle as you may see by the first Verse
of it, was directed to the Twelve Tribes that were scattered abroad. And such
was the Unhappiness of of the Israelitish Nation, that as they (through their
Pride by reason of their distinguishing Privileges) despised all other People;
so they were generally hated of those among whom they came: and seldom lived
peaceably with them, or indeed one with another; but were continually at
Variance among themselves, or quarrelling with their Nei'bours. And these
Contentions and Quarrels being, as Whitby in loc.
Josephus observes, not only in Judea, but in Alexandria, Syria, and many other
Places, were doubtless the Cause of setting the Roman Empire against them, to
such a degree as brought on the dreadful Destruction of the Jewish Nation,
which is supposed to have come upon them seven or eight Years after this
Epistle was written.

But then if we consider this Epistle as directed to the Christian Jews, yet
they even after their Conversion retained too much of their old Temper, which
threw them into many Contests and Quarrels about Matters of Religion, as well
as those of a civil Nature. And the Author of this Epistle observing with Grief
and great Concern of Soul, the unchristian Heats and Tumults which these
Professors of Christianity did so frequently fall into, is for leading them up
to the Source and Original of them, as the most powerful Argument to discourage
and dissuade them from such Broils and Quarrels for the future. From whence
come Wars and Fightings among you? come they not hence even of your Lusts? He
don't put these things by way of Interrogation, as if he was at a loss or
uncertain whether they took their Original from hence or no, but we are to look
upon it as an oratorical artful way of speaking, that he might persuade them
into the same Apprehension with himself, that all the Wars and Fightings that
were among them arose from their Lusts, or their (...)
Pleasures, as in the Margin, and which is observed to be the most common
Signification of the Word; but then it must be understood in this place of such
Pleasures as arise from the Gratification of some Lust or other, and then it
comes to the same thing with our Lusts. That war in your Members; i. e. in all
the Faculties of our Nature, both of the Mind and of the Body; the (...) Leigh.
Crit. Sac.
Word as is observed, bearing such an extensive Signification.

There are spiritual and fleshly Lusts, and they all war in our Members, they
militate one with another, and all of them against the Faculties of our Souls
and the Members of our Bodies. And these Lusts that are thus at war within, the
Apostle tells us are the Cause of all the Wars and Fightings that are without.
Accordingly these are the two Points in the Text that I propose to speak
briefly to. viz.

1. There are Lusts that war within us.

2. That these Lusts are the Cause of all the Wars and Fightings that are among
the Children of Men.

And then I intend to improve and apply the Truths, by which you will see that
my Text countenances the Designs and Purposes of this Day, further than at
first View some of you may be apprehensive of.

1. There are Lusts that war within us.

By Lusts we are to understand irregular Affections and inordinate Appetites or
Desires. Lusts are not any new Affections or Desires that differ in Nature from
those that were originally planted in our Constitution. But when Men's natural
Affections and Appetites are fixed upon improper Objects, or carried out to an
inordinate Degree, and the Gratification pursued in an irregular Manner, then
they become LUSTS.

And by the Indulgence of one such Lust or inordinate Desire in our first
Parents, their Souls were betrayed, and a multitude of them brake in
immediately, and got possession of their Nature; and so intimately united with
their Constitutions, as to become natural to them, and so by natural Generation
are transmitted to their Offspring; insomuch that there are now within us Lusts
of every kind, according to the several Faculties and Affections of the Soul,
Sensations and Appetites of the Body, which are distinguished into spiritual
and fleshly and worldly Lusts; which several kinds of Lusts, are comprised and
distinguished by the Apostle, into the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye,
and the Pride of Life. 1. Joh. 2. 16. Now all these Lusts war in our Members:
they keep up a perpetual Contest and Struggle within us.

Here let me say,

1. These Lusts are at war one with another.

The Lusts of Men, although they have a likeness in some respects, yet are far
from having any real Harmony or Agreement among themselves. For as they have
all one common Nature, which consists in irregular Motions and Desires of the
Flesh and Spirit, so the natural Tendency of them must needs be to jar and
jostle one with another. They have all different Views and Interests, and are
pursuing different Designs; and what will be the natural Effect hereof, but the
thwarting and opposing each other continually? The Lusts of the Flesh
interfering with those of the Spirit, in seeking after their several
Gratifications, and worldly Lusts opposing them both; Pride, Luxury and
Intemperance, being all opposed by Covetousness or an inordinate Desire after
an hoard of earthly Riches. But then,

2. These Lusts do all war in our Members, even against our Souls and Bodies.

Although they are at continual Variance among themselves; yet as the Jews of
old, in the midst of their civil Discords and Divisions, when Jerusalem was
besieged, would unite their Forces against their common Enemy, so these
disagreeing Lusts all unite against us as their common Enemy. These wicked and
unreasonable Lusts, have entered into a Confederacy, rather a Conspiracy
against us, and are offering the utmost Violence to our Natures. They have
usurped the Dominion, and gotten the Possession of our Souls and Bodies, so as
to weaken and deprave the Faculties of the one, and to make use of the Members
of the other, as the Instruments of Unrighteousness unto Sin.

These rebellious Lusts have turned Reason off the Throne, and Conscience from
the Judgment Seat: and as for the Will and Affections, they have so conquered
and corrupted them, that they have in a great measure, if not entirely, brought
them over to their Side. But now, the noble intellective Powers of the Soul,
are far from being easy while their Rights are thus invaded, and their
Prerogatives thus encroached upon; and by the Means and Helps that God affords
them, in his Word and by his Spirit, they are for recovering their original
Dignity and Authority. And hence arises a perpetual Struggle in the Man, the
Flesh lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, as the
Apostle expresses it, Gal. 5. 17.

Thus every Man becomes the Seat of War and the Field of Battle.

But oh! what Calamities! what Desolations! what Destruction and Misery! has
this intestine War bro't upon us! what Tumult, what Confusion does it keep us
in perpetually! How do these violent and impetuous Lusts, either by setting
themselves in Battle-array, bear down all the Dictates of Reason, Revelation
and Conscience, and even force us to yield to their sinful Demands! or how by
the secret and sudden Sallies of some particular Lusts, best acquainted with
our Tempers and Circumstances, take us at unawares, and carry us away captive
at their Will?

And Oh! how base and cruel are these usurping Tyrants, when they have gotten
us into their Hands!

How do they profane and prostitute our Bodies (designed for the Temples of the
holy Ghost, and that God has curiously wrought in the lower parts of the Earth,
and made in such a fearful and wonderful Manner as we now behold them) to all
our base and filthy Desires! and instead of having any regard to our Health,
and the preservation of our Constitution, every Member is made a Slave to some
base Lust or other, and rather than deny themselves any Gratifications, they
will abuse our Bodies to such a degree, as to bring on Weakness and Pains,
Diseases and Death it self.

And then again, these insulting Lusts are no less abusive to our Souls. For
instead of paying a proper regard to the dignity of their superior Nature, and
a due defference to the Dictates of their nobler Powers, which carry a Majesty
with them, they will vent their utmost Fury at them, as being their most potent
Adversaries, and that give the greatest disturbance to their sinful
Indulgences. These therefore they bend all their Force against, that if
possible they might prevail over them, to such a degree, as to go on in the
Pleasures of Sin without any Check or control from them. And the uncircumcised
Philistines never dealt more basely with Sampson their great Enemy, than these
Lusts do with our Souls. They put out the Eyes of our Understandings, and make
us grind unto them: improving our Skill and Knowledge in projecting and
contriving for their further gratification. And how do they abuse an
Understanding thus blinded as to Spiritual Things, calling for it upon every
Occasion, to find some way or other to please and make Sport for them?

In Short, there are no insults too gross for these Lusts to offer to the Soul.
They care not how they wrong and wound it; and rather than deny a Lust they
will degrade and defile the Soul, and make us more vile than the Beasts that
perish. To please a Lust, they will put the Soul upon the Rack, and by reason
of guilty Fears fill it with the utmost Horrors and Distress; nay they will
kill and destroy it forever, if it be not rescued out of their Hands by the
Almighty Grace of God.

Thus these wicked and unreasonable Lusts war in our Members, even against all
the Members of our Bodies and the Faculties of our Souls.

I proceed now to the Second general Head,

2. These Lusts that thus war in our Members, are the Cause of all the Wars and
Fightings that are among the Children of Men.

From whence come Wars and Fightings among you? come they not hence even of
your Lusts? The Lusts of Men don't confine their malign Influence within the
very Persons they have gotten the Possession of, but being insatiable in their
Desires as well as unreasonable in their Demands those Men that are under the
Government of them, naturally fall into Broils and Contests one with another.
For as different Lusts in the same Subject are continually jarring with each
other, so not only different Lusts, but even the same Lusts in different
Subjects, will naturally set them at Variance, and be a means of their breaking
forth into Quarrels, and oftentimes at length into Wars and Bloodsheds.

These are they that have turned the World upside down wherever they have
prevailed, and kept it in Wars and Confusions in some part or other, from the
first entrance of Sin and Lust into the World to this Day. Lust had no sooner
entered our first Parents, but Adam was for accusing his Wife Genesis 3. 12.
, and doubtless a Quarrel immediately ensued. And the two first Sons that were
born to them, were no sooner grown up, but the Spirit that lusts to Envy,
prevailed in one to such a degree that he slew his Brother Genesis 4. 8.
And oh! what Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Strifes, Wars and Fightings have,
there been in the World ever since!

The Lusts that are in the World, and that are in a peculiar manner litigious
and contentious are such as these, viz. Pride, Envy, Malice, Discontent,
Emulation, Wrath, Jealousy, Deceit, Covetousness, and the like. And now if we
trace up the Quarrels that are in Families and among Friends and Neighbors,
the civil Discords. Tumults and Animosities in particular Nations between
Princes and their Subjects, and all the Religious Controversies in the Church,
which have been generally carried on with as great Fierceness and Rage as any;
and lastly, if we were able to traverse all the Wars that have been among the
Nations and Kingdoms of the Earth, we shall find the Origin of them in some or
other of the forementioned Lusts. How came it to pass that Nation has been at
War against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, in the several Ages and
Generations of the World; so that there has scarce ever been a universal Peace,
but from Men's Lusts, at least on one side, and most commonly on both? Indeed
the Emperor Augustus, shut the Temple of Janus the third time, in Token of a
universal Peace, when Christ the Prince of Peace made his entrance into the
World; but whether it reached any further than the Roman Empire is uncertain.

What is it that has brought such mighty Armies into the Field, that has
covered the Face thereof with human Blood, that has ravaged so many
Countries, and laid so many rich and beautiful Cities waste, but the
unsufferable Pride of Princes, and the insatiable Avarice, Cruelty and
Blood-thirstiness of their Officers and Soldiers? Whence was it that the mighty
Monarch of Assyria and Persia, and Emperors of Greece and Rome, sent their
victorious Armies to all Kingdoms Countries and Provinces within their
Knowledge, to subdue and conquer them, but from their (I had almost said)
infinite Pride, grasping at an universal Monarchy, and from their Cruelty,
Tyranny and Covetousness, which have born down all regard to the Laws of
Nations, or the natural Rights and Properties of Men? And what are we to think
of many of those mighty and renowned Heroes, but as so many lawless Tyrants,
who when they led their Captives in Triumph through their capital Cities, were
themselves in a much more inglorious Manner led in Triumph by their own Lusts?

And then if we look into the Christian World, and among the Nations that
profess Subjection to the Prince of Peace, and to be governed by the Gospel of
Peace, we shall find they have been as often at War as other Nations, and their
Wars to have taken their Rise from as base a Cause. What has been the Cause of
all the dreadful Wars in Christendom, but the Pride of Princes, aiming at a
greater Dominion than was their Right; (...) their Covetousness, wickedly
desiring to be enriched by the Spoils of their Nei'bours; or from a jealous and
envious Spirit, not bearing to see others grow greater than themselves; or from
angry Resentment and cruel Revenge, raging in the breasts of haughty Princes to
such a degree, that nothing but the Blood and Destruction of those against whom
they are incensed can satisfy? And how often have the most public Treaties of
Peace, Leagues and Alliances that have been entered into, and in the most
solemn Manner ratified and confirmed, been violated and broken in upon by these
deceitful Lusts? So that we must all acknowledge with the Apostle, That Wars
and Fightings come from hence, even from Men's Lusts. They are begun by Men's
Lusts on one Side, and too commonly carried on by them on the other. I don't
say it is always so; for although it is hard to conceive how a War should begin
but from some Lust or other; yet we can see how it may be prosecuted on the
other side without. For there is no doubt, but when the just Rights of a Nation
or People are invaded and incroached upon by a Foreign Power, they may oppose
and resist even unto Blood; yea, and may prosecute the War so far against them
as to recover their Rights, and take Satisfaction for the Damages sustained by
the Invasions of their Enemies; provided that Satisfaction be not offered, and
cannot be obtained in a more gentle Way. Yea, and I see not why they may not
proceed to weaken the Power of the Aggressor, that has often proved false and
treacherous, so far as shall discourage from making any further Assaults upon
them. But how seldom does a Nation act merely upon such Principles, and
prosecute a War with such Limitations as these? But instead hereof, have we not
reason to think, that even those Nations who have engaged in a lawful War,
would carry it on to an unlawful Length and Degree, even to the utter
Destruction of their Enemies, or at least to the taking away of all Government
from them, and making them a Province of their own, if God in his wise and
gracious Providence did not interpose? How would Nations and Countries and
Kingdoms be sacrificed to the Revenge of each other, and how would the lesser
and weaker Kingdoms be swallowed up and devoured by those of superior Strength
and Numbers, if it was not for the Lord to whom the Kingdoms of the World
belong, and who is the Governor among the Nations, who causes the Wrath of Man
to praise him, by accomplishing his Purposes and Designs upon a Person or
People, and then restrains the remainder of it, saying to the insulting and
invading Powers of the Earth, as in Job. 38. 11. Hitherto shall thou come, but
no further, and here shall thy proud Waves be stayed.

I proceed now to make some Improvement and Application of these Things. And in
the

1st. place, What we have heard, discovers some of the evil Effects and
Consequences of our first Parents suffering Sin and Lust to enter into their
Hearts.

For as the Lusts which entered into their Hearts took Possession of the human
Nature, and have been propogated to all the natural Descendants of Adam, so
they have been the unhappy Parents of all the Miseries and Calamities that are
or have been in the World. Lust had no sooner entered the Heart of Man, but it
conceived and bro't forth Sin, and a Train of innumerable Evils with it. It
bro'c Curse on the Earth, and in a great measure, put the whole Frame of Nature
here below out of Course: But in a more especial manner has it disordered the
human Nature, and put those Faculties among which there was a perfect Harmony,
at the utmost Variance, and set every Man at war with himself. But these are
not all the unhappy Effects of Men's Lusts; for they are also the Seeds of
Discord that are sown among Brethren, and the Cause of all the Wars and the
Calamities which the World, by reason hereof, have labored under from the
beginning to this Day. Little did our first Parents think of the Disorder
Confusion and Misery, which they entailed upon their Posterity, when they
hearkened to the suggestions of Satan, and gave way to an irregular Desire.

2. We learn what may be expected and looked for in a World that is full of Sin
and Lust, viz. Wars and Rumors of Wars continually.

These are but the natural Effects of Pride, Envy, Jealousy, Malice,
Covetousness, and the like; And when we see these Lusts continuing and
prevailing in our selves and among Mankind in general, what can we expect but
Tumults in our own Breasts, Jars in Families, Discords among Brethren, Quarrels
among Nei'bours, Divisions in the Church, Contentions in the State, and Wars
and Fightings among the Nations? These things naturally follow upon Men's
Lusts; and we may as well expect that Causes will cease to produce their
Effects, as that these things should discontinue, while Men are inslaved to
their Lusts.

3. The only way to solid and lasting Peace, is to curb and conquer Men's Lusts.

There can be no way so effectual to procure and settle Peace upon a sure
Foundation, as to strike at the Root of all Contentions; and what is that but
the Lusts of Men? Let them be but once destroyed, and there is nothing remains
to disturb within, or to stir up Wars without. Take away the Cause and the
Effect cease. Take away the Lusts that are in the World, and Wars would come
to a perpetual End, and our Peace will be as a River, constant and never
failing. Then a People would be at Peace among themselves, and their Ways being
such as please the Lord, their Enemies would also be at Peace with them.

And this leads me to infer,

4. The Excellency of the Gospel, and the happy Tendency of its Doctrines and
Precepts, to procure and establish Peace among Men.

For the Design of the Gospel is to subdue Men's Lusts, to cleanse us from all
Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit: The Grace of God, the Gospel, that brings
Salvation, and that has appeared unto us, teaches us to deny Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts; yea, and all spiritual and fleshly Lusts. And if once the Gospel
had taken such powerful and universal Effect, as to root out these Lusts, then
would there be, as was sung by the heavenly Host, at the coming of the Messiah,
and first setting up the Gospel Kingdom, Peace on Earth, and good will among
Men, as well as Glory to God in the highest.

And it is only because the Gospel does not reign so powerfully and universally
in the Hearts of Men, as it ought, that those Prophecies of universal Peace and
Tranquillity to be in Gospel Times, are not as yet accomplished. Let Men but
live up to the Principles and Precepts of the Christian Dispensation, and see
if it would not then be as the Prophet foretold, Isa. 2. 4. They shall beat
their Swords into Plow shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, Nation
shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more.

5. We learn, that Heaven must needs be a Place of perfect Peace and Quietness
forever, because entirely freed from Sin and Lust.

Heaven is a high and holy Place, into which nothing enters that defiles; and
every Inhabitant being made perfect in Holiness, there cannot be the least
Discord or Difference among them. Indeed those litigious Lusts of Pride and
Envy did once invade those pure and peaceful Regions, when a number of Angels
revolted, and a dreadful War commenced upon it; but those apostate Spirits
being overborn by a superior Power, were immediately banished those blisful
Abodes, as Disturbers of their Peace, and Interrupters of their Happiness.

And now none can enter there, but such as are entirely cleansed from all their
Lusts, and made perfect in Holiness. No Pride, no Envy, no Discontent can come
within the Gates of this celestial City, but every one that has an entrance
ministered to him into this everlasting Kingdom, being thus perfectly freed from
these disturbing Lusts, there must needs be an inviolable Peace and perpetual
Harmony among them. Instead of looking with a contemptuous or envious Eye upon
one another, they will by a sublimated Charity, delight in each others
Happiness, and all rejoice in God, the Center of their Bliss.

But to come to some Inferrences that are more immediately to the Purposes and
Designs of the present Day.

6. What we have heard, may help us to judge, in a good measure, as to the
Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of a War.

For this we may lay down as a general Rule, That a War raised and prosecuted
merely by Men's Lusts, must needs be unlawful on the side of the Aggressor: But
then the same War becomes lawful, and very necessary on the side of the Opposer

When a Prince through Pride, Envy or Avarice, makes unreasonable Demands upon
his Nei'bour Princes, and upon their refusing to comply, proceeds in a hostile
Manner to force them to it, it must needs be unlawful, contrary to the Law of
God, of Nature, and the professed Rules of all civilized Nations. For the
superior Strength of one Nation gives them no more Right to invade the
Properties and Privileges of another, than one Man's being stronger than
another, gives him a right to injure and abuse him. And for one Nation to
encroach upon the Rights and Properties of a Nei'bour Nation, by Force and
Arms, is only a more open Violence, Robbery and Murder. But then as there is
no way for such a People to suppress, resist, or get Satisfaction for the
Violence and Injuries offered them, but by the like Force and warlike
Proceedings; so this must needs be very just and lawful, yea, and the Duty of
such an injured People, provided that reasonable Terms of Peace and
Satisfaction have been proposed, and a Compliance therewith refused by their
Adversaries. For, for one Nation to submit to be injured, invaded and run upon
by another, without resisting and opposing them with their utmost Power, (when
Terms of Peace have been unreasonably rejected) would argue such a Cowardice
and Meaness of Spirit, that the Gospel, as much as it preaches up Peace, would
reprove such a people for. For however it may direct private Christians to
suffer injuries rather than revenge themselves, yet it does not forbid them
from bringing such Offenders before the civil Magistrate to be corrected for
their Wickedness, who is declared to be the Minister of God, a Revenger to
execute Wrath upon him that does evil, Romans 13. 4. And much more necessary is
it to stop the Violence, and take Satisfaction for Injuries offered to a whole
Nation. But as this cannot be done by the civil Magistrate, because their Power
is confined within their own Government, therefore there is no other Way for a
Nation, as such, to defend or recover their just Rights, but by entering into a
War against their Enemies, which must needs be lawful, and the Duty of an
injured People, when all Capitulations prove in vain.

In short, a War is lawful, when it is entered into, not for the gratifying our
own Lusts, but for the opposing the Lusts of others that are injurious to us. A
War is lawful, when it is for the necessary Defense or recovering of our just
Rights. It is lawful also to enter into a War, when our Help is desired, for
the necessary Protection and Relief of a People whom we see oppressed, and in
Danger of being swallowed up by their Enemies, who have without Cause risen up
against them. And I don't see why a War may not be lawful, for the opposing and
suppressing the growing Power and Tyranny of any Nation, whom we behold
advancing themselves, by violent and unjust Encroachments upon their
Neighbors, to such a degree of Power, as would overballance all the Force that
we could make against them. Now in these and such like Cases, (for I don't
pretend to have mentioned every thing that will justify a warlike Proceeding) a
People may make War, and go forth in a humble Dependence upon Almighty God to
protect them, and prosper their just Arms against their Enemies. For a War
entered into upon such Accounts as these, is the Cause of Justice and Mercy,
and that is the Cause of God, and He will be on our Side, and if He be for us,
we need not fear who is against us.

But here I must observe, That it is not so much the Business of the Soldier to
enquire into the Merits of the Cause, and judge whether the War be lawful or
unlawful, for that is an Affair entrusted with the Prince and Councils of a
Nation; and the Soldier is to presume that the Government have good Reasons to
justify their proclaiming and engaging in a War: And his Business is to be
strong and courageous, and to fight manfully under his Commander, in the
several Posts of Difficulty and Danger that may be assigned him, without
puzling his Mind with scrupelous Enquiries, whether the War be lawfully entered
into or not.

7. What we have heard, teaches us after what Manner, and with what Views and
Temper of Mind, Men should go forth to War.

It must not be to gratify any Lust of our own, but for the resisting and
opposing the unreasonable Lusts of others. It must not be to injure and oppress
others, or to invade any of their just Rights, but from a generous Concern for
the Defense and Safety of our own: Not merely to hurt and destroy them, from
any cruel and savage Disposition whithin us, but for own Security.

In short, the Glory of God, the Interest of Religion, and the Safety of his
People, must lie nearest the Soldier's Heart; and a Zeal for these Things must
fill the Christian Soldier with heroic Courage and Fortitude of Mind, ready to
sacrifice his Life and Fortunes for the public Safety, if called to it. Then,
and only then, can he on good Ground expect that God will be a Shield and
Buckler to him. etc.

8. What we have heard, highly recommends Military Skill and Courage as
absolutely necessary, under God, for the Defense and Safety of a People.

For considering our own Lusts, and the Lusts of others, we must look for Wars
and Fightings. Our own Lusts are such as may provoke God to stir up our Enemies
against us. We are also in danger by our Lusts of abusing and injuring our
Nei'bouring Tribes and Nations, and thereby of stirring up their Corruptions to
come in a way of Revenge upon us: Or if we should by our just and honest
Dealings with them, escape the Guilt of bringing a War upon our selves; yet
their Lusts without any Provocation of ours, may break out against us. So that
considering the Lusts of Men, it is impossible for us to be assured of the
Continuance of Peace.

And therefore it must needs be the Wisdom of every People to be so aware of
the various Lusts of Men, and the Manner of their Opperations, as to put and
always keep themselves in proper Postures of Defense; not only by keeping up
Forts and Castles, and such like Strong Holds in good Repair, but by having a
suitable Number of skilful and valiant Soldiers, Men that understand the Art of
War, and have Courage to appear in the Field of Battle.

Although Men's Lusts are the Cause of War, yet military Skill and Courage are
from a nobler Principle, and are not only consistent with, but are very much
improved and heightened by true Grace. And my Text, although it disparages War in
general, considering its Original, yet by Consequence it countenances a warlike
Genius: For considering the Tendency of Men's Lusts, there must needs be Wars
and Fightings; and what is the natural Consequence of this, but that the Art of
War is highly useful and necessary, to defend us against the Violence of Men's
Lusts?

Here therefore let me address my self to the Honorable Company of the
ARTILLERT, and say, That your Designs and Endeavors to be thoroughly skilled
in the Art of War, is very Laudable and Praise worthy. For considering the
Lusts and Corruptions of Men prevail after such a manner, it is become as
necessary an Art as any: And it is the Wisdom and Duty of a People to cultivate
and improve it.

It shows what a proper Though It and Apprehension of these Things our Fore Fathers
had, when they established such a Company as this, and encouraged it with
certain Privileges and Immunities. It showed that they were well aware of the
Lusts of Men, and apprehensive in Consequence hereof, what frequent Occasions
there would be for Men expert in War.

And it is with Pleasure that we now behold this Company increasing, and more
of a military Spirit discovering it self, by the very considerable Additions
which have been made of late to this Seminary or School for the martial Art.
And what is further to be desired is, that this honorable Company might still
advance in Reputation, and be of more extensive Benefit, by the coming in of
those that sustain the higher Commissions in the military Order, such as the
Field-Officers in the several Regiments, who by attending these stated
Exercises a few Times in a Year, would be able to propagate this useful Art to
their Subalterns, and they to their several Companies; and so the whole Militia
of the Land might be gloried of, as those of the Tribes of Israel, in I Chron.
12. 30, 33. That were Men of Valor, expert in War, that could keep Rank, and
were not of a double Heart.

Blessed be God! We have not had Occasion for such disciplined Soldiers as
these of late, by reason of the happy Peace we have had for several Years, and
do still enjoy. But we may not expect a long and uninterrupted Series of it;
for we may justly fear that either our own Lusts, or the Lusts of others, will
break forth and disturb our present Tranquillity. It is necessary therefore that
we should be always ready, even for a sudden Attack: Improve your opportunities
therefore in gaining all the Skill, Courage and Conduct that is needful; for
you know not how soon there may be Occasion for you to go forth and employ the
same, in the Service of God and your Country.

We know not what Designs are forming against us. That we are hated by some,
and envied by others for our growing greatness, is not to be doubted. And how
soon their Lusts may rise to such a Head, as to break out against us in an open
War, and how soon God shall see cause to correct us with such a Judgment, is
known only to Him. And as for the reviving military Skill, if it should
forebode the Approach of War; yet it affords a happy Omen that we shall not be
given as a prey to our Enemies: but rather by these Means God will defend us
from our Enemies, and make use of our Skill to defeat their Designs, and cause
them to turn back ashamed.

But alas! to what Purpose is it to have Officers and Soldiers expert it War,
and valiant in Battle, and at the same Time to have our Castles and Batteries,
our Forts and Garrisons, neglected and suffered to fall to the Ground? Surely
upon these Accounts we are in a very defenseless Posture, and too much resemble
a City without Gates and Bars, yea, a City broken down, and without Walls. The
decaying State of our Fortifications, looks as if we were not aware of the
Lusts of Men, and thought all Danger of their breaking out against us was over,
and as if the glorious Times were come, when the Nations would learn War no
more. But how groundless are such Expectations? The Lusts of Men prevail as
much as ever, and our growing greatness naturally excites their Jealousies and
their Envy, and our growing wickedness as certainly stirs up the fierce Wrath
of the Almighty, that gives us reason to fear He will withdraw His Restraints
from them. And what a miserable Defense should we be able to make against a
Foreign Invasion, under our present Circumstances! I don't presume to tax the
Government in any Branch of it; but would only observe how unhappy it is, that
they cannot unite in Measures for their necessary Defense. For how can we expect
the divine Protection, when we cannot agree upon Methods proper for our own
Safety? It is only when a People's ways please the Lord, and they are united
among themselves, and take all prudent Methods for their own Security, that
they may expect God to be their Fortress and their Munition of Rocks.

To Conclude,

Whilst we, through the Favor of God, enjoy an outward Peace, let us not be
insensible of that dreadful War that is within, stirred up by our Lusts, that
are warring in our Members. And now let us manage this War with our Lusts, and
all our Spiritual Enemies, with the Skill, Resolution and Courage, that becomes
wise and good Soldiers under Jesus Christ, the great Commander of his People,
and Captain of our Salvation.

There can be no Dispute about the Lawfulness of carrying on this War: For it
is absolutely necessary, and our indispensable Duty. There can never be a Peace
made with these Enemies but a very inglorious one: Nay, by the least
Concessions, or so much as Capitulations with them, we forfeit our Honor.

Whatever Possession they have gotten of us, it is by Rebellion and Usurpation,
and none of these wicked Lusts have a right to live in us: We must therefore
fight 'till we are the Death of every one of them. It is not enough to weaken
and destroy the Power of some, for they are so interwoven and united together;
and such is their mysterious Nature, that if one Lust be left alive and let
alone, it will quickly give Life again to all the rest, and they will rise up
against us an exceeding great Army. The Temper therefore of these Enemies is
such as wont allow us to give Quarter, or show any Mercy; for Mercy to them is
Cruelty and Death to our selves. There must be no Treaties, no Truces or
Cessation of Arms, for the least Indulgence granted to them, will only give
them an Advantage against us. We must therefore be always upon our Watch and
Guard; nay, we must be actually resisting and opposing of them with all our
Might, and then we shall find that we don't fight as those that beat the Air.
For we shall after many a violent Struggle and sharp Conflict, at length gain
the Victory, and come off Conquerers, yea, more than Conquerers through Christ
that has loved us, and given himself for us, to redeem us from all Iniquity.
And having thus overcome through the Blood of the Lamb, we shall with Him and
holy Angels that have been attending on Him, make our triumphant Progress to
the Celestial City, and being welcomed with loud Hosannas, shall be crowned as
Victors with immortal Honors. And having thus ended the Toils and Fatigues of
War, we shall in everlasting Peace sit down with Christ on his Throne, even as
he has overcome, and is set down with his Father on his Throne.

FINIS.

