A SERMON Concerning the Excellency and Usefulness OF THE Common Prayer.
Preached by William Beveridge, D. D. (late Lord Bishop of St. Asaph) at the
Opening of the Parish Church of St. Peter's Cornhill, London, the 27th of
November, 1681.

The TWENTY-NINTH EDITION.

BOSTON: Printed for T. Cox at the Lamb on the South Side of the Townhouse.
1733.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY Lord Bishop of London, one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
YOUR Lordship having signified your Pleasure, that the SERMON which you heard,
when You did us the Honor to be present at the Opening of our Parish Church,
should be made public; notwithstanding my Averseness to Print any thing in
English; yet out of a just Sense both of that Obedience which I owe to You as
my Bishop, and of that Kindness which I have received from You as my Patron, I
have now done it, and herewith make bold to present it to You. What Effect a
Discourse of this Nature will have upon the Minds of those who should have so
much Patience as to read it, I know not; but must leave that to him who has
the Hearts of all Men in his Hand. My Subject I am sure is good and necessary:
And as for my plain and practical way of handling it, it is that which my Text
requires, in that it commanded, that in our Christian Congregations, All
Things be done to Edifying. So that unless I had endeavored to suit it to the
Capacities of all there present, and to make it as Edifying as I could unto
them, my Sermon had been a Contradiction to my Text: And besides that, I had
lost my Design in Preaching it: Which was, to convince those especially, whose
Souls, under your Lordship, are committed to my Care and Conduct, of the
Excellency and Usefulness of the Common Prayer, and so to persuade them to the
constant and conscientious Use of it; not only because it is conformable to the
Doctrine, Discipline, and Practice of the Universal Church, nor only because it
is established by the Laws both of our Church and State (though they also be
very great Reasons) but likewise because that Extraordinary Benefit and
Advantage which they would receive from it, for the Edifying of their Souls in
whatsoever is necessary to their Eternal Salvation.

I am very sensible, that much more might have been said upon this Excellent
Subject; but intending no more than a plain Sermon upon the Occasion, I was
forced to omit many things, and to confine my self to such only, which were
most obvious, and seemed the most necessary for People to know and practice, in
order to their being reconciled unto, and Edified by our Public Prayers. And
if upon Your perusal of that little which I have said, You shall find any thing
not agreeable to the Doctrine of our Church, I humbly submit it to Your
Lordship's Judgment and Censure; only desiring that you would be as ready to
pardon, as I am to retract it.

My Lord,

I have one Request more to make unto You, which is, that as You was the
Occasion of my Printing this Sermon, so you would be pleased to accept of it
now it is Printed: And if, by the Blessing of Almighty God, it may contribute
any thing to those great-Ends, which You continually prosecute with so great
Wisdom and Prudence, with such exemplary Care and Diligence in the Management
of that High Office which he has called You to, even to the Glory of his great
Name, the Good of his Church, and the Salvation of the Souls of Men, it is all
that is desired by,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, William
Beveridge.

1 CORINTHIANS xiv.26. Let all Things be done to Edifying.


WHEN Judas Maccabeus had new built the Altar, and repaired the Temple at
Jerusalem, after it had been polluted and laid waste for Three Years together;
the Church of God at that time and place rejoiced so much at it, that they kept
the Dedication of it eight Days, and ordered that the same should be observed
every Year, 1 Mac. 4.59. And so we find it was in our Savior's time; for he
himself was pleased to honor that Festival, though only of Ecclesiastical
Institution, with his own Presence, John 10.22. In the like manner, we of this
Parish have Cause to be transported with Joy and Gladness, and to spend this
Day in praising and adoring the most High God, for that our Church which has
lain waste for above five times Three Years, is now at last rebuilt and fitted
again, for his Worship and Service. For what the Altar and Temple were unto the
Jews then, the same will our Church be unto us now. Did they there offer up
their Sacrifices unto God, as Types of the Death of Christ? We shall here
commemorate the said* Death of Christ, typified by those Sacrifices. Did they
come from all parts of Judea to worship God there? So shall we, I hope, come
from all parts of this Parish to worship God here. Was the Temple an House of
Prayer to them? So is this Church to us. Was that the place where God,
according to his Promise, came unto his People to bless them? I do not doubt
but he will do the same to us in this place, if we come unto it, and carry our
selves in it as we ought to do. In short, was the Temple the place where all
things were performed, that could any way conduce to the Edifying of God's
People, as things then stood? The same may be said of our Church, as things now
stand. For whatsoever is, or can be, Necessary to the Edifying of our Souls
here, and so to their Eternal Salvation hereafter, is clearly and fully
comprehended in those several Offices, which according to the Laws of the Land,
are now to be performed in this placed. Neither is there any thing contained in
any of them, but what does really conduce to these great Ends and Purposes.

BUT this being a thing which is denied by some, and understood but by few
amongst us, I shall endeavor to explain and demonstrate unto all. Which I
choose to do at this time, because it is the most proper Subject I could think
of for this Occasion. For unless what is to be now done in this place, will
answer the Ends wherefore it is erected, all the Costs and Charges that have
been laid out upon it, will be to no purpose at all. But if it can be fully
made out, That the Service which is here to be performed, does highly conduce
to the Advancement of God's Glory and your Happiness, the great End wherefore
such places are erected, then you cannot but acknowledge, that whatsoever any
of you have contributed toward it, is the best Money that ever you spent; and
that this Day, wherein the said Service is begun to be performed in it, is one
of the most joyful days that this Parish ever saw.

THIS therefore is that which I shall endeavor to prove at this time: And for
that end I have chosen these Words for the Ground and Foundation of all that I
shall say upon this Subject. Let all Things be done to Edifying. For the right
Understanding whereof we must know, that the Apostle having in this Chapter
discoursed at large concerning the way and manner of holding Christian
Assemblies, and having proved, that whatsoever is there said, ought to be
spoken in such a Language, that all there present may understand, and so be
edified by it; he at last sums up the whole in this Proposition; How is it then
Brethren? When ye come together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a
Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a Revelation, has an Interpretation: Let all
Things be done to Edifying: As if he should have said, Whatsoever Gifts any of
you have, or pretend to, yet when you meet together upon a Religious Account,
for the Public Worship of God, take special care that all Things be there
done, to the Edifying of all who are there present. From whence it is plain,
that the Apostle lays down this as a general Rule, necessary to be observed in
all Christian Congregations. So that whenever we meet together to Worship and
Serve God, if any thing be there done which is not for our Edification, we come
short of this Rule, and so we do too, if any thing be there wanting that may
conduce to that end. For according to this Rule, as nothing is to be there done
but what is for our Edifying, so also on the other side, all Things that are,
or can be, for our Edifying, ought to be there done.

BUT for our better understanding the true Sense and Purport of this Rule, it
is necessary to consider what the Apostle here means by Edifying: For which we
must know, That all Christians being, as the same Apostle says, of the
Household of God, built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.19, 20. Hence whatsoever
tends to the Strengthening, Supporting, Cementing, or Raising this Fabric
higher, whatsoever it is whereby Men are made more firm and solid Christians,
more Holy and Perfect Men than they were before, by that they are said to be
Edified. And therefore it is a great Mistake for Men to think, as many do, that
they are Edified by what they hear, merely because they know perhaps some
little thing which before they were ignorant of. For Knowledge (as the Apostle
says) puffs up, it is Charity that Edifieth, 2 Cor. 8.1. And therefore,
whatsoever Knowledge we attain to, we cannot be said to be Edified by it any
further than as it influences our Minds, excites our Love, and inclines our
Hearts to God and Goodness. And that this is the rrue Notion of Edifying, is
plain from the Apostle's own Words, where he says, Let no corrupt
Communication come out of your Mouths, but that which is for the use of
Edifying, that it may minister Grace unto the Hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. For from
hence it is manifest, that that only is properly said to Edify, that ministers
Grace unto us; whereby we are made more Pure and Holy than we were before. And
therefore, we read of Edifying our selves in Love, Ephesians, 4.16. And building up
our selves in our most holy Faith, Jude 20. which are the two Graces that make
up a real and true Christian. And nothing can be said to Edify, but what tends
to the exciting and increasing of them: Until we come (as the Apostle says) in
the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect
Man, unto the measure of the stature of the Fullness of Christ God, all things
there are to be so done, that we may return home wiser, and better than we came
thither; with our Knowledge of God and Christ increased, our Desires enlarged,
our Love inflamed, our Faith confirmed, all our Graces quickened, and so our
whole Souls made more humble, more Holy, more like to God, than they were
before.

THE Words being thus briefly explained, I shall now apply them to our present
purpose, and show that that Form of Religious Worship, which is prescribed by
our Church, established by the Laws of the Land, and therefore to be used now
in this place, agrees exactly with this Rule, or Canon of the Holy Apostle,
even that all things in it are done to Edifying.

BUT before we prove that that Form in particular, which our Church has
prescribed, is agreeable to this Apostolical Rule, it is necessary to prove
first, That the prescribing a Form in general is so. For unless the prescribing
a Form in general, be according to this Rule, no Form in particular, that is
prescribed, can possibly agree with it. But now that this Rule admits, yea,
requires the prescribing of some Form, is evident from the Rule it self. For
the Apostle here commands the Church of Corinth, and so all Provincial
Churches, to take care that in their Religious Assemblies all Things be done to
Edifying. But how is it possible for any Provincial Church to see that this be
done, except she prescribes some certain Form for the doing of it? If every
Minister of a Parish should be left to his own Liberty, to do what he pleased
in his own Congregation, although some perhaps might be so wise and prudent as
to observe this Rule, as well no way secured that all would; and therefore must
needs be obliged to consider of, and appoint some such Form to be used in all
her Congregations, by which she may be fully assured, that this Apostolical
Rule is every where observed, as it ought to be. And although we should suppose
what can never be expected, that all the Clergy in every Province should be as
wise and as good as they ought to be, yet it cannot be supposed that every one
of them should understand what is for the Edification of the People, as well as
all together. And therefore it must needs be acknowledged, that the surest way
to have this Rule observed, is, for the Governors of every Church, and the
whole Clergy, to meet together by their Representatives in a Synod, or
Convocation, and there, upon mature Deliberation, agree upon some such Form,
which they in their Prudence and Consciences judge to be according to this
Rule, which the Apostle here lays down before them.

AND besides that, the prescribing a Form in general, is more for our Edifying,
than to leave every one to do what seems good in his own Eyes. We have the
concurrent Testimony, Experience, and Practice of the Universal Church. For we
never read or heard of any Church in the World, from the Apostles days to ours,
but what took this course. Though all have not used the same, yet no Church but
have used some Form or other. And therefore for any Man to say, that it is not
Lawful; or not Expedient, or not so Edifying, to use a Form of Prayer in the
Public Worship of God, is to contradict the general sense of Christianity, to
condemn the Holy Catholic Church, and to make himself wiser than all
Christians that ever were before him. Which, whatsoever it may be thought now,
was always here (...) Sins and Follies

NAY, more than all this too: For this is not only to make a Man's self wiser
than all Christians, but wiser than Christ himself: For it is impossible to
prescribe any Form of Prayer in more plain and express Terms than he has done
it, where he says, When ye Pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
Luke 11.2. And I hope none here present but will acknowledge that Christ, by
whom alone we can be Edified, knows better what is, or what is not for our
Edification, than we, or all the Men in the World can do. And therefore seeing
he has not only prescribed a Form of Prayer for his Disciples to use, but has
expressly commanded them to use it, we, who profess our selves to be his
Disciples, ought to rest fully satisfied in our Minds, that using of a Form of
Prayer is not only Lawful, but much more for our Edifying, than it is possible
for any other way of Praying to be.

THE same may be proved also from the Nature of the thing it self, by such
Arguments, which do not only demonstrate that it is so, but likewise show how
it comes to be so. For First, In order to our being Edified, so as to be made
better and holier, whenever we meet together upon a Religious account, it is
necessary, that the same good and holy Things be always inculcated and pressed
upon us after one and the same manner. For we cannot but all find by our own
Experience, how difficult it is to fasten any thing that is truly good, either
upon our selves or others, and that it is rarely, if ever effected, without
frequent Repetitions of it. Whatsoever good things we hear only once, or now
and then, though perhaps upon the hearing of them, they may swim for a while in
our Brains, yet they seldom sink down into our Hearts, so as to move and (...)
the Affections as it is necessary they should as, by a Set Form of Public
Devotions rightly composed, as we are continually put in mind of all things
necessary for us to know or do, so that is always done by the same Words and
Expressions, which by their constant use will imprint the things themselves so
firmly in our Minds, that it will be no easy matter to obliterate or raze them
out; but do what we can they will still occur upon all occasions; which cannot
but be very much for our Christian Edification.

MOREOVER, That which conduces to the quickening our Souls, and to the raising
up our Affections in our public Devotions, must needs be acknowledged to
conduce much to our Edification. But it is plain, That as to such purposes, a
Set Form of Prayer is an extraordinary help to us; for if I hear another Pray,
and know not beforehand what he will say, I must first listen to what he will
say next; then I am to consider, whether what he says be agreeable to sound
Doctrine, and whether it be proper and lawful for me to join with him in the
Petitions he puts up to God Almighty; and if I think it is so, then I am to do
it. But before I can well do that, he is got to another thing: By which means
it is very difficult, if not morally impossible, to join with him in every
thing so regularly as I ought to do. But by a Set Form of Prayer all this
trouble is prevented; for having the Form continually in my mind, being
thoroughly acquainted with it, fully approving of every thing in it, and always
knowing before hand what will come next, I have nothing else to do, whilst the
Words are sounding in mine Ears, but to move my Heart and Affections suitably
to them, to raise up my Desires of those good things which are prayed for, to
fix my mind wholly upon God, whilst I am praising of him, and so to employ,
quicken, and lift up my whole Soul in performing my Devotions to him. No Man
that has been accustomed to a Set Form for any considerable time, but may
easily find this to be true by his own Experience: And by consequence, that
this way of Praying is a greater help to us, than they can imagine that never
made trial of it.

To this may be also added, That if we hear another praying a Prayer of his own
private Composition or voluntary Effusion, our Minds are wholly bound up and
confined to his Words and Expressions, and to his Requests and Petitions, be
they what they will: so that at the best we can but pray his Prayer. Whereas
when we pray by a Form prescribed by the Church, we pray the Prayers of the
whole Church we live in, which are common to the Minister and People, to our
selves, and to all the Members of the same Church: So that we have all the
devout and pious Souls that are in it, concurring and joining with us in them:
which cannot surely but be more effectual for the Edifying not only of our
selves in particular, but of the Church in general, than any private Prayer can
be.

Lastly, IN order to our being edified by our public Devotions, as it is
necessary that we know beforehand what we are to pray for, so it is necessary
that we afterward know what we have prayed for, when we have done: For I
suppose you will all grant, that all the good and benefit we can receive from
our Prayers, is to be ultimately resolved into God's gracious hearing, and
answering of them: Without which they will all come to nothing.

BUT there are two things required to the obtaining an Answer of our Prayers:

First, THAT we sincerely and earnestly desire good things at the Hands of God,
to which, as I have shown, a Set Form of Prayer couduceth very much:

AND then,

Secondly, IT is required also, that we trust and depend up on God for his
granting of them, according to the Promises which he has made unto us in Jesus
Christ our Lord. And I verily believe, that one great Reason why Men pray so
often to no purpose, is, because they do not take this course: But when they
have done their Prayers, they have done with them, and concern themselves no
more about them, than as if they had never prayed at all. But how can we expect
that God should answer our Prayers when we our selves do not mind whether he
answers them or no? Nor believe and trust upon him for it? For certainly
trusting in God, as it is one of the highest Acts of Religion that we can
perform, so it is that which gives Life and Vigor, Virtue and Efficacy to our
Prayers, without which we have no ground at all to expect they should be
answered: For God having promised to answer our Prayers, except we trust on him
for his performance of such Promises, we lose the Benefit of them, and by
consequence our Prayers too. And therefore, as ever we desire that he should
grant us what we pray for, when we have directed our Prayers to him, we must
still look up* Psalm. 5.3. expecting and hoping for the return of them.

NOW as this is a thing of greater consequence, so a Set Form of Prayer is a
greater help to us in it, than it is commonly thought to be. For if we hear
another utter a Prayer ex tempore, which he never said, nor we heard before,
nor ever shall do it again, it is much if he himself can remember the tenth
part of what he said: How much less can we that heard him, do it? And if we
cannot possibly remember what we prayed for, How is it possible for us to
expect it at the Hands of God? or to depend upon him for it? But now it is
quite otherwise when we use a Set Form of Prayer: For by this means, when we
have prayed, we can recollect our selves, look over our Prayers again, either
in a Book, or in our Minds, where they are imprinted; we can consider
distinctly what we have asked at the Hands of God, and so act our Faith and
Confidence on him, for the granting every Petition we have put up unto him,
according to the Promises which he has made us to that purpose. And as this is
the surest way whereby to obtain what we pray for, it must needs be the most
Edifying way of Praying that we can possibly use.

THESE Things being duly weighed, I shall now take it for granted, That the
using a Form in general in the public Worship of God, is agreeable to this
Apostolical Rule, Let all Things be done to Edifying; and so shall proceed to
show, That that Form in particular, which our Church has appointed to be used
upon such Occasions, is so too. For which end it is not necessary that I should
run through every particular Word, Phrase or Expression in the Common Prayer,
much less that I should vindicate and defend it from every little Exception,
that Ignorance and Malice may make against something in it. For nothing ever
yet was, or can be said or written but something or other may be said or
written against it, either well or ill. But my Business must be to prove, That
the Form of Divine Service contained in the Book of Common Prayer, which is now
used in the Church of England, conduces so much to the Edifying those that use
it, that it agrees exactly to the Rule which the Apostle here prescribes in
that case. And this I shall demonstrate from four Heads.

1. From the Language. 2. From the Matter, or Substance of it. 3. From the
Method. And, 4. From the Manner of Performing it.
FOR if it be Edifying in all these Respects, it must needs be acknowledged to
be so in the whole. There being nothing in it but what may be reduced to some
of these Heads.

First, THEREFORE as to the Language, you all know that the whole Service is
performed in English, the Vulgar and the common Language of the Nation, which
every one understands, and so may be Edified by it. And this, indeed, is the
Ground and Foundation of all the Benefits that we can possibly receive from our
public Prayers. And therefore in the Church of Rome, the common People are
made incapable of being Edified by the Prayers of the Church, in that they are
all made in Latin, a Language which they do not understand. So that when they
meet to worship God, there are seldom any in the Congregation that knows what
is said there, except the Priest that reads it, and oftentimes not he neither.
By which means they have no such thing really amongst them as Common Prayer.
Neither is it possible for the common People to be ever Edified by what is
there said, or done, except they could be once convinced by it of the horrible
abuse which their Church puts upon them; in commanding all her public
Devotions to be performed in an unknown Tongue, directly contrary not only to
the Rule in my Text, but to the Design of this whole Chapter.

BUT blessed be God for it, it is not so with us. For ours is truly
Common Prayer; for it is written and read in that Language which is common to
all the Congregations in the Kingdom, and to every Person in each Congregation.
So that all the People of the Land, whatsoever Rank or Condition they are of
may join together in the use of every thing that is in it, and so be jointly
Edified by it: Especially, considering that it is not only all in English, but
in common and plain English, such as we use in our common Discourse with one
another. There are no unusual or obsolete Words, no hard or uncouth. Phrases in
it, but every thing is expressed as clearly and plainly as Words can do it. So
that the meanest Person in the Congregation, that understands but his
Mother Tongue, may be Edified by it, as well as the greatest Scholar.

BUT that which is chiefly to be considered in the Language of the
Common Prayer, is, that it is not only common but proper too. Though the Words
there used are but common Words, yet they are so used* that they properly
express the things that are designed by them. This, I confess, may seem to be
no great matter at first sight, yet it is that without which we might be
subverted, by that which was intended for our Edification. For impropriety of
Speech in Matters of Religion, has given occasion to all, or most of the
Schisms, Errors and Heresies, that ever infested this, or any other Church, as
might easily be demonstrated. Hence the Apostle gave Timothy, A Form of sound
Words, and charged him to hold it fast: Hold fast (says he) the Form of sound
Words which thou have heard of me, 2 Timothy 1.13. As knowing that except the
Words, whereby he usually expressed Divine Truths, were sound and proper, it
would be impossible for his Notions and Opinions of the Things themselves to be
so. And certainly, if ever there was A Form of sound Words, composed by Men
since the Apostles times, our Common Prayer may justly deserve that Title; it
being all made up of such fit and proper, such sound and wholesome Words, and if
we do but hold fast to them, there is no fear of our falling, either into
Heresy, or Schism. For they being duly considered, will suggest to our Minds,
right and true Apprehensions of all the Articles of our Christian Religion, and
so not only make us sound, but build us up strong and firm in our most Holy
Faith: So that considering the plainness and perspicuity, the soundness and
propriety of Speech which is used in it, the least that can be said of the
Common Prayer, is, that all Things in it are so worded, as is most for the
Edifying of all those that use it.

AND as the Words in the Common Prayer are all as Edifying as Words can be, so
in the second place, is the Matter expressed by those Words. For there is
nothing in it, but what is necessary for our Edification, and all things that
are, or can be for our Edification, are plainly in it. First, I say there is
nothing in our Liturgy but what is necessary for our Edification. There are no
such Fables in it, or Endless Genealogies, which (as the Apostle says)
Minister Questions, rather than Godly Edifying, which is in Faith, 1 Timothy 1.4.
There are none of those vain Disputations, and impertinent Controversies, which
have of late been raised in the Church, to its great Disturbance, rather than
its Edification. There are no new Opinions, nor airy Speculations in it, which
serve only to tickle Men's Ears, and please their Fancies, and so divert their
Thoughts from what they are about. Look it all over without Prejudice and
Partiality, consider seriously every thing that is in it, and you will find
nothing asserted, but what is consonant to God's Word, nothing prayed for, but
according to his Promise, nothing required as a Duty, but what is agreeable to
his Commands, nothing said or done, but what is grave and sober, solemn and
substantial; nothing but what becomes the Worship of our Great and Almighty
Creator. And therefore, nothing but what we may some way or other be Edified by
it.

AND as there is nothing in it, but what is Edifying, so all Things that are or
can be Edifying, are in it. For nothing can be necessary to Edify, and make us
solid and perfect Christians, but what is necessary either to be believed, or
done, or else obtained by us. But there is nothing necessary to be known or
believed, but we are taught it; nothing necessary to be done, but we are
enjoined in it; nothing necessary to be obtained, but we pray for it in our
public Form of Divine Service.

FOR first, As to those things which are necessary to be known, or believed, it
is acknowledged by all Protestants, that they are fully contained in the Holy
Scriptures, which make a great, if not the greatest part of our Divine Service;
and are constantly read over, the Psalms once every Month the Old Testament
once, and the New thrice every Year. And all the Fundamental Articles of our
Christian Faith, revealed in the Holy Scriptures, being briefly summed up in
the Apostles Creed; that we may be sure to keep them always in our Minds, we
have that Creed read, and repeated always once, and most commonly twice every
day in the Year. And seeing the Godhead of our Blessed Savior, the Foundation
of our whole Religion, has been, and still is denied by some, left we should
be led away with the Error of the Wicked, every Sunday and Holy Day we read the
Nicene Creed, wherein the Godhead, both of the Son and Holy Ghost, is asserted
and explained. And that we may not entertain any Erroneous Opinions concerning
the most Holy Trinity, or the Incarnation of the Son of God, but the true
Catholic Faith whole, and undefiled, upon certain days every Year, we read
that which is commonly called, The Creed of St. Athanasius, wherein those great
Mysteries are unfolded, in the most proper and perspicuous terms that they are
capable of.

AND as all things necessary to be believed, are summarily contained in the
Three Creeds, so they are frequently explained in the other parts of our
Liturgy; Insomuch, that it would be easy to frame a complete Body of Divinity
out of the Words there used: At least of all such things as are needful for any
Man in the World to believe or know, in order to his Eternal Salvation.

THE same may be said also of all those things which we ought to do: For, as we
here do whatsoever is necessary to be done, in order to our Worship of God in
this place, so we here are taught whatsoever is necessary to be learnt, in
order to our serving God in all other places. So that no Man that frequents our
public Congregations, where the Common Prayer is used, can ever plead
Ignorance of any one Duty whatsoever: For if it be not his own Fault, he may
there be instructed in every thing which he that made him requires of him. For
here, as I observed before, we constantly read the Holy Scripture, which as the
Apostle says, Is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
instructed unto all good Works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. And seeing it has pleased the
Most High God to comprise his whole Will, and by consequence our Duty, in the
Ten Commandments, hence we read them constantly every Sunday and Holyday
throughout the whole Year: By which means every one, that does not wilfully
shut his Eyes, may clearly see, and fully understand, his whole Duty, both to
God and Man. Especially considering that in your Prayers themselves also, there
is frequent mention made of all those Vices which ought to be avoided, and of
all those good Works which ought to be performed by us. So that we can never
come to Church, but we are still put in mind, both of what we ought, and what
we ought not to do, that we may be saved.

AND then, as there is nothing necessary to be known, or done, but we are
taught it; so neither is there any thing necessary to be obtained, to make us
either Holy, or Happy, but we pray for it in the Common Prayer. For here we
have the Lord's Prayer, a Prayer composed by Wisdom it self; and therefore it
must needs be the most perfect and Divine Prayer that ever was made. Neither do
we use it only once, but in every distinct Service of the Church, in our
Prayers before we read the Holy Scripture, and in our Prayers after; toward
the end of the Litany, and in the beginning of the Communion Service, and in
every Office of the Church besides. And the reason is, because although our
Savior has not forbidden us to use any other Prayer* yet he has expressly
commanded us to say this, whenever we pray. And therefore, in obedience to
his Command, our Church has wisely ordered, that in all, and in every Solemn
Address that we make to the most High God, we always say this Prayer, lest
otherwise, by our Transgression of his Command, in omitting this, we make all
our other Prayers to be ineffectual. And besides, by the constant use of this
amongst our other Prayers, we are always sure to use one Prayer, both
absolutely perfect in it self, and most acceptable unto him, to whom we pray;
it being a Prayer of his own Composure: So that we speak unto God in his own
Words, and so may be confident, that we ask nothing of him, but exactly
according to his own Will.

AND though all things necessary for us be virtually contained in the Lord's
Prayer, yet our Church, in Conformity to the Catholic and Apostolical, has
thought good to add some other Prayers, in which the same things are more
particularly expressed and desired, at the hands of our great and most
bountiful Benefactor. All which are so contrived, that there is nothing Evil,
or Hurtful for us, but we pray against it; nothing Good, or Useful, but we pray
for it. There is no Vice, or Lust, but we desire it may be subdued under us: No
Grace or Virtue, but we pray it may be planted and grow in us. Insomuch, that
if we do but constantly and sincerely pray over all those Prayers, and
steadfastly believe and trust in God for his answering of them, and so obtain
what we there pray for, we cannot but be as real and true Saints, as happy and
blessed Creatures, as it is possible for us to be in this World. Neither do we
here pray for our selves only, but according to the Apostle's Advice, we make
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks for all Men; yea,
for our very Enemies, as our Savior has commanded us, Mat. 5.44. And what can
be desired more than all this, to make the Matter of the Common Prayer
Edifying, either to our selves or others? Nothing certainly, but Truth and
Sincerity of Heart in the using of it.

I cannot pass from this Head, before I have observed one thing more unto you,
concerning the Prayers in general, and that is* That they are not carried on in
one continued Discourse, but divided into many short Prayers, or Collects, such
as that is, which our Lord himself composed; and that might be one Reason,
wherefore our Church so ordered it, that so she might follow our Lord's Example
in it, who best knew what kind of Prayers were fittest for us to use. And
indeed, we cannot but all find, by our own Experience, how difficult it is to
keep our Minds long intent upon any thing, much more upon so great things as
the Object and Subject of our Prayers are* but do what we can, we are still
liable to Distractions: So that there is a kind of necessity to break off
sometimes, to give our selves a breathing time, that our Thoughts being loofned
for a while, they may with more ease, and less Danger of Distraction, be tied
up again, as it is necessary they should be, all the while that we are actually
praying to the Supreme Being of the World.

BESIDES that, in order to the performing our Devotions aright to the most High
God, it is necessary that our Souls be possessed all along with due
Apprehensions of his Greatness and Glory. To which purpose our short Prayers
contribute very much: For every one of them beginning with some of the
Properties or Perfections of God, and so suggesting to our Minds right
Apprehensions of him at first, it is easy to preserve them in our Minds during
the space of a short Prayer, which in a long one would be apt to scatter and
vanish away.

BUT that which I look upon as one of the principal Reasons, why our public
Devotions are, and should be divided into short Collects is this: Our Blessed
Savior, we know, has often told us* That whatsoever we ask in his Name, we
shall receive: And so has directed us in all our Prayers to make use of his
Name, and to ask nothing but upon the Account of his Merit and Mediation for
us; upon which all our Hopes and Expectations from God do wholly and solely
depend. Hence therefore, (as it always was, so) it cannot but be judged
necessary, that the Name of Christ be frequently inserted in our Prayers, that
so we may lift up our Hearts unto him, and act our Faith upon him for our
obtaining the good things we pray for. And so we see it is in the
Common Prayer, for whatsoever it is we ask of God, we presently add, Through
Jesus Christ our Lord, or something to that purpose. And so ask nothing but
according to our Lord's Direction, even in his Name. And this is the reason
that ma^^^^ our Prayers so short: for take away the Conclusion of every Collect
or Prayer, In the Name of Christ, and you may join them all together, and make
them but as one continued Prayer. But this would be to offer manifest Violence
to the Prayers, by taking away that which gives them all their Force and
Energy, and so making them ineffectual to the purposes for which they are used.
For certainly the asking all things in the Name of Christ, as we do in the
Common Prayer, is the only way whereby to obtain what we desire, and by
consequence, the most Edifying Way of Praying in the World.

THE next thing to be considered in the Common Prayer, is the Method, which is
admirable, and as Edifying, if possible, as the Matter it self. This none can
deny, that does but fully understand, and seriously consider of it. Which
therefore, that you may all do, I shall briefly run through the whole, and give
you what Light I can into it, that you may clearly see, not only the
Reasonableness, but the Excellency of it all along.

FOR which purpose I shall instance only in such things which offer themselves
at first sight, to any one that does but cast his Eye upon it.

LET us therefore suppose a Congregation of sober and devout Christians (such
as we all should be) met together to perform their public Devotions to
Almighty God; every one of which has lift up his Heart privately unto him
already, imploring his Aid and Assistance in the Performance of so great a
Work, and so are all now ready to set about it.

THE first thing we do, is to Read some Sentences of Holy Scripture, that so we
may begin our Devotions unto God in his own Words. And they are all such
Sentences as put us in mind of our sins against him, and of his promise to
pardon them if we do repent: That so we may present and carry our selves with
that Reverence and Godly Fear before him, as becomes those who are sensible of
their own Vileness and Unworthiness to approach so great a Majesty: And
likewise, with that Faith and humble Confidence, which becomes those who
believe, that he upon our Repentance will pardon our Sins, and accept both our
Persons and Performances, according to the Promises which he has made unto us.

THEN follows a grave Exhortation, concerning the end of our present
Assembling, which is of great Use, and ought never to be omitted. For Men
generally are apt to rush into the Presence of God, without ever considering
what they go about Whereas, this Exhortation puts us upon considering the
greatness of the Work which we are now engaged in, and so upon composing our
Thoughts, and preparing our selves for the due performance of it.

OUR Minds being thus brought into a right Frame and Temper for it, we all,
both Minister and People, prostrate our selves before the most high God,
Confessing upon our Knees, the manifold Sins and Wickedness that we have
committed against him. Which Confession is so contrived, that all, and every
Person in any Congregation whatsoever, may join in it. For it runs in general
Terms: And yet so too, that every particular Person may and ought in his own
mind to confess and acknowledge his own Sins, which he knows himself to be
guilty of. As where we say, We have left undone those things which we ought to
have done, and we have done those things which we ought not to have done. At
the saying of this every one should call his own Sins to remembrance, and what
Duties he knows himself to have omitted, and what Vices he knows himself to
have committed, and confess them accordingly unto God. And when we have thus
confessed our Sins to God, we presently implore his Mercy in the pardon of
them, and his Grace, that for the future we may forsake them.

AND whilst we are thus upon our Knees, humbly confessing and bewailing our
Sins before the Lord our God, the Minister stands up, and in the Name of God,
declares and pronounces to all those who truly repent, and unfeignedly believe
his Gospel, The Absolution and Remission of all their Sins Which though spoken
also in general Terms, yet every particular Person there present, ought to
apply it to himself, so as to be fully persuaded in his own mind, that if he
does but sincerely repent, and believe the Gospel, he is perfectly absolved
from all his Sins by God himself, according to the Promises which he has made
to Mankind in Jesus Christ our Lord.

AND now looking upon our selves as absolved from our Sins, upon our Repentance
and Faith in Christ, and by consequence, as reconciled to God, we take the
boldness to call him Father* humbly addressing our selves to him in that Divine
Form of Prayer which he himself has given us. Which done, we lift up our
Hearts and Voices unto God, for his Assistance of us in what we do, in the
words of David, the Minister crying out, O Lord, open thou our Lips, and the
People answering, And our Mouths shall show forth thy Praise. The Minister
again, O God make speed to save us, the People, O Lord, make have to help us.
And them immediately we all lift up our Bodies to stand upon our Feet, and so
put our selves into a posture of Praising and Magnifying the Eternal God,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for his infinite Goodness and Mercy toward us; for
which purpose the Minister first says, or sings, the Gloria Patri, Glory be,
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; and the People to show
their Consent, answer, As it was in the Beginning, is now, and ever shall be:
World without end. Amen. But not thinking this to be enough, the Minister calls
upon the People again, saying, Praise ye the Lord, and the People answer, The
Lord's Name be praised; and then we go on to praise him together, saying, or
singing, the Ninety-fifth Psalm, Venite exultemus Domino, O come let us sing
unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our Salvation, etc.
And so proceed to the Psalm appointed for the Day. After every one of which, to
testify our Belief in the most Sacred Trinity, and our acknowledgment of that
infinite Love and Goodness, which every one of those Divine Persons has
manifested to us, we repeat that incomparable Hymn, Glory be to the Father, etc.

OUR Hearts being thus raised up to God in praising and admiring of him, we are
now in a fit Temper and Disposition to hear what he shall speak unto us. And
therefore have a Chapter read out of the Old Testament; and that in its
ordinary course, except upon Sundays and Holydays, when more people attending
the public Worship of God, than can conveniently come upon other days, we read
some select Chapter proper for the day, and such as is judged most edifying to
all that are there present. And having thus heard God speaking unto us in his
Holy Word, we presently fall upon praising of him again, for so unspeakable a
Mercy, saying, or singing in the Morning, the Te Deum, one of the most Heavenly
and Seraphick Hymns that was ever composed by Men: Or else, the Song of the
three Children, which is nothing but a Paraphrase upon that which David sang so
often upon Earth, and which the Holy Angels sing continually in Heaven, even
Hallelujah, Praise ye the Lord. Wherein we being all sensible how far short we
our selves come of praising God sufficiently, we call upon all the Creatures of
the World to do it, Bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever. In
the Afternoon, we sing either the Magnificat, or else the Ninety eighth Psalm,
both which being taken out of God's own Word, cannot but be very pleasing and
acceptable unto him.

AFTER this, our Soul being got upon the Wing again, and soaring aloft in the
Contemplation of the Divine Perfections, we are now rightly qualified to hear
and receive the Sublime Mysteries of the Gospel. And therefore have a Chapter
read to us out of the New Testament. After which, we being revived with the
good tidings of the Gospel, and filled with admiration at the infinite Goodness
of God therein revealed to us, we break forth again into Praising and Adoring
of him, in the Song of Zacharias, or else the hundredth Psalm, in the Morning;
and at Evening, either the Sixty seventh Psalm, or else the Song of Old Simeon,
still concluding with Gloria Patri.

NOW having thus heard some part of the Word of God read to us, and expressed
our Thankfulness unto him for it, to signify our Assent, not only to what we
have heard, but to the whole Scripture, we all with one Heart and Voice repeat
the Apostles Creed, wherein the Sum and Substance of it is contained. And so
profess our selves to continue in the number of Christ's Disciples, and that as
we were at first Baptized, so we still believe in the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, God Blessed for evermore.

HITHERTO we have been mostly taken up with Confessing our Sins to God,
imploring his Mercy in the Pardon of them, hearing his most Holy Word,
acknowledging his Goodness to us, and praising and magnifying his Name for it.
By which means, except we have been extremely wanting to our selves, our Hearts
cannot but be so united and fixed upon God, that we are now rightly disposed to
make known our Wants, and present our Petitions before him. This therefore is
the next thing we set upon: But seeing that neither Minister nor People can
possibly do it aright, without the Assistance of God himself, therefore each of
them first pray for his special Presence with the other. The one saying, The
Lord be with you, the other, And with thy Spirit. And then immediately falling
down upon our Knees, we Adore and Supplicate each Person of the most Blessed
Trinity to have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon
us, Lord have mercy upon us. After which we Address our selves to God in the
Words that he has put into our Mouths, saying the Lord's Prayer; which ended,
the Minister and People, by turns lift up their Hearts to God in some short and
heavenly Ejaculations, striving as it were to out-vye each other in prevailing
with the Almighty to pour down his Blessings upon us. And then, in an humble
and solemn manner, we join together in supplicating his Divine Majesty for his
Grace and Favor, his Defense and Protection, his Mercy, and Blessing, for our
selves, for the King, for the Royal Family, for his Church, and for all Mankind.

AND thus we do ordinarily in the Collects appointed for that purpose.

BUT upon Wednesdays and Fridays (upon which days the Primitive Church used to
perform their more than ordinary Devotions) as also upon the Lord's Day in the
Morning, we do it in the Litany, and in such a Litany as comprehends all, and
every thing that we can ever need to desire of Almighty God, either for our
selves or others.

AFTER this, upon Sundays and Holy Days, we proceed to the Communion-Service:
And therefore, approaching to the Lord's Table, we begin it with his own
Prayer. And after another short Prayer to God to cleanse the Thoughts of our
Hearts by the Inspiration of his Holy Spirit, we read the Ten Commandments,
which he has enjoined us to observe; and after every Commandment we ask God
Mercy for our Transgression thereof, for the time past, and Grace to keep the
same for the time to come; saying, Lord have Mercy upon us, and incline our
Hearts to keep this Law. And then, after a Prayer for the King, and the Collect
for the day, we read the Epistle and Gospel, that is, most commonly, a short
Paragraph taken out of the Canonical Epistles, and another out of one of the
Holy Gospels, which was the ancient way of reading the Scripture, before it was
divided into Chapters And we do it now to prepare us the better for the
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, therein revealed to us. But seeing
we neither do, nor can read over the whole, we repeat the substance of it in
the Nicene Creed, which it is very necessary we should do at this time, that so
we may demonstrate our selves to be Christians, and so capable of receiving the
most holy Communion.

He that all this while has employed himself as he ought to do in the Service
of our Church, cannot but find himself strangely edified by it. Yet howsoever,
that nothing may be wanting that may any way conduce to our Edification, after
the Nicene Creed, our Church has appointed a Sermon to be Preached, which if
sound, plain and practical, as it ought to be, cannot but be very edifying too.

And now we may be well supposed to be so far Edified, as to be raised up to
the highest pitch of Devotion that we can arrive at in this World, and so are
fit to be admitted to the highest Ordinance of the Church, the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper. And therefore we now betake our selves to it. But that we may
not appear before our Lord empty, we first offer up something to him of what he
has bestowed upon us, to be disposed of to Pious and Charitable Uses;
testifying thereby our acknowledgment of his Goodness to us, and that we have
nothing but what we receive from him. And to excite and encourage us to do
this, all the while that we are offering, we have some select Sentences of
Scripture read to us, wherein God either commands us to be Charitable, or else
promises a Blessing to those that are so. And then we pray for Christ's whole
Church Militant here on Earth, whereby we profess our selves to be real Members
of it, and desirous to hold Communion with it in Christ's Mystical Body and
Blood. And so we proceed to the celebration of it; in which the Method is so
clear, so apparently Edifying, that I need not say any thing of it. But shall
only observe two things in General concerning it.

First, THAT the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, being the highest Mystery in
all our Religion, as Representing the Death of the Son of God to us, hence that
place where the Sacrament is Administered, was always made and reputed the
highest place in the Church. And therefore also it was wont to be separated
from the rest of the Church by a Skreen or Partition of Network, in Latin
Cancelli, and that so generally, that from thence the place it self is called
the Chancel. That this was anciently observed in the Building of all
considerable Churches (for I speak not of private Oratories or Chapels) within
few Centuries after the Apostles themselves, even in the days of Constantine
the Great, as well as in all Ages since, I could easily demonstrate from the
Records of those Times. But having purposely waved Antiquity hitherto, I am
loath to trouble you with it now. But I mention it at present, only because
some perhaps may wonder why this should be observed in our Church, rather than
in all the other Churches which have been lately built in this City, Whereas
they should rather wonder, why it was not observed in all others as well as
this. For besides our Obligations to conform as much as may be to the Practice
of the Universal Church, and to avoid Novelty and Singularity in all things
relating to the Worship of God, it cannot be easily imagined, that the
Catholic Church in all Ages and Places for 13 or 1400 Years together, should
observe such a Custom as this, except there were great Reasons for it.

WHAT they were, it is not necessary for us to enquire now. It may be
sufficient to observe at present, that the Chancel in our Christian Churches
was always looked upon, as answerable to the Holy of Holies in the Temple,
which, you know, was separated from the Sanctuary or Body of the Temple, by the
Command of God himself. And that this place being appropriated to the Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper, it ought to be contrived, as may be most convenient for
those who are to partake of that Blessed Ordinance. But it must needs be more
convenient for those who are to enjoy Communion with Christ, and in him with
one another, in this Holy Sacrament, to meet together, as one Body, in one
Place, separated for that purpose, than to be dispersed, as otherwise they
would be, some in one and some in another part of the Church. Or in short, it
is much better for the place to be separate, than the People.

Furthermore, IT is not only convenient, but in some Sense necessary, for every
Communicant to observe and take special Notice of the several Circumstances
which our Lord has ordained to be used in this Sacrament, as the Breaking of
the Bread, and the Consecrating both that and the Wine, to represent his Death,
the breaking of his Body, and the shedding of his Blood for our Sins; that so
our Hearts may be the more affected with it, and by consequence our Souls more
Edified by it. But this cannot be so well done, except there be a place set
apart for it, where they may all be placed, about or near the Communion Table,
and so behold what is there done at the Consecration of the Elements. Hence
also it is, that the Seats there, are and ought o be so ordered, that all that
are in them may still look that way, and contemplate upon their Blessed
Savior, there evidently set forth as crucified for them.

THE other thing that I would observe unto you concerning the Holy Communion,
is this, that our Church requires, or at least supposes it to be administered
every Lord's Day, and every Holy Day throughout the Year, as it was in the
Primitive Church. For that is the Reason that the Communion Service is
appointed to be used upon all such Days, and to be read at the Communion Table,
that so the Minister may be there ready to Administer it unto all that desire
to partake of it. Which shows the great Care that our Church has of all her
Members, that they might be edified and confirmed in the Faith; to which
nothing contributes more, that frequent Communion at our Lord's Table. Which if
People could once be persuaded to, they would soon find greater Benefit by it
than I can express, or they themselves, till then, imagine. I shall say no more
of it at present, but only this, That I am so sensible of what I now say, that
could I be sure to have a sufficient Number of Communicants, I should be
heartily glad to Administer the Holy Sacrament every Lord's Day, both for their
sakes, and my own too.

THUS I have given you a short Scheme of that Excellent Method wherein our
Divine Service is performed; which whosover rightly considers, will need no
other Argument to convince him, that it is, according to the Apostle's Rule,
very Edifying indeed. The last thing to be considered in it, is the Manner of
its Performance; by which I mean only the several Postures of the Body, as
standing and kneeling, which are used in it: for they are also done to Edifying.

WHILE we say or sing the Hymns or Psalms to the Praise and Glory of God, we
stand up, not only to signify, but to excite the Elevation of our Minds at
that time. For as on the one hand, if our Souls be really lift up in the
Praises of God, our Bodies will naturally lift up themselves, to accompany them
as far as they can toward Heaven; so on the other hand, the raising up of our
Bodies helps toward the raising up of our Souls too, by putting us in mind of
that High and Heavenly Work we are now about; wherein, according to our weak
Capacities, we join with the Choir of Heaven in praising God now, as we hope to
do it for evermore. For this Cause also we stand at the Creeds, for they being
Confessions of our Faith in God, as such they come under the proper Notions of
Hymns, or Songs of Praise to him. All our praising God being really nothing
else but our confessing and acknowledging him to be what he is in himself and
to us. And besides that, by our standing at the Creeds and Gospels, we signify
our Assent unto them, and our readiness to defend them to the utmost of our
Power, against all Opposition whatsoever. And as for the Gospels particularly,
they contain the very Acts which our Lord did, and the very Words which he
spoke when he was upon Earth; and therefore we who profess him to be our Lord
and Master, cannot surely but stand up, when we hear him speaking, and listen
diligently to those gracious Words which proceed out of his Divine Mouth.

AND as when we praise God, we raise up our selves as high as we can toward
Heaven, so when we pray unto him, we fall down as low as we can toward the
Earth, not daring to present our Supplications to the absolute Monarch of the
whole World, any other ways than upon our Knees. Which is so proper, so natural
a Posture of Supplicants, that if all Men would but duly consider what they do
when they pray to Almighty God, the Church need never have commanded them to
kneel at that time. For they could not choose but do it: No, not although the
place where they are, should seem never so inconvenient for it. For we find our
blessed Savior himself kneeling at his Prayer in the Garden, upon the bare
Ground, Luke 22.41. and St. Paul upon the Seashore, where he could have no
other Cushion but Stones or Sand, Acts 21.5. Howsoever, to take off all those
little Excuses that Men are apt to make for themselves in this case, the Seats
in this Church are so disposed, and all things so prepared in them, that there
can be no Inconvenience at all in it, but rather all the Conveniences for
Kneeling that can be desired. And therefore if any one of you shall neglect to
kneel, while the Prayers are read, they will give us too much Cause to call
their Religion into Question, or to suspect they have none at all. For if they
had, they durst not, they could not offer such a manifest Affront to the great
Creator of the World, as to carry themselves no otherwise while they pray to
him, than as if they were conversing with their Fellow Creatures. But why do I
speak of their praying unto God! It is too much to be feared they do not pray
at all, nor come to Church for any better purpose, than only to see and be
seen. I am sure they perform no Act of external Worship of Adoration unto God,
nor show him that Respect and Reverence which is due unto him; and so give very
great Offense to all pious and devout Christians.

WHEREAS if all and every Person in the Congregation would always be upon their
Knees, while they put up their Petitions to the most High God, what a mighty
Advantage would this be, not only to every one in particular, but to the whole
Congregation in general? For as every one would by this means keep his Heart
more steadfast in the true Fear and Dread of God, and likewise more certainly
obtain the good things he prays for, as the Fathers frequently assert, so the
whole Congregation also would be very much edified by it. For by this means we
should excite and inflame each others Devotions, confirm and strengthen one
another Faith, and convince both our selves and all that see us, that Religion
is indeed a serious thing; and that we believe it to be so, by our serving God
with so much Reverence and godly Fear, as this humble Posture represents. And
therefore as you tender the Love of God, the Credit of Religion, or the
Salvation of your own Souls, I beseech you all, in the Name of him who made
you, that whenever you come hither to pray unto him, you do it in that awful,
lowly, and solemn manner, which our Church commands, and as becomes
Creatures, when you speak to your Great and Almighty Creator; that so you may
give true Worship and Honor unto him, and also receive that Benefit and
Edification to your selves, which he has promised, and you expect from your
public Prayers. This being certainly the most Edifying Posture that you can
possibly use upon such Occasions.

FROM what has been hitherto discoursed concerning the Language, the Matter,
the Method, and the Manner of performing Divine Service, as contained and
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer; we may positively conclude, that it
agrees exactly with the Rule in my Text, even that All things in it are done to
Edifying: Which was the Thing I undertook to prove. I know that many there
Arguments might be brought to show the Excellency and Usefulness of the
Common Prayer; but these already produced, are sufficient to convince any sober
and considering Christian of it. And if there be any here present, who are not
yet convinced by what they have heard of it, I desire only one thing of them,
and that is, That they would make Trial of it for a while For my Charity
prompts me to believe, that all the Zeal that some express against the
Common Prayer, and all that Indifferency that is in others for it, proceeds
only from their Ignorance of what it is, or at least from their want of an
Experimental Knowledge of it. For let any Man that seriously minds the Worship
of God, and the Salvation of his Soul, before all things else, let such a one,
I say, set himself in good earnest to use the Common Prayer, as he ought to do,
for some considerable time, and I not doubt but that by the blessing of God, he
will find that benefit and Edification by it, that his own Experience shall
convince him of all that I have now said, more than all the Arguments that I
have, or any Man in the World can ever produce to him. Some perhaps may think
this to be a Paradox; but I do not question but that many here present can
attest it upon their own Knowledge; having found themselves more confirmed in
their Faith, more settled in their Religion, more humbled for their Sins, more
supported under their Troubles, more inflamed with Love to God and Desires of
Heaven, every way more Edifi'd by the constant use of the Common Prayer, than
they could ever have believed it possible to have been, except they had found
it to have been so by their own Experience.

NOW these things being thus briefly considered, I shall observe only two
things from them.

THE first is the extraordinary Prudence, as well as Piety, of our first
Reformers, who first compiled the Book of Common Prayer, so exactly conformable
to the Word of God, and the Apostolical Canon in my Text; which I cannot but
ascribe to the same extraordinary aid and assistance from God, whereby they
were afterward enabled to suffer Persecution, yea, Martyrdom it self for his
sake, and so to confirm what they have done with their own Blood. Which
certainly is no small Commendation of it.

The other thing I would observe unto you, is the Reason why the Devil has had
such a Spite against the Common Prayer, ever since it was first made. For the
more Edifying it is to God's People, the more Destructive it must needs be of
the Devil's Kingdom. And therefore it is no wonder that he has all along
employed the utmost of his Power and Policy to blast its Reputation, and so to
discourage and dissuade Men from the use of it. And by the Permission of God,
for the Punishment of this ungrateful Nation, he has so far prevailed in his
Design, that the Liturgy has been twice cast out of the Church since it was
first brought into it, once in the Reign of Queen Mary, and then again in the
Days of King Charles the First.

In the Reign of Queen Mary, you all know, who were her Instruments in the
doing of it, even the Papists. For they clearly and truly foresaw that their
Erroneous Opinions could never be believed, nor Superstitious Practices
observed in the Nation, so long as the Common Prayer was used. Forasmuch as
there is nothing in it but what is sound and agreeable to the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and so contary to the groundless Opinions which the Church of Rome
would obtrude upon the World for Articles of Faith. And besides that, there are
many Expressions purposely inserted in it, to arm us against the Pope's
Supremacy, Indulgences, Invocation of Saints, Transubstantion, and other Popish
Errors; so that it would have been impossible for the Romish Religion to be
ever restored in the Nation, unless the Common Prayer was first removed. Which
therefore they took care to have done as soon as possible. But within a few
Years after, even the First of Queen Elizabeth, it was brought in again. And as
the Reformation was begun before, so from that time forward, it was carried on
and perfected chiefly by the means of Common Prayer. For it is very observable,
that in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, and for several Years too of Queen
Elizabeth, there was little or no Preaching in most parts of the Kingdom, and
few then could read English, and yet by the constant and general Use of the
Liturgy, and God's Blessing upon it, the whole Nation was so Edified in the
True Religion, that there was scarce one in an hundred but forsook and abhorred
all Popish Doctrines and Superstitions; which is an undeniable Argument, that
in this respect also it is as Edifying, as it is possible for a thing of that
Nature to be. Insomuch that so long as the Common Prayer is used and frequented
as it ought to be, it is morally impossible for Popery to get any ground
amongst us. But if this Bulwark was once removed (which God forbid) our grand
Adversary would soon accomplish his malicious Designs upon us, one way or other.

THIS he knows well enough, and therefore has left no Stone unturned so effect
it. But what he has done before by the Papists, he afterward brought about
again by other means in the Reign of King Charles the First. For by what kind
of Spirit the Common Prayer was then cast out you all know, and some of you
found by woeful Experience. All that I shall say of it, is only this, that the
same Spirit that then stirred up People so violently against the Common Prayer,
stirred them up at the same time to rebel against their King, to take away Men's
Estates and Lives contrary to all Law and Justice; and at last to murder one
of the most pious Princes that ever lived. And whether that was the Spirit of
Christ or Antichrist, God or the Devil, judge you. Be sure the Consequences of
its being laid aside at that Time were very sad. For People being deprived of
that whereby they should have been Edified, were immediately tossed to and fro
with every Wind of Doctrine, until at length many of them fell into the most
pernicious and damnable Heresies that were ever heard of in the Church. Yea,
together with the Liturgy, they laid aside all Distinction betwixt sacred and
common things; by which means the whole Nation was in Danger of being
overspread with Profaneness and Irreligion.

But blessed be the Name of the most high God for it, he was once more pleased
to appear for us, and in a miraculous manner to restore our Common Prayer to
his Church, together with our Gracious Sovereign to his Kingdoms. But what
shall we render to the Lord for so great a Blessing as this is? All that he
expects, or we can give him for it, is only to make the best use of it that we
can. This therefore is that which I now pray and beseech you all for the future
to do. Do not think it enough to be for the Common Prayer, and to come now and
then to hear it. This you may do, as many do, and yet receive no more Benefit
by it, than as if there were none at all to be received. Which therefore can by
no means be imputed to the Common Prayer it self, but to the Negligence of
those that use it. Neither must you think it enough to talk high for it, or to
rail at those who are not so happy as to be rightly informed about it. But
rather take all Opportunities to inform them, and by all means possible to
convince them of the Excellency and Usefulness of it. Which you can never do so
effectually, as by your out-stripping and exceeding them in Virtue and good
Works. For this is, and ever will be, a plain Demonstration, that the
Common Prayer is indeed far more Edifying than those New Modes of Religion,
which they are so unhappily seduced into. That therefore you may do this, and
so both experience in your selves, and demonstrate unto others, the Truth and
Certainty of what you have now heard concerning the Common Prayer, I desire you
to observe these few Rules in the using of it.

First, COME not to your public Prayers only out of Custom, or for
Fashion-sake, as the manner of some is, but out of a sincere Obedience to God's
Commands, and with a sure Trust and Confidence in his Promises for his Blessing
upon what you do. For which end it will be very good, as you go to Church, to
bethink your selves whither you are going, and what you are to do there, that
so laying aside all other Business, you may put your selves into a right Temper
for so great a Work.

Secondly, FREQUENT our public Prayers as often as conveniently you can, The
oftener you are at them, the better you will like them, and the more Edified you
will be by them. And therefore do not satisfy yourselves with hearing them once
a Week. In this City, as also in many other places of the Kingdom, especially
where there are Cathedrals, or Collegiate Churches, you may enjoy the Benefit
of them publicly every Day, and so keep your Hearts continually in an Holy and
Heavenly Frame, and always live as becomes Christians: And if you neglect such
Opportunities as are now put into your Hands, you will one Day wish you had
not; but then wishing will do no good.

Thirdly, IF possible, come always at the Beginning of Divine Service.
Otherwise you will certainly miss of something that would have been Edifying to
you, and perhaps of that, which at that time might have done you more good than
all the rest. Neither will you lose the Benefit only of part of it, but in some
measure of the whole too; all the parts of it being linked together in so
excellent a manner and method, that they influence and assist each other. So
that nothing can be omitted either by Minister or People, but the whole will
suffer by it, and lose something of that Virtue and Efficacy, which otherwise
you will find in it.

Fourthly, ALL the while that you are in God's House, carry yourself as in his
special Presence, and suitably to the work you are about: standing while you
praise God, and kneeling when you pray unto him, as our Church has directed
you. For though these may seem but little things in themselves, yet they are of
great Consequence, both to our Worshipping of God aright, and to our being
Edified by what we do, as I have showed before.

Lastly, TAKE special care all along to keep your Minds intent upon the matter
in hand; when you confess your Sins to God, do it with an hearty and sincere
Repentance for all the Errors of your Life past. When the Absolution is
pronounced, receive it with a firm and steadfast Faith in Christ our Savior.
When yon Repeat or Sing the Hymns and Psalms, raise up your Spirits as high as
you can, to join with those above in praising and magnifying the Eternal God.
When the Word of God is Read, hearken diligently unto it, and consider
seriously what he that made you, says to you, and requires of you, and
resolve by his Blessing to believe and live accordingly. And all the while that
you are upon your Knees, putting up your Petitions to the most high God, let
your whole Souls be employed in it, earnestly desiring the good things you pray
for at his gracious Hands, and humbly confiding on his faithful Promises for
the granting of them. By this means you will perform reasonable Service unto
God, and by consequence that which will be very acceptable unto him, and as
profitable and edifying to your selves. Whereas they that do not observe this
Rule, cannot be properly said to pray, or serve God at all. And therefore it is
no wonder that they come to Church and hear the Common Prayer read, and yet are
no way edified by it. Indeed it is impossible they should. Forasmuch as all the
Benefit and Edification that we can possibly receive from any of our Devotions,
depends very much upon the due Intention of our Minds in the Performance of
them. To which, as I have shown, both a Form of Prayer in general, and ours in
particular, is a very great help.

DO but observe these plain and necessary Rules in using of the Common Prayer
(without which you cannot be truly said to use, but rather to abuse it) and you
will soon find what I have said about it to be true, even that All things in it
are done to Edifying. And therefore I would to God, that not only you that hear
me at this time, but all the People of the Nation, could be once persuaded to
do so. What an holy Nation, what a peculiar People should we then become? How
Pious toward God? How Loyal to our Sovereign? How Just and Charitable to one
another? For by our constant Worshipping Almighty God in so solemn and devout a
manner as this is, our Hearts will be overawed with so great a Fear of his
Divine Majesty, that we should never dare willingly to offend him. Our Minds
would be filled and impregnated with such a Sense of his Power and Sovereignty,
that we should honor and reverence it in those also whom he has set over us.
Our whole Souls would be raised up so much above the World, that we should not
do an ill Act to gain it wholly to our selves. In short, we should be every day
Edified more and more in Faith, in Love, in Humility, in Self-denial, in
Temperance, in Patience, in all true Grace and Virtue: And so we should grow
from Strength to Strength, from one degree of Grace unto another, until at
length we arrive at Glory and Perfection in the Highest Heavens, where we shall
spend Eternity it self in Praising and Adoring the most high God; as for all
the other Mercies which he has vouchsafed to us, so in a particular manner for
our being Members of such an Apostolical Church, wherein all things are done to
Edifying.

WHICH God of his infinite Mercy grant we may all do, in and through our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, be all Honor
and Glory, World without end. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by T. Cox, at the Lamb on the South side of the Townhouse in
BOSTON.
I. DR. Edwards's Discourse, Folio. II. Dr. Hammond on the Church Cathechism,
8o. III. Dr. Horneck's Works. 8o. IV. Mr. Gurdon's Sermons at Boyle's Lecture.
8o. V. Dr. Aspinwall's Apology for the Christian Religion, 8o. VI. Bishop
Bull's Vindication of the Church of England. 8o. VII. Allen's Practice of a
Holy Life. 8o. VIII. Devout Christian's Companion. 12o. IX. Kettlewell's
Companion for the Penitent. 12o. X. -- Of Death and Prodigality. 12o. XI.
Tilly's Devotions. 12o. XII. Dr. Goodman's Old Religion. 12o. XIII. Moral
Thoughts on the Life of Christ. 12o. XIV. L'Estrange on the Common Prayer.
Folio. XV. Ollyffe's Exposition of the Church Cathechism. 2. Vols. 8o. XVI. The
Scripture Bishop, or an Answer to a Pamphlet Entitled, The Divine Right of
Presbyterian Ordination and Government. In two Letters to a Friend. XVII. A
Vindication of the Quakers: Or an Answer to the Bishop of L -- 's Charge
against them, with a full and perfect Account of the Quakers and their
Doctrines. to which is added, Dr. Henry More's Opinion of them.
N. B. At the above Place may be had the most Valuable Books in all Arts and
Sciences.


