The Christian's Duty of Watchfulness against Error, and Establishment in the
Truth: Opened and Urged, IN A Lecture-SERMON, Preached at New-Milford on
Wednesday August 23. 1732. (Occasioned by the Growth and Spreading of QUAKERISM
in that Place.)

By JOHN GRAHAM, M. A. Minister of GOD's Word in Southbury.

Ephesians. 4. 14. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. 2 (...). 1. 13. Hold fast the
form of sound words, etc. N. LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. GREEN. 1733.

QUisquis bonus verusque Christianus est, Domini ini esse intelligat. ubicurque
in venerit veritatem.

Aug. de Doct. Christ lib. 2. Omnis Haeresis paena. and exterminatione digna
est; praecipue illae quae principia Religionis quae in civitate colitur and
exercetur evertunt.

Salmasii ad Milton. Resp. The Christians Duty of Watchfulness, etc.
HEBREWS XIII. 9. Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines: for
it is a good thing that the heart be established with grace.


THE two main defects of wit, to which all others may be reduced, are Error and
Ignorance; by Ignorance we know not things neressary; by Error we know them
falsely. Ignorance is a privation, Error is a positive act. From Ignorance
springs Vice, from Error Heresy. Error in Judgment is worse than Error in
Practice, for then the Conscience takes part with Sin, and a man thinks he
ought to do what he does.

Every Error is a plot of the Devil to suppress some Truth, and is very
spreading and infectious: this is the most remarkable evil our blessed Savior
takes notice of, Mat. 24 and that no less than three times ver. 5, 11. 24. This
is that against which the primitive Fathers spent most of their painful
writings; and all the primitive Churches to whom the Apostles wrote Epistles,
are expressly warned, either Positively to stand fast in the truth, to hold fast
their Profession; or Negatively to beware of, and to avoid False-teachers, and
not to be carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines, as here in my Text.

I shall not spend time about those needless disputes that have been maintained
concerning the Author of this Epistle, which have taken their rise from some
Greek Copies of the New Testament, wherein the name of Paul is not prefixed to
this Epistle; this may be sufficient for us, that whoever was the Amanuensis,
the Holy Ghost was the Dictator: The clear evidence whereof it carries fully in
it self, being calculated to discover unto the believing Hebrews, that they had
not lost by renouncing Judaism for Christianity, seeing the whole Economy of
Moses was designed but to lead them to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to be
Perfected in Him, He being the Truth and Substance of all those shadows, and to
show them the Transcendant excellency of Christ's Person, both in regard of his
Deity and Humanity, and of his Offices; as a Prophet exceeding Moses, as a
Priest exceeding Aaron, and as Priest and King exceeding Melchizedeck; and
through the whole there are such heavenly Precepts and Doctrines according to
godliness intermixed, that I say the epistle it self declares its divine
original contrary to Marcion, Arius, and some other Heretics who rejected it.

I shall pass by what preceeds my Text in this Chapter, and Consider these
words (not as they may stand in relation to what goes before, or follows, but)
absolutely as they are in themselves. And here we have,

(1) A Dehortation, be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines: The
Doctrines of Christ being immutable, it is but necessary to dehort his Subjects
from all mutation or defection, as the Apostle does here, that they should not
be wheeling and whirling about (as the word signifies) with an unstable and
unconstant motion of Judgment, Faith and Practice. About such erroneous
Doctrines which are vain rules to lead to Christ, and are different in nature
from Christ's one and the same Rule; and these Doctrines are very numerous and
various, strange and untrue, taught by false Brethren and Seducers, to the
wounding of the Church, and destruction of Souls.

(2) A Reason wherewith this debortation is urged, for it is a good thing that
the heart be established with Grace. It is good in its self, and it is good to
the subject of it. The goodness of heart-establishment unto God being no less
than full and complete Salvation of the Soul, 1 Cor. 15 58, 2 Pet. 3. 17. 18.

DOCTRINE,
Such as sustain the Profession of the Christian Religion had need to take heed
and beware of strange Doctrines, and labor to get their Hearts well
established in the truths of the Gospel.



2 These. 2 2. Be not soon shaken in mind nor be troubled Ephesians. 4. 14. That we
henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine, by the slight it men and cunning raftiness whereby they lie
in wait to aeceive ^ Tim. 1. 13. Hold fast the form of sound words, etc.

The Devil has his Subtilities and Fallacies and false Doctrines, by which he
seeks to deceive (we (...) possible) the very Elect: Spirion of error to
corrupt the integrity of our Faith Be will tell men of new Lights and new
Doctrines concealed from the primitive Christans, (...) for these last times;
Paul warns the Corinthians of this practice of Satan, 2 Cor. 11. 3. I fear lest
by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through Subtilty, so your minds
should be Corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. There are TABATHETOU
SATANA, Rev. 2. 24 Depths and whirlpools of errors, into which he would plunge
the Souls of men And that Christians may stand it out against this assault,
they must labor to be well grounded and established in the Truth; get their
wills exercised to be able to discern 'twixt Truth and Error. They must not be
Children in understanding, ever learning, never coming to the knowledge of the
Truth. What says David? Be not like the Horse and Mule that have no
understanding; the Horse is ready for every Rider; the Mule is ready for every
Burden; but Christians should know what to believe, and from whom to receive
it, They must learn of the Apostle how to try and reject these false Doctrines,
and such as bring and teach them 2 Cor. 11. 4. If he that comes Preaches
another Jesus, whom we have not Preached; that can show you a more perfect
Sayiour, than our Gospel has taught you, or if ye receive another Spirit,
which ye have not received, gain more sanctifying Grace by their new light and
notions, than what the Ordinances of God have already offered to you, and (if
you be true Christians) wrought in you; or if they teach you another Gospel,
which you have not accepted, a more blessed Doctrine, and way to Heaven, than
you have been taught, ye might well bear with them: but this they cannot do,
therefore hearken not unto them.

I shall for prosecution of this Doctrine, endeavor briefly to show,

I. What Doctrines may be called strange Doctrines, and why. II. What it is to
beware of these strange Doctrines. III. Why Christian Professors should beware
of such Doctrines and labor for establishment. IV. What are these particular,
strange Doctrines that the Church in this Day, and especially in this Place,
should beware of. And then Conclude with a short Application.
I. I am to show, What Doctrines may be called strange, and why. The word
Doctrine in general signifies what ever is taught, any manner of Instruction,
whether true or false, wholesome or poisonous; but more particularly, it is
taken,

1. Sometimes in a good Sense, and so it signifies the Instruction of the
Church in that Truth which is according to Godliness, 1 Timothy 4. 13. Give
attendance to Doctrine, And this is sometimes called,

(1) The form of Doctrine. A phrase which expresses the efficacy of Divine
Doctrine in the hearts of Believers; it changes and fashions their hearts into
its own likeness, by imprinting upon them (through the Spirit of God) those very
Graces of Faith, Hope, Love and Obedience which it teaches and requires; the
Doctrine of the Gospel is a Mould, and the hearer is the Metal, which when it
is melted and cast into the Mould, it receives its Form and Figure, See Romans 6,
17. But ye have obeyed from the heart, that form of Doctrine which was
delivered you. In the Original it runs thus, The mould of Doctrine, into which
you were delivered. Hence in Jam. 1. 21, It is called an Ingrafted Word. It
turns the heart and life of the Hearer into its own nature, as the Stock does
the Cion that is Ingrafted into it.

(2) The Doctrine of Christ. i e. Such doctrine is has Christ for the Author
of it, for the matter, the scope and the end of it. Heb: 6. r. The beginnings
of the Doctrines of Christ. i. e. Which comes from Christ, teaches Christ,
and leads the Soul to Christ; no other Doctrine avails; no Doctrine diverse
from that which Paul taught, 1 Timothy 1. 3.

(3) The Doctrine of Godliness. That Doctrine of Grace, which teaches us the
way how to worship God aright, and makes us true Worshippers, i e. Godly
Persons, 1 Timothy 6. 30 The Doctrine which is according to Godliness.

(4) Incorrupt, wholesome, sound, such Doctrine as is not mixed with the leaven
of Error, but is in it self pure, and makes the receivers of it sound in the
Faith, incorrupt in Manners, and qualifyed for eternal Happiness, (...). 2 7, 8.

2. The word Doctrine is sometimes taken in an Evil sense; for false and
erroneous Tenets, taught and spread by such as are endued with a lying Spirit,
and by God's just Judgment given over to strong Delusions; and when taken thus,

(1) It is called the Doctrines of Men. Such Opinions and Tenets as have none
other than men for the Authors of them, without any ground from the word of
God, Col. 2. 22. After the Doctrines of men; these are also called the Precepts
of men, Mat. 15 9. But in vain do they worship me teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men.

(2) Doctrines of Devils. Such erroneous Opinions as come from Satan as Author,
and keep the receiver of them fast in his Snares, 1 Timothy 4. 1. They shall give
heed to Doctrines of Devils. i. e. Doctrines suggested by Satan, and published
by the Art and Cunning of infernal Spirits. It is in this latter sense, the
word is here to be taken, viz. for all false corrupt and erroneous Doctrines,
which come from the father of lies. However vile men are or may be employed as
Instruments in the spreading and teaching of them. And well may such be called
strange Doctrines, for they are quite foreign to whatever the blessed Spirit of
grace and truth ever taught; they are such as the Word of God knows nothing of;
such as the Church of God collectively, and the personal experience of the
Children of God severally are strangers unto. The Spirit of God is properly
called the Spirit of Truth, Joh 16. 13. And the Word of God is called the word
of Truth, Joh 17. 17 and Jam. 1. 18. And the Church of God is the pillar and
ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. And the glorious Head and King of the Church
(who himself is the Way, the Truth and the Life) has promised that every
Member of it, shall be guided into all Truth, Joh. 16. 13 And therefore all
such Doctrines as are either contrary unto, or inconsistent with truth, are
wholly strange to what either the Word and Spirit of God teach, or the Church
and People of Christ embrace and Entertain.

I proceed to show,

II. What it is to beware of these strange Doctrines. And,

1. It forbids intimate Conversation with such persons as do Profess them.
Christians must not receive them or entertain them with a friendly freedom, 2 John v. 1c, 11. If there come any unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive
him not into your house, neither bid him God speed: For he that bids him God
speed, a partaker of his evil deeds. Such as bring any contrary Doctrine, must
not be harbored or countenanced; even nor so much as by an encouraging
Salutation, left hereby we involve our selves in the participation of their
guilt. Nay, we must purposedly and carefully avoid such, Rom 16 17. Mark them
which cause divisions and essences, contrary unto the doctrine which ye have
learned and avoid them. In these words the Apostle lays down Two Precepts to
Christians, with respect unto such as would innovate and reach another Doctrine
broaching Opinions that (...) contrary, or at least besides the pure and
Apostolic Doctrine of the Gospel, and so make divisions and factions amongst
them. And first, Such are to be marked: The word signifies such a marking as a
(...) man (...) that stands on a Tower to (...) the Enemy; he marks (...) all
comers and goers, and gives notice accordingly for the treaty of the Place. The
(...). They should be avoided or declined. (...) Christians should turn away
from them, and shun their Society, that they may be ashamed.

2. It forbids Reading and Studying the Books that contain them. Satan has his
Scribes as well as his Teachers. And though neither the Magistrate should
faithfully Suppress, nor the Consciences of Printers prevent the Impression and
Publication of such Books, as are put forth in the defense of strange
doctrines, yet this very Apostolic Precept, forbids the Entertainment of them
by Christians. Persons may as safely receive the Author, as his Book; and are
as liable to be Ensnared by the latter as the former: Nay, such as Buy and
Study them, are the greatest Incouragers of them; and it is practically a
bidding the Author, God speed. If the workman is to be discountenanced and
avoided, purely for his works sake, then much more should the work it self be
rejected and shunned. Such Books are but baits cast by the Devils fishermen to
catch unwary and unstable Souls; and such as lay hold of them, are in very
great danger of being taken.

3 It forbids a personal Attendance on the Ministry of such as teach false
Doctrines. If we are not to receive or entertain the Persons of such Teachers
in our houses, far less are we to present our persons in the Place or House of
their Worship. As the Doctrines are strange, so They that bring them (however
they may appear, or whatever they may pretend) are not Shepherds but Strangers,
and the Sheep of Christ should be far from hearkening to the voice of such.
This mark Christ gives us of his Sheep, Joh 10. 5. And a stranger will they not
follow; but will flee from him, for they know not the voice of strangers.

4. It forbids especially all inward Consent of Soul unto such Doctrines as
true. Be not carried away, says my Text, be not removed from the Truth, by
embracing Errors. This is the principal thing that Satan and his Instruments
drive at in the teaching and spreading of them, to deceive men by them; by
parting with the truth for them: And if once the Soul come to embrace error for
truth, it will call evil good; Conscience it self will take part with fin.
Error in practice will follow Error in principle; and the person at the same
time falsely conceit himself to be doing nothing but duty.

III. I am to give the Reasons of the Doctrine. Or, show Why Christian
Professors should beware of strange Doctrines, and labor for Establishment in
the Truth. Now because the next Head will require some considerable time, I
shall do little more than Name these. And Christian Professors should beware of
strange Doctrines, etc.

1. Because it is inconsistent with their very Profession to do otherwise.
Christians profess to receive that and only that Gospel which the Apostles
preached, and that without either adding to, or diminishing from divine
Revelations; now to give heed to strange Doctrines, is inconsistent with this
profession, for it is no less than a perverting the Gospel of Christ, and a
removing or turning to another gospel, Gal. 1. 6, 7.

2. Because it is inconsistent with their own best interest. The Apostle tells
us that if any Man, nay were it possible that an Apostle of Christ, or an Angel
of God, should come from Heaven and teach strange Doctrines, he should be
accursed, Gal. 1. 8, 9. and if the Teacher is cursed then certainly he that is
taught is in great hazard; he that submits to such a Teacher is a partaker of
his evil deeds, and consequently will share with him in the Curse. And besides,
where Persons do not conscientiously take heed to themselves, God is sometimes
provoked judicially to give them over to strong delusions to believe lies, 2
These. 2. 11.

3. Because not to do thus is to gratify Satan and reproach Christ in the
highest degree. For to give heed to false Doctrines, is to give the father of
lies that credit which is due only to God, and to reject the record God has
given in his Word as if he were a liar.

4. Because not to do thus is very endangering to the Souls of our Posterity.
If Parents are poisoned, the Children are exceedingly exposed to infection;
Children have commonly a great deal of charity for their Parents, and therefore
take up with the Principles of their Ancestors upon trust, and consequently
Parents had need see to it that their Tenets be Orthodox. But I must hasten,

IV. To show what those particular strange Doctrines are, which professed
Christians at this day, and particularly in this place, should especially
beware of. I shall mention Eight, and give a brief confutation to each of them.

I. To deny the morality of the fourth Commandment is a very strange doctrine.
There are a sort of creatures risen up, who (in open defiance to the great God
and all good order) live in the constant breach of an express divine Law, by
denying the morality of the fourth Commandment, and cashiering it among other
Levitical Rites and Ceremonies. For confutation of this Error, we may here,

Note, That all the Laws given in the old Testament, are to be distinguished in
regard of their continuance, into these two sorts, viz.

(1) Perpetual, binding all men in all ages.

Or,

(2) Temporary, binding only such as lived before the Resurrection of Christ;
for the Will of the Legislator (which is the very original of all that force,
extent, and continuance that the Law has) was that some Precepts should be
observed only till the Resurrection of the promised Messiah, and no longer, and
that others should continue in force from the first promulgation of them to the
end of time. Now the Question is, Which of these kinds is the fourth
Commandment of? and to this I answer, That it belongs to the former sort, and
is binding to all men in all ages; as may appear by considering the following
particulars.

[1] Consider Adam had no Precept given him in innocence, but what was of
perpetual obligation: But this Precept was then given unto man, therefore it is
perpetual; the major proposition is evident thus, that all the Precepts then
given to Adam were moral and not ceremonial, for there was then no sin, and so
no need of a Savior, and consequently no use of ceremonies to signify the one
or typify the other; and the minor is plain from Gen 2. 2.

[2] It is apparent that it was the real intention of the supreme and absolute
Lawgiver, that this Precept should bind all men to the Worlds end. For how
could the great God declare his mind in this behalf more plainly than by
equalling it in all things with those Precepts which all men must own to be of
everlasting obligation. And by separating it wholly from, nay exalting it far
above all those which are on all hands acknowleged to be but Temporary.

(1) This Precept was promulgated in the same majestic manner, with the same
voice, at the same time, and in the same place that the other nine were.

(2) It was delivered to the same Person, to be laid up in the same Ark, and so
is a part of the same Covenant, whence those Tables are called the Tables of
the Covenant, and that Ark the Ark of the Covenant. Whence it may be thus
argued.

What Commandment soever is a part of eternal Covenant, and is by God graced
and commended with all those signs of commendation wherewith all the rest are
graced, cannot be made of less continuance than the rest (whose perpetuity is
signified by their being written on Tables of Stone, and being laid up in the
Ark.)

But thus it is with respect to the fourth Commandment. Therefore, etc.

(3) The blessed God himself has separated this from all temporary Precepts,
by giving it those privileges, as it were, and notes of honor, which all of
them wanted; and he has equalled it with the perpetual and everlasting
Precepts, by communicating to it all those testimonies of force and continuance
which they had; therefore we are bound to believe it was his holy will that
this should continue in force as much and as long as the rest, even to all men
in all ages till time shall be no more.

[3] Consider how unreasonable, nay what a vile reflection it is on the Divine
Wisdom, for any to think that God would put a ceremonial and temporary law in
the very midst of moral and perpetual Precepts, and urge it with more reasons,
words, repetitions and particulars than any of those morals, as he plainly does
in Exodus 20. 8, 9.

[4] Consider to deny the morality and perpatuity of this Precept, is to take
away one of the ten and so leave but nine, which is contrary to the express
word of God, in Deuteronomy. 10. 4. And he wrote on the Tables according to the first
writing, the ten Commandments, which the Lord spoke unto you in the mount, etc.
And how our Adversaries can answer this I know not, unless they betake
themselves to the same poor shift with the Papists, who when they raze out the
second Commandment, because it is expressly against their Idolatry, they divide
the tenth into two to maintain the number.

[5] Consider all those Laws in the Jewish Church, that were ceremonial and
temporary, were accomplished in Christ, and abrogated by him; but it was not so
with respect unto this Commandment, for we find plainly that this Precept was
still to continue in force under the Gospel; as appears briefly by these things,

(1) The Prophet (...) foretelling the days of the Gospel when Christ should be
(...) ( Isai. chapter 56.) he pronounces a blessing on them in those days that keep
the Sabbath from polluting it, ( v. 2.) nay he puts the keeping of the Sabbath
for the whole obedience of the Covenant ( v. 6) which he would never do had it
been no more than temporary.

(2) We accordingly find our blessed Savior himself, when speaking of those
days wherein all the ceremonial Law was dead and buried, viz several years
after his own Resurrection and Ascension, when Titus Vespasian should destroy
Jerusalem, he says, Mat. 24. 20 Pray that your flight be not in the winter, nor
on the Sabbath day, plainly showing that the Sabbath was to continue after the
legal Ceremonies ceased,

(3) The same point concerning the perpetuity of this Law is plainly confirmed
by James after Christ's Ascension: see Jam. 2 to where he says, He that keeps
the whole Law, and fails but in one point, is guilty of all. Whence we may
thus reason, The whole Law, and every part of it, was in force when James wrote
this Epistle, for how can a man break a Law that is abrogared, or be guilty of
all by breaking any one point, if the whole, and every point of it he not
equally in force. Now this Epistle was written by James to such as lived under
the Gospel. Wherefore at that time and to those Persons, the whole Law, and
every part and point of it was in force And if any doubt what James means by
the Law, it is plain he means the decalogue or ten Commandments, thus, He
that speaks of a whole Law, and after instanceth in particular members of the
Law, must needs mean the whole number of Precepts, whereof these two bro't for
instance are members and parts. Now for instance James brings in two members of
the decalogue. Therefore by the whole Law, and each point, he must needs mean
the decalogue and every precept thereof, as still farther appears by his manner
of speaking and reasoning, when as says thus, He that said, Thou shall not
commit adultery, said also, Thou shall not kill, if then thou commit not
adultery, but killest, thou art a transgressor of the Law. Here we have an
imperfect syllogism, or a plain Enthymem, and a proposition must needs be
understood to make up the Argument, and having one proposition and the
conclusion, no man that has reason can choose but add the proposition
understood, thus or to this effect, viz. What things were spoken by the same
Lawgiver, do bind so equally, that though a man keep one of them, and yet break
another, he is a transgressor of that Law given by that Lawgiver. Now these
two, thou shall not commit adultery, and thou shall not kill, were so spoken:
And may not one add to the same proposition, but this, thou shall sanctify the
Sabbath, was so spoken, and so conclude. Therefore if thou keep all the rest
and break this, thou art a transgressor. It is therefore from this place
clearly manifest, that the fourth Commandment as well as any other point of the
Law is now in force.

There is one Argument that has some show of weight, which some make use of to
overthrow this truth of the perpetuity of the fourth Commandment, viz.

That by our practice we declare our selves now not bound to do the thing
required in this Precept, nay that we are bound not to do it; Inasmuch as our
Sabbath is not the Seventh, but the Highth from the Creation. To which it may
be Answered.

That this Fourth Commandment does not require us to Rest, and Sanctify the
Seventh, from the Creation, nor from any other period of Time, but alone the
Seventh Day after Six of Labor, or coming betwixt Six of Labor; in a settled
Course of numbering from any Period that God should appoint; and so in the
meaning of the Commandment, we now do, and ever must Rest the Seventh Day: For
that is the Seventh in order of numbering, which does still come betwixt Six,
having Six before it, and Six after it continually, and so our Day of Rest
has, and therefore we also Rest the Seventh Day. It is true indeed the Period,
from which the Christian Church takes the beginning of her Account is not the
same, but another different from that which was the beginning of the Jewish
Account; for they reckoned from the beginning of the Creation, and so forward:
We from the Resurrection of Christ, and so forward; but ours is as truly and
surely the Seventh, as theirs, though reckoned from another Period; and as to the
Period, from whence the account must be made, we have no word at all of it in
this Precept. The Lawgiver says not, Six Days from the Creation thoushalt
labor, and the seventh from the Creation is the Sabbath of the Lord, in it
thou shall do no work: but, Six days shall thou labor: And he faith not
afterward, The Lord blessed and sanctified the seventh day from the Creation,
but the Sabbath day, that is the seventh after six of labor Indeed the Lord by
a special institution given to Adam, Genesis 2. 1. had for the times before Christ
appointed that they should reckon from the Creation, which was the cause of the
special institution, but this is no part of the Commandment; and the period
from which we take the beginning of our account has as Divine and as Special
an Institution, as shall appear anon.

II. The denial of the Change of the Sabbath, from the Last to the First day of
the Week, under the Gospel is a strange Doctrine: And the falsehood of this may
appear from the following particulars.

(1) We have sever ai intimctions of this change of the Day in the Old
Testiment. The Jewish Sabbath was the Seventh in order from the Creation, and
so the one immediately following it was the eighth day in the same order of
reckoning; now let us but take notice what special regard was had to an eighth
day under the legal dispensation, and see what may to our present purpose be
deduced from it; and we find Circumoision was to be performed on the eighth
day, Gen 17 12. The firstlings of the slocks and berds were to be seven days
with the dam, and on the eighth day to be given to God. In cleansing the
Leprosy, the person was to carry out of his Tent seven days, and on the eighth
day he was to come and offer his gifts according to divine Institution, Lev.
14. 10. So at the feast of In-gathering, on the first day was to be a Sabbath,
and on the eighth day a Sabbath, Lev. 23. 39. concerning which we may
particularly remark both the numbers as holding forth a Sabbath to some, which
should be both the first and the eighth day, the first in the weekly account,
and the eighth, as following the seventh which was the Jewish Sabbath. But to
come to that which is yet more plain, in Numb. 19. 12, to 36. we have the
manner of the least of Tabernacles, during seven days and the particular
offerings of every day, then in v. 35. we find that the eighth day was a great
holiday; now as the offering referred to Christ as the substance, why not this
eighth day also? the whole intimating to us, that after the Messiah should
offer up Himself once for all, the eighth day, i. e. the day after the seventh
which was the Jewish Sabbath, should be the Day whereon should be a solemn
Assembly. Again farther, Our blessed Savior calls himself the Temple, and he
was no doubt prefigured by it; now we find in 2 Chronicles 7. 8. that Solomon kept
the feast of dedication seven days, and in ver. 9. On the eighth day they made
a solemn assembly; intimating that when Christ, the true Temple, should by his
own power be raised up, then the eighth day, i. e. the day after the Jewish
seventh, should be observed, and that not only once but continually, as we see
in the Ordinance of the new Temple. Ezekiel. 43. 27. And when these days are
expired, it shall be that on the eighth day and so forward, the priests shall
make their burnt offerings on the altar. Thus also in the restoring of Religion
to its primitive purity under the reign of good Hezekiah, the Priests on a
first eighth day sanctify the Porch, and on a second eighth day made an end of
sanctifying the Lord's house, 2 Chronicles. 29. 17. And so Christ the true Temple
sanctified himself, and completely finished his work on an eighth day, i. e.
the day after the Jewish Seventh-day Sabbath. But because this may be looked
upon as no conclusive way of arguing (though for my own part I cannot see what
could be held forth or intimated by such a special regard had to the eighth day
under the Law, if it had not a look toward such a change of the Day) I shall
past it, and leave my undigested thoughts to the correction of the learned and
judicious.

(2) We have this change of the Day expressly mentioned by the Apostle, in Heb.
4. where we have these things.

[1] Mention is made of the SeventhDay-Sabbath, together with one reason of its
institution, ver. 4. For he spoke in a certain place of the seventh day on this
wise, And God did rest the seventh day from all his works.

[2] He tells us of another day ( viz. distinct from the seventh day
beforementioned) that was spoken of, ver. 8.

[3] He more particularly tells us what day that other day is, namely, the Day
wherein Christ rested from his Work, which was the first day of the week,
whereon by his Resurrection he completed the Work of Redemption.

[4] He fairly intimates the appointment of this other Day in commemoration of
the Son's resting; and that by giving us the like reason for the appointment of
this other (or first) Day as there was for the seventh; the reason of God's
appointing the seventh day, was his resting from his Works of Creation; and
there is a like reason for appointing the first day, which was the day of
Christ's Resurrection, namely, the Son of God's resting from his suffering
works about man's Redemption, into which rest he is said to enter, and which we
are more rearly concerned to remember, ver. 10. For he that is entered into his
rest, has ceased from his works, as God did from his. From all which we may
argue thus. If God in his word has spoken of another day, besides the seventh
day Sabbath, and has expressly told us what day that is, namely, the Day on
which Christ arose; and has given the like reason for observing this day, as
he did for that of the seventh day Sabbath; then the Sabbath, by God's own
appointment, is changed from the day on which God rested from the work of
Creation, to the day on which Christ rested from the work of Redemption, i.e
from the Seventh to the First day of the Week. But the former is true, as
appears by what has been already observed from Hebrews, chap. 4. Therefore,
etc.

(3) In the New Testament we have one particular Day ascribed to the Lord
Christ, as his Day in a peculiar manner beyond other days. Rev. 1. 10. I was in
the spirit on the Lord's day. Now there is but one other phrase in the New
Testament like this, and it is in 1 Cor. 11. 20. This is not to eat the Lord's
Supper: And such as are acquainted with the original, know this phrase to be
singular like that of the Lord's Day: It is called the Lord's Supper, as
opposed unto and contradistinguished from that phrase, v. 21. ( his own Supper)
which was not set apart from other suppers, and common use, as this was, and
these two being by one particular phrase expressed, the one may be easily
expounded by the other, viz That some one particular Day is called the
Lord's Day, for the very same reasons for which that particular Supper is
called the Lord's Supper, namely, Because the Lord Jesus Christ has separated
and set apart this Day to his special Service and Worship (therein
distinguishing it from other days) for the remembering the work of Redemption,
and His Resurrection till he come; as also to set forth the honor of the
Mediator, and that it may be enrolled among the Ordinances of the New
Testament; for these Reasons then is a particular Day called the Lord's Day,
because it is a special Day, set apart for the Lords use, of special
Signification, and for a special End. But now that which remains, is to show
what Day this is, or to prove that this is the First day of the Week; in Order
to which, Note, that the day here spoken of, is a special Day, then known to
the Church; otherwise John would not have given it such a denomination: It was
a Day known singularly to relate to Christ, and pointing at something in
Christ; and that it is the First Day of the Week, may be Cleared thus.

It must be either the first Day of the Week, or some other, but it is none
other, therefore etc. If it be any other, then it must be supposed one of these
two, viz. Either not any particular day of the week, but any special time of
Christ's appearing or manifesting himself; or else the Jewish Sabbath day; now
neither of these can be meant by the Lord's Day.

(1) Not the former: For such a day of Christ's special appearing not being
named here, it would leave the Church at the utmost uncertainty to know what
day was hereby intended; whereas the very scope and design of mentioning this
Day is to point it out from other days; besides, if it were any such day, it
would point at no one day; for there are many times of Christ's appearing; or
even thus it would most directly point (it at any) to the first day of the
week, as a day (well known to the Church) whereon Christ most frequently after
his Resurrection appeared to his Disciples.

(2) Nor the letter, to wit, the Jewish Sabbach day, as appears,

1. In that it is ever called the Sabbath, and still retained this name in the
NewTestament.

2. Because the Jewish Sabbaths were then annulled, Col 2. 16. and therefore
cannot be called the Lord's Day.

3. Because this phrase (the Lord's Day) in the New Testament, looks to Christ
as having its name some way from him, which cannot be said of the Jewish
Sabbaths: It points at an ordinance of the New Testament, whereas the Jewish
Sabbaths had respect to Old Testament ordinances. It remains therefore that it
must be the first day of the week, for no other can lay claim to it; and this
will still farther appear if we compare it with Hebrews 4, the practice of the
Apostles, and after them of the ancient Fathers.

(1) Compare it with that in Heb. chapter 4. here we have a particular Day, which
is peculiarly called the Lord's Day, and there we are told of another day
distinct from the seventh day spoken of, and clearly mentioned with a peculiar
reference unto Christ, viz. that Day on which he entered into his rest, which
was the first day of the week; Now if in one place a day be peculiarly called
the Lord's, and in another place we are informed that the first day of the week
is a day spoken of as (...) relating to Christ, being the day (...) which he
rose, it is hence evident (...) the Lord's Day is that very Day, Namely, the
First Day of the Week.

(2) Let us consult the Practice of the Apostles in this matter. And in Joh. 20
19 we read of the Disciples being assembled together on the first day of the
week, and that Jesus then came amongst them; and that eight days after they met
again, which was another First day, and Jesus came to them, ver. 26. From which
time it was set apart for the Lord and His Worship in the practice of the
Church. For we find, in Act. 20. 7. Upon the first day of the week, when the
disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to
depart on the morrow, and continued his speech until midnight. Which sets forth
not only a meeting but an accustom of meeting and that for Preaching, Prayer,
and celebration of the Lord's Supper; as appears in that Paul had been with
them seven days, as in ver. 6. and yet we read of no solemn meeting but on the
first Day of the week, and the last of the seven that he abode with them. It
was not on the old Sabbath, the last day of the week, that the solemn Assembly
for Worship was held, but the first day, which had it not been the Sabbath of
the new appointment, and of (...) essary observation unto Christians, (...)
have been most inconvenient for Paul (...) spent in religious exercises until
(...), when the next morning he was to (...) his Journey. Again we find this
same (...), 1 Cor. 16. 1. 2. appointing the performance of a Sabbath days duty
on the first day of the week; where he says, Now as concerning the collection
for the Saints, as I have given order to the Church; of Galatia, even so do
ye: Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in store as
the Lord has prospered him. Why does the Apostle give orders from the Lord to
the Churches of Galatia and Corinth, and consequently to the other Churches of
the Gentiles, for Collections on the first day of the week as God had prospered
them on other days? -- Because, on the other days they were allowed to follow
their secular employments, but on this day they we e called to honor God with
their substance, by acts of Charity, and Alms deeds to the poor, which being a
Sabbath days work, plainly intimates that he had also from the Lord given order
for the observation of this First Day as the weekly Sabbath. It is alsof arther
observable, that though the Saints had meetings on other days, yet it is never
said that they did meet on the second, third or fourth days, etc. but (...)
first, which (...) is (...) peculiarity in (...) and (...) thereon.

From the (...) has been said; I shall briefly (...) argument, and pass on to
the Fathers.

Arg. If in the Apostle time, this Day was set apart for the Lord's Worship and
Service, and in a special manner called His, as being kept to Him on a moral
ground, Then we have warrant, and it is our duty to keep it for the same end
and use: for, the practice of extraordinary men, grounded on moral and
perpetual reasons, and such as were not peculiar to them as extraordinary, but
are common to them and us (as the grounds and reasons of setting apart this day
are, it being for the remembrance of His Resurrection, and the bringing in of a
New World, and therefore, all did from the beginning; keep that day) are
binding to us, as is manitest.

But the First Day of the Week was appointed to be the Lord's Day in the
Apostles times, and singled out and set apart for His Service on a moral ground
(for no ground peculiar to them can be given.)

Therefore certainly it must be our duty to keep it.

(3) Let us (...) look into the practice of the Fathers. And there is none of
any Note in the ancient Christian, who does not give an ample Testimony to the
observation of the First-Day-Sabbath (...) Lord's Day. And amongst the renowned
witnesses of this Truth, let Ignatius speak, who ( Epist. ad Magnes. an 111.)
thus charges us, Let every lover of Christ celebrate the Lord's Day, which
(...) consecrated to the Lord's Resurrection, at the Queen and Prince (i. e.
the chief) of all other days. Justin Martyr in the end of his second Apology,
says, That on that day which they call Sunday, were holden solemn Assemblies of
all that lived both in Villages and Cities. Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, when
he mentions Clements Epistle to the Corinthians, (in Eusebius. hist. lib. 4. chapter
22.) says, He kept holy the Lord's Day. Tertullian ( an. 200 deldol. cap. 14.)
reckons the Lord's Day among the Christian solemnities. Origin ( an. 261. lib
8. contra Celsum) does the like. When Eusebius (hist. lib. 3. cap. 21.) speaks
of the Ebionites, he says, They observed the Lords Day after the same manner as
the Church did in remembrance of the Lord's Resurrection. Whence it is plain
that the Church did celebrate the Lord's Day. Cyprian ( epist. 59. an. 380.)
mentions this Day which he calls the first after the Sabbath. Basili^ M. (de
Spirit Sanct cap. 27) faith, the Church standing up, made their supplications
on the first day of the week; which he (...) the beginning of days. Chrysostom
((...) eleemosyn an. 380.) says, On the First Day of the Week, or the Lord's
Day, the Christians ceased from all Labor, that by their relaxation, the minds
of the offerers might become more cheerful. Ambrose (lib. 5. epist. 33) on the
Lord's Day, after the readings, and treating of the Creed, communicated Baptism
to the Competents, i e to those who being instructed in the Christian Faith,
sought Baptism. We meet with frequent mention made of this day, by Augustine, in
Exist. 119. cap 1, 3 and in the end of those Books, De civit, Dei. lib 22. cap
30. also Sermon. 15 de verb apostoli. and frequently elsewhere) Hilary says, The
Church does joyfully celebrate a Festival on the eighth day, which also it self
is the first of a perfect week. Prol. in psalm. Amongst the Holy Days confirmed
by the Laws of the Emperors, Valens, Theodosius, and Areadius, the Sundays,
which their Ancestors rightly called the Lords-Days, were reckoued. Leo also
and Athenius ordain, the Lord's Day to be always venerable and honored. Thus
one might go on to mult ply Testimonies, to confirm this, from every age of the
Church, down to this day. But what has been cited, fully shows, that the
Lord'sDay (or first day of the Week)) was always solemnly kept (...) Church;
that on it the Church ceased from (...) Labors; on it solemn Assemblies were
(...) on it the Scriptures were handled, and the (...) administered; on it the
Church made supplications: And that so it has been from the days of the
Apostles: which being added to what was said before may serve ^or a confutation
to this second strange Doctrine. And so I shall proceed to the

III Strange Doctrine, viz To deny the Old Testament ten Commandments, or any
part of the sacred Cannon This is so very gross and absurd that the (...)
little to be said against it. We (...) Christ himself and his Apostles,
frequently quoted Old Testament Texts to prove New Testament Doctrines; and
explained and enforced the moral duties both to God and man, as they were laid
down in the Old Testament, by new Arguments and Motives, and not only tell us
that all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable, 2 Timothy 3.
16 but denounce a most awful threatening against such as shall either add to, or
diminish ought of the sacred Cannon, Rev. 22. 18, 19.

IV. Another strange Doctrine (and that which is the natural offspring of the
former, as one Error (...) another) is, To assert the spirit (...), in
opposition to the Scriptures (...) guide. This is a Doctrine (...) the spirit
to it (...), the Spirit in (...) to the spirit in the heart, and (...)
contradicts the Doctrine of the Apostle Peter himself, who, tho he had both
seen with his eyes the glories of a transfigured Christ, and heard with his
ears that voice which came from the excellent Glory, yet declares the Word to
be a more sure Testimony, 2 Pet. 1. 19. Farther we are not allowed to try the
Word by any spirit, but we are enjoined to try the Spirits by the Word, and if
they agree not with this there is no truth in them; and it is only to such as
walk according to the rule of the Word that the Apostle has pronounced Peace,
Gal. 6. 16. But this Error is sufficiently confuted by that in Mat. 6. 23. If
the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? Whence these
things are obvious to be collected.

(1) That it is possible the light within a man may be darkness; as the light
which the Heathens had in them was, who had their understanding darkened, Ephesians
4. 18.

(2) That if it be so, it is a miserable darkness. How great is that darkness?

(3) This light within (as being every man's pretense, (...) a false light, and
in one contrary (...) must be tried; and then present (...) some certain Rule,
by (...) tried, (otherwise we shall never (...) from error and delusion) and
(...) can be no other than the infallible Word of God. All that light is
darkness which is not lighted at the Lamp of Scripture. So the Prophet expressly
tells us, Isai. 8 20. If they speak not according to this Word, it is because
there is no light in them.

V. Strange Doctrine is, To hold a state of sinless Perfection attainable in
this life. This is contrary to the daily experience of the most holy men alive,
to the positive declarations both of Old and New Testament Saints, and to the
express Word of God, which declares, That the righteous man falls seven (i.e.
often) times a day; That there is no man lives and sins not; and that, In
many things we offend all. It cannot be presumed, that any of these persons
(who plead for such a Perfection) will dare to assert themselves more Holy than
Paul; and though we should for once answer spiritual Fools according to their
folly, and allow them to be full as Holy as Paul was, vet this will not amount
to such a sinless Perfection; unless they, by their inward light, contrary to
Scripture, know what Paul was better than he did himself; for he fully
disclaims Perfection, in Phil 312 and plainly declares Perfection to be
reserved to a future State 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10, 12.

VI. Strange Doctrine is, To hold total and final apostasy (...) true Grace
This is a Doctrine wholly inconsistent with the nature of Divine Love which is
as immutable as God Himself (Joh. 13 1 Whom he loves he loves to the end) It is
contrary to the nature of the Covenant of Grace, which is an everlasting
Covenant, Heb. 13 20. It opposes the Promise of God the Father to Christ. Isai
53 10 He shall see his seed. It destroys the nature and efficacy of Christ's
Intercession which is perpetual, Heb 7. 25. It opposes and contradicts the
Promise of God the Father, who has declared, that He will never leave them nor
forsake them; but keep them by his Power through Faith unto Salvation, Heb. 13 5
1 Pet. 1. 5. It is contrary to the express declaration of God the Son, that
none shall pluck them out of his Hand, Joh. 10. 21. It casts the most horrid
reflection on the Truth, Power, and Wisdom of God. And it is wholly destructive
of the comfort of the Children of God. Nay it is at open wars with the last
mentioned Error. What a dreadful delusion must that Creature be under, who
looks upon himself, not only in a gracious State, but to have attained to
Assurance, yea arrived even at sinless Persection, and yet, after all, under a
possioility of Damnation at jast?

VII. Gtrange Doctrine is, To hold that human learning is not a necessary
qualification of a Gospel Minister. This is to be wise above what is written,
and is a base reflection on the Infinite Wisdom of God, who has always
accounted it necessary. Where can an instance be given of one person employed
by God in this Work, without this qualification? If they had it not in an
ordinary way, did not God Himself give it in an extraordinary way, when he
called and sent them Act. 2? And were it not for Human Learning, where would
these Persons been to seek for the Scripture? How could they had it in their
own Mother's Tongue?

VIII. Strange Doctrine is, For private persons to hold it lawful for them to
Preach and Administer the Sacraments of the New Testament. I hope these Persons
will not dare to deny the necessity of a Call and Commission to this Work, and
that from God Himself, Romans 10. 14, 15 Now if their Call be extraordinary, let
them give the extraordinary (...) and confirmations of it which (...) have
done, that have been (...) if it be an ordinary Gall, (...) by what ordinary
regular (...) they have received it, and give a sufficient proof of their other
ordinary qualification for this great and sacred Work.

APPLICATION, in a few words.
Infer. 1. Honce the Truth and Utility of the Doctrine of the Gospel, in that
Satan the grand enemy of mankind has always pursued it, with such malice, and
sought to lead men into such Errors as hinder the efficacy of it.

Infer. 2. That the People of God have no reason to think it strange when
Errors and Heresies spring up in the Church, and are professed and maintained
by some even from among themselves. It was thus even in the Days of the A
postles themselves, and that which they have warned us should be afterward.
Acts 20 30. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things,
to draw away disciples after them.

Infer. 3. That it should be the great Care of God's Professing People, to
stand up in the Detance of the Truths of the Gospel and especially for such as
are most Opposed by the Errors of the Times. Here let me turn this Inference
into a more direct word of (...) unto the People of God in Now (...) where
Satan (that implacable Enemy) whilst (...) have been asleep, has been
permitted to sow so many Tares. And you may take the Exhortation (with a little
variation) in the words of the Apostle, Jude (...), 4. Beloved (as before
publicly from the desk, so now) I write unto you, and exhort you, that you
should earnestly contend for the faith once delivered unto the saints. For
there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to
this condemnation: ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ.

Let me here only just Suggest to you briefly, and leave it to your own serious
Meditation.

(1) God has made this your indispensible Duty in his Word, particularly in
the place just now mentioned.

(2) God has herewith inseparably joined your own best Interest. Hereby you
become Witnesses for God, and such shall not lose their Reward.

(3) This will be greatly to the Interest and Advantage of your Posterity:
Hereby you will direct them into the good old way, and transmit the pure
Doctrines of CHRIST ^^nfully'd to them.

(4) Hereby you (...) then the hands and encourage (...) your Reverend Pastor,
who ( I hope (...) say, that he has no greater joy, (...) to hear that his
Children walk in truth, 3 (...) Joh. 4. Let me especially beseech you, to stand
by the most suffering Truths. And with all your might oppose and stem the
current of such Errors as have a direct tendency to overthrow the Power of
Practical Godliness. Particularly, the Errors of the Antinomians, who look upon
themselves above all Ordinances, and free from all Law; and hold that God sees
no Sin in his own Children; And no less impudently than falsely assert, That
God was as well pleased with David committing Adultery, as with David
worshipping in the Tabernacle. O monstrum horrendum! And also seek to overthrow
all Civil and Sacred Orders of men, Magistracy and Ministry. He that would have
every man a Magistrate or Minister, would have no Magistrate or Minister at
all. Take heed likewise of the Anti-Sabbararian Poison. The Fourth Commandment
is the very Hedge 'twixt the Two Tables, Exodus 16. 28. Take away the Sabbath,
and you take away all Religion. In a word, Beware of all such Errors as destroy
the Necessity, Efficacy, Freeness and Peculiarity of GospelGrace.

Inser 4. Hence let such of you as are in any measure Unsettled, or
Unestablished, take beed of strange Dectrines; left you take in Poison instead
of Food. Let me just hint by way of Direction.

(1) Beware of Conversations either with such Persons or Books as are (...)
Romans 16. 17. 2 Epist. Joh. ver. 10. Error is more catching than Vice, and more
dangerous than the Plague.

(2) Labor to get experimental knowledge, that you may find in your selves an
undeniable testimony for the Truth.

(3) Be constant in Reading and Hearing the Word of God, Heb. 4. 11, etc. 2 Timothy 3. 13.

(4) Try the spirits, 1 John 4. 1 Every man pretends to speak by the Spirit;
But bring the Doctrine to the Rule, and try to what it tends, Whether to abase
man and Exalt God, or the contrary?

(5) Be sure to live in the practice of no known Sin. Sin always makes way for
Error. If men step out of God's way, no wonder if they be caught in the Devils
Net.

(6) In all your Doubts seek the help of the Gospel Ministry.

(7) Water all your Endeavors after Establishment, with earnest and fervent
Prayers to God through Christ, for Light, Direction and Stability.

And may the GOD of all Grace, who is calling you to His Eternal Glory by JESUS
CHRIST, make you Perfect to every good Work, and Stablish, Strengthen and
Settle you in the Truths of the Gespel.

FINIS

