Mr. Prince's Funeral SERMONS ON THE HONORABLE Daniel Oliver, Esquire And his Son
Mr Daniel Oliver.

The Faithful Servant Approved at Death, and Entering into the JOY of his LORD.

A SERMON AT The PUBLIC LECTURE in Boston. July xxvii. 1732. Occasioned By the
much Lamented DEATH of The HONORABLE Daniel Oliver, Esquire One of His Majesty's
Council for the Province. Who Deceased There the 23d. of the same Month, In the
69th. Year of his Age.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M.A. And One of the Pastors of the South Church.

With a POEM by Mr. BYLES.

Psalm XII. 1. Help LORD! For the GODLY MAN cease. For the FAITHFUL fail from
among the Children of Men!

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for D. HENCHMAN, in Corn Hill,
1732.

TO Mrs. Elizabeth Oliver the Relict, AND TO Mr. ANDREW and Mr. PETER OLIVER
the Children Of the Deceased.
MADAM,
YOUR Bodily Weakness not allowing Your Presence at the Funeral Lecture,
Prevented me from Offering You a Word of Comfort There, and makes it requisite
that I should preface the following Sermon with it.

When this whole Town and Country are Lamenting their Great Loss of YOUR
CONSORT; How heavy must the Weight of Grief descend on the Heart of ONE, to
whom He was the nearest of all Others? Your Friends are sensible that the chief
of Your Earthly Comforts is gone from Your House for Ever; and such a Comfort
as we readily own is not in Creatures to be Repaired: And They also Feel the
Loss, and Mourn with You.

But O MADAM! Must Your Sorrow swallow up Your GRATITUDE for the Past and
Present Bounties of Heaven, and Your FAITH in Those that are set before You?
May the melancholy Passion weigh down the Consolations of the Everlasting
COVENANT? Or may we think our Greatest Comfort is fled away, while the
All-sufficient GOD remains to solace and make Us Happy.

You have not Lost so much in Creatures as You are owing to the Divine Goodness
for Lending to You. You have many still continued, and some of no ordinary
Value, of which I might name Your Children, and for which You know You have
Reason to be exceeding THANKFUL. But the Happiness set before You is infinitely
Greater than any You have yet Enjoyed: and FAITH will give You such a View, as
to make all things Here Possessed appear as nothing to Those in Prospect. The
Everlasting COVENANT is ordered in all things Well by GOD Himself, that it can
never be Mended; and by Him is made so Sure, that it can never be Broken.
Therein is a boundless Treasure of exceeding Great and Precious Promises. And
in the Blessed GOD there is an infinite Source of Good; and a Source Open
through CHRIST, and ever Free to Flow, to supply all our Wants, and answer our
most enlarged Desires.

Let Your GRATITUDE for Present and Past Enjoyments therefore moderate your
Grief for Those You have Lost, or rather Parted with for a little Season;
especially since this Greatest and Last of all has been continued so long to
You: And let Your FAITH in the Heavenly World, raise up your Mind above the
Sorrows of This and the Occasions of them. Let the Well-ordered COVENANT and
the Promises therein, be Your constant Meditation; and they will quickly send
you Streams of Comfort. And as GOD is the Greatest Good Promised in it; Let
Him, especially as He appears in CHRIST, be the chief Object of your Tho'ts and
Desires; and He will soon be your chief and satisfying Delight and Joy: He will
be a Fountain of Life to You, while the Shadows of Death are stretched over
You; He Will turn the Darkness of Your Bereavement into the Light of his
Countenance; and He Will make You Drink of the River of His Pleasure.

These, MADAM, are the Desires and Hopes of Many for You, and no doubt the
availing Prayers on File of Them that are gone before You.

And as for THE SURVIVING OFFSPRING -- I have only to Recommend the Lovely
Examples of Your FATHER and BROTHER; in Part exhibited in the following Pages,
but which Your own Memories will more perfectly represent than any Pen can
describe.

In the second Sermon indeed, I have not (...) mentioned Your BROTHER, nor so
much as lisped the Occasion of my Preaching it. The Reason of which was my
Caution of Offending the Humble Ear of His FATHER then Present: Though every
Hearer could not help applying almost every Passage to the Deceased and Beloved
Youth, whose Loss we were then Deploring. And because it was so Applicable; His
FATHER, though urged by several, was not willing to encourage its Publication.

At Your united Desire, that Second Sermon appears now with the First: And as
their Subjects were so nearly Related and so Dear to Each other, and are now
doubtless met and triumphing together in the World Above; It seems Fitting They
should be Remembered together in This Below: And Your Desire of the same I take,
not only as an Instance of Filial and Fraternal Affection, but as a Token of
Your Resolution to Follow their Patterns.

And Here, I cannot Forbear supplying a material Omission I made in the
Historical Part of Your FATHER'S Character; which was, His Devoting the TENTH
of his Incomes to Pious and Charitable Uses. I have been informed by an
intimate Friend of His, that once upon Occasion He said; Though he had a Thousand
Pounds come in that Year, He accounted One Hundred of them not his Own, but
immediately Due to GOD and the Poor! And I am informed by another; that he made
so much Conscience of this, that as he was often uncertain of the Sum of his
Gains, He would, rather Exceed what he thought a Tenth than fall below it,
least He should fail of his Duty. And Your Elder BROTHER Began to be noted for
Charity before He Left us.

I doubt not but You have Chosen the GOD of Your Fathers for Yours, and are
Resolved by his Help to Exalt Him. And as Your Father's Friends, who are also
Yours, are Pleased with the Prospect of This; They heartily wish You Life and
Prosperity, with Grace to improve them to as eminent a Measure as He. --

And that You may all at length ascend and meet in the Heavenly Places is their
united Prayer and Hope, with His

Who am Your very Obliged and Affectionate Friend and Servant T. Prince.
BOSTON, Aug. 30. 1732.
A SERMON on the DEATH of the Honorable Daniel Oliver Esquire
MATTHEW. XXV.23. Well done! GOOD AND FAITHFUL SERVANT! -- Enter Thou into THE
JOY of thy LORD!


IT is the happy Sentence CHRIST pronounces on his Faithful Servants, at the
End of their present State of Service and Probation.

In the preceding Context, He represents Himself as a MASTER of an Household
traveling into a far Country. He distributes to his several Servants various
Talents, according to his sovereign Pleasure, to manage and improve till He
comes and reckons with them. At length He appears and calls them to a strict
account: He condemns and orders the Slothful into outer Darkness; but the Good
and Faithful He commends and takes into the Joys of his House and Presence.

This Parable, methinks, is one of the most important and sublime in the
inspired Writings, though delivered in the plainest Language. For nothing sure
can give us a more noble, just and extensive View of the great Design and
Business of our present Situation in this lower World. Representing us as in a
state of Service to the SON OF GOD, who is also LORD, of the whole Creation; as
receiving all our Powers and Interests from Him; as being betrusted with them
as so many Talents to be improved for Him; as being accountable to Him, who in
his Humane Nature is gone to Heaven, but will one Day come and call us to a
strict Account, and assign our Recompense; condemn and send the unprofitable to
the infernal Prison, but approve and bid the Faithful welcome to the Joys of
Paradise.

What more grand Idea can be formed of the main Design of the present State?
being to serve the LORD of the World, in our Pursuits and Views, and to
contrive and act with a superior and extended Prospect into Eternity. Such
exalted Sentiments as these are inspired in this plain Parable. How
inconceivably mean are all the Passages of the wisest Philosophers in
comparison with it? And I have often though it it a Property peculiar to that
Humane nature inhabited by the SON OF GOD, to represent the Greatest things in
the most familiar Language.

Our Text is the joyful Sentence pronounced on the Faithful only. And the
Illustration of it I shall now by Divine Assistance, endeavor under these
Three General Heads.

1. Consider the Property, Life and CHARACTER of the Person here described, --
a Good and Faithful Servant.

2. The glorious APPROBATION CHRIST here expresses of and to Him, at the Period
of his present Service -- Well Done! Good and Faithful Servant!

3. and Lastly, Take a distant, but as clear a Prospect as we are able now to
form, of THE JOY OF HIS LORD, which this Faithful Servant is now welcomed into.

I. Consider the Property, Life and CHARACTER of the Person here described -- a
Good and Faithful Servant.

And here are these two things,

1. The singular RELATION He stands in to his Lord -- a Servant.

2. His happy DISCHARGE of the comprehensive Duty of this Relation -- a Good
and Faithful Servant.

1. The singular RELATION He stands in to his Lord, -- a Servant.

i. e. a Servant to CHRIST is his primary and essential Character. He is in a
state of Service to this LORD of Men and Angels, by a vast variety of
Obligations.

He was created by the SON OF GOD and for Him, and so produced in a state of
Service and Subjection to Him. He was formed at first with Powers to know his
Lord, to discern his Authority, to understand his Will, and to yield a
voluntary Obedience to Him. He was born in the Dominion and under the Law of
this supreme LORD of Heaven and Earth. He depends entirely upon Him, receives
all the Means of his Subsistence from Him, and is supported by his continual
Influence. By Him appointed and stated in his Place and Work, and by Him
endowed and entrusted with all his Talents. From Him he receives Commands,
which are Holy, Just and Good: and is on the one hand allured to obey them by
most gracious Promises; and on the other, deterred from Disobedience by most
terrible Threatenings. He has indeed rebelled, has rebellious Principles
subsisting in Him, and is by nature subject to the Execution of those dreadful
Threatenings: But this LORD of Life and Glory has first amazingly stooped to Dye
for his Redemption, and then to invite and urge Him to re-submit and again
enjoy the Privilege of his House and Family. In short, He is constantly
receiving a vast variety and number of undeserved Favors from Him, and is
offered innumerable others both for Time and for Eternity. And He is abundantly
convinced of all these things.

Nor is this the Half of his peculiar Character. -- There is a new Creation
accomplished on Him, a new Formation wro't within Him: a Day of mighty Power
has come upon his Soul, informed his Judgment, removed his Prejudice, changed
his Inclination, overcome his Will: In short, has bro't Him to an affecting
Sight and Sense of his sinful and miserable State, to a bitter Sorrow for all
his Sins and Follies, and to an hearty Willingness and Resolution to Forsake
them, and to Return and Re-submit Himself to this KING of Glory.

Now he hears the inviting Voice of CHRIST, He melts, He abhors Himself, He
mourns, He is encouraged, He rises, He makes haste: And now the Language of his
Heart is this -- O most Glorious LORD! Other Lords have had Dominion over me,
and they have ruled like cruel and malicious Tyrants: They shall never rule me
more: I renounce them all for ever, and I return to Thee! I see the Happiness
of serving Thee: I gladly embrace thy Offer: I freely and wholly yield my self
to Thee. O most merciful and mighty REDEEMER! I cast myself upon Thee! Accept,
Forgive, Possess, Rule and Save me! Write thy Law in this Heart of mine, and
put thy SPIRIT in me! Inspire me with Love and Zeal: and by thy Grace
assisting, I will improve all my Talents for Thee, I will obey all thy Laws,
and I will serve Thee faithfully for ever.

This is the happy Change and Bias, wherewith He enters the Service of this
great LORD, and Begins to serve Him with Freedom and Sincerity.

But of such a one we have it represented further, that He proves a Good and
Faithful Servant. We therefore now proceed to the other Part of his Character,
viz.

2. His happy DISCHARGE of the comprehensive Duty of this Relation, -- a Good
and Faithful Servant. (...).


Whether these two Qualities are of a different Species I do not determine. A
learned Writer thinks; He is called Good, because He does the Good Will of his
LORD; and Faithful, because He applies Himself to promote his MASTER'S Interest
and none of his own separate from it. Pareus.
But as the Good and Faithful Servant is mainly opposed to the Wicked and
Slothful one immediately described; Good may be especially opposed to Wicked,
and Faithful in the one to Slothful in the other. Goodness may therefore seem
to signify his pious and prevailing Affection to the Service of CHRIST: and
Faithfulness may point to his conscientious, careful and diligent Observance of
his Engagements to HIM. Or Goodness may look to that Good Principle or
Inclination from whence his Service flows; and Faithfulness to his continual
Action and Perseverance in it.

Or if CHRIST intends the same individual Character by these two different
Terms; they are then made use of, to express more strongly, how heartily He
approves this Servant of his, and how satisfied in Him.

I shall therefore consider the Good and Faithful as united in One, and
displaying themselves in the following manner.

This GOOD and FAITHFUL Servant then, carries always in Him a cordial
Inclination to the Service of his LORD. This lies the uppermost of all other
things and cares in his new-form'd Heart. All other things He justly accounts
inferior to it, and allows of nothing in competition with it. He has the like
Conception with the highest Angels about the Throne -- He esteems it the
greatest Honor and Happiness, first to be advanced to his Likeness in every
possible Excellency, and then to be always employed and accepted in the Service
of their common LORD. He desires nothing more than this, either in Earth or
Heaven: He delights in nothing more: He daily groans, and is deeply humbled for
his present great Inabilities thereto, and Deficiencies therein: He longs for a
complete Deliverance from them in the future State: He rejoices in the Prospect
of it: and in the mean while He labors to have his Heart more strong and fixed
in his present Work and Duty.

His first Concern is with his own HEART: That this may be always Good and
Upright; that no Iniquity may be reigning here; that every sinful Inclination
may be subdued, kept under, and also mortified more and more: that every
gracious Disposition may be kept alive and flourish in Him; and especially that
vital Faith in CHRIST and THINGS INVISIBLE, and that active Love to GOD and
Man, which are the moving Principles of all Fidelity and Goodness.

When he looks ABROAD, He is grieved to see how little this Great LORD, the
Lord of Heaven and Earth, is served in the World. How small the number of them
that even Profess to serve him: How many of these do in their Works deny him:
and what great occasion there is to make the same Complaint with the Apostle of
old, Phil. II.21. For all seek their own, not the things that are JESUS
CHRIST's.

He is greatly concerned to see the Ignorance and Pride of some, the
presumptuous Sins of others, the Uncharitableness and Contentions among his
Neighbors, the Scandals of Professors, the Declensions of the Times, the
Afflictions any meet with, the Calamities that threaten the Town or Land: and
by how much more extensive the Evil is, or the Interest or Honor of CHRIST or
his Religion suffer or are like to suffer; the more sad his mind and the more
deeply troubled.

He considers every kind of OBLIGATION lying upon him to lay out himself in
serving this Greatest and Best of Masters: The infinite Excellence and
Loveliness of his Divine Person; the great things he has already done, in
Creation, Providence, Redemption, Grace; the low State he condescended to; the
bitter Sufferings he underwent; the Glorious things he has dearly purchased,
offered, urged; the gracious Operations of his HOLY SPIRIT; and the undeserved
and boundless Love in all: the Revelation of Him, and of the Way to serve him,
the various Powers and Opportunities therefore, the solemn Consecration of them
all to promote his Glory, and therein our own Eternal Interest: In short, his
Eyes for ever on us now, and the strict Account he will surely call us to when
our uncertain Life expires.

The Good and Faithful Servant lives in the REALIZING VIEWS of these things:
and from them all he is conscienciously concerned to discharge the various
Trusts reposed in him, with Fidelity; to improve his Talents, Powers, Riches,
Honors, Time and Opportunities, in the Service of his Great LORD; to answer
the Ends of the present Life, and of the special Circumstances wherein his Lord
has placed him, to the constant Approbation of his all-seeing Eye, and therein
his own present great Satisfaction and everlasting Interest.

He first maintains the POWER of these lively Motives in him: by a frequent
Thinking of them; by constant secret and mental Prayer; reading, hearing, and
pondering on the WORD of GOD and then he applies himself to the clear Discovery
of every Duty.

He receives the INSPIRED ORACLES as his only perfect and unerring Rule: He
labors to understand the Meaning of 'em: He delights to converse with them: He
receives all the Doctrines, Histories and Precepts in them, with Faith and
Love: He applies them to himself: He lays them up in his Heart; i. e. in his
Affection, Memory and Conscience, ready to be called to mind and used on all
Occasions. He sets the GLORY of this Supreme LORD, as his highest End: He
subordinates all his Aims, Inclinations and Pursuits of other things to this.
And having found out the Means or Rules of promoting it, he carefully and
constantly observes them. He would not allow himself in the Commission of the
smallest Sin, nor in the Neglect of the smallest Duty: but he labors to stand
complete in the Will of his LORD.

First, He endeavors to pay to the Most High GOD all that more immediate
WORSHIP and Adoration which He requires. And this not only in the constant
Frame of his Mind, but in the frequent rising up of his admiring Thoughts to
the Perfections of this GLORIOUS BEING, appearing both in his Word and Works;
and especially in the various Operations of Providence, which offer themselves
to his Senses and Observation.

At the Beginning and Ending of every Day, he likewise RETIRES from the rest of
the World; that he may with a more fixed Intention look upon GOD in CHRIST, and
in the Presence of Angels give Him his Glory: Loving and Praising Him for all
his Perfections and Benefits: Confessing and Mourning for his own Offenses and
increased Unworthiness: Presenting himself a new through the Mediation of
CHRIST, as a living and holy Sacrifice to his Honor and Service: Imploring for
Pardon, Grace and every Blessing both for himself and others; and Trusting in
Him for the Bestowment of them. And O! what raised Views of Faith does he There
sometimes gain! engaging his Heart to this most AMIABLE BEING, transporting his
Mind with the most grateful Sight of his Interest in Him, and kindling up in
his Soul an holy Flame of Zeal to promote his Glory.

With his Well-ordered FAMILY, he also offers the Evening and the Morning
Sacrifice: and by his Oversight and Cares, Example and Instructions,
Admonitions and Reproofs, Corrections and Encouragements, Prayers and Tears; He
labors to promote Religion in every one of his Household, to make those under
his Care as good as himself, to keep alive the Power and Practice of Piety in
them, and to transmit it to his Offspring after him. If he derives of a pious
Family, he dreads nothing more than that he should be the last therein for
Piety; least the Religion of the Family expire with him, and his Children
forsake the GOD of their Fathers. However, he is deeply concerned for their
Souls, their everlasting Interest: He is afraid of their Temptations: He can
scarce have any Rest or Ease in his own Mind, till he sees their Faces turned
toward the heavenly Zion: Nothing gives him greater Gladness: He weeps for
Joy, to see the Bloomings of Piety in them: And when he sees it -- O! how
Thankful is he to the GOD of all Grace! With what Comfort can he lay down
himself to sleep in the Grave! and with what Satisfaction cry, -- LORD thy
Servant now is freely willing to Depart in Peace! This Day thou have sent
Salvation into my House, and mine Eyes have seen it!

From the Family, he gravely walks to the HOUSE of GOD: He apprehends it as the
Gate of Heaven, He enters it with holy Joy and Reverence. He seriously attends
on every Divine Institution there: He looks through them to the Glorious GOD:
He worships Him in Spirit and Sincerity: He receives into a good and honest
Heart, the Truths and Precepts there displayed and urged agreeable to the
INSPIRED WORD: He submits himself to their Divine Authority: In the very
hearing he is resolved to obey them. He keeps the Sabbath holy from the
Beginning to the End: and throughout the Week, He labors to live up to his
sacred Light and Resolutions.

For HIMSELF, he Denies all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, both in the sight of
MEN and in the Eyes of GOD. He has a constant Guard upon himself: He is
temperate in his Diversions and Enjoyments; sober, chaste, modest and
moderately cheerful in Society: He is afraid of going beyond the Bounds of
Decency and Moderation: and he would observe the Rules of Wisdom in all his
Conduct.

In obedience to the Will of his LORD, he is careful and industrious in his
SECULAR CALLING. He endeavors to provide for his own Household; and to get
yet more for charitable and pious Uses: and herein he labors to do every thing
in the most proper Time and Order. He resigns the Conduct of his Affairs to
GOD: He leaves the Success with Him: He is submissive under Crosses; Contented
with the Lot of Providence; Patient in Afflictions; Mild and Humble in
Prosperity: when Riches grow or Honors rise, he sets not his Heart upon them:
He despises the Pomp and Glory of this lower World: He lives above it, and has
his mind in Heaven.

In his DEALINGS with his Neighbors, he is conscienciously Just and Fair: True
to perform his Word; careful to discharge his Debts: Meek in bearing Injuries;
easy to be reconciled: Faithful to all his Friends: a special Lover of all that
fear the LORD: Gentle toward all: an Enemy to nothing but Profaness and
Immorality: and is on all occasions ready to promote the Good of all. He
rejoices with them who rejoice; He mourns with them that mourn: He pities the
Widow and the Orphan, the Poor and those that have none to help them: And he
constantly abounds, but as secretly as may be, in acts of Charity and Kindness.

In short, He is not only careful to discharge the Trusts reposed in him with
Integrity; But he is for doing more: His PUBLIC SPIRIT and BENEFICENCE are
Unconfined. He is concerned for the Peace and Welfare of the Church, the Town,
the Land wherein he dwells: He is ready to his Power to serve them: His Heart
enlarges to promote the General Interest; to uphold and carry on the Kingdom of
CHRIST in the Place of his abode; and to advance it in others, that others may
be happy in it, and his Lord receive a greater Glory. He would do Good for the
Unknown and them that know him not. He looks down into late Posterity: He would
have the Unborn the better for him: And beyond the reach of his immediate
Influence, he extends his Wishes, and makes his Prayers for all Nations.

Thus he lives, and thus he serves his Divine Master to the Death. But in the
midst and at the end of all, he bewails his great Deficiency: He humbly owns
himself an unworthy Servant: He looks to the Mercy of GOD in CHRIST alone, for
Eternal Life: and Blessed is that Servant, whom His LORD, when He comes, shall
find so Doing.

We now proceed to consider

II. The glorious APPROBATION CHRIST here expresses of and to Him, at the
Period of his faithful Services, -- Well Done! Good and Faithful Servant!

The ultimate View of this Expression may perhaps extend to that great and
illustrious Day which our LORD describes at the End of the present Parable.
ver. 31. When the SON OF MAN shall come in his Glory, and all the Holy Angels
with Him; then shall He set upon the Throne of his Glory, and before Him shall
be gathered all Nations. Then may this happy Sentence be pronounced to all the
Faithful, subsisting both in Soul and Body, collected into one vast Company,
and in the Public View and Hearing both of Men and Angels in that great Day.

But yet, it seems to me, that this 31st ver. of the Chapter Begins the
Description of the General Judgment, at the Winding up of the present State of
things in this lower World: and that the Parable foregoing and including our
Text, has a special Eye to the Particular Period of our several Lives; when our
Times of Service and Probation end, and one Part of us, viz. the principal, the
incorruptible and immortal Spirit, must needs be as ready as ever to give up
its account, to receive its Sentence, and in Part its Recompense.

For in the Parable before us, the several Servants are examined apart,
according to their various Talents: And even the Sentences approving the
Faithful are pronounced singly, first to Him that had improved his five
Talents, ver. 21. Well Done THOU Good and Faithful Servant; and then the like
to Him that had improved his two Talents, as in our Text: And so the Sentence
on the other, ver. 26. THOU Wicked and Slothful Servant etc. Whereas in the
following Description of the General Judgment, all Nations are represented as
appearing before the SON OF GOD; who divides them into two vast Assemblies,
setting the Righteous at his Right Hand, the Wicked at his Left; and then
pronounces first to them at his Right Hand, collectively -- Come YE Blessed of
my Father etc: And then to them at his Left, in the like Plural number --
Depart from Me YE cursed into Everlasting Fire, etc.

The 30th. ver. seems therefore both to conclude our Parable with the present
Life, as also to lead us on to the Description following. And the Meaning of
this ver. may be -- My Holy Angels who are here ready to execute my Orders on
the separate Spirit now before me -- Cast ye the unprofitable Servant into
outer Darkness; where he shall remain with Devils as in Chains and in a
Dungeon, without any Light of Hope or Comfort, reserved to the Judgment of the
Great Day; when his Body shall be raised, and then in this Place of Darkness
there SHALL BE weeping and gnashing of Teeth: [But (...) etc. v. 31. The
discretive Word BUT being omitted in Our Translation, though retained in Beza's.
] when the Son of Man shall come in his Glory etc.

However, this Outer Darkness is no doubt the State to which the UUPROFITABLE
Servant is adjudged at the Period of his Probation, and for that Interval which
lies between his Dying now and his Body's Rising to the General Judgment. And
for the GOOD AND FAITHFUL -- can any Proceedure be more agreeable to Reason,
Justice, Wisdom, Goodness, or the Nature of things; than that when he has
passed through the State assigned him for his Probation, and behaved himself with
persevering Faithfulness; He should then be called before his Judge, receive
his approving Sentence, and without Delay, and as much as capable, his promised
Recompense?

Agreeable to this, the Scriptures tell us; that when the DUST of the Body
returns to the Earth, the SPIRIT returns to GOD who gave it: that after DEATH,
comes on the JUDGMENT: that CHRIST is ordained of GOD to be JUDGE both of Quick
and Dead: that the FATHER judges no man, in an immediate manner, but has
committed all Judgment to the SON, that all may honor the SON as they honor
the FATHER: that for this End CHRIST both died and rose and revived, that HE
might be LORD both of the Dead and Living; and that we shall all stand before
the JUDGMENT SEAT of CHRIST. Romans XIV.9, 10. And therefore the Apostle argues,
2 Cor. V.9, 10. Wherefore we labor, that whether PRESENT in the Body, or
ABSENT from it, we may be ACCEPTED of Him; For we must all appear before the
JUDGMENT SEAT of CHRIST etc.

We are therefore now to view this Good and Faithful Servant as arriving to
this Great Period: as having finished the Services appointed for Him, as having
put off his earthly Garment, and in his Spirit appearing before this Lord and
Judge of Quick and Dead.

With his vile and sinful Body, he has quite put off his sinful Nature: He is
cleansed perfectly from all Pollution of Soul. And now the inward Consciousness
of his sanctified Mind, his sincere Designs and his pious Bent, extends it self
and fills his Pure Spirit with perfect Satisfaction. What a Joy possesses him,
to feel himself entirely released from Sin, to perceive the Likeness of the
Holy GOD arising in him, to find himself a Being suitable for Converse with
Him, and in the mighty Hands of blessed Angels as his Friends, and Comforters!
The Vision of the Face of CHRIST, appearing as a Glorious Judge, will strike
indeed with Reverence, as it does the Seraphims above, but not with Terror.

But O! the Voice! the surprising Voice proceeding from his Divine Lips -- Well
Done! Good and Faithful Servant! -- With what a Look of overcoming Grace and
Pleasure are these Words pronounced! and how full are they of Joy and Transport!

It is as if He should say -- O my dear Servant! I have seen your Faith, your
Love, your Patience, your Integrity, your sincere Desires, your pious Purposes,
your Perseverance! I have seen your Labors, your Charities, your Sufferings,
your Godly Sorrows, your Strivings with Temptations, your Self-Denials, and all
your Services for my Name and Interest! Mine Eye has been always on you: not
the least has escaped my notice: not one of all their number is forgotten by
me: and I have seen them all with Pleasure. I accept them all, and I approve
you for them! I overlook, I pardon, I will never mention your Deficiencies: I
only look at your Fidelity: and I bid you welcome to the Eternal End of all
your Trials!

O most Lovely SAVIOR! is this the Manner of thy Receiving the Spirits of thy
Faithful Servants in their Returning to Thee! when of thy free and mighty Power
and Grace, Thou at first have made them thy willing Servants, who had been,
before, thine inveterate Enemies! Thou did allure them to Love Thee: Thou
did preserve them from reverting to their former Enmity: Thou did recover
them from all their Falls: Thou did excite them to all their Services: Thou
did support them under all their Sufferings: Thou did inspire their
Strength in all their Conflicts: Thou have crowned them with Eternal Victory --
And now Thou speak of nothing but their Goodness, Faithfulness and
Well-Doing! Thou have made them Good; and now Thou commendest them for their
Goodness! Thou have made them Faithful; and now Thou praisest their Fidelity!
Thou have helped them to Do all the Good they have Done; and now in the
Presence of Angels Thou applaudest their Well-Doing! -- But They shall give the
GLORY of all to THEE, for ever!

Nor is all this any other than a Preparation for that unspeakable, endless and
ever-growing Happiness He has designed for them. They are now but just arrived
at the Border of it. And their Glorious Judge proceeds to bid them Enter into
the JOY of their LORD.

We are therefore come in the

III. and last place, To take a distant, but as clear a Prospect as we are
able, at present, to form, of the JOY of his LORD, which this Faithful Servant
is now welcomed into.

We are not Here to extend our Views to that State of Bliss which lies beyond
the first Resurrection: But to the Present State of the Spirits of the Just
made Perfect in the Invisible World, and which reaches no farther than the
Descent of CHRIST from Heaven in flaming Fire to Destroy the Wicked.

And here the inspired Scriptures give such Hints as these --

There were several APPEARANCES of the LORD Himself, both to our first Parents
before they sinned and after; as also to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Daniel
and others. There were also many Appearances of the Holy ANGELS in those
ancient Times. And in those Appearances there were Humane Colors, Shapes and
Voices; by means of which they conversed with Men clothed with Flesh, and
therefore doubtless could in like manner appear and converse with one another.
They appeared to see and hear us; as well as to be seen, and heard by us: i. e.
they produced those Impressions in the Medium between Their Spirits and Ours,
which we distinguish by the names of several Sounds and Colors; and they
perceived the like Impressions made by us. No doubt they appeared with a Beauty
suitable to their excelling Natures, and with such a Distinction as to carry an
Evidence with it, that one was the Lord JEHOVAH, and the other his created
Angels. Each Angel had also doubtless a Personal and distinct Appearance,
whereby they might be known from one another. Some appeared as youthful Men;
some in long and shining Garments; in some their Countenance appeared like
Lightning, and their Raiment white as Snow. And it seems to be only because we
are in a different Part of the Scheme of PROVIDENCE, wherein our sensible
Intercourse with the Invisible World is Barred, for various weighty Reasons I
have no place now to mention; that they do not appear and converse with us,
with the Faithful especially every Day.

It is as easy then to conceive, how the Spirit divested of the dull, unweildy
Body, may appear and converse with other Spirits and Angels, i. e. both appear
and see and speak and hear each other; as it is for them to appear and converse
with us while we are clothed with the Body. Appearances, Sounds and Visions,
among the SPIRITS and ANGELS, are therefore no such difficult things to
apprehend as we are apt to imagine. And indeed, it is only our Ignorance or want
of Contemplation, that renders it more difficult for us to conceive of the
Appearance and Converse of Angels and unembodied Spirits; than of our present
Appearing and Conversing with the Souls of each other while we may remain
embodied, and so through double and different Mediums between us.

You may scarce allow me to consider the Nature of these things nicely upon
such a grave Occasion. But from 2 Cor. V.1, -- 7. it seems to me, That upon the
Apostle's SPIRIT being uncloathed of his BODY, which he calls his Earthly House
or Dwelling; he expected to have his Spirit clothed upon with a CELESTIAL
SUBSTANCE, which he calls his House from Heaven: (...), From, or Out of Heaven;
not -- Out of the Earth, as the Resurrection-Body is to be.
So that when he came to be Absent from the Body and Present with the Lord; his
pure Spirit would not appear naked or uncloathed, but clothed with a Celestial
Substance, made by the supernatural Power of GOD and annexed to the Soul for
its various Uses and Perceptions of the wondrous Objects in that upper World of
Light and Glory.

Such Celestial Substances the HOLY ANGELS may be also clothed with, as their
proper Seats and Instruments. And by these, both Spirits and Angels may as
easily make and receive Impressions, but inconceivably more Perfect than our
Spirits can, by their Earthy, gross and dull Bodies. By such Celestial
Substances, the Holy Angels may have appeared and spoke and shined in this
lower World. And by such a one, it may be, Moses, if his Body was not Raised,
appeared and Spoke at the Transfiguration.

I might easily explain this matter further: But I must forbear --

In the Scriptures we also read of a GLORIOUS PLACE whither the HUMANE NATURE
of CHRIST triumphantly ascended, and therein illustriously resides with the
Spirits of the Just made Perfect and Ten thousand times ten thousands of Holy
Angels round about Him, till the Restitution of this disordered World. To this
both CHRIST Himself and the Apostle Paul give the name of PARADISE; the Martyr
Stephen, the Evangelist Luke, with the Apostles Paul and John -- the name of
HEAVEN; and the Apostle Paul -- the THIRD HEAVEN, 2 Cor. XII.2 -- 4. Thither
the ancient Elijah is said to ascend both in Soul and Body long before. Thither
no doubt ascended Enoch at his Translation, and all those Saints that rose out
of their Graves at our SAVIOR'S Resurrection. And there the separate Soul of
CHRIST Himself, with the separate Soul of the Believing Penitent expiring by
his side on the Cross, were to be together on the very Day of their Crucifixion.

Of this happy Place our Blessed Savior seems to speak a little before He left
the Earth. Joh. XII.23. The Hour is come that the Son of man should be
GLORIFIED: v. 26. If any man serve Me, Let him follow Me: and WHERE I am, THERE
shall also my Servant be. Some Glympses of the same he also gives us in the
Final Prayer he made the Evening before he suffered. He lift up his Eyes to
Heaven, and said, FATHER! the Hour is come! Glorify thy SON, that thy SON also
may Glorify THEE! -- I have Glorified Thee on the Earth: I have FINISHED the
Work which Thou gave me to Do: and NOW, O FATHER! Glorify Thou Me with Thine
own self, with the Glory which I had with Thee before the World was -- FATHER!
I will that They also whom Thou have given Me, be WITH ME WHERE I AM; that They
may behold my Glory which Thou have given Me -- And the Glory which Thou gave
Me, I have given Them; that They may be One, even as We are One!

This upper World is represented therefore as a Place of perfect LIGHT and
GLORY. It is the Glory into which CHRIST entered upon his passing through his
Sufferings: Luke XXIV.26. And the Apostle calls it the Inheritance of the
Saints in LIGHT, Col. I.12.

Thither the same Apostle was once caught up, whether in the Body or out of the
Body, he could not tell; and there he had such Visions and Revelations, and
heard unspeakable Words which it was not lawful or allowed for man to utter. 2
Cor. XII.1 -- 7. These were some of those Unseen and Eternal Things which this
Apostle looked to: Here is the Building of GOD Himself, an House not made with
Hands, Eternal in the Heavens; which he knew he should be clothed with upon
his putting off the Garment of the Body: Here was the immediate Presence of his
LORD: and for this the Apostle was confident and willing rather to be absent
from the Body, that he might be Present with that Great Object of his perpetual
Admiration and Desire. 2 Cor. IV.17 -- V.8.

Of this same Heavenly State he seems to give us some faint Resemblance in Heb.
XII.22 -- 24. But ye are come i. e. in your more immediate, believing and
delighful Views, unto mount ZION, and to the City of the Living GOD, the
Heavenly JERUSALEM, and to an innumerable Company of ANGELS; to the General
Assembly and Church of the FIRST BORN which are enrolled English Margin.
in Heaven, and to GOD the Judge of all, and to the SPIRITS of Just men made
Perfect, and to JESUS the Mediator of the New Covenant etc.

In the immediate Presence of the SON OF GOD must needs be a Fullness of Joy and
Pleasure for his People* And this must needs be the Place of Joy into which the
separate Spirit of the Faithful Servant is bid to enter upon its leaving the
Earthly Tabernacle and appearing before Him.

Enter Thou into the JOY of thy LORD! -- Thou have been Tried, and Thou art
found Faithful -- Thou shall be Tried no more! Thou have lived in a World of
Sorrow -- But now thy Sorrows shall end for ever, and Thou shall enter into a
World of Joy! Thou have passed through a State of Self-Denial and Humiliation, as
thy LORD had done before Thee -- Thou now shall enter after Him into a State of
Glory.

It is the Joy of thy LORD -- the Joyful Place and State which was set before
Him, to enliven Him to endure the Cross and despise the Shame, till He ascended
and sat down at the Right Hand of the Throne of GOD. The Joy which He now
possesses, which is worthy of all his Sufferings, and which will fill You with
perfect Satisfaction! You shall enter in to be with Him: You shall partake with
Him in his Joy and Blessedness! You shall for ever live in his happy Presence,
and in the joyous Company of these innumerable Holy Angels and Shining Spirits
round about Him! You shall with them see the Fullness of his Glory: You shall be
filled with the Vision: You shall be filled with the Likeness: the Glory shall
never fade, the Company shall never brake, and the Joy shall never end!

O! Happy Servant! -- We now by Faith look after Thee! We congratulate thine
Entrance There! and we long to rise and enter with Thee!

And thus we have seen some faint Description of the Good and Faithful Servant
passing through his State of Trial in this lower World, the Glorious Approbation
given Him by his Divine Master at the Period of it, and the Joy of his LORD
which thereon He enters immediately into.

And now -- To IMPROVE these Things -- Our

1. Concern of all, must be to get a Great, a Strong, a Lively FAITH in these
invisible Realities, and to keep the same in a constant Exercise.

If this Heavenly State of Bliss and Joy be Real, it is of the utmost Moment
that we make sure of it: and it is of the utmost Moment that we Believe it to
be Real, or we are sure to loose it. If we Believe it not to be a certain Thing
now subsisting in the Heavenly World; we cannot possibly be so concerned about
it, as to labor after it in earnest and persevere therein till we come to
enjoy it. For if we don't Believe there are such Joys and Glories There; we
don't Believe that CHRIST Himself is There: and then I Am sure we cannot be Good
and Faithful Servants to Him.

Nor will a bare or faint Persuasion of these Great Truths suffice: There must
be such a mighty Faith as is wro't alone by the Power of GOD: Such a Faith as
makes them Evident, and not obscure; and such a Faith as gives them a
Subsistence (...), Heb. XI.1.
in us, as if they were actually present with us.

And this lively Faith in these Heavenly Things had need be constantly kept in
Exercise: or we shall never be able to subdue our Lusts, or resist Temptations;
we shall never be able to rise above this World, or act for ETERNITY. It is
this lively Faith that inflames our Love to CHRIST, and that enlivens and
excites our Souls to his active Service: It is this that destroys Hypocrisy and
makes us Upright: It is the powerful Principle of all Fidelity.

Let us therefore earnestly and incessantly Pray for this Great Operation and
Gift of GOD. In the use of every Means, Let us look for his effectual
Influence. And when we obtain it, Let us also labor, in the use of every
Means, to keep it alive in its Power and Vigor: Such as frequent Prayer;
Reading and Hearing the Word; attending on the Holy Sacraments; Retirement from
Earthly Things; and Contemplation upon CHRIST, the Great, immediate and moving
Object of our Faith and Piety.

And being possessed of this most essential and vital Principle; Let us then

2. Improve it to Quicken us to a Life of Faithful and abounding SERVICES to
this Glorious LORD.

Let us now Devote Our selves, and all we have, to Him for ever. Let us
constantly consider the various Talents, i. e. the Powers and Opportunities
with which He at any time trusts us; his Holy Eyes continually on us,
offended with our allowed Omissions, but greatly pleased with all our upright
Labors and even Desires to serve Him in the midst of our unallowed
Deficiencies; and the strict Account we are every moment liable to be called
to, and must unavoidably and quickly give upon our Expiration.

Let us live as those that are now upon a Trial for a certain ETERNITY; that
are hastening greatly to it, and are even just upon the Borders of it -- the
Door of that amazing World opening -- the Tribunal of CHRIST appearing -- and
let the Prospect of his saying to us -- Well Done! Good and Faithful Servant!
Excite us to the utmost so to serve Him, as becomes this Blessed Character.

In fine, Let us constantly reflect and ask our selves -- Am I now a Good and
Faithful Servant to this all-seeing Eye? Is this to be so? or were I now to
appear before Him, could He Pronounce this of me? --

Surely such Reflections made in the Power of Faith, would awaken our drowsy
Souls, and put us upon vigorous Action and Fidelity.

3. For our further Excitement; Let us wisely value and improve those
Remarkable Instances of Good and Faithful SERVANTS to this Blessed LORD, as
have Lived and Died among us.

I say -- that have Lived and Died -- Because their Perseverance to Death in a
steady Course of Faith and Services, -- is the Crown, the Perfection, and the
conclusive Evidence of their Fidelity.

Upon this Occasion, Let us now therefore Improve that most sorrowful
Providence, which has this Week bereaved us of ONE that, we all acknowledge,
has been no small Part of the Glory and Delight of this Town for Forty Years.

Were I to endeavor to set forth all his Virtues, I should scarce know where
to Begin nor when to End. And I am easy in this, that my Lot is fallen to draw
so unexceptionable and so unenvied a Character, that I need not fear exceeding
to the offense of any that knew Him.

The very Name of Mr. DANIEL OLIVER -- How many grateful Ideas did it use to
raise in every Mind? To the Name there seemed to be annexed, the Beauty of pure
Religion, a plain and unaffected Mein, a serious and humble Countenance, a
sincere and tender Heart, a cautious and prudent Speech, a conscientious
Justice and Integrity, a peaceable and Public Spirit, an abounding Charity, a
perpetual Diligence, an exact Economy, a Mind above Earthly Pomps and
Pleasures: In short, all the Virtues that form an eminent Christian, and that
make Him lovely and admired in our Eyes. None could see Him till now without
some Pleasure -- and none can name Him now without some Sorrow.

But my Design is not to launch into a Sea of Praise. I shall only mind you of
some of the many Graces in Him, for which we used to esteem and love Him; that
may serve to make us sensible of our great Loss, and excite our lively
Imitation.

It was happy for him indeed to have been Born of Religious Parents, and in the
Pious Times of this Town and Land. Religion then was the prevailing Spirit here
without a Rival. And wherever he turned his Eyes, he saw many bright Examples
of the Power and Practice of it, to convince him 'twas a Real and a Serious
thing, and to raise his Esteem and Reverence.

This was no doubt a special means: But it was the SPIRIT of Grace that wrought
and bent his Heart for GOD in His Early Days. He then devoted Himself to serve
his LORD: He made Religion an affair in earnest; though Careful and Diligent also
in his Temporal Business. He had then the Wisdom to Redeem his Time: and He so
contrived it, that they should not interfere with each other.

His Custom was to Rise up very Early; to Read the Scriptures and other Books
of Piety alone, and Pray and Converse with GOD, while the Rest of the World
were Sleeping: and these he used to account his most precious Hours. By this
means his Heart was fixed a new with a Religious Frame and fresh Designs of
Good for the following Day: and as the Day came on, He was forward also in his
Secular Business. He went forth of his House with a clear Conscience, and under
the Favor and Conduct of Heaven.

From the Days of his Youth He loved and chose the Religious for his dear
Companions. He avoided the Taverns as Places of great Temptation and Expense of
Time. When others resorted to them, He chose rather to go wherever He heard of
any Exercise of Piety. When Recreation was needed toward the Evening; He
either rode out for Health, either alone or with some chosen Companion; or made
his agreeable and useful Visits to his particular Friends, or else to his poor
or afflicted Neighbors, to help or comfort them. He indeed often diverted
Himself by changing his Business only: By leaving his own Affairs, and
contriving and doing Good unto others; for which he had a singular Spirit, and
in which He delighted.

Thus he took the Right and Best way of Living. He first and early Begins with
Religion: He then with Forecast, Care, and Diligence applies Himself to his
secular Business: and when he had got through this; he mostly diverted himself
with doing Good, or visiting those that wanted him or were glad to see him.

He was a strict Observer of the Holy SABBATH. He though it there was no Occasion
of Differing about the Beginning or Ending of it: They who Begin in the
Morning, He would say, might improve the Evening before as a suitable Time of
Preparation; those who Begin in the Evening before, may improve the Evening
after as an agreeable Season of Looking back on the preceding Duties, or
Reading Books of Piety etc. and He accordingly kept his Family within his Gates
both on the Evening before and after. His Walk to the Place of Worship was
Grave and Early: and when seated There, he always appeared as one that minded
nothing but the Holy Duties There transacting. -- No noise, nor lifting up of
Eyes or Hands -- only a decent Gesture, with a serious and attentive
Countenance. He indeed kept up the ancient Practice of Writing from the mouth
of the Preacher; that he might not quickly forget, but repeat some useful
Truths and Precepts in his Family at the End of the Day. And THIS with the
happy Assistance of his worthy Consort, he always kept in excellent Order. Here
he not only daily read the Scripture and Prayed; But he charged his Household
to walk in the Paths of Piety; as he allured and led them the way by his lively
Example.

He loved the Conversation of Ministers and sober Scholars. His Table was
always free, and often surrounded with them, especially at our Weekly Lectures.
When the Lecture was over, he would look out for them: when he missed them,
They knew they should be welcome to him: He was troubled when he happened to
Dine without them: And was often doing them Services; which some Deceased have
testified, and others alive can tell.

He was always remarkable also for attending the Lectures in the Neighboring
Towns. By which he at once relieved himself of the weight of Business, promoted
the Health both of Body and Soul, informed himself of the State of Religion and
Providence, and met with fresh Occasions of doing some Good. And he had so
careful and exact a Foresight, and so happy a Faculty in ordering matters; that
as he went out in Season, he returned in Season, and let not his Business
suffer or run behind hand by his going abroad. There was no moving him from his
exact and regular manner of Living.

He was always noted among us for being strictly Just and Punctual in all his
Dealings. Some though it him rather too nice in this to a Penny. Considerate in
making a Promise: Conscientious to remember and keep his Word; and to discharge
the Trusts both of a Public and Private nature, which either the Town or
Government, or his Friends, by Wills or otherwise, had reposed in him.

He was remarkably careful for Paying his Laborers when they first came for
their Dues. And he would often rebuke his Friends for putting them off; and
tell them -- The Poor's Time was their Money and their necessary Subsistence;
and 'twas a great Injustice and Hardship therefore, to make them spend their
Time in coming for what was their own, for what they had earned, and 'twas
likely very much wanted.

He was as Good and Faithful a Friend as ever I knew. He was concerned for his
Friend as for a natural Brother, not only ready to advise and help them in any
Emergency; but was even Watchful over them, least there should any thing happen
amiss in their Conduct that might be in Danger to hurt them: not to observe it
to others, but in private to them. When he saw or heard of any such thing, he
would quickly come and impart his Sorrow; and where there was need, give a
friendly Reproof or Caution. When he smote them, it was a Kindness to them:
when he reproved them, it was an excellent Oil that broke not the Head, but
healed the Wound. He was one of the most suitable Persons for this -- he had so
few Faults of his own, and yet was so humble and ready to censure himself. When
he had rebuked them faithfully; they almost always expected some other Kindness
soon after to follow. And he would do more Kindnesses for them than ever he
told them: They would often find it only by Accidence.

He had nothing of an overbaring or assuming Spirit. His Words in Conversation
were not many, but wise. And there was such an unusual Mixture of Strictness
and Gentleness in Him as I have scarce ever beheld. The latter so tempered the
former as took off all its disagreable View: And we were rather ashamed than
afraid of his Reprehensions.

He was of a very Sympathizing Heart. He used to finish his Secular Business by
Saturday Noon; and spend the Rest of the Day in visiting the Sick in the
neighborhood. He constantly attended the Funerals of his Acquaintance, though of
low Degree. He much rather chose to go to the House of Mourning than to the
House of Feasting. He used to say, He found it a needful means to keep his own
Mortality in View, to show him afresh the Vanity of Earthly Things, call off
his Mind from being taken up too much with them, and restrain it from growing
too light and volatile. When any of his distant Friends met with any Grievous
Providence; he would carefully mind them, and redeem so much time, either early
in the Morning, or even in his Warehouse in the little Intervals of Business,
as to write them Letters of Condolence, Advice and Comfort. And when they met
with signal Mercies; he would also send them his friendly Lines; not of
Complement or Form, but of religious Joy and Counsel. And indeed, Ceremony,
Form and Complement, were very averse to his Genius.

But there was no Employment in which he took more Pleasure, than in being
Overseer of the Poor of the Town. He would often visit them and inquire into
their Cases; especially in Times of Sickness and Sorrow. The meanest was not
beneath his Notice. He has doubtless bestowed numberless Charities of his own
upon them, which GOD and his Angels have only seen. He was concerned especially
for the Training up of their Offspring, both to Reading, Religion and Business.
He has sometimes himself, maintained a School of Thirty of their Children: and
he excited others to follow him in the same kind of extensive Charity. He built
a considerable House for the Purpose Here at his own Expense; and in his Will
has given it for the Schooling of the Children of the Poor to all Generations.
The first Instance of the Kind, I think, on this side the Water.

He was known to be of a very Public Spirit. He was one of the most deeply
concerned for our growing Declensions, Sins and Dangers. When any Calamity
threatened the Public, he had but little Ease: when any came upon us, he had
but little Comfort. He accounted Contention as one of the sorest Calamities: He
was exceeding sollicitous for Peace and Concord. He was anxiously concerned and
troubled at the Flood of Intemperance and Profaness rising up in the Town and
spreading into the Land. And how often has he spoke with great Grief of the
Taverns, as the mischievous Fountains of Profaness, Disorder and Public
Poverty, and as Threatening the Ruin of all Religion.

When he saw Trangressors, he was greatly grieved. When Professors miscarried,
he sadly mourned. When the Righteous and Useful were taken away, he deeply laid
it to Heart: When such were in Danger by Sickness in any part of the Town, he
was much concerned, and would take care to visit them. He was concerned for the
Revival of Piety in the Town and Land. And he was remarkably Forward to
contribute largely for the Propagation of it to the Neighboring Countries.

In Fine, He was for pure, silent, unaffected and plain Christianity: not for
the gaudy Pomp or noisy Sound: nor was he ashamed of serious and strict
Religion in the Face of any.

And after all this eminent Life and Virtue -- who appeared more modest and
humble than He? The least Lisp of Commendation was sure to raise his Frown, and
move him instantly to check and stop us. -- Lowly in his own Eyes: Preferring
others above himself: Backward to appear and speak in Public: Scarce persuaded
to continue in His Majesty's Council, least he should hinder the Choice of
others whom he though it more able to serve his Country There -- His Face, like
Moses, came down the Mountain shining in the Eyes of others; and He wist it not.

This is Part of the Man we are bereaved of! -- And how great the Loss! -- His
Example very much helped to keep up the Reputation of Religion among us. In
such Men we see both its Reality, Power and Excellence; It appears with
Comeliness and Majesty, to charm our Love, as well as raise our Reverence; it
bares a convincing Witness against the Apostacies and Vices of the Times. And
if it has not now an happy Influence to draw us to be Religious too; it will
surely rise up against us and condemn us in the Future Judgment.

Can the Children of such a Father as this -- be any other than eminent like
Him? They have had greater Advantages than others: their Obligations are
therefore greater: and upon You his Rising Sons, are the Eyes of all Good
People fixed, through this Town and Land; that You will stand up in his Room, and
make Good his Ground. And with your Sorrowful Mother, You doubtless have the
Confluence of their universal Prayers and Blessings!

And can any of Us who knew Him, ever forget the Dear Example? How often have
we applied those Words to Him which the Angel once spoke to another -- O
DANIEL! a Man greatly Beloved! or a Man of Desires, as it is in the Hebrew? And
shall not Religion be always the more Lovely to us, for the Beauty thereof
which has appeared in Him?

And now, If it had not been my Lot to improve this Providence at the General
Lecture of this Great Town; I should have applied these things to that
respectful CONGREGATION, The South Church.
of which our FRIEND has been a shining Ornament from his Youthful Age; and in
whose withdraw They bare a special Share of Loss and Sorrow.

I shall therefore only observe, that as He used constantly to beautify this
Public Lecture, and we are Here to see his Face no more; He was one of the
last who is bringing up the Rear of the Second Generation of the Founders of
this Colony: and in Him we have seen the lively Image of their Piety and
Spirit. There is but Here and There a Son remaining; and our Glory seems to be
passing away with them!

O! Let us therefore bow our Knees to the FATHER of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, of
whom the whole Family both in Heaven and Earth are named; and earnestly
implore, that He would pour out His SPIRIT from on High upon Us and our
Offspring. That We and They after us may rise up in our Times, to follow their
bright Examples, to answer their strong Desires, and to keep alive the Work of
Pure Religion in the Power and Practice of it; for which our Fathers have made
so many Prayers and taken so much Pains, and for which their Fathers before
them chose to come and Live and Dye in these then hideous Ends of the Earth.

Let us then choose their GOD for ours, His WORD for the only Rule of our
Religion, His Institutions only for our Observance, and not content our selves
with the Form of Godliness without the Life and Power. And let us bring up our
Children also, as They bro't up Us -- That His Spiritual Presence may continue
with us, and We may have the Joy to see our Posterity like to follow into that
happy World which our Pious Fathers are gone into -- that They, I say, may
follow in their Times, and continually bring Accessions thither to our Joy and
Blessedness. To come into the Presence of our FATHERS There; To have our
Children come in after us; and for them to tell us, that their Children are
serving CHRIST and their Generation, and are coming too -- It will increase the
Joy of Heaven it self, and both multiply and raise our continual Satisfactions.

THE END.
An ACCOUNT of the Deceased From the Weekly News-Letter, No. 1487. Corrected.
BOSTON, July 27. 1732.

THe last Lord's Day Noon Expired here the Honorable DANIEL OLIVER, Esquire; One
of His Majesty's Council for the Province, and one of the most considerable
Merchants of this Place, in the 69th Year of his Age: being Born Here Feb.
1663, 4. He was the youngest Son of Capt. Peter Oliver, a Gentleman of good
Repute in his Day, and one of the Principal Founders of the South or Third
Church in Boston, in May 1669. The late Mr. Nathaniel Oliver a worthy Merchant
of this Town, and the late celebrated Physician Dr. James Oliver of Cambridge,
being Elder Brethren to the now Deceased. In April 1696, He Married Mrs.
ELIZABETH the Second Daughter of the late Honorable ANDREW BELCHER, Esquire Father
to the Present GOVERNOR: and by Her had the late Mr. Daniel Oliver Merchant,
who going over to London, Died of the Smallpox There on July 5. 1727; and Two
younger Sons, Mr. Andrew and Mr. Peter Oliver, with their bereaved Mother, now
living. And he brought up all his Sons to the College. He has been
distinguished for his eminent Piety, Humility and Charity from his early Days.
Was formerly many Years one of the Select-Men, and for many more, one of the
Overseers of the Poor, a Justice of the Peace, and at length a Councellor. In
every Station He behaved Himself with great Diligence and unblemished
Integrity: has for a long course of Years enjoyed the high Esteem and Love of
this Town and Country, and been remarkably famed and valued in Others.

He was up at Cambridge on Yesterday was sev'night, came home in the Evening,
and went to Bed in his usual Health: But a little after Midnight, making an
unusual noise in his Throat, His Consort spoke to Him, but perceiving Him
unable to return an Answer, quickly found Him seized with a Numb Palsy and
Coma: out of which he revived something on the Friday, but Relapsing, died to
our universal Surprise and Sorrow: And was yesterday interred with
distinguishing Respect and Honor.

He has left a considerable Estate. And as He was a great Friend to the Poor;
his Charity especially inclined him to promote the School Education of their
Children. And in his Will among other Legacies, He has bestowed a pretty large
House, called the Spinning-School, for which Use He first designed it, and
which cost Him Six Hundred Pounds, -- This House with the Profits, which will
bring in about Fifty Pounds a Year, He has given for ever, to Support a School,
to learn poor Children to Read the Scriptures, etc. And thus -- He has
dispersed abroad, He has given to the Poor, His Righteousness remains for
ever.

Young Abel Dead, yet Speaks.

A SERMON Occasioned by the Death of Young Mr. DANIEL OLIVER, Delivered at the
South Church in Boston Sept. 10 th. 1727.

Being the first Lord's Day after the Surprising Tidings came of His Dying of
the Small Pox in LONDON, July 5 th. as He was Finishing His Travels, and
Returning to His Friends and Country.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. And One of the Pastors of the South Church.

Prove. V.7. Hear Me now therefore, O ye Children

Isai. LV.3. Hear, and your Soul shall Live.

BOSTON: Printed for D. HENCHMAN, in Cornhill, MDCCXXXII.

A SERMON Occasioned by the Death of Young Mr. Daniel Oliver.
HEB. XI. -- 4. He being Dead, yet Speaks.


A Short, surprising, but instructive Sentence! -- And in Discoursing on it, I
shall First consider it in It self alone; and Then raise those Observations
from it which it most fairly offers.

I. Consider it in ITSELF alone. -- And here are three things, 1. The Person
mentioned. 2. His Death. 3. and lastly, His Speaking after it.


1. The PERSON mentioned. -- And this is ABEL, one of the hopeful Sons of our
Father Adam.

Even in his Bloom of Youth He appears to have resisted the strong Temptations
round about him. He lived a blameless, regular and righteous Life. Both his
Person and Services were very grateful to the Holy GOD. And his Conduct was a
lovely Pattern to the Age wherein he lived.

By the IV of Genesis and the 25 th, He seems to have been very much his
Parents Hope and Comfort in his Day; and to have been particularly dear to his
tender Mother. It there appears, he had a large Place in her Affection, as he
well deserved; that her Heart and Expectations were much set upon him; and she
remembered him with lasting Sorrow. Though indeed she after comforted her self
with her other hopeful Offspring, which GOD was pleased to raise up for Her in
the stead of her beloved and deceased ABEL. For,

2. He is said to be DEAD. -- And by the same Verse it seems, He deceased in
his Youthful Age, without Posterity, and while unmarried.

Whither his Name was given him by his Parents at his Birth or Death, is
utterly uncertain. If it were the former it seems to have been Prophetic: or
at least his Dying in the Flower of Life was exactly answerable to the Meaning
of it.

For ABEL is an Hebrew Word that in the Noun signifies Vain or Vanity; and in
the Verb -- He is Vain or Vanity, or vanishes away. ABEL, says a Learned Man,
is as much as to say, a vain thing; i. e. either what has scarce any Being, or
as a Puff of Breath out of the mouth of an Infant, quickly ceases and
disappears Pagnin and Mercer Lexic.
. It is the same Word which is so often used in Eccl. I.2. Vanity of vanities,
vanity of vanities, all is vanity. For in the Hebrew it is -- Abel Abelim, Abel
Abelim, all is Abel.

And as this is both here and elsewhere ascribed to All things under the Sun in
General; so to the Children of Men in Particular, in diverse other Places. So
Psalm. CXLIV.4. Man is like to ABEL, which we render Vanity: His Days are as a
Shadow that passes away. So Psalm. XXXIX.5. Behold! Thou have made my Days as
an Hand-Breadth, and mine Age is as nothing before Thee: Verily every Man at
his best State is altogether ABEL; i. e. Vanity. And so at the end of the 11 th
v. Surely every Man is ABEL; or Vanity.

The Word also signifies a Vanishing, and this very quickly; Buxtorf Lexic Rab,
and Alberti Lexic Nov.
as also a Breath or Vapor: Buxtorf and Cas^ellus.
And so I find the Syriack renders it in the three last mentioned Places. Bib
Polyglot.
And perhaps the Apostle may allude to this when he says -- Jam. IV.14. For
what is your Life? It is even a Vapor, that appears for a little Time, and
then vanishes away.

Just so did the promising Life of ABEL. He appeared as a Vapor; as visible
and fair to the Eye as the rest of Men: But his Appearance here below was but
for a little Season, especially compared with others: He quickly vanished: And
his surprised and affected Parents had soon a sad Occasion to cry out Vanity on
his Appearance with them, and on all the Prospects and Hopes he gave them of
Comfort in him. They were vain and empty things that were very gay and pleasant
in their View, but quick expired and came to nothing.

His early Death was a very great and public as well as private Loss, attended
with many pungent aggravations, an heavy Stroke to his pious Parents, and
bitterly lamented by them. And the Decease of this their hopeful Son was no
doubt the more affecting, as it was very sudden and surprising to them. He went
out Well: But he came not home at the time expected: But alas! instead of Him,
came the amazing Tidings, that he was Dead, and vanished from their sight for
ever.

And now as DAVID, at the Surprising News of Absalom's Excision, with an
Anguish inexpressible, cried out -- O! My Son Absalom! my Son! my Son Absalom!
would to God, I had died for Thee! O Absalom! my Son, my Son! So methinks we
may hear our first Parents, at the amazing Tidings of the Death of Abel, with
an equal Agony, cry out, in the forementioned words of SOLOMON -- O! Abel
Abelim! Abel Abelim! all things on Earth are vain and dead as Abel!

And thus did our First Parents very early taste of one of the most bitter
Fruits of their Sin and Fall. They must indeed die themselves in a little time:
But before they come to this, they must find how evil a thing it is to forsake
the LORD: They must meet with a great Variety of Griefs and Miseries: They must
see the Triumph of Death over one of their dearest and most hopeful Offspring:
They must needs First know what a grievous thing it is to be bereaved of (...)
Children; and what an exceeding bitter (...) they had in this respect provided
for their Posterity in all their future Generations.

ABEL then was Dead even before his Parents, and in his Youthful Days. He
quickly left them to bewail their heavy Loss and Disappointment in Him, and to
show the World the Lamentable Fruit of their Apostasy from the Blessed GOD.

But still

3. It Is said, that He being Dead, yet SPEAKS.

He was not only speaking after his Decease in the Days of his Surviving
Parents, or in that Age that knew Him; but even also in the very Age wherein
our Apostle writes concerning Him: He yet speaks; (...).
or he being Dead, is yet a Speaking. And so he may be said to be, even to this
very Day.

But how is ABEL said to Speak, when he is Dead and vanished?

To this I answer --

(1.) He speaks by the lovely Example of his preceding Life. De Dieu in Pol
Synops.


This is neither yet forgotten nor unrecorded. Though Abel be deceased; His
living Example still survives him: It still subsists in the Minds of Men. And
lovely Examples are the most speaking things that can be. They reprove our
Vices; they charm us with their Virtues; and they very powerfully invite and
urge our Imitation: and this not only while they live before our Eyes; but even
as long as they are remembered by us.

(2.) He also speaks by the Mouths of Others who tell of his Virtues with
Esteem and Honor.

He speaks as He is yet spoken of to his Commendation. (...), voce media vel
passiva.
And so the Word is often used, both in the New Testament and other Writings.
He not only lives in the grateful Memories of Men; But he is also conversant in
every Mouth: they still speak of his living Virtues, and mention him with
Praise. Varii in P^l Synops.


(3.) and lastly, He significantly speaks even by his Death it self, and
especially by the Earliness thereof.

He thereby plainly tells us, that neither Righteousness nor Youth, nor the
Love, Desires or Prayers of the most tender Parents, can preserve us from it.
That there is no Dependence on the Lives of the most desirable and hopeful
Children: That even these may dye in Youth as well as others: But then it is
wise and happy for them, that by a sober, righteous and pious Life they
prepared for it, as ABEL did. In fine, that our Expectations from things below
are vain; and when we expect most from them, we may be at once surprizingly
disappointed: they may in a moment vanish, and all our fond and pleasing Hopes
cut off for ever.

Such things as these, and many more, does ABEL speak, and is even yet a
speaking by his early Death. He not only spoke them to the contemporary
Generation that survived him, but even to Us who read and hear of his early
Death and Virtues.

And hence we may by the way observe, of what advantage it is to put on record
such affecting Histories. The Speech of ABEL would have been lost for ever as
to Us, and we had never heard Him utter these profitable Lessons, if his
virtuous Life and early Death had not been recorded.

But are there not Other Young and hopeful Persons, who being Dead, yet speak
as well as ABEL?

Yes alas! there are many such in every Generation. There is a Cloud, a great
Host, a Multitude of such affecting Speakers. They are continually going off
and adding to ABEL'S Company: they unite in speaking the same things with him
even to us: and as their Number still increases, their united Voice grows
louder: and so we should perceive it, if our Ears were not miserably deafened
with the perpetual Noise of earthly Businesses and Clamours.

We therefore now proceed in the

II. Place, to Those INSTRUCTIONS which our Text, in consort with like
Instances in every Age, conspire to give us.

And here are these three Things?

1. It pleases the Sovereign GOD to favor and distinguish some of the Race of
Men with Hopeful Children.

2. He yet sometimes takes them away by Death in their Early Days.

3. and lastly, When they are Dead and vanished, yet they Loudly speak to their
Survivours.

1. It pleases the Sovereign GOD to favor and distinguish some with HOPEFUL
CHILDREN.

It would take up all our Time to run through all the Instances of this in
Scripture. Nor is there any need in order to confirm our Observation. There
have been Multitudes of Instances in every successive Age and Nation where the
Gospel has been preached, even down to this very Day: and through the abounding
Grace of GOD among us, our Eyes have often seen this particular Favor given
either to Our selves or Others.

With the most humble Admiration, Let us briefly contemplate the Grace of GOD
in this Affair: And while we do it -- not to us, not in the least to us, but to
Him alone ascribe the Glory.

That the Children of Wicked Parents should be like themselves, is so exceeding
natural, that we can expect no other. For here there is both Inclination
inwardly to move them, and Example outwardly to concur and draw them. And how
can they help aspiring to copy after Those who appear to love and take care of
them above all others; when they also find it to be their Interest to imitate
and please them, and this agreeable to their own Propensities?

But alas! How many Parents eminent for Piety, have had the most pungent
Sorrow of very wicked Children; notwithstanding all their Care and Pains, their
Examples, Admonitions, Prayers, Tears, and every Method taken to induce them to
be Religious! -- a most mysterious and afflictive Dispensation! -- and there is
scarcely any thing on Earth that can affect the Heart of Man with such Distress
and Agony! And O! that the Children of pious Parents might be sensible of this
-- that if they have any Affection or Value for them, they would not grieve and
pierce the Hearts of those who love them as their own Souls, but rather do all
they can to comfort them in this great matter.

I might easily enlarge on this ungrateful Subject. But I must hasten to
consider, that through the Sovereign Grace of GOD, some other Parents have been
distinguished with Hopeful Children. And even indeed some wicked Parents have
had this surprising Lot; but to their own confusion Here, if not their dreadful
condemnation another Day. And this no doubt to show, that GOD is absolutely
free and sovereign; that He is not confined to the Line of pious Parents, though
He usually prefers it; but may choose and favor whom He pleases. He will be
Gracious to whom He will be Gracious, and show Mercy to whom He will show Mercy.

However, to honor his pure Religion, and to encourage his People and their
earnest Prayers, Hopes and Labors for their Children; He more frequently
favors them than others with an hopeful Offspring. And if we heartily desire
to have our Children Good; the most likely way is to be Good Our selves. By
becoming Religious we happily bring them into the Covenant, which is the usual
way of Grace: And by bringing them up in the Nurture of the LORD, and
accompanying our earnest Prayers with our lovely Lives; we are most like to
draw them both to admire and imitate our Virtues. The Blessed GOD is herein
greatly pleased with us: and we therefore take the fairest Course to obtain his
special Blessing for those pleasant Creatures whom we are training up to love
and serve Him.

Such pious Parents are therefore often favored with an hopeful Offspring. GOD
is pleased to encourage them with a gracious Motive, Prove. XXII.6. And He
usually grants his Blessing to their wise Endeavors. He commonly first
inspires into the tender Children an high Esteem and dear Affection for their
pious Parents: and this is the fruitful Source of every other Virtue. For this
inclines them to admire their excellent Examples, to see the Goodness of their
discreet Instructions, and in their Turns endeavor to be like them. The
contrary Speech and Carriage of the Vicious will from hence become disgustful:
their Temptations will therefore loose their Influence: and the Youth will
choose to imitate their more lovely Parents, to observe their Counsels, and to
grow more dear and delightful to them.

In short, the Language of their Parents is that in Prove. XXIII.15. My Son! If
thine Heart be Wise; my Heart shall rejoice, even mine: yea my Reins shall
rejoice, when thy Lips shall speak right Things! Hear thou my Son, and be Wise;
and guide thine Heart in the Way! The Father of the Righteous shall greatly
rejoice; and he that has a wise Child shall have Joy of him: thy Father and thy
Mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice. And as this is the
moving Language of their pious Parents; the grateful Children are equally
affected and impressed with it. Inspired with a Desire to please them, they
think they can never do too much to return their Love and to increase their Joy.

O delightful and hopeful Offspring! O happy Parents! Blessed are they that
bare such Children! They are your Joy and Crown already: and they attract the
Eyes and Love of others. They raise our lively Expectations: They are the
pleasing Hopes of the rising Age -- To support Religion, and to serve their
Country, when their Parents Heads are laid in the silent and unactive Grave.

But O alas! How forward are our Expectations! and how vain our Hopes -- when
in the

II. Place, GOD sometimes takes away even such as these by Death in their Early
Days.

They are some of the most Desirable that we could wish to Live, both for the
Glory of GOD, and for the Good of the World. They are endowed with excellent
Accomplishments to serve their Generation: and they have given a pleasing
Specimen of what a useful Life they would have lived, if they had continued
longer. They have gained the Love of all about them: and we cannot tell how to
Think, but that all this Preparation is for a long Train of Service in Times to
come.

But alas! when they have employed and spent their Younger Age to qualify
themselves, are completely formed for Business, and just are entering on the
Public Stage of Action; -- They must Proceed no further, They are taken away,
and all their fine Accomplishments are lost to us for ever! They must only just
appear, to show their Virtues, and raise our Hopes; and then must vanish! Their
Days must be as Grass: Like the Flowers of the Field they must but open to our
Eye and Flourish; and then the Wind blows over them, and they are gone, and the
Place thereof shall know 'em no more.

The Places where they lived could no more spare them than their Parents: The
most ardent Desires and Prayers of their Friends and Relatives for their
precious Lives must be denied: their earnest Expectations must be disappointed:
their Cares, Pains, Expenses and Projections for them, must come to nothing:
their pleasing Apprehensions of future Comfort and Delight on Earth, must
vanish: and their most desired Enjoyments must, against the strongest Passions
and Affections, be ravished from them. And even (...) this -- while Multitudes
of worthless and wicked Children, the Shame and Sorrow of their Parents, and
the Corrupters of their Age, are still continued. -- O! the Depth of the
Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of GOD! How unsearchable are his
Judgments! and his Ways past finding out!

Unbelief and Ignorance are upon this Occasion, ready to cry out -- LORD
wherefore have Thou made these hopeful Youths in vain? in vain adorned them for
that Delight and Love on Earth, which they are never to enjoy? in vain
accomplished them for that special Service Here, which they are never to
Perform? -- Or may we humly search into the deep and awful Mystery of this
Divine Dispensation?

What if this be only to give a Glympse of the adorable Sovereignty and
Perfections of that absolutely Blessed GOD; who can as easily and in a moment
make a World as not, to show his Glory, and then in another moment make it
vanish? So He causes the blazing Meteors of the Heavens to brake out and glare
with an admired Brightness, to show his Power and raise our Wonder; and then in
a moment vanish, and not leave the least Track of their Subsistence after them.
So He brings the Princes to Nothing: He makes the Judges of the Earth as
Vanity -- He blows upon them, and they wither: and the Whirlwind takes them
away as the Stuble. Isai. XL.23, 24.

Or, what if this be to show his boundless Fullness and Magnificence? That He
has not any need or want of any Creatures, or their most excellent Powers to
serve Him. So He every Day, in a most curious and amazing manner, Forms even
Millions both of Brutal and Humane Creatures; whom again He crushes before the
Birth, and never suffers to see the Light: that so with awful Reverence Others
may clearly see that The Inhabitants of the Earth are but as Grasshoppers to
Him; that the Nations are as a Drop of the Bucket, and are counted as the small
Dust of the Balance; yea that all Nations are before Him as Nothing, and are
counted to Him even less than Nothing and Vanity. Isai. XL.15 -- 23.

Or what if all this be rather to give his People, both the Children and their
Parents, a special Opportunity for the glorious Triumph of their Resignation to
Him?

How hard a thing is it, for the lively Youth, that has just begun to taste of
Earthly Delights, has his Relish strong, and his Prospects gay and promising;
in his very Entrance into These -- to Resign his Life! -- And this especially,
if he be one of a reputable Birth, of raised Figure, that has a Store of Riches
either in Hand or in Reversion, has the Respect and Love of all who know him,
and all the pleasing Views that can be of Earthly Happiness. I might mention
several other aggravations -- such as having traveled abroad, and finished his
Accomplishments, in a foreign Land, and about Returning to his dear and longing
Parents; -- And Then to come into the Views of Death, and give up all at once!
-- O! how hard! -- how difficult! --

But if by the Grace of GOD, the Youth can do it, if he can offer up so dear a
Sacrifice; O! how exceeding acceptable is this to the Sovereign GOD! How
Glorious the Victory over Nature! What a wonderful and delightful Spectacle to
the Holy Angels! With what Speed and Pleasure will they transport the resigned
Spirit to the Seats of Bliss above! and with what abounding Joys and Welcomes
will it be received There! -- Such a Sacrifice and such a Triumph is highly
worthy of all that we can have to offer. It is most highly worth the while to
have every Accomplishment and Prospect, if it were for nothing else, that we
might Dye in Youth, and have such a precious Offering to make to the Glorious
GOD.

And for the same Reason, it is fully worthy of all the Affections, Cares,
Pains, Expenses, Labors, Desires and Hopes of the most tender Parents; that
They may also have Occasion to Resign the dear and blooming Youth to HIM. It is
worth the while to have such lovely Children, if it were for nothing else, that
we might have such precious Things to yield up to Him: and the lovelier they
are, and the dearer to us; the greater is our Triumph over our own Affection
for them, the more Precious will He esteem our Present, and the more delightful
is our Offering to Him.

Or lastly, what if all this be, To take us off from too much admiring and
loving the nearest and pleasantest of Creatures; to remove our Dependence from
them; and to raise our Minds up more to that Unchangeable, All-sufficient and
most Glorious BEING! Whom we can never love or admire enough, never enough
depend upon: who can never fail or disappoint us; but will infinitely more than
answer our most raised Expectations.

However, when the Clouds and Darkness that are round about the Throne of GOD,
have come down and covered us, and cast an impenetrable Mist on these
Transactions; we must yet fall down, admire, adore Him, for the surpassing
Reach of his Intentions in them. We must yet Believe, that He orders all in
perfect Wisdom: that in all the Mysteries of Providence, He is ever wisely
carrying on his Good and Great Designs in the most proper Ways: that His
Covenant is well ordered in all things, and sure and everlasting: that He is
ever mindful of it: and that He is all the while advancing both His own highest
Glory and His People's highest Interest, as the united View and End of all.

But when our Hopeful Children Dye; Do they entirely vanish? Are they gone away
into perfect Silence? Have they quite left off speaking to us, and this for
ever? -- O! no! -- They are Dead indeed to all things here below, and are
disappeared from the Sight of our Bodily Eyes: But

III. and lastly, When they are thus Deceased and vanished, they yet SPEAK, and
this aloud to their Survivors.

Their imaginary Pictures live and dwell as dear and precious in our lasting
Memories. In our lively Minds they constantly appear. And O! how vainly do we
raise up and view those shadowy Imaginations in us; that we may painfully
remember what we Lost, and renew our Sorrows!

But instead of this vain Amusement, which is only like to hurt us; we should
rather apply our selves to Hear their Voice, which is like to comfort us, and
turn to our greatest Benefit. And here 1. They yet speak by their Lovely Lives.
And 2. By their Early Death.


1. They yet Speak by their LOVELY LIVES.

Did they resist Temptations, refrain the Company of the Vain and Wicked, and
honor and esteem the Good; They thereby instruct and quicken us to Do so
likewise. Or were they full of Love and Duty to their Parents, chaste and sober
in their Words and Actions, Fair and honest in their Dealings, Diligent in
Business, Faithful in their Promises, Kind and courteous to all about them;
their Examples, teach us to Be so likewise. Or lastly, were they Fearful to
displease the Blessed GOD, did they constantly attend religious Duties, and did
they mostly square their Lives according to his Holy Word; their Examples are
our loud Instructors: They now reprove our loose, irregular and careless Lives:
and unless reformed, will hereafter rise up in Judgment to condemn us. But then

2. They yet more awfully and loudly speak by their EARLY DEATH.

What a dreaful and surprising Sound did This first make in our astonished
Ears! What more piercing and awakening noise to strike the Soul than that, -- '
The Hopeful Youth is Dead!' -- And it is all one to us, whether he tells the
Shocking News Himself, or speaks by others. What is then the Language in which
he speaks by such a great and awful Change, but This -- O my Friends! I am on
Earth no more! my Body is utterly bereaved of Life and Sense, and my immortal
Soul is now Launched out into Eternity! My Eyes are closed, my Ears are shut to
Earthly things for ever! Mine Eye shall see Good no more among you: and the
Eyes of them that have seen me, shall see me no more! Yea my Flesh is clothed
with Worms and Clods of Dust: my Skin is broken and become loathsome! And as
the Cloud is consumed and vanished away; so I am gone down to the Grave, and
shall come up no more: I shall return no more to my Father's House: nor shall
the Place which has known me, know me any more!

This is what he tells us of his awful Change -- But O! Go on Thou Unembodied
Spirit, and Proceed to let us know What a kind of World it is, Thou art
transported to, and What Thou have gotten by all thy Prayers, thy Fear of GOD,
thy Honoring thy Parents, and thy lovely Life in thy Youthful Days! -- And
don't we hear Him speak such things as these -- O! I find that in Fearing GOD
there is a great Reward, a glorious Recompense, inexpressibly transcending all
that I could on Earth imagine! My Prayers are infinitely more than answered,
and so are all the earnest Cries of my Parents for me! And though my Days are cut
short among you; yet I am entered into an endless, happy Life, a Length of Days
for ever in This Blessed Place, which is the truest Region of the Living, and
which the LORD my GOD according to His Word has given me! a Region full of
perfect Purity, Light and Love: where Mortality is swallowed up of Life: and
where are Glorious Mansions and Inhabitants, and Joys for ever!

Thus may we well perceive our Dutiful and Hopeful Youth a speaking, even when
Dead and vanished: And thus may we hear Him speaking of His own Condition. But
O! has He nothing to say to us concerning Ours? Yes! -- He speaks to All that
knew Him, He speaks especially to Young Ones, and to his Surviving Parents, and
other Kindred also.

1. He yet speaks to US ALL, and tells us --

O! it is a sinful, mean and wretched World you dwell in. It is full of Snares
and Dangers: It is unworthy of your Portion: It is good for nothing, but to
improve for GOD the little time you have it, and to Resign to Him when He calls
you to it. You live in Dying Bodies: But you have immortal Souls like mine,
that are hastening on to the Eternal World. Your Lives like mine on Earth, are
as a thin, uncertain Vapor, that for a little while appears, and will quickly
vanish. You have now your precious Time of Trial: But it will soon be over; and
you must Dye as well as I, and come to Judgment. Your Lives are so extremely
frail, that a single Day or Hour may bring you to it: and if then you be not
Prepared; you must inevitably go down to Hell, to Hell for ever. I have had an
amazing View of that dreadful Place, while I was carried up to Heaven. O! it is
a fearful and tremendous Brink you live on! and what shall it Profit you, if
you should Gain the whole World and loose your Soul? or what will you give in
Exchange for your Soul? O! there is Nothing, not Ten Million Worlds can make
Amends for the Loss of This!

O then, Do not run the most desperate Venture a Moment longer of Loosing it,
and this for Ever! But whatever you Do, make haste to secure this dearest and
most precious Thing! O Let not this vain World deceive you: Pursue it not with
the greatest Earnestness, as your chiefest Portion: While you are in the eager
Chase, you may in a moment drop down into the Gulf below; and then what Good
will all your Earthly Treasures do you! O then, Take off your inordinate
Affections from them, and lift up your Eyes and see and choose this Glorious
Portion I Possess, and which never shall be taken from me. O! now Renounce your
Lusts, and give your selves entirely to GOD through CHRIST for ever. Receive this
Blessed Person in all His Offices, and Rely upon Him as your All-sufficient
Savior; as a Person worthy of your highest Love, that will ever raise your
growing Wonder, and give you satisfying Delight for ever. O! Redeem your
precious Time; improve your Talents; and make it your continual Business to
Please and Honor Him: To Promote His Kingdom, to Do His Will, to endure
Chastisements, and have Communion with Him. -- So shall you come at length to
Behold his admired Glories; to view his Love and Smiles with continual
Transport; and to be satisfied, ravished and even amazed in your being Filled
with his Divine Likeness.

With such Words as these He speaks to All in General. -- But,

2. He speaks yet more especially, to the YOUTH among us.

He being a Youth when He departed from us; He was especially acquainted with
the Inclinations, Prospects and Pursuits of Youth, their peculiar Snares and
Dangers; and from his own Experience, He therefore knows especially how to
speak to Them. And O! Young Ones! I beseech you now attend, and Hear Him
speaking loudly to You -- To You O Young Ones do I call, and my Voice is to the
Sons of Men! --

By my self you see that you may Dye in Youth, notwithstanding all your airy
Hopes and Expectations. Your Childhood and Youth are Vanity. Your Youthful
Hearts are Evil, full of Evil, and this continually. You have many Youthful
Pleasures to Pursue, and many Youthful Lusts to Gratify. Alas! You are
exceeding Prone to set the Evil Day of Death at a great Distance from you; and
then to please your selves with the vain Presumption, that it is as far from
you as you would have it: and then you freely give a Loose to Earthly Joys and
Pleasures. But O Young Man! Rejoice Thou in thy Youth as much as thou will, and
Let thy Heart cheer Thee in the Days of thy Youth; and walk in the ways of thy
Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes! -- But know Thou, that for all these
Things GOD will bring Thee into Judgment!

It is but a little while since, I was as well as You; as full of Life, of
Health, of Cheerfulness; as full of pleasant Prospects and Expectations: I had
as much of Earthly Things in View as almost Heart could wish: and I had as
little Reason as any among you, to suspect that all these pleasing Scenes of
Hope would so soon be vanished and come to nothing. Alas! You cannot be more
assured of a longer Life than I: and while you fondly please your selves with
groundless Expectations; you may be, before you are aware, surpised with the
Snares of Death, and disappointed for ever.

It is true indeed, Though GOD has pleased to shorten my Life on Earth; yet
because I feared Him in my Youthful Age, I have lost nothing by it; but made an
happy Exchange of Earthly Prospects for Heavenly Joys, and of uncertain Hopes
for Satisfying Pleasures at the Right Hand of GOD for ever. And this is the
wise and only Course I would now earnestly desire and counsel you to take for
your Eternal Safety. O! Remember now your Great and Kind CREATOR and REDEEMER,
in your Youthful Days, before the Evil Days of Sickness or of Death come on
you, or those distressing Times draw nigh when you shall say you have no
Pleasure in them. O! now Choose the Blessed GOD in CHRIST, for your Everlasting
Father, and for the Guide of your Youth. You will surely find it is the Best
and Wisest way to Take and Bare his Yoke in your Early Days. O! Forsake the
Foolish; and Fly Youthful Lusts; and Live for ever.

You may thereby loose some meaner Pleasures, and expose your selves to some
Reproach from the Vain and Wicked; But they are to be but little minded: The
Glorious GOD beholds them with Contempt; and their Triumphing will be short,
their Mirth but for a Moment. For every Jeer of theirs, you have the Applause
of Angels: while the Great and Blessed GOD looks on and sees your Patience with
Approbation and Delight. He Will quickly give you the Dominion over them: and the
more Reproach you suffer here, the Brighter will He make your Crown hereafter.

3. and lastly, To be sure He likewise speaks to his Surviving PARENTS and
OTHER RELATIVES.

His Voice is that which our Blessed SAVIOR uttered when He was Parting from
His own Below, -- My dearest Earthly Parents! weep not now for Me; but for your
Selves, and for your remaining Children! I have no Occasion now for Tears or
Sorrows; and I am now above the need of Cries. I enjoy the Fruit of all your
Cares, Expenses, Pains, your Faith and Prayers for me: I now reap their Harvest
with a great abundance: They are infinitely more than answered. And as you
offered them all to GOD, while you were bestowing them on Me; you have lost
nothing by them; But as they all are turned to My Eternal Gain, They are
likewise working out for You a vast Increase of Joy when we meet together.

O! Do not therefore mourn for Me, as if you had no Hope! But be exceeding
Thankful for the Grounds of Hope GOD has been Pleased to give You. And now
repair to the Everlasting Covenant; cease your flowing Tears; and Drink and be
Refreshed with its abundant Consolations! O Take off your strong Affection from
me, which I have now no need of; and lift up your Eyes and see That DIVINE
PERSON clothed with Our Humane Nature: who is infinitely Fairer and more
Lovely than any of the Sons of Men, and who Lives and Reigns for ever. See how
He shines in this World of Light and Glory! and how all the Saints and Angels
Here are ravished in Him! And Do You by Faith behold Him, till you forget your
Sorrows and loose the Sight of Things below!

And O! Let all my Relatives Prepare to Follow. Let them continually Remember
that there is an inconceivably Happier World than That they Live in; And let it
be their Great and constant Care to make sure of it. Let them keep unspotted
from that lower World in which they sojourn. Wherein I have failed in my Duty,
either with respect to GOD or Man; Let them supply my Failings. Let them make
Religion their chief Concern and Business. Let them serve their Generation
according to the Will of GOD. Let them Do all the Good they can. Let them study
to be Blessings to all about them. Let their Light so shine; that Others There
may Glorify and Praise GOD for them; and that We may have continual Joy in
Heaven among the Saints and Angels Here, from what They are Doing on Earth. Let
them never be weary of Well-Doing. And let them continue Faithful to the Death;
that they may obtain the Crown of Eternal Life, and We all may come to meet
with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory Here; never to Part again, and never to
Sorrow more.

This is some of the awakening Language of our deceased Abel! Thus He speaks
aloud to Us! He speaks from the Eternal World! Such things as These He
pronounces by me, and would with his own Voice Proclaim, were He now to appear
among us. And as He speaks by me -- would the SPIRIT of CHRIST accompany them
with His own impressive Power; They would become the Voice of CHRIST Himself;
with a mighty Efficacy they would Pierce into your Souls and make You Hear and
Live.

O that we might give our continued Attention to them, and not Forget them as
the airy Sound is now about to cease: But let us always hear it; i. e.
Habitually Remember, that these Great and important things concern us every
Moment of our Lives, as much as we now think they Do, while we are Hearing of
them in the House of GOD. And let us so Think of them, as by the concurring
Help of the SPIRIT of Grace, we may be effectually excited, To give all
Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure; that so an Entrance may be
ministered to us abundantly into the Everlasting Kingdom of our LORD and SAVIOR
JESUS CHRIST.

There GOD Himself appears in this WONDROUS PERSON, and unveils His Glories,
and converses with His People in the most immediate manner. There He fully
shows Himself their GOD and Portion; and clears up every Mystery to their
perfect Satisfaction. There no Impurity or Sin shall enter; and there is no
more Death, nor Sorrow, nor Pain, nor Crying: But all this vast and gloomy
Train of things are passed away; and in their Room succeeds, a perfect Life of
Immortality and undecaying Vigor, an Eternal Stream of pure Delights, a
Fullness of unmingled Joys, an absolute Assurance of their Perpetuity: And there
all the Heavenly Hosts congratulate and triumph in their mutual Happiness, and
unite in their Acclamations of Praise to GOD, the Free Original of all, for
Ever.

FINIS.
An ACCOUNT of the Deceased, From the Weekly News-Letter. Corrected.
BOSTON, September. 7. 1727.

ON the last Lord's Day, the 3d Instant, arrived here Capt. Shepardson in about
Seven Weeks from London, with the very sorrowful and surprising News of the
Death of Mr. DANIEL OLIVER, Jun. of the Smallpox there: Which is greatly
Lamented among us.

He was eldest Son of the Honorable DANIEL OLIVER, Esquire of this Town. Was Born
here on January 14. 1703, 4. Entered Harvard-College in 1718. Took his Degree
of Bachelor in Arts, 1722. of Master in Arts, 1725. And applied himself to
Merchandise; for which He had an excellent Genius and Ability. He set sail from
hence for London, May 10. 1726. Traveled into Holland, Flanders and Part of
France, and returning to England, visited several Parts of the Kingdom: And
having just finished his intended Travels, and Preparing to come Home; was
taken ill on Monday June 26, Died on Wednesday July 5th, in the 24th Year of
his Age, and was the next Day decently interred in a Vault under the Church in
Fenchurch-street, London.

He was a Young Gentleman of great Hopes. Of a lively, active and pleasant
Temper: Full of Duty and Affection to his Parents: Modest, Free and Innocent in
Conversation: Had preserved a blameless Reputation, and gained the Love of all
that knew him in his native Country: And by diverse Letters we are well
informed, that by the Help of GOD He maintained his virtuous Character Abroad.
One writes, That in his whole Conduct He never saw any thing unbecoming the
Christian: That He though it He could plainly see the Advantages of a religious
Education, which had made so good an Impression, that a Tincture of it run
through all his Behavior: That with Pleasure He observed the Stand He made
against the Temptations and Wickedness of the Age and Town: That from his being
first taken Ill, He was much composed and in a good Frame, and continued so in
his Intervals to the last: And that the Esteem He had gained when Living, was
seen by the Respect shown him afterward, being lamented by all his
Acquaintance.

In fine, His short Life was a worthy Example of a wise and virtuous Conduct,
to the Youth of his native Country, both at home and abroad: and his immature
Death is an affecting Instance of the Uncertainty of their Earthly Prospects
and Expectations. And may they be so wise and tho'tful as this Young Gentleman
appeared to be, even in the Hight of his Health and Cheerfulness. For the
Evening before He was seized, in Company with a Friend of his, He desired a
Sermon might be read on those important Words of our LORD, in Mat. XVI.26. For
what is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own
Soul? or what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? And in the Reading,
Mr. Oliver made many just and serious Remarks, which his Friend writes word, He
shall never forget.

An ELEGY, Addressed to His EXCELLENCY Governor BELCHER: On the Death OF HIS
Brother-in-Law, The HONORABLE DANIEL OLIVER, Esquire

-- Re ipsa repperi
Facilitate nihil esse homini melius, neque clementia. --
Clemens, Placidus; nulli laedere -- arridere omnibus;
-- Omnes benedicere, amant.
Ter. Adelph. TO His EXCELLENCY Governor BELCHER.
PEnsive, overcome, the Muse hung down her Head,
And heard the fatal News, -- " The Friend is dead.
Dumb, fixed in Sorrow, she forgot her Song,
The Tune forsook her Lyre, the Voice her Tongue:
'Till, BELCHER, You command her Strains to rise,
You ask, she sings; You dictate, she replies;
That well-known Voice awakes her dying Fires,
And, instant at Your Call, the Power inspires.
Then let our Griefs in mingling Streams descend,
You mourn the Brother, and I weep the Friend.
He Is dead -- O vast unutterable Woe!
Gone, gone for ever from these Seats below:
No more his gracious Lips our Souls shall move,
And lift us to the holy Joys above;
No more the Church his sacred Transports feel,
His strong Devotion, and his fervent Zeal;
No more his Face shines with the conscious Calms,
Of Faith, and Prayers, and generous Deeds, and Alms:
Ah! fainting, pale, ebbs out his quivering Breath,
And OLIVER the good descends to Death.
Thus while the Friends their private Loss deplore,
Lament unpitied, unreliev'd, ye Poor,
Who, round his Gates, your daily Blessings paid,
Warm by his Clothes, or from his Table fed.
Profuse, his liberal Hand their Prayer prevents,
(So shower'd the ancient Manna round the Tents)
Witness, ye conscious Nights, whose Shades he chose,
Unknown, to see, and succor Humane Woes:
Invisible, he trod the homely Cott,
The Hungry eat, the Oppressed to groan forgot,
The Sick perceived the sudden Cordial save,
All blessed the Gift, nor saw the Hand that gave.
From Men, with Art and sacred Caution hid,
The Muse, from Heaven inspired, reveals the Deed*
You painted Roofs, and pompous Rooms of State,
Where, in the Senate, the grave Patriot sat,
Say how his steady Conduct graced your Board;
Just were his Thoughts, and prudent every Word;
Serene, delib'rate, undisguis'd by Art,
His Tongue was faithful, and sincere his Heart.
Statesmen, the unblemished Counselor bemoan,
And from his fair Example form your own.
So must your Greatness sink, your Glories fade,
And, blended, in the common Dust be laid.
Nor Wealth, nor Titles, nor Fame's gentle Charms,
Can bribe your Life from Fate's relentless Arms:
Virtue, fair Goddess! only can allow
Conquests over Death, and crown the Victor's Brow.
Mindless of Grandieur, from the Crowd he fled,
Sought green Retirements, and the silent Shade.
Ye bow'ry Trees, which round his Mansion bloom,
Often ye concealed him in your hallowed Gloom:
Often he enjoyed, in your sublime Abode,
His Books, his Innocence, his Friend, his GOD.
Now, sad, I wander over the lofty Seat,
And trace the Mazes of the soft Retreat,
View the fair Prospects, round the Gardens rove,
Bend up the Hill, and search the lonely Grove;
But ah! no more his Voice salutes my Ear,
Nor in his Hands the blushing Fruits appear:
Yet is his Image in each Scene conveyed,
And busy Fancy forms his gliding Shade,
I seem to meet him in the flowery Walks,
And, through the Boughs, his whispering Spirit talks,
Eager I call, the dear Delusion flies,
Grief seals my Lips, and Tears suffuse my Eyes.
O far, far off, above the Ken of these,
The rising Mountain, and the aspiring Trees,
In the gay Bowers that crown the Eternal Hills,
His spotless Soul, in deathless Pleasure, dwells;
Tuneful replies, while Choral Seraphs play,
And in bright Visions smiles the Hours away.
He visits now no more this dull Abode,
But talks with Angels, and beholds his GOD.
Now cease, the flowing Tears, the Funeral Strains;
Let joyful Sounds revive the vocal Plains.
What though the Body in the Tomb be laid,
Ghastly, and breathless, in the awful Shade?
Though by our Eyes, his Form no more confessed,
Pleased by the Friend, and by the Christian blessed?
We view the bright Reversion in the Skies,
When the dead Saint, waked to new Life, shall rise.
Mean time, the heavenly Muse embalms his Name,
And gives him up consigned to endless Fame:
These faithful Lines thy Absence still bemoan,
And this Inscription grace thy mouldering Stone.
"Here, Passenger, confined, reduced to Dust,
"Lies what was once, religious, wise, and just.
"Steady and warm in Liberty's Defense,
"True to his Country, loyal to his Prince:
"In Friendship faithful, generous to Desert,
"A Head enlightn'd, and a glowing Heart.
M. BYLES.


