CHRIST Victorious over the Powers of Darkness, by the Light of His preached
Gospel.

A SERMON Preached in BOSTON, December 12. 1733. At the ORDINATION of the
Reverend Mr. Stephen Parker, Mr. Ebenezer Hinsdell, and Mr. Joseph Seccombe,


Chosen by the Commissioners to the Honorable SOCIETY for Propagating
Christian Knowledge, at Edinburgh, to carry the Gospel to the Aboriginal
Natives on the Borders of New England.

By Joseph Sewall, D. D. Pastor to a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

To which are annexed, A brief Account of the Honorable SOCIETY and of the
present Mission, with an Abstract of the Ordination Prayers, and the Charge
given by the Reverend Dr. COLMAN.

And the Right Hand of Fellowship given by the Reverend Mr. PRINCE.

Psalm ii. 8. Ask of Me and I shall give Thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth for thy Possession. BOSTON:
Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queen Street. MDCCXXXIII.

To the Honorable and Reverend The SOCIETY for Propagating CHRISTIAN
KNOWLEDGE, at Edinburgh.
Most Honorable and Reverend,
YOUR Correspondent Members in New England, by the Blessing of GOD on their
Endeavors, according to the Trust reposed in Them, having seen the Solemn
Ordination of Your Three Missionaries to the Natives on our Borders, approved
and attended joyfully by the Churches of CHRIST here; were pleased to order the
Sermon preached, together with the Charge given, and the Fellowship of the
Churches testified on that Occasion, to be printed; and that the Whole should
be humbly Dedicated to YOU in their Name.

In Obedience therefore to the Command of His Excellency our GOVERNOR, and of
the Gentlemen your Commissioners here, we have the Honor to present the
following Sheets to Your Honorable Board; believing that notwithstanding all
the Defects which Persons of your Learning will easily see in them, yet they
will find a candid Acceptance with You: And that the Knowledge of this
Beginning of your Mission will excite, as the Thanksgivings of Many to GOD, and
their Prayers for the Progress of it under the Smiles of His Providence and
Grace, so likewise the Charitable Contributions of Some for the more effectual
Support of it in Times to come.

You have made us too much Parties in the glorious Design of your
Incorporation, for Us to allow Our Selves to go into the Praises due to it,
which must needs be in all the Churches of CHRIST, so long as the true
Intention of the pious Donors is faithfully pursued, as we are confident it
always will be by You, in the Propagation of the Principles of the Christian
Protestant Religion in Places that most need the Knowledge thereof, and among
People that are indeed perishing for want of it. Not to keep strictly to these
Rules were to prostitute a very Sacred Trust and Confidence reposed in You, and
to forfeit the Blessing of a Righteous Providence.

We thank GOD who has so far crowned your sincere Labor of Love with Success
in Your own Isles and High-lands: And though Clouds and Darkness do very much
incompass your present Excellent Attempt here in our Borders, by reason of the
Prejudices of Popery sown in the Minds of the Salvages by the Jesuits and
Friars who sojourn among them; yet there is nothing too hard for GOD: Or if He
deny the desired Success we trust He will say, " You did well that it was in
your Heart; and our Brethren here who are Companions with your Missionaries at
Home in the Kingdom and Patience of JESUS CHRIST, will with them be precious in
the Eyes of the LORD.

Our Days are happily fallen in those Times whereof the DIVINE SPIRIT spoke to
the Prophet Daniel, when many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased. The BLESSED AND ONLY POTENTATE in these His Times is performing this
by the Navigation of Great Britain, and other Kingdoms of Europe. For how
easily and swiftly is the Knowledge of the True GOD, and of the Only SAVIOR,
communicated hereby from one End of the Earth to the other? And O that the
Maritime Protestant Powers would more bring their Glory and Honor into the
Administration of this Service! not only by granting their Letters Patents in
Favor, of it to the Rich and Pious in their Dominions that are well disposed
toward it, but also by Opening of Their Own Treasures for its Support! As David
set his Affection to the House of his GOD, and gave of His own proper Good, of
Silver and Gold.

We are sure that Empires and States, Provinces and Cities cannot better
consecrate a Part of their Riches unto CHRIST. And the Promise of the GREAT GOD
which stands so near the Prophesy before mentioned from the Book of Daniel, is
well worthy of the ambitious Regards of the many Noble and Mighty of this
World; and should inspire Them as well as the Poor Ministers and Missionaries
in the Kingdom of our LORD JESUS: AND THEY THAT BE WISE SHALL SHINE AS THE
FIRMAMENT, AND THEY THAT TURN MANY TO RIGHTEOUSNESS AS THE STARS FOR EVER AND
EVER. This gracious Promise is not so much to be understood (as a worthy Divine
has long since observed, in his Dedication of his Theory of the Earth to the
late Excellent Queen MARY) of the Illumination and Conversion of single Souls,
as of Nations and People; the turning the WORLD to Righteousness. They that
lead on that happy Work shall be distinguished in Glory from the rest of
Mankind.

This is the proper Work of SOCIETIES and Combinations of Men, under the
Countenance of Christian PRINCES: And may the Illustrious House of our KING
bear away a glorious Part of the Recompenses in the Day of CHRIST, that shall
be to the Societies of his Subjects, who are by His Authority spreading the
Knowledge of the Way of Salvation to the Ends of the Earth.

We need not ask your continued Prayers for Us while we are ministering under
You, and much less a Remembrance at the Throne of Grace for Your Missionaries
who are returned to their respective Posts of Service; Nor shall we cease to
pray for the Honorable Society, that the special Direction of GOD may ever
attend their Counsels, and His Blessing always crown their faithful Endeavors
with great Success.

We are most Honorable and Reverend In the Name of His Excellency and Your
other Commissioners here, Your Obedient Humble Servants, Benjamin Colman,
Joseph Sewall.

BOSTON, N. E. Jan. 1. 1733.
CHRIST Victorious Over the Powers of Darkness, By the Light of His Preached
Gospel.
ACTS XXVI. 16, -- 19. But rise, and stand upon thy feet: for I have appeared
unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness both of these
things which thou have seen, and of those things in the which I will appear
unto thee;
Delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send
thee,
To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me.
Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision.

IN this Chapter Paul declares before King Agrippa and others, his
extraordinary Conversion and Call to the Apostolic Office. When he set out on
his Journey toward Damascus, it was breathing out threatenings and slaughter
against the Disciples of the LORD; but behold, the triumph of Almighty Power
and Sovereign Grace! In the way, our exalted SAVIOR shined down upon him with
a Light above the brightness of the Sun; and when he was fallen to the Earth,
said to him, Saul, Saul, why persecuted thou me? So near is the relation
between CHRIST the Head, and the Members of His mystical Body, that what is
done to them, he takes as done to himself. 1 Cor. xii. 12. As the body is one
and has many members, and all the members of that one body, being many, are
one body: so also is Christ. Mat. xxv. 40. And now, trembling, he says, Who art
thou Lord? He knew not that JESUS was the promised Messiah, till he thus
revealed himself to him. And how wonderful is it that this Appearance should
be, not only to Convert him, but also to Call him to be an Apostle, that he
might Convert many others! Divine Goodness overcame his Evil, and where Sin did
abound, Grace super-abounded.

I shall here take notice of several things as they lie in the Text. 1. He was
Called to be a Minister, and this he had in common with others that preach the
Gospel; however he was also called to be a Witness of the Resurrection of JESUS
CHRIST, whom he had now seen; and received extraordinary Gifts whereby he might
confirm his Testimony. 2. We have a Promise of deliverance from the People etc.
ver. 17. By the People, understand the Jews, who were many of them filled with
rage against him upon his turning Christian. GOD protected him under
innumerable Dangers while he had Work for him to do, and then gave him the
crown of Martyrdom; Faith and patience and courage to suffer for the Name of
JESUS, 2 Timothy iv. 6. Ecclesiastical History informs us that he was beheaded
under Nero. 3. We have the great Errand upon which he was sent, ver. 18. To
open their Eyes etc. Paul was in a peculiar manner the Apostle of the Gentiles,
who were under Heathen-ignorance, and so under the power of Satan. -- He is
sent to turn them from darkness etc. that is, as on Instrument in the hand of
CHRIST, whose Work this is. 4. We have the gracious Design of our LORD in this
Work, and the End which crowns it: That they may rece^ve forgiveness etc. 5. We
have his obedient submission to this divine Call, ver. 19. Our LORD spoke to
his Heart, and made him willing in the day of his power. He tells us, Gal. i
15, 16. When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him
among the heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood. He looked
above himself, to him that called him, and without delay set about the Work;
and when he had preached the Gospel, as is supposed, above twenty years, he
could say, ver. 22. context. Having obtained help of God, I continue to this
day.

From the Words, and as related to the Context, we may observe the following
Doctrines.

DOCT. I. Our LORD JESUS CHRIST calls and sends forth the Ministers of the
Gospel.
Ver. 16. -- To make thee a Minister -- ver. 17. -- Unto whom I send thee.
Indeed this Call was immediate, neither of Men, nor by Men; but by a glorious
Appearance of CHRIST, and his Voice from Heaven: however, he continues to speak
to his People in his Word, and to declare his will; and therefore though Men may
be the Instruments, yet when the Rules of the Gospel of CHRIST are observed,
the Call of Ministers is from him. This Divine Person, GOD-Man-Mediator, is the
glorious Head of his Church, whose Prerogative it is to appoint the Laws and
Ordinances of his House, and Officers that are to act under him in his visible
Kingdom on Earth. Accordingly, after his Resurrection, He said to his
Disciples, All power is given unto me in heaven and on earth. Go ye therefore
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you, Mat. xxviii. 18, -- 20. And when our LORD ascended on high,
he received Gifts for Men, and he gave some Apostles --: and some, Pastors and
Teachers, Ephesians. iv 11. Now, that these ordinary Officers last mentioned, were
appointed to succeed the Apostle, in the Work of the Ministry, is evident from
the great design of this Gift and Institution. It follows, ver. 12, 13. For the
perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ. Upon which Mr. Burkitt observes, the Apostle
declares how long the Work of the Ministry appointed by CHRIST for his Church's
edification and advantage, was to continue; namely, to the End of the World,
till all come etc. And this is further evident from the directions given in
GOD's Word, respecting the Qualifications of such Ministers, and their
Separation to this Work. 1 Timothy iii. 2, -- 11. Tit. i. 5, -- 9. And whereas
they stand in absolute need of the Presence of CHRIST with them, His most
gracious Promise given when He commissioned his Disciples to teach in his Name,
was not restrained to them, and the Age wherein they lived; but extended to
Gospel Ministers to the End of the World. Mat. xxviii. 20. -- Lo, I am with you
always, even to the end of the World. And inasmuch as the Great GOD our SAVIOR
makes Overseers or Bishops, and effectually calls his chosen People, by his
Spirit, Act. xx. 28. Tit. iii. 5, 6. He promised that the HOLY GHOST, who is
also a Divine Person, should be sent from the Father in virtue of his
Intercession, and that to abide with his People for ever, Joh. xiv. 16, 17.
Upon the whole, we may conclude, that our LORD JESUS CHRIST continues to call
and send forth Gospel Ministers.

DOCT. II. (...) LORD JESUS CHRIST sends His Ministers to open the eyes (...)
turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto GOD.
PROP. I. T^^ Children of Men are since the Fall in darkness, and under the
power of Satan.
GOD created Man at the first in his own Image, gave him the perfect
understanding of his Law, and power to keep it; set him at the head of the
visible Creation, giving him the dominion over it, and requiring him to collect
the tribute of Praise which was his due from the inferior Creatures, and pay
it to him: But alas! Man being in honor abode not. Adam, who stood as a
public Person in the first Covenant, sinned, and we in him. Romans v. 12. By one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death has passed upon
all men, for that all have sinned. Thus both sin and misery entered into this
World, and Satan having prevailed in his temptation, obtained a dreadful power.
-- We have the description of the apostate Children of Adam, Romans iii. 9. They
are all under sin. ver. 10. There is none righteous, no not one. ver. 16.
Destruction and misery are in their ways.

1. They are in Darkness.

Darkness, in the proper acceptance of the word, signifies the privation of
light, when the Sun which rules the Day is withdrawn from us: And in a
metaphorical and borrowed sense, in which the Scriptures often uses it,
darkness signifies both moral ^^d penal Evil, sin and the misery consequent
upon it. Accordingly, when the Son of GOD who saves from both, was manifest in
flesh, and arose as the Sun of Righteousness, to make and rule the Gospel-day;
it is said that the day spring from on high visited his people, to give light
to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, Luke i. ^8, 9. And
such as are made an holy nation and peculiar people to GOD, are said to be
called out of darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. ii. 9. It Is true of
all that are Converted, and in an eminent manner verified in such as are turned
from heathen ignorance. More particularly,

(1.) The Children of Men have their Hearts blinded, and so are alienated from
the life of God Ephesians. iv. 18. Having the understanding darkened, being alienated
from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the
^^ndness of their heart. Indeed Men have some kind of knowledge of GOD, and of
his Law which was at first written on the Heart, enough to leave even the
Heathen without excuse, that when they knew God, they glorified him (...) as
God. But alas (...) this Starlight (...) direct them how they may return to
the LORD so as to (...) with him: nor yet how they may aright do his will.
(...) Heathen ^ell into the vilest Idolatries. Their foolish heart (...) and
they changed the glory of the uncorruptible God, (...) image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds etc. Romans (...) 23. Wherefore GOD also gave them
up to uncleanness, (...) the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own
(...) between themselves; and unto vile affections, ver. 24, 2^* They were not
only abominable in their way of Worship; but also full of all unrighteousness
in their behavior toward Men. Psalm. lxxiv. 20. -- The dark places of the
Earth are full of the habitations of cruelty. Yea, such is the darkness of
Men's minds, that when the light of the Gospel shines upon them, they need to
have their Understandings opened that they may see and know the truth. Their
Reason is so depraved by Sin, and they are so filled with Prejudice against the
Gospel, that they will not receive the saving Truths thereof, unless it please
GOD by His Spirit to heal their Souls, and restore spiritual ^ight unto them. 1
Cor. ii. 14. But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God:
for they are foolishness unto him; neither can be know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. Yea, such is the enmity of the carnal Mind against GOD
and his Law, that when Sinners are left to themselves, they rebel against the
clearest Light. Thus it was when the Son of GOD came as the light of the World,
to declare his Father, and reveal his Will. Joh. iii. 19. This is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather
than light, because their deeds were evil.

(2.) The Children of Men are brought into a miserable condition by Sin, and
upon this account may be said to be in darkness. Calamity is fitly set forth by
this similitude, and is an inseparable companion of sin, Lam. iii 2. He has
brought me into darkness, but not into light. No sooner were our first Parents
fallen from God, but an horror of darkness seized on them; afraid, they fled
from the presence of that God in whose favor had been their Life: this lower
World fell under a dreadful Curse, and has been a dark place to their
Posterity ^ver since. Man that is born of a woman, is of few days, and full of
trouble. Job xiv. 1. He is subject to great disquietments of Mind, and horror
of Conscience; to Sickness, Pain, Bereavements; and in a word, to innumerable
Evils Spiritual and Temporal, till his Eyes are closed in darkness, and he
descend to the Grave, of which Job elegantly speaks, Chap. x. 22. A land of
darkness, as darkness it self, and of the shadow of death, without any order,
and where the light is as darkness. But alas! all this is but the beginning of
sorrows which must never end.

(3.) The Children of Men are in darkness; for they lie exposed to the eternal
Torments of Hell. And there is reserved for them the blackness of darkness
forever. Jude 13. The wages of Sin is death. Romans vi. 23. Not only temporal,
but spiritual and eternal Death. Mat. xxv. 46. These shall go away into
everlasting punishment. The infinitely glorious GOD is offended, and therefore
no temporary suffering of the damned can make full satisfaction; they must be
forever paying the vast debt they owe to GOD's justice, and so suffer the
everlasting Destruction of Body and Soul in that place of Torments, where no
beam of light ever shines; for there will be a vast gulf fixed between them
and the blissful presence of GOD the Father of lights, and they must be cast
out into outer darkness. Here, poor creatures, they might comfort themselves a
little with sparks of their own kindli^^, but there, they lie down in sorrow;
yea, sink forever in the bottomless Pit without the least gleam of hope. Psalm
xlix. 19. He shall go to the generation of his fathers, they shall never see
light.

2. The Children of Men are under the power of Satan.

He is the ruler of the darkness of this World, and has obtained a dreadful
power over Men by drawing them into sin. This old Serpent beguiled Eve, and
then made use of her as a (...) Instrument to tempt Adam to Eat the forbidden
fruit: Thus did the ^^vil prevail, and led our first Parents and their
rebellious Race captive. Ephesians. ii. 2. Wherein in time past ye walked --
according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in
the children of disobedience. The word of GOD speaks of the Apostate Angels as
united under one Head, the Prince of Devils, and so forming a Kingdom of
Darkness, in opposition to JESUS CHRIST, and His Kingdom on Earth. Luke xi. 18,
19. Col. i. 13. Accordingly, GOD's People are said (...) wrestle against the
rulers of the darkness of this World, (...) 12. And alas! Satan finds an easy
access to such as are under the guilt and dominion of Sin, and works in their
Hear^^ An excellent Divine, (...) observes, "He could not come to (...) and
work in her, he could not put a thought in her undiscernably, for that had been
his best way; but now, we being Sinners, he can, especially those that are his
own, work in them undiscernably". There Is a powerful energy of Satan in many
Sins committed by Men. Act. v. 3 -- Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to
the Holy Ghost? I do not say, that the Devil can force Men to Sin; but then,
taking the advantage of the darkness and corruption of their hearts, he is
powerful to deceive, and incline them to it, when their rightful LORD whom they
have voluntarily forsaken, in his righteous Judgment permits him: And these
(...) Creat^^^^, cannot in their own strength, overcome his temptati^^^ but are
led captive by him at his (...)
will: They bear his Image, and his Lusts they will do. The carnal Objects
which this evil One has to allure them, worldly Pleasures, Riches, and
Honors, are exactly suited to their worldly Lusts; the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, and pride of life; and he knows how to set these before them
in the most advantageous light; and spiritual Objects are far above out of
their sight. Thus does he as a strong Man armed keep the Souls of Sinners; yea,
he hurries them along in the way which leads to H^ll, his own place. And as to
the Heathen World, the Devil behaves himself as the God of it, obtaining
Worship from them in their vile Idolatries 1 Cor. x. 20. The things which the
Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and ^ot to God. How dreadful is
the power of Satan as it is represented in the Book of the Revelation, both in
Rome pagan and antichristian! And if we look into that part of the World which
is called Reformed, we shall find that he has in an amazing manner prevailed,
as a Spirit of Error, to sow damnable Heresies and doctrines of Devils, to the
obscuring of the light of the Gospel; and as a Spirit of Uncleanness, to entice
Men to those abominable Immoralities which are condemned by the light of
Nature. But blessed be GOD, there is light arising to us under this Darkness! To
us a Child is born -- who is the mighty GOD, and in whom is fulfilled that
Promise, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head. Heb. ii. 14.
Forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is the devil. And this divine Person is
pleased in his adorable Wisdom and Grace, to make his Ministers whom he sends
forth in his Name, Instruments in his Hand of pulling down the strong holds of
Satan, and of setting up his Kingdom in the hearts of Men.

PROP. II. Our LORD JESUS CHRIST sends forth the Ministers of the Gospel, to
open the eyes of Sinners; to turn them from darkness to Light, and from the
power of Satan unto GOD.
But, who is sufficient for these things? Are they able, of themselves to open
the eyes of the spiritually blind, and to cast down Satan from his Throne of
Darkness? No surely. But an answer is ready, We have this treasure in earthen
vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God and not of us, 2 Cor.
iv. (...). They must preach the pure Truths and Doctrines of the Gospel, and so
hold forth before Men the light of the glorious Gospel; And withal give
themselves to Prayer, that GOD would send down His Holy Spirit to accompany
their Endeavors with Men, and that as a Spirit of Wisdom, that the eyes of
their Understanding being enlightened, they may know what is the exceeding
greatness of his power toward them that believe, Ephesians. i. 18, 19. Our SAVIOR
says to his Disciples, Mat. v. 14. Ye are the light of the World; and requires
them to take care that their Light shine before Men. They must hold forth the
Word of Life not only in their Doctrine, but in an holy exemplary Conversation:
And in a word, use all proper means that those to whom they are sent, may
behold the truth and beauty of pure Religion. And thus are they to be workers
together with God, 2 Cor. vi. 1. And though the work it self is truly Divine,
(it is the Work of the HOLY SPIRIT savingly to enlighten and change the Heart,
and turn Sinners from the power of Satan to GOD,) yet is our glorious LORD
pleased to put honor upon his Ministers in using them as Instruments in his
Hand, in this wonderful Work. And thus has GOD chosen the weak things of the
World to confound the things which are mighty, that no flesh should glory in
his Presence, but that he that glories should glory in the LORD. Who is of God
made unto us Wisdom 1 Cor. 1. 2^, ^1. And then, in this way our LORD pours
contempt upon Satan, that haughty Spirit, while he is made like Lightning to
fall to the Earth, and his power is broken by weak Men. GOD ordains strength
out of the mouth of babes, to still the enemy and the avenger. Psalm. 8. 2. And,
in this way he also manifests his condescending Goodness to the Children of
Men, while He sends such to publish the Gospel to them, as are formed out of
the Clay, and whose terror need not make them afraid.

DOCT. III. The gracious design of our LORD JESUS in this dispensation of the
Gospel, is, that Men may receive Forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance among
them which are sanctified, by Faith that is in Him.
I might have connected this with the foregoing part of the verse; but as that
is mentioned as the work the Apostle was sent upon, and this is here brought in
as the happy fruit of it respecting those whose Eyes should be opened; I shall
consider it distinctly. In the Gospel is published the glad Tidings of Pardon,
and a rich Inheritance to be given to all them who receive Christ by Faith; and
all to whom the Gospel comes in power, and in the Holy Ghost obtain these great
Benefits.

1. Our Lord Jesus sends his Ministers to open the Eyes of Men -- That they may
receive Forgiveness of sins by Faith which is in Him.

Forgiveness of sin consists in the removal of the guilt of sin from off the
Sinner, whereby he i^ delivered from the Con^^mning Sentence of the La^; and
his Obligation to bear the Curse of it. And this is done by a gracious Act of
GOD our Sovereign Lord and Lawgiver. He alone has power to Forgive Sins. And
He dispenses this free Gift of Pardon by means of his Gospel published to
Sinners, wherein the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith. Here
we have the glorious discovery of the way in which we may obtain the Remission
of Sins, even through the Blood of JESUS CHRIST, on whom GOD has laid the
Iniquities of his People, and who has given fall Satisfaction by the Sacrifice
of Himself. Here we are assured that as He was delivered for our Offenses, so
that he rose again for our Justification; and that GOD has exalted Him with
his own right Hand to be a Prince, and a Savior, for to give Repentance to
Israel and Forgiveness of Sins. Here we are taught how we may obtain this great
Blessing which CHRIST has purchased; that GOD has set him forth to be a
Propitiation, through faith in his Blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of Sins, Romans iii. 25. And that it is of Faith, that it might be by
Grace, Chap iv. 16. Now, this Faith is a Grace of the SPIRIT, whereby we
believe the record GOD has given of his Son, and firmly assent unto it, upon
the Authority of his Testimony who cannot lie; and accordingly accept receive
and rest upon CHRIST alone for Pardon and Justification before GOD. See the
Confession of Faith (...)
In Him GOD is reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their Iniquities,
but "imputing the Obedience and Satisfaction of CHRIST," unto all them that
believe, whether Jews or Gentiles. And when the eyes of Sinners are opened, and
they are renewed in the spirit of their minds, they behold the LORD JESUS as
the Lamb of GOD which takes away the Sin of the World, and are united to him
by a true and living Faith, and so there is no Condemnation to them, being in
Christ Jesus, Romans viii. 1. And thus, though respecting them whose Sins are
pardoned, this great Benefit is free; yet is it so dispensed, that GOD's
Justice and Grace are glorified together. Romans iii. 26. -- That he might be
just, and the (...) of him which believes in Jesus.

2. Our LORD JESUS CHRIST sends his Ministers to open the eyes of Sinners, --
that they may receive an Inheritance among them that are sanctified by Faith
that is in Him.

GOD's People are enlightened and converted, not only in order to their
obtaining the remission of Sins by Faith in CHRIST; but also that they may
receive a rich Inheritance in Heaven. The word here used (...) signifies a Part
or Portion, a Lot, an Inheritance. "The Inheritances of the Jews were divided
by Lot, Numb. xxxiv 13." And thus the disposal of this Inheritance is of the
LORD. See Henry in (...),
GOD's People were predestined to it according to the eternal purpose of GOD,
Ephesians. i. 11. In whom (that is, CHRIST,) we have obtained an inheritance, being
predestined according to the purpose of him who works all things according
to the counsel of his own will. And they obtain a sure title to it by Faith in
JESUS CHRIST the only begotten Son of GOD, and Heir of all things. Joh. i. 12.
As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of GOD, even
to them that believe in his Name. And if Children, then Heirs; Heirs of GOD,
and joint heirs with CHRIST, Romans viii. 1^. And thus the Apostle declares to
the Galatians, that GOD gave the Inheritance to Abraham by promise; that they
were the Children of GOD by Faith in CHRIST JESUS; and if Christ's then
Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the promise, Chap. iii. 18, 26, 29. The
Inheritance here mentioned, of which the believing Gentiles as well as Jews
were heirs, must be the heavenly Inheritance, of which Canaan was a type. Heb.
xi. 16. They desire a better Country, that is, an Heavenly. This glorious
Inheritance is revealed and offered in the Gospel; and true Believers who are
enlightened by the Spirit and Word of GOD, receive JESUS CHRIST by faith, and so
are entitled to this purchased Possession. But then, they cannot enter upon it,
till they are made meet to be partakers of it; and here also the exercise of
faith is of excellent use. It is an Inheritance among them that are Sanctified:
It is an Inheritance in the high and holy Place, into which nothing enters that
defiles. The pure in Heart shall see and enjoy GOD: But without Holiness none
shall have this beatific Vision. Heb. xii. 14. It is called, The Inheritance of
the saints in light, Col. i. 13. An Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, 1
Pet. i. 4. They that are blessed in heavenly Places in CHRIST, were chosen in
Him, before the foundation of the World, that they should be holy, and without
blame before him in love, Ephesians. i. 3, 4. The End and Means are connected in
GOD's Decree. 2 These. ii. 13. -- God has from the beginning chosen you to
salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth.
Accordingly, that Faith whereby GOD's People are united to and interested in
JESUS CHRIST, is an active Principle of new obedience. GOD purifieth the Hearts
of (...) People by it, Act. xv. 9. It works by Love, which is the fulfilling of
the Law. Again, Faith is the (...) of things not seen; and while the Believer
beholds the riches of Glory in this Inheritance, he is inflamed with holy
desires after it, and presses toward the mark for the pri^e of the high (...)
GOD in CHRIST JESUS. While he embraces the Pro^^^^^ of it, he confesses
himself a stranger on ^arth, and endeavors to have his Conversation in Heaven.
In the assurance and joy of Faith he receives some first fruits of the
Heavenly Canaan. In a word, he is kept by the power of God through faith unto
Salvation, 1 Pet. i. 5. Which is therefore said to be the End of his faith,
ver. 9.

DOCT. IV. Our LORD JESUS CHRIST will be with His Ministers, and give them all
that help and deliverance which are needful for them.
Ver. 17. Delivering thee etc. ver. 22. Having therefore obtained help etc.
What mere Man ever passed through more difficult Duties or sharper Trials, than
the Apostle Paul? He was in Deaths often, and yet the LORD delivered him See 2
Cor. xi. Yea, when the messenger of Satan buffeted him, our gracious LORD heard
his cry, and said unto him, My Grace is sufficient for thee. Upon which he
triumphs in CHRIST, and says, Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. Therefore I take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
distresses for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong, 2 Cor. xii.
7, -- 10. So that in him we have a most encouraging Example to confirm the
truth before us: And blessed be GOD, in many others. CHRIST is
GOD-Man-Mediator, and in Him as a Mediatorial Head has it pleased the Father
that al^ fullness should dwell, Col. i. 18, 19. God gives not the Spirit by
measure to him, Joh. iii. 34. And he has received this great Gift to bestow on
his Church and People according to their several wants and necessities. And in
a particular manner does he send his Spirit to furnish his Ministers with Gifts
and Graces, and strengthen them to their Work. Accordingly he commanded his
Disciples to tarry at Jerusalem until they were endued with power from on high,
by the promise of his Father sent upon them, Luk^ xxiv. 49. Which was the
Promise of the HOLY GHOST, which they received in an extraordinary manner after
CHRIST's Ascension, Act. ii. 2, -- 4. iv. 33. to qualify them to carry the
Gospel to the Heathen. And by the same Spirit does our LORD continue to
communicate spiritual Abilities, Gifts and Graces to them whom He sends to
Preach the Gospel. Job. xiv. 16, 17. Ephesians. iv. 7. He strengthens them with all
might by his Spirit, and thus upholds them with the right Hand of his
Righteousness. And then, as CHRIST rules in the kingdom of Nature and
Providence as well as of Grace, He sets bounds to the wrath of Satan and wicked
Men; so that while he has Work for them to do, neither Earth nor Hell shall
hinder it. And thus obtaining Help from the Head of the Church, they continue
and persevere, till they finish their Course, and the Ministry which they have
received from Him.

DOCT. V. Our LORD JESUS inclines and enableth His Ministers to obey his
Sovereign Will, when called to the most difficult Services.
Ver. 19 I was not disobedient -- He that appeared to him, wrought effectually
in him both to will and to do according to his own good pleasure; so that he
was willing, a Voluntier in CHRIST's Service, in this Day of his Power. Many
Objections insuperable to flesh and blood might be raised. Act. xxii. 19. Lord,
they know that I imprisoned -- And as to the Gentiles, how could he persuade
them who were in gross Ignorance, and wholly given to Idolatry? How could he
prevail with them to turn from their Idols, to renounce the prejudices of
Education, forsake their beloved Lusts, and this World; and all this in
obedience to One that suffered as the vilest Malefactor, to outward appearance
forsaken by GOD and Man; and who requires his Disciples to deny themselves,
take up their Cross and follow him. 1 Cor. i. (...). We preach Christ
crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block. (...) unto the Greeks foolishness.
It Is true, here is the power (...) GOD, and the wisdom of GOD, but in a mystery;
and (...) can open the eyes of the blind that they may behold it? But the
Apostle conferred not with flesh and blood, Gal. i. 16. No, he looked above
himself, and in the strength of the LORD who called him, went about a Work
above the power of Angels. A like Instance we have in the Prophet Isaiah. When
he saw the Glory of the LORD, he cried out, Woe is me, for I am undone, because
I am a man of unclean lips -- But when touched with a living Coal taken from
the Altar; when the virtue of CHRIST's Sacrifice, who is a Lamb slain from the
foundation of the World, was applied to him, and he was purified by the HOLY
GHOST as with Fire, then he was ready to answer GOD's Call, Here am I, send me,
Chap. vi. 8. Thus the Prophet Ezekiel, though sent to a rebellious People, yet
when the Spirit lift him up, he went in bitterness indeed; but the Hand of the
Lord was strong upon him, Chap. iii. 14. Thus when JESUS called Peter and
Andrew to make them Fishers of Men, they straightway left their nets, and
followed him, Mat. iv. 18, -- 20. His Divine Power accompanied the outward
Call^ they feel it, and instantly obey. And thus our Glorious LORD makes his
Ministers to resemble Him according to their measure, who being called of GOD
to the most difficult Work of all, yet said, The Lord God opened mine ear, and
I was not rebellious, neither turned away back, Isai. l. 5.

APPLICATION.
USE. I. Are the Children of Men in Darkness, -- How deplorable is their
Condition! How does it Command our Pity and Prayers!
What can be more dreadful, than to be held in these Chains of Darkness, of
Ignorance and Infidelity, of Enmity against GOD and his Law; and so to be kept
in bondage to Satan, who is leading such blindfold to that Everlasting Fire
which is prepared for him and his Angels, where is the most intense heat
without light. O worse than Egyptian Darkness! the Plague which follows our
Apostasy from Him who is Light, and in whom is no Darkness at all. What
Miseries and Woes are comprehended in that description of the Ephesian Gentiles
before they enjoyed the light of the Gospel? Chap. ii. 12. At that time ye were
without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to
the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. Let
this then move our Compassion, to consider how great a part of the World is at
this Day sitting in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death; and let us earnestly
beseech the LORD to send forth his Light and Truth, and give the knowledge of
Salvation to such as are perishing for lack of Vision. And also, that GOD would
have mercy on them which believe not, whom the God of this World has blinded,
lest the light of the glor^ous Gospel of CHRIST, who is the Image of GOD,
should shine unto them: For if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost, 2 Cor. iv. 3, 4.

USE. II. Learn the Honor and Duty of Gospel Ministers.
Of all Men, Ministers had need be very humble, le^t they fall into the
condemnation of the Devil. However, they ought to magnify their Office, by
entertaining high and honorable thoughts of it, and by taking care so to
behave themselves, that others may esteem them for their Work's sake. How great
is this Honor, to be sent by the King of Glory to the Sons of Men, and that
upon an Affair the most important, to treat with them about the great Concerns
of their Souls and Eternal State, 2 Cor. v. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be
ye reconciled to God. And how strongly may we hence also infer the Duty of such
Ministers? Certainly, they are under indispensable Obligations to own Him who
is the King of Kings, as their Sovereign LORD, by keeping close to His
Instructions contained in his Word, teaching Men to observe all things
whatsoever he has commanded, and never presuming to teach for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men. They must not preach themselves, but CHRIST JESUS the
LORD. They may not lord it over GOD's Heritage; but must go before others as
E^^^mples of dutiful Obedience to Him who is the LORD of all. They must always
remember, that CHRIST's Kingdom is not of this World, and not inordinately seek
worldly Riches, Honors and Pleasures; but rather approve themselves as the
Ministers of God, in much patience, in labors, in watchings, in fastings -- 2
Cor. vi. 4, 5. In a word, they should endeavor in their whole Behavior, to
show forth the virtues and praises of Him that has called them.

USE. III. How precious is the Gospel Revelation and Ministry!
In the Gospel we have the Revelation of the Mystery of our Redemption by JESUS
CHRIST, GOD manifest in Flesh: We are taught how we may obtain deliverance from
the power of Sin and Satan; the only way in which we may receive the
Forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance among them that are Sanctified. Let us
then account GOD's W^^d more to be desired than Gold, and the Wisdom and
Knowledge therein contained as the principal thing: Let us take it as a light
to our Feet, to direct us in the path of Life. Let us say, How beautiful are
the feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace! and not despise the
Gospel Ministry, because we have this Treasure in earthen Vessels. Let us with
most humble Thankfulness accept the unsearchable Riches of CHRIST, which they
offer us in his Name, and account all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of him. Let us not look upon the Gospel as a burdensome Charge; but
prize it as a rich Blessing, and cheerfully do our part toward the Support of
it. But the truth, and ^ell it not, Prove. xxiii. 23. "Spare no Pains or Cost to
get it, and do not forsake it for any Worldly Advantages". P^^^^.
Surely they cannot be losers who have the Infinite GOD for their exceeding
great Reward, and the riches of Glory laid up in Heaven as their Portion for
ever.

USE. IV. Learn the glorious Power, and tender Pity of our LORD JESUS CHRIST.
The greatness of his power appears, in that He Commissions whom he will to
Preach the Gospel to them who ^it in darkness; in that, when the state of the
(...) called for it, He in the most extraordinary manner (...) Instruments for
this great Work, and gave them Success above our thought and conception. Here,
we may also behold his tender Compassion to the Apostate Children of Adam. GOD
the SON, who is the Brightness of the Father's Glory, has taken ou^ Nature
into personal Union. The Word was made Flesh* Joh. i. 14. And thus has GOD
purchased the Church with his own Blood. And now, from his Exalted State, he
beholds the Children of Men, and pities them under their Sin and Misery; yea,
is most ready, consistent with GOD's eternal Counsels, to succor and save
them. This his Divine Power and Mercy appeared most Glorious in the primitive
Times of Christianity; they still continue to appear, and will again shine
forth with the brightest Luster, when the Jews shall be called, and the
receiving of them shall be as Life from the Dead to the Gentile Churches, Romans
xi. 15, -- 25. How amiable then does our LORD JESUS appear in these
Perfections? How great is His Goodness; How great is His Beauty! And how
inexcusable shall we be if we despise him, and neglect his great Salvation?

USE. V. When CHRIST's Ministers are prosper'd, and their Labors crowned with
the desired Success; the Glory must be given to our LORD JESUS CHRIST.
Their Abilities for the right discharge of their Ministry are from Him. 1 Cor.
^v. 10. I labored more abundantly than they all: yet not I, but the Grace of
God which was with me. And it is He that commands the Blessing on their
Labors, otherwise they must labo^^ in vain. The Apostle Paul therefore
ascribes all to Him. 1 Cor. iii. 5. Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but
Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the (...) gave to every man? ver. 7. So
then, neither is he that (...) anything, neither he that waters: but God that
gives the increase. And thus the Seventy Disciples whom our SAVIOR sent
forth, returned saying, Lord, Even the Devils are subject to us through thy
Name! Luke x. 17. Let Gospel Ministers then be ready to say, Not unto us, O
LORD, not unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory; for indeed, His is the Power
and the Wisdom and the Strength. The weapons of their Warfare are mighty
through GOD.

USE. VI. Learn a great Duty incumbent on GOD's Covenant ^^^ple; which is, to
use their best Endeavors that the Light (...) the Gospel may shine to them who
are in Darkness, and under the power of Satan.
The great design and use of the Gospel make this evident: By the Di^^^^sation
of the Word, Men are delivered from the power of Darkness, and translated into
the Kingdom of GOD's dear Son; and so made meet to be partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in light. Certainly then, GOD's People must not fail
to publish the Gospel to others as they have Opportunity, that these may unite
with the^ in giving Glory to GOD in the Highest, and so come to enjoy Peace on
Earth, the best Prosperity; under the happy Government of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST. Churches are compared to Golden Candlesticks, Rev. i. 12. And they must
accordingly hold up this Light, that it may shine to others. To them are
committed the Oracles of GOD, as a sacred Depositum and Treasure; and as they
must keep them, and transmit them to their Posterity; so they must further
improve this rich Talent to the honor of their LORD, and the good of Men,
least they fall under the doom of the slothful Servant, who hid his Lord's
Talent. The two great Commands of the Law unite to strengthen their Obligation
to this Duty; for so far as the Gospel prevails, GOD is made known, and Glory
given to Him as the chief Good and highest End of Man; and precious Souls, more
worth than a World, are delivered and saved. Jam. v. 20. Let him know, that he
which converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from
death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. Again, What Indignation, what Zeal
should it work in us, when we behold Satan, that cursed Usurper, lording it
over so great a part of the World? while the faithful Subjects of CHRIST are
comparatively few, a little Flock; and how earnest should we be that these
deluded Wretches, of one Blood with us, and no worse by Nature than we, may
have their Eyes opened to behold our rightful LORD, and their Hearts inclined
to bow before Him? And considering the Word of GOD assures us, that in the
multitude of People is the King's honor Prove. 14. ^8.
, certainly, all such as would approve themselves loyal to CHRIST, must be
sensible they are (...) in (...) and gratitude to seek the Enlargement of his
kingdom; and act accordingly.

Give me leave then humbly to recommend to you this pious Charity, which has
(...) tendency to promote the Glory of GOD, and ^^st Interests of Men* Blessed
be GOD for what has been d^^^ this w^^ mo^^ privately, and by our worshipping
Assemblies in their Collections. I wish that excellent Proposal might be
generally accepted, viz. The having public Collections for pious and (...) on
our Anniversary Fasts and Thanksgivings. In this way we might honor GOD with
our Substance, and give our helping Hand toward propagating Christian
Knowledge among our own People, and the Aboriginal Natives: And certainly the
generous Compassion expressed toward this poor People by the Honorable
SOCIETIES in South and North Britain, should provoke us to an holy Emulation;
especially, considering GOD has given us the Possession of this good Land
which their Ancestors once inhabited; and that this was the professed Intention
of our pious Progenitors, the first Planters of this Country. This appears in
the ROYAL CHARTER granted to the Inhabitants of this Province, by their
Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, of glorious Memory -- " So as their good
Life and orderly Conversation may win the Indians, Natives of the Country, to
the Knowledge and Obedience of the true GOD and SAVIOR of Mankind, and the
Christian Faith, which His Royal Majesty Our Royal Grandfather King CHARLES
the First, in His said Letters Patents declared was His Royal Intentions, and
the Adventurers free Professi^^ to be the principle End of the said Plantation."


And here, while I humbly thank our honored Fathers in the Civil Government,
for the liberal Encouragement they have been pleased to give toward this
Mission which is the Occasion of our Assembling in GOD's Name this Day; I would
with suitable deference propose it to their Consideration, what may further be
done by this People to spread the Gospel, particularly among the Indians, which
is but to build on the noble Foundation others have laid for us. And whereas
Complaints have often been made, that the immoderate love and (...) of Strong
Drink threaten to drown that unhappy People in ^^^dition, and to defeat the
great and good Design proposed ^n sending the Gospel to them; I would humbly
move that all further needful Care may be taken to prevent so great a Mischief.
And inasmuch as our Compassionate REDEEMER, while on Earth, made Men feel the
Effects of his bountiful Love in their Bodies, and so prepared the way for
their receiving his heavenly Doctrines, to the Salvation of their Souls; let us
imitate this Divine Pattern, and make these poor Creatures know by things they
are sensible of, that it is their Interest to be attached to us. O let there be
such a fair and friendly Commerce carried on with them, as shall adorn the
Doctrine of GOD our SAVIOR, and in some good measure exemplify the perfect
Rules of our holy Religion! O that they may behold our good Works, and glorify
GOD in this day of Visitation! LORD, our Eyes are unto Thee, the GOD of
Salvation, to whom belong the issues from Death: Glorify thy Name, glorify thy
Son, by turning these miserable People from Darkness to Light, and from the
power of Satan to GOD.

USE. VII. What has been said may afford Direction and Encouragement to such
as are called to Preach the Gospel in the dark Places of the Earth.
It is profitable for Instruction and Encouragement to all Gospel Ministers,
who need both for the right discharge of their holy Calling, which must be
attended with great Difficulties in this Evil World, where the Devil has such
power by reason of our Sin, that he cannot be overcome and cast out but by the
Divine Power. And in an especial manner, the Text and Doctrines may be improved
to these Ends, by such as are sent to teach GOD's Word in Places that have been
for time immemorial covered with thick Darkness, being destitute of the outward
Revelation of the Gospel. The Direction it gives to such is, that they look
above themselves to our glorious LORD, who has all power, and that they go
forth with an humble and believing Dependence on Him to whom the FATHER has
given the Heathen for his Inheritance, and who is able to assert his Right, and
subdue them to the Obedience of Faith. Indeed they must heedfully observe the
working of his Providence, and what intimations He gives them of his Will by
his Word and Spirit; whether He qualifieth them for, and calls them to engage
in such a difficult Work; and when they find good Grounds to believe that they
have the Call of GOD, they should dutifully answer, Here we are, send us. They
must go in Obedience to their Sovereign LORD, and with a single Eye at His
Glory as their chiefest and highest End; they must go, sensible that unless He
go before them, and condescend to work with and by them, they shall labor in
vain; and then they should encourage themselves in the LORD, who is able to do
above all we can ask or think. In the 55 th. of Isaiah, where we have an
illustrious Prophecy of the Call of the Gentiles, ver. 4, 5. we have also these
encouraging words to strengthen the faith, and raise the hope of GOD's People,
ver 8, 9. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways,
says the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways
higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.

BUT I now proceed more directly to apply these Things to our Brethren, who^ We
are this Day separating to the great and difficult Work of Gospelizing the
Aboriginal Natives ^n our Borders.

My dear Brethren, I apprehend GOD in His good Providence calls us to make
further (...) in this important Affair, notwithstanding all the Difficulties
with which it is attended; and I trust it is pleasing to Him, that you offer
your Selves, and consecrate your Service to the LORD this Day. Duty is our's,
the Event and Success are ^^ntirely in GOD's Hand. Now then, let your Eyes be
to our Ascended SAVIOR, while you engage in this Work, and devoutly say with
Moses, Exodus xxxiii. 15. If thy Presence go not with us, carry us not up hence.
Let the governing Design of your Undertaking be to glorify GOD, by turning
Sinners from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan to Him, that they
may receive forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance among them that are Sanctified
by faith that is in CHRIST; and being sensible that the Arm of the LORD must be
revealed to effect this, rely and rest on Him, and be ready to give the Glory
of all the least Success unto Him. Praise wa^teth for thee, O GOD!

In the first place, Give up your selves to the Lord JEHOVAH, who is the
FATHER, the SON, and the HOLY GHOST, by renewing your Covenant with Him, to be
His entirely and for ever; beseeching GOD to pour out His Spirit upon you, to
furnish you with all needed Gifts and Graces. Look to it, that you be united to
CHRIST by His Spirit dwelling in you; that being washed from Sin in His Blood,
and clothed with his Righteousness, you may be accepted in the Beloved; and
then live by the Faith of the SON of GOD, and be strong in the Grace that is in
CHRIST JESUS. Cry to that GOD who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness,
that He would shine into your Hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of GOD, in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Hear and learn of the
FATHER the great Truths and Mysteries of the Gospel, that you may be qualified
to teach others the Truth as it is in JESUS. You need the teaching of the
Anointing, of GOD by His Spirit; and therefore should earnestly seek to Him to
send his Spirit into your Hearts to lead you into all Truth, that you may be as
Scribes instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven. And the more you feel the power
and taste the sweetness of GOD's Word in your own Souls, the better will you be
qualified to Preach the Kingdom of GOD, and Teach those things which concern
the LORD JESUS CHRIST, with all Confidence. But then, remember that while you
tr^^^ in the LORD, you must be found in the diligent use of Means: Give your
selves therefore to Reading and Study, (...) your Circumstances will allow; and
above all, study your B^BLES; for all Scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness; That the man of God may ^e perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works, 2 Timothy iii. 16, 17. And let GOD's Law and Testimony be your rule
and directory in all your Instructions, or there will be no light in them.

And here give me leave to offer a few Hints.

Let there be a Compendium or Summary of Christian Religion agreeable to the
Scriptures, and as short and plain as may be, often inculcated, till the
Natives shall have learned the Principles of the Doctrine of CHRIST. Declare to
them the only true and living GOD, who made Heaven and Earth, and all things in
them; and that He made Man upright, in His own Image. Show them their vile and
miserable State by the Fall. Declare to them that this GOD, who is the FATHER
and the SON and the HOLY GHOST, has contrived a way in which they may be
delivered from their Sin and Misery. That in order to this, the Eternal SON of
GOD has taken our Nature, and became Man; that He was obedient to Death, the
Death of the Cross; (...) again from the Dead, and lives in Heaven to intercede
for his People. Declare to them, that this JESUS is the only Mediator between
GOD and Man; and that they must pray to GOD in His Name only. Show them the
necessity of turning from all Sin to GOD in true Repentance; and of receiving
the LORD JESUS CHRIST by Faith, and depending on His Righteousness for Pardon
and Justification. Declare to them that GOD alone has power to forgive Sins.
Show them the nature and use of the holy Sacraments, and that those which
CHRIST has instituted are only two, Baptism and the Lord's Supper; and labor
to maintain in them an high esteem of them. Show them that they must be taught
the Principles of the Christian Religion, and subject themselves to the
Authority and Laws of CHRIST, before these may be administered to them: That if
they would receive saving benefit by Baptism, they must also seek the washing
of Regeneration, and renewing of the HOLY GHOST, for themselves and their
Offspring, that being born of Water and of the Spirit they may enter into the
Kingdom of GOD. Teach them that the Lord's Supper must be received by the
Communicants in both Elements, Bread and Wine; and that it is contrary to Sense
Reason and Scripture, to imagine, that these are turned into the very Body and
Blood of CHRIST* and therefore that CHRIST, who is spiritually present with his
People, must be apprehended and received by faith, if they would partake in the
saving virtues of his Death. And take heed you never prostitute these Sacred
Mysteries of our holy Religion, by administering them to any under Heathen
Ignorance, under Romish Idolatry, or that live and allow themselves in open and
scandalous Immoralities.

Declare to them the Commandments of the Moral Law. That GOD only is the Object
of Prayer, and all religious Worship. Tell them, forasmuch as we are the
Offspring of GOD, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto Gold, or
Silver or Stone, graven by art, and Man's device: that it is a most heinous
Crime to worship GOD by Images; and that He who is a jealous GOD, threatens to
punish this Iniquity upon Parents and their Children, unto the third and fourth
Generation. Teach them to Sanctify the Sabbath Day; and in a word, the
necessity of a sober righteous and godly Life* In particular, do all you can to
convince them of the great Evil of that Sin which most easily besets them, and
to keep them from it; le^t they wholly forget GOD's Law, and quench every good
motion of His SPIRIT: Solemnly warn them of the Destruction they are bringing
upon themselves by it, and how they are consuming away under the deadly
influence of it.

[However, I am informed that though they have a Name for GOD, yet they have no
form of taking his Name in vain, in their own Language. Be astonished, O ye
Heavens, and be horribly afraid! in that this presumptuous Sin of profane
Swearing is so common where the light of the Gospel shines, and GOD's glorious
and fearful Name is clearly revealed* And let such bold Transgressors know,
that it will be more tolerable for barbarous Indians than for them, in the Day
of Judgment; when the LORD shall make it appear, that He will not hold them
guiltless that take his Name in vain.]

But to return from this Digression; Declare to them, that GOD alone can change
their Hearts, enable them to hate Sin, and love his Law; and then direct them
to ask of GOD His HOLY SPIRIT, to sanctify them, and create them in CHRIST
JESUS unto good Works. And show them that when they have done all, they must
Trust in the Merits of JESUS CHRIST, and not presume to think that they can
merit by their good Works. But I forbear.

In your teaching, there must be precept upon precept, line upon line; here a
little, and there a little. But how much skill and prudence do you need in this
matter? Depend on GOD for all, and encourage your selves in Him, who said on
the first Day, Let there be Light, and there was Light; and can now more easily
shine into their Hearts to give them the knowledge of the Gospel, than you can
speak a word. Who has heard such a thing? Shall a Nation be born at once? Yes,
if GOD please, a Nation shall be born in a Day, and Converts be numerous as the
drops of Dew from the womb of the Morning. O that this Day of GOD's power might
dawn and shine on a World sitting in Darkness! O that the poor Indians might
see the light of Life, and live!

But think it not strange, if you meet with sharp Trials from the Prince of
Darkness, and such as are under his power, while you are endeavoring to
enlighten Men with the knowledge of JESUS CHRIST; and be ready to endure
hardness, as (...) good Soldiers. Look to GOD continually for all that
Knowledge and Wisdom, Faith and Patience, Zeal and Courage, Meekness and
Self-denial, which you need; and be clothed with Humility. Live by Faith and
Prayer, and then say with the ^^almist, Psalm. cxviii. 6. The Lord is on my
side, I will not fear: that can man do unto me? If He be your Sun and Shield,
you shall neither want Light nor Protection.

And here, for your further Encouragement, I might propose to your
Consideration the Promises made to our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who sends his
Ministers to open the eyes of Men --. Psalm. ii. 8. Ask of me, and I will give
thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for
thy possession. Isai. liii. 10. -- He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his
days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. ver. 11. He shall
see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied. Isai. xlix. 6. -- I
will give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation
unto the end of the earth. Again, Consider, GOD's Hand is not shor^n'd, that it
cannot save; and the Sacrifice, by the Blood of which our SAVIOR has Redeemed
His People out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation, is as full
of Virtue as ever; and His Intercession as prevalent for the sending of the
HOLY GHOST: so that all that the FATHER has given Him, shall come unto Him.

I might also for your Encouragement mention the extraordinary Success which
the Blessed GOD gave to the Gospel among the Heathen, as we have this
transmitted to us from the Records of the Sacred Scriptures. I might also put
you in mind of the wonderful Work of GOD, in causing the Light of his Gospel to
shine upon our Ancestors in Great Britain, who before sat in gross Darkness;
and then in recovering them from the Idolatries of Popery. When we look back on
these things, we may well admiring say, What has GOD wrought! And looking to
the hole of the Pit whence we our selves were dug, you may encourage your
selves in that GOD, with whom all things are possible.

And whereas the Honorable SOCIETY for propagating Christian Knowledge at
Edinburgh, are under GOD the Instruments and Encouragers of your Mission, by
the pious Donation of the late Reverend and Charitable Dr. Daniel Williams, of
London; I may with propriety observe to you the Success which we are informed
GOD has already given to Their Endeavors nearer Home, among the Highlanders
in Scotland, who had been sunk very low in barbarous Ignorance: Of this a
Reverend Person The Rev. Wm. Hamilton Professor of Divinity in the University
of Edinburgh.
in a Sermon preached to the abovenamed Honorable SOCIETY, Testifyeth, "That
many Thousands of those poor People have been taught the Knowledge of CHRIST."

However, I need not go so far to fetch Encouragement for you. It pleased our
merciful GOD in the last Century to send His glorious Gospel to the Aboriginal
Natives of this Land, who for unknown Ages had been in Heathen Darkness; and to
give them the Bible in their own Language, by his signal Blessing on the
Labors of our pious and renowned Eliot, whose Name, together with that of
Mayhew and other Worthies, should be had in Everlasting Remembrance, in honor
to our Glorious LORD, who spirited and strengthened them to this difficult Work,
and made them the happy Instruments of enlightening not a few with the Knowledge
of GOD, and JESUS CHRIST, whom to know is Life Eternal. See the Rev. Dr. Cotton
Mather's Ecclesiastical History of New England; and the Rev. Mr. Experience
Mayhew's Indian Converts.
And this manifestation of Divine Power and Grace may answer an Objection: You
may be ready to think with your selves, How can we go to a People of a strange
Speech, and hard Language, who have not the extraordinary Gifts with which the
Apostles were furnished, when they spread the Gospel among the Heathen? Let
Experience answer; GOD wonderfully blessed these excellent Persons in their
diligent Endeavors to learn the Indian Tongue, and then to communicate
Christian Knowledge; so that we behold a considerable number of Indian Churches
Gathered, and walking together in the Faith and Order of the Gospel; some
furnished with English, others with Indian Pastors. Do you go, and do likewise.
May you with like Zeal for the Glory of GOD, and Compassion to Men, lay out
your selves in this weighty Affair, and the LORD be with you. And certainly Hi^
Presence, and the Light of His Countenance, are sufficient to brighten the most
disconsolate Circumstances of Life. The (...) Paul could say, I have learned in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. I can do all things through
Christ which strengthens me, Phil. iii. 11, 13.

And further, consider what a Price is now put into your Hands to serve GOD and
your Country? What great and public Blessings you will be to this People, if
the gracious Presence of CHRIST with you shall be as a Wall of Fire about us,
on our Eastern and Western Frontiers. Consider, what a Honor it will be to
you, if after all the Blood and Treasure spent in War with these Salvages, you
must be the Instruments of obtaining the most glorious Victory over them, by
subduing them to CHRIST, and the obedience of Faith. Upon this, I do not
promise you a Corruptible Crown of fading Laurel, nor yet a Roman Triumph;
Honors which engaged the ancient Heathen in some of the most difficult
Enterprises. No! we serve a better Master; our bountiful LORD, does not call
you to strive unto Agony for such perishing things; but from His High Throne
holds out to you a Crown of (...) that f^d^th not away; and His Voice from
Heaven to each of you is, Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give (...) a
Crown of Life. This glorious Reward then, which CHRIST has purchased, and
freely offers to you, does not depend upon your Success, but Fidelity. Your
Judgment is with the LORD, and your Work with your GOD.

USE. VIII. In the last place, I turn myself to this Assembly: Let us bless GOD
who has cast our Lot in pleasant Places, where the light of the Gospel shines*
and take care we do not receive this Grace of GOD in vain.
In Gospel Privileges we are Exalted unto Heaven; but we must know that if we
continue unbelieving and impenitent, we shall be brought down to Hell. Let us
then with godly fear attend to that word, Mat. iii. 9, 10. And think ^^t to say
within your selves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God
is able of th^se stones to raise up children unto Abraham And n^w also the
(...) is laid to the root of the trees: therefore every tree which brings not
forth good fruit, is (...) down and cast into the fire. Let the Children of the
Covenant look to themselves, and beware le^t that threatening should be
fulfilled in any one of them, Mat. viii. 11, 12. I say unto you, that many
shall come from the east and west, and shall ^it down with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. But the children of the kingdom shall be cast
into ^^ter darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Great is our
Advantage, that unto us are committed the Oracle^ of GOD; and we ought to be
very thankful for this distinguishing Favor, that the Mystery of Salvation by
JESUS CHRIST, kept secret from many others, is made manifest to us by the
Scriptures. But then, let us not be high minded, but ^ear; and seriously
consider what we shall render to the LORD for so great a Benefit; least we
treasure up to our selves wrath against the day of Wrath, by despising the
Riches of GOD's Goodness. Let us, sensible of the Darkness and Corruption of
our Hearts, ask the HOLY SPIRIT to Enlighten and Sanctify us. Let us not (...)
ourselves with an outward Profession, and a Name to live; but earnestly seek a
thorough Conversion to GOD, and vital Union with JESUS CHRIST, that we may be
found in Him. Let us beseech the LORD to fulfill that precious Promise to us and
our Children. Jer. xxxi. 33. This shall be the covenant that I will make with
the ^^use of Israel, After th^se days, says the LORD, I will put my law in
(...) inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people. And let us then walk as Children of the light and day,
having no fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather
reproving them. Let us resist the Devil, and he shall flee from us; Watch and
Pray le^t this Evil One should get an advantage of us: for we are not ignorant
of his devices. And be not conformed to this World* but be ye transformed by
the renewing of your Mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable,
and perfect Will of GOD. Thus you may hope to enjoy the light of GOD's
Countenance while passing through this World, and shall certainly come to see
the good of his Chosen, and to glory with his Inheritance in Heaven. But if
after all the Means GOD uses with you, you continue to reject CHRIST, to vex
the HOLY SPIRIT, and to walk according to the Course of this World, according
to the Spirit which now works in the Children of Disobedience; I say unto
you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day
of Judgment, than for you, when that Sentence must be pronounced on the Wicked,
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels.

And now, I call heaven and earth to (...) this day against you, that I have
s^t before you li^e and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose li^^,
that ^oth thou and thy ^eed may live. Deuteronomy. xxx. 19.

To Conclude, Let us continue in Prayer that GOD would pour out his SPIRIT on
his servants now to be separated to this great and difficult Work, to Qualify
and Strengthen them to the faithful Discharge of it.

Let us Pray that the Honorable SOCIETY and their Commissioners may at all
times ^^joy the Direction and Assistance of GOD. That the Lord of the Harvest
would from time to time send forth such Laborers into the Indian Harvest, as
He shall own and bless; and that His Servants employed in one part of the Land
and another, may have the Hand of the LORD with them; that many may believe and
turn to the LORD. That the KING of (...), who is the LORD Strong and Mighty,
would cast down Satan from his usurped Throne, Destroy Antichrist by the
brightness of His Coming, and take to Himself his great Power and Reign. That
He would sprinkle many Nations with his Blood, and pour out his SPIRIT upon all
Flesh* and thus in a more illustrious (...) that Promise, Isai. xi. 6, 9. The
wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the le^p^^d shall lie down with the
kid: and the calf, and the young lion and the fatling together, and a little
child shall lead them. They shall no^ hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain:
for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the LORD, as the waters ^^^er
the sea.

Let us pray, that both Jews and Gentiles may be gathered, and united under
this Glorious Head of the Church, and so that good Word of His be accomplished,
Joh. x. 16. -- There shall be one fold, or Flock, (...) (...) g^ex, et (...)
pastor.
Re^^.
and ^^e Shepherd.

HE which testifies these things, ^aith, Surely I come quickly. Amen. E^^^ so
Come LORD JESUS.

THE END.
ERRATA. Page 4. for uses r. use. p. 18. f. chiefest r. chief.

N. B. Some Paragraphs omitted in Preaching are here inserted.

THE foregoing Sermon was both pr^ceeded and followed with fervent Prayer,
suited to the very serious Occasion; wherein the Rev. Mr. William Cooper and Mr.
John Webb were the Mouth of the Audience to GOD;

Dr. Colman, who had been chosen Moderator by the Reverend and Honorable
Council, then took the Desk, and said,

IT is a rare and singular Occurrence in the Providence of GOD, that has
called this Great and Reverend Assembly together at this Time. And no doubt but
many who are here present may desire to be informed of the several Things,
occurring in the Providence of a Glorious GOD, which have been the Occasion of
our present Meeting. And I think that I cannot better introduce the Solemn
Action before us, in the Ordination of the Reverend and beloved Brethren here
present, than by giving the following Account.

KNOW then, See a printed Account of the Society in Scotland. 1720.
that in the Year of our LORD 1701. a Number of private Gentlemen did usually
meet in the City of Edinburgh for the Reformation of Manners; who reflecting on
the Ignorance, Atheism, Popery and Impiety, that did so much abound in the
High-lands and Isles of Scotland, did justly reckon that they flowed in a great
Measure from the Want of suitable Means of Instruction.

THIS led 'em to engage by themselves at first in a voluntary Subscription for
Erecting Charity Schools in those Places of Darkness and Irreligion. But upon
Trial finding Themselves not able in their private Capacity to carry on so
great and public a Work, they applied their Thoughts to find out Methods for a
Fund equal to the Design.

IN pursuance of this they moved it privately to Members of the General
Assembly, that the Representatives of the Church of Scotland might concur in
the Work. And they had so much Success that in the Year 1706. the General
Assembly took it under Consideration, and recommended it to their Commission,
who published Proposals for the Propagating of Christian Knowledge in their
High-lands and Isles, and also in Foreign Parts.

THESE Proposals we^^ sent to all the Presbyteries in Scotland, and to the
several Societies there for Reformation of Manners: And in the Year 1708,
Application being made to Her Majesty, Queen ANN, to countenance and support
the Design by Her Royal Authority; it pleased Her Majesty, with the Advice of
Her Privy Council to approve and recommend this most pious and charitable
Design, and to grant Her Letters Patents for Erecting the Subscribers into a
Society and Corporation for managing the same.

PERSONS of the highest Dignity in the Nation, both Dukes and Earls, stand at
the Head of this Commission; with a long Train of Names of known Honor and
Merit, and of distinguishing Character for Piety and Religion.

THE first Subscription was somewhat above One Thousand Pounds Sterling. which
within twelve Years increased to above Eight Thousand: So that a vast Number of
Charity Schools have been erected and are now supported by the Honorable
Society: And they have their Corresponding Members at London, Dublin, Bris^o^;
in Holland, and now lately here in New England. For they are expressly empowered
by the Letters Patents erecting them into a Society, to nominate fit Persons in
any Place of His Majesty's Dominions, or elsewhere, for laying our such Sums as
They are entrusted with.

ACCORDINGLY the Honorable Society being unanimously resolved to employ
several Ministers of the Gospel, as their Missionaries for the Conversion of
Infidel Foreign Countries, chose to make the poor Heathen People about New
England the first Objects of their Care; to bring them to the Knowledge of GOD
in CHRIST.

To which End They did on the twenty ninth Day of April 1731. at a General
Meeting nominate, commissionate and empower His Excellency Jonathan Belcher Esquire
with other Honorable and Reverend Persons, to be their Correspondents and
Commissioners: And the first Thing they are Entrusted with is to pursue the
excellent Design of the late Reverend and Charitable Dr. Daniel Williams of
London, in his pious Mortification of an Estate of Fifty Six Pounds Sterling
per Annum, to the Society; toward the Support of three qualified Missionaries,
to labor in the Conversion of the poor perishing Natives on our Borders.

HIS Excellency in his great Wisdom, upon the Receipt of these Letters, laid
the Matter before the Honorable General Court then ^itting, who readily
testified their high Approbation of the proposed Mission, by granting an
Additional Honorable Support to each of the Missionary's for five Years.

ALSO He was pleased to write to the Society, who have printed His Excellency's
Letter,

THAT He had received Their Commission, and did accept of being a Correspondent
Member; that He gives Praise to GOD who inspired the Founders of this excellent
Charity to Souls: And that as the KING has made Him the Head and Father of this
Part of His Dominions, He therefore returned Thanks to the Society in behalf of
the poor Natives of the Country: And that the Society might depend on the
united Endeavors of their Correspondent Members here, to do all the good
Service they can in this pious Undertaking, etc.

THE Commissioners, under this Influence and Encouragement, set themselves to
find Persons qualified and inclined to undertake a Mission of such Weight and
Importance: and through the good Hand of GOD with them there willingly offered
Themselves, upon the Motion made to them, Mr. Stephen Parker, Mr. Ebenezer
Hinsdel, and Mr. Joseph Secomb; who have been already Ministering in the Places
assigned them more than a Year.

AND now at the Call of the Commissioners, by Direction from the Honorable
Society, whose They are under CHRIST, for the glorious Ends proposed; They do
this Day here present Themselves before the LORD and his People, in His Fear
and with a Reliance on his Grace which is A^sufficient; to take on them this
Ministry among the Heathen; weighty difficult and awful as it is in it self,
but most honorable in the Kingdom of our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

AND a Number of the Reverend Pastors of the Town, having received from the
before named Missionaries a satisfying Declaration of their Adherence to the
Principles of Religion, as they are contained in the Holy Scripture and
exhibited in the Assembly's (...), are here present to commend Them by Prayer,
with Imposition of Hands, to the Grace and Blessing of GOD.

THE Reverend Elders and Messengers of the Churches, convened in Council on
this Occasion, do by their Presence sufficiently declare their Consent unto and
Approbation of the Ordination that is before us: And if there are any in the
Assembly, that have any thing to object against our proceeding in the holy
Action before us; either as to the Doctrine, Principles, Life and Conversation
of the before named Mr. Stephen Parker, Mr. Ebenezer Hinsdel and Mr. Joseph
Se^^mb, they are called upon to declare the same. --

No Objection being made, it remains only to address my Self to You my dearly
beloved Brethren and honored in the LORD: For the LORD JESUS highly honors
You before his People, in this extraordinary Call He gives You to bear his Name
unto the Heathen; and therein to do the Work of Evangelists (in part at least)
by his Grace in you and with you.

" DO You therefore now in the Presence of CHRIST, and before this Assembly as
the LORD's Witnesses; before GOD Angels and Men, willingly and freely, with
Humility and Fear, offer your Selves first unto the LORD, and then to the
service of Souls; as in the Work of the Ministry in general, so in a particular
manner in that Mission to which you esteem your selves called of GOD, by His
special and singular Providence, to carry the Gospel among the Heathen in our
Borders? And will you, by His Grace, so long as GOD continues you the
Opportunity, humbly, diligently, faithfully apply your selves to this Work of
the LORD, as Those that must give an Account?"

THE Missionaries in a very serious manner signifying their Submission and
Consent to this very awful Promise and Vow; the Moderator told them that the
Length of the Exercise, and the Coldness of the Season prevented Him from
repeating to Them, on this public Occasion, some of those Instructions which
they had received from our Honorable Constituents; which as he doubted not
they had often and seriously considered, so he had thought to have received
from them their public Consent to the same as in the Presence of CHRIST.

THESE Instructions are as follow. Commission and Instructions to the
Missionaries in New England.
You are to instruct the Heathen People, as GOD gives you Opportunity, in the
Principles of the Christian, Reformed, Protestant Religion: And in order
thereunto, not only to preach and catechize, but also to school and teach them
to read the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and other good and
pious Books Supposed that they will be prevailed on to learn.
. You are also to teach them Writing and Arithmetic, and to understand and
speak the English Language. You are especially to direct them how to pray, and
to carry as becomes the Gospel. And when you shall judge them fit to receive
the Seals of the Covenant of Grace, you are to administer the same unto them;
and use your best Endeavors to confirm such in the Truths of our Holy
Religion, and to engage them to persevere therein.

IN all this Letters of Instruction to Missionaries.
you are to act conscienciously, depending on GOD for Counsel, Strength,
Furniture, and Success. Let the Glory of GOD, and the Salvation of precious
Souls be your chief Motive. You are employed on a very important and glorious
Work, and will much want the Help of the SPIRIT OF GOD therein. Remember your
Blessed REDEEMER's Instruction to his Disciples, Matthew. x. 16. Behold, I send
you forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves; be ye therefore wise as Serpents,
and harmless of Doves.

YOU must look for Difficulties and Discouragements, and therefore study
Patience, Self-denial, Humility, Forbearance; and carry with all Meekness and
Love toward those with whom you have to do. Let your Deportment and Management
be such, as they may see that you seek their Good; and take the most gaining
Methods with them.

YOU are also frequently to report an Account of your Diligence and Success, to
the Societies Correspondents here. But your great Care must be to approve your
selves to GOD, who sees and tries the Heart, and to WHOM you must give an
Account. And GOD make you those faithful and wise Servants who shall do it with
Joy and not with Grief. In the Hope whereof we shall now immediately proceed to
lay our Hands upon You, according to the Direction of the Gospel, and to pray
over you in the Name of the LORD.

THE Moderator then left the Desk, and the Ministers came down to the Seat
prepared for the Candidates before the Pulpit, and about Ten of the Pastors
present laying on Hands, the Moderator prayed,

GIVING Glory to the Supreme and Immense JEHOVAH, the LORD OF HOSTS sitting
upon a Throne high and lifted up, and his Train filling the Temple! Who walks
in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, and holds the Stars in his right Hand!
Whose Eyes are as a Flame of Fire, and He will make the Churches to know that
He searches the Hearts and the Reins.

ADORING HIM in the Condescentions of his Grace that His Tabernacle is with Men
on Earth, and that we have seen the Goings of our GOD and King in his
Sanctuary! while Seraphims are covering their Faces before Him, and crying One
to Another, Holy, Holy, Holy is the LORD OF HOSTS! And while We are of unclean
Lips, and dwell among a People of unclean Lips.

SUPPLICATION was then made for Pardon and Cleansing through the Sacrifice of
CHRIST, which is for the Priesthood and the Congregation; that the LORD would
send his Angel as with a live Coal from his Altar, to touch our Hearts and Lips
to take away Iniquity and purge away Sin! that if then the LORD's Voice come to
us, saying, Whom shall I send? and who will go for Us* our purified Hearts
might readily answer, Here am I, send me!

THANKSGIVING was then rendered to GOD, that He has a Church in the World,
bought with his Blood, to be sanctified and cleansed with the washing of Water,
by the Word! and for a glorious SAVIOR, Head over all things to the Church,
who is ascended on High and has received Gifts for Men even for the rebellious,
that the LORD GOD might dwell among us! and has given Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, for the Work of the Ministry and the
Edifying his Body! that He has set up his Kingdom among us, shown us his
Covenant, made known to us his holy Sabbaths, and committed to us the Ministry
of Reconciliation! that He has appointed and is calling from Age to Age an
Order of Men to Minister in holy Things whom he sends to disciple all Nations
baptizing them in the Name of the FATHER and of the SON and of the HOLY GHOST,
teaching them to observe all Things whatsoever He has commanded, with whom He
has promised to be always even to the End of the World.

MORE particularly CHRIST JESUS OUR LORD was thanked that He was pleased to be
now putting into the Ministry these his Servants who were now presenting
Themselves before the LORD and his People, to give Themselves first unto the
LORD, and then to the Service of Souls by his holy Will.

PRAYERS were therefore poured out to GOD for Them, that He would please to
call them effectually by his Grace, and to reveal his SON in them, that they
may preach Him among the Heathen, as well as in the Churches of the Saints, not
conferring with Flesh and Blood; but accounting it a distinguishing Honor,
that unto Them (the least of all Saints) this Grace should be given, to preach
among the Heathen the unsearchable Riches of CHRIST.

THAT the Grace of our LORD JESUS CHRIST might be therefore exceeding abundant
to Them, with Faith and Love, to enable them to encounter and surmount the
Difficulties of this Mission; that it may appear they are chosen Vessels to the
LORD, to bear his Name before the Gentiles: And that GOD would show them how
great Things he will do for them and by them, if by their Ministry the
Heathenish People may be Fellow-Heirs and of the same Body with us; Worshipping
the true and living GOD in Spirit and in Truth, and in the Name of the One
MEDIATOR between GOD and Man, the Man CHRIST JESUS, who is GOD over all,
blessed for ever! No longer serving dumb Idols as they have been led, nor
worshipping Angels and Saints that are no Mediators.

THAT a wide and effectual Door may be opened to them, by the Power of the HOLY
GHOST, who once said -- Separate Me Barnabas and Saul for the Work unto which I
have called them: That this Manner of Entering in unto the Heathen may be
granted them, to turn unto GOD from Idols, and to wait for his SON from Heaven!
to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto GOD; that
they may receive the Forgiveness of Sin and an Inheritance among all them that
are sanctified.

THAT the Gospel may be preached by them with the HOLY GHOST sent down from
Heaven, and be the Power of GOD unto the Salvation of many Souls; as it is unto
all them that believe, both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians, to the wise
and to the unwise; for therein is the Righteousness of GOD revealed from Faith
to Faith.

WHEREFORE according to the Direction of the HOLY WORD we humbly laid our Hands
on them in the Name of the GOD of all Grace, as His devoted Servants;
separating them to his special Service in the Work of the Ministry, imploring
the ETERNAL SPIRIT to descend and rest on them, to enlighten them in his Truth,
to spirit 'em for his Service, to be in them the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication; to assist, support, comfort and succeed them in his Work: to
furnish 'em abundantly with Ministerial Gifts and Graces, to direct 'em in
their Holy Studies, to assist them in their public Administrations; to inspire
them with pure Aims and fervent Zeal for his Glory, and with tender Compassion
to precious Souls; to make 'em able and faithful Ministers of the New
Testament, wise to Salvation, and wise to win Souls; And that the Blood of HIM,
who through the ETERNAL SPIRIT, offered up Himself without Spot to GOD, may purge
their Consciences from dead Works, to serve the living GOD in Righteousness and
Holiness before Him, all the Days of their Life.

Prayer being ended the CHARGE was given in the following Words.

HAVING prayed over You in the Name of the LORD, commended you to His Grace,
and separated you to his special Service in the Work of the Ministry; We do in
His Name declare you to be Authorized Ministers of the Gospel.

AND we charge you before GOD and the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who shall judge the
quick and the dead at his Appearing and Kingdom: Preach the Word; be instant in
Season and out of Season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering. Give
attend^^ce to Reading, to Exhortation and Doctrine. Give your selves to Prayer
and to the Ministry of the Word; give your selv^^ wholly to them* that in so
doing you may both (...) your selves and those that hear you.

HOLD the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience, showing Uncorruptness,
G^^vity, Sincerity. Hold fast the Form of sound Words which you have heard,
with Faith and Love that is in CHRIST JESUS. Hold fast the faithful Word, and
rebuke with all Authority.

(...) the LORD with all Humility: Keep back nothing that is profitable to
Souls: Shun no^ to declare the whole Counsel of GOD. Study to show your selves
approved of GOD, Workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of
Truth. Preach not your selves, but CHRIST JESUS the LORD; and your selves the
Servants of Souls for JESUS sake.

ADMINISTER the Sacraments of the New Testament, as wise and good Stewards of
those heavenly Mysteries. Impartially dispense the Discipline of the Gospel,
putting a Difference between the Holy and pro^^^e. Watch for Souls as those
that must give an Account. Seek that which is lost, bind up that which is
broken, strengthen that which is sick.

WATCH in all things, endure Afflictions, do the Work of Evangelists, make full
Proof of your Ministry. Be blameless, be sober, be vigilant, and of good
Behavior. Be Examples to Believers in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in
Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. Flee youthful and worldly Lusts; from which if a
M^n purge Himself, and follow after Righteousness. Faith, Charity, Peace, with
all that call on the LORD out of a pure Heart, He shall be a Vessel of Honor
sanctified and meet for the Master's Use, and prepared unto every good Work.

AS Men of GOD foil^^ after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience,
Meekness. Them that Sin rebuke before all, that others may fear. Lay hands
suddenly on no Man, neither be Partakers of other Men's Sins; keep your selves
pure.

B^ ye not ashamed of the Testimony of the LORD, nor of the Po^^ to whom you
are sent; but labor in the Word and Doctrine, that they may be Evangelized by
your Travels among them; and you shall be accounted worthy of double Honor. Be
ye Partakers of the Afflictions of the Gospel according to the Power of GOD;
for the LORD has not given us the spirit of Fear, but of Power and of Love and
of a sound Mind.

BE strong in the Grace that is in CHRIST JESUS. Endure Hardness as good
Soldiers in his Cause; endure all things for the sake of the Elect, that they
may obtain Salvation which is in Him with Eternal Glory. It is a faithful
Saying, that if we be dead with Him we shall live with Him, if we suffer with
Him we shall reign with Him, if we deny Him He will deny us.

INSTRUCT those that oppose themselves, if GOD peradventure will give them
Repentance unto the Acknowledgement of the Truth; that they may recover
themselves out of the Snare of the Devil. Continue ye in the Things which you
have learned and been assured of, knowing from whence you have received them;
and that from your Childhood you have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able
to make you wise unto Salvation; to perfect the Man of GOD, and thoroughly to
furnish him unto every good Word and Work. Be ye therefore steadfast, immovable
and always abounding in the Work of the LORD, as knowing that your Labor shall
not be in vain in the LORD.

WE give you Charge, each of You, in the sight of GOD who quickneth all things,
and before JESUS CHRIST who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good Confession,
that you observe these Things and keep this His Commandment without Spot,
unrebukable, until his Appearing and Kingdom. And the LORD stand by you and
strengthen you, that by you the Heathen may hear and believe! the LORD deliver
you from every evil Work, from wicked and unreasonable Men, and preserve you to
his heavenly Kingdom! To H^^ be Glory for Ever! Amen.

The Charge was followed with a short Prayer for the Enlargement of the Kingdom
of CHRIST through the whole Earth: And (...) was rendered to GOD for bringing our
Fathers into this Wilderness to plan^ the Gospel here; and for Wisdom and
Largeness of Heart given Them to lay those Foundations for Religion and
Learning, which GOD has been pleased to own and bless unto this Day.

IN particular, Glory was given to GOD for all that our Fathers did in their
Day toward Gospelizing the Heathen, and Shame was taken to our selves that no
more had been done in ours.

The English and Indian Teachers, who are entered into the Labors of our
Fa^^e^s, were commended to the special Grace of our LORD JESUS, and the Persons
n^w (...) in their Mission to the more distant (...) or (...); That the Hand of
the LORD may be with them, and their Hands be made strong by the Mighty GOD of
JACOB! that they may see of the Travel of the Soul of CHRIST in a glorious
Success! that the miserable Nati^^s may be rescued from the Delusions of (...)
and (...), and from the Love of Strong ^rink, the Sin that easily (...) them,
and drowns 'em in Perdition.

THE special Blessings of Providence were asked on the Honorable Society in
Scotland, and on the like in England and other Places, for propagating
Christian Knowledge, That Grace, Mercy and Peace may be multiplied to them! and
they that sow and those that reap may rejoice together.

THE living GOD was also blessed for the " Dead that die in the LORD, rest from
their Labors and their Works follow them; and the particular Legacy, the
Foundation of the present Mission was humbly presented before the LORD, as
bequeathed to His Glory, and the Salvation of Souls perishing in Ignorance of
Him.

THE Direction of GOD was also asked for the Commissioners at all Times, and a
gracious Dismission from the House of GOD to the Assembly; That both Ministers
and People mighty carry away the Blessing, with Forgiveness of the Sins of Holy
Duties.

THE Reverend Mr. Prince was then declared chosen by the Venerable Council to
give the Right Hand of Fellowship in their Name: Who did it with the following
Speech.

THE Right Hand of Fellowship.
THE HANDS OF THE PRESBYTERY having thus been laid upon the Persons now
ordained to the Gospel Ministry; I am appointed by the Ecclesiastical Council
here convened, to Give Them the RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP. But inasmuch as the
Ordination of this kind of Officers has been very rare, and may therefore seem
to be new among us; It may be requisite to prevent Objection, and convince you
of the Warrantableness of these Proceedings, that I First lay before you the
SCRIPTURE GROUNDS upon which we go: and if you please to allow me a little
Patience; I doubt not but soon to satisfy you, both that These are proper
SCRIPTURE OFFICERS, and that in this affair, we rather act in a more precise
Conformity to the SCRIPT^RE INSTANCES both of Laying on of Hands and of Giving
the Right Hand of Fellowship, than in other Ordinations.

For, if we review the State of Mankind at our Blessed Savior's Ascension; we
shall see that almost the whole World were perishing in Ignorance of the Way of
Salvation, and under the deluding Power of Satan, who led them captive at his
destructive Pleasure. To redeem them from this wretched Ignorance and Bondage,
our Blessed SAVIOR set up his Spiritual KINGDOM among them: And this Kingdom
was (1) to be extended to Those who knew Him not; and (2) to be continued among
Those who were brought to know and embrace Him.

In the Propagation therefore of this Kingdom, there were these Two things to
be done; that it might be thus extended and continued: (1) The Gospel must be
Preached among the Ignorant, both Jews and Gentiles; that they might be turned
from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to GOD, and so receive the
Forgiveness of their Sins and an Inheritance among the Sanctified through Faith
in CHRIST: (2) These enlightened Converts were to be gathered into Particular
Congregations or Churches, for their own further Edification and Perseverance,
and the more sure Transmission of this happy Kingdom to their Successors.

Whoever therefore are now able to lay aside their Prepossessions for the
particular (...) they have assumed, and with an impartial and (...) Mind*
search into the Now Testament (...), will (...); That agreeable to this State of
the World and these (...) of Our Savior's Kingdom, there were (...) of
Officers (...) in the primitive Age of Christianity: (1)The Business of SOME
was to go forth and Preach the Gospel among the Ignorant, both Jews and
Gentiles, to Baptize them upon their embracing it, and Gather them into
Churches, to begin the Administration of the other Ordinance of the Lord's
Su^p^r, and see a suitable number of stated Officers engaged in the Care of
them, for their further Edification and Continuance: (2) The Business of the
OTHER sort of Officers, was therefore to take the stated Charge of the
Particular Churches thus gathered and settled.

Of the former sort of Officers were the APOSTLES, and EVANGELISTS: of the
latter sort were the BISHOPS, that is, in the plain, ancient sense of the Word,
the OVERSEERS or ELD^RS of particular Churches, who were to take (...) Charge
of the Spiritual Part; besides the DEACONS, who were to take the Charge of the
Secular.

The peculiar Character of the Twelve APOST^^S, was to be the Eyewitnesses of
a Risen JESUS, Acts i. 21, 22.
wh^^^ They had a Power to prove by working Miracles. And their great Business
was to Go forth into all Nations, Mat. xxxviii. 19, 20.
to Preach, Convert, Baptize, to Gather them into Churches, and see well
qualified (...) or Elders placed in them for their farther Edification, Safety
and Continuance.

But inasmuch as it was impossible, that Twelve Men should be sufficient to
Preach the Gospel and Gather Churches in every Town or City of every Country;
therefore both the Necessity of Mankind and the Kingdom of CHRIST required,
that Others duly qualified, should be added to them, in their great Business of
the Propagation of the Gospel among the Nations: and for this End therefore,
were employed Others, who were distinguished from them by the Name EVANG^LISTS.

By which Name was meant in those ancient Times, not only the Writers of the
(...), to which the Modern Ages have restrained the common Use and Meaning of
the Word. As indeed the Modern Ages have wonderfully ch^ng'd the ancient Sense
of some other Scripture (...), in order to support their particular
Constitutions, which could not be maintained from Scripture otherwise.

But by EVANGELISTS were especially meant, that sort of Spiritual officers,
whose Business was the same with the general Part of the APOSTLES Office; viz.
the EVANGELIZING the Jews and Gentiles; i. e. the Preaching the Gospel to them,
the laboring by all proper means for their Conversion, Gathering Churches
among them, and Committing the Care of those gathered Churches to well
qualified Overseers or Elders.

Such an EVANGELIST was not only MARK, the Writer of the Gospel that bares his
Name; who was a Preacher of the Gospel also among the Gentiles; as both the New
Testament Acts xil. 25 ^v. 37, -- 39. Col. iv. 10. Philem. 24.
and (...) have informed us.

But such an EVANGELIST was PHILIP likewise: Who was at first one of the seven
Deacons chosen by the Brethren of the Church at Jerusalem, to take care of the
Po^r That they were (...) and ordained to Take care of the Poor; both the HOLY
SCRIPTURES inform us, Acts vi. 1, -- 6, and (...) also expressly assures us, in
his Eccl. Hist. Book III. Chap. 29.
But upon that Church being dispersed by the Persecution at the Death of
Stephen; there being no further occasion for his attending his Deacon's Office,
and being full of the Holy Ghost and duly qualified; He becomes an EVANGELIST:
and such a one He is expressly called, Acts xxi. (...).

Such EVANGELISTS were great NUMBERS OF OTHERS of that Church also; which were
by the same Persecution dispersed abroad: as we read in Act, viii. 1. At that
time there was a great Persecution against the Church which was at Jerusalem:
and they were all Scattered abroad, throughout the Regions of Judea and
Samaria, except the APOSTLES: ver. 4. Therefore They that were Scattered
abroad, went (...) where Preaching the Word: and ver. 5. Then PHILIP went down
to the City of Samaria, and Preached CHRIST unto them. For that this was not
Philip of the twelve Apostles, but the same that was before the Dispersion, a
Deacon, is plain, by comparing the vi, viii, and xxi. Chapters of the Acts
together.

Such an EVANGELIST was TIMOTHY: as appears most plainly from a great Number of
Scripture Passages concerning Him; wherein we find that He went (...): and
Preached the Gospel both to the Ephesians and Colossi^ns in ASIA, and to the
Thessalonians and (...) in EUROPE. And in the second Epistle to Him, ^he
Apostle Paul exhorts Him, To PREACH THE WORD, to be instant in Season, out of
Season, to Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort with all Long suffering and Doctrine: Chap.
iv. 2. and in ver. 5. To Watch in all things, to DO THE WORK OF AN EVANGELIST,
and ((...)) Fulfill his Ministry.

Such an EVANGELIST was TITUS: as fully appears from 2 Cor. viii. 6, 23. Gal.
ii. 3. 2 Timothy iv. 10. and from the Epistle of the same Apostle to Him, compared
together.

In short, such EVANGELISTS were BARNABAS and SILAS, APOLLOS and SYLVANUS; as
appears from so many Scriptures as the Time will not allow me to mention: and
it is likely MANY OTHERS named in the New Testament, whom the Apostle PAUL calls
HIS FELLOW LABORERS -- had we Leisure to enquire into their History.

Agreeable to this, the same Apostle, speaking of our Blessed SAVIOR, says
Ephesians. iv. 8, -- 12. When He ascended up on High, He led Captivity Captive, and
gave Gifts to Men: and he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
EVANGELISTS, and some Pastors and Teachers; for the Perfecting of the Saints,
(i. e. the completing their NUMBER So Vatablus in Pol. Synops.
) for the Work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of CHRIST.

And agreeable to all this also, Eusebius not only calls MARK, Eccl. Hist. Book
II. Chap. 16 and 24.
but also THADDAEUS, Book I. Chap. 13, and Book II. Chap. 1.
an EVANGELIST; because they Preached the Gospel among the Heathen. Yea, in the
same Places, He calls them APOSTLES; for which He had given the Reason in Book
I. Chap. 12. Where He tells us, that, MANY besides the twelve APOSTLES, were
called APOSTLES ((...)) by way of IMITATION, i. e. Because, like Apostles. They
went about, Preaching the Gospel to diverse People, Converting them to the
Faith of CHRIST, and Gathering them into Churches.

In Book II. Chap. 3. He has these remarkable Passages -- Thus by the
Cooperation of the Divine Power, the comfortable Word of GOD, like the Beams
of the Sun, on a sudden enlightened the whole World: and presently agreeable to
the Divine Scriptures, the Sound of the Heavenly EVANGELISTS and APOSTLES went
out into all Lands, and their Words to the Ends of the Earth: and in a short
time, throughout ALL CITIES and VILLAGES, there were CHURCHES gathered; which
like a Threshing Floor filled with Corn, were thronged with infinite
Multitudes. And in Book III. Chap. 3^. He says, that, MANY OTHERS were also
famous at that Time, having obtained the first Place among the SUCCESSORS of
the APOSTLES -- Promoting greatly the Doctrine of the Gospel, and Scattering
the Salutary Seed of the Kingdom of Heaven, at large over the whole World --
Traveling abroad they performed the Work of EVANGELISTS to those who as yet
had not heard the Word of Faith -- And these Persons having only laid the
Foundation of Faith in remote and barbarous Places, and CONSTITUTED other
PASTORS, committed to them the Culture of those they had ((...)) lately I
rather render it [lately] and not [perfectly] as the English Translation of
Valesiu^'s Eus^bius ^^t it, which I otherwise choose to keep to. And Valesius
more agreeably renders it, though He vary's the Phrase into [Novellae
Plantationi^] i. e. the Culture [of the New Plantation] departed again etc.
introduced to the Faith, departed again to other Regions and Nations -- And in
the close of the Chapter -- It being impossible to recount by name, all Those,
who in the First SUCCESSION of the APOSTLES, were PASTORS or EVANGELISTS in the
Churches throughout the World.

By PASTORS He plainly means the stated Overseers or Elders of the Churches
gathered: and by EVANGELISTS, Those who First Evangeliz'd and gathered them
into Churches.

Not but that the One sort of Officers might be changed into the Other, as the
Occasion of the Kingdom of CHRIST required. For the KINGDOM of CHRIST could not
be made for these Officers, but They for this KINGDOM: and therefore just
according to the Demands of this Kingdom, They might be set up, removed, or
continued in one Place or other, or reciprocally change their Offices. Thus,
upon the Dispersion of particular Churches, or other weighty Occasions, whereby
the Kingdom of CHRIST might be the more advanced, the stated Pastors of those
Churches might become Evangelists, to Preach the Gospel and gather Churches in
other Places. And so, the Evangelists, through Age, Infirmity, or the weighty
Occasions of particular Churches, might become the stated Pastors of one of the
Churches They had Gathered, or of any other.

From all these Premises, we may fairly draw these three CORROLARIES --

(1) That it is therefore a great Mistake, which the Generality of Learned Men
have inadvertently fallen into; in supposing that EVANGELISTS, or Ministers to
Preach the Gospel (...) gather Churches among the Heathen, were an
extraordinary sort of Officers, peculiar to the Primitive Ages.

They were extraordinary Men indeed in those ancient Times, and had
extraordinary Gifts: and so had the DEACONS also, as those Times required. But
as mere Evangelists, they were no otherwise extraordinary than the Occasions of
their Office. That is, so long as there are Heathens to be Evangelized, to be
Converted to the Christian Faith, to be Baptized and gathered into Churches; so
long do both the Kingdom of CHRIST and Necessities of Men require the Office,
as well as in the primitive Times; and so long do they call aloud for Persons
duly qualified and spirited to be engaged in it, until all the Nations are
Converted and gathered into Churches: and then indeed the End of their Office
ceasing, the Office will therefore fail, and no other Spiritual Officers remain
but the Stated Pastors of particular Churches.

And the contrary narrow Conception, laying aside those Evangelical Officers
and confining the Christian Ministry to the Pastors or Elders of Particular
Churches, has not only a plain natural Tendency to hinder; but has also
doubtless been a principal Mean of hindering the Propagation of the Gospel
through the World. To this it seems in a great measure owing, that the Religion
of CHRIST has not made a much farther Progress in the Eastern Hemisphere, than
it had about 1400 Years ago, in the Days of CONSTANTINE the Great. Whereas had
this Order of Ministers, from those ancient Times been constantly kept up and
emitted among the Heathen Nations; by the common Blessing of Heaven, it seems
to be likely, that all the Ends of the Earth, in a far more extensive Sense
than Eusebius is to be taken, had long before now been Evangeliz'd, and happily
seen the Salvation of GOD.

Nor can I imagine, that the Reformed and famous Churches, either of FRANCE or
SCOTLAND ever intended to militate this sort of Officers thus described: For
though They discountenance a Vagous Ministry See Quick's Synodicon, and Steuart's
Collections
; I presume they only mean in those Parts of the World, where the People are
Christianized and Churches gathered.

(2) From hence we likewise plainly see, that EVANGELISTS, or Preachers of the
Gospel and Gatherers of Churches among the Heathen, are much more properly and
strictly, the SUCCESSORS of the APOSTLES, than the stated Bishops or Elders of
particular Churches: the Office of the former much more resembling that of the
APOSTLES, than the Office of the latter.

(3) and lastly, These EVANGELISTS thus Preaching among the Heathen, Converting
and Baptizing them, Gathering them into Churches and then Constituting stated
Bishops or Elders over them; They, the Evangelists, cannot therefore possibly
be an Inferior Order of Officers to those Stated Bishops or Elders whom* They
thus set over the Churches* They have converted and gathered. Though their
Ordaining such Bishops or Elders will on the other hand no more infer a
Superiority in the Evangelists; than one Stated Bishop of a Church ordaining
another Bishop, will infer a Superiority in the Ordainer.

And for your farther Satisfaction in the strict Propriety of Laying our Hands
upon, and Giving the Right Hand of Fellowship to such sort of Officers as have
been now ordained; I shall only observe these Two things --

(1) That they were such sort of Officers, upon whom HANDS WERE LAID in the
primitive Times, when they were separated to this peculiar Service.

Thus we read of BARNABAS an EVANGELIST, as well as of PAUL an APOSTLE, in Acts
xiii. 1, -- 3. Now there were in the Church that was at Antioch, certain
Prophets and Teachers -- as they ministered to the LORD, and fasted, the HOLY
GHOST said, SEPARATE me BARNABAS and SAUL for the Work whereto I have called
them: and when they had fasted and prayed, and LAID THEIR HANDS on them, they
sent them away. And so were the Hands of the Presbytery laid on TIMOTHY,
another EVANGELIST, when the Gift of Preaching the Gospel, which was at first
among the Jews or Heathen, was communicated to Him. 1 Timothy iv. 14.

(2) That they were also such sort of Officers, to whom the Apostles at
Jerusalem gave the RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP; when they were going to Preach
among the Heathen.

So the Apostle Paul himself assures us, in Gal. iii. 9. And when JAMES, CEPHAS
and JOHN, who seemed to be PILLARS, perceived the Grace that was given to ME;
they gave to ME and BARNABAS the RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP; that WE should go to
the HEATHEN etc.

And thus we see that the Scripture Instances both of Imposition of Hands and
Giving the Right Hand of Fellowship, are firstly in Favor of Such sort of
Officers; and are by Inference or Imitation only, applied to Others.

But how extremely agreeable is the last mentioned primitive INSTANCE, to the
Case before us!

For besides, that those Five Ministers were then at JERUSALEM, the Seat of the
principal Christian Church in that Age and Part of the World; from whence were
Ministers sent continually to Preach the Gospel and gather Churches in all the
Countries round about: -- What I would chiefly observe is -- (1) That this was
done upon their Perceiving the GRACE of GOD given to Paul as well as Barnabas
-- i. e. not only the Ministerial Gifts and Graces of the HOLY SPIRIT, but also
their evident Call of GOD to engage in this Office, and their unquestionable
Investiture therein. (2) That this was done at the ^^arting of these Christian
Ministers; viz. Paul and Barnabas, to (...) ou^ of Jerusalem among the
GENTILES, while the (...) Ministers were to continue to Preach among the Jews.
(3) That though they were all invested equally with the Ministerial Office; yet
now at their Parting, Those who were Prior in the Ministry and seemed to be
PILLARS; i. e. were so conspicuous (...) the Christian Church, as they were
every where known and owned as Ministers of CHRIST, and were also to remain
among the Jews, if not in or near Jerusalem -- were though it most proper to Give
the Right Hand of Fellowship to Those who were going to a greater Distance and
among another People.

And from these Observables we may now easily collect the singular INTENTION of
these wise and inspired Ministers in this Significant Action. For no doubt They
meant thereby -- (1) To testify their Approbation of them as true Ministers of
CHRIST, both duly qualified for this Sacred Office, rightly called to it, and
invested and employed in it; that all might own them as such, and none dispute
their Ministerial Power. (2) To signify, that though they were now to Part; yet
They were still United in the most (...) Affection and in the same Design,
embarked in the same Holy Cause of CHRIST, and were to Propagate the same pure
Religion in different Places. (3) To signify their continued Con^^^n for each
other, with their hearty Readiness and Resolution to assist each other, both by
constant Prayers, Advices and Endeavors, as there might be Occasion. (4) and
lastly, to exp^^^^ therewith, their earnest Recommendation of Them to the
Providence and Grace of GOD, that they might be greatly assisted and prospered
in their Ministry.

In Imitation of these agreeable EXAMPLES, in the midst of this Metropolis, at
the Desire and in the Name of the Pastors and Deleg^^^s of the Churches here
Convened, and in the Sight of this great Assembly,

I Do therefore,

Dear and Reverend Brethren!

At your Parting from us, to carry the Gospel among the Heathen, now Give you
heartily the RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP. -- And it is to Signify -- Our
Approbation of You as true Ministers of CHRIST; furnished for this Sacred
Office, rightly called to it, and fully invested in all the Powers and
Authorities of it, wherever the Affairs of His Kingdom may call you, and now
especially for the Propagation of it among the Heathen: -- That we account you
still to be United with us in the same General and great Design and Interest of
our common LORD; to carry on that happy Kingdom in the World, which consists
not in carnal Ordinances imposed on Men, but in Righteousness and Peace and the
Joy of the HOLY GHOST: -- That we shall be continually concerned for You,
mindful of You in Prayer, and be ready to assist You as Occasion requires. --
And finally, We commend You to the GRACE of our LORD JESUS CHRIST: That He
would fill You with His SPIRIT: Inspire You with Light and Zeal; supply you
with Faith and Patience, Courage, Wisdom, Self-Denial, Meekness, and Humility;
Touch You with the most tender and condescending Pity for those wretched
Natives; Excite You to Your Duty, guide You in Your Work, defend You from every
Evil, suppor^ and comfort You in all your Trials; and prosper Your Endeavors
for the Advancement of the Kingdom of our Blessed LORD, in the Salvation of
many Sinners perishing in Ignorance and Wickedness.

May Your Eyes be always to Him, Your Dependence always on Him, and His mighty
Grace be sufficient for You. May You from Him give Light to them that sit in
Darkness and in the Regions of the Shadow of Death, to guide their Feet into
the Way of Eternal Peace and Blessedness: May You faithfully discharge the
Office of the EVANGELISTS of CHRIST among them: and from Preaching the Glad
Tidings of Salvation to them on Earth, may You at length ascend the World
above, and carry the News of their Conversion thither; to highten the Joy of
the Heavenly Hosts, and increase the Praise of our Great REDEEMER. Amen.

N. B. The Right Hand of Fellowship being thus Given; the Sixty-seventh Psalm
was Sung, and the Rev. Moderator dismissed the Assembly with the usual Blessing.

FINIS.
CORRIGENDA.
PAge 38. in the Margin; for xxxviii, read xxviii. p. 39. line 21. for which,
r. who. p. 40. l. 2. r. make full Proof of, or Fulfill his Ministry* l. 25. r.
like the Apostles,


