Adam's Losing, and CHRIST's Saving all their Seed. A SERMON Preached at the
LECTURE in East-Haddam, June 12 th. 1734.

By George Beckwith, A.M. Pastor of the Third Church in Lyme.

Romans 5.15. For if through the offense of one many be dead, much more the grace
of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded
unto many.

Ver. 19. For as by one man's disobedience many were m(...) sinners: so by the
obedience of one shall many b(...) (...) righteous.

BOSTON: Printed by (...)

TO My much Respected, and worthy Friends, Deacon Daniel Brainard, And Deacon
Isaac Spencer, Both of East-Haddam
Brethren,
YOUR repeated request, the reasons you have offered, together with the
importunity of some other my Friends, have at length prevailed with me to grant
you a Copy of that Sermon, I preached some time ago, at your Lecture: In doing
which, I have preferred your judgment before my own; and have sought to gratify
you herein, rather than to please my self.

For to me it appears, that I have little consulted my own Reputation herein.
The World will censure me, for appearing at all in Print, who am but of
yesterday; and the Copy which I have here sent you, is one, but hastily
corrected, which some time ago I transcribed for the use of a private Person
only; being by an extraordinary dispensation of Providence (of which you heard)
prevented from preparing a more correct Copy for you, as I had given
encouragement to do; however, I don't think it worth while for me to go about
to excuse my self, by telling under what disadvantages this comes forth; nor
yet, by declaring to the World, my unwillingness to come into this. You Sirs,
and other my Friends, know how the matter was; And I hope it now is, and ever
will be, more my concern, that I be able to give a goal account to God, and my
own Conscience than to any Man on Earth.

I have made little alteration in this Copy from what you heard me preach; and
doubt not, but that it is the truth, which I ought to teach and maintain, though
it appears in a very plain dress, and will find but a very indifferent
reception with many. And indeed, your pious zeal and forwardness to promote the
spreading and establishing of these Truths, in which you are so well
established, and built up, has been a principal motive with me, to adventure
thus to expose my self.

And I hope it will still be your care, as well as mine, to do what you may for
the propagating and maintaining these fundamental Truths, which are but growing
out of fashion at this Day.

But if it will please God (who can work by any means) by his Grace and
Blessing, to make this mean Essay serviceable, for the promoting and
establishing of his Truth in the Minds and Hearts of any, that his great Name
may have the Glory, and precious Souls the benefit, then your end in Printing,
and mine in Writing, will be attained.

I am, SIRS, Your sincere Friend and Servant, G. B.
N-Lyme, May 30. 1735.
Life lost in Adam; and Regained in JESUS CHRIST.
1. CORINTHIANS XV. 22. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be
made alive.


THE great Subject which the Apostle is principally treating of in this
Chapter, is the Doctrine of the Resurrection, which he asserts and establishes
by sundry Arguments, principally drawn from the Resurrection of Christ, wherein
having first proved that Christ is certainly risen, he thence infers that the
dead shall certainly rise, which is an incontestable proof of the Resurrection,
especially of all good Men; for Christ is their federal Head, they members of
his Body mystical, and if the Head be risen, it is certain the members shall
rise also; yea Christ's Resurrection is the earnest and first fruits of ours.
Ver. 20. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of
them that slept.

(...) from it, ver(...) (...) Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the
dead.

And he further illustrates and confirms this in my Text, For as in Adam all
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive; i. e. as through the Sin of the
first Adam all Men became mortal, because all derive from him the same sinful
Nature; -- so through the obedience and merits of Christ, shall all that are
made partakers of the divine Nature, be made both alive and immortal. All that
died, died in Adam, all that ever are made alive, are made alive in Jesus
Christ.

But in the Words we may further,

1. Observe, The Persons treated of, viz Adam and the Lord Jesus Christ; the
first and the second Adam.

2. Observe, That both are spoken or treated of, as public Persons, Heads, or
Representatives. And this is evident from the form of the Apostle's reasoning,
wherein he shows that Adam did not act in a single capacity for himself alone,
but as a public Head for all mankind, therefore is it that all die in him; i.
e. as in their public Head: For in no other sense could they die in him. And
that the Lord Jesus Christ was and is such a public Person, not only the
Apostle here, but also the whole Gospel witnesses.

3. Observe, The influence, and effects, that the acts and doings of these
public Persons had, and have on those they represent and act for, viz. Death
and Life. Adam conveys Death to all he acted for: Jesus Christ Life to all his.
In Adam all die, i. e not only became guilty with him in the first Sin conveyed
to them in the channel of natural Generation, to the exposing all his progeny
to temporal and eternal Death; but the Phrase also denote, the conveyance of
such a coruption of Nature so communicated to all who abide in him, as is daily
working Death in them.

But now! the Lord Jesus Christ coming in as Man's second common and covenant
Head, for his deliverance from this Death, and fulfilling both the penal and
preceptive parts of the Law, has hereby abolished this Death, and purchased
for his People a title to spiritual and eternal Life; which by his Grace and
Spirit he conveys and communicates in effectual Vocation to all, as many as the
Father has given him.

And so a Number of those who were dead in Adam, are thus again recovered and
made alive in Christ Jesus.

The Doctrine then is plainly this, viz.

DOCT. That as Adam brought in, and communicates Death to all his natural Seed:
So the Lord Jesus Christ has brought in, and communicates Life to all his
spiritual Seed. Text, As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive;
i. e. all that ever are made alive.

I shall endeavor to illustrate and clear up this Doctrinal Truth, by speaking
to these five things contained in it, viz.

PROP. I. That both Adam and Jesus Christ, were treated with, and acted as
public Persons, Heads, or Representatives.

PROP. II. That both Adam and Jesus Christ had, and have a Seed, whom they so
represented and acted for.

PROP. III. That as both Adams had, and have a Seed* so both their acts and
influences are communicated to their Seed.

PROP. IV. That the one of these public Heads conveys Death with all the
cursed influence of original Sin and Pollution: The other conveys Life with all
the fruits of Grace, and blessings of Salvation to his Seed.

PROP. V. That each of these communications are made much in the same way and
manner.

PROP. I. That both Adam and Jesus Christ, were treated with, and acted as
public Persons, Heads, or Representatives.

And in this respect Adam was indeed a Type of Christ, did represent and
resemble him, and is so spoken of in the Scripture on this account, Romans 5 14.
-- Which was the figure of him that was to come. Adam was the Head of the first
Covenant; and so was treated with, for and instead of all Mankind. He was the
common Head and surety of all Mankind, acted for them, and represented them, as
the Deputy of a Town, Colony, or any Corporation acts for, and represents those
who choose and send him.

God was pleased to call and appoint him to this Office, to treat with him in a
Covenant way as such a common Head and public Person; did so plight a Covenant
with him, wherein Adam became engaged for, and charged with all his Children
that should descend from him; that he was to act for them, and they to stand to
what their Covenant Head did: If he should punctually obey, his Obedience was
to be ours too, and we to receive the benefit, if he should disobey, the act
was to be ours too; we must stand and fall in our federal Head, we were in his
Loins, he our Root in which we grew, and we acted in him, or with him, or by
him. This is evidently implied in the Text, and further cleared up in other
paragraphs of holy writ, particularly in Romans 5.12, 17, 18. Here the Apostle
plumply asserts that Sin came into the World by Adam, and Death by Sin; and
that this Death has passed or fallen on all Men, for that all have sinned, i.
e. in Adam their public Head. And in the 17 and 18 verses, he tells us to what
sad Effect this has passed on all, even unto Condemnation: And that this Death
has a sovereign power over, or reigning influence in the Hearts of Men, that
they die in Adam daily.

Thus the holy Scripture looks upon, or represents all Men in their natural or
unregenerate State, dead in Adam, and condemned with him in Law. But how could
this be, were he not our public Head, were he not so looked upon and treated
with in the first Covenant? Where would be the Justice of such a conveyance of
Sin, Guilt, and Death, to all his Posterity? Besides it is evident he did stand
in the place of such a public Person, and acted as such, because the
Scriptures speak of him as such an one, placing him in opposition to Christ who
is the second public Head: So in the 47th ver. of our Context, The first Man
is of the Earth earthy, the second Man is the Lord from Heaven.

And what! Though Mankind was not then capable to depute him to this Office by
their own Choice, or Vote; yet infinite Wisdom knew, who was the fittest Person
to be deputed to this public Trust, and therefore could make as wise a Choice
for us, as we could have made for our selves; and it is clear the fittest Person
was in fact Chosen; so that we cannot complain of any injustice done us on this
account.

Well! As Adam, so Jesus Christ is also a public Head and Representative: he
is Head of the second, as Adam was of the first Covenant. Christ is the Head of
all the Elect; he was treated with as such, acted for them, suffered for them,
bea^ the Wrath of God in their room and stead, ^ied the just for the unjust,
their Sins were charged to him, laid upon him; and he bear the punishment of
them, Isai. 53.5, 6. And the Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of us all.

The Elect were in the eternal Decree, involved and wrapped up with Christ in
the first Covenant, even from Eternity, Ephesians. 1.4 And as soon as Man fell,
Christ actually undertook for all the Elect, became surety to his Father on
their account, that so by his own personal acts, he might do away Sin and
present his Elect to the Father guiltless and blameless in and by his own
sufferings and merits. And God was pleased to accept him as such a Surety, and
to plight such a Covenant with him, and publicly declares his royal acceptance
and approbation of Christ in this Office, when he did actually appear in the
World, to execute that for which he had so undertaken, as in Mat. 3.17. And lo,
a Voice from Heaven, saying, this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

And it was by virtue of this early undertaking of Christ, as a public Head,
and his becoming security to the Father for all the Elect, that the Patriarchs
and holy Men of old were saved. For inasmuch as he was become Surety, and was
to obey and suffer for them in time; the Law therefore looked on all that were
in him through believing, as having really suffered the penalty and yielded the
obedience required, and so as having fulfilled the Law of the first Covenant;
because Christ was become Surety, had put in his Bond for us; become engaged to
Justice to do all for his Elect, when the fullness of time should come.

And thus also when he did actually come in the Flesh, and did in our Nature
obey and suffer, he did this as a public Person for us, in our room and stead:
Hence that 2 Cor. 5.21. For God has made him to be Sin for us who knew no Sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

And he now appears before the Father in Heaven as our public Head, he is
there our Advocate to plead our Cause, present our Services, and to procure for
us all that good which we stand in need of, and pray for. So the Apostle
teaches, 1 John 2.1. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous.

Hence,

PROP. II. That Both Adam and Jesus Christ had, and have a Seed whom they so
represented and acted for.

All for whom they acted, and to whom they stand in in the relation of a common
or public Head, are their Seed. Adam was not only the natural Parent, but also
the federal Head of all Mankind; as they are descendants from him, and in their
natural estate, they are his Seed; his natural Seed, his Covenant Seed,
branches of the same Stock sprang from the same Root; Before we had our being
in the World, we were virtually in Adam's Loins, as the effect is in the Cause,
or as fruit is first in the Tree, before it is brought forth, or has any
actual Existence. -- Thus in this very sense as I take it, the Tribe of Levi,
is said to pay tithes in Abraham, long before Levi the Father of that Tribe was
born, Heb. 7.9.

And when we actually have our being in the World, we are actually in Adam as
our Covenant Head, are his Seed; and hence as one observes, it is that all
Nations are said to be of one Blood, Acts 17.26. And has made of one Blood all
Nations of Men. -- We are in Covenant looked upon not only as the natural Seed
of Adam, as we spring from him in natural Generation; but also as his Covenant
Seed and Children for whom he acted, and in whom we both stand and fall.

Well! as Adam, so the Lord Jesus Christ has also a Seed: He also undertook as
a Covenant Head, or public Person to transact for Man, and to purchase to
himself an holy Seed out of the ruined Rubish, and fallen race of old Adam;
that thereby he might bring many Sons home to Glory at last.

When God called him to this his Office, according to Psalm. 40 7. Then said I,
lo, I come, etc. i. e. in answer to the call of the Father; then did the Father
promise him such a Seed, to be the reward of his undertaking, Isai. 53.10 When
thou shall make his Soul an offering for Sin, he shall see his Seed, etc. And
again ver. 11. He shall see of the travail of his Soul and be satisfied, by his
knowledge shall thy righteous Servant justify many.

All the Elect were Christ's appointed Seed in the eternal Decree of Election,
so chosen in him, according to Ephesians. 1.4, 5. According as he has chosen us in
him, before the Foundation of the World, that we should be holy and without
blame before him in love: Having predestined us unto the Adoption of
Children, by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will.

And all the faithful upon their actual believing, become his real Seed. Faith
takes them out of old Adam, Grace cuts them out of the old Stock and ingrafs
them into the true Olive, the new Covenant, the second Adam, whereby they
become his Seed, according to Romans 11.

But this brings me to the third thing, viz

PROP. III. That as both Adams have a Seed, so both their acts and influence
are communicated to their Seed.

And this necessarily follows from the former: For if both were public Persons
or Representatives, and both had and have a Seed for whom they, in their
public capacity acted, and who were involved and wrapped up with them in the
Covenant, Adam's Seed with him in the first, Christ's Seed with him in the
second Covenant; then both their acts and doings, must needs be communicated to
their Seed, so far forth as they acted in this their public capacity. Indeed
their Seed did really act in them, or with them, or by them; as a Town acts
with and by their Representative, or a Colony by their Agent; whose acts and
influence so far forth as he acts properly, in his public capacity, must needs
be communicative to all for whom, and in whose name he so acts

And as by the general Vote of mankind, such a deputing of one to represent,
and act for the whole body, in cases civil, is allowed to be just; so it is
certainly no less just in this case. Nor can any one justly complain of his
being wronged, or laid under any disadvantage by his being so in, or
represented by Adam: for it is certain they acted no otherways in him than they
would have acted out of him; for the nature of every one being just the same
with his, they would have done just as Adam did, if put upon the same trial as
he was. -- So that it was every whit as well; yea and on some accounts at
least, more safe for his Children to act in, and by him, then it would have
been for them to have acted singly for themselves, and each one to have made
his own Choice. For it is certain that the happiness of his whole Posterity
(whom nature would make dear to him) being concerned in the Affair, as well as
his own happiness, could not but lay him under far greater moral engagements to
take heed what he did, and so make it seem far more likely that he should
persevere and be faithful, than for any other Person in a single capacity who
would not be under the same engaging Circumstance. So that it should seem this
way fixed, or put Mankind really upon a fairer foot for happiness, than if each
single Person had been to have acted for himself and to have made his own
Choice.

But then it is to be observed, that although both Adams acted in such a public
capacity; yet there is a vast odds, a wide difference in the acts and
influences themselves, which these two public Persons communicate to those
standing in such a Covenant relation with them.

PROP. IV. For the one conveys Death with all the cursed influence of original
Sin and Pollution: The other conveys Life with all the blessed fruits of Grace
and blessings of Salvation to his Seed.

The first Adam by his first Sin, brought Guilt and Death on himself and all
his Seed or Posterity; the second Adam, Christ, by his obedience and sufferings
purchased Life and Grace for his. This the Apostle assures us of in the Text;
it is there taken for granted, that in Adam all die; which is a sad Truth, in a
twofold Sense, viz. his first Sinful act which brought in the Fall was our act
too, as acted by our public Head, and so by us in and through him,; as also that
sinful pravity and corruption of Nature, which thereby he procured to himself,
he does in the way of natural Generation communicate to us; in both which
respects, we all sinned in him, and are dead with him.

When Adam put forth his Hand, and took and eat of the forbidden Fruit, he did
this, not as a private but as a public Person, as we have before shown: Hence
that his act was our act too, justly imputed unto us, and charged on us, and
put down to our Account, because the act of our Head and Representative, and by
virtue thereof conveyed unto us. Thus we all died in Adam, he sinning, we
sinned in him, he being condemned for it, we are condemned in and with him;
hence that, Romans 5 18 By the offense of one, Judgment is come on all Men to
condemnation --

Again, by this first Sin or Fall, our Father and common Head, Adam, not only
lost the Life and Happiness promised to perfect obedience, and incurred the
Death threatened; but also he lost that noble rectitude of Nature, that divine
principle of Grace, and stock of Wisdom, with which in his native state of
innocence he was furnished and endued; the most High taking of it from him, as
a just punishment for that first and great Transgression, for his great abuse
thereof; on which followed ignorance, pravity, and perverseness of Nature,
corrupt and evil Principles, indisposing the Mind for any good, and inclining
of it to all manner of Evil.

Now this pravity and corruption of Nature which is spiritual Death; according
to Romans 8.6. Adam communicates to all his Seed, and that in the way of natural
Generation. How and what this is, will more fully appear in the sequel. But
allowing the Hypothesis, the thing itself will appear consistent with the rules
of Justice. For we being guilty in the first great Transgression by and with
our Covenant Head, and that as soon as we have our being in him, by becoming of
the species of Man; therefore the same punishment became justly due to us, as
to him, for the same Sin, at least the same for kind.

Now that punishment which immediately took place on him, for the first Sin,
was God's casting of him out of his favor, and taking from him those noble
divine habits, or principles of spiritual Wisdom and Grace, with which he was
dignifyed and endowed in his first Creation, called in holy writ the Image of
God. Genesis 1.27. And so leaving of him to fall under the Government, or
governing influence of a corrupt and depraved mind.

Well now! we being guilty in and with Adam of the same Transgression, and that
as soon as ever we become his Seed by having Soul and Body united together, it
is but just that we should for the same Sin be punished in the same way Adam
was, viz. by having that stock of Divine Wisdom, Knowledge, and Grace (or what
ever men will please to call it) withheld from and not bestowed on us, in our
Creation or Formation, which was due to our natures as first made in innocence,
and absolutely necessary to capacitate and furnish us for performing or
yielding that perfect Obedience, which the Law required of us. On which
depravation or withholding from us, will necessarily follow that pravity and
corruption of Nature of which we are speaking. For Man hereby being left
without divine Light, and so incapable to discern the spiritual and real
Excellencies of divine and heavenly things, being sunk below the chief good,
and so consequently without inclination to it, hence the Soul cannot choose and
embrace it; but being still desirous of good, and not rightly apprehending
wherein it consists, and how it may be attained unto; hence he betakes himself
unto the World for happiness, and would fain attain thereunto by gratifying the
desires of the Flesh and carnal Mind, living in ease and pleasure, apprehending
no greater happiness than he fancies may be enjoyed in this way, etc. -- which
certainly is Death in a sound Scripture sense, Romans 8.6. To be carnally minded
is death.

Now of this original depravation or pravity of humane nature, I think this
further account may be given, viz. Man in his innocent state, was furnished
with powers natural, and supernatural. By supernatural powers, I mean such as
capacitated him, clearly to discern the Will of God, and to entertain right
notions about God, and spiritual things, and mysteries, and perfectly to
delight himself in the same. Hereby he was made capable of communion with God,
and of enjoying him as his chief good; perfectly to do his Duty, and to delight
himself in it, and to live a life of communion with Heaven -- this the Image of
God in him.

His natural powers, I call such as flowed from his natural Constitution, and
capacitated him for the enjoyment of this World, and for taking complacency
therein as a subordinate good. And these were under the government and
regulation of his divine supernatural Powers. But when Man sinned, God (in way
of just punishment) took from him these supernatural Powers, or divine nature,
or habit, and left him wholly to his natural powers, which immediately assume
the Government, and lead away the Man captive, etc. Now this as I take it, is
the natural Man, spoken of in 1 Cor. 2 14. But the natural man receives not the
things of the spirit.

And now, the Man being become thus depraved and carnal, wholly bent to carnal
Pleasures and enjoyments, conceiving his happiness to consist therein; hence he
cannot but have an inward aversion, to every thing that tends to thwart, cross
and stop him in the pursuit of that, wherein he has conceived his felicity to
consist.

Now the Word of God, and his authority therein, doing this; hence he cannot but
dislike and hate it, at least in his heart; as what he conceives would abridge
him in his happiness, by laying such restraints on him, as he cannot bear, and
this inkindles enmity in him, against God and his holy Law: Which I take to be
the Enmity spoken of, Romans 8 7. Because the carnal mind is enmity against God,
for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.

So that all Men dye in Adam, in this twofold sense, viz. We are condemned in
and with him, for the first sin: and he communicates this pravity and
corruption of nature, to all that descend from him, in the way of natural
generation. And this seems to be the truth, evident both from reason and
Scripture; For Adam could communicate no other nature to his Children, than he
had himself: well, his nature being now depraved and viciated, such a nature
therefore he must needs communicate. And the Scriptures seem to give us this
very account of the matter. Thus, after the Fall, Adam begets a Son in his own
likeness, Genesis 5.3 -- And begat a son in his own likeness, after his image. --
And we are told what this is, John 3.6. That which is born of the flesh is
flesh And we are assured, that Children born of corrupt sinful Parents, do
derive from them no better a nature, Job 14.4 and 15.14 What is Man that he
should be clean? And he which is born of a woman that he should be righteous?
And the Apostle confirms all this by telling of us, what the spiritual
condition of all persons is, while in their natural estate, wholly corrupt,
wholly gone out of the way, etc. Romans 3.10, 11, 12. As it is written, There is
none righteous, no not one: There is none that understands, there is none
that seeks after God. They are all gone out of the way, they are together
become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one And ver. 13, 14,
16, 17. -- Destruction and misery are in their ways: And the way of peace have
they not known.

Well now, Christ the second Adam in like manner communicates a twofold life to
all his spiritual Seed, viz. The life of Grace in Conversion, in this World,
and a title to Eternal Life, in the other World.

As the first Adam by the first sin, brought all his Progeny under a sentence
of Death; so Christ the second Adam by his bearing the sins of all the Elect,
in his own Body on the Cross, and being so made a curse for them, Gal. 3 13.
Has hereby removed the Sentence of the Law, from all that are his, and
purchased them a discharge from that Sentence; hence that, Rom 8.33, 34. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is Christ that died. And
also Christ by himself yielding, in our Natures, that very Obedience to the
moral Law, which in the first Covenant, was made the condition of Eternal Life
being bestowed; has hereby given them a good and legal title unto life.

The first Covenant threatened Death, on the least failure in obedience, Gal.
3.10. It is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the Book of the Law to do them

Adam by the first Sin, made himself and all his Posterity, Men of Death, the
Law immediately pronounces sentence on them, Ezekiel. 18.4 -- The Soul that
sins it shall die. Hence Justice cannot be satisfied, nor the sentence be
reversed, unless the blood of the offender be shed, the penalty truly suffered,
Heb. 9.22. And without shedding of blood, is no remission. Hence Christ the
second Adam, undertakes for this, dies in our Nature, and suffers the full
demands of Justice, as our Surety; which upon our believing, becomes ours, by
the valid constitution of God; and in the Law looked upon as our own act, and
suffering, as though suffered by us; because done by our Surety and
Representative; which therefore takes us out of old Adam, in whom we sinned;
brings us from under the Law sentence, and into good terms with it. Hence that
Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus; compared with Romans 3.19. and 6.14. Ye are not under the Law, but under
Grace.

Again, the reward of Life, was promised to perfect obedience, to the whole
moral Law, as the Apostle plainly describes, Romans 10 5. But this Adam, and we
in him, failed of, and so forfeited the reward; and have lost all claim
thereunto, as the Apostle teaches us, Romans 3 23. For all have sinned, and come
short of the glory of God. But Christ the second Adam, has also undertaken
this for us, to renew our Claim, and in our Nature has performed and yielded
that very perfect obedience for us; has fulfilled all righteousness, as Matt 3
15. And that as a public Person, as our great high Priest and Surety

Hereby has he purchased for all that believe on him, the same title, and
legal claim, to Eternal Life, that Adam would have had, and we in him, had he
persever'd in perfect obedience. Thus the second Adam saves from the Death
brought in by the first; not by any Relaxation of the severity of the first
Covenant, or Law, but by an exact and punctual fulfillment of the conditions of
it, which seems to be the plain meaning of the Apostle in that, Rom 3. ult. Do
we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid; yea we establish the Law.

Fi^^^^y, As Adam brought in by the Fall, and communicates to all that descend
from him, a fearful pravity and corruption of Nature, which inclines all Men to
stray and wander from God endlesly; and every way disposes and incapacitates
them for a return; so that under the efficacy of this impotency, they are dying
daily; as we have before shown. So Christ the second Adam, has also a remedy
for this evil disease, he recovers from this spiritual Misery and Death. He
has purchased all Grace for his People, which by his holy Spirit, he conveys
and communicates unto all, whom he effectually Calls to be his, to their
recovery, and Renovation. He renews their spiritual powers, implants a
principle of new Life, persuades and enables them to return to God, and their
duty; and makes them alive unto God, and holiness. Romans 6.11. He revives again
his own lost Image in them; so making them new Creatures. 2 Cor. 5 17 If any
Man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are past away, behold all
things are become new. He likewise communicates unto them, all that
influencing, assisting, and quickening Grace, whereby his spiritual Seed, and
Children, are enabled to overcome the World, vanquish Temptation, mortify their
Lusts, and to persevere in an holy Life; to the final Salvation of their Souls.
Hence that Joh. 1.16. Of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace.

Thus we have shown what both Adams convey, and communicate to their Seed.

Which brings me to the fifth and last thing, viz

PROP. V. That each of these convey; or each of these communications are made
much in the same way and manner.

So the text intimates to us; As in Adam -- So in Christ --

Three things considered will clear up this,

1. Each of these communications are made in a Covenant way

Each of these are in pursuance of the Covenant made with each public head.
The first Adam being Head of the first or old Covenant, does therefore (...)
and communicate the guilt and curses of that broken Covena^^ unto all wrapped up
with him therein; because such was (...) tenor of that Covenant; that his acts
and doings as such a public Person, should be equally their act, for whom he
so acted: and that his influence should derive to them as above shown.

So in like manner, that Christ's Suffering, and Obedience, is made ours in
Law, and imputed; and the influences of his Grace conveyed, is in pursuance of
the second or new Covenant. Hence

2. As Adam conveys sin and guilt to those that had not sinned actually; So
does Jesus Christ convey righteousness to those* that had not wrought
righteousness. Adam acting for us in the Covenant, and we in him; hence upon
his first sinful act, we were all virtually made sinners; and so the sentence
went out against us; and we were hereby involved in the Curse, were looked upon
as sinners, and exposed to the condemning sentence of the Law; and this before
we made our selves so, by any personal, sinful act of our own. Hence that Romans
5 14. Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned
after the similitude of Adams transgression. Now to sin actually, is to sin
after the similitude of Adam's transgression, but before we sin so, says the
Apostle, Death reigns over us. The Apostle in this, as one observes, doubtless
points at Babes, who die in Infancy, before ever they had committed an actual
sin; yet Death reigns over them, they are guilty in their federal head.

So Christ's righteousness in like manner, is conveyed to those that had not
wrought righteousness. Yea all the Elect are chosen, and in the Decree or
Covenant of Redemption looked upon as Righteous, having a Righteousness engaged
for, secured and laid up for them in the Covenant, long before there is any
real conveyance thereof made to them, yea long before they have their being or
existence in the World; as seems evident from the Ephesians. 1 4, 5. According as he
has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy, and without blame before him in love: Having predestined us unto the
adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure
of his will compare Romans 9 ^0, 31 What shall we say then? That the Gentiles
which followed not after righteousness, have attained to righteousness --.And
it was by virtue of this Obedience and Righteousness of Christ, though not
actually wrought out, yet engaged for, and secured in Covenant to all the
Elect, to be conveyed unto them upon their believing, -- that all the holy Men
of old were saved; as was before observed.

3. Finally, It is in the same way and manner, even through our union to either
of these public Heads, that either of these communications are actually made,
and conveyed to us. No sooner do we become of the species of Mankind, by having
Soul and Body united, but hereby we become united unto Adam, of his Seed and
Children; by virtue of which union to him, his Sin is imputed and his Guilt
conveyed unto us personally, together with that whole depravation, pravity, or
corruption of Nature which Adam procured, and brought in by his first Sin or
Fall. What less than this is contained in that ingenious and plump confession
of the Psalmist, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my
Mother conceive me.

And this corrupt and sinful Nature thus derived, discovers its self in
Children as soon as they can act, which is indeed an incontestable proof of the
truth here in hand: Hence that Psalm. 58.3. The wicked are estranged from the
womb, they go astray as soon as they be born speaking lies.

Well now in like manner; as soon as a Soul is united to Christ the second
Adam, through Faith in his Name, what he has done becomes that Souls, his
merits are applied and his righteousness is conveyed, and made over to it, and
is in Covenant, and Law looked upon as his own: and that Person stands
righteous and clear before God in the virtue of the same; hence such Texts,
Romans 3.22 Ephesians. 2 61.

Through this union also is conveyed all needed influences of Grace. No sooner
are we through Faith, cut out of the old and cursed Stock in which we grew, and
ingraffed into the true Olive; but hereupon are we made to partake of the juice
and fatness, or sap of this Olive; whereby we have our natures changed from
sinful to holy Dispositions, and are prepared to bare and bring forth good
Fruit, as branches abiding in the true Vine, as Joh. 15 4, 5.

Thus we have endeavored to show what is contained, and wrapped up in these few
Words. As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

Some Application or Improvement now follows

USE I. Of Information in a few things, As

1. Learn we from what was offered under the Doctrine, That Adam and Jesus
Christ divide the World. They are both covenant Heads, and the alone public
Heads, to whom all Persons in the World stand related in Covenant. All in their
natural Estate are the Children and covenant Seed of Adam, have their in-being
in him, and so are under the Curse he brought in; and also under the Government
and influence of a depraved vitiated Nature derived from him, and must so
remain until by Faith in Christ the second Adam, they get out out of this
cursed Stock by being ingraffed into the new and living one. This is a sad
state and condition, not only of all Heathens, Pagans, Infidels, etc. but also
of all unbelieving, profane, hypocritical, christian Professors: They are
still the Children of old Adam and fallen with him, involved, deeply involved
with him in Guilt and Misery, exposed to perish for ever.

But now all believers, all faithful Christians, they belong to the other
public Head, even Christ the second Adam; they are no longer related to the
first Adam, no more under the dominion of the Law of the first Covenant, Christ
has fulfilled that Law for them, born the penalty, yielded the obedience
therein required, and so has discharged them from the demands and penalties of
it, stoped its mouth, that it has nothing to lay to the Charge of these Elect
of God.

This shows us the wide difference there is between us, who make profession of
the same Faith, embrace the same way of Worship, dwell together and Worship
together, in the same Family, same Congregation, and same visible Church, there
are some who are the Children of the first Adam, involved in the Curse, laden
with Guilt, receive of his cursed influence, and are really heirs of Hell and
wrath. Others belong to Christ, are his happy Seed and blessed Children, heirs
of the Covenant of Grace and through him of Glory; who receive of his blessed
influence; of his fullness and grace for grace.

Oh! the difference between the Children of Christ, and the Children of fallen
Adam, though we discern it not with a carnal Eye.

2. Hence learn also, from what has been insisted on; That there is no midway
between a state of Nature, and a state of Grace: Or between an estate of real
Justification, and real Condemnation. There is no medium, no midway between
these two. Every Person in the World, is in an estate either of complete
Justification, or of real Condemnation; there is no being, or standing in
midway between these two. Conversion is instantaneous; the Man passes
immediately out of the one condition, into the other. There are degrees of
Sanctification, but none of Justification. No Man is partly in an estate of
Justification, and partly in an estate of Condemnation; nor is one Saint more
fully justified than another. He that has any title to Heaven, has all the
title that can be; Christ's Righteousness is equally unto and upon all who
believe, without any the least difference; and he that has not this full
title, has none at all. He that an't fully in Christ, is fully in Adam, etc.
Alas there are many who cannot conclude themselves Converts, have no good
evidence or warrant so to do; yea who dare not really pretend to do it: Who yet
labor to bear themselves up, upon a hope, that their honest meanings, moral
lives, duties, almsgiving, etc. will so make even for their Sins, and be of
that worth in the sight of God, as to procure for them acceptance: They fancy
they live as well as most Christians do, they don't wrong their Neighbors in
their dealings, they are no Fornicators, no Idolators, they defraud nor, they
go the rounds in Duties, make many Prayers; and they think surely there is real
worth in all this; and why an't they as likely to find acceptance as any; they
cannot think that a God of mercy, will send such as they are to Hell, though they
do fall short of a thorough Conversion, though they an't really in Christ through a
divine Faith.

But Sirs, if what we have heard on this Subject be true, your hopes, such
hopes, are utterly vain and groundless; for it is certain you belong to the
one, or the other of these public Heads; if you are not in Christ by a
thorough work of the Spirit, by a true and sound Conversion, you are yet in old
Adam; and if in him, you are certainly under the Curse, and can have no
acceptance with God: And you should hearken to what the Scripture says Joh.
3.18 -- But he that believes not is condemned already. and ver. 36. He that
believes on the Son, has everlasting life: and he that believes not on the
Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him. And that is an
awful Text, Rev. 21.8. The fearful, and unbelieving, etc. shall have their part
in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone.

But I pass on,

3. From what has been offered we may gather something, To teach us the woeful
estate of Adam's Children. They die says the Apostle in the Text; they are in
a fearful deadly Condition; they are fallen in Adam, the Law has passed
Sentence of Death on them, which Sentence unless they get reversed, get removed
from off them, it is impossible they should escape Damnation: But this they can
never do by their utmost pains and diligence, while they remain in their
present estate of unbelief and impenitency; for the Law they are under, curses
them, even while they strive to keep it, because they fall short of perfect
obedience. Hear that Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the works of the Law, are
under the curse: For it is written, Cursed is every one that continues no^ in
all things which are written in the book of the law to (...) them, compare
James 2.10. Besides they have derived such (...) impotency and corruption of
Nature from old Adam, through the mediation of their next immediate Parents, as
renders them incapable of that which is good* and eagerly bent to all that is
evil* hence they every day come short of the glory of God, and run themselves
further on the score with him, many ways aggravating all the Guilt that before
lay on them, and are daily giving fresh wounds to their poor Souls, treasuring
up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath. -- How sad a condition then,
are all unconverted Persons, all the natural Seed of Adam in; though insensible
secure and hardened in it. And though there is a most glorious way of escape
provided, yet how indisposed, and averse are they to a compliance therewith,
they are full of enmity against it, at least in their Hearts, Romans 8.7. The
carnal mind is enmity. -- And no wonder! since they are so full of spiritual
blindness, as not to be able to see, either their own Misery, or Christ's
Excellency.

Hence being destitute of Divine, and Spiritual Light, and incapable to discern
the Excellencies of God and Christ and Holiness,'it is no wonder that they cannot
love God and Holiness, and hate Sin; without which the will never can convert,
nor the Man have any true desires to be brought out of his present sinful
condition.

Indeed in their present state of blindness, they may have some notions, and
rational Convictions, that their present condition an't safe; and so may be
endeavoring to recover themselves by their own doings; and hence many times
take pains, and go a great way in moral Virtues and Duties, yet still they have
no inward cordial love for Religion and Holiness, it is always a burden, and
mere vexation to them, and they will not be persuaded, to cast off their own vain
confidences, and to see that all they can do will not help, nor avail them, until
they do indeed lay aside their own Righteousness, and look out after Faith in
Christ, and an interest in him, who only can help and save them, out of their
spiritual Misery.

This while they neglect, what ever pains they may take, to be their own
savior's, yet are they but running themselves deeper in debt, and getting
further from true peace and safety.

4. Our Doctrine also teaches us, something of the happy estate of Christ's
spiritual Seed. The Text tells us, that in Christ they are all made alive: Though
they were once dead in Adam, yet now in Christ they are made alive, and live
evermore. The Lord Jesus Christ delivers all his from the death and misery
brought in by Adam, and gives them the same, or a better title to life, than
Adam would have had, if he had perfectly kept the Law, and performed the
obedience therein required.

From spiritual Death, or the reigning Power of Sin, he delivers them, by
sending his holy Spirit into their Hearts, to dethrone Sin there; -- soften the
Heart, enlighten the Mind, persuade the Will, put a new Bias on the Affections,
etc. whereby the Temper, Disposition, and Inclination, of the Mind is altered,
from sinful to holy: Sin and Lust loses the Dominion, and Grace takes the
Throne of the Heart, sits and rules there; that although Corruption rise, and
stir around the Heart, and give Trouble, yet it cannot get the Dominion, Grace
keeps it down and subdues it again Hence that, Rom 6.14. For Sin shall not have
Dominion over you -- compare with Psalm. 37 24 Though he fall, he shall nor be
utterly cast down: for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand From the curse and
condemnation of the Law, has he redeemed them by being made a curse for them,
and so bearing the penalty in their room and stead, Gal. 3.13. A title unto
life has he purchased for them, by yielding in our natures as our public
head, that very obedience to the Law of the first Covenant, which was required
of Man in innocence, as the condition of Life's being continued, and perfect
happiness being bestowed, which condition Christ having fulfilled, must needs
now give the same title and claim to happiness.

And as obedience to the new Covenant, is required in order to our partaking in
the saving benefits thereof, so Christ has purchased, and by his good Spirit
conveys all needed influences of Gra^^ to his Seed and Covenant Children; yea
He himself as th^^^ surety and covenant Head, stands engaged to the Father for
their perseverance and safe conduct to Glory. How happy, how safe, how
comfortable then, is their condition, to whom the comfort of those words
belong! Luke 12.32. Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to
give you the kingdom.

USE II. Of Examination.

If it be as we have heard, then surely it concerns us all to Examine our
selves, that we may know to which of these Covenant Heads we belong, in which
Adam we are; It is certain we every one of us belong to the one or to the
other, and according as we stand related, so is our estate good or bad, safe or
dangerous: Then let us be advised to examine into this matter, and try our
selves, that so we may know how it is like to fare with is; it is a matter of
the last moment, therefore take heed of carelessness herein; don't be flighty,
don't deceive yourselves; remember it is the precious Soul that lies at stake,
that is to be saved or lost, and your end will be as your spiritual relation is
at last found to be, either to the first, or to the second Adam. In the one all
die, in the other all are made alive. And for your help here, I will lay down
two or three rules of trial;

1. What Birth have you? Only the natural! are you only Born, or are you also
Newborn? For they who descend from Adam* in the way of natural Generation, are
his Seed, and belong to him, as you heard under the Doctrine. But, they that
are Born again of spiritual regeneration, are the Seed of the second Adam.
Well! what evidences can you produce of your New birth, of your being Born of
the Spirit, of your Regeneration? Christ's Seed are a New born Seed, Joh. 1.13
Which were born, (...) of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God. Do you know what this New birth means? Many are ignorant of
it, Nicolemus though a Teacher in Israel was so, Joh. 3. But do you know by
experience, what it is? Have you felt the pangs of it, in deep convictions of
your sin and misery? Have you had a soul humbling, and heart affecting sight of
your perishing condition in old Adam Not only a sight of federal Guilt and
personal acts (...) sin, but also that sad and fearful pravity and pollution of
nature, which Adam conveys to all his Seed, which wholly unfits for all
spiritual service, and pollu^^s all the Duties we do perform while in such a
condition, keeping the heart full of Enmity, etc. And have you therefore been
brought really to see, that your help was not in your own Powers? And has this
put you upon an humble, fervent, and diligent looking and seeking unto Christ,
to send his holy Spirit to enlighten, help and save you? In a word, has the
Law slain you, and the Gospel healed you? have you been indeed dead in Adam,
but revived and made alive in Christ? How do you live, is it in newness of
life, as becomes such a Newborn state?

2. Which Covenant does your Souls cleave unto, and act under the influence of,
that of Works or of Grace?

Adam is head of the Covenant of Works, but Jesus Christ of the Covenant of
Grace. Well then, would you know to which you belong, in which Adam you have
your in-being; Examine to which Covenant does your Souls cleave, to that of
Works or of Grace? And would you know this; then reflect and ask your selves,
on what score do you perform Duties, is it to ingratiate your selves into God's
favor by your own doings, merits, and duties? why this is to cleave to the old
Covenant of Works. So on what account do you look for, and expect acceptance in
Duties and Obedience, is it on account of any worth in them, or in you? why
this is an old Covenant Spirit. So do you go forth in your own strength unto
Duty? this is to cleave to the old Covenant, and will argue you belong to old
Adam.

But now to go out of self, to have no confidence in the flesh, to depend on
the mere Grace of God in Christ, to look unto and be as dependant on the holy
Spirit for assistance, disposition, and ability, to perform duties, as on
Christ the Son to merit acceptance for you* to be thus dependent on mere free
Grace for every thing; for assistance in all your Obedience, and on Christ's
merits and intercessions alone, for your whole acceptance therein: (...) is a
new Covenant Spirit.

(...)
