Mr. Appleton's SERMON, At the ORDINATION Of the Reverend Mr. John Sargent,
August 31. 1735.

Gospel Ministers Must be fit for The Master's Use, AND Prepared to every Good
Work, if they would be Vessels unto Honor: Illustrated in A SERMON Preached at
Deerfield, August 31. 1735. At the ORDINATION of Mr. JOHN SARGENT, To the
Evangelical Ministry, with a special Reference to the INDIANS of Houssatonnoc,
who have lately manifested their desires to receive the Gospel.

By Nathanael Appleton, M.A. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Cambridge.

Act. ix. 15. -- He is a chosen Vessel unto me, to bear my Name before the
Gentiles --

Ephesians. iii. 2. If ye have heard of the dispensation of the Grace of God, which
is given me to you ward.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queen Street.
MDCCXXXV.

The PREFACE.
AS there is no Salvation but in Jesus Christ, nor any other Name under Heaven
given among Men, whereby they must be Saved, so it must needs be the greatest
Mercy to Mankind to enjoy that Gospel which reveals this Savior, and the Way
to Eternal Life by him. And as those who are thus highly favored, should with
all thankfulness acknowledge this Sovereign Distinction of divine Grace, in
revealing these things unto them, so they ought, and if they have the true
Spirit of Christ and his Gospel, will pity those of their Fellow Creatures who
are destitute of the Means of Light, and are perishing for lack of Vision.

And it is just matter of Lamentation to think that when we are so remarkably
Blessed with the Light and Grace of the Gospel, there should be so many Tribes
and Nations of the Aborigines of this Land, within or just upon our Borders,
who do still walk in Heathenish Darkness, and dwell in the Region of the Shadow
of Death, with little or no Light springing up unto them, unless what some of
them have by the Romish Missionaries, which Light is but Darkness.

And it is doubtless to our Reproach, as betraying a want of that Gratitude to
Christ, and Love and Charity to Mankind, which his Grace teaches, that there
has been no more done by US for the Propagation of the Gospel among them.
Especially when we consider how much we have been outdone by the French, and
those of the Church of Rome in this Matter. For how shall we answer it, that
when they have been at so much Cost and Pains for Propagating their
Superstition, we have been at so little for the promoting that Religion of
Jesus, which before God and the Father is pure and undefiled.

But how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall
they hear without a Preacher? and how shall they Preach except they be sent? To
which I may add, How shall they be sent unless God sends them? For Men
qualified for this Service are as it were with one Consent making their Excuse.
And it is God alone that can incline the Hearts of any to engage in such a
difficult and Self-denying Service. And whenever any Persons are inspired with
so much Zeal for the Honor and Interest of Christ, tender Pity and fervent
Charity to those uncivilized as well as ungospelized People, as to live among
them and Preach the Gospel to them, God must have the Glory of it.

And such an One we trust Mr. Sargent is, who notwithstanding the agreeable
Business he was in as a Tutor of Yale-College, and his having as fair a
prospect as any Candidate for the Ministry whatsoever, to have an agreeable
Settlement in any of the Churches that should need a Pastor; yet voluntarily
devoted himself to the Service of Christ and of the poor Indians; and more
especially those that are at or near Houssatonnoc.

And now with respect to this Tribe of Indians, their Number, Situation, and
other Circumstances relating to them; and particularly the Manner how they came
first to be disposed to receive the Gospel, and how Mr. Sargent as a Minister,
and Mr. Woodbridge as a School Master, were introduced among them, and
entertained by them, and the hopeful Prospects there are of the Gospel's
spreading and prevailing in those dark and ignorant Parts of the Land, will
best appear in a particular Narrative hereof given by the Rev. Mr. Stephen
Williams of Springfield, in a Letter of June 24 1735. to a Gentleman then in
Boston, which for the Entertainment of the Reader, is here inserted, and is as
follows. viz.

Worthy Sir,
THE Concern you seemed to have on your Mind, for the Welfare of the Aboriginal
Natives of this Country (when I last saw you at Boston) is the Occasion, of my
troubling of you with some Account of the good Disposition there is in the
River Indians (as they are called) to receive the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And here before I proceed, it is needful to inform you, that this Clan
of Indians (whose Prince or Chief Sagamore was the late Etouocoam, one of the
Indian Kings that went to England in Queen Ann's Reign) live upon Hudson's
River, below Albany; and their Bounds extends East, so as to reach to
Houssatonnoc (which is the South-West part of our Government) and to a Place
called Weteoge (that is the North-West of Connecticut Government) so that they
live in the three Governments. They are the most numerous Tribe of Indians that
I am acquainted with. They can raise (I am told) three or four hundred Men. But
having thus informed you, I proceed to tell you, that there live several
Families of these Indians at Houssatonnoc; amongst whom there are two Indians
of note, the one is named Cuncaupot, the other Umpecheny. Cuncaupot has been
honored by Governor BELCHER with a Captain's Commission, and Umpecheny with a
Lieutenant's. When they received their Commissions (which was at Springfield,
in May 1734) I made them a Visit, and found them grave, desirable, prudent Men;
the Captain then 42 Years of Age, the Lieutenant 38. In Conversation with them,
I found that Capt Cuncaupot was apprehensive that the Religion of his
Forefathers was not right. But yet he did not know how to think well of the
Christian Religion, because the Christians (many of them) lead immoral Lives I
improved the short time I had with them, in discoursing about Religion, and
removing their Objections, and asked them when I left them, whether they should
be willing to see me at their own Country? They said they should, and would go
home and tell their People what had been said by me, and the Rev. Mr. Hopkins,
who was with me part of the time of conversing with them. I informed his
Excellency Governor BELCHER, and the Honorable and Reverend Commissioners of
the Indian Affairs, of this matter, who encouraged and directed my going up to
see them. And in July 1734, I went up to their Country, accompanied with the
Reverend Mr. Bull of Westfield. Capt. Cuncaupot, and his Kinsman Lieut
Umpecheny, manifested great Joy at seeing us. They gathered their People
together the next Day, after we got to Houssatonnoc, with whom we discoursed
about Religious Matters. They told us they would consider what had been said,
and give us an Answer in four Days; the most of which time was spent in
consulting together, considering and weighing what had been said to them. When
we met them again, I preached a short Sermon to them, which was interpreted
Sentence by Sentence. They gave good Attention to what was said. After the
Exercise was over, all that were present (which was the Houssatonnoc Families)
gave in their Names to us, with their desire that some Body might be sent to
instruct and teach them the Christian Religion: Upon which I gave them a Belt
of Wampum, which they received as a Pledge, that I would do their Message to
the Governor, etc. It would be too tedious, to give you an Account how they
managed themselves in their Debates on what was offered to them; and what
Arguments (we understood) were urged for or against receiving the Christian
Religion. But I cannot omit informing you, we were told, that an Indian (whose
Name is Ebenezer, and who has since made a Profession of the Christian
Religion, and received Baptism) offered thus to his Countrymen, viz. The
Indians (says he) continue still in their Heathenism, notwithstanding the
Gospel has been bro't so near them, and they are greatly diminished; so that
(says he) since my remembrance, there were Ten Indians, where there is now One:
But the Christians greatly increase and multiply, and spread over the Land; let
us therefore leave our former Courses and become Christians, etc.

Soon after my return home I went to Boston, and waited upon His Excellency and
the Honorable Commissioners; who were so satisfied with the account given
them, that they desired the Rev. Mr. Bull and me, to look out some suitable
Person, to be employed as a Missionary, among that People. We undertook the
Affair; and Divine Providence led us to the learned, pious and ingenious Mr.
John Sargent, one of the Tutors of Yale College, whom God had inclined to such
a self-denying, difficult Service. He went up to Houssatonnoc in October. 1734,
accompanied by the Rev. Mr. Bull, to introduce him. When Mr. Sargent arrived at
Houssatonnoc, the Indians immediately set up a School-house, and a considerable
number of them began to learn their Primers. Mr. Sargent (who is one of the
most suitable Persons for such business, that I know of) was very agreeable to
the Indians, got a great interest in their Affections, so that the Captain and
Lieutenant each of them, sent a Son with him to New Haven, though at an Hundred
Miles distance, to live with him the Winter Season (for Mr Sargent returned to
College to take care of the Senior Class). When Mr. Sargent came away, Mr.
Timothy Woodbridge went up to keep the School, who spent the Winter with them,
who has done very good Service in bringing them on in their Reading, and in
instructing them Principles of the Christian Religion. He taught them the
Catechism of Dr. Watts.

In the Winter past, the whole Nation of the River Indians met by their
Delegates at Houssatonnoc to examine what the Houssatonnoc Indians were doing.
Capt. Cuncaupot, and Lieut. Umpecheny were fearful they should be frowned upon,
and have Objections cast in their way, which they should not be able to remove,
and therefore sent to some of the Ministers desiring they would come up. The
Rev. Mr. Hopkins and I went up in the middle of Winter to see them. There were
assembled together One hundred and fifty or Two hundred Persons, Young and Old;
and among them Corlair, the chief Sachem of the whole Nation. I preached two
Sermons to them on the Sabbath. It was one of the gravest, and most attentive
Auditories that ever I preached to. We had diverse Conferences with the Indians,
and read to them a Letter from the Hon. John Stoddard, Esquire and endeavored to
answer their Objections, etc. And so far satisfied those that came from other
Places, that they thanked us for the pains we had taken; and desired Mr.
Woodbridge might continue among them, and that Mr. Sargent would return to
them, and said they would give an account to their several Towns, of what we
had offered to them, yea gave us Encouragement that they would as a Nation
submit to Instruction. Soon after we left them, a pleuretick Fever seized
several of them, and two of them died with it: When they were Sick, they
desired Mr. Woodbridge the Schoolmaster to pray with and for them. And those
that died (before their Death) desired they might be buried in the Christian
Burying-place, and after the English manner: And according to their desire,
they were; and without the Indian Howlings and Lamentations and Ceremonies.

Sometime in February last, they sent a Letter to the Ministers that had
visited them, which was dictated by them, though written by an Englishman: in it
they have these Expressions, We do humbly thank you for your care and kindness
toward us in instructing us in the Christian Religion; which we acknowledge to
be the best Religion in the World; and the Religion which we intend to stand by
and follow as long as we live: Although there are a great many difficulties in
the way, yet we have no thought of giving out, etc. This was signed by
Cuncaupot, Umpecheny, and several others. In the Spring Mr. Sargent returned to
them again, and was received by them with a great deal of Joy. And he writes to
me thus, viz. I find (I think) a better Disposition in the Indians here,
toward Christianity, than I left them in. The Scholars, many of them, have
made considerable Progress in their Learning: And the Number of them is
increased to near Forty. There is Business enough for two Men, etc. Mr.
Woodbridge in a Letter tells me, that several Indians from other Plantations
have come, and joined to them.

Thus I have given you a short and imperfect Account of an Affair, that I have
been something concerned in; and which has cost me, with the other Ministers,
some hundreds of Miles travel. I have been solicitous for the Welfare of the
poor Heathen, ever since I was a Prisoner with them, and have with Concern
observed the little prospect there has been of bringing any of them to receive
the Protestant Religion, by our Missionaries at the Forts, where the Indians
make but short stays, and are either drunk or busy about their Trade, all the
while they tarry. And the Indians that frequent our Truck-Houses, are generally
such as are poisioned by the Jesuits, who have a great ascendant over them; as
the Rev. Mr. Seccombe observes, in a Letter I have seen of his. But I cannot but
think, there is a hopeful prospect of much Good being done to these River
Indians, if prudent Measures are pursued: For they are well disposed to receive
the Christian Religion; have never been poisoned by the Jesuits (for their
Situation is such, that the Jesuits cannot come among them, without passing by
Albany) There are among them several Persons of good Morals, remarkable for
their Truth, Justice, yea and Temperance (though Intemperance is the Indians
National Vice). They have an Affection for the English, especially for those
who take pains to Instruct them. Their Children are desirous to learn to Read,
etc -- Are very mannerly since they have been at School. I don't know what a
Fund the Commissioners have to support their Missionaries, but Mr. Sargent and
Mr. Woodbridge seem very willing to spend and be spent in this good Work, if
they can be subsisted so as to be enabled to go on with it. Mr. Sargent in his
last Letter to me expresses himself thus, I hope the Commissioners will support
Mr. Woodbridge and me here, so as that we can attend upon the Business without
Distraction; for I hope we shall find a Door continually open to serve God and
Mankind to some good Effect. And I am satisfied that the honorable the
Commissioners will be willing, if they have a Fund sufficient to do it, and to
answer their other necessary Charges at Natick, etc. But I cannot but hope (if
the Fund is not sufficient) that God will raise up Friends, and increase the
Stock, since such a wide, and (I hope) effectual Door is opened, and God has
led to so suitable a Person as the worthy Mr. Sargent, who has told me, he
should choose to serve his Redeemer in such Service, if there was a prospect of
Success, rather than any other Way. The difficulty of the Service, the hardship
he must undergo, dwelling in the Wilderness, and out of the Way of his learned
Acquaintance, don't dishearten and discourage him. He is a Gentleman of such
Parts and Learning, and so remarkable for his Piety, that any of our destitute
Churches would be fond of him, but he will not allow any of them, to think of
diverting him from the good Work he is engaged in.

I have already exceeded the bounds of a Letter, but if what I have said, be
any ways grateful to you, or occasion the thanksgiving of any unto God, I shall
heartily rejoice. I have endeavored to give you a plain Narrative of Things;
and you may make what Improvement of it you please. You yourself, will easily
overlook my plain way of Writing: but you must not expect that what I write
will be entertainment for the curious, that are not possessed of your Candor.

I am, Sir, your obliged Friend, and very humble Servant, S. W.


There are also two other Letters to the Reverend Dr. Colman, one from the Rev.
Mr. Hopkins of Springfield, and the other from the Rev. Mr. Sargent himself,
which serve to give a further Account of this affair. And therefore with Dr.
Colman's Allowance, I will presume to publish some Paragraphs out of them;
asking the Gentlemen's Pardon for such a Freedom.

From Mr. Sargent's Letter, June 3. 1735.
Reverend Sir,
Though I am not so happy as to have much personal Acquaintance with you, yet
your known Character in general, and especially your Relation to the Affair I
have been engaged in, has made me hope, I shall have your Pardon for the
Trouble I now give you.

It Is but lately that I have returned from Houssatonnoc; and I doubt not but
you will rejoice to be informed of the happy Success, God has been pleased to
bless the Endeavors with, that have been used to convert the Heathen there to
the Christian Faith. The Design has hitherto succeeded beyond Expectation. They
are I think now resolved to be Christians, and have an earnest desire to be
taught. The fondness they show for me is surprising; and considering how much a
Stranger I am to them, their own barbarous Education, and how little I have
done to win them, there appears something more than humane in it.

I am very willing (if the Gentlemen Commissioners please) to devote my Life to
the Service of their Souls. If God give success in it, it will be the greatest
satisfaction to me. -- There is now, and I hope will be Work enough for two: I
wish therefore Mr. Woodbridge may be maintained there with me.

I am sensible that One Hundred Pounds will but just pay the necessary Charges
of living: for the Necessaries of Life, are and must be dear in that remote
part of the Country. But I make my self easy in that matter, assuring my self,
that (if there be Money) the Gentlemen betrusted with that affair, will do what
is reasonable. Money alone is no temptation to me at all, to devote my self to
such a Life, yet it is but reasonable, I think, to expect to be supported, so as
to have no other care, than to attend the business I shall go about.

Some of the Indians (I perceive) have a mind to be baptized: Cuncaupot
especially, who appears to me, to be well qualified for it. I have therefore
though it it would be convenient I should be Ordained speedily; at lest as soon as
I am dismissed from the concerns of College. I would gladly be informed,
whether it wilt be expected I should come to Boston for that purpose. To be
Ordained here will be more convenient for me, and less expensive.

The Lads I brought down with me, lived here last Winter upon my Credit. The
Charges have amounted to something considerable; too much for me, under my
present Circumstances, to bear alone; though were I able, I should gladly bestow
my Money that way. --

If you will be pleased to return a Line in answer to these, I shall esteem it
a great honor, and favor done to

Reverend Sir, Your most Humble Obedient Servant.
New Haven June 3. 1735.

From Mr. Hopkins's Letter of July 3 d. 1735.
Reverend Sir,
MR. Woodbridge, Indian Schoolmaster at Houssatonnoc, upon some necessary
business, left his School, a few days, and has been with us. And the account he
gave is so encouraging, that I am sensible it will be grateful to you, and
therefore send it.

He informs me that several of the Houssatonnoc Indians have lately been to the
Westward as far as Siscohannah, which they say is six Hundred Miles, and upon
their return they say, that the Indians, through that large space, are generally
dissatisfied with their own ways of Religion; and are disposed to inquire after
some other way of Salvation, than ever they have been acquainted with.

He informs me further, that the River Indians (of which those at Houssatonnoc
are a part) frequently visit their Brethren at Houssatonnoc, take great notice
of what is doing there; none of them oppose it, they generally approve of it:
and many of them express their designs of coming to settle there; and some have
put such a design in execution already, and are upon the spot: So that the
number of Scholars, now actually under Instruction is upwards of Forty. And he
adds, that he is persuaded, if the Indians could be accommodated with a proper
quantity of Land, there would, in a little time, be a Congregation of several
Hundreds of them worshipping GOD there.

That the Indians at Houssatonnoc continue in a fixed resolution to seek after
knowledge in the Christian Religion, and to live in the practice of it; and
have made great proficiency for the time.

That Capt. Cuncaupot seems to be overjoyed to see the good disposition there
is in his Brethren, to embrace the Christian Religion. Religion seems evidently
to be next his Heart: And he, with some others of them, desire to be baptized.
--

That Lieut. Umpecheny's Wife and others, have wept more than once, upon
heating divine Truths: And she especially has her Heart very much upon this
Affair. She is also greatly engaged in learning to read: She will not fail of
reading as often as any Scholar; and urges that she may read a little further,
and a little further; so that Mr. Woodbridge tells me, it grieves him to the
very Heart, that he is obliged almost to force her from him, that he may have
time to hear the rest of the Scholars. Other Women there are also, who discover
much of the same good disposition, viz. the Captain's Wise, the Lieutenant's
Wife's Sister, etc.

He further informs me, that there came an Indian, a little while ago, from
Hudson's River, named Nompeh, about Thirty Years old, a Man of very singular
Gravity, and began to learn to Read; he knew his Letters when he came, and that
was all: He applied himself to the business with the utmost attention, and has
made great progress etc. --

These things give us reason to hope that the Hand of GOD is in, and his
blessing upon that Affair. That it may succeed to the saving benefit of those
poor Indians, is the ardent desire of

Reverend Sir, Your most Humble Servant.


Such a general inclination and desire as appears in these Indians to be
Instructed in the things of God, and to be taught to Read, in order to their
coming at a fuller knowledge of these things, is so uncommon and extraordinary,
that there seems plainly to be the finger of God in it. And the Honorable
Commissioners who have the disposal of the Moneys, annually sent over, for the
propagating the Gospel among the Indians, have been so far pleased with these
Accounts, that they have readily done what they thought proper, for the
encouraging and supporting both Mr. Sargent and Mr. Woodbridge in their
respective Services.

And as it was though it highly proper, according to Mr. Sargent's proposal, that
he should be Ordained; so His Excellency the GOVERNOR, who is at the Head of
the Commissioners, was pleased so to order the matter, as to have a very
favorable Opportunity for it. For His Excellency having proposed a Treaty at
Deerfield with some of the Indian Tribes, he gave orders to the Indians at
Houssatonnoc to meet him there; accordingly the Governor, attended with a
large Committee of the Honorable His Majesty's Council, and House of
Representatives, and many other Gentlemen, was at Deerfield on August 25; And
that Week being taken up in the Treaty with the Indians, in ratifying the Peace
and Friendship between us and them; and in giving and receiving the usual
Pledges of it; and Mr. Sargent not coming to Town till the Friday Evening, it
was judged proper to have the Ordination on the Lord's Day, which was
accordingly carried on in the forenoon of the said Day, by the Reverend Mr.
Williams of Hatfield, and the other Ministers then present, at the desire, and
in the presence of His Excellency, and the honorable Gentlemen of the General
Court, and others that attended him thither, together with the Assembly of
Christians usually meeting in that Place, and many of the Indians who were
grave Spectators of the Solemnity, and the Houssatonnoc Indians, who sat by
themselves, and attended throughout the whole Service with great Seriousness;
and were much pleased to see One whom they had such a love for, so solemnly
separated to the Service of their Souls.

The Service was carried on in the following order, viz. the Reverend Mr.
Ashley of Deerfield began with Prayer: and as by the Governor's Invitation, I
waited on him in his Journey, so by His Excellency's Order I preached the
Sermon, which by His authority and Influence is here made public: The Charge
was given by the Reverend Mr. Williams of Hatfield: and the Fellowship of the
Elders by the Reverend Mr. Williams of Springfield: and the Exercise concluded
with a Song of Praise: and the solemn Benediction of the People in the Name of
the Lord, by the Reverend Mr. Sargent.

And now; May this Servant of the Lord prove a chosen Vessel to bear Christ's
Name among the Heathen, for many Years to come! May his Life and Health be
precious in the sight of God! May he be filled with Wisdom and Grace from Him
in whom it has pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell; and come laden
to them with the Treasures of a Glorious Gospel! And may he, with his beloved
Companion in the Service and Patience of Jesus Christ, be instrumental of
spreading the saving knowledge of God and Christ, both far and near, among
those that have for so many Ages been in ignorance! And as the Harvest shall
increase, may the Lord of the Harvest thrust forth more and more Laborers into
it! May the Funds for the support and encouragement of such be enlarged; and
may all such as generously contribute to such a noble design, receive an
hundred fold in this World, and in the World to come life everlasting!

Finally; May the SON OF GOD more fully than ever, take the Heathen for his
Inheritance, and the utmost Ends of the Earth for his Possession! And may there
be of every Kindred and Tongue and People and Nation, shouting forth the
Praises of the Redeemer! Yea, may every knee on Earth as well as in Heaven, bow
at the Name of Jesus, and every tongue confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to
the Glory of God the Father!

Cambridge, October. 20. 1735. Nath. Appleton.

A Consecrated Vessel Fitted for the Master's Use.
2 TIMOTHY II. 21. If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a
vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for the master's use, and prepared unto
every good work.


THE great Apostle of the Gentiles is giving many excellent directions, earnest
exhortations, and solemn cautions and charges unto his son Timothy, in this as
well as the foregoing epistle, in order to his faithful, acceptable and
successful discharge of his evangelical office.

And among other things, in some of the verses of the preceding context, he
cautions him particularly against profane and vain babblings; that is in
general against all vain, empty, and impertinent discourses in the discharge of
the ministerial office, etc. More especially, it is a caution against his
delivering any false doctrines, and spreading any errors in and by his Sermons;
which instead of promoting true religion, would only serve to increase unto
more ungodliness; and fill the world with corrupt principles, and false
notions, to the destroying their virtue rather than to the promoting of it.

And here the Apostle to back his caution, instances in two that probably were
teachers in the church, viz. Hymeneus and Philetus, who had erred from the
truth, and were for teaching their error to others, which was this, viz. that
the resurrection was passed already, as at our Savior's resurrection; or by
turning all that was said concerning the resurrection into mere allegory,
making it intend only our regeneration, or our being raised to newness of life;
or that the resurrection is only in procreation whereby the species is
continued.

And now such erroneous doctrines, and such false teachers, the apostle exhorts
Timothy to shun and avoid, if he would be a good minister of Jesus Christ. But
upon it observes, That it was no great wonder, if there were some such
heretics and false teachers in the church; for it was no more than we should
meet with in any great house, vessels, or utensils of different kinds, some to
honor and some to dishonor; as in the verse preceding my text: In a great
house (says he) there are not only vessels of gold, and of silver, but also of
wood, and of earth; and some to honor, and some to dishonor. And then comes
in the words of my text, If a man therefore purge himself from these; (that is
from these heretics and false teachers; especially from their errors and
corruptions that he spoke of in the 16 th and 17 th verses; or any other false
doctrines and corrupt practices that would subvert the fundamental doctrines of
christianity,) he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for the
master's use, and prepared unto every good work.

Here the apostle carries on the metaphor he had begun in the foregoing verses;
representing the church of God under the similitude of a great house, and
Christ as the master of it; and the members, especially the ministers of the
gospel, as vessels in it; which if they would be vessels unto honor,
sanctified and fitted for the master's use, and prepared to every good work,
must be thoroughly purged and cleansed.

It must needs be a desirable thing to be vessels unto honor, to be employed
in the high and honorable services of that great house, which is the church of
the living God. And they are vessels unto honor indeed, who are not only
sanctified, set apart and consecrated to that holy service, but are also fitted
for the master's use, even prepared, qualified and disposed to every good work
that he shall set them about. But now in order to this, a man must be purged
and cleansed: if a man purge himself from these he shall be a vessel unto
honor, etc.

This may suffice to introduce the scheme of my present discourse: And as for a
fuller explication of the words, it shall be under the several observations
which I shall be obliged to speak very briefly to.

I. Obs. The church of God is as it were a great house, of which Christ is the
head and master.

II. Obs. Ministers are as vessels and instruments for the use and service of
this house.

III. Obs. Some of these are unto honor, and some unto dishonor.

IV. Obs. The vessels unto honor, are such as being sanctified and set apart,
are fitted for the master's use, even prepared unto every good work.

V. Obs. In order to their being such vessels unto honor, they must be purged
and freed from many things.

I. Obs. The church of God is as it were a great house, of which Christ is the
head and master.

The apostle makes a comparison between the church and a house, in the
foregoing verse, and carries on the metaphor in my text, speaking of the
vessels and the master of the horse. And it is not unusual for the Holy Ghost
to represent the church of Christ under that similitude. Sometimes the church
is considered as a building it self. Thus (says the apostle to the church of
Corinth) Ye are God's building, 1 Cor. 3.9. And particular saints are called
lively stones, that make up the building, 1 Pet. 2 5. Ye also as lively stones,
are built up a spiritual house. And so the happy union of christians in the
principles and practice of faith and holiness, love and charity, is represented
as the several parts of a building that are framed with great exactness, so as
to come together every piece to its proper place. Ephesians. 2.21. In whom all the
building fitly framed together, grows into an holy temple in the Lord.

But then at other times the church, when it is represented under the metaphor
of an house, intends not the building it self, but those that live in, and
belong to the house; even the family or household. Thus we read of the house of
Cloe, 1 Cor. 1.11. of the house of Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy 1.16. which intend those
that belong to the house, even the household. And thus the church is called the
household of God, Ephesians. 2.19. and the household of faith, Gal. 6.10. So that we
may indifferently consider the church of Christ either as the house it self, or
as the household, even those that make up the family of Christ.

And considering the church as an house in one sense or other, Christ is the
owner, head and master of it. Heb. 3.6. But Christ as a son over his own house,
whose house are we, that is we christians, if we hold fast the confidence and
the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. So that the church of Christ is
his house: He is the master, the owner and the governor of it. It belongs to
him by all imaginable right whatsoever.

This spiritual house, the church of God, is Christ's by gift; for it is made
up of those whom the father has given unto him, Joh. 17.2.

They are also his by purchase; for the church of God is what he has purchased
with his own blood, Acts 20.28.

They are his also by conquest; for it is by his almighty power and grace that
they are rescued out of the hands of their spiritual enemies, bro't out of the
kingdom of satan into the kingdom of the Son of God.

And then lastly; He is the owner and master hereof by free compact and
agreement; for every one that comes in to make a part of this spiritual house,
or to be one of the household of faith, freely surrenders up himself to him, as
to his prince and ruler, as well as savior. They publicly own and profess him
for their lord and master, and promise obedience to his commands.

So accordingly Christ acts as the head and master of this great household. He
looks upon them as his particular care and charge, and gives his orders,
directions and commands to them, even all the laws, statutes and ordinances of
the Gospel. He sets them their service, and gives every one his work to do. And
then as a good householder he makes provision for his church; not only for their
bodily, but for their spiritual support and comfort. He takes care that they be
fed with the bread of life. They eat and drink at his table, and are clothed
with his righteousness, as well as fed by his grace, and he takes care that
every one has his portion in due season.

II. Obs. The Ministers of the Gospel may be and are considered as vessels or
instruments in this house.

I say vessels or instruments, because the word used in my text for vessels,
signifies also any instrument, as Critics observe; especially any instruments
or utensils of a family, as well as those excavated ones that do more strictly
go under the name of vessels.

The ministers of Christ are set forth under various characters, and their
office represented by very different metaphors; some importing the honor,
others the labor, and others the usefulness of their office. They are
represented sometimes as angels, Rev. 1.20. sometimes as stars, Rev. 2.1.
sometimes as ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. sometimes as messengers of
the Lord of hosts. Mal. 2.7. sometimes stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor.
4.1. sometimes overseers of the flock or family of Christ, Act. 20.28.
sometimes as laborers in the harvest, Matthew. 9.38. sometimes as watchmen, and
at other times as servants: And in our text they are represented only as
vessels or utensils in the house, for the convenience and service of the
household.

And this is not the only place where ministers are represented under this
humbling metaphor: For thus says the apostle, 2 Cor. 4.7. We have this treasure
in earthen vessels, (that is the treasure of the gospel,) that the excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of us. And the apostle Paul might well make
use of this metaphor, because the Lord himself declares of him in particular,
that he was a chosen vessel unto him to bear his name before the gentiles, Acts
9.15. So that ministers may be looked upon, and ought, in order to keep
themselves humble, to look upon themselves but as vessels in the house: And
they may well be looked upon as such; for they are but as vessels or
instruments that the great master of the household makes use of, for the benefit
of his church.

They are vessels as they are of God's forming and not of their own; and all
formed and fashioned as he pleases; some of larger and some of smaller size and
capacity, just as seems good in his sight, and will best answer the several
uses they are to be put to in his church.

Moreover, they are vessels, as whatever is contained in them is not their own,
but what they receive: If they are filled with knowledge and wisdom, with gifts
and graces, it is not from themselves any more than any empty vessel can fill
itself. A vessel is capable of receiving, and that is all that can be said of
us; for what have we that we did not receive? 1 Cor 4.7. All ministerial
accomplishments are given to ministers: Every good gift, and every perfect gift
is from above, and comes down from the father of lights, Jam 1 17.

Again, they are vessels as they not only are made to receive and contain, but
also to pour out again, to convey and dispense to others. This is the use of
vessels, not only to receive and contain, but to pour out again as there is
occasion. Thus ministers have the treasures of the gospel committed to them,
and are filled with gifts and graces, that they might convey and dispense the
same to others. Their business is to deliver as well as receive. I delivered
unto you that which I received of the Lord, says the apostle, 1 Cor 11.23. Paul
was a chosen vessel to bear Christ's name, and to convey his gospel, and the
way to salvation by him to the Gentiles. And this is the business of every
chosen vessel, to convey the knowledge of Christ, to dispense his gospel, and
his ordinances unto the people, according as they have received them; every one
according to his capacity, and the measure he has received.

Furthermore, ministers are vessels as they are of no use, nor are they
employed any farther than Christ, the great householder, sees cause to make use
of them. The vessels or instruments of a house can make no use of themselves,
nor are they of use any further than the master of the family sees cause to
occupy and improve them: so ministers are serviceable in the church no further
than Christ sees cause to improve them in his service; and some he makes more
use of, than others; and the more service he puts them to, the more honor he
confers upon them.

Again, they are vessels as they are only the means and instruments of any real
saving benefit flowing to the church by them. They are not the efficient
causes, but only the instruments of the conversion of sinners. They cannot beget
faith in any, nor bestow saving grace upon them, but are only instruments in
God's hands, by which God works such a gracious change in them. Who then is
Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers by whom ye believed? 1 Cor. 3.5

Lastly, Ministers are vessels as they like other vessels are liable to be
broken, or in time to decay and wear away. No vessel, let it be made of gold or
silver, of brass or iron, and much more of wood or stone, but what (...)
cusualty or other is broken to piece, or by (...) usage in time wears out, so
as to be fit for no (...) service. And this is the case with the choicest
vessels that God has among his ministers: if they are suffered to continue, yet
according to the common course of nature, in a few years they wear out,
dissolve to dust, and are laid aside in the place of silence and inactivity.
But how much more common is it for them by some violent distemper, or some
sudden stroke of the divine hand, to be dashed in pieces like a potter's vessel
before that time?

III. Obs. Among the ministers of the Gospel some are vessels unto honor, and
some unto dishonor.

As in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also
of wood and of earth, and some to honor and some to dishonor, so it is in the
church of Christ, with respect unto the ministers of it.

Here let me say,

1. Some are vessels unto honor.

Some there are that for the exquisite frame and constitution of their natures,
the brightness of their natural parts, their improvements by education, and
above all for their refinements by divine grace, may well be compared to
vessels of gold and of silver, exceeding precious and valuable, as well as
useful and serviceable.

And these vessels, these ministers are unto honor, --

1. Unto the honor of Christ the master.

Vessels of gold and silver in a house are to the honor of the master of the
house, as they set forth his rich estate: so these vessels of gold and silver
in the church of Christ are unto His honor, as they serve to set forth the
riches and the glory of Christ. Such ministers by their doctrines and by their
lives do much to display the honor of Christ: They set forth the glory of his
person, the glory of his offices as our redeemer, the glory of his wisdom, of
his power, and especially of his grace in the redemption of sinners. Hence the
apostle says of such golden vessels, 2 Cor. 8.23. They are the glory of Christ.

2 They are unto the honor of the holy religion they receive, and dispense to
others.

A silver or a golden vessel serves to recommend the liquor or whatever is
contained therein, especially if otherwise it be good in its nature and kind.
And nothing tends more to do a proper bottom to religion, and recommend it to
the esteem, the choice, the love and practice of a People, than its being
brought to them in such golden vessels, that is, able ministers of the new
testament, who are not only able by acceptable words to set forth the
excellency of it, but also recommend it by their own example. Such ministers by
their shining gifts and graces reflect a very pleasing luster upon religion,
and adorn the doctrine of God their Savior in all things.

3. They are vessels unto honor, as they are such on whom God will confer
special marks of honor.

Vessels of gold and silver are unto honor, as the master and owner of them
puts honor upon them, by taking particular care of them that they be not lost
or abused, and by providing more honorable shelves and closets for them in the
house. Thus God sets a great value upon those ministers that are as vessels of
gold and silver; he has a higher esteem of them, and sets his love more upon
them, and delights to honor them. Them that honor me I will honor, says God,
1 Samuel 2.30. He will put marks of honor upon them whilst they live, and
afterward he will crown them with glory and honor. Now he will cause them to
shine like bright vessels of gold and silver, but then he will cause them to
shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as the stars for ever and ever.

2. Among the ministers of the gospel, some are vessels unto dishonor.

In this great house of the church there are vessels of wood and of earth; men
of a course and a heavy mold, of inferior powers and small abilities, dull
lifeless souls, without any vigor or activity, uncultivated and unrefined,
gross and ignorant in their thoughts and apprehension of things, fit only for
the mean and ordinary business of life, and no way suitable for the high and
honorable services of the sanctuary.

But by vessels of earth and of wood we may understand men of earthly souls,
men whose souls cleave unto the dust, and that mind earthly things, that are
carnal, earthly and sensual, having their affections engrossed by the world,
and the things of sense, filled with some filthy lust or other, which hinders
them from receiving, much more from conveying any thing that is of a sublime
and spiritual nature, and so utterly unfit for, and indisposed to the holy and
spiritual services of the sanctuary.

And now these are vessels unto dishonor; these are a dishonor to Christ, a
dishonor to the faithful ministers of Christ, a discredit to the church and to
themselves: or if they should pass without any remarkable disgrace here, yet
depend upon it, they will be covered with shame and everlasting contempt
hereafter.

IV. Obs. Vessels unto honor are such as being sanctified and set apart, are
fited for the master's use, even prepared unto every good work.

Here is the character or account that the apostle gives of a good faithful
minister, a vessel unto honor; that he is sanctified, separated and set apart
to that service; and not only so, but fit for the master's use, and that is to
be prepared unto every good work. So that a minister who is a vessel unto
honor is,

1. One that is sanctified, consecrated and set apart to that office.

2. He is also one that is fit for the master's use.

And this

3. Is to be prepared unto every good work.

1. A minister that is a vessel unto honor is one that is sanctified,
consecrated or set apart for that holy office.

A vessel unto honor sanctified. -- A vessel that is unto honor must be
sanctified. This doubtless has reference to the vessels of the altar and
tabernacle, that were all to be sanctified before they were made use of for the
service of the sanctuary, Exodus 30.29, 44. were sanctified as they were set
apart purely for that use, separate from all common and ordinary uses.

So the Priests and Levites of old were set apart and sanctified to the holy
services of the altar and tabernacle. And a great deal of ceremony and
solemnity was used in the consecrating the priests, and separating them to
their holy office. And although these burdensome ceremonies of consecration under
the law are abolished; yet even now ministers of the gospel are to be
sanctified, and set apart to their holy office, and in solemn manner introduced
into that sacred function. They are to be separated unto the Gospel of God, as
the apostle says he was, Romans 1.1. which was agreeable to the direction of the
Holy Ghost, Act. 13.2. Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I
have called them.

And now the manner they took for the separation of them was fasting, and
prayer, and laying their hands on them, as in the following verse. Accordingly
this became an apostolical practice to sanctify or separate to the ministerial
office, by fasting and prayer, and laying on of the hands of the Presbytery,
accompanied with a solemn charge in the name of the Lord Jesus, that they take
heed to their ministry, that they fulfill it. So that the solemn ordination of
ministers is their sanctification or consecration or separation to the sacred
office of the ministry: It is the regular introduction and solemn investiture
of them in their office. So that every one that is thus solemnly ordained may
be said to be a vessel sanctified or consecrated.

But then this external sanctification supposes something that is internal and
real. It signifies that God approves of them; that he sets them apart, and owns
them for his ministers. And then that they separate themselves to that office,
and devote and give up themselves to that service; that they separate
themselves from the other business of life, and give themselves wholly to these
things.

And now one whom the Lord approves, and does thus sincerely give himself up to
the service of Christ in the gospel ministry, and is solemnly separated by
fasting and prayer, and the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, he is a
vessel sanctified to all intents and purposes under the gospel.

2 But if he would be a vessel unto honor, he must not only be sanctified; but
fit or meet for the master's use.

It is not sufficient to be sanctified and separated, unless we are fit for the
use and service we are separated unto. What will it signify to be ordained and
inducted into that holy office of the ministry, and yet not fit for the use;
not capable of answering the ends and designs of it? Therefore if such would be
vessels to honor, they must be meet for the master's use. The vessels of the
sanctuary that were consecrated, were made fit for their several uses designed
for them; so must ministers be fit for the use which Christ the master has for
us, if we would be vessels unto honor. The word translated fit is in 2 Timothy
4.11. Phil. 11.
other places profitable; it signifies very profitable; it signifies that they
must be very profitable for the master's use, that would be vessels of honor.
They must be in all respects fit for the service of Christ. They must have that
knowledge, that wisdom, and that grace that is necessary to make them fit for
Christ to employ, and to render them capable of performing the service he calls
them unto. The master's use of ministers, or the business that he has occasion
to use or employ them in, is to bear his name, to make him known to the people,
and the way to salvation by him, as it is laid down in the gospel. Their
business is to show men the way to Salvation; to turn men from darkness to
light, and from the power of satan unto God. And now ministers must be fit for
this use and business.

They must have that knowledge of God and Christ, and such an acquaintance with
the holy Scriptures, and with the doctrines and duties contained therein, as
will make them able ministers of the new Testament. And must have that
principle of love and obedience reigning in their souls, as will prompt and put
them upon the faithful discharge of the trust reposed in them, and of answering
all the good ends and purposes of their office. Without this it is impossible
we should be fit for the master's use. For how can a man answer the end of
enlightening and instructing others that is ignorant and in the dark himself?
And what is there that will put a man upon the faithful discharge of the
ministerial office, but a principle of love and obedience to Christ? But with
such a principle, the man will be fit for the master's use; for such a
principle reigning in the soul, will carry the man forth to every kind of
service that the master shall call him to. And this leads me to say

3. That they are even prepared unto every good work.

This explains the former head; for to be fit for the master's use, is to be
prepared to every good work. For what is the use the master has for his
ministers? Why, it is for every good work; sometimes one good work, and
sometimes another: And he that is not prepared unto every good work, is not
entirely fitted for the master's use.

Sometimes the master has occasion to use us, in such a work, and sometimes
another; and therefore the minister must be prepared for every good work. But
now what a vast variety of work is there in the ministerial office, that the
master does constantly, or may occasionally call us unto? There is the daily
work and business of the study; giving our attendance to reading, meditation
and prayer, and composing discourses for the public instruction of the flock.
And then there are the ministrations of God's house, such as being the mouth of
the people in offering their prayers and praises to God, and bringing the
oracles of God opened and applied to them: The administration of the
sacraments, and the consures of the church; visiting the sick; hearing the
difficulties and distresses that one and another may be laboring under;
clearing up their doubts, removing their ignorance, leading them out of their
errors, scattering their fears, taking away their scruples, and leading them in
the paths of righteousness and peace.

And besides these ordinary and common services of the minister, there are
other services of a more difficult nature, that he may be called unto.
Sometimes there are dreadful divisions and contentions to be healed. Sometimes
there are gross and dangerous errors to be refuted, and the truths of the
gospel to be supported and defended. Sometimes gross disorders to be reformed,
and growing wickedness courageously and steadfastly to be opposed. And to
mention no more, sometimes they may be called, not only to bear testimony to
the truth; but to seal it with their blood. These are some of the uses, that
the master may have occasion to put these vessels of the sanctuary unto: And if
they would be vessels unto honor, and fit for the master's use, they must be
prepared for these, and every other good work.

Quest. But now, What is it to be prepared unto every good work?

1. Their being qualified and capacitated for it.

And then

2. Their being constantly inclined and disposed to any and every good work,
the master shall at any time set them about.

1. To be prepared for every good work, supposes our being qualified and
accomplished for it.

It supposes that we have those natural capacities, and those acquired
accomplishments, as are in some proportion to the use and service the master
calls us unto The word in the original is observed by Dr. Preston, to have a
reference to the fashioning of a vessel: And therefore a man's being prepared
for every good work, intends his being fashioned as a vessel, that may serve
every use. It supposes such an one, in his very make, to have good natural
powers and capacities, and that these be enlarged, and improved and refined by
education and study. To be prepared for every good work, supposes a man of
superior accomplishments, a quick apprehension, solid judgment, and an enlarged
thought, able to comprehend a great deal of knowledge, to see far and wide, and
reach deep into things. It supposes him also stored with a great deal of
knowledge of various kinds, but especially that he be mighty in the scriptures:
that he understands the doctrines of the gospel, and the arguments to support
them: that he be aware of the errors crept into the church, and able to detect
the false foundations upon which they are built: that he be well acquainted
with the duties of the christian life, with the reasons and motives to enforce
them: that he be apt to teach, able to convey his tho'ts and ideas of things to
others, in a way that shall both enlighten their minds and affect their hearts:
in a word, he must be a ready scribe, well instructed in affairs relating to
the kingdom of heaven, and furnished for every kind of service, that the
ministerial office is concerned with.

2. But then this being prepared for every good work, intends that there be a
constant readiness and willingness to every service the master may call us unto.

He that is prepared to every good work is not idle and slothful, he is not
backward to any service that his master calls him unto. He will be diligent in
his master's business, and will go on with cheerfulness. He will not engage in the
business he is called to by constraint, but willingly, and of a ready mind. He
will not excuse himself from labor and service through sloth and indolence, or
because of the difficulty of the service; neither will he suffer himself to be
so encumbred with other business, as not to be able to attend the work that
Christ has for him to do. He will look upon himself devoted to the service of
Christ, and will lay aside every thing that shall clog and hinder him in any
part of the ministerial calling. -- In a word here, for I may not enlarge; He
loves his master, and loves his work, and esteems his wages infinitely beyond
the utmost service he can possibly do, nay and that the very service carries a
reward with it; and therefore from a principle of love and gratitude, as well
as that of obedience, he readily engages in every service he is set about; and
rejoices that he is counted worthy to be employed in any service for the honor
of Christ: And therefore he sticks at no work that Christ calls him to, let it
be never so difficult; but if his master enquires, Whom shall I send, and who
will go for us? he will (like the prophet Isaiah when his lips were touched
with a coal from the altar) answer, Here am I, send me, Isai. 6.8.

V. Obs. There are certain things that ministers must be purged and cleansed
from, in order to their being vessels unto honor, fitted for the master's use.

If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor,
etc. implying that there are some things cleaving naturally to them, or which
they are incident unto, that must be taken away in order to their being vessels
unto honor. An unclean filthy vessel cannot be a vessel unto honor, till it be
purified and cleansed; and we are all such in our natural state: for who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. In our state of nature we are
defiled with sin, and are altogether an unclean thing; and therefore must be
cleansed in order to become vessels of honor. The vessels of the sanctuary
were to be clean, so were they that were to bear them, Isai. 52.11. And order
was expressly given concerning the Levites, that were to attend the service of
the tabernacle, that they should be taken from among the children of Israel and
cleansed, Numb. 8.6. And there is the same reason that all who minister in holy
things, and before a holy God, should be purged and cleansed from all their
filthiness.

The prophet Isaiah was so sensible of this, and of the danger of entering upon
holy services, without being purged and cleansed, that he cries out, Woe is me
for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips; and immediately there
flies a Seraph with a live coal from off the altar to touch his lips, and so
his iniquity was taken away, and his sin purged. And surely every one that
would be meet for the master's use, must have a live coal to touch him; he must
have the influences of the Holy Ghost to purge and cleanse him. Isai. 6 5, 6.

Quest. But what are the things that such must be purged from, that they might
be vessels unto honor etc?

Ans. In general, from errors in doctrines, and corruptions in heart and life.

1. They must be purged from errors, and false notions in religion.

These are particularly referred to in my text; if a man therefore purge
himself from these, that is from the persons, or rather the errors of those
false teachers, Hymeneus and Philetus, who had imbibed, and were setting forth
a most dangerous doctrine, that began to spread like a gangrene, and had
overthrown the faith of some. And now as ministers were to be purged from that
gross error, so the reason will hold the same for their being purged from all
other dangerous and destructive errors, as well as that particular one, in
order to their being fitted for the master's use. Christ was full of truth, as
well as grace, yea he was truth it self, and he came to teach and preach and
bear witness to the truth: And it is highly necessary, that every vessel fit
for his use, must receive the truth as it is in Jesus. How can that vessel be
fit for Christ's use (which is to convey the truth) that is already full of
error, in matters of religion, both as to the doctrines and duties of it? How
can that man be fit to teach the truth to others, that is himself given up to
strong delusions, and made to believe lies? How can that man be fit to teach
others the way to salvation, that is mistaken in the way himself? I would not
be understood here as if a man's having some mistaken notions in some
particular points of religion utterly unfits for the service of Christ; if so,
I know not who would be fit for his use. For, I may venture to say, that there
is not a man upon earth, but what labors under some mistakes or other; and
many who have by education or prejudice imbibed false notions in some lesser
points, have been vessels unto honor. But what I refer to more especially, are
fundamental errors: errors in the essential parts of religion, and that are
inconsistent with a principle of saving grace within. And as to these, I shall
not pretend to enumerate them; not that I think them so many, as the generality
of people imagine.

But these, men must be purged from, that would engage in the service of
Christ; for they disqualify persons for that sacred office. So that it highly
concerns every man, designing for, and engaging in this service, to take all
possible care that he be found in the faith, and that his principles be well
established and confirmed by the oracles of God. And he must earnestly pray
that the Spirit of truth would lead him into all truth, and keep him from all
errors. And if we set our selves to a diligent and impartial search after truth
in the holy scriptures, we may hope to be saved from any mistake that will be
hurtful unto our selves, or that will unfit us for the master's use.

2. We must be purged from our lusts and corruptions, if we would be vessels
unto honor.

Nothing does so universally and effectually disqualify for the service of
Christ, as the prevailing of our lusts and corruptions. Accordingly this is the
direction to Timothy immediately after my text, that he free all youthful
lusts; intimating hereby that it was absolutely necessary to his being a vessel
unto honor, fit for the master's use. And so it is, for every one that would
be a good minister of Jesus Christ; he must flee all manner of lusts, and get
them all subdued and mortified. One lust reigning in the soul, and breaking
forth in the life, pollutes and dishonours the vessel, and makes us unmeet for
the holy service of Christ.

Here therefore let me say,

1. Such must be purged from all fleshy lusts.

For as these war against the soul, so they war against Christ; and how unmeet
then, must they render the man for his use? The man that is under the
government of fleshly lusts, is in a state of enmity and rebellion against
Christ, and all that is holy. And how is such an one prepared unto every good
work, when he is inclined to evil, and only evil? How can any be vessels unto
honor, unless they know how (as the apostle says, 1 These. 4.8.) to possess
their vessels in sanctification and honor? Surely if any would be vessels unto
honor, they must crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts, and mortify
their members upon the earth; fornication and all uncleanness, let it not be
named among them.

In a word, ministers must be sober and temperate in all things, suppressing
their irregular appetites, and keeping their bodies under. The apostle was so
sensible of the necessity of this, that he looked upon himself in hazard not
only of losing the success of his ministry, but of losing himself for ever; and
his words ought seriously to be considered, 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my body
and bring it into subjection, lest that by any means when I have preached to
others, I my self should be a castaway.

2. Such must be purged from worldly lusts.

That is, they must get rid of an inordinate love to the world, and the things
that are in the world. For where there is such a love prevailing, there cannot
be that love to Christ, that is necessary for his use and service. For as our
Savior plainly tells us, Matt. 6.24. No man can serve two masters; for either
he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and
despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon. Whilst men's hearts are full
of the world, how can they be full of Christ? Our love to Christ is necessary
to our feeding his flock, and therefore does he demand so often of Peter,
Love thou me? Love thou me more than these? For as he says Mat. 10 37. He
that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me: He that loves
son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me.

3. Spiritual lusts must be purged away, in order to men's being vessels unto
honor.

Such as unbelief, pride, envy, malice, and the like, which are so contrary to
Christ, and to the design of his gospel kingdom, that it is impossible for
such, who have these lusts reigning in them, to be any way vessels of honor,
meet for the master's use.

What can be more improper, than for one that has an evil heart of unbelief
(whereby he departs from the living God continually) to be employed in
conveying the doctrines of the gospel to others, and be an instrument to
persuade them to believe, what he does not believe himself?

What is more absurd than for one that has the lust of pride reigning in him,
to be employed in bringing a meek and lowly Jesus to the world, and
recommending the imitation of him? What more incongruous, than for one that is
full of hatred, malice and envy, to be employed in representing Christ, and
setting forth his infinite love and good will to the world?

I don't say but that God may suffer such instruments to be employed, and knows
how to get glory to himself by them, and so to answer his own purposes: But
according to the natural tendency of things, such men are the most likely
instruments the devil can have to oppose the interest of Christ, and cause a
revolt over to his own kingdom. And it is most certain that such ministers as
have been under the power of their lusts, have done the most of any men in the
world to dishonor Christ, and hurt his interest in the world, and to overthrow
the faith of christians. Which shows that ministers must be purged from these,
if they would in any measure be fit for the master's use and service.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. Inf. Is Christ the head and master of that house, which is the church of
the living God, hence his dominion and authority is to be duly acknowledged and
submitted to.

He is not only head of that great family the church, but head over all things
unto the church; so that he has the sole absolute government of all things in,
or any way relating to his church and kingdom. He has the ordering and
disposing of every thing in his house; he makes what provision for it he sees
cause, he makes use of what vessels and instruments in the house he pleases,
and as long as he pleases, and then lays them aside as seems good in his
sight, and his sovereign hand is to be acknowledged herein. He prescribes rules
and orders for his house, which are carefully to be regarded by all the
household; and these he has given us in his word, which we must carefully
observe, and not presume to set up any of our own that are not agreeable
herewith. This master as Moses was faithful in his house, and has given rules
sufficient for his church. We must therefore carefully adhere to his
institutions, without presuming to impose any inventions of our own.

2. Inf. Are ministers but as vessels in the house, this should give them an
humble sense of themselves, and keep them low in their own minds.

Whatever high and honorable uses they are put to, they must remember they are
only as vessels and instruments, not as efficient causes.

If they are made use of in the conversion of sinners, it is only as
instruments in the hand of the Spirit; and they must take no other glory to
themselves therein. Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers by whom
ye believed? So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters, but God that gives the increase. Ministers are only the vessels that
bring Christ and his gospel, with all the gracious offers thereof to the soul;
they cannot compel or persuade men to accept thereof; nor can they apply it to
their souls and consciences. We only bring it to them: It is the almighty
Spirit that applies whenever it becomes effectual.

3. Inf. How should every minister be filled with fear and holy jealousy, lest
he ne found among the vessels unto dishonor.

In this great house there are vessels of wood and of earth, as well as of gold
and of silver; some unto dishonor, as well as some unto honor. And now every
minister is one or other of these; ministers therefore should be jealous of
themselves, whether they don't by their sloth and negligence, by their carnal
and earthly affections, give reason to fear that they are but vessels of wood
and of earth. And are there not so many lusts and corruptions working in them,
as may make them fear whether they are not vessels unto dishonor, and unfit
for the master's use? And when we see how unprepared, how unqualified, how
backward, how indisposed to many a good work, we are, we may well be suspicious
of our selves. But oh, with what fear and trembling should this fill our souls!
For such as are vessels unto dishonor, what are they but vessels of wrath? And
such as are unmeet for the master's use, are fitted for destruction.

4. Inf. Here is a rule to judge whether we are vessels unto honor or no, viz.
our being fit for the master's use, and prepared unto every good work

5. Inf. How great a blessing are colleges and schools of learning, that may
serve to fit men for the master's use, and prepare them for the ministerial
work.

These are the means that God makes use of to fit them for his service. Here it
is, that of vessels of wood and stone, he so refines them, that he makes them
vessels of gold and silver. Here it is that he inlarges these vessels, and then
fills them with knowledge, by which he fits them for service. Such nurseries
then are to be esteemed the great blessings of our land, and what ought always
to be cherished and encouraged by us.

6. Inf. We learn what is to be looked at, in choosing and separating any to
the work of the ministry, viz. their being fitted for the master's use.

This is what a people are to look at in the choice of a minister; and what
ministers are to look at in separating or setting apart any to that sacred
office. It is the master that is to use and improve them. And unless they are
fit for his use, to what purpose are they chosen and ordained to that service.
The rule given to Timothy was, that he should commit this work to faithful men,
who should be able to teach others also, 2 v. of the context. And therefore it
would be an horrible betraying of our trust, to commit this work to unskilful
and unfaithful men. Accordingly that must needs be a very good rule of
prudence, which the same apostle gives, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no
man; that is, not till we have some good grounds to think that they are free
from gross errors and corruptions; that they are like to answer the good ends
of their ministry, and prove vessels unto honor.

7. Inf. We learn what such as are entering on the ministry, must find something
of in themselves, and make it their highest ambition to be obtaining more and
more of continually, namely, a fitness for the master's use.

For men to desire to be put in the priest's office for a piece of bread,
merely to get a living, without taking any care to be fit for the master's use,
would be daring presumption. And it is very doubtful whether such would ever
come to be vessels unto honor. A man entering upon such a sacred service as
this, must examine himself as to his qualifications and accomplishments for it.
I don't mean that a man must find himself equal to the service he is engaging
in; for alas! who is sufficient for these things? But every man must see some
degree of fitness, before he undertakes: So much knowledge, so much grace, so
much readiness to Christ's service, as may give him good grounds to hope, he
may answer the end of his office.

And now, all that remains is to apply what has been said, to the solemn
occasions of this day.

And in the first place, I will address my self to you, dear Sir, who I trust
have been applying the several things that have been offered, as they relate to
your present case.

And here you see, that God is calling you, by his providence, and we trust by
his Spirit, to be a vessel in his house; and you are now to be introduced,
sanctified and consecrated to that holy service. And we trust (or else we dare
not lay our hands upon you) that you will be a vessel unto honor, and that you
are in a good measure fitted for the master's use. We trust that you are free
from every error that would be dangerous or hurtful to your master's interest,
and from those lusts and corruptions that would pollute the vessel, and render
it unfit for the service of Christ. We hope that you who are by nature unclean,
have been so powerfully touched by the holy Ghost, as with a live coal from off
the altar, that has taken away your iniquity, and purged your sin, and
sanctified you throughout in spirit, soul and body. And if you find any
comfortable tokens hereof, you may make an acceptable surrender of your self
unto the service of Jesus Christ.

And here I would take notice with thankfulness, that we have so much reason to
hope that you are a chosen vessel, well formed and fitted by Christ to bear his
name among the Gentiles, even the ignorant heathen, to whom he is now sending
you; and that there is such a hopeful prospect of success among them, by the
readiness there appears in so many or them to receive the glad tidings of
salvation.

The gospel ministry has it is dangers and it is difficulties in every place, but
the place assigned you in the house of God has it is peculiar difficulties: and
it requires a vessel peculiarly formed, to be fitted for this part of the
master's use. And such an one we trust you are; and rejoice that God is
inclining and spiriting you to that difficult service, even to go to a people
of a strange speech, and of an hard language, whose words thou can not, at
present, understand.

You are now to be a consecrated vessel in the house of the Lord (although in a
dark part of it). And this imports that your office will be to convey all the
treasures of a glorious gospel to the people, and to bring back the several
conditions, necessities and desires of the people to God. And what does this
imply but that you your self must be filled with these treasures in order to
your dispensing the same unto them. Oh labor then to be filled with all that
speculative, spiritual and experimental knowledge of God and Christ that you
can; and that you may be filled even with all the fullness of God. Go to the
fountain head, to Christ, in whom it has pleased the father that all fullness
should dwell: go to him by faith and prayer, and by diligent attendance on
reading, meditation and study; and he will fill you after such a manner, as
that you will come to them, in the fullness of the blessing of the gospel of
Christ.

And as you will be frequently pouring forth, and dispensing to the people, so
frequently repair to the fountain for a supply. Remember that you are but a
vessel, and so may soon be exhausted without recruits. And as you return to God
to be replenished, don't forget to come laden with the wants and desires of
your poor people. Remember to pour out your prayers to God for them, as you
pour out or dispense the grace of God to them. And thus endeavor to be full
going and coming. And by being thus continually employed in carrying what
Christ the master has to send to the people, and bringing back requests with
thanksgivings upon their account, you will be found a vessel unto praise and
honor and glory.

For although the use that the master puts you to in his house, may appear mean
and contemptible to the men of the world, who have their hearts set upon the
gaiety and granduer of it, and can think of nothing but ease and pleasure; and
although but few of those who are consecrated vessels in the house of the Lord,
will submit unto it; yet it is a most glorious service in the eyes of Christ
the master, and of all the angels in heaven, that are beholding your solemn
consecration: for those ministering spirits think it their honor to be sent,
and do with pleasure go forth to minister unto them who shall be the heirs of
salvation. And oh what an honor, what a pleasure must it needs be to every one
that has a love to Christ and a compassion for souls, to turn men from darkness
to light, and from the power of satan unto God; to convert them from the error
of their ways, and to save their souls from death!

Wherefore, to carry on the metaphor, don't be ashamed of the outward meanness
of the apartment the master has assigned you in his house; and don't be
discouraged at the difficulties you may have the prospect of; but let those
gracious words of Christ, LO I AM WITH YOU ALWAYS, be a comfort to you: and the
tokens you have had already of Christ's presence with you, in the success of
your labors hitherto, may well encourage your further dependence upon him. Go
forth therefore in the name and strength of the Lord Jesus, and we trust that
he will never leave nor forsake you, and that his grace shall be sufficient for
you. And let me assure you, that if you be wise and faithful in this work, you
shall shine as the sun in the kingdom of your father; and when the chief
Shepherd shall appear, you shall receive an unfading crown of glory.

And now I would turn my self to the Houssatonnoc Indians, who are at this time
to have a minister sent unto them.

Behold the man, the messenger of the Lord of hosts, that is coming unto you.
This is a vessel God has made choice of, to bring Christ, and in him the glad
tidings of salvation to you. This is the man that is to show you the way to
salvation; to direct you how you may escape the damnation of hell; and how you
may obtain the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. See then that
you love him, and that you steem him very highly in love for his works sake;
and that you come to him to be instructed by him: that you hearken to his
counsels, and observe his directions, and follow his example wherein he follows
Christ. And this is the way for you to be happy here, and for ever hereafter;
for godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come.

To conclude, How earnestly should we all pray, that there might be numbers of
chosen vessels, persons fitted and disposed to carry the everlasting gospel to
the heathen nations that are about us: to convey to them the knowledge of God,
and of Jesus Christ, whom to know is life eternal. How should we pity them when
we see them perishing for lack of vision? And how should we be doing our utmost
to encourage persons to go forth and carry the gospel to them? And how highly
proper would it be for the Government to take effectual care to support and
encourage such as God may raise up from time to time, to go forth into such
difficult service? And since many of our nation at home have expressed such a
tender concern for the propagating the gospel among the Indian natives of this
Land, at so great a distance from them, by their charitable and pious donations
for that purpose, it must needs be highly reasonable that we who live among
them, and possess their country, should readily expend of our estates, for that
which will be of the greatest advantage to them. This is a way of honoring the
Lord with our substance, which doubtless God expects from us.

But to have done, Let us be careful to recommend christianity to them, by our
own sincere practice of it. Let us make it manifest to them, in all our
treaties, and in all our commerce, and conversation with them, that we are
under the influences of the Spirit of Christ. In a word, let us adorn the
doctrine of God our Savior in all things, and cause our lights so to shine
before them, that they seeing our good works, may be moved also to glorify our
father which is in heaven.

The End of the SERMON.
As an Introduction to the Ordination, the Reverend Mr. William Williams of
Hatfield, Moderator, thus applied himself to His Excellency the GOVERNOR,
being present.
IT having pleased the most wise and gracious GOD, who governs all things, to
put it into the Hearts of a number of generous and well disposed Persons in
Great Britain, to devote a part of their Estate to promote the propagation of
the knowledge of Christ, the only Savior of a perishing World, among the
Natives of America, who for an unknown number of Generations, have been
ignorant of Him, and been perishing through lack of vision: And this their
Charity being under the direction of an honorable Corporation there, and a
number of the Honorable and Reverend Gentlemen here, of which Your Excellency
is at the Head, being appointed as Commissioners by them to direct and put
forward that good Work; who now being satisfied, after a considerable time of
trial, of a good Disposition in the Indians at Houssatonnoc and parts adjacent,
to be instructed: And having obtained a fit Person for that great and difficult
but worthy Service; and there being now a number of Pastors convened to set him
a part by solemn Ordination to that Service; we humbly ask, if it be Your
Excellency's Pleasure, that we now proceed to it; and that a just and proper
care should be taken for his encouragement in it

To which His Excellency the Governor manifested His Approbation.

It was then asked of the Person to be Ordained;

You now understand, Sir, That it is His Excellency's desire, in the Name of
the Honorable and Reverend the Commissioners for the Propagation of the Gospel
among the Natives of New England; That you would take upon you, that Ministry
and Service.

I now ask you, whether you are willing to consecrate your self and service to
Christ, and to the good of the Souls of those poor People to whom you are sent;
who have hitherto sat in darkness and in the shadow of Death; to take a
Pastoral care of them, and to spend your time in a careful Instructing of them
in Christian Knowledge.

To which Mr. Sargent, the Person deputed, gave his Consent.

Now follows the form used in his Ordination.
WE do now in the Name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and by virtue of the authority
derived from Him, set apart and Ordain you a Minister of CHRIST, to serve in
the Affairs of his Kingdom, under the conduct and direction if his Providence;
and especially to take a Pastoral Care of the Natives inhabiting at
Houssatonnoc, and as many as will join themselves with them and submit to your
Instruction. And to you are now committed the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
that what you bind on Earth should be bound in Heaven, and what you loose on
Earth should be loosed in Heaven. In this Service it must be your care to be
prudent, faithful and diligent. You should remember that your Service is both
honorable and difficult: It is honorable as being a Service for the great
GOD, whose Name alone is excellent in all the Earth; and immediately a Service
to the LORD JESUS CHRIST, for the spreading of his Glory, Name, and Kingdom in
the World; whom the Father will have all Men to honor even as they honor
Himself; who has put the highest honor upon him in raising him from the dead,
and giving him Glory, even that Glory which he had with him before the World
was, and has put this peculiar honor upon him as Mediator, in giving all
power in Heaven and Earth to Him. We read that the greatest Person that had
been born of a Woman thought himself not worthy to hear his Shoes after him:
And the holy Apostle Paul thus expresses himself, To me is this Grace given
that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ. To
preach CHRIST, and the great Salvation he has wro't out for a sinful World,
though at present far less profitable, yet is not less honorable than any
Service that Men are employed in in this World; and they who obtain mercy of
the Lord to be faithful in it, and are instrumental to turn many to
Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever.

But GOD puts this special honor upon you ministerially and declaratively, to
lay a foundation of Christian Knowledge, by preaching CHRIST, and teaching the
fundamental Truths of the Gospel among those to whom they have not hitherto
been made known. This was what the great Apostle St. Paul was ambitious of, to
Preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named, lest he should build on another
man's foundation.

Now this being your special Province, I may mind you that it concerns you to
use all that wisdom and heavenly art you have, to lay a good Foundation, even
to build on the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, making JESUS CHRIST
the chief corner Stone. And though I am not ignorant that it is hard and
difficult exactly to determine what are and what are not Fundamentals in
Religion, yet I shall venture to mention some things which you must teach that
are the main Pillars which support the Christian Building.

1. Matters to be believed by us, which are plainly taught in the holy
Scriptures, or by just and necessary consequence inferred from them, to which
you must not add, nor diminish from, nor shun to declare the whole counsel of
GOD.

2. The Worship or Service of GOD, which is the visible respect he requires his
People to pay to Him: This is both natural and instituted: It must be all and
only that which He has appointed. Your special duty as to this lies in Praying
with and for those that are committed to your Charge. You must not sin against
the LORD in ceasing to Pray for them. In Preaching the Word both in season and
out of season: and in your Preaching you must be careful to Preach the Truths
plainly, seasonably, and convincingly, so as to reach their Understandings,
Consciences and Affections: You must administer the Sacraments of Baptism and
the Lord's Supper to Persons duly qualified: Baptism to visible Believers and
their Seed, the Lord's Supper to such as can examine themselves and discern the
Lord's Body, and who are of a regular Conversation. You must apply the Censures
to such as are scandalous or heretical to bring them to Repentance; doing all
things without partiality, for he that acquitteth the Wicked, and he that
condemns the Just, are both of them an abomination to the Lord. You are also
authoritatively to bless in the name of the LORD.

3. The spiritual benefits of Justification, Grace, Peace, and Salvation, that
flow alone from CHRIST as the Head of his mystical Body, and the grand Medium
of all Divine Communication to us, are to be explained to them.

4. Such Christian Duties as are to be done and practiced by all who profess
themselves the Disciples of CHRIST, that they may he kept in a state of Grace
and Salvation, may honor their relation to CHRIST, and adorn the Profession
they make. These are too many now to be enumerated. And it will be a special
part of your Business to teach them the good Way and right Way in which they
must walk. If you do these things faithfully, you will be a Workman that need
not to be ashamed; you will honor your great Lord and Master, will honor your
self: And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, you shall receive a Crown of
Glory that fades not away.

I may mind you now, that there are Difficulties which attend this honorable
Service, which must be expected and provided against, besides what are common
to you with other Ministers of CHRIST; there are peculiar Difficulties, many of
which you may foresee, and possibly many more than you can foresee, from the
Place and Persons to whom you are sent; to an ignorant People, to a People of a
strange Speech and an hard Language, whose Words you cannot understand; to an
uncultivated People, among whom you must take leave of many of the
Conveniences and Comforts of Life, which are enjoyed in the civilized World:
It will require much labor and inculcation to instill into them the necessary
Truths of Divine Knowledge, which they are yet ignorant of; they must be taught
Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, even as Children weaned from the Milk
and drawn from the Breast. Besides, there is danger lest they be tenacious of
Customs, they have received by Tradition from their Fathers; inconsistent with
the Faith and Worship of the Gospel, which they will not easily be brought to
renounce. They have also as others have had, their National and Hereditary
Vices, which by long custom they have been habituated to, and have been
hitherto unconvinced of the evil of, which seems as hard to recover them from,
as for the Ethiopian to change his skin, or the Leopard his spots. These things
will necessary put you upon much Assiduity, Watchfulness, and Prayer, that you
may be furnished with the armor of Righteousness on the right hand and on the
left, with knowledge, Prudence, Patience, Meekness, Humility, Self-denial, and
Zeal for the Honor of Christ, and the good of Souls; especially that you may
enjoy the promised Presence of Christ always with you, to Guide, Strengthen,
and Comfort you in the Work he now calls you to; to whose Grace we now commend
you.

After the CHARGE, with the Imposition of Hands, the Reverend Mr. STEPHEN
WILLIAMS of Long Meadow in Springfield, Taking Mr. Sargent by the Right Hand,
thus addressed him,
Reverend, and Dear Sir,
WE heartily rejoice, that the God of all Grace, has so well fitted and
qualified you for, and disposed and inclined you, to undertake this great and
glorious Work, of carrying the Gospel to the Heathen; and that he has disposed
and inclined such a number of them to receive the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And I do now testify, and declare to you, in the Name of the Ministers
here present, that we look upon you, as a Minister of Jesus Christ, duly
called, and introduced into the Work of the Evangelical Ministry, and that you
may be assured of our Prayers always, and of our help and assistance (as far as
we are able) in the great, good, as well as difficult, and self-denying
Service, you have so willingly engaged in. We heartily desire and pray, you may
be instrumental of turning many to Righteousness, that so you may shine as the
Stars for ever and ever, etc.

And then he turned himself to the Houssatonnoc Indians (who sat in a body by
themselves) and said, Now my Brethren and Friends of the Houssatonnoc Indians,
You have seen the Reverend Mr. Sargent solemnly set apart to the Work of the
Ministry: I ask of you, whether you willingly receive him, as your Teacher, and
Instructor, in Spiritual and Divine Things? If you do, I desire you would
signify it, by standing up? Upon which, they all rose up, etc.

N. B That what was said to the Indians as above, was interpreted to them
Sentence by Sentence, that so they might all understand, etc.

FINIS.

