Mr. Adams's Sermon,

On Psalm. 65 5. By terrible things in Righteousness, will thou answer us, O God
of our Salvation.

and sometimes Answers His People, by Terrible Things in Righteousness.

A Discourse Occasioned by that Awful Thunderclap Which Struck the
Meeting House in N. London, Aug. 31st. 1735. At what Time One was Killed
outright and diverse Others much hurt and wounded, Yet graciously and
remarkably Preserved, together with the rest of the Congregation, from
Immediate Death. AS IT WAS Delivered (Sept. 7th) the Lord's Day Following.

By Eliphalet Adams, M. A. And Pastor of the Church there.

Psalm. lxxxi. 7. -I answered thee in the secret place of Thunder-.

Respondi tibi in Loco Abscondito Domus majestatis meae, personantibus Coram me
rotis Igneis.

Chal. vel. Targ. N.LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. GREEN, 1735

To my Dear Friends, THE FLOCK under my Pastoral Care.
SINCE it is at Your Request and Importunity, that the following Discourse now
sees the Light, this will not only supersede all other Apologies to the world
for its being made Public, of which I had no manner of though it when it was first
Composed; But also Justify me in a farther Address to You on so awful an
Occasion.

I could not but take Notice of the Crowded Assembly when it was Delivered,
Many (doubtless) being led by their Curiosity to hear some New thing and
observe what our Sentiments and Dispositions were under such an Awful hand of
God, And Oh that our Behavior at this Day, may be suitable and becoming both
in the Eyes of GOD and Men!

Moses giving a relation of the Solemnity of that Day when the Law was given
from Mount Sinal, thus Express h himself, Deuteronomy. 4.32, 33. But ask now of the
days that are past which were before thee, since the day that God creared man
upon earth, and ask from the one side of heaven unto the other, whither there
has been any such thing, is this great thing is, or has been heard like it,
Did ever people hear the Voice of God, speaking out of the midst of the fire,
as thou have heard and live?

Never was any Dispensation in all its Circumstances to be Compared to that, It
was a wonder how their frail Natures could Endure the Majesty and Terror of the
Lord, that they were not quite oppressed by the over-bearing Glory.

However, Something like this; We also have heard the Voice of God, speaking out
of the midst of the Fire and yet we Live. And it is hard to say whither the
greatness of the Danger, or the wonderfulness of our Preservation be most to be
Admired; And possibly one End of his, in bringing us into the Danger was to
show his great power and mercy in our Signal Preservation and Escape.

We also like the People of Israel, were thrown into great fear and
Consternation, and perhaps like them were ready to promise, Let the Lord please
to declare unto us his Will in a more familiar and gentle way and we will hear
it and do it. If any such Impressions were made upon us, no doubt the Lord
approves of them so far as to desire they may be lasting. Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh! that
there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me and keep my
commandments always, that it might be well with them and with their children
for ever.

Doubtless You are persuaded, that it is not Enough to be a little startled and
put on a face of Seriousness for a time, We must think on our ways and turn our
feet into God's testimonies, And though frowns and Severities alone, be they ever
so sharp and awful, will not produce an happy change of Heart and Life, Yet by
disposing us to be more Serious and thoughtful, they may prepare the way for
God's grace to Effect this desirable Change; when every Valley is Exalted and
every Mountain and hill made Low, then the Glory of the Lord may be revealed.

I have in the following Discourse, taken the Opportunity, to recommend and
press several particulars for the Amendment of our Conduct, which now it is put
into Your hands, I trust you will peruse with a suitable regard, For are there
not with us, Even with us Sins against the Lord? Every one may Know the Plague
of their own Hearts and Discern the Error of their ways, if they would set
themselves diligently to Enquire, Let us then Search and try our ways and turn
again unto the Lord.

God has graciously begun of Late a good work in the Country, We hear of great
Numbers of People asking the way to Zion with their faces thitherward; Why
should we be the Last to bring the King back to his Throne? Yea, why should we
come behind the very Chiefest Christians?

It is Certainly our Interest as well as Duty, to get Near to our God and keep
Near to our God, to walk in all his Ways and keep his Commandments, as he
Commanded our Fathers; And who can tell what reserves of Mercy of this Kind, he
may have in store for us? When he pleases to work, there is Nothing can Let
it, Then the hearts of the rash shall understand Knowledge; the most stubborn
tempers shall Yield and the Heart of Stone be Changed into An Heart of Flesh.

If this may but be the fruit, even to take away all our Sin, If by this, our
Iniquity may be purged, We shall have reason to bless the Stroke that drives us
home to our God and directs our feet into the path of Life.

I trust there will be but little Need to lay in Caution that you guard against
such Seducers and Sectaries who are still saying, Lo here is Christ, or Lo
there; And are ready to represent that it is safer taking on with them, against
whom as yet no such Severity has been displayed, Since you are taught of God
that Neither Love nor Hatred is certainly to be learned by any thing that is
before us, Or if any thing of that nature be to be gathered, we are told that
whom the Lord Loves he rebukes and chastens and that Judgment sometimes begins
at the House of God; Only let us be Humbled under the Lord's Discipline and let
them remember that it is their wisdom, not to be high-minded but to Fear.

I am now Growing into Years and as I would ask Your prayers for me, that while
I am Continued, I may be Enabled to speak the Word plainly and boldly, as a
good Steward of the manifold grace of God; So God forbid that I should Sin
against the Lord in ceasing to pray for You, or in failing (as I am able) to
teach you the good and the right way.

We have Escaped this Time, but there will quickly come a time when we shall no
Longer Escape, Man Goes to his long home, And Death whith is approaching by
Insensible steps should never be out of our Minds;

Nor should we forget the Time, when (as the Apostle Peter tells is) 2 Pet
3.10, etc -- The Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise, and the Elements
shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also and the works that are therein
hall be burnt up; Seeing then that all these things shall be Dissolved, what
manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and godliness,
Looking for and hasting to the Coming of the day of God, wherein the Heavens
being on fire, shall be dissolved and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat.

Hinally, Whatever good Impressions have been made upon any of us, by this late
Awful Dispensation of divine providence, May the Lord our God, Keep this for
ever in the Imagination of the thoughts of the heart of his people and prepare
our hearts unto him. As we were seasonably taught from, I Chron 29.18 by a
message in the mouth of his Servant, The Rev'd Mr. WILLIAM WILLIAMS of Weston.
the same Day when the following Discourse was delivered; And may we all of us
give diligence that we may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.

I am Your Affectionate Pastor, Eliphalet Adams.

GOD Sometimes Answers His People, BY Terrible things in Righteousness.
PSALM LXV. 5. By Terrible things in Righteousness, will thou Answer us, O God
of our Salvation, --


IN this Psalm, David begins by saying, that Praise waited for God in Zion and
unto him the Vow shall be performed. What if we should conjecture Now, that
this may possibly have reference to that period of time, when David finding a
little respite from his Wars and having Conquered Jebus (which was afterward,
called Jerusalem) and particularly taken the Strong-hold of Zion, which was
called the City of David, And having fitted up a place for the reception of it,
was preparing to bring the Ark of God in thither; To be sure, this is what he
had Vowed, and at length happily Accomplished and he elsewhere Appeals to the
Lord to be graciously remembered for his Zeal in that matter, as we find in
Psalm. 132. beg. Lord, Remember David and all his afflictions, how he swear unto
the Lord and vowed to the mighty God of Jacob, Surely I will not come into the
tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my bed, I will not give sleep to mine
eyes, or slumber to mine eye lids until I find out a place for the Lord, an
habitation for the mighty God of Jacob, Lo, we heard of it in Ephrata, we sound
it in the fields of the wood: We will go into his Tabernacles, we will worship
at his footstool, Arise, O Lord, into thy rest, thousand the Ark of thy
strength.

Praise waited or was Silent for God, (as the Hebrew word signifies) now in
Zion, The Servants of God stood ready, as soon as the Ark should be brought in,
and the Worship of God be set up there, to Celebrate his praise and there he
should be praised from Generation to Generation.

And not only God's peculiar people the Jews but Proselites and people out of
all Nations, brought by the Fame of the God of Israel, should come to Zion with
their prayers and praises, as we learn from, ver. 2. O thou that hear
prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.

As to their Present state indeed, he Acknowledges it to be bad Enough,
Iniquities prevailing and abounding among them (In his Predecessor's reign, too
little care had been taken about the Exercise and Establishment of religion,
Neither had he that just authority in his own Court as yet, which were to be
wished, while the Sons of Zerviah were frequently too hard for him) But then he
Exercises faith, that God would graciously pardon their Iniquities and heal
their backslidings. Ver. 3. Iniquiries prevail against me: as for our
transgrissions thou shall purge them away.

And now he refreshes himself with the Consideration of the blessedness of
their condition, who shall he admitted to approach into the presence of God in
the way of his appointment (a thing too little understood and Valued by vulgar
and carnal minds) ver. 4. Blessed is the man whom thou chusest and causest to
approach unto thee that he may dwell in thy courts; we shall be satisfied with
the goodness of thy house and of thy holy temple.

Why may it not be thought that David has particular reference to himself
here? Especially when we compare the words with a Sam. 6.21. -- It was before
the Lord which chose me before thy Father. --

Now come in the words of the Text, which seem a little to cloud and Darken
this glorious prospect, wherein he says, By terrible things in righteousness,
will thou answer us.

If the foregoing Exposition should hold and may be allowed, whither these
words may not refer to the breach that was made upon Vzzah, in the Day when the
Ark was bringing up to the City of David, An account whereof we have at large,
in 2 Samuel 6. I submit to better Judgments. Certainly, it was an awful and
terrible thing, And it was done in Righteousness too, however severe it might
seem; David was much affected with it, And it put a stop to the bringing home
of the Ark for some years afterward.

Some Interpreters Expound these words of the terrible Judgments which God is
wont to Inflict upon the Enemies of his Church and People; They pray to him in
their distress, when they are set upon and used hardly by their Enemies and the
Lord hears in heaven his dwelling place and Executes Judgments oftentimes in a
terrible manner upon these their Enemies in Answer to their prayers, So he did
at the red Sea, upon Pharaoh and his host, So he did in the Days of
Jehoshaphat, upon the Children of Moab and the Children of Ammon, And often at
other times.

Other Interpreters, tell us, that this may be understood, Of the rebukes which
God in his providence gives sometimes to his own People, He often answers them
by terrible things for the Awakening and Quickening of them, But always in
righteousness, He neither does them any wrong, nor means them any hurt; for
Even then he is the God of their Salvation, By wonderful things, Things which
are very Surprising, Things that strike an Aw upon us will thou answer us; The
holy freedom that we are admitted unto in God's Courts, and the Nearness of our
approach unto him, must not at all abate our reverence and godly fear of him,
For he is terrible in his holy places, Psalm. 68.34, 35. Henry in loc.


The term Answer us here used, does not always stand for a reply to something
before spoken, or for a return made to some petition preferred and put up,
which are the usual senses of this phrase (although taken in this sense it was
Literally true in the days of Samuel. 1 Samuel 12, 18. So Samuel called unto the
Lord and the Lord sent thunder and rain that day; and all the people greatly
feared the Lord and Samuel.) When our Lord accommodated his Discourse to what
was in the hearts of the people and met with something that was running in their
minds and they were ready to Object, he is said to Answer them. Luke 14.355.
Yea, when God suits his providential dispensations to something before done by a
person or people, he is said to Answer them Psalm. 99.8. Thou answeredst them, O
Lord our God; thou most a God that forgavest them though thou wokest vengeance
of their inventions. Perhaps in the Text this term Answer may be taken as
Equivalent to the Terms Show or Manifest, By terrible things in righteousness,
will thou manifest thy self to us, O God of our Salvation. When God puts on
glory and arrayeth himself with Majesty and comes near to his people in any of
his great and mighty works, striking an aw and dread into their hearts and
causing them to feel something of the weight of his hand, then he may be said by
terrible things in righteousness to answer them.

In the farther speaking to these words, we may Consider, First, That sometimes
God appears and manifests himself to his people in very terrible things.
Secondly, That when he does so, it is always in righteousness. Thirdly, That
yet at the same time he is the God of their Salvation.


I. We may Consider, That sometimes God appears and manifests himself to his
people in very terrible things. Things that are wonderful and surprising, that
strike an aw and a dread into them and cause them to say, as in Psalm. 119.120
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. Or as
Moses, Heb. 12.21. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear and quake. And here,

1. The Execution done upon Sinners, the Enemies of God and their Enemies in
their sight, has struck an aw into them.

This way (as it has been observed) Interpreters have carried the sense of
these words, But then the things which God has done, have not only been
Destructive to his and his people's Enemies, but it has been awful to behold
and Consider of it, No doubt, Noah, shut up as he was in the Ark, was greatly
affected to think of the destruction of the whole world by the flood, to whom
he had long been a preacher of righteousness, but all in Vain. No doubt Lot was
mightily affected with the Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha and the Cities of
the plain, by that horrible Tempest that was sent upon them out of heaven, The
good man flies and dared not look behind him or stop till he was Entered into
Zoar, having received such a Charge from the Angels, No, though his wife were
turned into a pillar of Salt for her disobedience, Genesis 19 16, 17 Concern for
his own particular preservation drove him thus along, Yet at the same time, we
may well conceive, his heart to be full of thought and solicitude about the
poor people that were actually perishing under the fatal stroke.

For though as it is the Execution of God's will and pleasure, they may arquiesce
and approve of it, and the memory of the Injuries done to them, may abate very
much of their concern, So that in a sense as it is in, Psalm. 58.10. They may
rejoice when they see the vengeance, Yet it is still an awful and melancholy
thing to behold the destruction of many, when it is sudden and violent, Even
though they are the Enemies of God and of his people.

2. The works of God's common providence when they are unusually signal and
remarkable, done before our Eyes and when they come any thing near to us, are
very terrible and strike an aw into us. Among these things, we may reckon
raging and Epidemical Sicknesses; Though these operate more slowly, yet they
carry a great terror with them, all faces gather blackness and every heart is
filled with apprehension, Expecting when they shall be seized and carried into
Eternity with their Neighbors that are dying daily round about them; As also,
Stormy Winds, fulfilling God's word; when these blow Tempestuously, whither by
Sea or Land, the hearts of the people are moved as the trees of the wood are
moved by a mighty wind; So, when some Earthquake happens, who that feel the
Earth trembling under them and all that is upon it shaking and tottering and
that hear the mighty roaring within, do not also at the same time feel their
hearts failing for fear and looking after some dreadful and fatal Consequences
immediately? Once more, When some fearful Storm of Thunder and Lightning comes
over us, when the Voice of the Lord (as the Psalmist calls it) waxes Louder
and Louder, all Nature is made to tremble, an aw is struck upon every mind,
that is not altogether stupid and Insensible, because they are uncertain where
it may please God that the hurtful Strokes shall light, Thus the Psalmist
speaks of it, Psalm. 29.3, -- 9. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters, The
God of glory thundreth, The Lord is upon many waters; The voice of the Lord is
powerful, The voice of the Lord is full of majesty, The voice of the Lord
breaks the Cedars, yea, the Lord breaks the Cedars of Lebanon; He makes
them also to skip like a Calf; Lebanon and Syrion like a young Unicorn; The
voice of the Lord divides the flames of fire, The voice of the Lord shakes
the wilderness, The Lord shakes the wilderness of Kadesh; The voice of the
Lord makes the hinds to-calve and discovers the forests; And in his Temple
does every one speak of his glory. Yea, and it is not unbecoming Even godly
people to stand in aw of God's terrible Majesty at such a time; A slavish fear
indeed should be striven against, because our heavenly Father has the whole
Direction of the Storm; Yet we should stand in aw of him when he thus loudly
utters his Voice. Job 37: 1, -- 5. At this also my heart trembles and is moved
out of its place. Hear attentively the noise of his Voice and the sound that
goes out of his mouth. He directs it under the whole Heaven and his
Lightning unto the Ends of the Earth. After it a Voice roareth; He Thundreth
with the Voice of his Excellency, and he will not stay them when his Voice is
heard. God Thundereth marvellously with his Voice. These works of God are
terrible and should strike an Aw into us, Especially,

(1) When we are particular Sufferers, or are hurt in any of our Interests by
such providence, our hearts should stand in aw of God. Even when we hear of
such things happening to Others at a distance, our hearts should stand in aw of
that God who does such mavelous things; But when it lights upon us or on our
relations, when we are wounded by his hand and broken by his power, it becomes
us to tremble and bow before him, Now the Lord comes nearer to us and they must
be stubborn Children indeed that will not yield, when they feel the smart and
suffer under the Effects of his Displeasure. (2) When Death is brought upon any
by these means in our presence, then our hearts should stand in aw of the Lord.
So when the Bethshemites were smitten in such great numbers, the rest that
survived thus Express themselves, 1 Samuel 6.20. -- Who is able to stand before
this Holy Lord God? So when Uzza was Smitten, David is said to have been
Displeased, This does not sound so well, For shall mortal man pretend to be
more just than God? to arraign his Proceedings, or charge him with doing any
thing that is wrong? But afterward he is said to have been afraid of the Lord,
And this may be a little upon the other Extreme, But certainly an holy aw of
God is proper and becoming on such an Occasion, 2 Samuel 6 7, 8, 9. To see any
person die, be it ever so Leisurely, pined and broken with distempers, has
something in it awful and solemn, which may well compose the spirits and fill
the beholders with thought and Concern; But when they are taken off at once, in
full health and strength, we are struck with surprise and astonishment, and
scarce know how to behave or which way to turn.

Once more,

(3) When God comes to break in upon some obstinate Sinners heart, many times
his appearance is very Terrible. Especially if they have gone far, continued
long and done much Evil against the Lord, Then an Heart-quake is raised within
them; They look pale, they tremble, they know not what to do, They cannot rest
Day nor Night. They repair to their Closets, They retire to the Woods, They
make their moan to their Friends, They Enquire of the Watchmen, They endure no
little Anguish and are indeed in a sad Condition for a time, till God do give
them rest from this day of trouble, So the three thousand Converted at the
Apostle Peter's Sermon, were in a mighty taking for a time. Act. 2 37 When they
heard this, they were pricked in their heart and said unto Peter and the rest
of the apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Much such a condition was
that which Paul was in, Act 9 6. And he trembling and astonished, said, Lord,
what will thou have me to do? So the Jailour, Act. 16 30. -- Sirs, what must I
do to be saved? Perhaps the Psalmist may have some references to this, when he
says, in, Psalm. 45.4, 5. And in thy majesty ride prosperously because of
truth, and meekness and righteousness, and thy right hand shall teach thee
Terrible Things; Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings Enemies,
whereby the people fall under thee.
II. We may Consider, That when God thus manifests himself to his people in
Terrible things, it is always in Righteousness. Text. Not only does God now
manifest his Almighty Power and Uncontrolled Sovereignty, against which there
is no disputing or contending, but his Righteousness too. This we must readily
own and acknowledge, God will be Justified when he speaks and Clear when he
Judges. Psalm. 119.75 I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are right and that
thou in faithfulness has afflicted me. Psalm. 145 17. The Lord is righteous in
all his ways and holy in all his works There is no blemish or defect in any
thing which God does, Nothing of which we should dare to say, That it ought to
have been otherwise; There are faults Enough and Enough in us to Justify the
Lord in his most severe Dispensations toward us; We must hold our peace and
not open our mouths to Complain, nor suffer an uneasy or grudging thought to
stir in our hearts, how heavy so ever the Stroke be, or how much so ever we are
made to smart thereby, We must still ascribe Righteousness to our Maker and our
Judge. So does Nehemiah, Chap. 9.33. Howbeit, thou art Just in all that is
brought upon us, for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly.

And here,

1 When God Executes Judgments upon his and his peoples Enemies, how ever Awful
it be, yet this is done in Righteousness. They Deserve it all; Even they shall
not be able to say, that he lays upon them more than is right, that they should
enter into Judgment with him. The people of God, perhaps, may be more ready to
allow that God is just and right in these cases, It is what they have Expected,
waited and prayed for, Yea and wondered that it came no sooner; But certainly
the Lord is not governed by a weak fondness and partiality for his people, to
lay upon their enemies more than is right; They are (...) for Judgments before
they are sent: Their Iniquities come to the full, before he Visits, When the
Harvest is ripe, then he gives Order to put in the Sickle, These phrases are
used, Joel 3.13, 14. Put ye in the sickle, for the Harvest is ripe; Come, get
ye down for the press is full, the Fats overflow for their wickedness is great
Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision, for the day of the Lord is
near in the valley of decision. The Enemies of the Lord and his people have
sometimes fallen wonderfully. His hand has been Heavy upon them; But yet the
Lord has been always righteous, Their mouths have been stopped, They could not
with any Justice Complain and it was really wonderful that the Lord suffered
them so long as he did. Rom 9.22 -- Endured with much long-suffering the
vessels of wrath, fitted to Destruction.

2. When God inflicts heavy strokes upon his People in the course of his
providence, he is certainly and must be acknowledged to be, just and righteous
therein. Whatever they fear, what ever they feel, even they must acknowledge
with Ezra Chap. 9.13. -- Thou, our God, have punished us less than our
Iniquities deserve. And indeed, why should a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sin? We are much unacquainted with the Nature of Sin, if we
think that they who are guilty of it in any Degree, may be overloaded with
Sufferings in this life; Neither does the Lord in this world always observe a
Mathematical proportion, in ordering out an equal Degree of Sorrow to an equal
Degree of Sin: That is reserved to the great and final Judgment, When HOW much
persons have glorified themselves and lived Deliciously, so much Sorrow and
torment shall be given them. But in this world, Sometimes they that have sinned
less are Corrected and afflicted more, And on the other hand they that have
sinned more are Corrected and afflicted less; This is according as it seems
good in the sight of our heavenly Father, But still all is done in
Righteousness; They that suffer most do not meet with a Jot too much. It any
are more spared it is always mercy and Clemency and is so acknowledged by them
that have a right sense of things. And when God lays heavier Strokes upon his
people, there is Nothing amiss. The Lord does all things well.

3. When God comes to subdue the heart of some Careless and obstinate Sinner,
whatever pain and Anguish is raised within, he is not only Just and righteous,
but very merciful therein. Especially if these strong Convictions do happily
Issue in a siving Conversion; For it is very sit that all should stoop to God's
Authority and bow to his Scepter, It is very Just that they who have taken
pleasure in Unrighteousness should be made heart Sick of their folly, that they
who have swallowed down Sin as some delicious morsel, should find this meat to
be turned in their bowels and be made as the gall of Asps within them, This is
not only Just, but it is a good day when the people are made willing in the day
of God's Power; Though their hearts ache and throb and a sword pierces through
their Souls, vet if these Awakenings and Convictions issue in Conversion, they
themselves in time to come, will acknowledge, that it is not only just and
righteous, that they should be brought to God's foot, but also that it was the
greatest Mercy that ever they received in all their Lives, For it may be said
of them as the Father did of his prodigal Son, at length returned home, These
poor Creatures were dead and are alive again, were lost and are found.

III. We may Consider, That yet at the same time He is the God of their
Salvation. So he is styled in the Text, And this Consideration is as
Comfortable and refreshing, as the other is awful and Terrifying Terrible
things from an almighty, stern and inexorable Judge are overwhelming indeed,
but when they come from a reconciled Father, the God of our Salvation, this
Consideration may well sustain and bear us up; Often in Scripture is the Lord
styled, the God of Salvation, and the God of our Salvation. 1 Chronicles 16.35. Save
us, O God of our Salvation. Psalm. 24.5. He shall receive -- righteousness from
the God of his Salvation. Psalm. 68.19, 20. -- Even the God of our Salvation, He
that is our God is the God of Salvation and unto God the Lord belong the issues
from Death. And frequently elsewhere.

In two respects principally the Lord our God may fitly be styled the God of
Salvation.

1. On the account of the Eminent Salvations and Deliverances given to his
people in times of Danger, Difficulty and Distress. Whatever Salvations they
receive God is the Author of them, Whatever means or Instruments are used, he
is the principal Cause and they are effectual only in his hand; When
Destruction is near people, God many times rescues them from the strokes of it
and that very remarkably, He puts them a little out of the way of it, He
shields and covers them and as it were hides them in the Hollow of his hand
that they shall not be at all hurt; In Battles, when Destruction is flying on
every side, In Storms at Sea and in Tempests and other Dangers on Shore, The
Lord covers their heads, is their Shield and the God of their Salvation; We
wonder how they Escaped when we come afterward to reflect and Consider of it;
We should have thought it almost Impossible that persons in such Circumstances,
in such a Situation, could have Escaped Death; but God preserves them by his
power and goodness and they receive little or no hurt; The Psalmist uses many
metaphorical yet apt Expressions to set this forth. Psalm. 91.3 -- 7. Surely he
shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler and from the noisome pestilence,
He shall cover thee with his feathers and under his wings shall thou trust, His
truth shall be thy shield and buckler, Thou shall not be afraid of the Terror
by Night, nor the arrow that flies by Day, Nor for the pestilence that walks
in Darkness, nor for the Destruction that wastes at Noonday; a thousand shall
fall at thy side and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh
thee. On this account he is the God of Salvation, Creatures may be Means of
Salvation, but He is the God of it.

2. He may be styled, The God of Salvation, in that he is the Author of their
Eternal Salvation from Sin and all the fatal Consequences thereof. When all had
been ruined and lost by man's Apostasy from God, he graciously devised means for
their recovery and laid help upon One that is mighty to Save, He sent his Son
into the world to take our Natures upon him and therein to make Satisfaction
for our Offenses, to lay a foundation for our recovery and reconciliation to
God; He has ordered this good News to be brought to our Ears and Life and
Happiness to be offered us in his Name; If any of the Sons of men, hearing of
these things, do close with Jesus Christ upon his own terms, it is he that
Enableth them to do it; He saves them and calls them with an holy Calling,
not according to their works, but according to his own purpose and grace; And
Finally, he brings them safely at last, through many Hardships and trials,
temptations and difficulties to Everlasting Life; On this account He is (as he
is here termed) the God of Salvation.

And Even when persons fall by temporal Judgments, as Eli and Uzza and Josiah
and others did, it would be hard to think or say, that they must needs on that
account, come short of Eternal Salvation.

I proceed to the IMPROVEMENT.

1. Does the God of their Salvation sometimes manifest himself to his people by
Terrible things in Righteousness? Then it is a weakness even in them to Expect,
that the Course of his providential dealings with them, should be always
Smooth, gentle and easy. They may look that sometimes he will write bitter
things against them, that he will show them hard things and cause them to Drink
the wine of astonishment, as the Expressions are, Job 13.26. Psalm. 60.3. It is
Enough, that he is the God of our Salvation and that he will take a fatherly
Care of them that Love him and desire to fear his Name and that at length their
Souls shall be bound up in the bundle of Life; They must not think to be Exempt
from the Common Accidents, troubles and sorrows of Life, No, nor from
Extraordinary strokes Neither, at what time or in what manner it shall please
our heavenly Father to inflict them.

II. Does the God of our Salvation sometimes manifest himself to his people by
Terrible things in Righteousness? Then it is not for them to Murmur and
Complain, no, not so much as to think hardly of the providence of God, when
such things happen to them. All is done in Righteousness, There is Enough in
our Conduct to justify even a much greater Severity, Our mouths must be stopped
from Charging God foolishly, and we must say with the Psalmist, Isal 103.10. He
has not dealt with us after our sins nor regarded us according to our
iniquities. Or. Lan. 3.22. It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not
consumed, because his compassions fail not. Instead of finding fault or
thinking hardly, it will become us on such Occasions, with Job. to fall down
and worship and Adore. Job 1.20, 21.

III. Does the God of our Salvation sometimes manifest himself to his people,
by Terrible things in Righteousness? Then all their religious Friends that hear
of such severe dispensations of divine providence, toward any person or
people, should be sure to pity, Sympathize with and pray for them. They should
put themselves in their place and Imagine that their Souls are in their Souls
stead; If they have Opportunity they may do very well to get about them,
direct, counsel and Comfort them under all that has befallen them, So Job 's
three friends proposed to do, and it had been well if they had performed the
good Office aright; But they seemed to have quickly forgotten their Design. Job
2.11. -- They had made an appointment together to Come to mourn with him and to
comfort him. People should not be careless and unconcerned about what befalls
others, while their Condition cries to them in that Language, Job 19.21. Have
pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God has
touched me.

IV. Does the God of our Salvation sometimes manifest himself to his people by
Terrible things in Rightcousness? It becomes them then in such a day, to
Consider what the can and Language of such providence is, and to Comply as
readily and punctually as ever they can, with the Lord's design and Intention.
There is a meaning in all such providence, which we should be sollicitous and
Inquisitive to find out, with a resolution to Comply with; Now we need the
Interpreter, One of a thousand, which Elihu speaks of, to show unto man his
uprightness, Job 33.23. Now we should apply our selves unto God, as Job did.
Job 10.2. I will say unto God, Do not condemn me, show me wherefore thou
Contendest with me.

And this brings me to Discourse more particularly of the Awful Dispensation of
divine providence toward Us of this Congregation the last Lord's Day.

We had finished our forenoon's Service and were returned again to the house of
the Lord, when no small Storm came over us, which prevented diverse of the
Congregation from assembling together with us; No sooner had we, that were met,
risen up to worship and scarce had we begun to utter our selves before the
Lord, when a dreadful Thunderclap broke upon us, with an amazing Noise, as if
diverse Cannon had been Discharged at once; The fire of God fell among us,
rending the House in a wonderful manner, which I may not stand, neither would
it be so proper, now to Describe; Striking down to the ground great Numbers of
people, Burning and wounding several in a most sorrowful manner; One desirable
Youth after a little struggle presently Expiring, the Lightning having licked
up his spirits beyond recovery.

Others, upon the application of proper remedies, being brought to their
Senses, were after a while carried home, where some of them still are the
Lord's prisoners, waiting upon the same hand that wounded, graciously to heal
and restore, And others are come Halting hither to Day, to give thanks to the
God of their Salvation; All of us Stunned and astonished with the sudden and
surprising Blow; Methinks the dreadful Sound is still in our Ears and we shall
scarce forget it to our Dying Day, Thus did the God of our Salvation answer us
by Terrible things in Righteousness;

It can scarre be Expressed by words the Concern, the Surprise, the
Consternation that was among us on that Occasion, Every ones Countenance was
changed at what had happened Uncertain whither there might not be something yet
more Severe presently to follow.

When we could a little recover our selves, then the Cries of friends for them
that needed help, were very pitiful and affecting.

We ran to the assistance of One, and behold Another and Another and Another in
every corner of the House, wanted us at the same time; We were all busied in
doing good offices for our friends, of one kind or another, to recover them
that were quite stunned with the blow, to revive them that fainted and bind up
the wounded and at length (when they were in condition for it) to attend and
bear them to their several homes; And only one, by the awful dispensation of
providence, was carried off dead, beyond all possibility of recovery; Thus
instead of the usual Exercises of the Lord's Day, this was our Employment for
that afternoon, And when we had sent off our dear friends sufficiently
attended, we had no more time left, but only to call together the remains of
the Congregation and in a short and humble address to God, to give thanks for
our preservation and bewail the burning which the Lord had kindled; So we
hastened home to the farther assistance of our wounded and Languishing friends
and also to bemoan and Comfort them that had been so awfully bereaved.

The Lord himself was pleased to preach to us more Immediately, that afternoon
in a tremendous manner, causing such a seriousness, trembling and
Consternation, as it did at Mount-Sinai, at the giving of the Law. Exodus 20,
18, 19. And all the people saw the thunderings and the lightnings and the voice
of the trumpet and the mountain smoking and when the people saw it, they
removed and stood afar off. And, they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us and
we will hear, but let not God speak with us, lest we die. The Apostle relating
this matter, adds some more Circumstances, Heb. 12.18-21

Too often (we must Confess) we have made too light of the Calls and warnings
that have been given us by men, but how shall we Escape if we turn away from
him, that thus speaks from Heaven?

I shall Cast what I have farther to say upon this Occasion into the following
method.

First, I shall Consider what Constructions may possibly and also what ought to
be made, of this astonishing dispensation of divine providence.

Secondly, I shall call upon the whole preserved Congregation never to forget,
but always to praiso God for their Eminent Deliverance.

Thirdly, I shall put you upon Sympathizing with the more Immediate Sufferers
and especially with them who have been so sorely bereaved.

And, Fourthly, I shall Invite and press you, Every one to make that wise and
good improvement of this providence, which our heavenly Father now Expects.

1. I shall Consider, What Constructions may possibly and also what Ought to be
made, of this astonishing Dispensation of divine providence. In such cases,
Every one have their Sentiments, all persons have their Say; Some perhaps may
Censure us as greater Sinners than Ordinary, because we have Suffered such
things; Others, that are more forsaken of sense and reason, may Interpret it,
as a Testimony from Heaven, against our Observation of Holy Time and professing
to spend it in the worship and service of God; To these last I would say, That
when we are commanded, not to forsake, the assembling of our selves together,
as the manner of some is, When the word is to, be preached in season and out of
season; when a Seventh part of our time has been set apart from the beginning
and made Sacred to the service of God and the care of our Souls, by a Statute
for Ever; We may Easily pass by such Censures as these and pity those that
offer them, Could we Observe holy time and attend these religious Duties in a
right manner we might Easily Justify our selves both to God and the world, for
our Observing them at all.

To the first, I would say, in our Blessed Savior's words, Judge not that ye
be not Judged, And put them upon remembering what he also said, Luke 13: 1, --
5. There were present at that season, some that told him of the Galileans whose
blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices, And Jesus answering said unto
them, Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans,
because they suffered such things? I tell you Nay, but except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish; Or those Eighteen upon whom the tower in Siloam fell
and slew them, Think ye that they were sinners above them that dwelt in
Jerusalem? I tell you Nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

We may be allowed, possibly, to make some such returns unto men.

But before the Lord our God, we must fall down and adore his Sovereignty,
acknowledge his righteousness, Kiss the rod, accept the punishment of our
Iniquity and own that he has punished us Less than our Iniquities have
Deserved, while he thus spits in our Faces and makes us an Example before the
world. There is no Justifying our selves before him, Nor may we Expostulate the
matter with him, saying, Wherefore have thou done this unto us? There has been
Enough and Enough amiss in our Conduct, to draw down this and heavier
Calamities upon our heads. We must say with Judah, Genesis 44.16 What shall we say
unto the Lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we clear our selves? God has
found out the Iniquity of his Servants. And, Oh! may the fruit of it be to
purge away our Sin and make us partakers of his holiness.

From all our Fellow Servants, who are wise and Considerate and that are
partakers of the true spirit of Christianity, we promise our selves, their pity
and prayers, that they will not despise our Sufferings, but will cordially
Commend us to him, who is able to make all things work together for our good.

II. I shall call upon the whole preserved Congregation never to forget, but
always to praise God for their Eminent Deliverance. We might have died by
Scores and by Hundreds, Yea, the whole Congregation might have been dispatched
at once into Eternity. The House might have been burnt about our Ears, Death
came round about us, Destruction hovered over us, Diverse were bro't to the
gates of Death, the very brink of the pit, and one actually carried thither,
more likely to have lived many Years the moment before, than multitudes of us;
How is it that we have Escaped, but only that it pleased our heavenly Father to
have Care of our Lives and mix abundance of Mercy with this Judgment; And shall
we not now cry out in the Language of the Text, O God of out Salvation! O God
of our Salvation!

We are as so many brands plucked out of the Burning; when we were all of us,
as it were thrown into the fiery surnace, our Lives were precious in God's
sight; And though some were more Scorched in the flames, yet they are now in a
fair way of recovery, And upon the most of us, not so much as the smell of fire
has passed, And that promise has been, Even Literally fulfilled unto us, Isa.
43.2, -- When thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee.

And it is well worthy of Remark, that there were many Instances of persons,
who but just before, removed from their usual places of Sitting, Some to avoid
the rain that came down upon them, Some moved with fear and some (perhaps) for
no manifest reason, who, if they had Continued but ever so little longer in the
places where they were, would have been in Eminent hazard of Immediate Death,
whither by the Thunder, which struck very near those places with a dreadful
force and Effects; Or by the fall of pieces of Timber from the roof, so large
and long, as might have crushed many to Death at once, or at least, made them
Cripples for their whole Lives;

So narrowly have we Escaped; so signally did providence Exert it self for our
preservation! And shall we not now say and sing with the psalmist, Psalm. 103.1,
2, 4. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within one bless his holy
Name, Bless the Lord, O my soul and forget not all his benefits. Who redeemeth
thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with loving kindness and tender
mercies.

Some (perhaps) may please and bless themselves, that they were not present in
the Congregation that awful Day and so, that they were more out of the way of
Danger; But to have been present and been witnesses, as we were, not only of
God's terrible Majesty, with which he was then pleased to Array himself, but of
his tender Care and goodness to his Unworthy people, It is a rich Experience,
well worthy to be laid up in Everlasting remembrance, Especially if God will
please to bless it too for our spiritual good, as (it is to be hoped) he will.

III. I shall put you upon Sympathizing with the more Immediate Sufferers and
Especially with them, who have been so Awfully bereaved. We, who have Escaped
better, should bear a tender Regard to them who have fared worse; We might have
been in their places and they in ours, had it so pleased God; Now as they that
know the heart of a Stranger, do better know and are more inclined to show
kindness and do good offices unto Strangers than others be, So we, that were so
near the Danger and did so narrowly Escape, It is to be presumed, can better
Sympathize with them that did more smart by it, And the rather, because this is
one good way to show our thankfulness to God, for our deliverance; Their wounds
and sores and bruises and lameness, should, in a sort, be felt by Each of us
and we should be ready to do all manner of good offices about them. And, I
bless God, that there is no manner of reason of Complaint of any backwardness
on this score.

But what shall we say to, or do for our dear Friends, that have been Called to
part with, a near and dear Relation, in so awful and solemn a manner?

Perhaps, it would but aggravate grief, to observe that he was a very promising
and desirable Youth, One that had Escaped more Untainted in his Manners, in
this dangerous time, One that by his Discreet Conduct had recommended himself
to every ones Esteem, and that none had any Evil thing to say of him; Just
arrived to his Freedom; Just setting out in the world, which he might have done
with good advantage; His Parents promising themselves much from him and even
saying with the parents of Noah, This same shall Comfort us concerning our work
and the toil of our Hands.

Hither he was come that Day, to worship with us and it seems he must not be
Diverted, though proposals were made of his going some other ways (for he chose
to worship with us, now that matter was left to his own choice and discretion)
And here the Providence of God met with him, on a good Day, in a good place and
(we trust) on a good Design; He falls in the Sanctuary (where some good people
have wished to Expire, if it were the will of God) and Dies at the very horns
of the Altar; He was observed to be more than ordinarily thoughtful and
Concerned, as the Storm gathered and blackned and drove more fiercely upon us;
And who can tell but that he dyed praying for himself and us? Who can say, but
that our Lord Jesus Christ, looking upon the Youth, might Love him, cloth him
with the bright robes of his Righteousness and so receive him to his Mercy?

These are things that we must leave, They are not to be Determined by us;
Wherefore I would say to his bereaved Relations, Sorrow not, my Friends, as
they that have no hope; We know your Trial is great and you will have need of
abundance of Grace and patience to behave suitably under this Sovereign
dispensation of divine providence. But Remember the Instance of Aaron, He lost
two Sons and both dyed in actual Sin (which was a much harder Case than yours)
and yet he held his peace, Lev. 10.1, 2, 3. So, do you labor to Acquiesce in
the dispensations of an holy God and say, The Will of the Lord be done.
Especially since you have much more to Quiet you under his hand.

And the good Lord make up to you this Loss in Spiritual and better blessings
and give you a Name better than that of Sons and of Daughters.

You have seen the Sympathy of your Fellow Servants, how forward they have been
to mingle their Tears with yours, in our late (almost) universal attendance at
his Funeral, We all looked on with pity and joined in Imploring mercies from
the God of Heaven, And now, May we all be Edified by your Example of patience,
Submission and resignation to the will of God, that we may learn the better how
to behave, if Ever God should call us out to any the like Trial;

And the Lord prepare us, Every one, for our Dissolution, at what time and in
what manner soever it may come, that then we may be found of him in peace.

IV. I shall invite and press you, Every one, to make that wise and good
Improvement of this providence, which our heavenly Father now Expects: The Eve,
both of GOD and Men will be now more upon us, to observe what our Conduct and
behavior will be after this; Some things are Evident, what is plainly our Duty
at this Day and some things may Easily be Searched out and come at, if we will
be at the pains to Examine;

Shall we not think now Every one of us, What if it had been our Lot to have
been struck dead at once in that awful Day, when Death was so very Near us?
What condition should we have been in? Was our peace made with God? Had we
gotten an Interest in Jesus Christ? Was there no guilt lying Unpardoned upon
our Souls? If so, we should then only have been hastened a little sooner into
the presence of our Redeemer, and ascended, as in a Chariot of fire, into the
region of the blessed; But if we had been yet in our Sins, Unregenerate,
Unconverted, Alienated from the life of God, Servants to diverse Lusts and
pleasures, it would have been a dreadful stroke indeed upon us, We should have
gone from one fire to a worse and it had been good for us that we had never
been born; Methinks every profane Sinner, when he remembers it, may Yet tremble
at his very Narrow Escape, to think how near he was to his being past all hope
and help and remedy. Well, now we are all spared a little Longer and have a
little more time to think and to set, our Souls in Order, if we have but the
heart to do it, And surely the loud Call, which we have had from heaven, should
be sufficient to rowze us; Shall we still put off and Delay? Shall we ever cry
to morrow, when God is saying, To Day? To Day if ye will hear his Voice, Harden
not your hearts.

The Great Design of the Gospel and indeed of all religion is, to bring us to
Love and to Fear God and to Subject our selves to him, To help us to Govern
well our passions and affections, our appetites and inclinations; To make us
just and righteous, kind and Benevolent and useful to all that are about us,
good Neighbors and good men, Thus it is represented, Tit. 2. 11, -- 14. For
the grace of God, that brings salvation has appeared to all men, Teaching
us, that denying ungodliness and wordly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world, Looking for that blessed hope and
glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for us that he might redeem us from all Iniquity and purify to himself
a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

And since we are fallen by our Iniquity and there is a Necessity of a Savior,
Surety and Mediator between God and us, upon whose account we may be accepted
in God's sight, Repentance toward God and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ,
are much Insisted upon in the New Testament Act. 20.21, Testifying both to the
Jews and also to the Gentiles, repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ. Heb. 6.-1 -- The foundation of repentance from dead works and of
faith toward God. And often elsewhere. These are the things that we must
Enquire after and not rest till we can find them in our selves; Wherefore now
especially since we have been under such Awakening Dispensations.

1. Let us Every one reform what has been amiss in our Conduct and testify
against Sin in Others. We all know, better than other persons, what Sins they
be that do most Easily beset us and most frequently prevail against us, We must
be best acquainted with the Plague of our own hearts and whatever our faults
and Irregularities be, whither we have Indulged our selves in any of the kinds
of Evil Speaking, taking God's Sacred Name in Vain, or Injuring of men; Whither
we are addicted to the Sins of Intemperance and Unchastity, to Injustice and
Unrighteousness, to Uncharitableness and Cruelty, or what ever other Fault it
be; Let us search it out and put it away, For why should we Indulge our selves
in any thing so Mischievous and fatal, that is like to End in Death? Let us
think, What fruit we have already had in these things, They have done us no
service and we have reason to be ashamed of them.

Thus having Reformed our selves, let us go forth to testify and appear against
Sin, where ever it is to be met with; From this day, let us not be
mealy-mouthed; If others will transgress the Laws of God, let us be so free and
bold as to tell them of it; Let those that are in Authority Exert their Power
for the Suppressing of Vicious practices, as they that do not mean to bear the
Sword in vain.

Pray also for me, that Utterance may be given me, that I may speak the Word
boldly and as I ought to speak.

Let wildness and Extravagance cease from this Day forward and Oh! that this
Stroke which has been upon us, might through the blessing of God, produce a
greater Circumspection, Sanctity and regularity in our Manners.

2. Let us set our selves Carefully to practice, the great Duties of
righteousness and mercy, which would make us blessings in our places and useful
to all that are about us. So Daniel Counseled Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.27.
Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee and break off thy
sins by righteousness and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; if it
may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity. Let us learn to be just to our selves,
and not live in Idleness, prodigality or any ways of unnecessary Expense. And
then, let us be just to other people, giving to Every one their due, and doing
to them, as we would have them to do unto us, Let there be no grinding of the
faces of the Poor, No Imposing upon the weak, simple and Credulous, any more
among us; Yea, let us learn to devise Liberal things and show mercy with
Cheerfulness. There will be ever among us, some that are Poor, some that are
Afflicted, some that are in Distress; From these we must not turn away our
Eyes, or shut up our bowels of Compassion, but run and even fly to their
assistance and relief; How much Religion lies in this the process at the great
day of Judgment may inform us, where our blessed Savior tells us that all
these things shall be Considered and brought to an account, Mat. 25.34, etc.
And the Apostle James informs us, Jam. 1.27. Pure religion and undefiled before
God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction and to keep himself unspotted from the world.

3. Let us live in the Use of the Instrumental Duties of religion which are
Designed to bring us to the Love of God and our Neighbor and use them as means
for this farther End.

Such as reading, hearing, meditating, Examining our selves, and attending upon
the Ordinances of the Gospel.

We must make Conscience of doing these things, because God has Commanded them
and makes use of them as Means to bring us to an Intimate Acquaintance with
Jesus Christ, to fill our hearts with Love to God, to make us fit for Service
and meet for the Inheritance among the Saints in Light hereafter; Wherefore let
me Exhort you Every one to study and peruse your Bibles and Meditate in the Law
of God Day and Night, This is the Rule by which we must live and by which we
must one day be Judged, We had need Endeavor therefore that we may be
intimately Acquainted therewith;

Get alone, frequently, by your selves, to think what Condition you are in and
what you must do to be Saved, to call your selves to a strict Account and
accomplish a most diligent Search. Then and there pray to your heavenly Father
that sees in secret and your Father that sees in secret shall reward you
openly. And let me beseech all such as are Masters of Families to set up and
keep up practical Religion there, walking within your Houses with perfect
hearts, that God may come and Dwell with them. Oh! Why are not your Voices
heard in the Morning and why in the Evening are you so very Silent; The Lord
grant that we may see this Fruit of the Frown that has been upon us, that
there may not be found One Prayerless Family among us any more; If hitherto you
have not Learned the way to the Throne of Grace, begin this very Night and now
take it upon you to Open your mouths to the Lord; And the Lord grant you
according to your wants and the desires of your Hearts, Yea, when ever you come
in your anguish and bitterness of your Hearts, then let the Lord please to hear
in heaven his Dwelling place and grant you answers of peace.

And shall I not prevail that the Sanctuary may be more frequented? Let no
persons place be Empty, when God gives you an opportunity to be present, that
you may not miss of any good for your Souls; Love the Habitation of God's
House, the place where his honor dwells, But come still in the multitude of
God's mercies and worship in his Fear toward his holy temple: From this time
forward keep your feet when you go to the House of God and be more ready to
hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools who consider not that they do
wickedly. Remember that God will be Sanctified in them that come nigh him and
before all the people he will be glorified.

The Voice of the Lord which we have lately heard, was not meant so much to
drive us from our place of public Worship, as to make us Cautious, Serious and
Devout whenever we Come thither, Now we should remember, that God is a Spirit
and they that Worship him should do it in spirit and in Truth, Among the
Romans, during the state of Heathenism, if any place were struck with
Lightning. It was straitway Expiated by the Sacrifice of a Sheep, of two Years
old and from thence it was termed Bidental, It was presently tail'd in; None
were allowed to approach to it, It was Esteemed Impiety to remove the
boundaries placed about it and it was accounted Sacred to their gods, It was
usually called triste Bidental and Evitandum Bidental.


Farther, Why do so many Live so long without Baptism for themselves, or for
their Children? Arife and be Baptized and wash away your Sins, calling upon the
Name of the Lord.

And why do More Live in the Neglect of the Lord's Supper? As if he had never
said to us, Do this in the remembrance of me, Or as if they did not Concern
themselves though he had; Oh! When shall the Lord's House be better filled, For
as yet, there is room.

It is time that we should be rouzed and Quickened to the Observation of these
things with greater diligence preparation and Care.

Once more,

4. Let us see to it, that the saving change of Conversion be wrought upon us;
Let us not be able to rest, till we can find that it is happily begun. Our Lord
himself has told us, in, Mat. 18.3. -- Except ye be Converted and become as
little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And again, Joh.
3.3, 5 -- Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God --
Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. We must begin to Live before we can act and work, We must Enter
in at the strait gate, before we can Walk in the narrow way that leads unto
Life; Let no persons flatter themselves, or rest in a deceitful Work, thinking
that they are something, when indeed they are nothing, Imagining that they are
Rich and Full and stand in need of Nothing, when at the same time they are Poor
and Wretched and Miserable and Blind and Naked. But let them Accomplish a
diligent Search and not cease till they can find the Lineaments of the New
Creature and that Christ is formed in their Hearts. Better had it been that we
had not been Born at all, than not be New Born before we Die; When shall the
time to favor us come, the set time, when shall it come? When they that are
yet Dead in Trespasses and Sins, shall be made to hear the Voice of the Son of
God, and hearing it, shall Live?

To Conclude, We have heard that a Work of God has been happily begun and
carried on, in some parts of the Country, People, in a general way, being
greatly Concerned for the Everlasting welfare of their Souls; It may be the
Lord means good unto Us also (When will he think upon us!) and begins with this
Terrible Stroke, For there was need of something very Awakening to Rouse us out
of that deep Security, into which many of us were fallen, But this alone will
not do; It may startle and make us tremble for a time, but we shall soon get
over it and return again to folly, unless the Lord please to send down his
Effectual grace, to pour out the Spirit of grace and Supplication to Accompany
it; The case may be something resembled by that passage, we meet with, in, 1
King. 19. 11, 12, -- And behold the Lord passed by and a great and strong wind
rent the mountains and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord, but the Lord
was not in the wind; And after the wind an earthquake, but the Lord was not in
the earthquake, And after the earthquake, a fire, but the Lord was not in the
fire; and after the fire, a still small voice.

We have had Earthquakes among us, a while since, which have rent the
Mountains, And though some were Awakened thereby to greater Seriousness. Yet
too many remained Unaffected; We have had a Violent Wind this present Year,
that has born down Buildings, Trees and the Fruits of the Earth before it; And
now we in this place have been Encompassed with this Terrible Fire;

But all will not do for the Amendment of our Hearts and Lives, if the Lord be
not in them; Oh! That he would please to utter the still, small Voice, which
shall silently and sweetly. Yet powerfully Transform us all into the divine
Image.

Can these dry bones Live? said the Lord once to the prophet; And he Replies, O
Lord, thou know. The Lord knows how to soften the hardest hearts, Enlighten
the blindest minds and turn Even the worst of Sinners into Eminent Saints; Turn
us and we shall be turned, Heal us and we shall be healed, for thou art the
Lord Our God.

FINIS.

