A Second LETTER From a Minister of the Church of England, To his Dissenting
Parishioners.

A Second LETTER From a Minister of the Church OF ENGLAND, To his Dissenting
Parishioners, In Answer to Some Remarks made on the former, by one J. G.

Prove. xxvi. ^^. As a madman who casts Firebrarnds, Arrows and Death, so is
the Man that deceives his Neighbor, and says, am not I in sport.

Psalm. cxx. 7. I am for Peace, but when I speak, they are for War.

BOSTON: Printed in the Year 1734.

A Second LETTER From a Minister of the Church of England to his Dissenting
Parishioners, in Defense of the former, etc.
Dear Brethren,
MY wi^^ing my former Letter to take off the Aspersions, which have been
injuriously cast upon the Church, was principally occasioned by this very J. G.
who, without any manner of Provocation* had (as some of his Friends have owned)
written a scurrilous Paper of Verses, which did most abominably misrepresent,
and abuse the Church, and tend to beget in People a very wrong Notion of it,
and a bitter, uncharitable Temper toward it: And now, in spite of all the
Caution and Tenderness wherewith I endeavored to conduct my self, both in my
Conversation and Letter, is still resolved to go on reproaching and
misrepresenting us, and setting us in all the odious and ridiculous Lights he
can invent. -- For my part, I sincerely aimed at reconciling the Difference
between you and us, and composing our Spirits as far as I was able, that if
possible we might come at a right understanding of each other, and a good
Agreement; or at least, if we could not attain to think alike, that we might
not think hardly, censoriously or injuriously of each other, and might live in
tolerable good Peace and Charity one with another. But this Man is resolved to
set, and keep us still at a variance, and to blow up the Fire of Contention and
Uncharitableness, and all forsooth, under the Pretense of doing Justice! tho
you will find by what follows, that his Remarks are in Truth one continued
Piece of Injustice.

As to my self, I regard not his Reproaches: Let him rail and try to expose and
vilify me as much as he pleases; his Wrath is impotent, and cannot hurt me: I
do heartily forgive him, and pray God give him Repentance and Forgiveness! --
and as to his reproachful and abusive Treatment of the Church, I will only say,
the Lord rebuke thee. I assure you that as I am not disposed, on so serious a
Subject, to be either angry or merry; so I shall not go into such a Method in
defending our Cause: I have not so lea^ned Christ: The Church of England does
not need such a furious, scolding, delusive Management, in defending her: She
has stood the test of Time, of Fire and Faggot, of Civil Rage and Tumult, of
Popish Tyranny and Enthusiastic Anarchy, and is not to be looked out of
Countenance at this time of Day, by the bold Insults, and brazen Estrontery of
little impertinent Adversaries God has abundantly assured the World that the
Church of England, which has ever been allowed to be the Bulwark of the
Reformation, is dear to Him, by delivering her in Six Troubles, and in Seven,
by a Series of remarkable, (I had almost said) miraculous Providence, and
having delivered us so often, and from so great Deaths, we trust in Him that He
will yet deliver us. The Wrath of Man shall Praise thee, O Lord, and the
Remainder thereof shall thou Restrain!

I am indeed sorry, for the poor Man's sa^e that he suffers himself to be so
much out of Temper and without any Provocation; that he should show himself so
little of the Gentleman, or the Christian; that he should betray so much ill
Breeding, as well as ill Temper, as he does by so much base Language, and such
odious Insinuations; However, The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of
GOD, and I doubt not but He will overruled all this wrathful Treatment of us in
such a manner as to make it turn to our Advantage; as it is, on the other hand
a great Disgrace to your Cause, that it should be defended in such a scurrilous
manner, insomuch that most of the sober, serious and thinking People among your
selves have often declared themselves ashamed of it, and even your Ministers
will not venture to offer a Syllable in defense of it.

It is indeed unaccountable to many considerate and moderate-spirited People of
both Persuasions, what can be the Occasion of it, that this Man, and some
others like him, should discover such a bitter Spirit against the Church of
England in the Country, and raise such an hi^eous outcry, as if it were the
greatest Judgment that ever befell it? What can tempt them to make such dolorous
Lamentations, as though our Church was the most heretical, corrupt and abominable
Communion in the World? How can it be such a dreadful Grief to them, as though we
brought another Religion, or another Gospel among you which you have not
received? Whereas it is not so, my Brethren, we have the same Religion, the
same Gospel, and the same Hope with you; only we think in some Things you are
mistaken, and that you are in the wrong in being on the side of those that
separate from so excellent a Church as ours is: These Men do therefore fright
themselves and you with mere shadows, and they know best what Ends they would
serve in so doing: But do not, I beseech you, suffer your selves to be frighted
or exasp^^^rated by their hard Speeches: We have no design (...) desire to
break in upon your Liberty, or impose up^ you; nay, we do not desire you to
conform to our Church any farther than you see good Reason for it: only we
would wish you to exercise your Reason and consider things heartily and
impartially, and not be governed by Passion or Prejudice, nor be put out of
humor by empty noise or confident nonsense.

I own, and bless GOD for it, the generality of your Ministers are Men of a
better Spirit, and will not run into the same excess of Riot with this Stranger
in speaking Evil of us; and many of them I know to be sensible and ingenious
Men, and of a good christian catholic Spirit, with whom I do, and shall
converse, with the same freedom, friendship and good will, as with any of my
Brethren of the Church; and I do aver that (...) Difference in Opinion ever
did, or shall alienate my Affections from any of them: And I cannot but wonder,
that they would suffer such a mess of Bil^insgate-Scolding to be printed, or
that they can any of them stomach to vend it about among their People: I am
sure they hurt themselves by it, and I am sorry for them, and for you, that you
are in danger of being imposed upon by it, though I cannot think it will
eventually hurt the Church: It breaths nothing of the English Spirit; it is all
over Outlandish: Had I had any of your own Writers to deal with, I should hope
to have been treated in a more Gentleman-^ike, and christian Manner; however, I
have not found my self disposed to be put out of humor by it, and I can assure
you, that all the Passion it ever rai^ed in me, is that of Pity for him, that
he should be so unhappily enslaved to his own Passions and Prejudice.

The only Instance wherein he can have any face to pretend that I expressed my
self harshly is, (as he will have it,) that I called your Teacher a blind
Guide, and then launches out in a great Commenda^ion of him, which, I assure
you, I don't envy him; I rather wish for his sake it had been given him by a
Person of a more Established Reputation that it might have been a Credit to
him. -- But he is very wrong to represent me as calling Him, in particular, a
blind Guide: All that I did was to exhort you in our Savio^^s Words to (...) he
Danger there is, lest, if the blind lead the (...) both fall into the Ditch, i.
e. into ^rror, which certainly is the Case of those, be they who they will, who
lead, and are led, into such a wrong and bitter Notion of the Church of
England, and such an uncharitable Temper toward it: But I applied it to
nobody: let Them take it to whom it belongs: That there are blind or ignorant
Guides in all Communions, n^^e will deny, and it was our Savior's Intention,
(a^^ that and that only, was mine,) to exhort the People to be upon their
Guard, to look out carefully and see with their own Eyes, and not to pin their
Faith upon any Man's Sleeve, nor be blindly led on into Error by ignorant and
designing Men, be they who they will: This was all that I did, and pray where
was the Crime of it?

I wish your Teachers were, some of them, more studious, and more knowing than
they are; and it would be well for them and you too, if, (as some of them do,)
they would all read the excellent Writers of our Church: For I find that those
of your Preachers that are most acquainted with our D^^ines, are the most
admired by your selves, and that the more knowing any of them, or their People,
are, the better tempered they are toward the Church; and you may depend upon
it, that in proportion as true Knowledge increases (...) Country, a Veneration
for the Church of England ^^ll increase, and that the most bitter and
censorious will ever be found the most ignorant.

But to come a little nearer to our Controvertist: I will first make two or
three general Remarks on his unfair Management in this Controversy. (...) One
is, that ^e wou^ seem to defend the Constitution of the Churches of (...)
Country, and you are apt to take it, that it is your Cause he is pleading,
whereas it is the Presbyterian Kir^ of Scotland, that (...) really has at
Heart, and aims at, at the bottom; and the Truth is, he drives as really a^ an
Innovation in the Country, as I can be supposed to do: It is not the Cause of
the Congregational Principles of this Country that he is after, but what he
calls the glorious Zenith of Presbytery, p. 16. and to gild over his Design the
better, he calls you Presbyterians, and speaks as though Presbyterianism was
established in these Governments, p. 2. whereas every body that knows any thing
of the matter, must know, that the Principles and Practices of this Country
are, in many things, very remote from Presbyterianism. It is well known that
the generality of our Forefathers were Independents or Brownists, and he
himself owns, p. 12. that he has as much aversion to Brownism as to Prelacy. He
dislikes your Church Government, and owns your Relations and Church-Covenants,
p. 28. and your not reading the Scriptures to be Errors, p. 35. So that he is
really an Enemy to the Cause he would be though it to defend.

In the next place, he is very unfair in observing so often, and making such a
Triumph of it, that I say some things without proving of them, when he knows
that I never armed nor pretended to prove every thing in the Compass of two or
three Sheets of Paper, and that it was one Design of my Letter to invite you as
Lovers of Truth and fair Inquirers, to give me opportunity in Conversation to
prove several Things that I did not pretend to prove in so little a Compass:
and yet this mean Artifice is used to represent as though I had proved nothing at
all: Tho you will find by what follows, that there were many things, and those
the most important, which I did prove, and he has not, to several of them, so
much as attempted an Answer.

Lastly, when I express my Dislike of the Temper of some of your Treachers
toward the Church, and especially their scattering abroad several Books, which
set it in a very false and odious Light, he is very injurious in representing
me, p. 15. etc. as though I condemned them all in a lump, as so many Seducers,
Deluders, Enemies of GOD, Crucifiers of Christ, and I know not what: I am sure
there is nothing in my Letter that can be justly interpreted to bear such a
meaning. No, I know very well that there are not very many of them, (and I am
sorry for him that he has given so much proof that he is one) who are of that
bitter, injurious Spirit that I though it it my Duty to bear Testimony against. --
But though some of your Ministers, as he says, do treat me with all Civility and
Candor, (and I am sure I never have been wanting in my Returns, as he very
well knows,) He is resolved to be none of that Number; he is engaged to blacken
me, though it be at the expense of known Truth and common Justice: He charges me
with repeated railings against them, both from the Press and Pulpit. p. 15. Now
as to this, I may say, GOD is my Witness, and you also, that it is a most
notorious falsity -- And I appeal to you all that ever knew or heard me, if I
have ever said or written any that could be justly called Railing, or any thing
like it.

And now to begin with this Pamphlet, and take things in Course. -- The first
thing he objects against me is, that I call you Dissenters, and my Parishoners;
and he will have that we of the Church rather are Dissenters in this Country,
where he says the Presbyterians are the established Church, p. 2. -- To all
which I answer thus, -- That you are my Parishioners, is as true, as it is that
I am appointed Minister of this Town and the Places adjacent, by the Honorable
Society incorporated by Royal Charter for providing Ministers for the
Plantations, and by the Bishop of London to whom the Ecclesiastical Government
of them is committed by the supreme Authority of our Nation: And for this I can
produce my Instructions. -- That you are Dissenters is as true as it is that
you dis^ent from our Church and do not conform to it, as I have proved it your
Duty to do. -- That the Church in this Country are not Dissenters* in his sense
of the Word, is as evident, as it is false, which he says, that the
Presbyterians are the established Church ^^re: And that neither they, nor any
(...) Persuasion contrary to the Church of England, are esta^hed in this
Country, is evident from the Lord's Justice ^er to the Lieutenant Governor of
Boston, in the (...), which declares, That there is no regular Es^ of ^y
National or Provincial Church in these Pl^^tations* (...) there be any without
His Majesty's Consent, and that it would be a Contempt of his Royal Prerogative
for the Legislature here, to undertake to make any Establishment without Him,
etc.

He seems angry p. ^. that I call you Brethren: What a strange Man is this? He
is neither pleased, full nor fasting: If I did not call you so, then he would
exclaim against me as uncharitable; and if I do call you so, then I am
inconsistent with my self: If the Church should declare a formal Sentence of
Excommunication against you, then he would say she is Tyr^^^ical; and if she be
so tender as not to declare such a Sentence against those that do, ipso facto,
i. e. materially or in fact excommunicate themselves: and is so kind as still
to call them her Brethren, (as the fact is, and we have always done,) then,
forsooth, we must be faulted for not treating you as Heathen and Publicans;
though in that case, according to St. Paul, 2 These. 2.15. we should not count you
as Enemies, but admonish you as Brethren. How shall we contrive to please this
(...)-tempered Gentleman? However, Whither he be plea^ed or displea^ed, I will
go on, upon the S^^re of our common Christianity, to call you, my Brethren, tho
you are on the side of A Separation from the Church; and the rather because, I
don't consider you as being so much to blame for it, as such furious Men as
this J. G. who try to keep you as much at odds with us as possible; upon which
account you are rather to be pitied than severely treated.

Nay, He seems displeased that I pray for you, and f^^uts at me that I pray
without Book; as though the Church allowed of no Prayers to be used, even in
private, or any particular Occasion, besides the Public Prayers; though he
knows, or might know, that she prescribes no Forms for private Use, but leaves
the People to use what Method they please, and even allows the Minister to
express the Prayer in public, before the Sermon, as he thinks fit: And if he
had read our Public Prayers over so carefully as he pretends, he might have
found that we do constantly pray, That GOD would bring into the way of Truth,
all such as have erred and are deceived, in which we pray for you; and
moreover, That we pray for all our Enemies, Persecutors and Slanderers, in
which we pray for him; And GOD forbid that I should cease to pray for you, or
him either.

He says, p. 4. That he must use plainness of Speech, and tell me, That it is a
most notorious falsehood, when I say that great pains are taken to fright you
from coming within the Doors of the Church, when he knows I meant the Church of
England. Now that this is true, I appeal to your own Knowledge, and to his
bitter Writings, full of dolorous outcrys against the Church -- He exhorts me
to take beed how I seduce end deceive poor Souls, etc. this I have always done,
and by the Grace of GOD, I hope shall do, very conscientiously: and I wish he
had been careful to act up to his own Exhortation: I am sure he greatly
endangers them by trying to inspire them with such bitterness and rancour
toward their Christian Brethren, so much the reverse of the Temper of the
Gospel.

He says, p. 5. It can be nothing but an ambitious Spirit of Usurpation that
makes me find fault with People's not coming to me, when I only desire that
they would be so candid, and so much lovers of Truth and Right, as to examine
things impartially, and when they hear the Church decryed and derided, to come
and give me opportunity to vindicate it, and see with their own Eyes, whether
it be that odious thing it is represented to be; to try all things, that they
may know, and hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5.21. Now why must this be
uncharitably styled a Spirit of ambitious Usurpation? Why may it not be from a
Love of Truth, and an earnest desire that it may not suffer from a Spirit of
Party and Prejudice? As I do sincerely declare that it is.

However, to antidote you against coming to the Church, which is solemnly
dedicated to the Worship of GOD, he contemptuously and impiously calls it a
little Cage under the Hill: -- Much like a Gentleman! -- And like a Christian!
-- This I suppose he takes to be very pretty, thus to sport himself with sacred
things. Is this the Man that writes himself a Minister of the Word of GOD? (for
that is the meaning of those mystical Letters, V. D. M.) -- With what face can
he pretend to be a Minister of the Gospel of Peace and Reconciliation that
shall use such Language as this to stir up a Spirit of Hatred, Contempt and
Ill Will among Christians?

He says, p. 6. I tell you you are brutishly ignorant of the way of Salvation:
-- Now where have I used any such Expression, or any thing like it? Have I not
said the contrary? How abominably false and injurious is this? -- I do indeed
maintain, that your unacquaintedness with the Church of England is the main,
and I would hope the only, reason of your Aversion to it: and I must say, and
am well a^^ured of it, that the Christian Religion is more clearly and
intelligibly taught in the Church of England, than it is among yo^^ But is this
to say, you are brutishly ignorant of it? GOD forbid!

In p. 7. also you have a most gross instance of unfair and unrighteous
Dealing: He would persuade you that we have no Godly Discipline: And that the
Church her self owns it, and quotes a Passage in the Liturgy for it: But how
unfairly does he act? He sets down the Beginning of a Sentence, and leaves out
what should explain it: -- What can this be, if it be not a wilful design to
delude you? I will give the whole Sentence that you may see what the Truth of
the Case is. -- Brethren there was in the primitive Church a Godly Discipline
that at the beginning of Lent such Persons as stood convicted of notorious Sin
were put to open Penance. -- This particular Instance of ancient Discipline,
that notorious Offenders should do open Penance on the first of Lent, we own we
have not, and wish it restored: But is this to own we have no Godly Discipline
at all, because we don't use this good ancient Custom? I say again, GOD forbid!
If open Penance is not done on the first of Lent, as it was in the ancient
Church, it does not follow that it is never done at all: And if he had not been
resolved to blacken us at any rate, right or wrong, and at the expense of both
Truth and Justice, he would not have concealed the express Order of the Church
at the beginning of our Communion Office, where the Minister is strictly
required to forbid any open and notorious evil-liver, presuming to come to the
Lord's Table, till he openly declare himself to have truly repented and amended
his naughty Life, etc. And what this open Penance is, you may see in the
Present State of Great Britain, p. 190. The Delinquent is to stand in the
Church Porch, on some Sunday bearhead and barefoot, bewailing himself, and
begging every one that passes by, to pray for him; then to enter the Church,
and in the middle of the Church he is placed over against the Minister, who
declares the foulness of his Crime, odious to GOD and scandalous to the
Congregation, But if he is obstinately Impenitent, the dreadful Sentence of
Excommunication is denounced against him. -- Now is not this a Godly
Discipline? What would this Man have? -- If indeed, There be too great a
Relaxation of Discipline in the Church, we may thank the Separation for it,
which has been a Refuge for the obstinate and perverse, whereby the Churches
Authority has been grievously weakened.

As to the Government of our Church he says, you have unanswered and
unanswerable Arguments against us extant. -- Now this I deny to be true, and do
assure you that I know him to be very ignorant of the best Writers on our Side;
and therefore no wonder he should talk at this Rate, and that you have no
Arguments against us but what have been answered over and over again: On the
other hand, We have sundry Authors that never were so much as attempted to be
answered, such as Hooker, Potter, The Original Draught of the Primitive Church,
The London Cases, etc. -- He calls me, p. 8. to show what there is on your side
nearer akin to Pop^ry, than any thing in the Church: Because he is so
importunate, I will here mention one thing, and that is, That Bishops and
Presbyters are of the same Order: This is the main Foundation Principle of
Presbyterianism, and this was also strenuously contended for by the Managers of
the Court of Rome, as any one may see in F. Paul's History of the Council of
Trent: Some other Instances I shall mention afterward.

As to what he says here of the Apocrypha, Holy Days, the Sign of the Cross and
Kneeling, it shall be considered afterward. -- And a^ to what he says, p. 9.
and 10 of the Lordly Superiority of Bishops and their swearing Obedience to
Archbishop: -- I answer, It is very injurious for him to represent them as so
many arbitrary Tyrants, when he knows, They can require nothing but what is
according to Law: and where is the harm of swearing to be obedient to lawful
Authority in all Things lawful and honest, which are the Words of the Oath as
expressed in our Licenses: -- But he would represent as though it were a blind
implicit Obedience that is required, which is a thing the Church knows nothing
of, but has ever declared her utmost abhorrence of it. -- And here, how
wickedly does he insinuate that the Archbishop of Canterbury is as bad as the
Pope of Rome? -- He is but another Pope! -- Not a Penny to choose between them!
-- What can this be, if it be not a formed Design to impose upon you? And to
operate the more pleasingly on your Credulity, he insinuates it with a
Similitude of a Cat and a Mouse-Catcher, -- and laughs, and thinks he is
wondrous Witty: -- poor Man! -- As if a Cat caught nothing but Mice, and
nothing caught Mice but a Cat: what poor despicable childish Stuff is this? --
I wonder he could not have thought, on this Occasion, of a Weasel, or of a sort
of Owl that catches Mice: So difficult a thing is it for some People to look at
home! -- No, He says they are the same, and so is the Pope and Archbishop! --
Now, how intolerably abusive is this? -- when he knows well enough that the
Pope claims an Infallibility and absolute Supremacy over all the Bishops in the
World; whereas the Archbishop of Canterbury, is but the First among his
Equals, and no more to the rest, than a Foreman to a Jury, or a Moderator to a
Town-Meeting.

Here he would have you believe too, that however wicked a Man is, we declare,
in the Burial Office, that we have a good Hope he is gone straight to Heaven:
-- I must still say, such false Insinuations are very wicked: We do indeed
declare our Hopes in that Office, but not however wicked a Man has been: For I
know not that we are obliged to use that Office over one that there is no hopes
of. --

He falsely pretends because I mentioned Delaune's Name but once, that this is
all you bear of Delaune's Arguments, when I pretended to answer the most
material Objections in that Book: Now as to this I still say, that I answered
the most material Objections in his Book, though I mentioned his Name but once:
And where I did mention his Name, I answered the main Objection he has, and
indeed that which runs through the whole Book, weak as it is, as this Man owns,
viz. that of our symbolizing with Popery, and showed that it concludes as
strongly against you as against us.

In the next three Pages you have a long harrangue about Persecution. -- To
which I have these things to say. -- In the first place, That what he calls
Persecution, I still maintain, was the doings of the State, and not of the
Church; and this is as evident as it is that they are entirely distinct
Governments: -- Do any of the Churches Laws threaten Fines, Imprisonment or
Death to those that break them? No: How then can she be charged with inflicting
them? -- Why he says, because some of the Ecclesiastics were of the
Legislature: -- Well, be that as it will, this don't prove that they either
made those Laws, or executed them, especially as Ecclesiastics: -- But suppose
they did: I don't pretend to say, there never was a Churchman of a persecuting
Spirit: -- If there have been such, they must answer for it: I am not concerned
to defend Them, but the Church: And I challenge him to show one Principle or
Tenet of the Church that implies or justifies Persecution; for the Church is
the same now there is no Persecution as when there was, and yet the Divine
Right of Diocesan Episcopacy still is, as it always was, a Doctrine of our
Church.

And Secondly, Neither did the civil Government of England, except in Popish
Times, overshed a crop of any Man's Blood on account of Religion, which was the
Expression I used. -- Nor do I, as he says, represent the Presbyterians as
seditious Incendiaries, unless he will own they were those that were guilty of
seditious Practices under a pretense of Zeal for Religion. -- Indeed most of
the bitter things he instances in, were what the Dissenters suffered in the
latter part of King Charles II's Reign and under King James II. when it was
very well known, that not the Church but Popery was at the bottom, and the
Church at last was Persecuted as well as the Dissenters.

I tell you in my Letter, p. 7. that you are most unreasonable in talking of
Persecution now, when you have almost 50 years enjoyed an uninterrupted
Toleration. -- To this he says, he is sorry I cannot reckon back as far as 1688:
Why really I fancy if he could reckon so far back he would find it almost 50
years. And with what propriety could King James be said to interrupt the
Toleration, when he was the King that first granted it? and that the year
before; and the Presbyterians were vastly lavish of their Compliments in
thanking him, though they knew it was designed for the sake of bringing in Popery.

As to the Days of Oliver Cromwell, when the Dissenters were uppermost, though
the Brownists or Independents were his greatest Favorites, as he pleads, yet
the Presbyterians were also supported by him in opposition to the Church: And
though I believe they generally abhorred the Murder of the King, yet they
barbarously deprived him of his Chaplains, and denied him the Liberty of the
Common Prayer, and had a great hand in the management of those Times when, as I
say, the Church was suppressed, and her Clergy sequestered, plundered and
barbarously treated; and for this I appeal to Walker's History of the
Sufferings of our Church and Clergy in those Times of Rebellion and Confusion.
-- But I would as^ him, (...) not things go as the Presbyterians would have
them when the Directory was established, and (...) Cl^v^ got into the Sadd^e?
Now the same Act of Parliament that establishes the Presbyterian Director made
b^ (...) Assembly of Divines, did enact, that If any (...) or Persons
whatsoever, shall at any T^me or T^ hereafter use the Book of Common Prayer, in
any Church, Chapel or public Place of Worship, or in any private Place or
Fami^, etc. that then every such Person so offending ^^all for the first
Offense forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Pounds, and for the second Offense the
Sum of Ten Pounds, and for the third, shall suffer one whole years
Imprisonment, without bail or main-prize. These are the very Words of the Act
of that Presbyterian Parliament, and yet he has the assurance to ask, Will you
charge these things on the Presbyterians? And in Scotland I still maintain that
the Presbyterians did, not only, as he says, repossess themselves of what they
had been deprived of, but did, moreover frequently disturb and interrupt the
Episcopal Clergy in their religious Assemblys, and prosecute them for using the
English Service in their Congregations, and administering the Sacraments
according to the Form and Manner prescribed in the Church of England, till
Queen Anne and her Parliament found it necessary to make an act of Toleration
for the Episcopal Church there. These are Words of the present State of Great
Britain, p. 281. See also Letters of Toleration against Meldrum. -- I do
therefore still say, that no Dissenters of any Denomination can with any face
of Modesty object Persecution against us, when they in their Turns have
persecuted us as much as ever they can pretend they were persecuted: Though I do
abhor and condemn it equally on both sides, and wherever it is found.

After he has pretended to set the Case of Scotland in a clear Light, (though I
can see no Light in it,) he says boldly and roundly, that no part of Christ's
mystical Body over drank deeper of the Cup of Persecution, than the
Presbyterian Church there did from the Hands of Protestant Prelates. What a
prodigious Assertion is this? What can I make of it? I am loath to charge him
with a design to say a notorious untruth, I had rather think him beside
himself, or grossly ignorant, if I could any way help him out: Did he never
read any thing of the ten bloody Persecutions of the primitive Church? Or does
he know nothing of the innumerable Butcheries of Protestants from the Tyranny
of the Church of Rome? Need I say how vastly more, even beyond Comparison, they
suffered in 4 years under Queen Mary's Reign in England, than these People in
the whole 28 years he speaks of in Scotland? Nay I may appeal to Walker's
History abovementioned, compared with Bp. Burnet, that the Church of England
and her Clergy suffered, at least as much in 12 years in the Time of the
Rebellion: What does the Man mean in giving himself such unaccountable
Liberties? -- I am not concerned to vindicate Archbishop Sharp; but with what
face can he mention him, when he knows that he was barbarously Murdered by
Presbyterians? He ought rather in tenderness to his own Cause to be ashamed to
revive the Memory of that bloody deed.

As to Lampoons, I dislike them on both sides: but with what Justice he or
others can complain I cannot see, when he knows they begun with their Catholic
Remedy, and their important Questions as he calls them: I will venture to tell
you one of his very important Questions, it was this; after a very false and
odious Description of the Church of England, in a sort of barbarous Rhymes, he
asks, Are these Christ's Church, pray, or ben't they the Devils. Does he think
such Questions deserve serious Answers? Or, if he does, can he or any mortal
blame me; who (without returning Railing for Railing, or one Lampoon for
another,) have though it it my Duty, seriously to endeavor to vindicate the
Church, in a Country where she is so barbarously misrepresented and abused?

We are now come to that point, Whether the Martyrs in Queen Mary's Days were
Presbyterians? Now I can produce living Testimony that such things have been
pretended, -- However this he gives up, and allows that whoever said so ought
to be made ashamed of it. -- But yet he thinks they would have been for
bringing the Reformation forward to Presbytery, if they had lived a little
longer, p. 16. -- No, no, they were not such weak People, or so ignorant of the
Scriptures or the State of the Primitive Church as to be likely afterward to
alter their Judgments, or think Presbytery preferable to Episcopacy: They knew
what they did, and having the Civil Government with them in their Proceedings,
they had opportunity to go on leisurely, and to consider things with Care and
Accuracy, and to set down their foot very wa^ily. -- It has indeed been often
pretended, merely from some unguarded Expressions of private Men, that our
first Reformers held Episcopacy to be only Jure humano, i. e. of human
Appointment: But with what Justice can this be pretended? When they
deliberately and publicly declare in the Preface to the Ordination-Office,
that, It is evident to all Men, diligently reading Holy Scriptures and ancient
Authors, that from the Apostles Times there have been these Orders of Ministers
in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, which were ever held in such
reverend Estimation, that no Man by his own private Authority, might presume to
execute them, except he were first tried, examined and approved, and with
public Prayer and imposition of Hands admitted thereto.

I say, Those holy Martyrs were the very Men that compiled our Forms of Prayer.
-- In answer to this, He asks, What did our Church do for Forms before their
Day? and would insinuate, that before this they prayed without Book, and so in
this Regard were Presbyterians, p. 16. What wretched quibbling and unfair
delusive dealing is this? when he and every body knows, that before their Days
Popery was the established Religion in England. What they aimed at, and
declared to be their Design, was to purge the Church of all Popish Innovations,
and restore it as near as possible to the Primitive Model, as it stood before
the Days of Popery; and the Forms they prescribed were such, and many of them
the very same, as were used in the Church, within the Three or Four first
Centuries, as Dr. Comber, and Mr. Bingham plainly make appear: and for these
their Proceedings and their steadfast adhering to them, in Opposition to the
Church of Rome, it was that they burnt at the Stake, and not merely for such
Things as we hold in common with you, as he insinuates.

He still insists upon it, that, Though we use the Service of the Church, we are
no true Churchmen; and will have it that we are Arminians, and a deal of pains
he takes upon this Point, pages 17, 20, 29. and says, p. 42. Though I hate the
Name of that Dutch Presbyterian, yet I am a Man after his own Heart: To all
which, I answer, First, Though I am none of his Disciples, yet I don't hate him:
Nay, I will own, that I have a much better Opinion of this Dutch Presbyterian,
than I have of some Scotch and Irish Presbyterians, and don't deny but that we
hold some Doctrines in common with him: Where he follows Christ and his
Apostles, I am content to follow Him; but I am far from following him in every
thing; and therefore it is unfair and unjust for him to endeavor to render me
odious by calling me an Arminian. He would think me very unjust if I should
call him a Mohammedan, because he holds some Doctrines that Mahomet taught; and
yet this he certainly does; for it is well known that the Doctrine of absolute
Predestination which he holds, was one of the fundamental Principles of
Mahometanism: But just so unfair is he in calling me an Arminian.

Secondly, Whereas he says, you hold this Doctrine just as we do: This I deny;
and leave it to any body to compare your Confession, and his pretended
Explication of it in p. 43, with our Article: You can indeed consistently own
our Article, but we cannot consistently own your Confession, because it
peremptorily determines in this Controversy, which ours does not, for there is
not a Syllable in it of absolute Reprobation, which is the grand Point that we
scruple: And herein the Wisdom and Goodness of our Church was very conspicuous,
in so treating of this Doctrine, as not to give Offense to Persons of either
Persuasion. For,

Thirdly, I appeal to Dr. Heylin's History of this Controversy, and Bp. Burnet
on the 39 Articles, [and I here mention it once for all, that when I quote
Authors to save the Trouble of writing, if any Persons want to be further
satisfied, and desire it I will lend them the Books I refer to] I say I appeal
to those Authors, that our first Reformers did not aim at expressing Calvin's
Sense; but designedly went in the middle way of Erasmus, Melancthon and the
Ausburg or Lutheran Confession: And those who were rigid Calvinist's afterward
were so sensible of this, that they were not contented with our Articles, and
would have had the Lambeth Articles, (as they are called) established, which
strongly express the Calvinistic Sense: Now if our Articles, were full on that
side, what need they have troubled themselves to bring in any others? See
especially Dr. Heylin, who abundantly vindicates our Church from the
Imputation, of Calvinism. I would observe,

Fourthly, That it is not a just and fair way to judge of the Sense of the
Church by any single Phrase or Expression taken by it self alone; (especially
since so accurate a way of Speaking and Writing on controversial Subjects had
not then obtained in our Language, nor in those Times, as it has since,) but
the right way of ascertaining the Churches Sense, is to take the whole of it
together, and compare the several Passages in the Articles, Liturgy and Homiles
on a Subject one with another, which you may see done by Dr. Heylin in a
multitude of Instances; I will mention two or three; Thus in the Prayers we use
such Expressions as the^e, Almighty GOD who have compassion on all Men, and
hate nothing that thou have made, and would not the Death of the Sinner,
but rather that he should be converted and live. And in the Catechism we teach,
That Christ has redeemed us and all Mankind. -- And indeed the 17th Article
explains it self, if he had fairly given you the whole of it; for after what he
recites, these Words follow, Furthermore we must receive GOD's Promises in such
wise as they be generally set forth to us in Holy Scripture, and in our Doings,
that Will of GOD is to be followed, which we have expressly declared to us in
the Word of GOD. Now in the Word of GOD it is expressly declared, that Christ
died for all, 2 Cor. 5.14. That he tasted Death for every Man, Heb. 2.9. That
he bought or redeemed, even those who notwithstanding by denying him brought on
themselves swift Destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1. And that GOD is not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to Repentance and be saved, 2 Pet. 3.9.
and 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. I would ask now, how it can be supposed to be the Sense
of our Church; That Christ died only for here and there one, and that GOD has
absolutely Decreed or Willed the eternal Misery and Destruction of all the rest
of Mankind: No, I am sure if we take the Articles, Prayers and Homilies
altogether, and heartily interpret one Passage by another, and by the general
Tenor of the whole, we shall find nothing in them that can be justly
interpreted to express the Calvinistic Doctrine of absolute Predestination and
Reprobation: And let the Articles be so understood, as in Candor and Justice
they ought, and there is not one of them, but I do heartily own and assent to.
And besides,

Fifthly, Who, I beseech you, can be supposed so well to have understood the
Churches Sense in her Articles, as those very Men that composed them? Now it is
certain that they taught exactly as we do now, and that long before Arminius
was heard of; I might instance in several of them, but for brevity, I will only
quote a Passage out of each of those three good Martyrs, Archbp. Cranmer, Bp.
Latimer, and Bp. Hooper, which you may see in Bp. Fowler's Discourse on
Christian Liberty, and many more in Dr. Heylin. Archbp. Cranmer says, that
Christ made a Sacrifice and Oblation of his Body on the Cross, which was a full
Redemption, Satisfaction and Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World.
Which are also very near the same Words that our Church uses in her Communion
Service. Bp. Latimer says, that Christ shed as much Blood for Judas as he did
for Peter; Peter believed it, and therefore was saved, Judas would not believe,
and therefore was condemned; the fault being in him only and in no body else,
etc.. And Bp Hooper says, Judas was no more excluded from the Promise of Christ
than Peter; Esau than Jacob, concerning which two Brethren in the Sentence
g^ven to Rebecca, there was no mention at all that Esau should be disinherited
of eternal Life, but that he should be inferior to his Brother Jacob in this
World, which Prophecy was fulfilled in their Postery, and not in the Persons
themselves: GOD is said to have hated Esau, not because he was disinherited of
eternal Life, but in laying his Mountains and Heritage waste for the Dragons of
the Wilderness, Mal. 1.3. Thus they interpreted the 9th of Romans then, just as
we do now, and as the Church always did from the beginning in it is best and
purest Ages, when they had no Notion of any absolute Personal Decrees.

And lastly, I observe, That according to the Doctrine of our Church, her
Articles are to be interpreted according to the Scriptures, and not the
Scriptures by our Articles, or those of any other Church; and for this I have
the Authority of the Church herself, who declares in Art. VI. That The H.
Scriptures contain all things necessary to Salvation, so that whatsoever is not
read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any Man to be
believed as an Article of the Faith, or be though it requisite or necessary to
Salvation. Now I am well assured, that the Scriptures no where teach this Man's
Notion of Predestination, and therefore neither does our Church. -- And
according to this Article, I am free to declare, and am glad he has put me upon
it, p. 30. That I do from the bottom (...) my Heart hold the H. Scriptures to
be my only, perfect, complete and unerring Rule in the pursuit of Salvation;
nor do I in the least think that this Declaration will at all rub hard on any
of the Churches Articles, nor Ceremonies neither, as he surmises, because I
know, and am sure, That the Scriptures teach all the Doctrines of our Church,
and justify her in the injunction of all her Ceremonies, and oblige us to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace in the Observance of them, Ephesians.
4.3.

But if this be his Notion of the Scripture, what an unaccountable Man is he,
p. 20. to question my Soundness in the Doctrine of Regeneration, or whither I
hold the necessity of it, because I express it in Scripture Phrases, and don^t
hold his unscriptural Notion of Predestination? Is it because he is resolved to
represent me as an Heretic in spite of Reason and Scripture, and every thing
I can say or do? I assure you, I must think my self much safer while I speak of
these things in the Language of the H. Ghost, than in his unscriptural
unintelligible Phrases. -- And I do still say, that it vastly recommends the
Church of England to me, as it ought to all good Christians, that all her
public Forms of Worship are entirely conformed to Scripture, and generally
expressed in the very Words of it, whereby she teaches all her Children to
Worship GOD their heavenly Father in his own Language; I do therefore also
still say, that we of the Church call no Man Master upon Earth, and no Man
Father, for one is our Master and Father in Heaven, in the Sense of our blessed
Savior, Matthew. 23.8, 9. which does not forbid us to call Men Master and
Father, as Terms of Respect and Reverence, but as implying an implicit Faith in
them and Submission to them, like Servants to their Masters, and Children to
their Parents. Thus St. Paul justly assumes to himself to be the Spiritual
Father of those whom he had begotten through the Gospel, yet says he not as having
Dominion over your Faith, but as helpers of your Joy, 1 Cor. 4 15. 2 Cor. 1.24.
In this Sense it is that we call Ministers Masters, and Bishops Fathers: And
what a mean Quibble is it for him to object this, when he would take it hard
not to be called Mr. G. and Reverend Sir, which is the same with Reverend
Father. -- I would add here, that our Savior may be reasonably supposed in
that Text to forbid his Disciples going into Sects and Divisions, following
different Masters or Heads of Parties, as the Corinthians did, one saying I am
of Paul, another I am of Appollos, etc, 1 Cor. 1.12. In this Sense, which was
what I principally intended, we say we call no Man Master upon Earth, we are
neither Calvinists, i. e. Disciples or followers of Calvin, nor Arminians, i.
e. Disciples or followers of Arminius, etc. but Christians, only, as being the
Followers and Disciples of Christ alone.

In the next place, he would willingly have it believed yet, that we are
Jacobites, and High-Flyers, notwithstanding all I can say or do for our
Exculpation: We have taken the Oaths to our most gracious Sovereign King
George, we pray for him, we preach up all Loyalty and Fidelity to him: and the
utmost abhorrence of the contrary Interest, and our Practice and Behavior is
all of a piece herewith, and yet he insinuates we may be Jacobites after all,
p. 19. Well, all I can say, not only with respect to this, but many others of
his odious Insinuations, is, that there is no fencing against a Flail: One
might as well as pretend to dispute a Whirlwind, as to reason with this
scrupulous Surmiser: --

This point he would justify by a Fling at the late Bp of Rochester and another
Clergyman, which is compounded of nothing but Malice and Impertinence, the
shining Ornaments of his Book. The latter Quality saves me the Trouble of a
Disquisition into the Characters of those Persons; and it is Answer enough to
ask him, Whether he would think I used him fairly, if I should argue thus about
him. Heath and Cummin in Queen Elizabeth's Time, (as Mr. Strype tells us,)
pretended to be Presbyterians, and preached against the Pope, and prayed and
pleaded for a further Reformation, and pressed forward earnestly toward the
glorious Zenith of Presbytery, as this Man does, and yet they proved at last to
be arrant Jesuits, and promoting the Pope's Interest all the while: so may this
J. G. be a Papist for ought any thing we know: I say how abusive would he think
me, if I should argue thus: however all I would say is, Judge not that ye be
not Judged.

We are now come to his Talk about Ceremonies, which is a Word, that the
continual Din and Noise made about them has rendered odious and frightful to
the vulgar, though all that is meant by them, is certain Appointments of things
in their own Nature indifferent, made by lawful human Authority, for the more
decent, orderly and edifying Administration of the Worship of GOD. Concerning
which, I shall first vindicate the Lawfulness and Expediency of ours, in answer
to his Exceptions against them; and then show upon what Foot it is, that we
hold our Obligation to observe them. -- As to the first of these -- The first I
mentioned was the Surplice: And as to this I showed from Ezekiel. 44.17. and Rev.
19.8. the Propriety, Lawfulness and Significancy of this Garment, and I might
have added Rev. 4.4. where the Elders are represented as clothed in White: And
here, p. 21. he fully agrees with me, that the Sacred Officers should be
distinguished by a peculiar Garment. But he says, why should they appear in
white, and sometimes in black in the same Service? I answer they never do so: I
take it, that Worship is one Service, and preaching another, entirely distinct;
for the Minister acts in quite a different Capacity in presiding over the
Congregation in offering up their Devotions to GOD, from what he does in
preaching and teaching them their Duty to him. Now I cannot see but there is as
good reason for distinguishing these different Services by different Habits, as
the Clergy from the Layity, which he allows: And if it be proper to distinguish
them, as he grants, and Government, for such good Reasons as I have given, has
appointed the proper habits, I still say, it betrays not only littleness of
Mind and narrowness of Soul, but also too much of a factious disorderly Spirit,
to disobey it.

The next thing I mentioned was Sponsors, or Godfathers and Godmothers in
Baptism: -- And on this head I said, What can be more proper or expedient, than
when the Child is admitted into Covenant, that somebody should answer it is part
in it is Name. etc. -- Here he says, the Child was in Covenant before, by virtue
of it is Parents professed Faith, otherwise it could (...), etc -- Now this is
what I cannot understand: And I would ask, How then any Children have a Right to
Baptism whose Parents did never profess the Christian Faith: According to his
Doctrine, no Children could be Baptized, but those of Christian Parents: This
he has no proof for, nor any Reason does he produce, nor can any good Reason be
given, why merely the Parents Faith should entitle them to Baptism, or the want
of it forbid them: Not only Abraham's Children, but all that were born in his
House, nay, and bought with his Money, were Circumcised, Genesis 17.12. Why then
may not such be Baptized? -- We of the Church hold, that it is the Prospect or
good Hopes the Church has, that a Child will in all probability have a
Christian Education, which gives it a right to Baptism, and that it is not
properly in Covenant till they that undertake for its Education do in its Name
answer its part of the Covenant; upon which occasion the Minister in GOD's Name
engages that he will fulfill his part, and affixes the Sea^ accordingly which
he has appointed: And till this be done, I cannot see what propriety there can
be in saving it is in Covenant; for a Covenant implys Engagements undertaken
between the Parties Covenanting; till therefore such Engagements are undertaken
on both sides, and regularly Sealed, there is no Covenant completed. Now since
the Church looks on the Prospect of a Christian Education, as that which
immediately intitles the Child to Baptism, therefore it is that she insists on
a double Security for it: She knows that GOD and Nature have made it the
Parents Duty to bring up their Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the
Lord; and therefore she does not require any express Promise of them, but
because they may fail, she insists that they should have others undertake with
them, as a further and additional Security: And where is the evil of this? I am
sure he has proved no evil in it, nor can he. Indeed that he might seem to ma^e
a bluster, he calls it a daring Presumption, as though we pretend to mend those
Rules which infinite Wisdom has calculated, as he expresses it: As if GOD
designed by the Rules he has made, to exclude all humane Prudentials: But for
this he has not the least shadow of an Argument. -- If in any instance Duty is
not done, this is no more an Argument against the goodness of an Appointment of
the Church, than it is against the the ten Commandments, or against humane Laws
appointing Guardians, etc. And the Canon he quotes which forbids Parents
answering as Godfathers, is so far from declaring against this double
Security, as he insinuates, that it was ordered for this very End that there
might be a double Security; since if the Parents, who are supposed to be
engaged by Nature, were admitted to answer as Sponsors, the others might be apt
to think themselves excused from any Obligation, and so it would at length be
in the more danger of dwindling into an useless Ceremony.

As to the Sign of the Cross, p. 23. I mentioned it as being after Baptism, and
not in Baptism, to intimate that it does not in the Churches Sense properly
belong to the Office of Baptism, but is only used after the Administration of
it, in the public Declaration of the Child's being, by virtue of it is Baptism,
received into the Flock of Christ: For which Reason it is not used in private
Baptism, and yet the Church declares that it is complete without it. -- And as
to the Expediency of it, I said that we used it to put us in Mind that we
should be so far from being ashamed of the Cross ^f Christ, that with St. Paul,
Gal. 6.14. we should rather glory in it, and since it was commonly used in the
Church within a hundred years of the Apostles, as appears from T^rtullian and
St. Cyprian, it appeared to me very probable that it was alluded to by St. John
in Rev. 7.3. -- To this he has the amazing uncharitableness as to say, that I
had reason to fear lest Divine Justice should have smitten my right Hand with a
Leprosy, when such Words drop^ from my Pen. -- What Bitterness of Spirit does
this express! I may at least guess what to expect had he the disposal of GOD's
Judgments: however I bless GOD I am not in his Power, And in truth, after a
serious reconsideration of this Passage, I cannot see any Reason I had to fear
GOD's Displeasure on the account of it: And as I am not ashamed of the Cross of
Christ, but do glory in it that I Worship a Crucified Savior, and suffer in
his Cause from this most abusive Writer; so I still think this Practice a very
proper and suitable Expression of it.

And here he has taken a great deal of Pains, most invidiously and i^^uriously
to insinuate, that the Sign of the Cross is a new Sacrament of the Churches
making, and that even according to our own Definition of a Sacrament, that it
is an outward and visible Sign of an inward and spiritual Grace, etc. -- Now to
this I answer, that all his Talk on this head is merely a contrived Piece of
delusive Sophistry, without so much as a shadow of any Foundation: And one
would be tempted to think that nothing but an obstinate Resolution to be
perverse, could put People upon wracking their Inventions to put such odious
and groundless Constructions on this innocent Ceremony.

For,

1. As to the Sign it self, it is only the Sign of the Cross; unless therefore
the Cross were an inward and spiritual Grace, it cannot be pretended that the
Sign of it is a Sacrament. However,

2. We allow that the use of this Sign after Baptism, is appointed to be
significant of the Obligations the Person baptized is laid under by that holy
Ordinance, to exercise the spiritual Graces of ^aith in a Crucified Savior,
and Courage and Stedfastness in adhering to Him in spite of all Temptations to
the contrary: And supposing, in this Sense, it were an outward and visible Sign
of an inward and spiritual Grace, it would not therefore be a Sacrament; for by
the same Reason, every Name of a spiritual Grace, (such as Piety, Justice,
Mercy, etc.) would be a Sacrament, and if you should Name a Child, Hope or
Charity, you would give it a new Sacrament; since none can deny but they are
outward and sensible Signs of inward and spiritual Graces.

3. That therefore, which is the distinguishing Character of a Sacrament, is,
that it be ordained by Christ himself as a means whereby we receive spiritual
Grace, and a Pledge to assure us thereof. Now this essential Character of a
Sacrament, does not, and cannot belong to the Sign of the Cross, since it is
not ordained by Christ, nor was it ever pretended by the Church to be ordained
as a means whereby we receive Grace, or a Pledge to assure us thereof: Nor is
there a Syllable of all that he has alleged, and after all his mangling Work,
that can be justly interpreted to imply any such thing. -- Yes, he says, it is
to operate Grace morally, to stir up the dull Mind of Man, etc. -- I answer,

4. No otherwise than as Words do: None will deny that Words and Exhortations,
aptly addressed to the Minds and Consciences of Men, do operate morally on
them, to stir them up to the exercise of Spiritual Graces, but no body ever
therefore took them to be Sacraments, because they are not means of Grace, of
the same kind with Sacraments; which are appointed by Christ to be Seals of the
Covenant of Grace to the right use of which, he has by Promise graciously
annexed the bestowment of Spiritual Grace: (so that all he says on this Head,
equally proves Preaching the Word to be a Sacrament, or indeed any good serious
Discourse between Christians in private Conversation.) -- Whereas,

5. Our Ceremonies are not, nor were they ever designed, or taken, to be Seals
and Assurances from GOD of his Grace to us, but only Hints and Remembrances of
some Obligations we are under with respect to Him: And this kind of significant
Usages has ever been taken up without any imputation of introducing new
Sacraments, and this was the only intent of our Church, not only in the Sign of
the Cross, but in all her other Ceremonies, that they should be used as a kind
of Language, that, according to the ancient Custom of the primitive Church we
should by Actions as well as Words outwardly testify our Devotion to GOD and
Christ, and acknowledge our Obligation to all Fidelity and Sincerity in the
Service of our Creator and Redeemer: And indeed appointed significant Actions
are as properly Language as articulate Sounds; so that there is really no more
reason to object against this kind of Language, than any other that is used in
our Service or yours: Thus Bowing and Kneeling, and Standing and Sitting, in
the several respective parts of Service in which they are used, are so many
Actions expressive of certain inward Tempers and Dispositions of Mind, suitable
to the several Occasions on which they are appointed. -- And thus we use the
Sign of the Cross, not as a Sacrament or means of Grace, appointed to seal or
convey the Grace of the new Covenant, (far from this,) but as a significant
Memorial of our Obligation, being Baptized into the Death of Christ, not to be
ashamed of Christ Crucified, as our Church expresses it, but manfully to fight
under his Banner, against Sin, the World, and the Devil, and to con^inue his
faithful Soldiers and Servants to our Lives end. And, I pray, where is the
harm of all this? Nay why I beseech you, is it not as proper and significant a
Language as any other, and as free from any just fault or blame? The Words used
on this Occasion were never found fault with, and as little Reason was there to
object against the Action, which was never considered by our Church as
signifying any thing besides what the Words import. What needs then all this
impertinent Clamor?

In the next place, As to Holy Days, I showed that they were wisely appointed
by the Church to commemorate the several Steps which our glorious Redeemer took
in accomplishing our Redemption, etc. and rested our Obligation to observe
them, upon the same Foot as you hold your Obligation to observe your Fasts and
Thanksgivings, viz. The Command of lawful Authority. -- Now as to our Fasts and
Feasts he says, p. 27. It is no less than a bold invading of Christ's Royal
Prerogative to appoint them; but does not so much as attempt to show why it is
not as much a bold invading of His Prerogative for you to appoint your Fasts
and Thanksgivings: -- This therefore I still insist upon, that with the same
Breath that you justify yours, you justify ours, and he cannot show the least
difference: -- for the same Temporal Blessings you fast and give thanks on the
account of, are to be prayed for and acknowledged on every Lord's Day, as well
as the Spiritual Blessings we commemorate on our Feasts and Fasts: So that the
strongest Reasons are clearly on our side, as much stronger than yours,
certainly, as Spiritual Blessings are greater than Temporal, the fruits of
Christ's coming into the World, than the fruits of the Earth. Indeed GOD
commands us to keep Holy the Sabbath Day, which is now the first Day of the
Week, to Pray and give Thanks for all Blessings Temporal and Spiritual; but it
is not therefore unlawful for us to yield him our free will Offerings, by
appointing other Days to be kept Holy for some particular Purposes of either
kind: This is what we are all agreed in; and why, I beseech you, may not we
appoint other Days to be set apart for Public Worship, as lawfully as you? All
his Talk therefore about new Sabbaths, is as impertinent and abusive as that
about a new Sacrament. -- And I still say, notwithstanding his great boasting,
that for want of your observing the Festivals of Christ's Birth, Resurrection,
Ascension and his Sending the Holy Ghost, you scarce ever hear those great
Fundamental Principles of Christianity, duly explained and enforced: I can
truly say, though I lived 25 years among you, I never heard either of those great
Articles of your Faith, particularly and professedly opened, proved and
insisted on.

As to your Objection against us from Mat. 15.9. about teaching for Doctrines
the Commandments of Men, I showed that it concluded nothing against us; unless
you could prove either first, That we did with the Pharisees advance Human
Inventions into Essential Doctrines, as they did the washing of Hands before
eating, etc. holding their Traditions of equa^ Authority with the written Law:
or, Secondly, That by, and for the sake of human Appointments, we justle out,
and set aside Divine Commands, as they did the 5th Commandment by their Corban,
neither of which ever were, or can be proved against the Church of England. --
All his Answer to this is, that I could not answer the Objection, and that I
deal very unfairly with the Context, and rend it in pieces; without so much as
endeavoring to show wherein I did so. What was incumbent upon him, if he would
have done any thing to the purpose, was in answer to my Challenge, to show one
Scripture Doctrine rejected, or one Divine Law set aside, or any thing enjoined
as necessary in it self which is not so, by the Church of England, which were
what the Pharisees were blamed for: But to this he makes no manner of Reply.

And as lame is he in his Reply, p. 25. to my Answer to that Objection from
Jer. 7.31. where GOD gives that as a Reason of his Displeasure with his People
for their building high Places and worshipping Idols, that he commanded them
not: I told you the meaning of it was that he had forbidden them -- To this he
only Answers, my Gloss was very unjust, without showing wherein. -- Now as to
this, I appeal to all that know what is meant by that Figure called Meiosis,
whither this Expression be any thing else: I commanded them not, i e. So far
from this, that I strictly forbad them; for every Body knows that what he here
complains of, he had peremptorily forbidden them: So that what he calls a moral
Reason, is only a figurative Expression, -- for, that it could not, Literally
understood, be any Reason at all, I shall show presently, because, as St. Paul
says, Romans 4.15. Where no law is there is no Transgression: where no law
forbids a thing, there is no transgression in doing it.

Nor has he so much as attempted one Syllable of Reply to the Answer I gave to
your Objection about offending weak Brethren. -- And he owns you are in an
Error in enjoining your Church Covenant and Relations; and only says, Your
Errors will not lessen our Guilt, p. 28. So that even according to Him, you are
as guilty of unwarrantable Impositions as we, and do as ready teach for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men; though this I have proved the Church does not,
according to our Savior's meaning. -- Thus this great Champion who pretends to
defend your Cause, miserably leaves you in the lurch, where you most wanted --
his help.

And now I proceed to the second Head I mentioned, viz upon what foot it is
that we hold our selves obliged to observe the Appointments of our Church. And
upon this head, he says, If it were to save a Million of Souls, we must not let
go the least trifling Ceremony. p. 20. -- To which I answer, -- This Sophistry
is equally levelled against all Government, and all Churches. In your Churches,
no body shall be admitted without submitting to your Church Covenant, and in
some Places, without a Relation, and Vote of the Brethren, etc. -- Nay, I have
known People to go out of the World in the bitterness of their Souls, for want
of Baptism and the Lords Supper, which were refused them by the Ministers,
merely because it was not the Custom in those Places where they lived, to
administer the Sacraments in private Houses, though on the most urgent Occasions:
Which Practices among you, are vastly more unreasonable than any thing can be
pretended in the Church of England. Nay, this Sophistry of his, entirely
subverts his own dear Kirk of Scotland, which asserts, and indeed very justly;
Art. XX. that They that under the Pretense of Liberty, oppose any lawful Power,
or the lawful Exercise of it, [such as is interposing in matters indifferent]
whither Civil or Ecclesiastical, resist the Ordinance of GOD, and may be
proceeded against by the Censures of the Church, and by the Civil Magistrate.
And indeed there never was, or can be a Church or Government in the World, but
did, and must interpose in some things, for Public Order, that were
antecedently matters of indifferency, which as I said, are what we mean by
Ceremonies. -- Now I have proved that there are no Ceremonies in our Church,
the compliance with which, could do the least Damage to the Souls of Men; and
therefore if they don't comply with them, it is not Government, Civil or Sacred
that excludes them, but they exclude themselves by refusing to observe the Laws
of Christ, which require obedience to Government in all things not contrary to
His Laws: And after all he has declaimed, it still remains to be proved, that
the Church requires any thing inconsistent with the Gospel, or forbids what
that requires.

He has got indeed a fine pretense for Disobedience, p. 26. where he quotes our
Savior's saying, Matthew. 28.20. Teaching them to observe whatsoever I have
commanded you; upon which he says, It is a rule in Divinity, that where a Duty
is enjoined, the contrary Sin is forbidden. This I allow to be a good Rule, and
own, that hence it follows that we may not teach any thing for a necessary
Doctrine of Christ, which he has not taught and commanded us to teach as such.
-- But does it hence follow, that Government may not enjoin, for Public Order,
some things which are declared in their own Nature to be indifferent, and only
required for external Order and Decency? No such matter: So far from this, that
Christ requires we should not only render to GOD the things that are his, but
also to Caesar, the Civil Magistrate, the things that are his, Mat. 22.21. And
with respect to Ecclesiastical Rulers; (such he means by those that sit in
Moses Seat,) he says, All whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do,
Mat. 23.2. So that when he requires obedience to lawful Authority in Church and
State, by this Rule of Divinity, the contrary Vice of Disobedience is
forbidden. This Rule therefore concludes nothing against us, unless he will say
that our Savior's meaning when he commands us to obey him, is, that he forbids
us to obey even lawful Government in things not forbidden by him: This would be
fine Divinity indeed* What can this mean, but that it is utterly unlawful to
obey humane Authority, even where Christ has not interposed? And what can this
tend to, but to demolish all Government, not only in Church and State, but even
in Families also? And what is this, but to make our blessed Savior the Patron
of all manner of Disorder and Confusion?

Now that this is the Tendency of this Man's Doctrine, is evident from this,
that he says, Christ does, by Command limit us, not only to that all that, but
moreover only to that which he has commanded* And now, pray look at home, and
see what will come of your own Cause: And here I will use the Words of Mr.
Heart, in his Bulwark Stormed, which is a full and complete Answer to Thomas De
Laune's Plea for the Non-Conformists, which you have often boasted to be
unanswerable, p. 35. I say let us ex^mine your own Practice, and take De
Laune^s and this J. G.'s Max^m along with us, for nothing is lawful in the
Worship of GOD, according to them, unless it be expressly commanded: -- ^ut I
say GOD has no where expressly commanded your Teachers to preach, and the People
to pray standing, therefore if Delaune's, and this J. G's Maxim be true your
Practice in these particulars is unlawful. -- Again, Nothing is lawful in the
Worship of GOD, says Delaune and J. G. unless it be expressly commanded; but I
say, and so says Mr. Baxter, Christ. Dir. Lib. 3. p. 11. you have no express
command for extemporary Prayer; therefore, if these Men say true, your Practice
in this particular is unlawful -- Again, Nothing is lawful in the Worship of
GOD, say they, but what is expressly commanded; but I say, and so says Dr.
Manton on Jam. 5.13 (one of your party) GOD has not to commanded you to sing
Psalms in Meter, and with the Tunes you use, therefore your Practice in this
particular also is unlawful. -- Again, Nothing is lawful in the Worship of GOD,
say they, unless it be expressly commanded; but, I say, GOD has no where
commanded you to use leavened Bread in the Sacrament; therefore in this
particular also your Practice is unlawful. -- Again* once for all, Nothing is
lawful in the Worship of GOD, but what is expressly commanded, say Delaune and
J. G but I say, and so says Mr. Baxter, ibid. p. 111. GOD has no where
expressly commanded you to receive the Sacrament ^^^ing, or a^ N^on, or to
sprinkle Children in Baptism, or to Preach out of a Pulpit, or to enjoin a
Church Covenant, etc. therefore either Delaune's and J. G^s Principle is false
or your Practice in these Things is un awful -- So you see how much you are
beholden to Delaune and this J. G. for their Pleas and Remarks, in pretending
to defend your Cause. They care not whom they ruin, so they do but destroy the
Church.

He then impertinently asks, p. 25. Will you dare to assert, that we may
introduce any thing into the Worship of GOD, as a part of his Worship, without
a Divine Institution? I answer, we don't pretend to do any such Thing: But though
we may not as a part of Divine Worship, we may as a Circumstance of (...) for
the more decent, edifying and orderly Administration of it. -- He asks then,
Why not Cream and Salt, and Oil and Spittie, and I know not what? I answer,
because these and the like are indecent, inedifying and burdensome to the
Worship of GOD. However it is time enough to dispute such things with our
Governors when they require them We are only concerned to defend what is
required; and we are in no Danger of having any thing further enjoined; for our
Rule^ can require nothing of us, but what is according to the Laws in being,
and we find nothing in them, nor could he prove anything, that does in the
least interfere with our Duty to GOD, or the general Rule of Decency, Order and
Edification. -- After all he says, we may thank the Papists for all this, for
this is their very Language, p. 27. Now how abusive is this, when he knows they
require many Doctrines to be believed, and enjoin many things to be done, that
are plainly and directly contrary to Scripture, and our Duty to GOD? How
injurious then are such Insinua^ons.

I do still venture to say, that we may lawfully do whatsoever GOD has not
forbidden, however so great a venture he would represent it, p. 25. and would
ask him seriously, where is the great venture of it: All Divines admit that
there are three kinds of Actions, viz Good, Evil and Indifferent, i. e. such as
GOD has commanded or forbidden, or such as he has neither commanded nor
forbidden, and these last mentioned are called Indifferent: these therefore may
be done or left undone at our Pleasure; for according to St. Paul's Rule
beforementioned, Romans 4.15. Where there is no Law, there is no Transgression.
Where there is no Law that commands or forbids an Action, there is no
Trangression in doing or omitting it; for it being the Design of GOD's Laws to
restrain our natural Liberty in such Instances as he knows it will be for our
Good to be confined to do or avoid, and wherein he requires us to testify our
Duty, and Obedience to him; it is plain. That in all other Instances, he leaves
us to the Exercise of our natural Liberty. This seems to me a clear Case, but
it is as clear, that Government both in Church and State, is God's own
Ordinance, and he has made it a necessary Duty to us to obey it, and
consequently a Sin to disobey it: it must therefore according to his Will, be
in the Power of Government also, in Subordination to him, to restrain our
Liberty in certain Instances -- And lastly, It is no less evident, that those
Actions, which in regard to the Commands of God are indifferent, are the only
proper Objects of human Authority, i. e. wherein our Governors may properly,
and Lawfully interpose, to command* or forbid: for if they were to command or
forbid only what GOD has commanded or forbidden, our Obedience would not have
their Authority or Commands for it is Object, but GOD's; and then those Laws of
the Gospel which commands us to submit to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's
sake, 1 Pet. 2.13 and to obey them that have the Rule over us, Heb 13.1^. would
be empty Words, without any meaning. Obedience has ever a Relation to Commands
or Prohibitions, and these must be the Commands or Prohibitions of the
Authority that Commands or Forbids; and the Apostles here speak of lawful
Authority, which they must therefore suppose to have a power of interposing by
their Authority where GOD has not interposed by His.

-- They are indeed limited by him, but it is only by the general Rules of
Decency, Order and Edification, and that nothing be repugnant to his plain
Declarations; but of this it must reasonably be supposed they are the proper
Judges to whom the Government is committed both by GOD and Man. And when they
do thus interpose in what they take to be for the Good of the whole, GOD has
made Obedience our Duty: not that their Authority alters the Nature of those
Actions; they still remain what they were before, in their own Nature, i. c
Indifferent; but it is not indifferent whether we obey or disobey, because GOD
has indispensibly commanded us to obey them that are set over us in the Lord, 1
These. 5.12. And if in this Case, we should in opposition to their Authority,
still use our Liberty, it would be only for a cloak of maliciousness, and not
as the Servants of God, 1 Pet. 2.16.

You will say, What! Does he require an implicit Obedience* May we not judge
for our selves? -- I answer, Yes; you not only may, but ought to judge for your
selves, and see to it that these be nothing required by Authority that is
evidently contrary to the Word of GOD, and inconsistent with your Duty to Him:
But it you would make a just Judgment, you must judge seriously, and in the
fear of GOD, as those that must give an Account; you must not dispute for
disputing sake, no^ be governed by a captious, discontented and factious
Spirit: you must be disposed, as far as possible, to resign your Private
Scruples to the Public Peace, and the Good of the whole, and by no m^ans
disobey, unless it be, at least, as evident that what is commanded is contrary
to the Word of GOD, and defaces, desecrates, dishonours and en^^vates the
Worship of GOD, as it is that the Word of GOD commands you to be obedient: you
find it evident in your (...), that GOD requires your Obedience to Authority,
both (...) and E^^^esiastical: Ask your selves seriously, is it as evident that
what Authority requires is forbidden by Him, or pollutes, disorders, or
destroys his Worship? Is it as evident that you will not do more Damage to the
public Weal, by indulging your Scruples, and for the sake of them, breaking in
upon Public Peace and Order, and thereby weakening the Hands of Government,
which also is GOD's Ordinance, than any thing you Scruple can do to His public
Worship? -- I say, these things ought to be most seriously weighed and
considered. -- And sure I am, had those who have dissented from us, acted upon
these Principles and Considerations, as they were in Duty bound, there never
would have been any Separation begun or continued -- It is a dreadful thing to
break the Public Peace of a Church or Government, and nothing can excuse it
but a clear Conviction that what we divide on the account of, is utterly
unlawful, evidently sinful: Every little Scruple will not justify it: And if
after all we can do to gain Satisfaction, we have some Scruples that are
unsurmountable, we should however still conform as far as possible. How
inexcusable then is it to contrive to make Scruples and propagate them, to
magnify and exaggerate them, and raise Mole-Hills into Mountains, as this Man
and those like him, do? to strain at a Gnat, a little innocent Ceremony, and
swallow a Camel, by breaking in upon public Peace and Order.

It is pleaded against what I have been saying, that he that doubts is ^
damned, in the Original it is,) condemned if he c^t, Rom 14. ul^. I answer, The
Apostle is this Chapter is speaking only of those Things wherein Authority,
neither Divine nor Human had in^erposed, as was the Case of Meats and Days
appointed in the Mosaic Law, after the Abolition of it, and shows how
Christians should conduct toward one another in such Cases, that they should
receive one another, and not judge one another, etc. But he is far from meaning
that Public Order and Government, when things have been established in the best
manner, for the good of the whole, should give way to every Private Man's
trifling Scruples, and be demolished for the sake of them, or be continually
chopping and changing like the Wind: This would be contrary to that Unity and
Obedience which he every where requires, 1 Cor. 12.14 to 26. Phil. 3 16. Romans
15.5, 6. Phil. 2.2. Rom 16.17. Heb. 13.17. etc. and to our Savior's Prayer,
John 17.21. And upon this foot there would be no end of Scruples and
Indulgences, Divisions and Subdivisions, and no Public Peace and Order could be
provided for. -- No, the Truth and the Right of the Case is, if I would do
justice both to my Self and the Public under my Scruples, I should set what is
clear in balance against what is doubtful, and this will determine what Choice
I ought to make: Thus I would fairly state the Case, I doubt, (and therefore it
is supposed I am not clear in it,) whether I may lawfully comply with such a
Ceremony: But it is clear on the other hand, if I don't submit to what is
established, I shall destroy the public Peace, and enervate Government:
therefore I can no longer, properly Speaking, make a doubt of it. -- Whether I
should comply. -- So that though in a Case not decided by Authority, if I should
doubt, I ought to abstain by this Rule of the Apostle, yet if lawful Authority
has interposed, the Case is altered, and it is my Duty to resign my Doubt,
which implies some uncertainty, to the public Sense, to which I ought to pay a
great defference, and to the good of the whole, which should be ever held
sacred, and ought to be vastly dear to me, and which on the other hand, by my
insisting on my Scruple, will certainly be infringed. -- But for a more full
and complete Solution of this, and indeed all other Cases of this kind, I refer
to Dr. B^nnet's excellent Abridgement of the London Cases, p. 267. etc.

And now I am upon this Subject, I will take occasion once for all, to
vindicate my Self and Brethren, from the Imputation of the heinous Sin of
Schism, which this Man has the Assurance to charge us with, in going over from
the Way of these Churches, into the Unity of the established, pure and
primitive Church of England. -- P. 34 he says, You had a general Peace in your
Churches, till we made a causeless Defection from you. -- To which I answer. --
First, As to your general Peace, GOD knows, there was little enough of it, and
indeed, how impossible it was, or is, for you to subsist peaceably under such a
mere shadow of Ecclesiastical Government as you have among you, which from the
Nature and Conduct of it, we saw, and your own sad experience finds, to be
sinking more and more every Day, into what will eventually prove little better
than none at all. -- And as to what Disturbance has followed upon our retiring
into the Church, it has not been owing to that, any otherwise than as a mere
innocent Occasion, but rather to the bitter Spirit wherewith some People,
without any good Reason, are too much disposed to treat the Church, and oppose
the Growth of it: I may however say, that we had in these Parts generally, a
tolerable good peaceable Temper between the Church and Meetings, till this busy
Stranger interloped among us; (if I may give him his own Expression,) and has
besides not only been the Occasion of Disturbance where he is, but also
assisted in setting up a Faction in another Place, in opposition to what
Constitution you have, and the general Sense of your own Ministers: On the
other hand, I am hold to say, That we (...) the Church have been very tender of
meddling in any thing that should rend to make disturbance among you, and your
Disturbances have been much greater in places where the Church never came, than
where it is; and have therefore never been owing to us, but to the weakness and
in(...) of your own Constitution and to the wrong (...) Church Government that
generally prevail among you, as might easily be demonstrated.

Secondly, Whereas he would aggravate our Offense in that as he pretends, we
have broken in upon your Establishment: As to this, I have already proved from
the Lords Justices Letter abovementioned, that you have not any regular
Establishment at all: And therefore we have, at least, as much Right to assert
and promote the Church of England here, as you have to assert and maintain the
contrary, ^upposing they were both upon a level in other Respects, which I have
proved they are not. But pray, with what face can this be ob^ected against us
by those who act upon Principles which first occasioned the severation in
England, from an excellent Church which was regularly established? And I desire
to know, why it is not at least as lawful to set up the Church of England, side
by side with the Churches of the^e Countries, as it was for our ^^re-fathers to
set up, what they called Churches, in ^^^ition to the established Church; and
this especially,

Thirdly, Since our Defection was not caus^less, and it is not true what he
says, p 35. that I own you are Right in the Essentials of Religion. I said in
most of them, not all, as this Assertion of his seems to import: And tho he
says, I dare not, I assure him I dare, and do assert, and think I have
abundantly proved (in my two Letters, printed with, Eleutherius Enervatus, or
the Answer to the Divine Right of Presbyterian Ordination, as well as in the
Letter he pretends to Answer, but makes no Reply to, on this Head: I say, I do
assert and have proved,) that your Administration, especially in the Point of
Church Government, is disagreeable to the Primitive Institution, and that you
have grievously erred in casting off the original Government which Christ, or
at least his Apostles, under the guidance of his Spirit, established in the
Order of Bishops, as superior to Presbyters, in the present Sense of these
Words. -- He pretends indeed, p. 33. that what I allege has been answered over
and over again: -- But this I again deny; and maintain, that the Arguments, in
the Light wherein I set them, have never, yet been attempted to be answered. --
I put the Case of Episcopacy at the lowest, and produced, at least, as good
Evidence for it in Scripture, as you have for Infant Baptism and the First Day
Sabbath, and give, at least, as good Answers to your Objections from Scripture,
as you can do to the Ana-Baptists in those Controversies: And to ascertain my
self, that I am right in interpreting the Scriptures on the side of Episcopacy,
I use exactly the same Method of Reasoning, as my Antagonists do in the Cases
of Infant Baptism and the First Day, viz By appealing to the ancient Facts of
the Primitive Church, and show clearly that there is as much, nay more Evidence
of the Fact, that the Episcopal Government did universally obtain from the
beginning in the Primitive Church, than they can produce for Infant Baptism and
the First Day: So that they must either own they are inconsistent with
themselves, or give up Infant Baptism and the First Day, upon the same Foot as
they declare against Episcopacy.

This, perhaps, is the Reason why this Man does not undertake to Answer what I
say on this Head, because he knows he has taken the same course in pleading the
Cause of the first Day Sabbath, as I have taken in the Cause of Episcopacy; and
he must be very render on this head lest he destroy his own Cause: For neither
he nor any Man alive, can give any Reason, why the Facts of the Primitive
Church, should not as well be appealed to, for the justification of our
interpreting the Scriptures, on the side of Episcopacy, as of Infant Baptism,
or the first Day: And I have in my Letters abovementioned, produced, at least
as good Evidence, both from Scriptures and Antiquity, for Episcopacy, as he has
for the Sabbath, or my other Antag^nis^ (...) Baptism. -- Now I would ask him,
or either of them, (whether if the Country had been generally Seventh-Day
Baptists, nay, suppose them established too,) they would not have thought it
their Duty, and that they would have been sufficiently clear of the Guilt of
Schism, if they had set up for Infant Baptism, and the first Day, in opposition
to the general Sense of the Country? And sincerely, I declare, I am fully
persuaded, and have clearly proved, that Episcopacy is at least as much an
Essential or Fundamental in Religion, as Infant Baptism, or the first Day
Sabbath. -- Besides, I cannot but think, I have also fully proved, that it is a
real Duty enjoined in the Gospel, to read the Scriptures in Public, and use the
Lord's Prayer, and this, this very Man also confesses, p. 35, 37. though he lives
in the Neglect of them, and finds as much fault with you on these Accounts as I
do: Not to mention those other things, that I proved from Scripture to be
wanting among you. -- Now is it as justifiable a Cause of Separation, to be in
a state, where some necessary things are wanting, and evident Duties not
allowed to be done, as where some unlawful thing are required; and seeing this
was our Case, and we could not proceed with an unreproaching Conscience, for
want of a regular Commission to act in Christ's Name, with what pretense of
Justice can he charge us with Schism.

I will further add on this head, that my Departure from you, my Brethren, has
never been attended with a Spirit of Severity, Censoriousness or
Uncharitableness toward you, much less with railing against you, as he again
injuriously Charges, p 35. I have indeed always insisted on what I take to be
the Truth as it is in Jesus, but I have ever done it, in the Spirit of
Meekness. Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the Truth? Gal.
4.16. Why should it be thought so? I have ever said, that I charitably believe,
you generally mean well, and endeavor to do your Duty, and please GOD in the
Way you are in according to what Light you have, nor have I ever taken upon me
to judge you as insincere, but only to judge for my Self, and act for my Self,
according to the best of my Light and Ability. I must indeed own, that as I am
fully persuaded upon the strictest Examination I can make, and with a most
solicitous Concern not to be deceived my Self nor impose upon others, that I am
in the Right in the Principles I have embraced, and the Choice I have made, so
I am very desirous others should think with me, which is what ought and will be
the Case with every one that loves his Neighbor as himself: But I can
sincerely say, I never have used, nor do I desire to use, any other Methods for
influencing others to think with me, than friendly, calm and dispassionate
Reasoning, heartily willing that every one should think for himself, and judge
for himself, as I have done; and heartily endeavor that every thing I suggest,
either to my self or others, should turn to, and issue in some good Practical
Purpose, which may tend to make us wiser and better; more virtuous and holy
here, and happy hereafter: And sure I am, neither Truth nor Right can ever much
suffer under such a Management, nor can I think, that any thing can by this
Means be promoted that tends to damnifie the moral or political, the civil or
religious, the temporal or eternal Interests of Mankind; all which are
certainly, at least as well, provided for in the Church of England, as any
other Church this Day upon the face of the Earth. -- And I must do my self that
Justice, as to say, that I should even abhor my self, if I had the least
Suspicion that I lived to any mischievous Purposes, or that any thing I said or
did, had any tendency to the real Damage of my dear Country; and that I have as
hearty a good Will to it, and as solicitous a Concern for its Welfare, in every
thing wherein it is true Interest consists, as any one that ever was bred or
born in it; And it would be hard indeed if I should not have as much at least,
as one that is but a Stranger in it. If in any thing I am mistaken, (as we are
all liable to mistakes,) I assure you, as far I can know my Self, my Mistakes
are involuntary, and therefore pardonable; they are my unhappiness and not my
fault.

But whatever charitable Opinion I willingly entertain of your Sincerity, on
which Account I also hope for your Forgiveness if you are in an Error: yet this
cannot alter my Opinion of those Things wherein I think you so: Things are of
an inflexible Nature, they are what they are, let our Apprehensions of them be
what they will; And therefore as no Error is really in it self the less,
whatever charitable Opinion we entertain of the Persons involved in it, and it
is not a matter of Indifferency which fide we are of; so it deeply concerns
every one to see to it what the Grounds of his Persuasions are, and that it is
really Truth at the bottom on which he stands. -- There are a certain Number of
Truths and Duties which our Blessed Savior and his Apostles have made
necessary to be believed and done, and therefore he is really on the side of
(what is called) Heresy that denis and rejects any of them, though according to
St. Austin's say, E^rare possum, Haere^icus esse n^lo.
A Man may not be guilty of formal Heresy who does s^ provided it be through mere
Weakness, and involuntary Ignorance and Mistake, and not from a Spirit of
Self-Conceit, Faction, Obstinacy and (...). -- In like manner, as there are
really certain Reasons that will render it not only lawful, but a Duty for a
Man to set up in opposition to the Government he is under, and separate from
his Christian Brethren among whom he dwells; so on the other hand, it must be
owned, that there are groundless Pretenses for Separation, upon which if a Man
separates, he is really i^ a state of Schism, tho he may not be formally guilty
of this Crime, because he may be involuntarily mistaken, and not conducted
under the influence of Worldly Motives, and with a conceited, obstinate,
factious and schismatical Temper; which to do is certainly a most heinous Sin,
and was ever accounted a Crime of the deepest die. -- It therefore vastly
concerns every one to see to it, that the Reasons upon which his Opinion and
Conduct subsists, be such as will bear the Test of a most exact and careful
Examination, and that, whatever they be, he do scrupulously and conscientiously
endeavor to be ever under the influence of a truly Christian Temper, a Spirit
of Humility, Meekness Charity and universal Obedience. -- What my Reasons were,
I gave you briefly before, and have been now again just mentioning, and it is
my business in the next place to defend them against this sour-tempered, and
most unfair dealer in Controversy.

1. My first Reason against you was, that you are destitute of the Episcopal
Government, which was at first appointed and established in the Primitive
Church, and continued down for 1500 Years, and is still, by GOD's Goodness
continued and established in our Nation and Mother Country, as well as in
several other Protestant Countries. -- And here I gave you a short Abridgment
of the Scripture Evidences for Episcopacy, from the Nature of a Gospel
particular Church, as plainly consisting of several Congregation, with each an
Elder at the Head of it, and all united under One chief Pastor, such as we now
call a Bishop; of all which I gave Instances in the Churches of Ephisus and
Crete, and in the Persons of Timothy, Titus, and the Angels of the seven
Churches of Asia, confirmed by the universal Facts of the Primitive Church: To
all which, as I have said, he makes no Reply; and for a further Vindication of
the Episcopal Government, I refer you to my Letters abovementioned, printed
with the Elutherius Enervatus, and the other Answer to the Divine Right of
Presbyterian Ordination, but especially to Bp Potter on Church Government, and
the Original Draught of the Primitive Church, and to several others that were
never attempted to be answered. -- Under this head I told you, that you have
utterly forsaken the Scripture Rule, in not Ordaining Deacons, Acts 6.6. and in
the Layity's Ordaining Ministers, for which you have no Scripture Rule or
Example, but the contrary: This indeed you are generally asham^d of, and have
long laid aside: But I showed you, from the original Platform agreed upon in
1649, Chap. 9. it was the ancient allowed Custom of the Country, and has
propagated a fundamental Disorder down to this very Day. -- Now upon these most
weighty Points, which were the chief Objections we have against you, he has not
offered one Word of a Reply; so far is he from being true to the Cause he would
be thought to defend.

2. My next Objection was, that the Separation was founded upon an
unwarrantable Disobedience to Authority, both in Church and State, contrary to
those Tex^s, 1 Pet. 2.13. and Heb 13.17. To this he only answers by talking of
your Loyalty to King George, which is nothing to the purpose, and against
Diocesan Bishops, which I have already answered, and falsely pretends that the
Missionaries of the Church are forced upon you. -- But does not offer one Word
to show wherein the Church requires any thing of you contrary to the Word of
GOD, which was the only thing incumb^nt on him.

3. As to my third Objection of your being in a state of unjustifiable
Separation from the Church; This he makes no Reply to, only would have you
believe that this is rather our Case in leaving you to return into the Unity of
the Church; as to which, I refer you to what I have said already above, upon
this Subject.

4. My fourth Reason was, your not Reading the Holy Scriptures in Public
Worship, which I proved it to be your Duty to do, from Luke 4.6. Acts 13.27. 1 Timothy 4.13. And as to this he entirely falls in with me, and says your
Confession of Faith requires it; if so, I am sorry you are so inconsistent with
your selves as not to practice it: And I hope you will take the Hint from this
able Defender of your Cause, and hereafter reform this gross Neglect.

If you profess it to be your Faith, that the public Reading the Scriptures is
a part of Divine Worship, consider I beseech you, what St. James says, ch 4.17.
To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is Sin; and a
greater than He has said, That Servant that knew his Lord's Will, but did it
not, shall be beaten with many Stripes, Luke 12.47. -- What, my Brethren, can
tempt you to shuffle out this Ordinance of GOD, but the love of a long
extempore Prayer and Sermon? And if this be not transgressing the Commandments
of GOD for the Inventions of Men, I know not what is, Mark 7.7. And I hope you
will not be angry with me for telling you some of your Mistakes, when your own
Public Confession of Faith condemns you, as well as the Presbyterian
Directory, and the Practice of, not only the Church of England, and all other
Protestant Churches, whether Episcopal or Presbyterian; and when your great
Advocate himself condemns you. -- Now though he perfectly agrees with me, that
the Scriptures ought to be read in Public Worship, yet he cannot forbear
spitting out some of his Venom ^ere, p. 35. And notwithstanding he had
mentioned it before, p. 9. he falsely represents us as denying to Read some of
the Canon, and imposing some of the Apocrypha. -- Now, I know his meaning is,
that we don't read some part of the Canon for public Lessons: But why must
this be abusively represented to the Understanding of the vulgar, as though we
forbid some part of the Scriptures to be read at all. But as to reading them in
Public, it is true we are not required by the Church, (nor is there any Reason,
why we should) to read all the Parts of Scripture in the Time of Public
Worship; and I believe any Body would think it very abusive to fault any Church
for not reading many parts of it, such as hard Names of Places, Genealogies,
and very obscure Prophesies, and the like: Such Parts of it, though on many
Occasions, they are very useful, yet it is no disrepect to them to say that
they are less edifying to the common People, than the Books of Wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus. -- But as to the Apocrypha, it is only some part of it that is
to be read, and we are not required to read one Syllable of it on the
Lord's Day, though if we were, it would be much more edifying than any thing this
great Preacher could offer. -- Now I will put it to your own Consciences, do
you really think that such Reasons as these will justify a Separation from the
Church Established in our Nation, viz. Because they don't read hard Names and
obscure Prophesies in Public on the Lord's Day, and because they read some
excellent parts of the Apocrypha, (though not as canonical Scripture,) on
Weekdays?

5. I told you it appeared to me a great Duty commanded by Christ Luke 11.2.
Mat. 6.9. to use the Lord's Prayer in Public Worship. -- Upon this head he flys
in your Faces, and says, you say that unless it be unlawful to obey the express
Command of Christ, it is lawful to use these Words, p. 37. Pray, Brethren mark
well his Words, he says unless it be unlawful to obey the express Command of
Christ, Luke 11.2. To do what? Why, to say, Our Father, etc. i. e. to use this
Form which our Lord taught his Disciples. Very well, you see he allows it to be
an express Command to use it; but then, what a strange Expression is this;
unless it be unlawful to obey an express Command, it is lawful to use it: What?
Is it only barely lawful to obey an express Command? Certainly I should have
though it it a great Duty to obey an express Command of Christ: And yet he,
(strangely inconsistent with himself,) goes to prove that we may lawfully break
it; for he pleads that we are not tied by it to the Words, but the Things; as
if to pray after this Manner in Matthew. 6.9. which might more properly be
rendered, to pray thus, did not relate to the Words as well as the Things, and
as if Christ did not mean the same here, as in Luke 11.2. where he expressly
Commands his Disciples to say, Our Father, etc. But what need I trouble my self
to Answer what he says here, and his long String of quibbling impertinent
Questions above, when you see he has himself effectually answered, all he has,
or can say; for, pray, what business have we to go to questioning about it,
when we have, as he owns, a plain and express Command before us? I should
willingly Answer his Questions as fairly as he pleases, if they were not very
unfair ones, and if he had not sufficiently answered them himself: But indeed
it would be beneath a fair well-meaning Man to ask such trifling Questions
about precise Words, Syllables and Translations: The result of his Queries is,
that if we must use the Lord's Prayer at all, we must use it in the very
Language wherein Christ delivered it, and with as good Reason he might have
said, if we must read the Bible at all, we must read it in the Original. --
Truly, I should choose to use it in the Greek or Hebrew, if the People
understood those Languages, but as they don't, I wou^d use any good
Translation; but indeed, that whole Page i^ spent for no other purpose, but to
raise a dust that you might not see the Truth. I^ the Truth is, He is as much
convinced that it is a Duty to use this Form of Prayer as I am, and you may see
here the great Sincerity of this Man, when he ^^ks against the Church, then he
says there is no need of using the Lord^s Prayer as it is recorded in the
Evangelists, but as soon as ever he has turned his Back, and engaged with a
Brownist, then he says, there is an express Command to use these Words. -- Upon
the whole, I would observe, that when a Man speaks against his own Judgment,
merely to please a Party, he had need be very cautious, or else he will,
sometimes, open his Mouth so wide, that one may see his very Heart, which will
spoil all that he has said.

Indeed I fear many of you quiet your Consciences in the Neglect of the Lord's
Prayer, by thinking that you answer the End of Christ's Command, by using the
Substance of it, though in Words of your own Invention: But, I beseech you
consider, that the Matter of this Prayer is put by Christ in the most apposite
and comprehensive Words possible, and to decline those Words of Christ for
Words of our own inventing, is to prefer our own Inventions before the Command
of Christ: And can you be so conceited of what you call your Gift^, as to think
you can Word that Prayer better than Christ has done? -- Besides, if you lay
aside the Words of that Prayer, you are danger of laying, aside some of the
Matter of it too -- Particularly of that Petition, Forgive us our Trespasses,
as we forgive them that Trespass against us; for in all the time that i^
frequented your Meetings, I don't remember that ever I heard the Substance of
that Petition in your extempore Prayers. -- In a Word, the Lord's Prayer is
given us to be, as it were, a ^adge of our Profession, as being the Disciples
of Christ, and therefore it may no more be altered than the Form of Baptism, In
the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and both of them were ever used by
all Christians, as such without variation, from the very beginning of
Christianity. I will only add, If he understood our Prayer Book, so well as he
pretends, he would be sensible that he is very unfair here, to represent us as
using it, not only once, but repeatedly in the same Service; he might know that
Morning Prayer is one Service, and the Litany, another, and the Communion
Service before Sermon, a third, in each of which, as well as in each of the
other Offices, we use the Lord's Prayer, according to our Savior's Command,
When ye pray, or, as often as you pray, say, Our Father, etc. -- He talks here
about your Directory. -- Pray what Directory have you for Public Worship? You
see the Man conceits himself in Scotland or Ireland all the while, and quite
forgets where he is.

6. I found fault with you, That you are destitute of Public Forms of Prayer,
which I proved to be the ancient Scripture-Method, from the Examples of David,
Solomon, Hezekiah, Daniel, our Savior in John 17. and Mat. 6.9. and 26.44. and
the Apostles, Acts 4.24, etc And here also he seems to agree with me, that
there should be Public Forms, and says you have not only Public Prayers, but
Public Forms of Prayer, p. 37. -- Now this is very surprising to me, as I
believe it must to you, for pray where are they? I should be very glad to see
them. -- I have been told that one did, not long since, solemnly avouch it,
that Forms of Prayer were no Prayer at all: And now another tells you, that you
have Forms. What this Man means by saying you have Public Forms of Prayer, I
cannot conceive; It is a Riddle to me: Sure I am, many of your Prayers are
miserably without Form, consisting of an odd mixture, sometimes addressing GOD,
and sometimes the Audience. -- However, if, as he says, you have Public Forms;
the Question is, which are best, Yours or Ours: And to make a Judgment of this,
I say again, seriously, and without levity, I could be glad some of Yours might
be taken in writing as they are delivered, that you might compare them, and
then you would be in a Capacity to judge. -- Our Worship, as I told you, is,
most of it, the pure Word of GOD: We always pray to Him, and praise Him, in
those Prayers, that the ^oly Ghost has dictated: We use the Lord's Prayer, and
several Psalms and Hymns taken from the Scripture, and indeed the whole Book of
Psalms once a Month: We read the Scripture, and then pray for every thing we
need for Soul or Body, in the best Words and Method that the wisest Men by the
ordinary Assistance of GOD's Spirit, could contrive, and mostly expressed in
Scripture Language: And if there be any extraordinary Occasions, we have
Prayers suited to them: And what can a reasonable Man desire more? -- Instead
of all this, you have only one or two Extempore Prayers. -- Now though I don't
think that Extempore Prayers, on extraordinary unforeseen Occasions, such as,
sudden Calamities ana Disasters, and the like, are unlawful; yet I am sure, to
trust the Expressing of all our Desires, and especially in Public Worship, to
unpremeditated Words, just as our Invention shall suggest to us at that Time,
is such a Rashness as Solomon cautions us against, in Eccl. 5.1, 2. or I know
not what Rashness is; which Text I mentioned in my former Letter, but he was
too wise to ^ake any Notice of it; for he knew it was dangerous meddling with
edged Tools.

I appeal to you, whether you would not think it ^ gross Rashness in an
ordinary Person to make a long Speech to a King or an Honorable Assembly,
(...) a Matter of great Importance, in unpremedita^^^ Words? and whether, if
many were equally concerned in it, they would not all take Care to be agreed in
it, before it be offered? As our Savior says, Mat. 18.19. with respect to
Prayer, we should be agreed touching any thing we would ask -- Now if this
would be your Method in addressing an Earthly Monarch, about Worldly Matters:
How much more should it be your Method in addressing the great King and Lord of
Heaven and Earth, in things that concern your Everlasting Weal? He says you
must be agreed in Matter, but not in Words, p. 38. -- But pray how can you be
agreed in the Matter, when you know no more what that will be, in particular,
than what the Words will be? And how can you know what the Matter will be, but
by the Words that should express it? You have therefore no other way in this
Case, but, as I said, (like the Papists) to have a kind of implicit Faith in
your Minister. -- This indeed you might have, if it were as he tells you, p.
39. that such as he, depend upon the Spirit, to teach them how and what to
pray, and bring Words to their Minds. This Quakerish Talk I answered in my
Letter, where I told you, if this were the meaning of praying by the Spirit, 1
Cor. 14.15. you must sing extempore as well as pray extempore. -- When
therefore we see these Men that are so familiar with the Spirit, sing New
Psalms extempore; -- When they make no use of Prayer-Books to learn the Art of
praying, as I know they do; when there are no foolish, senseless and very
unbecoming Expressions in their Prayers; when no wicked Man, who we know has
not the Spirit of Christ, can pray fluently; then perhaps we may begin to think
that the Spirit brings to their Minds what to say next upon all Occasions: But
till we see these things, we can never believe that the Spirit has so much to
do in their Prayers as they would persuade us: -- Not but that we own we cannot
pray acceptably without the Assistance of the Spirit of GOD inspiring us with
such holy Tempers, Dispositions, Affections and Resolutions as become that holy
Duty; but further than these, we can see no sense in this Notion of praying by
the Spirit he pleads for. -- Upon the whole, it is really a melancholy thing to
hear you forever talking of pure Worship, and against the Inventions of Men,
when at the same time, your Worship is little else but Man's Invention: For
pray consider, what have you in your Service, but an extempore Prayer and a
Sermon, and these you cannot but see, are your Ministers Invention, unless you
will say, as some Quakers do, that they are as much the Word of GOD as the
Bible: You sing, it is true, two or three Verses of the Psalms, but they are
turned into Meter, and this together with the Tunes you use, are but Humane
Inventions, and of late date too: And one would think you don't sing as an Act
of Worship, for then, sure you would stand up: The Blessing, it is true, is
taken from Scripture, but then you have generally something added to it to mend
it. This, my Brethren, is your pure Worship, for which you have turned out
several Divine Appointments, such as the Lord's Prayer, reading the Scripture,
the People's bearing a part, etc. For your further Satisfaction, read, Bp.
King's Inventions of Men in the Worship of GOD.

7. Another Thing I told you wherein you appeared to me to vary from the
Scripture-way of Worship, is, That the People do not bear a part in your
public Worship. And here he says, We do allow them all that the Word of God,
and the Examples therein, allow them. p. 39. Now would to God this were true,
for we desire no more: But alas! What can be more contrary to Truth? for any
Man, with but half an Eye, may see that the Word of GOD and the Examples
therein, allow and require the People to join their Voices in speaking the
Public Prayers and Praises: Thus, besides the Texts I mentioned before, see
Judges 21.2. The People came to the House of God, and lift up their Voices, and
wept sore, and said, O Lord God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel,
etc. And 2 Chronicles. 7.2. The People bowed themselves with their Faces to the
Ground upon the Pavement, and worshipped and praised the Lord, saying, He is
Good, for his Mercy endures forever. -- Nehem. 8.6. And Ezra blessed the Lord,
the great God, and all the People answered and said, Amen, Amen, with lifting
up their Hands and they bowed their Heads and worshipped the Lord, with their
Faces toward the Ground. Yea, There is an express Command for it, in Psalm.
106.48. Let all the People say, Amen. And in like manner, in the New Testament,
it is plain from 1 Cor. 14.16. That the unlearned had a vocal part assigned
them in the Christian Assemblies, so from Rev 19, 6. To which he made no Reply,
and yet had the Courage to charge this Scripture Way of Worship with Confusion.

But let us take a view of his Comment on two Texts that I mentioned to prove
this Point; one was Acts 4.24. They lift up their Voice with one accord, and
said, etc. Now, says he, it is evident this was a singing Voice: Sure he is a
bold Man, thus to contradict the Holy Ghost: The Spirit of GOD says, they said
this Prayer: It is no such thing, says J. G. they sung it: Well, Let us see how
he proves it? Why, says he, It is evident that part of this Prayer was part of
the second Psalm: Here now is Demonstration! Not a Word more to be said! for
you know it is impossible to use one Sentence out of the Psalms without
Singing. Had this Man ever been at Church, he would have seen this Argument
consuted for there we use whole Psalms together without Singing: and I pray
does he never use a Sentence taken out of the Psalms in Prayer? and does he
always sing his Prayers? -- I cannot leave this terrible Argument without taking
Notice of a flat Contradiction: He had said but the Page before, That the
Apostles did not use either David's, or Solomon's or Hezekiah's Prayers, yet
here in the very next Page he tells us, that part of this Prayer which the
Apostles used was the express Words of the second Psalm, which David composed.
This verifies the Proverb, They that tell two Stories, need have a good Memory:
But it is no wonder a Man should contradict himself that makes bold to
contradict his Maker; nor is it any wonder that a Man should plead for
unpremeditated Prayers, that Writes without any Premeditation or Consideration.

He next falls upon Romans 15.6. where we are commanded with one Mind, and one
Mouth to glorify our heavenly Father, -- And says he, this one Morth is the
Ministers Mouth, p. 40. -- Very fine! And why not the one Mind the Ministers
Mind too? and then the People have nothing at all to do, and may even go to
Sleep, or go home and leave the Minister to pray for them, for he can do it,
according to Mr. J. G's sense, with one Mind and one Mouth, as well without
them as with them: Now we take it, that as the one Mind signifies the Minds of
all the Congregation, united in thinking the same thing, so the one Mouth means
the Mouths of all the Congregation, as it were with one Voice saying the same
thing. -- He then propunds two or three childish Questions: One is, Why don't
your People join in reading the Lessons, i. e. Chapters, as well as the Psalms?
I answer, because when other Parts of the Scripture are read, GOD is therein
speaking to the People, and therefore it is proper for the Minister alone to
read it, as Ezra did, in Neh. 8.3. And it was but a little before he had said,
that in Scripture-times, One read Moses and the Prophets, and all the People
did not read with an audible Voice, in a most confused manner, as if we did so:
Whereas we in this conform exactly to the Scripture Pattern: But now he has
forgot himself, and asks why don't the People read a part of the Lessons? --
But on the other hand, the Psalms are Prayers and Praises, or Addresses to GOD,
and therefore all our People join in saying and singing them. -- He next asks,
By what Rule do Women thus speak in the Church? I answer, pray by what Rule do
Women sing in your Meetings? There is as good warrant for one as the other, 1
Cor. 11.5. where the Apostle speaks of Women praying and prophesying, or
singing* as Mr. Mead justly interprets it. Though the Apostle forbad them to
teach or usurp Authority over the Man, 1. Tim. 2 12. Yet he never forbad them
to join with the Congregation in praying and praising GOD. Now I hope these
Difficulties are removed, and our Worship wholly cleared from Confusion.

And now I am on this head of the Peoples part in Public Worship, I will
vindicate what I alleged to prove it their Duty to say Amen vocally: I
produced several Texts out of both the Old and New Testament, which are as full
to the purpose as Words can be, some of which I mentioned above. Now observe
how easily he turns them off: -- He says, p. 42. My multiplied Quotations prove
no more than that the People should say Amen privately. I confess, I am much at
a loss to know what he means by saying Amen privately, unless it be to say Amen
silently, i. e. to speak and at the same time say nothing at all: This is quite
as good as the Quakers silent Meetings, which they say are most edifying. But I
entreat you to consider, That to assent to a Public Prayer in my Heart is one
thing, and openly to testify this Assent by saying Amen is another, and that
GOD requires the latter as well as the former. -- It is a dangerous thing to
make a Nose of Wax of the Scripture, as he does on this, and many other
Subjects; thus when GOD requires us to confess with the Mouth, as well as to
believe with the Heart, Romans 10.9, 10. to say Amen as well as to think it, for
a poor silly Mortal to start up and say, it is Confusion, and it is more decent
to say it privately, etc. How intolerably presuming is this? If this Method
will do, the Quakers must never be condemned for rejecting outward Baptism, and
the outward Lord's Supper, so long as they can say they receive them inwardly.
-- Lastly, Whereas he represents us here as saying Amen twenty or thirty Times
in reading the same Prayers. -- I pray what People do so? I am sure the Church
of England say Amen but once to one Prayer. -- To use his own Words, How
hateful are such slanderous Insinuation? -- Upon the whole, I cannot but think,
Brethren, you had but a hard Bargain of it, when you were persuaded to give up
your most valuable ancient Scripture Privilege of bearing a vocal part of the
Public Prayers and Praises, and instead thereof are allowed the Liberty of
holding up your Hand to Vote in every trifling Affair of Church Discipline: I
would therefore wish you to resume that your ancient Privilege again.

8. Another thing wherein you appeared to me to have gone off from Scripture
Rule and Example, was your Neglect of bodily Worship, which I proved to be your
Duty from 1 Cor. 6.20. where we are required to glorify GOD with our Bodies,
as well as our Spirits. Particularly I proved Kneeling in your Prayers and
other Services to be your Duty from the Command, Psalm. 95.6. and the Apostles
Example in Acts 20.36. nay, Christ himself Kneeled, Luke 22.41. To this he
makes no Reply, only gives an ill-natured Flout, which deserves no notice. -- I
mentioned Bowing at the Name of Jesus, as a proper Token of our Submission to
Jesus of Nazareth, as our Lord and King, our Savior and our GOD, in opposition
to the Arian and Socinian Heresies, and as being sufficiently justified to be
lawful from Phil. 2.10. His only business in Answer to this, was to prove that
it is inexpedient or unlawful: Instead of which he pretends to a little Greek,
and says it might be rendered in the Name, But I say if it was so rendered, it
would not be so justly rendered as it is now, and for this I appeal to the
Critics, and to the Scope of the Apostle in that Context. As for his Questions
that follow, about doing it but once, and to the East, they are mere Quibbles,
and I am not at all concerned to Answer them, if they deserved any Notice, as
indeed they do not. -- I will only say, that it is then most proper to express
our Adoration of him when we confess our Faith in him, and that we do in all
other parts of our Worship, offer up our Addresses to GOD in the Name of Jesus
Christ, as well as you.

But the most material Objection you have against us on this head is our
Kneeling at the Sacrament; and as to this, I gave you as briefly as I could,
the Reasons of our Practice: One Reason I gave you was this, viz. that the
Lord's Supper is the most solemn Act of Worship that we can perform, and
Kneeling is the proper and Scripture Posture of Worship. -- To which this
Remarker makes no reply at all: And the Reason doubtless was, because he was
not able, for he promised at first setting out, that he would do his utmost, p.
2. -- And because you commonly think that Christ gave this Sacrament to his
Apostles, Sitting, I observed to you, that this was a mistake, for the Table
posture in Christ's Time was Leaning; and therefore in Sitting at it, you cannot
pretend to conform to the manner of the first Institution. This also he takes
no Notice of; for Answering was not his Design, but Quibbling.

He indeed tells us that it was first administered in a Table-Posture, but dare
not tell what Table-Posture he means, for that would have spoiled all: nor does
he vouchsafe to give us the least Proof of this bold Assertion; for although it
be easy to affirm, yet it is impossible to prove that it was first administered
in any Table-Posture: And yet he immediately brings a most terrible Charge
against me as being guilty of a most horrid Reflection on the Lord Jesus
Christ, p. 41. because I said* how scandalously indecent is it to receive this
Seal of our Pardon, sitting? -- But why so hasty, Friend? What makes you think
it a most horrid Reflection on our Lord? This is, in effect, to charge me with
Blasphemy! -- Do you really think it as horrid a Reflection, as that of the
Pharisees, who said our Savior had a Devil? Or was there never a Jew, Turk or
Pagan, that cast a more horrid Reflection on Christ? Why then, in the
superlative Degree? -- However, Brethren, being arraigned at your Bar for no
less a Crime than Blasphem^, which is what must be employed in most horridly
reflecting on Christ, I plead not Guilty; and to acquit my self, I will prove,
That it is scandalously indecent to receive the Seal of our Pardon, Sitting;
and that to say so, is no horrid Reflection on our Savior, because it does not
appear that he gave it to his Disciples, Sitting.

As to the first of these Propositions I argue thus: It is a Rule allowed by
all; and the Counterpart of it this very Man pretends to, That Those Commands
in the Decalogue, which forbid a Sin, do at the same Time require the Contrary
Duty: Thus when the first Commandment forbids us to acknowledge any false Gods,
it does oblige us to acknowledge the True God: So when the second Commandment
forbids us to bow down to false Gods and serve them; it obliges us to practice
the contrary Duties in our Addresses to the true GOD, viz. to bow down to Him
and serve Him: i e. To worship Him both with our Bodies and Minds. -- Therefore
as he that either bows or kneels, or uses any other Posture of Reverence to a
graven Image, breaks the second Commandment, so does he who in the most solemn
Act of Worship, (such as receiving the Lord's Supper,) refuses to use some such
Posture of Worship to GOD: for it is a Contempt of GOD to address his Infinite
Majesty without some Posture of Adoration, as well as a Sin to kneel to an
Image, though without praying to it, as the Papists pretend to do: The one is
Idolatry, the other Sacrilege; for the Reason why we are forbid to bow down to
an Idol, is because it is an Act of Worship due to GOD, and whether we give to
an Image what is due to GOD, or refuse to pay it to Him, we are equally Robbers
of GOD, we deny Him His Honor, and are guilty of Sacrilege. -- I beseech you,
my Brethren, consider this without Prejudice: I know you abhor Idolatry; pray
do not commit Sacrilege, Romans 2.22. -- I before urged this positive Command to
you, from Psalm. 95.6. O come let us Worship and bow down, let us kneel before
the Lord our Maker. Now if ever we would bow our Knees to our Maker, we ought,
surely, to do it then, when we come to Him in the nearest Approaches that we
are capable of in this World, and with the highest Sense of Gratitude that our
Son's can admit of, to remember and adore Him for the most astonishing Instance
of Love that could be bestowed on us, even giving his own Son to die for us:
Certainly if it be not our Duty to kneel before GOD on this most solemn
Occasion, it is hard to say when we are obliged to it: And he that can so far
disregard this positive Command of GOD, as to sit down in this nearest and most
solemn Approach to him, no doubt but he may with as good Reason sit in every
other part of Worship, and so never bow his Knee to GOD, or give Him any Bodily
Worship, through the whole Course of his Life.

And as Sitting at the Lord's Table is a Transgression of the Positive Law of
GOD; so it is likewise contrary to all the Rules of Decency among Men: for this
I appeal to any Man's Conscience: Suppose that for some grievous Crime you were
justly condemned to die, and when you were come to the Place of Execution, the
King being present, should hold out a Pardon to you; I ask in what Posture
would you receive it? Would you sit on your backside and take it? No,
certainly, you would fall on your Knees with the deepest Gratitude: -- And will
you be more unmannerly to GOD than toward Man? -- You know that in the Lord's
Supper, the Bread and Wine represent the Body and Blood of Christ, whose Death
is the alone Foundation of our Pardon: And as the Minister delivers you this
holy Bread and Wine, so GOD at the same Time gives you Christ, and the
Blessings He has purchased. -- Now does not even Nature teach (as St. Paul says
in another Case,) that it is a Shame to receive our Savior, Sitting, as though
we were his Companions rather than his Subjects: But I proved before, that we
are to consider our Savior now as being in a different Capacity from what he
was while on Earth: Then he was in the Form of a Servant, but Now He is King of
Kings and Lord of Lords, and GOD has commanded even His Angels to worship Him,
Heb. 1.6. Rev. 19.16. How much more is it a Duty incumbent on us sinful
Mortals? No says this Man, He allows us to be as free and intimate with Him as
ever, p. 41. Now I would ask, whether this does not look something like a
Reflection on Christ? The Pope indeed conceiting himself Christ's Vicar, looks
upon it as his Privilege to sit at the Sacrament; and pray consider, whether it
does not look like Symbolizing with him for you to do so? -- I add lastly, on
this Head, -- We find St. Paul severely reproved the Corinthians for their
irrevence in receiving the Sacrament, and threatened them with Damnation for
their not discerning the Lord's Body, 1 Cor. 11.29. i. e. Their not making a
difference between the Lord's Table and their own, but receiving it as common
Food: -- Now he that sits at the Lord's Table, as to his outward Deportment,
makes no Difference between the Lord's Table and his own; he makes no
Distinction between the Body and Blood of Christ and Common Food.

It is pleaded on your side, That if Christ gave this Sacrament to His
Apostles, Sitting, then it is lawful at least, for us so to receive it. -- I
answer, It is a great Mistake to think that Christ gave it to his Disciples,
Sitting: For every Man that has but the smallest Acquaintance with the
Original, and the Customs of those Times, must know that they did not sit down
as we do now, but lay down on Couches, so that their Feet came behind each
other, and they leaned on each others Breast, John 21.20. -- Well, but say you,
this was a Table-Posture, -- I answer, We have no Reason to think that Christ
gave this Sacrament to his Disciples while they continued in this Posture.
There is not the least Intimation of any such thing in either of the
Evangelists, but it is highly probable that they changed their Posture, before
they received it. -- Pray take your Pibles, and turn to Matthew. 26.26. Mark
14.22. Luke 22.19. We there find that after they had eaten the Supper of
unleavened Bread, which was called the Passover, (but not the Paschal Lamb, for
that was not killed till the next Day, and that by the Priest at the Temple,) I
say, after this Supper was over, Christ took Bread, and gave Thanks and Blessed
it: Now you cannot think, that the Apostles continued in that Posture, while
Christ was giving Thanks, and Blessing or Praying: -- If you think they did so,
Why don't you sit still or lie down, while your Minister is praying over the
Bread and Wine? No, you think they rose up and put themselves into a
worshipping Posture, or else how dare you do so? So that it is plain, and your
own Practice shows you believe that neither Christ nor his Disciples did
continue in a Table-Posture, but put themselves into a Worshipping-Posture,
when this Sacrament was instituted. -- If you say. None of the Evangelists take
Notice of their rising up from the Table to Pray and give Thanks, -- I answer,
neither was there any need of it, since the change of Action from eating to
giving Thanks, does sufficiently signify and infer a Change of Posture.
Neither Matthew nor Mark nor Luke mention Christ's Changing his Posture, from
the Time that they first sat down that Evening, till they arose to go into the
Garden, and yet it is certain that they did rise up and sit down again after
Supper, John 13 4. etc. -- Now if Christ and his Apostles did rise to pray over
the Bread and Wine, (which you must own, or condemn your selves,) then pray
tell me where you find that they sat down again to receive it after it was
consecrated? If Mr. J. G. can do this, then I will own my Guilt, but till this
be done, which I am sure no Man can do that has not another Bible than I have,
I must look on him as a false Accuser. -- I entreat you therefore, my Brethren,
no longer to entertain that Notion, which has no foundation in the Bible, that
Christ gave this Sacrament to his Disciples, sitting; nor is there one Instance
in all that holy Book, of one good Man that Worshipped GOD, in that indecent
Posture, and it is contrary to many express Commands that enjoin Bodily
Worship, as I showed you before.

But Mr. J. G. tells you that kneeling at the Sacrament had its rise from those
that adore the Elements. I answer, It is true he says so, and that is all:
Entreat him in his next to prove it, and a great many more untruths that he has
confidently asserted. -- I am sure Mr. Bingham in his Orig. Eccles. l. 15.
makes it evident, That the Primitive Church never used the Posture of Sitting
at the Sacrament, and that they always used a Posture of Adoration, either
Standing or Kneeling. He quotes among others St. Cyril, whose Words are these,
Approach, says he, not rudely, but bowing thy self, and in a Posture of Worship
and Adoration, saying Amen. Now St. Cyril lived in the Year 350, whereas
Transubstantiation and Adoring the Elements, came not into the Church till
about 1200 as Mr. Dalice proves. So that an adoring Posture was certainly used,
at least above 800 Years, before Transubstantiation; so far from Truth is what
he here asserts! -- But supposing, (not granting,) that it was so, does that
make it unlawful for those to kneel that have no design or thought of adoring
the Elements? Pray look into our Rubric in the end of the Communion-Service;
and then charge us with adoring the Elements if you can. And why is it not as
good to symbolize with the Papists in using a reverent Posture, as with the
Arians or Socinians in an irreverent one. The Arians, or rather Socinians, who
deny Christ's Divinity, first brought in that indecent Practice of Sitting at
the Lord's Supper, because they thought it unlawful to worship Christ: I don't
desire you to take this upon my bare Word, as he does what he says, but I will
give you the very Words of the Protestant Church in Poland: The Words of their
genera^ Synod are these, -- Those traitorous Fugitives from us to Arianism,
were the first Authors among us of Sitting at the Lord's Table, contrary to the
Rites used in all the Reformed Churches throughout Europe; we therefore reject
this Ceremony as indecent and irreligious. -- You see they thought Sitting
indecent and irreligious as well as the Church of England, and they tell us it
was not used by any Protestant Church in their Time. This Synod was held in the
Year, 1578. -- And now I hope I have said enough to convince you, if Reason or
Scripture will convince you, That it is a scandalous us Indecency to receive
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, Sitting.

The last Thing I objected against you, was your teaching Children That GOD has
foreordained whatsoever comes to pa^s. For I say, since Sin has come to pass,
it seems clear to me that you must herein teach them that GOD has foreordained
i. e. willed, Sin, etc. I added, That your Doctrine of Absolute Reprobation
seemed to me directly inconsistent with what GOD declares with an Oath, in Ezekiel
33.11. that he has no Pleasure in the Death of him that dies. Chap. 18.32.
etc Now upon this Head he says, p. 42. That I call the Truths of GOD, Error,
and when he has done, he in effect gives them up himself, and pretends to show
that you do not teach that GOD has foreordained Sin; though it has come to pass,
and that you do not hold Absolute Reprobation. -- What an inconsistent Man is
this? -- He then undertakes to explain what it is you do hold: And I wish you
to consider carefully what he says, and see whether you can make Sense of it,
or indeed any thing, Sense or Nonsense. -- In order to show that though Sin has
come to pass, and though GOD has foreordained whatsoever comes to pass; yet he
has not foreordained Sin, he says, I know little, or use little Philosophy, as
well as Divinity: And to show his own great Learning, he adds, (for this is
what is employed in his Questions,) That Sin has not so much as any Physical
Goodness in it: That there is nothing positive in it: That it is a mere
negation of Rectitude: A mere Nonentity: And that GOD's Works about Sin, are a
willing Permission of it, and a wise and holy Gubernation, but no actual
Efficiency into the real Anomy thereof. p. 42.43. -- And now he thinks he has
made it as clear as the Sun. -- I cannot imagine what Notions you have when you
read these wonderful plain Passages. -- By the Physical Goodness of Sin,
indeed, you may possibly think he means whether it be good Physic or not? But
what you can think he means by its being a Nonentity, by the Gubernation of
it, and no actual Eff^ciency into it, and the Anomy of it, it is quite beyond
me to imagine. -- However, I will endeavor to explain it to you, as well as I
can, in plain English, that you may see what fine Doctrine he reaches, when it
comes out of the Clouds and thick Darkness, under which he is obliged to
conceal it.

When he says, Sin is only a Negation, a mere Nonentity, the true meaning of
it is, That it is not; that, properly speaking, it has no Being, or there is
nothing in it; for Nonentity is as much as to say not-Being: And so he has
made a very harmless Business of it -- This is delicate Philosophy! and fine
Divinity! -- It was by the same sort of Philosophy, that some Philosophers of
old, undertook to prove that Pain is no Evil, and others, that there is no such
Thing as Motion in Nature; and by the same sort of Philosophy, some more modern
Philosophers taught, That it is better to be exquisited, and forever Miserable,
than not to be: and it is by the same kind of Philosophy, that some Infidels of
these Times undertake to prove, That there is no such Thing as Liberty of
acting, either in GOD or Man. -- I confess, I am not ignorant either of this
Philosophy, or Divinity, though GOD forbid I should use any of it: No, my
Brethren, this an Instance of that vain Philosophy, that Science falsely so
called, that St. Paul bids you beware of, Col. 2.8. 1 Timothy 6.20. And I
earnestly exhort you with him, to beware of it, and of the pernicious Notions
it tends to ensnare and entangle you in: The Doctrines of the Gospel are plain
and easy, and level to ordinary Capacities: They don't need this
Cobweb-Philosophy to be employed about them: It only confounds them, and
renders obscure the plainest Things in the World: Take heed therefore that ye
be not led away by them from the Plainess and Simplicity of the Gospel: He
would be thought to be a Paulonite, as he expresses it, and pretends the Church
of England teaches as he does; but I am sure, Neither St. Paul, nor the Church
of England teach any such Doctrine as he does here, and which he has not one
Text to justify: Where, I pray, do St. Paul, or the Church of England teach
that Sin is a mere Negation, and only a Nonentity, and has nothing positive in
it, etc.? -- If it were nothing but a mere Negative, Sinners might be tempted
to hope they shall Escape any other Punishment than the mere Negation or Denial
of Happiness; but you may depend upon it, that without Repentance it will
finally meet with positive Punishment even exquisite Pain (...) Torment. --
Besides, Is there not a positive Perve^^^ness, Stubborness and Wilfulness of
Opposition (...) Hearts and Lives of wicked Men to the Will of GOD, ( Romans
8.7.) as well as an indolent Inactivity in neglecting to obey it? And are there
not positive Transgressions of negative Precepts or Prohibitions, as well as
negative Omissions of positive Duties? -- The Truth is -- He does by this
Doctrine confound the very Assembly's Catechism, which it was his Business to
defend, for that defines Sin to be, not only, a want of Conformity unto, (which
is the negative part of it) but also a Transgression of the Law of GOD, which
is the positive part of it. -- However, whether according to his Metaphsics, it
be Entity or Nonentity, be it negative or positive, I am sure none can deny,
that it has, properly speaking come to pass; and therefore, in a Word, so sure
as Sinners are conscious to themselves of an inward Aversion to Holiness, and
Pleasure in sinful Practices, and of a violent, habitual, impetuous Tendency
toward the commission of them; so sure as you see with your Eyes, and hear
with your Ears, and understand with your Hearts, that there are such Things, as
Murders, Thefts, Oppression, Lying, Swearing, Cursing, etc so sure Sin has,
properly Speaking, a Being in the World; and so sure it is that GOD could not
ordain or will it, and therefore he has not foreordained whatsoever comes to
pass.

Indeed he durst not speak out and own the Conclusion, though it be so evidently
contained in the Premises; and therefore he says, what GOD does about Sin, is,
a willing Permission of it: That is, (in plain English,) though GOD does not
decree Sin, yet he is very willing it should be, because, otherwise, (according
to his Doctrine,) he could not get Glory to his Justice in the Punishment of
it: But this is not a whit better than to say He Decreed it; for he that Wills
the End, must Will the Means. -- To permit Sin, (especially according to his
Metaphysical Explication of it,) may seem too strong an Expression; but if all
that is meant by it were, that GOD does not positively interpose to hinder it:
This we allow; because so to do would be to alter his own Workmanship, by
laying a Necessity upon those Creatures which he has made to act freely, and
this he could not do, consistent with the Law of their Nature which he has
made, i. e. he could not wisely do it, at least in the ordinary Course of
Things; and because to necessitate them to good or bad, would be to destroy the
very being of Duty or Sin, of Virtue or Vice, since the very Essence or Nature
of Virtue or Duty consists in the free and willing Obedience, and of Vice or
Sin, in the free and wilful Disobedience to the Law of GOD. -- The other of
GOD's Works about Sin, he says, is the Gubernation, i. e. the Government of it:
-- This is an odd Expression: However I shall not contend with him about it,
provided what he means by it, is only, that GOD overrules the Sins and Follies
of Men in such a Manner as to bring Good out of Evil, and make them turn to the
advancing of his own Ends in the Government of the World: -- This I own he may
do, without doing any thing Himself that shall necessitate them to Sin: Which I
suppose, is what he means by His having no actual Efficiency into the real
Anomy thereof: But I cannot help observing here, what an odd way of Speaking it
is to talk of the Anomy of Sin: It is as much as to say the Sin of Sin, for
Anomy is only a Greek Word, by which the same Thing is meant, as we mean by the
English Word Sin, 1 John 3.4. To speak thus, therefore, it is to distinguish
where there is no difference, which is what obscures and confounds that which
otherwise would be plain and intelligible; as though GOD might necessitate the
Action, which is Sin* without having to do in the depravity of it, which really
implys a Contradiction.

As to the Doctrine of absolute Reprobation, this he does, in effect, give up:
For he says, p. 43. GOD did not ordain any Creature to absolute Damnation, but
^o Damnation for Sin. And p. 44. that you do not teach that GOD has Decreed
the absolute Damnation of any Man. -- Now if it be thus, it is very well, I
have no Fault to find with this; it is I own exactly agreeable with what We
teach. -- The Doctrine of our Church conformable to the Holy Scriptures, is
this, -- That GOD has, through Christ, predestined the Righteous, the Virtuous
and Holy, to everlasting Happiness and Glory, and ordained the Wicked, the
Obstinate and Impenitent to everlasting Misery and Perdition. St. Paul says
Romans 8.29. Whom he did (...)-know, he also did Predestinate: Who he foresaw
would repent, believe and obey the Gospel, these are they whom he had chosen in
Christ ou^ of Mankind, to bring them to everlasting Salvation, as our Church
expresses it in her 17th Article, and those who would obstinately persist in
their Disobedience and Impenitence, notwithstanding all the means he should use
to reclaim them, these he determined to reject. -- This is our Doctrine, and if
he would teach no otherwise, I should have nothing to object. -- But I must
Remark here two things: -- One is, That in denying Absolute Reprobation he
denis his own Articles, and therefore with what Face can he charge me with
denying any of the Articles of the Church. -- That he denis his own Articles in
denying Absolute Reprobation, is evident: For these are the Words of your
Assembly's Confession of Faith which he has assented to, p. 20, 21, -- GOD has
not Decreed any thing because he foresaw it as future, or would come to pass
upon such Conditions. And By the Decree of GOD, for the Manifestation of his
Glory, some Men and Angels are predestined to everlasting Life, and others
are foreordained to everlasting Death. And these Angels and Men thus
predestined and ordained are particularly and unchangeably designed, and
their number so certain and definite, that it cannot be either increased or
diminished. -- You see it is plain from these Words of your Confession, that
they are particularly, unchangeably and unconditionally, or absolutely,
ordained, some to everlasting Life, and others to everlasting Death, and not
because GOD foresaw such or such Conditions; either Holiness in the one, or Sin
in the other. -- So that, as I said in denying absolute Reprobation, he plainly
denis his own Articles; let him therefore hereafter forbear charging others
with denying theirs. -- But the other Remark I would make here, is, That he is
not only inconsistent with his Articles, but also with himself. For he had said
just before, that in GOD's Decrees. He consulted the Counsel of His own Will,
and not the Wills of any of his Creatures. -- Whereas, If he decreed the
Reprobate to Damnation for Sin, as he owns here, and if they fall into Sin by
their own Wills, as he here also says, it is plain that GOD in ordaining them
to Damnation must have had an Eye at their Wills in making this Decree. -- So
apt are those on that side to run into Contradictions in explaining their
Notions! -- To conclude, I earnestly beseech you, Brethren, to beware of these
Doctrines, so full of Inconsistencies, and I may add, of most fatal and
pernicious Consequences, as tending to beget in your Minds very gloomy, hard
and unworthy Thoughts of GOD, and to dishearten and discourage you from an
earnest and engaged pursuit of the Eternal Interests of your Souls: since any
one will be apt to say, If my Fate is already beforehand determined by an
absolute inexorable Decree of GOD, all my Endeavors can do no Good: If I am to
be saved, GOD will sometime or other bring me home, whether I strive no; and if
I am to be forever miserable, all my Endeavors can never prevent it: Than
which Conclusion, nothing can be more pernicious to the Souls of Men! -- Let me
rather exhort you to work out your Salvation with fear and trembling, for it is
GOD that works in you to will and to do: And you may depend upon it there is
no absolute Decree in your way; You shall reap in due Time, if you faint not.

But I have done with this unaccountable Man for the present, and am not
conscious that I have in any Thing misrepresented either Him or my self: I will
only desire you to compare things exactly and impartially, and to weigh and
consider well the true Merits of the Cause between us, without Favor or
Affection.

I perceive some of you Triumph in his Victory over me: But I cannot help
thinking, but that, if you would be impartial in making your Judgment, you
would find his Advantage over me to consist only in Quibb^es, Inconsistencies,
Misrepresentations, glaring Falsehoods in Matters of Fact, hard Speeches, and
censorious and abusive Language; and in these, I am content he should have the
Victory, especially since I know I have Truth, Reason and Scripture on my side.
And I will leave it to you, and all that will be reasonable, dispassionate and
impartial, to judge between us, whose Letter is most void of Truth, Charity,
Meekness and Moderation, and which savours most of the Spirit of the Gospel. --
He says, If I had not laid ^side all show of Modesty, I would not have
mentioned any thing of our being styled grievous Wolves and false Bret^n, for
that was what I complained of. Now I must confess, I am not so very modest as
to receive such in^urious Treatment without declaring that I think it most
abusive and unchristian, and am sure nothing can justly be pretended on our
side that can compare with it. -- If he will lay aside his sour wrangling Way
of Writing, and fairly and calmly attend to the real Merits of the Cause, and
reason Soberly, without Railing, Scoffing and Reviling, as it becomes a
Gentleman and a Christian, and like a Lover of Truth and righteous Dealing, I
shall willingly attend him again; but if he thinks fit to go on in the manner
he has done, I shall think him hereafter beneath my Notice, and endeavor to
find some more advantageous Method of spending my Time. In the mean Time, as I
have devoted my Life to serve the eternal Interests of the Souls of Men, so I
shall be heartily glad to make my Self any ways useful to you and yours, in
endeavoring to promote Truth and Holiness among you here, and your everlasting
Happiness hereafter: for I sincerely still remain,

Dear Brethren, Your hearty Friend, and Well-Wisher.

A POSTSCRIPT To this Second LETTER.
THERE being an Appeal made, in the foregoing Letter, to Two Letters published,
in Elutherius Enervatus, as containing sufficient Evidence of the Apostolical
Institution of Episcopacy; and there having been just Published, a pretended
Answer to those Two Letters, by one who styles himself Phileleuth. Bangor: --
Though it be though it needless to enter upon a very pa^ticular Examination of this
vainglorious Triumph, yet it seemed not unnecessary to add here, some brief
Animadversions of the Author of these Letters, by way of Reply to it; which are
as follows.

It would be almost endless, if I should take Notice of every particular
Instance of this Gentleman's unfair Dealing: He often strains my Expressions,
and those of the Authors he quotes, into meanings which neither they nor I ever
intended, and then laboriously fights with his own Shadow: In other Instances,
and those very many, he has nothing but a Set of mere Quibbles, for two or
three Pages together: And in others he seems industriously to go besides the
Question, insomuch that I really wish I could see for what End he could write,
at least, half this long-winded Pamphlet, unless it were purely to amuse his
Readers with a tedious Verbosity, and to see how much he could say upon the
Subject. -- In such a captious, quibbling Way of Writing, there is truly scarce
any thing but what may be answered: Even the most sacred Causes of the Trinity,
the Divinity of Christ, nay, and Christianity it self, are not without
Adversaries, that can find Art enough to make a plausible Pretense of
answering. -- With respect to such a management it was, that Mr. Baxter, as I
remember, says, somewhere, He should never think the worse of a Book because it
was pretended to be answered. And as to the Letters under Consideration, I
cannot think but I may say, with, at least, as much Justice as Elutherius does
concering his Dialogues, p. 2. That a new Edition of them would be a sufficient
Reply to his Invectives.

The main Artifice that runs through his Performance, consists in producing long
and numerous Quotations from several of the most considerable Writers of our
Church, especially in their Writings against Popery, which he would have his
unwary Readers believe, from a mere Gingle of the Words, to be destructive to
the Cause of the Church to which they adhered, and which they so admirably
defended: As if those great Men did not know how to Write consistent with
themselves; or, as if what we plead for were arrant Popery, and the Arguments
and Manner of Speaking they use, were as much inconsistent with, and subversive
of what we plead in behalf of Episcopacy, as of the great Corruptions of the
Church of Rome, which they impugn. -- Seriously I can scarce conceive, how this
Gentlemen can think himself in earnest, in the use he pretends to make of those
Passages; for there is not a tenth part of all his numerous Quotations from
Jewel, Hooker, Chillingworth and Tillotson, etc. but which take them as they
lie in the Authors themselves, and with the Views they had in Writing them, and
I do highly approve of them, and can find nothing in them, that is at all
really inconsistent with what I contend for, nor with the way of Reasoning that
I use. -- They were certainly as great and good Men, and as excellent Defenders
of our Church, as ever the Nation bred, and are remarkable for a prodigious
vein of Reason and Eloquence: And I cannot help saying, with respect to Hooker
and Chillingworth in particular* That it seems to me, the Man who has seriously
read and considered, and at the same Time is not convinced by their mighty
Reasonings in behalf of Episcopacy, as well as the other things they contend
for, must have a Mind of a very strange and odd Sort of make.

This Mr. Phileleuth. indeed, pretends p. 3. from Edwards's Authority, that Mr.
Hooker, l. 3. held Episcopacy was mutable, and might be abrogated; which is a
Specimen of Edwards's usual abusive Misrepresentation of his Authors: For the
Truth is, Mr. Hooker is there speaking of Prudential Constitutions, respecting
the Circumstantials of the Episcopal Government, and other Institutions of
Religion, and not of Episcopacy it self, which he strenuously holds to be
founded on the Word of GOD, in that very Book,. ult. and the same is evident
from his 7th Book, where he says,. 1. (and afterward abundantly proves it,)
Neither has Christianity been ever Planted in any Kingdom throughout the
World, but with this kind of Government alone, which to have been ordained of
GOD, I am for my own part, as resolutely persuaded, as that any other kind of
Government in the World whatsoever is of GOD. -- Could he then think it mutable
or that it might be abrogated? -- What is there that some People, to serve a
Turn, will not say?

And as to Mr. Chillingworth's Demonstration of Episcopacy, let Mr. Phileleuth.
say what he will about Edwards's Strictures, and one Lauder's pretended
Confutation of it, p. 136. I cannot yet believe, there ever was, or will be, a
just Confutation of it; for it really is, what it pretends to be, A
Demonstration in it is kind. -- And for this Gentleman to pretend, because Mr.
Chillingworth, in his Modest Way of speaking mentions Episcopacy, as being not
repugnant to the Government left in the Churches by the Apostles, etc. that
this is all he undertakes to prove, is very wrong, for he knows that what he
undertakes to demonstrate, is, that it was really Instituted by the Apostles,
and that it is to this Conclusion that he affixes his Q. E. D. And does this
make nothing to our Cause? Pray wherein does the "unaccountable Folly" consist
of my alleging this Demonstration? I am not willing to say, it was an
unaccountable want of Integrity in him, to misrepresent it as he does. -- He
says, We read nothing there of Episcopacy's being a Fundamental of Religion: --
But, If it was an Institution of the Apostles, as he has demonstrated it to be,
I desire to know how much that falls short of making it a Fundamental, since
the Apostles were under the Direction of the Spirit of GOD in Planting and
Settling the Churches -- I own it is only an external of Religion, and so were
the two Sacraments, and I should be glad to be informed, supposing it proved to
be an Apostolical Institution, way it is not at least as much a Fundamental in
Christianity, as Infant Baptism and the First-Day-Sabbath, which I conclude he
holds to be Fundamentals, i. e. Necessary; why then should he be so much amazed
as he pretends to be, that I esteem Episcopacy Fundamental. Sure I am,
Government, and a proper Form of it, are things of Importance enough in
themselves to be made Fundamentals, by being appointed by the Apostles; and I
will be free to say, that if Mr. Hooker and Mr. Chillingworth, and I may add,
Potter, Slater, Sage, Brett, Bingham and many others, (nay even Hoadly
himself,) have not, by fair and just Reasoning, proved the Apostolical, and
consequently, Divine Institution of Episcopacy, so that nothing but Skepticism,
that will cavil at any thing, can pretend to dispute it, I for my part shall
despair of ever seeing any thing proved.

The chief use he makes of Mr. Chillingworth against me is to disprove what I
plead for, respecting the use we make of the Fathers, in finding out the true
Sense of the Scriptures in disputed Cases. -- Now as to this, I was sensible I
had not sufficiently explained my self in my first Letter, and therefore in my
second Letter, I endeavored to explain my self in such a manner as, I though it,
Ill Will it self could not mi^represent. -- My Principle, as I then explained
it, was to this Effect, -- "That I take the H. Scriptures for the only Rule of
my Faith and Practice, which is the great Fundamental Principle of the Church
of England: -- But inasmuch as every Sect of Christianity do also pretend to
the Scriptures as their Rule; and there are several Texts, especially
respecting the External Polity of the Church, that are differently understood
by different Sects: I judged the safest and most undoubted way to ascertain the
meaning of those Texts, after all the Light we could get from the Scriptures
themselves, was to appeal to the Facts and Practices that universally obtained
in the Church, immediately after Scripture-Times, and so downwards through the
first and purest Ages, and to the Fathers who lived in those Times, only as
Witnesses what those Facts really were." -- This Method I found our Dissenting
Brethren themselves took, and that very justly, to establish the First Day
Sabbath and Infant Baptism, which they esteem as much Fundamentals as we do
Episcopacy; and therefore they must either allow our Method of Reasoning to be
good, or own that they are inconsistent with themselves.

Now this stating of the Case Mr. Phileleuth. takes little, or no Notice of in
his Reply, and leaves his Friend miserably helpless where he most needed his
help; and one would think, by his Neglect of him in this Affair, that he was
willing to Sacrifice Infant Baptism, and the First Day Sabbath themselves, so
that he might but destroy Episcopacy with them -- All this he artfully conceals
and keeps out of sight, and instead of attending to it, as he ought to have
done, in faithfulness to his Friend, and his own side; and notwithstanding that
I had abundantly cleared my self from such an Imputation: He would still
invidiously have it believed, p. 72. That I join with the Papists in setting up
Tradition as a Rule of my Faith, in Conjunction with the Scriptures, and makes
a great show with many large Quotations, not only from Chillingworth, but also
from Bp. Jewel, Ep. Hall, A. Bp. Tillotson, etc. as though they condemned my way
of Reasoning; whereas, (however some few Passages may carry a different Sound
with them, yet) in the whole, what they contend for is not at all inconsistent
with it; so far from this, that their Reasoning against the Roman Catholics,
is, in many Instances upon the same foot with mine against the Presbyterians,
who are both alike condemned by the Facts of the Primitive Church. -- But as to
the Passages he quotes, let the impartial Inquirer examine them in the Authors
themselves, and compare them with what I plead, and he will readily see the
Difference -- They were pleading against the Corruptions and Innovations of the
Church of Rome, which were introduced some Hundreds of Years after the
Apostles; whereas I was pleading for a Practice universally obtaining from
their Days: -- They were pleading against the Authority of Fathers that lived
after the Introduction of those Innovations, and of Writings of uncertain
Authority; whereas I was pleading from the Authority of the Fathers who lived
in the Apostolic Age, and the two next Ages after them: -- They were pleading
against the Authority of the pretended oral or unwritten Traditions of the
Church of Rome, i. e. against Things which the Roman Catholics pretended, were,
for several Ages, handed down from Age to Age, by Word of Mouth, for which they
could produce no written Tradition at all; whereas I was pleading from the
Authority of what was written and recorded by very many, and those the most
faithful Witnesses of Antiquity, of different Countries, Nations and Languages,
yet all conspiring in Attestation to the same Facts: -- The R. Catholics
pretend to have Traditionary Interpretations of Scripture so handed down, to
justify what they hold, which I do with Chillingworth and Tillotson disclaim,
and with them do appeal to open Universal Facts attested to by the Fathers, as
being what were obvious to every Man's Senses, nor do I argue from any Facts
universally obtaining in any one Age alone, which, I deny not but that they
might be contrary to Facts as generally obtaining in another Age; but I argue
from Facts that obtained in every Age, from the Beginning of Christianity? --
How disingenuously then does this Gentleman deal, in pretending those Authors
were at all against me, and when he knows they were in the same Sentiment with
me, on the Subject now under Debate?

My Adversary had written very contemptuously of the Fathers, and their
Authority and Usefulness: This I though it it necessary to animadvert upon, as
tending to favor the Cause of Infidelity, by weakening, if not destroying the
external Evidence of the Canon of the New Testament, which can no otherwise be
Established but by the Testimony of the Fathers* who are likewise Witnesses to
Episcopacy. -- And truly after all that this Gentleman has said, on this Head,
I should be glad to be made sensible that the Case is otherwise. -- Does it not
weaken the common Cause of Christianity to weaken any one of the Evidences of
it? Is not the Testimony of the earliest Christian Writers to the Apostolical
authority of the several Books of the New Testament a mighty Evidence of their
being Genuine? And are they not the same Men who are Witnesses to their
Apostolic Original, and their being universally received as such, that are also
Witnesses to the Apostolic Original of Episcopacy, and its universal Reception?
Does not therefore the weakening their Credibility with respect to the one,
weaken it also with regard to the other? If the Scriptures were translated into
diverse Languages, and dispersed throughout all Countries, did not Episcopacy go
every where with them? If the Scriptures were handed down from Age to Age, was
not Episcopacy handed down with them? Nay were they not Bishops that handed
them down, and spread them abroad successively, with the successive
Communication of their own Order? They received the Holy Books at first from
the Apostles, with their Orders, and conveyed them to others successively, with
the same Orders. -- And whatever this Gentleman or others may pretend against a
Succession of Bishops, can He or They find one Age or Nation of Christendom,
without Bishops, till of late, or wherein a Successive Ordination or
Consecration by Imposition of Hands was not practiced and held necessary for
conveying that Character? If there have been some Irregularities in the Manner,
must they destroy the Essence of the Thing? And if in any particular Church the
Succession may have failed, did it therefore, or could it, fail in the whole?
If GOD's Providence was engaged for the Preservation of the Scriptures, was it
not also engaged to preserve a true Succession of those who were to convey them
down, and to explain and enforce them, and to be always with them to the End of
the World?

He slyly, and most abusively Insinuates, p. 86, and 92, as though my Reasoning
on this Head was slyly libelling Christianity and abusing the Bible. But pray,
is it Libelling Christianity to be Solicitous to prove it is Divine Original,
and not to be mistaken about it, or any thing relating to it, and to be tender
of, and do Justice to the Character and Reputation of those who have
transmitted it down to us? -- Is it abusing the Bible to prove the several
Books of it to have been received from Inspired Men, and to have been always
handed down as such, by the same Witnesses who attest to the Fact of Episcopacy
in their Times, and that it was Originally derived from the Apostles; and to
prove to my Self and others that I am not mistaken in my Notion of Scripture
Facts, by Appealling to the Facts immediately after Scripture Times and
downwards, as attested to by those very Men who are Witnesses for the
Apostolical Original of those sacred Books? This sure is so far from abusing
Scripture, that I cannot but think it the greatest Honor we can do it, next to
governing our Lives by it, to establish all the Evidences of it in the best
manner we can, to be solicitous rightly to understand it, and to reverence the
Characters, and honor the Memory, and to pay a great Difference to the
Testimony of those Holy Martyrs who attest to it is Divine Original, and those
Facts afterward that are so highly useful to lead us to the right
understanding of it: And this is all I can be justly charged with: Nor were my
Concessions concerning them at all inconsistent with this, were they but
considered with the least Candor. -- On the other hand, I cannot but be still of
Opinion, that to asperse and deride them, as my Adversary had done, does
really, so far forth as the External Evidence of the Canon of those holy Books
is concerned, greatly tend to the Disadvantage of our common Cause, and to
serve the Cause of Infidelity. -- And by the way, I cannot help saying on this
Occasion, that it is an unaccountable thing to me, and a sad Instance of the
Force of Prejudice, that our Brethren in this Country, should be so intent upon
opposing the Church of England, that they scruple not, in order to disgrace her
among the People, to reprint, recommend and scatter about Pamphlets that have
been written by Infidels at Home, with a Design to bring all Religion into
Contempt, and to stab the Gospel through the Sides of the Church; -- Such was
Parson Alberoni; -- Such were Trenchards Lucub^ations, and such the Pamphlets
recommended by this Gentleman, p. 51. at least one of them: -- Nay some have,
to my Knowledge recommended Tindal's Book of The Rights, etc. (not to mention
Chubb's Latitudinarian Pieces, who has lately declared himself on the Infidel
Side, with Tindal, for the Sufficiency of Reason without Revelation.) Wretches
these! Who care not how much they belie, abuse and misrepresen^ the Church, so
that they may but by that means bring all Religion into Contempt. -- With what
Conscience could my Brother Phil. recommend such vile Pamphlets as that
addressed to Sir Nathanael Curzon, when he cannot but know that it is stuffed
with most notorious Falsehoods, such as these, That the Bishops give Lic^es to
Mid-wives to Baptize, and to M^n to keep two Wives, to commit Adultery, to
practice Knavery, and to communicate with the Church of Rome, etc. Many more I
might mention. -- What do you mean, my Brethren, in ^^king such Courses as
these to blacken the Church? ^n you be insensible that these Men are as really
^emies to you as to us, and that they equally De^ the Ruin of us all? I am
mistaken if you are not (...) the Event made sadly sensible of your Error, in
ta^g such Methods to render the Church odious: (...) you not see loose Notions
in Religion and even ^idelity coming in apa^^ among us? Ought you (...)
therefore in saithfuln^^s to the Gospel and your Selves, to join with us
against the common Enemy?

Put to go on,

This Gentleman, p. 91. suggests as though I insinuated that the Divinity of
Christ was doubtful, because I mentioned it with Episcopacy, as an Instance
wherein the Matters of Fact attested by the Fathers, are highly useful to
satisfy us, that we take up a right Notion of the Scripture-Sense. Now, why
should this be invidiously represented, as though I doubted whether the Divinity
of Christ was plainly taught in Scripture? He knows I was not speaking of
either the one or the other, as being doubtful to me, but as being disputed,
and consequently doubted by others: He is not ignorant that there are those
that notwithstanding the Plainness of Scripture, pretend to doubt, whether the
Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father be a Scripture-Doctrine? And to
satisfy them in this matter, I say it is highly useful to appeal to the
Testimony of the Fathers, whether that was constantly taught from the Beginning
as a Scripture-Doctrine or not? The same I say with respect to Episcopacy, It
appears to me not doubtful but sufficiently plain from Scripture, to be an
Apostolical Institution; but since there are those that doubt and dispute it, I
plead, that the consequent Facts ought, in all reason, to satisfy, any one that
it was so.

But he says, supposing the Fact or Episcopacy ever so well attested, He that
argues from Fact to Right is a mere Sophister. p. 80. -- I allow this in all
other Facts but such as are done under the Infallible Conduct of the unerring
Spirit of GOD; but in this Case we may be undoubtedly argue from Fact to Right:
The Apostles did, in Fact, wherever they propagated Christianity, institute
Episcopacy; we therefore justly conclude, that Form of Government, and that
only, to be Right, and that it is our bounden Duty to submit to it, and that it
ought to be continued in all Churches to the End of the World. -- Is this
Sophistry? No sure, There can be no Danger of erring in arguing thus: The only
Question then is, whether the Apostles did in Fact institute Episcopacy? We
think it plain from Scripture, that they did, in the Persons of Timothy, Titus,
and the Angels of the seven Churches; and we are well assured that we are not
mistaken, since we find it so clearly attested by the Fathers, Clemens,
Ignatius, Irenaeus, Tertullian and Cyprian, which I quoted, besides many
others, within the three first Centuries successively, that I might have
mentioned, and which have often over and over been alleged, that the Apostles
did every where institute Episcopacy, in our Sense of it. Nay Mr.
Chillingworth, (whom he so basely misrepresents, and so emptily Triumphs in,)
says, in the Margin of his Demonstration, that Dr. Hammond has fully
demonstrated it, in his Dissertations against Blondel, (which, says he, never
were answered, and never will) by the Testimonies of those, who wrote in the
very next Ages after the Apostles. not to mention Molineus's, Beza's, Chamier's
and Vedelius's Concessions, on which he builds his Demonstration. -- But of the
Facts themselves, I shall say more afterward.

His grand Objection against my way of arguing is taken from the Chiliast
Notion of Christ's personal Reign on Earth, and the Communicating of Infants:
-- These, he pleads were universal Facts of the primitive Church, and we may as
well, argue the Right of them, as of Episcopacy, from the same Reason. -- To
all which, I answer -- First, Supposing the Case to be as he represents it, his
Friend Elutherius was impertinent in appealing with so much Assurance to the
universal Fact of Infant Baptism in those Days in Proof of it is Divine
Institution. And you must never hereafter pretend to argue from the Fathers,
but be confined to Scripture alone in proving, that and the First-Day-Sabbath,
in both which Cases, your Adversaries will perhaps be even with you, at least,
if Antiquity be not taken into the Account -- But, Secondly, The Instances of
the Chiliast Opinion and Communicating of Infants, are not in any measure upon
a par with Episcopacy: For, First, As to the Communicating of Infants, I cannot
find that there is any one Father within the the 3 first Centuries that ever
pretended they had that Practice from the Apostles: Nay, I am persuaded it
cannot be made appear to be Universal Matter of Fact within the 2 first
Centuries. -- There are indeed two Passages, one in Dionysius the pretended
Areopagite, and another in the Clementine Constitutions, which are both
Writings of very dubious Authority, that seem to allude to such a Custom's
obtaining in their Time, and there is a Passage or two in St Cyprian that seem
to imply as much: I say these three Instances, and two of them of very doubtful
Authority, are all that I can find concerning this Custom within the 3 first
Centuries; and will this Gentleman pretend Communicating Infants is proved to
be equally early, and universal Matter of Fact with Episcopacy, and equally
derived from the Apostles? What partiality is here? I deny not that it was
practiced in Africa in St. Cyprian's Time, and so was Rebaptising Heretics,
which last mentioned Practice, though it obtained there, was contrary to the
general Practice of the Church; and so might the former for ought that appears
to the contrary. It is confessed, that this Practice did at length, by degrees
universally obtain in the Church, and in St. Austin's Time, in the beginning of
the 5th Century, it was (as several other irregularities were, that had crept
into the Church by that Time,) pretended to have been derived down by Tradition
from the Apostles, but there does not appear to have been any manner of
Foundation for such a pretense. -- What then is this to the Case of Episcopacy,
which had been constantly mentioned in every Age from the very beginning as
derived from the Apostles? And I am free to own that if this Practice could be
made appear as evidently to have been derived from the Apostles, as Episcopacy,
I should have the like Veneration for it as I have for that, especially,
provided also there were as good Grounds for it in the Scriptures as there are
for that: Whereas there does not appear to be any Grounds at all.

Now, Secondly, as to the Chiliast Opinion, it consisted only in adhering too
strictly to the Letter of that Passage in the 20th of Revelations, concerning
the Saints Reigning with Christ a 1000 Years. -- This Notion, I own, did get
considerable Footing in the Church in the second and third Centuries; but it
took it is Rise from the single Testimony of Papias, an honest, but weak Man,
who pretended he had it from St. John, as the true Sense of that Passage in the
Revelations, in which it is easy to imagine he might be mistaken: But it does
not appear to have been ever the universal Belief of the Church. -- It is true,
Mr. Chillingworth and Archbp. Tillotson do make use of it against the Papists,
and speak of it as being generally received: But Dr. Whitby, since, in his
Treatise of the Millennium, has, I think effectually confuted the Arguments
they use, and made it sufficiently appear, from even Justin Martyr and Irenaeus
themselves, who were Chiliasts, and from Origin, That it never was the
universal Doctrine of the Church: For Brevity I omit his Arguments, and beg the
Reader to consult Dr. Whitby in that Treatise, where I think he cannot fail of
receiving Satisfaction in this Point. -- Upon the whole, I cannot see, that
either our Cause, or my way of Reasoning in Defense of it, are at all
endangered by what this Gentleman argues from that Practice of Communicating
Infants, or this Opinion of the Chiliasts: They do by no means appear to be
parallel Instances with Episcopacy: All his boasting therefore on this Head is
utterly empty and vain.

And now we are come to the Stating of the Question; in order to which I had
made this Observation, as being what I judged just in it self, as well as a
necessary Means in order to prevent contending about Words, viz. That there is
no more arguing from the promiscuous Use of the Words Bishop and Presbyter, to
prove them the same Order, than from the promiscuous Use of the Words Apostle,
Presbyter, and Deacon to prove them to be the same Order: Now I can see little
else but mere Cavilling in all that is said on this head: I readily allow the
Word Deacon, when applied to the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.5. etc. is not used in a
restrained Sense to signify the Office so called, but it is evidently so far
restrained as to signify the ministerial Office in general; for he is there
speaking of the Ministry of the Gospel, whereof, says he, I am made a Minister;
and therefore what I contend for is, that as the Word Deacon or Minister does
not always signify a particular Office in the Ministry, so neither can the
Word Bishop be necessarily supposed to signify a particular Office: And that
therefore a Presbyter is an Overseer or Bishop, only in the same Sense as an
Apostle is a Minister or Deacon; those Terms being always restrained to the
Ministry in general, though not always to any particular Office of it: And the
Apostle Peter calls himself a Presbyter, 1 Pet. 5.1. as what was employed in his
Apostle-ship, though not therefore implying all that his Apostle-ship did imply.
So that what I plead is, that it is plain, and nothing can be plainer, than
that these Words being all frequently used in a general Sense in the
New Testament, there is no certain arguing from them to the more restrained
Sense in which they were used afterward; and that therefore we ought to leave
off arguing from the promiscuous Use of Words, and to be determined wholly by
Facts. Accordingly I stated the Question between us to be this, -- Whether the
Apostles did not appoint in each Church, a President or Governor Superior to,
and with Jurisdiction over the Presbyters and Deacons, who were Officers of
that Church, as well as the People under them? And here I must own, It was a
vain attempt for me to endeavor by Words to fix any one of this Gentleman's
skeptical Humor: One might as well undertake to fix Proteus himself to one
particular Shape: For though I believe there is nobody that had a Mind to
understand another, and that was not resolved to indulge a mere Strife about
Words, but would readily enough comprehend my meaning; yet Mr. Phileleuth.
notwithstanding he himself owns with me that we should wholly leave contending
about Terms, p. 101 etc. and professes he desires to understand, and hates and
scorns a mere strife of Words, is sadly puzzled to understand me, and spends no
less than 5 Pages, here, besides many more else where in carping and quibbling
upon the Words of the Question as I have stated it: And I must again explain
what I mean by a Church? And what I mean by a Governor or President of it,
etc.? Tho I had sufficiently explained my self on all these Points before.

Now as to the first, it is plain to me from Scripture and Antiquity, that by a
particular Church was ordinarily meant all the Christians of a City, with the
adjacent Country depending on it, even though they consisted of many
Congregations; as I proved they generally did, even in the most Primitive
Times: I have owned that it was many Years before any Parochial Bounds were
fixed to the several Congregations, this being merely a circumstantial Thing.
In this sense I showed, we must unavoidably understand the Churches of
Jerusalem, Ephesus, Corinth, Rome, Smyrna, and the rest of the
Scripture-Churches. I deny not but the Word Church may sometimes in Scripture
mean a particular Congregation, as when we read of a Church in a House, Romans
16.5. and so it might possibly mean in the Text he mentions, 1 Cor. 14.34. of
Women speaking in the Churches; though it seems to me more probable this ought to
be understood of the Places of Worship, like that, Chap. 11.22. Have ye not
Houses to Eat and Drink in, or despise ye the Church of GOD? i. e. the Place
dedicated to his Worship. This instance therefore of the Churches of Corinth
that he brings, is so far from weakening, that it confirms what I contend for,
viz. that in the same particular Church, there were several Congregations and
Places of Worship, while yet they were all called but one Church, as this
Church is it self styled, Chap. 1. of each Epistle, The Church that is at
Corinth. -- According, therefore, to the Scripture-Style, we should not say the
Churches of Boston, but the Church of Boston, notwithstanding there are many
Congregations and Places of Worship, which should all be united under one Head
as the Congregations of each Church in the Primitive Times were which though they
might be sometimes called Churches, as we nowadays call the Places of
Worship, and particular Congregations, Churches, (meaning Parish-Churches,)
yet, it is evident, from this very instance, that they were all in
Scripture-Times called one Church, meaning a particular Church, consisting of
several Congregations, under the Care of so many Presbyters, all united under
one principal fixed Person, at the Head of them; as the Pre^byters of the
Church of Ephesus, (whereof there were several, Acts 20.17.) were united under
Timothy, and afterward under the Angel of that Church.

I say ordinarily all the Christians of one City and Country adjacent, were a
particular Church, and but one Bishop presided over each of them: Not that this
was ever reckoned a necessary Rule, but what was judged most for the public
Advantage always governed: Hence when two Cities were very near each other,
they were united together under one Bishop; and on the other Hand, when there
was a large Country without any City in it, it was divided into several
Districts, like Counties, the chief Town of which was the Bishop's Seat. Thus
in England, London and Westminster, being near each other, make one Bishopric,
and Bath and Wells another, and Litchfield and Coventry another; otherwise
there are just as many particular Churches and Bishops in England, as there are
Cities, according to the primitive Model, and some large Countries had
formerly-Suffragans, of the same kind with the ancient Chorepiscopi or Country
Bishops, and it would perhaps, be well if they were restored: However, as
things are, the Number of Bishops in England is so considerable, for so small a
Spot of Ground, that I think there is little Occasion for Complaint. -- As to
Mr. Phileleuth's ill-natured Flouts, and unmannerly, indecent Reflections in p.
107, 8, 9, and 123. as well as many other places, I take no Notice of them: It
is sufficient to pass them by with Pity and Contempt.

And as to the Government of each particular Church, though he pretends to be so
much at a loss for my meaning, he knows well enough, that what we contend for,
is, that this is, and was always deemed to be essential to Episcopacy, that in
each District, be it a City, with it is adjacent Country, or a Chief Town with
it is County, there be one chief Head or Governor, ordained to that Off^ce, who
has such a Presidency ever the rest of the Clergy, and the People under them,
as well as him, and in subordination to him, as may be properly called, a
Jurisdiction, not Legislative but Executive, not Despotic and Abitrary, but
l^mited by Laws which he may not dispense with, no^ may he any more transgress
them than the meanest Presbyter. -- And this was always the same in the Church,
whatever Irregularities and Exorbitances there may have been in some Places and
Times, and whatever accidental Alterations there have been, are, and lawfully
may be on Account of which it is a mean Artifice of our Adversaries, when we
prove that such a Person was always from the Beginning at the Head of the
Clergy in each Church, to cry out. O, But those ancient Bishops were not of the
same kind with our modern Bishops: Why truly, we don't pretend that they were
Lords, or had many other Temporal Privileges which Christian Kings and Princes
have since granted to Bishops, or that there was always one precise Method in
their public Administrations; notwithstanding these, and the like purely
Circumstantial Differences, we insist upon it that our Bishops are now of the
same kind with those ancient Bishops, as to what was a^ways essential to their
Office and Character, be they called Prelates, Presidents, Governors,
Moderators, or what they will.

Another Quibble that runs through this Gentleman's Performance, is, That those
primitive Bishops were not of a different Order from the Presbyters. -- To this
I answer, That to me it seems a mere Strife about Words to object against
calling them distinct Orders: However, If that would please him, I should find
no fault with Mr. Hooker's Account of the different Orders, which he himself
quotes, p. 47. That the Clergy be divided into two Orders, Presbyters and
Deacons, and that of Presbyters, some be greater, some less in Power, and that
by our Savior's own Appointment. Thus the whole Clergy of the Jewish Church
were Priests and Levites, but the High Priest was never the less, by Divine
Appointment, superior to the other Priests. Let the Bishop be a Presbyter if
you please, according to this way of stating the Case: The Gentleman it seems
likes a Dichotomy better than a Trich^tomy, let him have his Humor, so that
the Truth of Things be not infringed. -- The Reason why we call the Bishop of a
different Order from the Presbytery is, because he is, and always was
consecrated or ordained to that Superiority of Station and Office, in solemn
manner, by Imposition of the Hands, either of the Apostles at first, as Timothy
by Paul. 2 Ep. 1.6. or of other Bishops afterward, as is plain from many
Passages in Antiquity, Vid. Bingham's Origines. And for this Reason Deans and
Archdeacons which he mentions, p. 58. are not different Orders, but of the
same Order with the rest of the Presbyters, because they have no distinct
Ordination from the rest, as Bishops have, and as Archbishops likewise have
not from the other Bishops, being both the one and the other, only primi inter
pares, i. e. chief Men of the same Order with the rest of their Brethren, only
appointed to particular Businesses of more especial Weight and Trust.

Upon the whole therefore, what we plead for is only this, That according to
the Primitive Model, every Nation or Province be divided into several
Districts, consisting of a convenient Number of Congregations, each immediately
under the Care of their several Presbyters, and all united under one principal
Person at the Head of them: Such as those were, whom the Apostles at first
ordained, one in each City, wherever they prop^ Christianity, and who by the
End of the First, or beginning of the Second Century, began to be distinguished
from the rest of the Clergy by the Name Bishop, whose fixed Business it was,
and to which He was ordain ^, to presice Authoritatively in Ordination and
Government, in such ^ manner, that nothing might be regularly done by the
Clergy, without him at the Head of them -- This I say, is what we plead for,
and for this we appeal to the Facts of the Holy Scriptures, and the most
Primitive Churches. -- Thus, in Fact the Church of Ephesus with it is Presbytery
and People were under the Government of Timothy, and that of Cr^te under the
Government of Titus, as is plain from the Epistles to them, and the Seven
Churches of Asia with their Presbyters and People, were under the Government of
their Seven Angels, as appears from the second and third Chapters of the
Revelation.

Now, as to Timothy and Titus, this Gentleman contends that they had, one the
Care of all Asia, and the other of all the Cities in Crete, and therefore they
could not be fixed Bishops of particular Churches: As if these were
inconsistent the one with the other. They might have, and, if we will believe
the Testimony of the Ancients, they had a Primacy and general Inspection over
the Bishops, and all the Churches in those Parts, though they had a particular
fixed Jurisdiction each one in his own particular Church: Timothy had
manifestly a Jurisdiction over the particular Church of Ephesus, as appears
from the Epistles to him; and all that Theodoret's Testimony can reasonably be
supposed to imply is that he had a Primacy and general Inspection with regard
to the rest of the Churches of Asia, each of which had it is Angel or Bishop
besides, as is clear from St. John's Epistles to them, Rev. 2. and 3. -- And
where I beseech you, is the Inconsistency of supposing a Succession of such
fixed Governors of Ephesus, and the rest of the Churches of Asia, as in Fact
they were, and St. John's settling at Ephesus in the Decline of Life (which he
makes such ado about) not to Preside over them as a fixed Governor of any
particular Church or Province, but to Complete ^he Settlement of Christianity
in the World, to receive Revelations from GOD and communicate them, to finish
and settle the Canon of Holy Scripture, and to direct, reprove, instract and
exhort the Churches, and all in the Quality of an Apostle? Such Arguing as he
has upon this Head, is very trifling.

And as to Titus, where is the inconsistency of calling all the Christians of
Crete a Church at first, and yet supposing, as from the Nature of Things we
unavoidably must, that upon the Increase of Christianity there, there might be
a particular settled Church in each City, with each one its Bishop and
Presbytery: And that then Titus, who had before been Bishop of the Church of
Crete, might now be more properly Styled, (as Doro^heus call him,) a Bishop in
Crete; i. e. in one of the Citys of that Island, with a Primacy respecting the
other Bishops? There is no inconsistency in all this with what I plead for; and
this Supposition renders the Testimonies of the Ancients all consistent with
one another. He brings a Passage out of Dr. Whitby against me, who says, He
cannot find in any Writer of the three first Centuries, any intimation, that
Timothy and Titus were fixed Bishops. But does not the Gentleman deal very
unfairly in leaving the Matter thus, when Dr. Whitby's next Words are, That
this Defect is abundantly supplied by the Concurrent Suffrages of the 4th and
5th Centuries? And does he not next quote Eusebius, (who indeed lived in the
third Century,) and who says, it was delivered down to them by History, that
Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Crete. From whence it is manifest,
though those Histories are now lost, that such were then extant; and the Doctor
quotes many others that attest to the same ^act. -- It is true, Dr. Whitby has
a Conjecture that is almost peculiar to himself, and which I don't see to be
sufficiently supported by the Reasons he gives; however afterward he
abundantly proves Timothy and Titus to have been truly Bishops, though he is
somewhat doubtful about their having a fixed Charge in any particular Church;
and that Episcopacy was truly an Apostolical Constitution, he demonstrates in a
most unanswerable manner in that Preface to the Epistle to Titus, where among
other Instances he mentions the Angels of the 7 Churches as undoubted Bishops,
and says, There can be no stronger Proof of such a Matter of Fact, than the
general and concurrent Practice of the Christian Church in the Ages next
succeeding the Apostles; and this general Sense of the Christian Church may be
demonstrated. And then goes on with his Demonstration, and among others he
alleges the Arguments of Bp. Stillingfleet as unanswerable, whom, Mr.
Philele^th. still vainly pretends is on his Side of the Question: Where he has
these remarkable Words in his Dut. and Rights of the Paroch Clergy, p. 11. They
who go about to unbishop Timothy and Titus, may as well unscripture the
Epistles written to them, and make them only some occasional Writings, as they
make Timothy and Titus to have been some particular occasional Officers -- And
we have no greater Assurance that these Epistles were written by St. Paul, than
we have that there were Bishops to succeed the Apostles in the Care and
Government of the Churches. Thus you see how much reason he has to boast of
Whitby and Stillingfleet. -- And lastly, as to the Argument for Episcopacy from
the Angels of the seven Churches of Asia, what he says in Answer to it, does
not, as far as I can see, in the least weaken it: Nay he owns, p. 127. the main
of what we contend for from it, viz. "That they might be so many distinct fixed
Persons, presiding over the rest of the Clergy as well as People, in each of
those Churches". Only he pretends this don't prove them to be of a different
and superior Order: To which I need say no more than what I have already said,
only I think it is plain enough, that, even in Governments, ever so well
balanced and limited the distinction between Governors and Governed, is
sufficient to denominate them of different Orders.

Next to these Facts of the Holy Scripture, we appeal to the Facts of the most
Primitive Churches, by which we ascertain our selves that we are right in our
Notion of Scripture Facts. -- And here the Gentleman pretends to be mightily
astonished at my Assurance in saying; "I cannot see how it can be doubted, but
that we have the universal Witness of the Church of GOD, in every Place, and
every Age of the ancient Times of Christianity, even from the Beginning,
entirely on our Side of the Question." -- Now by the universal Witness of the
Primitive Church here, and the General Suffrage of Antiquity, I mean, That all
the Writers of the Primitive Church, that have any Occasion to mention the
Government of the Church, either in their Times or before, do constantly and
unanimously attest to, or, at least suppose it to be such an Episcopacy, as we
plead for, as to the Essentials of it, and that none ever speak a Syllable of
any other Form of Government: This I cannot but still take to be the Case: Nor
can I conceive how any one that impartially reads Bp. Potter's Church
Government, Mr. Slater's Original Draught, Mr. Bingham's Origines
Ecclesiasticae, (not to mention many other modern Authors,) together with the
Ancients themselves St. Ignatius, Irenaeus, Tertullian, St. Cyprian, Eusebius,
and many others of the Fathers, can make any Doubt of it: I am sure, I can no
more doubt of it, than I can, from reading the ancient Greek and Roman Authors,
what the Form of Civil Government was which obtained in their Countries and
Times. Sir E. Deering (though no Friend to the English Constitution,) in his
Collection of Speeches, has these Words, They who deny that ever any such
Bishops ( i. e. Bishops presiding over Presbyters,) were in the best and purest
Times, I entreat them to show me how I may prove that there ever was an
Alexander, a Julius Caesar, or a William the Conque^or: -- To me as plain it is
that Bishops President have been the c^nst^n permanent Governors of the Church
of GOD in all Ages -- Therefore, says he, Answer not me, but answer Ignatius
answer Clemens, Tertulli^n, Irenaus, nay answer the whole indisputed
Concurrence of the Asian, the European, and the African Churches, all Ages, all
Places, all Persons: Answer, I say, all these, or do as I do, submit to the
sufficient Evidence of Truth. Grotius who was willing to say the best he could
of the Presbyterian Scheme, does however declare, De Imp. Sum. Pot. That
Episcopacy had it is beginning in the Apostolical Times, this is testified by
the Catalogues of Bishops left us by Ienaeus, Eusebius, Socrates, Theodoret and
others, who all begin from the Apostolical Age: But to detract from the Faith
of such Writers, and so agreeable to one another, -- is the part only of an
irreverend and obstinate Mind. And he produces many Testimonies, and among
others, says, The seven Angels of the Asiatic Churches in the Revelation are an
irrefragable Argument to this Assertion. See more at large in Dr. Brett of
Church Government, p. 83. etc. Now whoever knows the Characters of these two
great Men, will be sensible that nothing but the Force of Truth could have
extorted such Declarations from them.

I assure you I meant nothing like Railing or Uncharitableness in what I said,
however that hard Construction must uncharitably be put upon it: But I should
be glad any one would tell me, in what Church, or in what Age this Episcopal
Form of Government did not obtain? And where or when, it would not undoubtedly
have been judged censurable for any one to dispute against, and set up in
opposition to it? These that did so, we find were in Fact censured, and what
else could others have exp^^ied? -- To these things my Brother Phil. (...) to
say: Why then should he be so terribly amaze^ (...) Episcopacy was not among
those things that M^ Chillingworth judged unwritten and unnecessary, for he
held and proved it to be Apostolical; why then should he be brought in as
censuring my Expressions: I must still think such a management to be fallacious.

It is not worth the while for this Gentleman and I to enter into a particular
Debate upon the Testimony of the Fathers, concerning the Matters of Fact
relating to the Controversy before us; because it has been so often done to our
Hands already. -- The ingenious Author of* The Inquiry into the Constitution,
etc. of the Primitive Church, had done the best that the Nature of the Thing
would admit of, in endeavoring to Support the Presbyterian and Congregational
Pretenses from the Facts of the Primitive Church: To which Mr. Slater gave a
distinct and complete Answer in his Original Draught of the Primitive Church,
with which that ingenious Gentleman, the Inquirer, (as I have been told by good
Hands,) owned himself fully satisfied, and that his Book was sufficiently
answered, nor would he be persuaded to attempt any Reply. -- Let those who are,
without partiality and without Hypocrisy, desirous of finding the Truth, read
those Books, and the others I mentioned above, and judge for themselves. -- And
I would hope no body would be so disingenuous as to bring over ^gain the
Testimonies by which the Inquirer endea^ed to support his Hypothesis, without
taking ^ce of Mr. Slater^s Remark and Replys: When I see his Original Draught
fairly and justly answered, with ^he same Christian Temper, and the same
Integrity, wherewi^h he wrote it, then, and not till then, shall ^ began to
think our Cause in some Danger. -- In the mean time ^ can^t (...) e^pres^ my
Surprise on this (...) to deal with, after having read these Books, (as he
pretends to have read them for he quotes the Orig Draught, p. 15.) should yet
have the Face to impose upon ignorant People with such fallacious
Misrepresentations of Authors as his Remarks are, upon the Authorities I
produced. Verily he, and whoever goes with him into such a Management, must
have Backs of Steel, as well as Faces of Brass, (if I may for once in a way
give him back his own Words,) to stand it out against Mr. Slater's mighty
reasoning. -- I will make two or three Remarks on his Misrepresentations of the
Fathers I quoted, and so conclude.

I had observed that Ignatius, who first wrote after the Apostles, A.D. 107.
(for so it should be according to Dupin,) mentions the 3 Orders under the 3
distinct Names, Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon, no less than 16 Times, and
requires the Presbyters and Deacons as well as People, to be subject to them.
-- Now Mr. Phileleuth. to invalidate this, argues, that the Words Bishop and
Presbyter do not, in Ignatius, signify different Orders, because I allowed
they did not in St. Clement's Time, and to establish this Conclusion, he pleads
that St. Clement must have written his Epistle but a little Time before
Ignatius. -- To this I Answer, That Mr. Wooton and A.Bp. Wake have proved that
Clement wrote his Epistles at least nigh 40 Years before Ignatius; for that ^t
appears from the Epistle it self, that it was written just after the
Persecution under Nero, which was A. D. 65. because he speaks, c. 5. of St.
Peter and St. Paul as having been lately Martyred; and that it must have been
written before the Destruction of Jerusalem, which was A. D. 70 bec^^se he
speaks of the Temple and it is Services as still continuing. These and other
Arguments they use, advance a very strong probability, at least, that the Date
of this Epistle must be whereabouts I placed it: And consequently there must
have been Time enough for the first Gov^^^^urs of the Church, who at first were
called Apostle^ as being Fellow Laborers with, and Successors to the Twelve,
by degree; to drop that Name, as Theodore^ and others testify, out of respect
to the Twelve, and to be generally distinguished by the Name Bishop.

However it is abundantly clear from Ignatius's Epistles, that his Bishops were
sufficiently distinguished from his Presbyters to be called a distinct Order.
-- That they had a distinct Ordination, as Bishops cannot be reasonably
doubted, since all accounts extant from the Beginning do constantly, without
Exception, speak of Bishops as being ordained to their Office by Imposition of
Hands: The o^dest Rule of the Church extant, among those which Bp. Beveridge
proves to have been the Rules of the Church in the second and third Centuries,
is, That a Bishop must be Ordained by two or three Bishops, and a Presbyter and
Deacon by one Bishop. V. Cler. Vad. Mecum. p. 2, 3. And this cannot be disputed
by any one that is versed in St. Cyprian's Works: St. Polycarp is by Irenaeus,
who personally knew him, said to have been ordained by the Apostles Bishop of
Smyrna, and Ignatius is universally declared to have been ordained by the
Apostles, Bishop of An^ioch, not to mention St. James at Jerusalem, Clemens at
Rome, Timothy at Ephesas, Titus at Crete, Mark at Alexandria, and many more
which were ordained by the Apostles themselves: Now it is clear from Igna^ius^s
Epistles that the Bishops of those Times, (particularly Polycarp,) had
Presbyters under them; and since it is evident from the Holy Scriptures that
the Apostolic Method of Ordination was by Imposition of Hands, it cannot be
questioned but that they were to ordained to their Office of presiding over and
governing the Clergy, as well as People of their respective Churches, See
Bingham, l 2 5.1. -- That Ignatius's Bishops had such a Jurisdict^on over their
Pre^byters as the English Bishops, is clear from Ep. ad Smyr.. 8. which I
mentioned before, in which it appears that nothing could lawfully be done
without the Bishops Approbation or License: And since it is there manifest
that, under his Directions, their Presbyters did administer Baptism and the H.
Eucharist or Lord^s Supper, as did likewise St. Cyprian's Presbyters, Ep. 15,
16, 17. It is little short of right down Raving for Anderson, and after him
Elutherins, to pretend they were only Lay-Ruling Elders of the Presbyte^ian
kind. And by the way, how shall we reconcile Elutherius and his Friend
Phileleuth. while one holds Ignatius's Presbyters to be Lay Elders, and the
other to be of the same Order with the Bishops? So inconsistent are false
Schemes one with another, as well as with Truth! -- That Ignatius's Bishops had
the sole Power of Ordination is manifest, not only from the Canon
abovementioned, but also from hence, that there is not one Instance to be
given, in all Antiquity, of any other approved Ordinations, but what were
performed by Bishops, as Mr. Bingham abundantly proves, l. 3. c. 3.. 6. and I
challenge one Instance to be produced. -- And lastly, That Ignatius held
Episcopacy to be Fundamental, is clear from many Passages, particularly Ep. ad
Ephesians.. 3. where he says, that the Bishops appointed unto the utmost Bounds of
the Earth are by the Will of Jesus Christ. And. 5. Let us take heed that we do
not set ourselves against the Bishop that we may be subject to GOD. And. 6. For
whomsoever the Master of the House sets over his Household, we ought in like
manner to receive as we would do him that sent him. And he requires the Deacons
to be subject to the Presbyters, and both Deacons and Presbyters to the Bishop
according to the Will of GOD.

And now as to St. Cyprian's Testimonies, who lived within 150 Years of the
Apostles: I must have the Charity to believe, that this Gentleman never
thoroughly read the Works of this Father, or surely he could never go about to
mislead People into such a wrong Notion of his Sense of Episcopacy from the
Passage he quotes: for nothing can be clearer than that St. Cyprian's Notion of
Episcopacy, and that which this Gentleman pleads for, are utterly diverse from
each other: For he would have St. Cyprian's Bishop to be nothing but a mere
Moderator, i. e. to have only (...) Primacy, without any proper Jurisdiction,
(...) it is plain from the Passage I quoted, Ep 33. Ed. O^ (...), That it is
established by the Divine Law, that every Act of the Church should be governe^
(...) Bishops, and what St. Cyprian in this Place ^^ledges (...) for, Thou art
Peter, etc. is not to show what respect Peter bore to the other Apostles, as
having a Primacy among them, but that the Apostolate, and consequently the
Episcopate as succeeding to it, was first Instituted in what Christ there says
to him -- And in his Letters to his Presbyters and Deacon^ while he was in
Banishment, he plainly writes to them in the Style, not of a mere Moderator,
but of a Governor, particularly, Ep. 15, 16, 17, or 10, 11, 12, Ed. Pam. He
chastises some of the Presbyters for not considering the Honor and Obedience
they owed to the Bishop set over them, in that they had admitted some to the
Communion who had fallen, without his having first declared his Acceptance of
their Repentance, as the Custom then was, by Imposition of Hands. -- It is also
plain that he considered the Bishops as being of a distinct Order from the
Presbyters, from what Mr. Slater argues in his Original Draught, viz. That St.
Cyprian styles the Bishops his Colleagues, but never gives that Appellation to
the Presbyters: And this Distinction is abundantly evident throughout the whole
of his Writings. Particularly I desire the Reader to consult, Ep. 21, 22, 26,
28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 65, 69, 75, as they stand in Pamelius^s
Edition, as well as many other Places. In the 35th Ep he gives his Clergy an
Account of his having ordained Numidicus Presbyter, and calls them, "his
Clergy": and in that, and Ep. 38. he speaks of Ecclesiastical Promotions as
depending on the Bishop; can these and the like Expressions be reconciled with
the Character of a modern Moderator of a Presbytery? -- In Ep. 39. he tells
them "he had suspended or censured such and such Persons". -- In Ep. 69. he
says, The Bishops succeed the Apostles by vicarious Ordination, and calls them
" Governors of the Church", as he also does in the Council of Carthage; and in
Ep. 76. he makes a Regular Succession from the Apostles necessary to a lawful
Ordination, and the same does Firmilian, Ep. 75. -- But it would be endless to
mention all the Passages in St. Cyprian that explain the Nature of the
Episcopacy of those Times, as being manifestly of the kind we plead for. I wish
the Reader could at least consult these, and that he would readily see how far
this Gentleman is from giving a fair and just Representation of St. Cyprian's
Sense. -- Nothing can be more evident from the whole of his Conduct with
respect to his Presbyters, than that he had, and exercised a proper, though
limited Jurisdiction or Government over them; and yet this unaccountable
Gentleman would face down the good old Father and the whole Primitive Christian
World, That his, and all the ancient Episcopacy was only a mere Primacy.

Well, But he undertakes to prove this from St. Cyprian himself; who, in his
Tract De unitate Ecclesiae, makes the Primacy of Peter with respect to the rest
of the Apostles who were of the same Order with himself, a Pattern for all
succeeding Bishops. Now as to this, I think it will be plain to whoever will
consult that Passage, compared with the Design of the Discourse, and the other
Passages of his Works which I have referred to, that among other Arguments for
Unity, he uses this, That as the Apostolate was one, each Apostle having the
whole Authority of the entire Apostolate; so the Episcopate which succceds it,
is but One each Bishop having the whole Authority of the Episcopate: But as the
Unity of the Apostolate centered in the Primacy of Peter, so he would have the
Unity of the Episcopate center in the Primacy of One in each Province, which
Primacy is mentioned in the 6th Canon of the Council of Nice, as an ancient
Custom, and as having universally obtained in the Church: See Bp. Fell's Notes
in loc. -- And agreeably to this Sense of St. Cyprian St. Jerome pleads, That
all Bishops have the same Power, whether the Bishop of Rome or of Eugubium,
whether they be great or small, rich or poor? etc. They are all alike
Successors of the Apostles: And yet he would have a Primacy among them, as
appears from the Passage this Gentleman refers to. -- All that can be gathered
from the Passages, therefore, is, that all Bishops are equal, as all the
Apostles were to whom they succeed; but does it therefore follow, that,
according to them, Bishops and Presbyters are equal? By no means, for they are
not speaking a word in those Places of Presbyters: -- They would have a Primacy
in each Province among the Bishops, as Peter was Primate among the Apostles:
but does it therefore follow that the Bishop has only a Primacy among the
Presbyters? No such thing, for neither of them ever speak of Presbyters as
being the proper Successors of the Apostles. -- This Gentleman therefore does
manifestly pervert the true Sense of St. Cyprian and St. Jerome, in
understanding them to mean that the ancient Bishops had only a Primacy with
respect to the Presbyters, just as St. Peter had with regard to the other
Apostles: for they are not speaking a Syllable in those Places of the Bishop
with respect to his Presbytery, but of the Bishops among themselves; neither is
St Cyprian there speaking of the Unity of a particular Church, but of the
Catholic Church; and maintains, as I have said, that as there is one
Apostolate, of which each Apostle had the whole Power, so there is one
Episcopate, of which each Bishop has the whole Power! Never does he once speak
thus of Presbyters, though he very often mentions them, but ever speaks of them
as being distinct from Bishops, and inferior and subject to them: But as there
was a Primacy in the Apostolate; so he frequently speaks of a Primacy in the
Episcopate in each Province, but never does he speek of this in regard to the
Presbytery. -- He himself was Primate or Archbishop of the Province of Africa,
and presided in the Council of Carthage, in which, beside many Presbyters and
Deacons, there were 87 Bishops of that Country: on which Occasion, he says,
None of us takes upon him to be a Bishop of Bishops. i. e. To exercise a proper
Jurisdiction over other Bishops: In this consisted the Papal Usurpation
afterward, turning the Primacy into a Supremacy, and the Spiritual into a
Worldly Dominion: This St. Cyprian disclames, (as did even Gregory the Great, a
Bishop of Rome, above 300 Years after this:) But it is evident from his
Epistles, that he was at the same time a Bishop of Presbyters, and did exercise
a proper, though limited Jurisdiction or Government over the Presbyters, Deacons
and People of his own particular Church of Carthage. -- And now I appeal to
every unprejudiced Reader, whether I have not truly and justly represented his
Sense, and the Sense of those Primitive Times, and consequently whether this
Gentleman has not grossly misrepresented it.

The Church of England is formed exactly according to St. Cyprian's Model as to
all the particulars I have been mentioning: Does he make all the Apostles equal
in Power with St. Peter? So are all our Bishops equal in Power with the
Archbishops, except what a mere Primacy for Order nece^a^^ly implys: -- Had
Peter a Primacy with respect to the other Apostles? So have our Archbishops
with respect to the other Bishops, and as St. Cyprian likewise had with respect
to the other Bishops of Africa. -- Did the Unity of the Primitive Church, as
to its common Polity, center in this Primacy? So does the Unity of the Church
of England: -- Had St. Cyprian's and Ignatius's Bishops each of them Presbyters
under them, and a limited Jurisdiction over the Clergy, as well as People, each
one in his own Church? So have the Bishops of England each in his, and only a
limited Jurisdiction: -- The Bishops of those Times alone ordained, and so do
ours, excepting that the Presbyters with us assist in ordaining Presbyters, and
so they probably did then. Some circumstantial Difference there may be, but the
Substance, or most material Points of Ecclesiastical Government, are the same.
-- Upon the whole, I can truly say, I desire no other kind of Bishops than such
as were in St. Cyprian's time; and if I did not sincerely think that those of
our Church were manifestly of the same kind with them, I would immediately drop
my Pen, and never undertake to plead her Cause any more.

But before I finish, I must beg leave to observe, That this Gentleman seems,
after all, not unwilling to own that the Cyprianic, and even the Ignatian
Bishops, (nay, and even Timothy, Titus and the 7 Angels themselves, were at
least fixed Moderators, p. 127, 128, 152, And for ought I can see, his Argument
from St. Peter's Primacy must make them fixed by Divine Appointment: By which I
think he must be allowed to grant that the way of these New England Churches,
and the Scotch Presbyterians, are not conformed to the Primitive Model, as
established by Christ and his Apostles; for it is well known that theirs are
only vague Moderators, and chosen pro re^ata. -- Now seeing he is come so near
to us, as not only to allow that those whom we call Primitive Bishops might be
fixed Moderators or fixed Presidents, as in fact they were, and seems not to
dislike this Constitution; methinks it is pity we should differ any longer. Let
him only grant two Things more, which the Primitive Model certainly also
requires, viz. That these fixed Presidents be ordained to their Office with
Imposition of Hands, by those of their own Order, and That no Act of Ordination
and Government be allowed but under their Presidency: Nay, rather than fail,
let it be so limited, if he pleases, as that the President shall no more be
allowed to do any thing of Moment without his Presbytery, than They without
him; I say let these things be granted, and we will be at once united with him,
and all be one Communion again.

And now to conclude: As to the Business of Charity, I must think my Brother
Phil. has not considered the Expressions I used, (which he will needs have to
be inconsistent with both It and Themselves) with that Candor and Charity he
might and ought to have done. -- For GOD's sake, my Brethren, Let us not, for
the Future, study to put the worst Constructions we can on one another Words
or Actions; but let us rather endeavor to make the best we can of them: Let us
not try to magnify and aggravate the Differences between us, but rather to
make as little of them, and to consider them with as much Tenderness, as
possible: Let us not dispute which has already most or least Charity, but let
us strive to see who shall hereafter, really and in fact, most abound in the
Practice of that Heavenly Virtue, both toward each other, and toward all Men:
This is the best Course we can take, as far as possible in this imperfect
State, to reconcile our selves to one another, both in Judgment and Practice;
to meet together in Truth, and live in Peace here, or however to meet at last
in that perfect State of Truth, and Peace, and Holiness hereafter, where GOD
and Charity alone shall forever Reign!

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 7 line 29. read, will have it. p. 15 l. 8 for was r. is p. 25 l. u^ is,
only certain, etc. p. 42 l. 18 for would r. should. p. 46 l. 17 r. though (as I
am told) he lives, etc. l. 21 for is it r. it is. l. 24 for thing, r. things.
p. 47 l. 21 for endeavo. ur, r. endeavoring. p. 49 l. 8 for conducted, r.
conduct p. 5 ^ ^ 31 for and, r. but. p. 54 l. 29 r. you are in danger. p. ^4.
l. 6 blot out (it) p. 89 l. 32 blot out (be) p. 99 l. 2 5 r. as in fact (...)
was.

Page ^32, at line 2 inse^ ^is marginal Note, (...) a (...) all Answer to this
Objection, read A. Bp. King^ (...) excellent Answers to Mr. Boise.


