Mr. Abbot's SERMON Preached to the Artillery-Company in BOSTON, June 2. 1735.

JEHOVAH's Character as a MAN OF WAR, Illustrated and Applied. A SERMON
Preached at the Desire OF THE Honorable ARTILLERY COMPANY in BOSTON, June 2.
1735. Being the ANNIVERSARY-Day FOR THE ELECTION of their Officers. Now
published at their united Request.

By HULL ABBOT, A. M. Pastor of the Church in (...).

1 Chronicles. XXIX. 11. THINE O LORD is the GREATNESS, and the POWER, and the
GLORY, and the MAJESTY: for all that is in the HEAVEN and in the EARTH is
THINE; THINE is the KINGDOM O LORD, and THOU art EXALTED as HEAD above ALL!
Dan. IV. 35. HE does according to HIS WILL in the ARMY of HEAVEN, and among the
INHABITANTS of the EARTH: and none can stay HIS HAND, or say unto HIM, what
do THOU? Psalm. XXIX. 1, 2. Give unto the LORD, O YE MIGHTY, Give unto the
LORD GLORY and STRENGTH. Give unto the LORD the GLORY due unto HIS NAME, etc.
BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhil. M, DCC,
XXXV.

The LORD, A Man of War.
EXODUS XV. 3. The LORD is a Man of War: The LORD is His Name.
THESE Words are part of the Triumphant Song, which Moses the Captain General
of the Hosts of Israel, indicted by Divine Inspiration, to express their
Gratitude to GOD, and to celebrate His Name and Praise, for their miraculous
Deliverance from the Hands of their enraged Enemies, at the Sea, even at the
Red Sea.

This Mavelous work or wonder is often mentioned to the Honor of GOD's
excellent Majesty both in the Old Testament and in the New; and it is a
wonderful work to be always remembered by his Church and People to the end of
the World; especially since it was Typical of our Eternal Redemption and
Spiritual Deliverance by CHRIST the Captain of our Salvation.

The time would fail me, to give an Historical Narration of the whole matter.
It shall suffice therefore to observe,

That after the Children of Israel had obtained leave from Pharaoh their cruel
Oppressor, to depart out of Egypt, and they had Marched to the Borders of His
Kingdom; it repented this ambitious Monarch, and vexed his Soul, that he had
consented thereunto; though he had stood it out even to the last extremity.

He resolves therefore, if possible, to bring them back and reinslave them, or
however to be thoroughly revenged on them, for those Plagues he had been
visited with upon their account. Accordingly he Levies a numerous Army, and
mustered all his forces of Chariots and Horsemen; for it is thought, he took
none of the Foot with him, because the King's Business required haste.

Then does he declare his purposes at the Head of his CAVALRY, assures them of
the Victory before the Engagement, and that his brandished Sword should reduce
the Fugitives, or be Drunk with the Blood of the Slain. Context ver. 9. The
enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil: my lust
shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.
It Is delivered in an elegant figure, and beauteous form of Speech, but the
matter of it is Proud and Insolent without a parallel! Surely he had forgot his
past succesless attempts to keep them in Slavery, or that GOD had by his
powerful Arm broken their Yoke; and visited the Egyptians with a series of
Judgments, till 'twas thought they themselves, should be next struck dead by
the blow of his Hand. "Or, did he think that GOD's Arm was now shortened, that
his Weapons were blunted, and that the Magazene of his Plagues was waited, or
that his Strength was too weak to preserve those whom he had Redeemed with an
High Hand?" However, his Heart being hardened, and trusting to his Sword and
Militia, he rushed swiftly on to his own Destruction, as we shall see in the
sequel.

It Is true, he had now to deal with an unarmed People, unprovided for Defense,
and whose late Slavery had rendered them unfit for Military Enterprises; and
although they went out in good order, in Rank and File; having five in a Rank,
as some; or in five Squadrons as others; yet they were a very unequal Match for
a well furnished and disciplined Army. Nevertheless Pharaoh had but little
reason to promise himself the Victory, and to glory in his success beforehand,
because Israel had the same Almighty Power to protect them in their March, that
had bro't them out of their Bondage.

Thus did Sisera's Mother once vainly Triumph in a victorious hope before the
Battle of her Son: But though she Sung Te Deum before the Conquest, yet after
the Engagement she changed it for the Mournful Notes of Domine Miserere Mei!
And it was much like this, but worse, in the case before us! --

The Egyptian Hosts pursued till they came near to the Israelitish Armies: who
had encamped by Divine Order before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the Sea,
over against Baal-zephon: And when they beheld the Chariots behind them, they
were thrown into the greatest fear and amazement; for they were so encompassed
on every side, that Destruction seemed unavoidable.

They beheld a Deep Sea before them, as some say, three Leagues over; a
numerous and potent Army behind them fired with Indignation and Rage; on the
one hand was a range of deep and craggy Rocks, and Mountains that were
impassible; and on the other, as some think, Forts and Garrisons upon the
Frontiers of Egypt. And in the midst of themselves, what a confused Noise and
Murmurs especially among their Women and Children? every Heart panted for fear,
and paleness seized every Face; that, Unarmed and Defenseless as they were,
they should lie at the Mercy of a Bloody-Tyrant, and a Savage Enemy.

Now in this Mount the Lord was seen: and the People stood still to behold the
Salvation of the Lord! The GOD of their Fathers commanded Moses to stretch
forth his hand over that arm of the Sea; and by a strong East Wind he caused it
to go back; He made it as the dry Land, and the Waters were divided. "The Sea
suffers violence to preserve GOD's People, and that Liquid Element is
transformed as it were into a Wall of Brass."

GOD Himself marched before them in the Pillar of Fire as their Leader; and was
in the Pillar of Cloud behind them as their Rere-ward; and the Waters were a
Wall to them, that the Egyptians might not charge them in the Flank either on
the Right or Left: and they passed safely to the opposite shore.

The Egyptians being Infatuated, in the heat of their pursuit, went in after
them, into the midst of the Sea; and here they marched for some time as safely
and triumphantly as Israel did; till the Lord looked upon their Host and
troubled them. Some think that they heard or saw such voices or sight from the
Pillar of Cloud, which put them into the greatest Consternation, and struck
them with a panic Fear. They drove on heavily, plunged almost every step, and
would fain have Retreated, but 'twas all in vain.

JEHOVAH is now resolved to be Eased of his Enemies, and to be Avenged on His
Adversaries: wherefore when the Hosts and People of Israel, and their Substance
were safely arrived on the other side; Then did God Command Moses His Servant
again to stretch forth his hand; he did so, and the Waters returned to their
place, and overwhelmed the whole Egyptian Host, so that not so much as one
escaped. God blew with His Wind, which made the meeting of the Floods more
swift and boisterous; and they were suddenly and irrecoverably lost. Context
ver. 10. Thou did blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank as lead
in the mighty waters.

Come see what fearful Desolations the Lord has made! The former Plagues were
but smaller wounds in the Egyptian state, but now the glory, power and
strength of Egypt, are buried in the Sea to their utter ruin.

The Israelites saw their Bodies afterward scattered upon the Sea shore
numerous as the sands: This Tragical Spectacle greatly affected the People; as
well as the wondrous Mercy they had received at God's Hand: They were now
ashamed of their past Murmurs and Unbelief, and were resolved to trust in the
Name of the Lord, and to Magnify their God for ever.

To assist them in this Duty, Moses the Man of GOD, pens This Divine Song,
which is a PANIGYRIC to the praise of GOD's Power in their Salvation, and of
his Victory over their Enemies. Moses led in the sacred Anthem; the whole
Assembly joins him in it; and how harmonious the Sound, how sincere and exalted
the Praise?

And as it was designed to give that glory to GOD which was due to his Name; so
to Him he directs it, under a Name and Title suited to the great occasion; as
in the words read, The LORD is a Man of War; the Lord is his Name Which
intimates that the LORD JEHOVAH is most skilful powerful and successful in all
his Engagements against His and his People's Enemies. -- The phrase a Man of
War is descriptive of an eminent and complete Warrior; most expert and valiant
in Wars and Battles. It is a form of Speech usual in the Scripture, as
Interpreters show us. Thus a Man of Eloquence, of a soft and fluent Tongue, is
called a Man of Words, Exodus 10. 4. And Moses said unto the Lord, O my Lord; I
am not Eloquent; or a Man of Words, as the Margin has it according to the
Original. So a Strong and Mighty Man, is called a Man of Arm, Job 22. 8 But as
for the Mighty Man etc. the Margin preserves the Hebraism and reads it, the Man
of Arm; as if he was all Arm, Strength and Power. And thus a Man of War,
denotes an experienced, expert, courageous and victorious Warrior, 1 Samuel 17.
33. Thou art but a Youth, and He a Man of War from his Youth.

But some suppose that the expression, a Man of War, being applied to the Lord
Jehovah, does intimate that JESUS CHRIST who is Man as well as GOD, is intended
in the Words. However that be, so it is indeed, that He is the Captain of our
Salvation, the Captain of the LORD's Hosts, and victorious over his Enemies.
Joshua beheld him at Jericho, in the form of a Man with a Sword drawn in his
Hand; and when He enquired who he was etc. He answered that He was Prince or
Captain of the Hosts of the LORD: and as such, He fell on his face and
worshipped Him John the beloved Disciple in his visions of Him, saw a Two-edged
Sword proceeding out of His Mouth, and on his Vesture and on his Thigh a Name
written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and the Armies following after Him.
Isaiah beheld Him with his Prophetical Eye, in His Triumphant return from his
Conquests, and Victory over his Enemies, Isai. 63 init. Who is This that comes
from Edom, with d^ed Garments from Bozrah? This that is glorious in his
apparel, traveling in the greatness of his Strength? I that speak in
righteousness, Mighty to save Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy
garments like him that treads in the wine fat? I have trodden the wine press
alone etc.

The Doctrinal Observation from the Words may be this,

DOCT. That the LORD GOD of Israel, is eminently a Man of War.

Now in the management of this point, I shall attempt,

First, To say what is contained in This Description of the Almighty; or
instance in several things, wherein it evidently appears, that GOD the LORD is
by way of eminence, a Man of War.

Secondly, I shall briefly apply the truth in some useful Inferences and
Reflections; and more particularly with a view to the occasional Solemnities
and Military Actions of the Day.

I. I am to say what is contained in this description of the Almighty, that He
is a Man of War; and instance in several Things, wherein it evidently appears
and manifests it self. And this may be done in the several following
particulars, which may suffice to illustrate the truth.

I. The LORD is eminently a Man of War, as He is the Chief and absolute Monarch
and Commander of all the Creatures which He has made.

The LORD He is GOD; He has made all Things, and for His Pleasure and Glory
they are and were Created. He uttered forth the Word of his Almighty Flat and
all things started into Being. He has made the Heavens, yea the Heaven of
Heavens with all their Hosts, the Earth and all that is thereon, and the great
and wide Sea, with the innumerable things that are therein.

And as it is His Divine Prerogative upon this account, so GOD is the Blessed
and only Potentate, His Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom; and His Dominion
rules over ALL. --

The Glorious Armies of Heaven above; the Wise and Mighty Angels of His
presence, which are peculiarly His Hosts; and the innumerable Inhabitants of
the Earth; and the forlorn Regions of the Prince of Darkness, his
principalities and powers, are all under His Commands or Restraints, and at His
absolute Disposal. "Of the former of these, God has standing Armies that were
never disbanded: regular and well Disciplined Troops, that are always ready,
never at a loss, never Mutiny; they are veterane Soldiers, that have been long
in His Service; and so victorious that they never failed of Success, and never
will, while they Obey the voice of their King and God."

And not only rational and moral Agents, but the Animate and Inanimate World
are governed and employed by Him.

The Beasts and Birds, all Insects, and Reptiles, and the numerous Things that
creep in the Sea; and even the fiercer Crocodile, and the invulnerable
Leviathan belong to his Hosts and Armies.

So the Light and Darkness, Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor, Thunder and
Lightning, Stormy Wind and Tempests, are all of his Divine Artillery, and he
makes them Instruments in his Hand, to the Vexation and Destruction of his
Enemies whenever he sees meet.

He sent forth a Detachment from most of these Regiments, against the People
and Kingdom of Egypt, and they were consumed and devoured by them. And the
Scriptures furnish us with many other instances of this kind, which I stay not
now to mention.

Upon this account then, the LORD may be called by way of eminence a Man of
War; as all the Armies of the Creatures above and below, from the Highest Angel
to the most contemptible Worm, yea to the most neglected Plant and Vapor, are
at His Dispose. No wonder then that Bildad demanded as he did, Job 25. 3. Is
there any number of his armies?

GOD is the absolute Monarch of the Universe, the Leader and Commander of the
Creatures; they all obey the Voice of his Word, and observe and fulfill the
Commands and Orders which he gives forth from his exalted Throne.

2. The Lord is eminently a Man of War, as He disposes Men's Hearts to engage
in Wars and Battles.

The Hearts of all Men are in the Hands of GOD; He turns them which way so ever
He pleases, and over rules them, to serve His great Ends and Purposes, his
Glory and Designs in the World, whether they be the Hearts of His Friends, or
of His Enemies. But GOD's Hand is more especially seen, or his Permission
granted, in the Provocations to Wars and Battles among Men. When their Minds
are taken off from Peace and Amity, and they are disposed to Contend in a Field
of Blood, and have their Cabinet Councels, to contrive, prepare and execute the
Stratagems of War.

Thus it was from the LORD JEHOVAH, that Pharaoh's Heart was so hardened against
GOD and His People, as to go forth to Battle against them; but it was because
GOD had purposed to destroy him and his gallant Armies. -- And it was of GOD
that Rehoboam was so invariably set to hearken to the Council of his young and
giddy Cavaliers, and to turn a deaf ear to the Sage Advice of his venerable and
experienced Counselors; that GOD might rend ten Tribes from him, that would
rise up in Arms against Him. -- It was also of GOD, that Ahab, was so
immoveably fixed, to go to War against Ramoth-Gilead, that he might be wounded
and fall in the Field of Battle.

GOD as the Governor of the World, has great and secret Designs to carry on in
the Earth; and He is pleased often to do it, in the Bloody scenes of War. When
a People have sinned against Him and provoked Him by their Inventions; He raises
up another Nation as a Rod of His Anger to punish them; and in their turn He
takes the Rod and burns it in the same flames. Agreeably we read of GOD's
influence in matters of War in His Word, I Chron. 5 22 And there fell down many
slain, because the war was of GOD. And again, Jer. 25. 39 Ye shall not be
unpunished: for I will call for a sword, says the LORD of hosts.

So that upon this account also, and from the influence which Almighty GOD has
in disposing Men; Nations or particular Persons to Wars and Battles, He may
eminently be called a Man of War; as well as the GOD of the spirits of all
flesh.

3. The Lord is eminently a Man of War, as He musters the Forces together, and
leads them as their General into the Field of Battle.

GOD not only disposes Men's Minds to Wars and Contentions, but musters them
together for the Field of Battle: He raises their Forces and collects their
numerous Armies principal and auxiliary. Isai. 13. 4. The Lord of hosts
mustereth the Host of the Battle.

Men indeed act freely and according to their Minds and Counsels in these
Affairs; nor is there any necessity laid upon them by the divine Will and
Purposes; yet, the Finger of GOD must be acknowleged in so great an Event as
this. No Army could be raised, no Regiments or Battalions drawn up in the Seat
of Action, if He that was not the LORD General of the Hosts of the Universe did
not call for them.

If we look into the Book of the Wars of the Lord, and consider the Story of
the Engagements of his ancient People, we may easily see a special Hand of
Divine Providence therein, and that in the very beginnings of the War; as
raising Forces, mustering Armies, giving Orders etc. Isai. 5. 26. And he will
lift up an Ensign to the Nations from far, and will hiss unto them from the end
of the Earth; and behold they shall come with speed swiftly. If Almighty GOD
did but give an Hiss or a Nod, or the least intimation of His Sovereign Mind in
this case, the Cry would immediately be, to Arms, to Arms. If GOD does but lift
up His Ensign and Standard, vast and numerous Armies, a fierce and formidable
Host shall draw near to his Banner, ready to hear the words of Command, and to
execute His Pleasure.

That was justly esteemed a proud and arrogant Speech in Pompey, when one of
his Officers told him they wanted Men: Let me, says he, but stamp my foot on
the Ground of Italy, then I shall have Men eno', Horsemen and Footmen from
every Corner; and when he attempted it, he was shamefully disappointed. But not
so with the LORD of Hosts and the GOD of Armies; let Him but lisp the Word, or
signify His Sovereign Pleasure; and to Him will the gathering of the People be,
they will March with speed, swiftly to fight the LORD's Battles. --

But then GOD Almighty comes Himself as the GENERALISSIMO into the Field with
his People. He not only musters the Host, but leads them forth, and sets them
in Battle Array.

Sometimes indeed He leads the Enemies of His People against them, to punish
them for their apostacies and rebellions against Him; but usually He is with
His People as their Chief Commander, to lead them on to, and to direct and
encourage them in, their Martial Actions and Enterprises. This was the
encouragement which the Priests were directed to give GOD's People of old, when
they were engaging in Battle, Deuteronomy. 20. 3, 4. Hear O Israel, you approach this
day to battle against your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not and do
not tremble, neither he ye terrified because of them: The reason follows, For
the LORD your GOD is he that goes with you, to fight for you against your
enemies, to save you. i. e. He will be your GENERAL at the Head of your Armies
to lead you on against your Enemies, and to make you victorious over them.

And how Gloriously did He march before His People Israel when he brought them
out of the House of their Bondage? Was it possible they should ever have
obtained so many Victories as they did over such Puissant Enemies, with their
Chariots of Iron, if the LORD of Hosts had not been in their Front, and fought
their Battles for them? And it is His Presence and Influence that makes their
Arms prosperous. Zech. 10. 5. And they shall be as mighty men which tread down
their enemies as the mire of the streets in the battle, and they shall fight
because the LORD is with them, and the riders on horses shall be confounded.

Moreover, according to the Military style, the LORD is also their
LIEUTENANT GENERAL; He is not only in the Front but in the Rear to secure and
defend them. Isa. 52. 12. For the LORD will go before you: and the GOD of
Israel will be your Rereward. And thus He was in the Pillar of Cloud betwixt
the Egyptians and Israelites, when Pharaoh and his host, were about to attack
them.

Surely that Army that has Almighty GOD both in the Front and Rear, must be
called Invincible; they must needs be safe, prosper and prevail.

4. The LORD is eminently a Man of War, as He Instructs the People in the Art
and Mystery of War, and endows them with Martial Skill and Valor.

The LORD instructs the People in the Art of War. He led them first into the
discovery of the Rules and Methods of it; He enables them to apply them and to
improve upon them: and when any are excellently well skilled therein, in all
their Military Exercises, Postures, Encampments, Engagements, etc. they are
Taught and Instructed by the LORD. Psalm. 144. I. Blessed be the LORD my
strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my fingers to fight.

And then GOD directs in every Design, and suggests such politic Counsels, that
the most expert Warriors could not invent or guard against. Other Generals have
their Counsels of War upon Emergencies, to advise, encourage and strengthen one
another: But the LORD of Hosts the Wonderful Counselor, has all Wisdom and
Counsel in Himself, and Communicates of them to all that are under Him. -- The
LORD accounts it his Glory, that He teaches the Plowman, to open and break the
clods of the Earth, and to Sow his Seed, etc. But how much greater is his Glory
to give Wisdom and Skill to Order and lead forth Armies, for their Safety,
Defense and Victory? This comes from the GOD of Armies, who is wonderful in
Counsel, and excellent in Working.

On the other side, it is the LORD also that takes away Counsel, and defeats
the Designs against his People; so he turned the Counsel of crafty Achitophel
into follishness. GOD besotts them in their Consultations, mingles a perverse
deceitful Spirit among Men, and scatters darkness in their paths, so that their
Counsels are turned upside down, and they are snared in the work of their own
hands. Isa. 19. 11. Surely the princes of Zoan are fools, the counsel of the
wise counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish. The princes of Noph are
deceived, they have als^ (...) Egypt: And we see the fatal issue of it in the
case that has been mentioned.

But then as the LORD gives Wisdom and Counsel, so He gives Courage and Prowess
in War. Then are Some mighty Men of Valor; they face the greatest Dangers, and
out-brave the King of Terrors himself, marching in his most frightful Forms
against them. When the Spirit of the LORD came upon Sampson, Gideon and others,
what valiant Soldiers were they, and how great their exploits? They subdued
Kingdoms, stopped the Mouths of Lions, out of Weakness were made Strong, waxed
valiant in Fight, and turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens. Were there
ever more brave and undaunted Spirits, more resolute, heroic and magnanimous
Warriors? Verily there is no Valor like That of GOD's infusing.

But then as the LORD gives a Spirit of Courage and Puissance, so He takes it
away: Then the stoutest Champions become the greatest Cowards, and their Hearts
melt and sink within them, so that they flee even before a Leaf shaken with the
Wind, and are affrighted at their own shadows. Isai. 19. 16. In that day shall
Egypt be like unto Women; and it shall be afraid and fear, because of the
shaking of the hand of the Lord of hosts which he shakes over it.

So that upon this account also the LORD may be called a Man of War, as He
instructs the People in the Art and Mystery of it, directs their Counsels, and
endows them with Martial Skill and Valor; so that they are expert in War, and
mighty in Battle.

5. The LORD is eminently a Man of War, as He has the absolute disposals of
all the Weapons in the Day of Battle.

Although He endows Men with Wisdom and Cunning, to make the Instruments of War,
and Skill and Courage to use the Martial Weapons; yet He reserves to Himself
the Prerogative to dispose of them as to the Event. All the Weapons used by the
Sons of War, and the most formidable preparations of the strongest Armado,
shall be of use only so far as the Lord pleases. Agreeable to this is that
promise which God made to his ancient People, Isai. 54. 17. No weapon that is
formed against thee shall prosper. i. e. If any be pointed at thee, though never
so skilfully managed, it shall not harm thee: It shall miss the Mark, fall out
of the Hand of your Enemies, or recoil upon them to their own Wounding and Hurt.

Swords and Spears in the Hand of the most valiant, shall be but as the feeble
Reeds and Straws, unless GOD give them a Commission to devour and destroy: And
when He lifts up his Voice, a blast of Rams Horns, and the rattling of broken
Pitchers, shall do more Execution, and demolish Walls and Castles more
effectually, than Battering Rams, the Roaring Canon, Bombs or Granados.

Thus we have sometimes heard, that an Army has been miserably defeated, that
was admirably well equipped, and prepared with Martial Engines and Weapons of
War; and though they styled themselves Invincible; Their Arms and Artillery,
their Galleys and Fire Ships, their floating Castles and Batteries, did not
answer their name. GOD disappointed them; they were ashamed and confounded,
defeated and scattered. This is the LORD's doings and should be mavelous in
our eyes! Who is like unto the LORD among the Gods, who is like unto Him?
Fearful in Praises, working Wonders. He Governs these Events without control.
He breaks the bow in pieces, cuts the spears in sunder, burns the chariots in
the fire; and will have all the Armies know that He is GOD: That the Lives of
all are in His Hand; and that the Weapons formed against them shall prosper or
be defeated, according to His Sovereign Purposes and Will.

The Bow drawn at a venture, and the Gun discharged without sight, are directed
by the Providence of GOD. So that in Life and Death none may say, a Chance has
happened to them.

6. The LORD is eminently a Man of War, as He causes it to Continue or Cease
whenever He pleases.

Thus Sovereign is Almighty GOD in the management of the grand Affairs of War.

The Sword shall not be drawn till He gives the the Word of Command; and when
it is unsheathed it shall not be returned into it is Scab-board till He requires
it. This is described by the Prophet, Jer. 47. 6, 7. O thou sword of the LORD,
how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy scabbard, rest
and be still. The reply is, How can it be quiet, seeing the LORD has given it
a charge against Ashkelon, and against the sea shore? There has he appointed
it.

And it shall abide upon a People till it has accomplished the ends for which
it was sent. Hos. 11 6. And the sword shall abide on his cities, and consume
his branches, and devour them, because of their own counsels. How long a Time
Wars shall continue in a Land when the Bloody Scene is opened, or when they
shall cease, and be turned into Peace, is wholly of the appointment of the LORD
of Hosts. His Providence works in continuing the hostile spirit, in upholding
Parties, in bringing in Supplies and Recruits in breaking asunder Leagues and
Treaties, and in increasing the provocations to the War, etc.

We are apt to look at Men altogether in the continuance of a War; now though
it be true that Their haughty spirit, and mutual Provocations, are the
Secondary causes both of the beginning and continuance of War, yet there is an
overruling Providence, disposing and ordering these things, for wise and good,
though it may be, secret ends and purposes.

As the War begins in the day that GOD has fixed, so it concludes at the time
that He has appointed; and till that happy Period arrives, all Negotiations for
Peace, and the Accommodation of differences among the Nations will be fruitless
and ineffectual. But when GOD says, it is enough; then the Sword shall be
sheathed again, and the destroying Angel return to render an account of the
slain, unto the LORD of Life and Glory.

Here then we may also further observe, that God puts a period to War, or
sometimes marvellously prevents it, as He at other Times calls into the Field
of Battle, there to hear the confused Noise, and to be clad in Garments rolled
in Blood. Psalm. 46.9. He makes Wars to cease unto the Ends of the Earth. Isai.
2. 4 And they shall beat their Swords into Plow shares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks. Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn War any more.

GOD sounds a Retreat, calls off the Nations from opposing and destroying one
another, and disbands the most furious Armies. Hence that is part of GOD's
royal Character, Psalm. 65. 7. Which stilleth the Noise of the Seas, the Noise
of their Waves, and the Tumult of the People.

We have a surprising Instance of GOD's Power and Influence in preventing of
War and Bloodshed in the case of Rehoboam, recorded I King. 12. 21. We have
not the like in all the Book of God; neither is there any thing to be compared
unto it before or since in the Earth.

King Rehoboam was greatly incensed against the Tribes that fell off from him:
He was in as great a Rage and Ferment as we may suppose a Furioso to be raised
into; and the Flame was blown up to the Height by the heady and unexperienced
Courtiers about him. He had raised an Army strong eno'; an Hundred and
Fourscore Thousand Men; a Mighty Host this! mustered to reduce the revolting
Tribes, and to bring the Kingdom again entire to the House of David. Their
Power was great; fierce was their Rage; the goodness of their Cause they
questioned not; and they were going forth with the most cruel Intentions; and
who shall Let them? Who can stand before and prevent them? -- This the LORD of
Host did by a Word; showing Himself to be a Man of War in a wondrous manner. He
sent them an order to lay down their Arms; Power went forth with His Word; they
immediately obey and retreat; nor Prince nor People oppose it.

The account is this, The word of God came unto Shemaiah the man of God,
saying, Speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon king of Judah, and unto all the
house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the remnant of the people, saying, Thus
says the Lord, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren the
children of Israel: return every man to his house, for this thing is from me.
They hearkened therefore to the word of the Lord, and returned to depart
according to the word of the Lord. What a mighty Work of God was this! What
Power has He over the Hearts of Men? Yea of the Greatest, who think it an
Unsufferable Dishonor to be controuled or defeated in any thing they have set
their Hearts upon.

GOD by His Omnipotent Arm dashes the most daring Designs in pieces. He
quelleth the proud Spirits of the most furious Nimrods, and reduces the foaming
Billows of Wars and Tumults, into the most perfect and delightful Calm and
Tranquillity. Once more,

7. The LORD is eminently a Man of War, as He overrules the great Events of
it, and gives Success and Victory to whomsoever He pleases.

A Horse is a vain thing for safety; and so is a Coat of Mail, or the keenest
Armor: Though Men be never so well equipped and prepared for the Battle,
Salvation is of the Lord. How frequently are Men deceived and mistaken in their
Hopes and Conjectures, as to the Success of this and the other Battle and
Engagement, whilst they don't consider the overruling Hand of GOD, and His
Sovereignty in the case. The vast numbers of the Host, the abundance of
Armament, Ammunition and Artillery, the Skill and Puissance of the Generals,
and the Courage and Dexterity of the Soldiers, all signify nothing to depend
upon, as to the Issue and Event.

That Is a Maxim of Wisdom and Truth. Eccl. 9. 11. The race is not to the swift,
nor the battle to the strong. And if the LORD be on their side, one shall chase
a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight. GOD can by weak and
contemptible means overthrow the greatest Powers and Strength. Hence let not
him boast that puts on his Harness, any more than he that puts it off.

GOD determines that such shall go up, and be slain in such an high place of
the Field; or fall in such a skirmish and attack: and of others He designs to
cover their Heads in the day of Battle, that not an Hair of them shall fall to
the ground; He gives them their Life for a Prey.

And so as to Victory in respect of the Action of the main Body, That also is
ordered of the LORD. The Battle is the LORD's, and to what Nation or Armies
soever He wills the Victory, to them it shall be given. Thousands shall fall
down at their side; Ten Thousand at their right Hand: They shall shout with the
Voice of Triumph; return with their Captives and their Spoils, and be exalted
in the Songs; and be crowned with the Honors of their King, and the
Acclamations of their People.

Thus HE that formed all Things, and rules over all; He that Thunders in the
Clouds, that holds the Winds in his Fist, and the Ocean in the Hollow of his
Hand, that measures the Earth with a Span, and weighs the Mountains in
Balances; He that sits on the Circle of the Earth, does sway the Scepter among
the Nations; and especially orders and influences the great Affairs of Wars and
Commotions among them, wherein the Lives, Liberties and Happiness of his
Creatures, and of his People, are very nearly concerned.

And thus, I conceive, from the Hints that have been given, it appears that the
Title of a Man of War is fitly given to the LORD GOD of Israel. We have seen
wherein it consists, and many of the Instances and Particulars wherein it
manifests it self. And by this I suppose the Doctrinal Truth is sufficiently
confirmed and illustrated. I proceed in the next place,

II. Briefly to apply the Truth in some Useful Inferences and Reflections; more
especially for the Instruction of the Militia in our Land.

I. We see something of the Majesty and Glory of the GOD of Israel, for which
He is greatly to be feared and praised by His People.

As He is the Almighty Maker of Heaven and Earth; and the Sovereign Ruler and
Disposer of all things in His Holy Providence; particularly as He has the
Government of Wars and Fightings among the Nations; in the management of which
He discovers His Infinite Wisdom, irresistible Power, Unspotted Holiness,
Boundless Goodness, Perfect Righteousness, and the other Glorious Perfections
of the Divine Nature.

With what Terrible Majesty and insufferable Glory does the LORD Himself appear
at the Head of all the Armies of the Universe; an innumerable Host consisting
of all the Creatures? They are all obsequious to Him, waiting His Commands; a
Nod of His Head, or the Beckning of His Hand, will instantly move whole
Battalions and Regiments, as well as particular Species and Individuals.

Great is our GOD, and greatly to be Praised, who will not fear before Him, and
worship His Holy Name? But who can declare the mighty Acts of the LORD, who can
show forth all His Praise? not one. The Tongue of Michael or Gabriel would
faulter and fail in the attempt. This is the KING OF GLORY; and if you inquire
who He is, and why He is so called; I shall answer with the Psalmist, Psalm. 24.
8. 10. The LORD strong and mighty, the LORD mighty in battle. The LORD of
Hosts, He is the King of Glory.

Let all His Creatures, all His Hosts and Armies Praise Him, in Heaven, in
Earth, and in all deep Places, as they are exhorted to do, Psalm. 148.

2. We see hence the Lawfulness of War, and of the Military Art.

The LORD is a Man of War; and so may and should His People be, who are part of
His Forces, whenever they are called to engage therein; then they should
approve themselves Skilful and Valiant, for the LORD of Hosts.

In some cases, and for some reasons, it is both Lawful and a Duty, to take up
Arms and go forth to War; and it is necessary for Men to study the Military Act
and to acquire a Martial Genius and Spirit, that they may either turn the
Battle to the Gate, and raise the Siege; or Invade a Foreign Enemy, and
Courageously encamp against them. It is Lawful to take up Arms in the Defense
of our Lives and Estates, to guard our Religious and Civil Liberties, and to
take just Revenges on those that have cruelly Slain our Neighbors and carried
into Captivity our Friends. This we see in the example of Abraham, who had a
Trained Band in his House; in that he pursued those that had spoiled his
Kinsman Lot, and led him and his Family into Captivity: and by force of Arms
rescued him and his out of their Hands.

There is no Prohibition in Scripture against a Military Profession; were
there, says the great PEMBERTON, Why did not the Baptist disband the Soldiers
that came unto him and demanded of him, What they should do? And why did not
our LORD and Master deplume the Centurion, that came unto Him? Why did He not
Command him to lay down his Commission, as inconsistent with that Faith which
in Israel it self had not a parellel. Thus He.

"That God has not forbid a People (in case of Necessity and where amicable
Means will not prevail) to maintain their own Safety and Welfare, even by an
armed Violence, against such as wrongfully invade them; or to assist their
Neighbors in such a Case, is plain from the Laws of Humanity and
Self-preservation, as well as from the permission and encouragement given to
Wars in the Jewish Polity; which was Instituted by God, who was their Lawgiver
and King." But I need not insist on a Point so clear as this.

3. Since GOD is styled a Man of War, the Office of a Soldier should be
esteemed an honorable Profession and Employment.

As the Estate of Marriage is much honored, in that CHRIST is pleased to
express that great Mystery of the Gospel, the blessed Union betwixt Himself and
His Church by it: So the Calling of a Soldier or Warrior is much honored by
this, that GOD Himself is styled a Man of War, and so often takes upon Him the
Title of the Lord of Hosts, and God of Armies.

We have but now said, that the LORD of Hosts is the King of Glory; and surely
some of His Glory will shine and rest upon those Soldiers, that serve under
Him, and are like unto Him. The Roman's honored a Soldier much, and the Latin
calls a Soldier and a Knight by the same name.

It was an Observation of the Learned Dr. COTTON MATHER, that it was made an
Act among the Warlike Spartans, that no Man should have an Epitaph, or so much
as his Name written upon his Grave, if he had not been a Soldier; that some of
the chief Dignitary Titles now in the World had a Military Rise; and that the
Soldiers in King David and King Solomon's Times, were reckoned the Worthies of
the Kingdom.

And indeed, many Monuments in Scripture are raised to their Honor that were
remarkable for their Martial Skill, Valor and Exploits; their Names are
mentioned with Characters of Praise, they are consecrated to Posterity, and the
smell thereof is fragrant as the precious Ointment; and when they Dye in the
Bed of Honor, their Names are had in Everlasting Remembrance.

4. Since the Holy GOD is styled a Man of War all Soldiers and Men of War
should be Holy.

In our Context after GOD is Magnified as triumphing gloriously over His and
His People's Enemies; He is, ver. II. said to be, Glorious in Holiness. It is
very remarkable that GOD's Holiness in the Sacred Oracles is frequently joined
with His Title of the LORD of Hosts. Isa. 47. 4. As for our Redeemer, the LORD
of Hosts is his Name, the holy One of Israel. So when the Cherubims and
Seraphims, are Magnifying His Glory, in their exalted and unceasing Responses,
they cry out, as Isa. 6. 3. Holy, holy, holy is the LORD of Hosts. And because
the Great General is Holy, so should all His Hosts, His Officers and Soldiers
be.

It has been the custom of Soldiers to endeavor to imitate their General in
any thing; yea in their very Imperfections. ALEXANDER's Soldiers counted it a
graceful Mein to hold their Heads on one side, because Alexander their General
did so. But with an how much more, should Christian Soldiers, endeavor to be
like the LORD of Hosts, in that which is his greatest Excellency and Glory; and
which will cast a peculiar Luster and Glory on them. Such will find, that
Holiness and Valor are not only consistent with one another, but subservient
to each other, even in Men of Arms. It is a detestable Maxim of Machiavel, that
Religion makes Men Cowards. The most Valiant Soldiers in the Earth, have been
most eminent for their Religion and Virtue. It is true to a Proverb, Prove. 28.
I. The Wicked flees when no Man pursues; but the Righteous are hold as a Lion.

I suppose, says the ingenuous SYMMES, that the Sun never shone on three braver
Warriors, than Abraham, Joshua, and David; and yet who more renowned for the
Power of Godliness than these Worthies? Cornelius a Roman Captain was a devout
Man, and one that feared GOD with all his House; and he had a devout Soldier
which waited on him continually, Act. 10. 2, 7.

PLUTARCH tells us of a Theban Band of Soldiers, which they called the holy
Band, in which there was more Confidence put than in any, because they
prospered above others. The holy GOD who walks in the midst of the Hosts and
Armies, requires Holiness in them, Deuteronomy. 23. 9, 14. When the Host goes forth
against thine Enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing: For the Lord thy
God walks in the midst of the Camp; therefore shall thy Camp be holy; that he
see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee. This is that Divine
Wisdom, of which Ecclesiastes speaks, that is better than Weapons of War.

5. We see hence where Soldiers must repair for, and to whom they must give the
Glory of their Military Skill, Valor and Success in Wars. viz. To the GOD of
Armies, who is eminently a Man of War.

We have seen something intended in this Character, and find that a Martial
Skill and Genius, Spirit and Courage, Conduct and Stratagems in War, do all
come down from the Father of Lights, who is the giver of every good and perfect
Gift.

Those then that profess themselves Soldiers, should give Thanks to Him, for
the discovery of the Military Science, which is so necessary to furnish Men
with the methods of Safety and Defense against an Invading Enemy, etc.

And they should carefully Study, and exercise themselves in all the parts of
it; that they may gain as thorough and complete a knowledge therein as possibly
they can, and that hereby they may make full proof of their Armor. --

And in the Use of Means, they should have their Eye and Prayer lifted up to
the LORD of Hosts, that He would succeed their Studies and Exercises; that He
would teach their Hands to War, and their Fingers to Fight, and make them Men
of valor and Men of renown in their day, because of their proflciency,
expertness and prowess therein. --

And if any do excel in this Martial Skill, and are very dexterous and active
in their Military Exercises; or are fired with a magnanimous Spirit and
Puissance; and have been Successful and Victorious in a day of Battle: they
should Religiously Sacrifice the Praise of all to GOD, for to Him does it
appertain. He that teaches the lowest Husband man his Art, teaches the greatest
General his Skill; and it is by His Blessing they are both succeeded.

To rob GOD of this Glory, is very provoking to Him; the King of Assyria is
threatened with Destruction for it. Isa. 10. 12, 13. I will punish the fruit of
the stout heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks. For he
says, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom; and I have
put down the inhabitants like a valiant man.

Wherefore, Let not the strong Man glory in his strength, nor the skilful glory
in his wisdom, nor the stout-hearted glory in their fortitude: But let Him that
glories, Glory in the LORD alone. But,

6. We learn that War is a most sore and desolating judgment inflicted by the
LORD Himself.

As God is a Man of War; so the War is sometimes remarkably of the LORD: and it
is one of the greatest and most terrible Judgments wherewith He has been will not
to punish a rebellious People.

So amazing was it in the apprehension of David, though a man of War, and most
expert and valiant in it, that he chose rather the Pestilence should break in
upon his People, than their bloody Enemies; though they were to be destroyed by
them but for three Months, 2 Samuel 24. 13, 14. When GOD reckons up his four
Cardinal Judgments, we find War or a devouring Sword marching in the Front,
Ezekiel. 14. 21. And it is a most distressing Calamity, when GOD furbishes a Sword
and gives it a Commission, saying, Sword, go through the Land, cut off, and spare
not.

Should I enter upon a Detail of the Miseries of it, where should I begin, and
when should I end. I would turn you to the Book of the Lamentations of
Jeremiah; there you have the Bloody Scene opened, and some of the Horrors of it
described, by one who both saw and felt no small part of it: And who can read
the tragical Story, without joining with the weeping Prophet in his Moans, and
say, Mine Eye! mine Eye! runs down etc. And if the bare description of the
direful Calamities of War, are so affecting and grievous, what are the Evils
themselves? --

This by the way should excite our Pity and Compassion, and engage our Prayers,
for the People that are at this Day, more especially in EUROPE, distressed with
the Calamities of War, Depredations and Bloodshed. We should remember Those
that are in these Bonds, because we also are in the Body; and should consider
the Afflictions of Joseph, and deeply sympathize with Him therein: and not only
so, but should add our earnest Prayers, that GOD would deliver them out of
their Troubles; and in the mean time, that He would support them under their
fiery Trials; and sanctify their Losses in the Sea of Blood; and that He would
restore to them their precious Liberties, valuable Estates, and all the
Blessings of Peace: And in order to this that the LORD of Hosts would not
suffer the Sword to devour any more; that He would set up his Ensign to Command
a Retreat from the Field of Battle, and turn Wars into Peace, even unto the
Ends of the Earth. --

This also should raise in us a Spirit of Gratitude to our Almighty and most
Merciful GOD, that He does not at present visit us with this sorest Judgment
for our Sins, though they have deserved it. We should bless GOD's holy Name for
the Continuance of Peace in the ENGLISH NATION; and entreat that it may be
lengthened out; and that the National Councils and Negotiations may be
succeeded for the restoring Peace in Europe: But if the Nation should be called
to War; then to beseech the LORD of Hosts and GOD of Armies, to be on our Side,
and to Fight our Battles for us.

And we should bless GOD more especially, that we enjoy Peace and Rest in THIS
LAND. That the LORD who is a Man of War has not called us forth into the Field
of Battle; nor sent the Armies of the Aliens to Invade us, Impoverish or
Destroy us.

The LORD make our Peace as a River, and our Righteousness as the waves of the
Sea; and let our ways please the LORD, that our Enemies may be always at Peace
with us.

What now remains, but to Address my self more particularly to the Honorable
Company of the Artillery that have this day pressed me into their Service.

MUCH HONORED!

Forasmuch, as You are by Profession Men of War; and the ancient Company of
which you are the Members, was originally designed to be a Nursery for Military
Skill, Discipline, Order and Courage: and because it is expected that You
excel in all Martial Exercises and Exploits; and that You be ready to go forth
to War, whenever Divine Providence calls unto it: I have therefore at this time
set before You the Divine Exemplar, as a Man of War, for Your Instruction,
Imitation and Encouragement. --

You see the Honor that is Reflected on Men of Your Order, not only by the
honorable mention that is made of such in the Book of GOD; but also and more
especially in that the LORD Himself has been pleased to take the Title of a Man
of War, of the GOD of Armies, and of one Mighty in Battle.

Content not Yourselves with the Honorary Title only; but seek to be Conformed
to the Blessed GOD, in His Communicable Perfections, especially in His Holiness
which is the Glory of the Divine Nature, and will be the greatest Glory of
Yours if You attain it: Wherefore be ye Holy as GOD is Holy.

I hope I need not Caution You against those Sins and Vices, which will stain
the Glory of Your Character, and have often brought the Military Order into
Contempt.

Next to this Grace which will make Your Face to shine; it will be Your Honor
to exceed in all the parts of the Military Art. That You may all to a Man, from
the highest Field-Officer to the lowest private Sentinel, know Your Posts, and
be very expert, and well Disciplined Soldiers; that You may understand the
Words of Command, and gracefully manage the Exercise of Your Arms, Guns and
Swords, that You may readily form your various Figures; and perform exactly the
numerous Wheelings, Fa^ings, Doublings, Counter-Marches, etc. which a Word of
Command, or a signal may require of You. That You may know how to Encamp, and
Entrench, how to lay Seiges, and to raise them; that You may understand the
Statagems of War, when to take Advantages of an Enemy, how to Fight them with
their own Weapons; and this either in a Line of Battle, or in lighter
Skirmishes and Engagements. Yea it is expected that Your Company be like that
which is described, Cant. 3. 7, 8. Threescore valiant men are about it, of the
valiant of Israel. They all hold swords, being expert in war: every man has
his sword upon his thigh, because of fear in the night. --

Wherefore make use of all the means requisite for this end; not only to get
the Theory of the Art into Your Minds; but to be exact in the Practice and
Application of it. And here that advice, which was once given to a Spiritual
Soldier, may be fitly applied to every one of You: Give thy self to these
things, that they profiting may appear to all.

But how can this be expected, unless You constantly attend Your Duty on the
days of Your Muster, and admit only such into Your Company, that have both a
Genius and a Desire to be expert in the several parts of Military Discipline.

And to further this Design yet more; when the Anniversaries arrive for the
Election of Your Officers it is expedient that You make Choice of such Persons
among You, that are remarkable for their Skill in Arms and Battles, and that
will endeavor to diffuse their Knowledge and Martial Spirit into the whole
Company: and that will stand ready if there be an Alarm of War, to Gird on the
Sword, and appear a Glory at Tour Head, to lead You forth and Conduct You, with
Wisdom, Valor and Order, not only to defend Yourselves and the Cities of Your
GOD; but also to offend and vanquish Your daring Enemies.

And having used the proper means, seek earnestly to God for his Blessing on
them. The LORD is a Man of War; expert in it, and ready to communicate a
Martial Skill and Spirit to those that seek aright unto Him for it. Give to Him
the Glory of your present Seize; and seek for the abundant increase of
your Military Skill, Courage and Conduct; especially of the Graces and Virtues
of the Divine Life, which will make you good Men, good Christians, as well as
good Soldiers.

In Fine, Let the Glory of GOD, the Honor of the King, the Love of Your
Country, and the Defense of Your Religion and Liberties, be the Springs of Your
Actions, and the strongest Motives to induce You to answer the Character of Men
of War, of Mighty, Valiant Men.

And with these Hopes and Views, we the LORD's Ministers, do this Day, wish You
a Blessing out of the House of the LORD.

To Conclude. Let us all Spiritualize the Truths we have heard, and apply what
has been said for our Instruction and Encouragement in our Spiritual Warfare.
We are all of us Members of the Church Militant, and have numerous and potent
Enemies to conflict with; not only Flesh and Blood, not only the Men and Things
of the World, but also Principalities and Powers, and Spiritual Wickednesses in
High Places: Their Name is Legton for they are many.

Now we are no ways a Match for them or equal to them; and if the LORD help us
not, we shall one Day perish by their Hands. To Him therefore let us all humbly
repair: to JESUS who is a GOD manifest in Flesh. He is the Captain of our
Salvation, the Captain of the LORD's Hosts, and an eminent Man of War.

Let us seek to Him for Divine Wisdom and Skill, that we may not be Ignorant of
the Devices, Statagems and Depths of our Spiritual Enemies; nor of the Methods
how to Oppose and Defeat them.

And let us seek to Him, for Spiritual Courage and Conduct; that we may be able
to stand an assault, to resist the Devil, and to quench the fiery darts of the
Wicked one.

And in a Word, we must seek to Him to Cloth us with our Spiritual Armor; to
teach us the use of it, and to make us Wise and Successful in it. Let us be
satisfied with nothing less than the entire Defeat of the Enemies of our Souls.

Wherefore, Let us look unto JESUS to direct and strengthen us; and Obey the
Words of His Command: so shall we be Victorious in the Day of Battle; and come
off Conquerors, yea, more than Conquerors, through Him who has Loved us, and
Died for us; who has led Captivity Captive, and drawn Satan in Triumph at His
Chariot Wheels.

And when the Warfare is accomplished, and the Camp is raised, and we are
discharged by Death, an open Entrance shall be ministered to us abundantly into
the everlasting Kingdom of our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST.

Then we shall be clad in White Raiment, have Crowns put upon our Heads, and
Palms in our Hands, and our Mouths filled with Songs of Joy and Triumph: Yea we
shall join the Heavenly Host and the Church Triumphant above, in their
HALLELUIA's and Anthems of Praise to GOD, and to the Lamb that sits on the
Throne for ever and ever.

I shall close with that Doxology, 1 Timothy 1. 17. Now unto the KING ETERNAL,
IMMORTAL, INVISIBLE, the only WISE GOD, be HONOR and GLORY, for ever and ever.

AMEN.

