The Greatness of Sin improved by the Penitent as an Argument with GOD for a
Pardon. A SERMON At the Thursday Lecture in BOSTON, October 17 th. 1734.
Preached in the Hearing OF John Ormesby, AND Matthew Cushing, Two Condemned
Malefactors On the Day of their EXECUTION, The One for Murder, and the other
for Burglary.

By JOHN WEBB, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Boston.

With an APPENDIX, Giving a faithful Account of the Behavior of Matthew
Cushing, after his Condemnation, and at the Time of his Execution. By the
Reverend Mr. COOPER.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queenstreet over
against the Prison 1734.

The Greatness of Sin improved by the Penitent as an Argument with GOD for a
Pardon.
PSALM XXV.11. For thy names Sake, O LORD, pardon mine iniquity: for it is
great.


THIS Psalm was penned by David, in a time of great Affliction. And it appears
most likely, from several Passages in it, that he wrote it in his Old Age,
after his shameful fall into Murder and Adultery; and in the time of the great
Rebellion, which was raised against him, by his ungrateful Son Absalom, who
would have usurped the Crown and Kingdom from him. And as Sin is the only
ground of God's Displeasure, and the moral cause of all the Afflictions we meet
with; so we find David here (as in all the other Psalms which were penned on the
like sorrowful Occasions) makings mournful confession of his Sins, and seeking
the Favor and Protection of God, by first, securing a Pardon to himself And
indeed this is the only effectual Course we can take, to obtain mercy from God,
in any time of Distress.

And as I am now called, by the Providence of God, to preach the last Sermon to
two Condemned Criminals, who in a few hours, are to have the fatal Sentence
executed upon them, I know of no Subject more proper than this, to quicken and
direct them in their speedy Preparations for that awful Eternity they are going
into. And therefore, poor miserable Men, I beseech you, by the Mercies of God,
to give the most serious and close Attention to these public Counsels which
are the last you are ever like to receive, in this way, before you appear at
the awful Bar of God; where, it is likely, before this Day is ended, you will
receive that Divine Sentence, which will determine your eternal State, and fix
you either in everlasting Happiness, or in endless Misery. Indeed the little
Acquaintance I have had with you since your Imprisonment and Condemnation (by
reason of my bodily Indispositions, and other necessary Avocations) very much
unfit me for making those particular Applications to you, which, I fear, your
unhappy State and Circumstances may call for. And therefore I should have been
glad if my dear and reverend Brother The Rev. Mr. Cooper.
, who has often visited you in Prison, and almost daily attended you with his
instructive Counsels and Prayers, would for this once, have exchanged the
Lecture with me, and been God's Messenger to you on this awful Occasion. But
since he has declined the Service, that he might have greater leisure to
express his tender Compassions for you in those more private and personal
Applications, which you have all along stood in the greatest need of; and since
the Lot is now fallen upon me, I shall endeavor, by the Assistance of Heaven,
to give you the most seasonable Advice I can from these words of the Psalmist;
which contain a most moving and ardent Address to God: An Address fit for any
Sinner in a dying Hour, and especially for such notorious Malefactors as you
have been. And that you may be enabled by divine Assistance, to make this
Prayer to God in your last Moments, with that Understanding, Faith and
Fervency, which will secure your eternal Salvation; I shall, first, briefly
explain these Words, and then speak to some Doctrinal Notes from them.

And for the Explanation of them, we may observe the following things.

1. We have here David's Petition for pardoning Grace, in these words, Pardon
mine Iniquity. To pardon iniquity, is to do away the Guilt of Sin; or to free a
Sinner from that sentence of Condemnation which he has justly fallen under, by
his Transgression of the Law of God. And this is the Subject of David's Request
here. Pardon mine Iniquity: mine Iniquity, in the singular Number. From whence
it is very likely the Psalmist had an immediate reference to some particular
heinous Transgression, he had been guilty of, and for which he was then full of
Distress, both in Body and Mind. And if he had an Eye here to his Murder and
Adultery (as I observed before) these, indeed, were Sins of a complicated
guilt: and we have no reason to wonder at the Anguish of Soul he expresses on
the account of them. But however we need not confine the sense of the words so
as to exclude his other Sins: For when a true Penitent pleads for the Pardon of
any particular great Transgression, he has been left to fall into, in a day of
Temptation, he earnestly desires the pardon of all his Sins, at the same time.
And that this was the case with David, when he penned this Psalm, appears from
the 18 th verse of the Context, Forgive all my Sins.

2. We may observe, of Whom it is, David asks the Pardon of his Iniquities. And
this is of God alone: O Lord, pardon etc. For as God is most highly offended by
Sin, and as he is the only Object of Prayer; so it is He only can effectually
forgive our Transgressions: and agreably we read in Psalm. 130.4* 7. With the
Lord there is forgiveness, and with him there is plenteous Redemption, that he
may be feared.

3. We may further observe, the Arguments, David made use of for the success of
his Prayer. And these are two: The one taken from the final Cause, and the
other from the Object. The first is taken from the final Cause; in these Words,
For thy Names sake, i e. That the Greatness of thy free and sovereign Grace and
Mercy, may be displayed and magnified in pardoning mine Iniquities. This is a
very natural Plea in it self, and one of the most successful Pleas we can make
for the obtaining a Pardon For Mercy is emphatically the Name of God: and the
Display of it, in a way consistent with Divine Justice and Holiness, is the
last and highest End of Forgiveness For God forgives a Sinner, not for his own
worthiness, but for his great Mercies Sake in Jesus Christ. Again, the other
Argument here, is taken from Sin, the Object of pardoning Mercy: In these
words, for it is great. That is, the Iniquity of which I beg a Pardon, is
great. It is attended with very great Aggravations: I have greatly dishonored
thy Name by it: It has contracted an exceeding great Guilt to my Soul: It has
bro't me already into the greatest Adversity: And unless I obtain Forgiveness
from thee, it will quickly plunge me into the Depth of irrecoverable and
endless Misery. This Argument, indeed, is very surprising in the Nature of it;
and what one would scarce choose to make use of, to obtain the Favor of an
offended Neighbor or Brother. For the greatness of our Offenses against Men,
is generally though it a sufficient Reason why they should retaliate upon us. And
therefore a Confession of this nature to Man, does too often serve only the
more to irritate the Passions of the Injured against the Offender; and
sometimes, according as the nature of the Offense may be, it would put it out
of the Power of those to whom we confess to forgive. But it is far otherwise
with respect to the infinite God. For, as we read in Isai. 55.8, 9. My tho'ts
are not your tho'ts, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord. For as the
Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my
tho'ts than your tho'ts. And therefore since God's great design in forgiving
Iniquity is to exalt free and sovereign Grace through Jesus Christ; the greater
our Transgressions have been, the more illustrious will his Mercy appear in the
Act of Forgiveness. And for this Reason among many others, he allows us, with
David in the Text, to mention the greatness of our Iniquity, as an Argument why
he should pardon and forgive us.

And now from the Words thus explained, we may make these three general
Observations,

I That God alone ought to be addressed unto, for the Pardon of all our
Iniquities.

II. Whenever God pardons Iniquity, he pardons it, for his own Name's Sake; or
to magnify his free and sovereign Grace and Mercy in Jesus Christ. And
therefore,

III. Since this is God's chief End in pardoning Iniquity, the true Penitent
may humbly plead the Greatness of his Sins, as an Argument with God, why he
should pardon and forgive him.

I. I shall observe from these Words, That God alone ought to be addressed unto
for the Pardon of all our Iniquities.

Here I shall not have time to enquire particularly into the Nature of a
Pardon: Nor is there any need of it in this place: For since my present Design
is chiefly to direct and encourage such Sinners, as are deeply wounded with a
sense of their own Sin and Guilt, in the sure way to obtain the pardoning Mercy
of God; every such Sinner must needs understand something of the true Nature of
a Pardon; and feel the necessity, and see the worth of it, in his own
Experience. And therefore I shall only, First, Confirm the Truth of this
Observation; and then, Secondly, Show after what manner a distressed Sinner
must make his Address to God for his pardoning Mercy.

First, I shall prove to you* that God, and He alone, is to be sought unto, for
the Pardon of our Iniquities And the Truth of this will appear in two
particulars,

1. All Sin is immediately and directly an Affront to God. For as the Apostle
observes in 1 John 3.4. Sin is a Transgression of the Law of God. That is, all
and every Sin opposes and tramples upon God's ruling Authority. And all they
that are guilty of it, set up themselves, more or less, against the Government
of God, and practically say with the rebellious Jews, in Jer. 2.31. We are
Lords, we will come no more unto thee. And it is upon this account only, that
Sin contracts such Guilt as to need a Pardon. Indeed, in many Cases, one Man
may really injure and grieve another. And, in all these Cases, we usually say,
such a Man has sinned against his Brother or Neighbor. But then we must
observe, that the real sinfulness of such Actions arises only from the
Contrariety of them to that holy Law of God, which forbids this Ill treatment
of Mankind. So that, in strict propriety, God is the only Object against whom
Sin is or can be committed. And therefore, in the Nature of the thing, it is
most reasonable, yea, and absolutely necessary too that God, and he only,
should be religiously Addressed unto, for the Pardon of Sin. And besides this,

2. There is none but God, who can effectually forgive Sin. For Sin, as it
exposes the Transgressor to eternal Misery, is a matter of Concernment between
God and the Sinner only. The Sinner transgresses the Law of God by his
Iniquity, and the Justice of God arresteth the Sinner for his Transgression:
And thus God is offended, and the Sinner brought under a sentence of
Condemnation, for one and the same Act of Sin. And therefore as the Offense is
against God only, there is none but he can release a Sinner from the Guilt of
Sin. And this is the meaning of that Confession, in Dan. 9.9. To the Lord our
God belong mercies and forgivenesses. And now since Forgiveness, as it respects
a Man's eternal state, belongs to God only, we ought surely to ask this
Forgiveness of God, and of him alone: And it would be both impious and foolish
in a Sinner, either to request or expect a free and full pardon of his Sins
from any else.

And having thus briefly confirmed the Point*

Secondly, I come now, in the next place, to consider how, or after what
manner, we must make our Address to God, for the Pardon of Iniquity, so as to
find Mercy with Him. And here I shall say,

1 When we pray to God for a Pardon, we must pray with a deep sense of our
utter Unworthiness of the Mercy. For such is the odious and defiling Nature of
Sin, that it vilifies and debases the Subjects of it, and renders them the
proper Objects for revenging Righteousness. And it is not possible for a
Sinner, on the account of any worthiness in him, to challenge a Pardon, or
claim any other Favor, at the hands of God. And therefore whenever we plead
with God for a Pardon, and hope to find Mercy with Him, we must go to the
Throne of Grace, as it were, with Ashes on our Heads, and with Ropes on our
Necks, and confess that we are Malefactors, justly doomed to eternal Wrath We
must take with us words, and either, say with the penitent Prodigal, in Luke
15.21. Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee; and am no more
worthy to be called thy Child. Or, we must confess with the repenting Jews, in
Dan. 9 7. O Lord Righteousness belongs unto thee; but unto us Confusion of
faces. In a word, we must freely acknowledge that Hell and the inconceivable
Torments of it, are our just Desert; and that every thing, on this side the
everlasting Burnings, is of the free and sovereign Mercy of God to us. This we
have strongly recommended to us, in that penitent Language of the afflicted
Church, Lam. 3.22. It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed,
because his Compassions fail not.

2. When we pray for the Pardon of Iniquity, we must make a free and full
Confession of our Sins unto God. That is, we must not only make a free and
ingenuous Confession of such Actual Transgressions and the Aggravations of
them, with which we find our Consciences oppressed and burdened: but we must be
led on by these to the corrupt Fountain from whence all our Actual Sins
proceed, and particularly confess and bewail that Corruption of Nature we
brought into the World with us. Of this David has left us a most excellent
Example, in the Fifty first Psalm, which is full of penitential Grief and
Sorrow for his scandalous Sins of Adultery and Murder: for if we compare the 3
d. and 4 th. verses with the Title of the Psalm, we shall find that he makes a
most ingenuous Confession of those Sins in them. For (says he in his Address to
God) I acknowledge my Transgressions: and my Sin is ever before me. Against
thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou
might be justified when thou speak, and clear when thou judge. And then
he traces these, and all the other sins of his Life, to the accursed Fountain
of them, in the original Corruption of his Nature; and makes a most sorrowful
Confession of this, in the 5th verse. Behold, I was shapen in Iniquity; and in
sin did my mother conceive me. And such a free and full Confession of Sin is
generally necessary to a Pardon: as appears from those two Texts of Scripture,
Prove 28 13. He that covers his Sins shall not prosper: but whosoever confesses
and forsakes them shall have mercy. And 1 John ^ 9 If we confess our Sins, he
is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness.

3. When we pray to God for the Pardon of our Iniquity, we must pray for it in
the Name of CHRIST, and hope to receive the Mercy for his Sake alone. For as
Christ is the only MEDIATOR between God and the Sinner, so he is the only Way
of our Access to the Father, and Acceptance with him. And therefore if we beg a
Pardon, or ask any other Favor, in the Name of any one but Christ, God will
cloth Himself with a thick Cloud, and turn a deaf Ear to our Prayer. But (as
the Apostle observes in 1 John 5.14.) this is the Confidence we have in him, i.
e in Christ, that if we ask anything according to his will he hears us. And
this holy Confidence is grounded upon that Promise of our blessed Savior to
his Disciples, Joh. 14 13, 14. And whatsoever ye shall ask [in my Name] that
will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye ask any thing [in
my Name] I will do it. And consequently when a Sinner asks the Forgiveness of
Sin, with any reasonable hopes of success, it must be in some such Language as
this, Dan. 9.18, 19 O my God* incline thine ear, and hear: -- for we do not
present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses* but for thy
great mercies. O Lord hear, O Lord* forgive, O Lord hearken and do, defer not,
for thine own sake [for thy dear Son's sake] O my God.

4. Lastly, When we pray for a Pardon, we must humbly resolve and promise to
God, that, by his Grace, we will forsake all Iniquity. For to ask the
Forgiveness of Sin without such a purpose of Heart, and Engagement to God, is
basely to play the Hypocrite, and to dare the Almighty to take Vengeance upon
us. This, I think, appears very evident from those Words of the Psalmist. Psalm
66.18. If I regard Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear me. But, on the
other hand, when a Sinner goes to the Throne of Grace for a Pardon; if he finds
his Heart broken for Sin, his Soul full of the hatred of it, and, with holy
Job, is bro't to loath and abhor himself for his Iniquities; and with these
Dispositions is led on to say, as in Job. 34.32. Lord, if I have done Iniquity,
I will so no more. These are the Evidences of true Repentance. And such a
Sinner, upon his asking, after this manner, shall receive the Forgiveness of
his Sins, through the Merits and Mediation of Christ our Redeemer.

And thus I have finished the first general Head, and come now to my second
Observation from these Words. And this is,

II. Whenever God pardons Iniquity, he pardons it for his own Names Sake.

This Proposition is evidently contained in these Words of the Psalmist. For
thy Names sake, O Lord, pardon etc. For here David makes use of the NAME of God
as the strongest Argument for a Pardon: Which plainly implies that the
Magnifying of God's Name, is the last and highest End of Forgiveness And that
this is really the Case, I think, no one can doubt when he reads that solemn
Declaration of God himself to his People Israel, in Isa 43.25 I, even I am he,
that blotteth out thy Transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy
Sins.

But here we may, first, briefly enquire into the meaning of this Expression,
For thy Names sake And, secondly, Give you some Reasons to prove that when ever
God pardons Iniquity he pardons it for his own Name's sake.

First, I shall briefly enquire into the meaning of this Expression. For thy
Name's sake.

And here I shall say,

1. By the Name of God, in this place, we may understand the infinite Grace and
Mercy of God. For this Mercy is spoken of once and again in this Context; and
to the same Purpose, for which the Name of God is mentioned in the Text. And
this makes it most probable that they both signify one and the same thing in
this Psalm. And besides, it is certain the Mercy of God is elsewhere
emphatically styled the Name of God; as though the Almighty eminently gloried in
this Perfection of his Nature, and delighted chiefly in the display of it. This
is evident from Moses's humble Request to God, in Exodus 33.18 and God's
condescending Answer to it, in the 5 th. and 6 th. verses of the next Chapter^
Moses's Petition to God is, I beseech thee, show me thy Glory: And we have the
Answer referred to, in the following words. And the Lord descended in a Cloud,
and stood with him there, and proclaimed the Name of the Lord And the Lord
passed by before him, and proclaimed the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. Here we see the
Goodness and Mercy of God are expressly called, the Name of God^ And in this
sense, For thy Name's sake, is as much as to say, For thy Mercy's sake, or to
make a Display of the Riches and Glory of thy free Grace and Mercy. But since
this Display cannot be made but in a way consistent with the essential Rights
of Divine Justice; and since we know of no other way (to use the Psalmists
words in Psalm. 85.10.) wherein Mercy and truth may meet together: righteousness
and peace kiss each other, in the Pardon of Sin, but only by the Death and
Sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ; I add,

2. It is not unlikely, that by the Name of God here, the Psalmist might also
have an Eye to the Lord Jesus Christ, the promised Messiah. For I make no
doubt, since Christ was so often and clearly typified by the legal Sacrifices
of old, that the believing Jews had some way or other a Dependence upon the
future Sacrifice and Satisfaction of the promised Messiah, for the Pardon and
Forgiveness of their Sins; and that they frequently pointed to him in their
Prayers to God for a Pardon. Now there is no one Expression which they commonly
made use of, in this Case, that has a clearer Aspect this way, than the
Expression in the Text, For thy Name sake. For the Name of God, we know was in
the Angel, whom God sent to conduct the Israelites through the Wilderness (
Exodus 23.21.) By which Angel Christ is generally understood. And if so, Why
may not we rationally suppose, that in Allusion to this, the Jews frequently
spoke of the expected Messiah under this Character. The Name of God? Which if
they did, For thy Names sake here may signify as much as for the Messiah sake,
in whom thy Name is. And that which renders this the more probable is* That the
believing Jews made use of this Expression much after the same Manner, and in
the same Cases, wherein we Christians make use of these Words, For Jesus
Christ's sake: as though they signified one and the same thing. And this
Interpretation receives still farther Light and Strength when we consider that
David who made use of this Expression, was one to whom God had made wonderful
Discoveries, by the Spirit of Prophecy, of the future Death and Sufferings of
the Son of God in our Nature; and no doubt, revealed to him, at the same time,
the great Importance and Necessity of them for the Pardon of Sin And therefore
it is not reasonable to suppose, that David, when he was in so great Concern to
obtain the Pardon of Sin, as we find in this Psalm, could expect to obtain it,
in any other way, than on the Account of the Death and Sacrifice of the
promised Messiah And if this may be allowed a true Account of the Name of God,
in the Text, then the full meaning of the Psalmists Petition in it, is this,
Lord, pardon mine Iniquity, that thy free Grace and Mercy may be magnified, in
and through Jesus Christ, the promised Messiah. Where the magnifying divine Grace
is to be considered as the principal End of Forgiveness, and the Merits of
Christ as the necessary Medium to it And having thus briefly explained the
Point, I proceed in the next Place

Secondly, To prove that whenever God pardons iniquity, he grants the Mercy
upon no other Account than only to display and (...) if the Riches of his
Grace, in and through the Lord Jesus Christ. And this will fully appear in two
Particulars.

1 There is a thing originally in the Sinner* that can move the Lord to extend
his pardoning Mercy to him Indeed* when we consider a Sinner as he is a Subject
of (...) by reason of Sin; so he is a proper Object for mercy. But when we
consider him under all the unhappy Circumstances the Fall has brought him into,
this quite alters the Case with him. For it is with a Sinner, in this Respect,
as it is with a Malefactor brought into Prison and Chains by a vicious Life. If
we consider such an one, simply in his afflicted state, he is a proper Object
for Compassion. But if at the same time, he appears obstinate in those Vices
which have brought all his Distress and Ruin upon him; he cannot deserve any
Mercy should be extended toward him. And this is the very Case with a Sinner
when the Grace and Mercy of God first finds him out. For we are not only
miserable, and the Children of Wrath, by Nature: but we are naturally obstinate
in those Sins, which have bro't all our Misery and Distress upon us. For the
Sinner, in his natural state, is in Love and League with Sin: at Enmity against
God, from whom alone his Salvation must come: and walks on in a constant Course
of those Iniquities, which are the highest Provocation to Heaven. And there
neither is, nor can be any Alteration in him for the better: No Repentance for
Sin: no godly Sorrow for Iniquity; 'till God of his free and sovereign Grace,
grants him Repentance unto life. And now, this being the true state of the
Sinner by Nature, there can be nothing found in the Sinner, considered in
himself, that may be though it a sufficient Motive to the Lord to extend his
pardoning Mercy to him; since the very necessary Qualifications of a Pardon, as
well as the Pardon itself, are wholly from God. And from hence it plainly
appears, That whenever God pardons Iniquity, he pardons it for his own Name's
sake. The Argument for a Pardon is wholly in himself, and not at all in the
Sinner. Again,

2. Neither the Sinner himself, nor any mere Creature, is able to pay the
necessary Price of a Pardon, to the Justice of God, for him. For though God
intends to magnify free and sovereign Grace in the Forgiveness of Sin; yet he
has no design to exalt one Perfection of his Nature, to the Prejudice of
another. And therefore since Justice is as dear to God as Mercy; he can never
exalt his Mercy but in a way consistent with the Rights of infinite Justice.
Now Justice indispensibly requires full Satisfaction for the Offense, before
the Bands of Guilt be loosed, and the Transgressor discharged. What this
Satisfaction must be, appears from the nature of Sin, which is infinitely evil;
not simply, but objectively considered. And, for this Reason, the Price of
Forgiveness must be of infinite Value to ^^ar a full proportion to the nature
of the Offense, and from hence it evidently appears that no mere Creature can
pay such a Price as this to Divine Justice; for it is impossible, in the Nature
of things, that a finite Being should be able to pay an infinite Price. And the
necessary Conclusion from this, is, that if ever Satisfaction be made to the
Justice of God for our Transgressions, God himself must provide, as well as
accept the Price. And such a Price God has provided, in giving his only
begotten Son to die a Sacrifice for Sin; and his Justice has accepted it, on
the Account of all that truly Repent and believe in him. And now the concluding
Argument, from the whole, is this, That whenever God magnifies his Mercy in
pardoning Iniquity, it is, and can be, only for his Name's sake, that is, for
his Son's sake, or upon the account of the infinite Merit of his Death and
Sacrifice. And now I have done with the second general Proposition, and come to
observe, in the last place,

III. That since God's great End in pardoning Iniquity, is to magnify his
infinite Grace and Mercy in Jesus Christ, the truly penitent Sinner may humbly
plead the Greatness of his Sins, as an Argument with God, why he should confer
his pardoning Grace upon him.

I say, the truly penitent here, because this was the Case with David, when he
made use of the Argument, in the Text, O Lord, Pardon mine Iniquity: for it is
great. And without this Repentance, it is impossible for a Sinner, by all the
Arguments in the World, to prevail with the Lord to pardon his Iniquity: For
our Savior has peremptorily told us (in Luke 13 3, 5) That except we repent we
shall certainly perish. But, on the other hand, if the Sinner has a truly
broken and contrite Heart in him: if he finds his Soul full of Grief, and
Sorrow, and holy mourning for Sin: full of the Hatred of Sin, full of
self-loathing on the Account of it; and humbly resolves, by the Grace of God,
never to have any thing more to do willingly with Sin: He is then a fit Object
for pardoning Mercy. And, in this holy Frame and Temper, he may go to the
Throne of Grace* and, with Humility and Confidence, make use, even of the
Greatness of his Sins as a prevailing Argument with God for a Pardon

And there are these two Reasons with which I shall confirm this comfortable
Doctrine to the penitent Soul.

1. The greater our Iniquities have been* the more do we need the pardoning
Mercy of God For the more notorious and aggravated a Sinner's Transgressions
have been, the greater is the Guilt he has contracted by them: and unless he
obtains the Forgiveness of them, he must certainly suffer a heavier Vengeance
for them. And thus the greatest Transgressors are in the most deplorable Case,
and are under the most amazing Condemnation. And now, since the proper Objects
of Mercy are miserable Creatures; the more miserable they are in themselves,
the fitter Objects are they for Mercy And Mercy never works with tenderer
Bowels, or with more melting Compassions, than while it has to do with the most
distressed Objects. And from this Consideration, the penitent Sinner, who finds
himself deeply wounded with a Sense of his own Sin, and Guilt, and Misery, may
take Encouragement to go to the only Physician of perishing Souls, and to
spread his deplorable state before him, in some such Language as this. Lord, I
have strangely played the Prodigal, and run away from thee, ever since I was
born, speaking lies. I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no
more worthy to be called thy Son. Mine Iniquities are increased beyond Account;
and they have been attended with these and the other the most aggravated
Circumstances. I have abused thy Grace and Patience toward me, as much as ever
any wretched Creature has done; and may justly account my self, the very Chief
of Sinners. And by reason of my Transgressions, which are of a crimson and
scarlet dye, I have exposed my self to thy hottest Wrath and Vengeance: And
unless I obtain pardoning Mercy from thee, my Condemnation, at the Day of
Judgment, and my miserable Portion in Hell, will for ever be more intolerable
than that of the Sinners of Sodom and Gomorrah: Nor did any poor Wretch ever
stand in more need of thy pardoning Mercy than I do. For thy Name's sake,
therefore: For thy Mercies sake in Jesus Christ, O Lord, pardon mine Iniquity:
for it is exceeding great, and my miserable Condition is inexpressibly, yea,
inconceivably great on the account of it. And now, if there is any thing, the
penitent Transgressor can say or do, that is likely to move the Divine
Compassions toward him: nothing seems to have a more promising tendency this
way, than some such ingenuous Confessions as these. And therefore, for a true
Penitent, to mention the Greatness of his Sins, after this manner, is as proper
an Argument as he can make use of, to obtain Forgiveness from God. Again,

2. The greater our Transgressions have been, the more will the Mercy of God be
magnified in pardoning of them. For since God's chief design in Forgiveness, is
to display the Glory of his free and sovereign Grace in Jesus Christ; the
greater those Sins are which he forgives, the more illustrious will his Mercy
appear in the Act of Forgiveness. For the Riches of Divine Grace and Mercy
appear to be no less than infinite, when the greatest Unworthiness is
overlooked, and the most crimson Guilt is removed, by them. Hence, in this
way, the super-abounding Grace of God is occasionally illustrated from the
Abounding of Sin; as the Blessed Apostle Paul assures us in Rom 5.20. And he
elsewhere confirms this Truth to us in his own Example. For when he first
acquaints us what a great Sinner he had been: That he had been a Blasphemer, a
Persecutor, and Injurious, in 1 Timothy 1.13. He tells us in the next verse, that
in his obtaining Mercy, the Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant. And
indeed, the Mercy of God never appears more illustrious than it does, in
Rescuing the most miserable and unworthy Objects from Destruction. For in such
Instances, the Grace of God discovers it self to be Almighty-Grace, and that
nothing can be too hard for it. And since this is the true state of the Case,
what should hinder the true Penitent from going to the Throne of Grace, and
pleading thus with the Almighty? especially if he knows his Transgressions have
exceeded. Lord, my Sins have been many, and attended with the highest
Aggravations: I neither know the Number nor the heinous Guilt of them But this
I am sure of, though my Offenses have abounded, thy Grace and Mercy in Christ
Jesus have abounded much more. And thou have taken Occasion heretofore, highly
to magnify thy Grace in pardoning the Chief of Sinners: Yea, the greater their
Transgressions have been, the brighter Display have thou made of thy free and
sovereign Grace in the Forgiveness of them. O therefore take Occasion once
more, from the Heinousness of my Sins, to show forth the infinite Riches of thy
Mercy. And if thou will forgive my crimson and scarlet Transgressions, thy
Grace shall forever have the Praise of it, through Jesus Christ. And now for
the Penitent Transgressor to mention the Greatness of his Sins, after this
manner, is certainly pleasing in the Sight of God; and so must be as proper an
Argument, as he can make use of to prevail with the Almighty to extend a Pardon
and Eternal Salvation to him.

And thus I have gone through the doctrinal Handling of these words, and come
now to the APPLICATION of them, in two general Heads.

And the first is,

I By way of solemn Caution and Warning to all, especially to our profane
Children and Youth, who are madly running on in the ways of Sin, and have
hitherto obstinately refused to be reclaimed, by all the Means and Methods that
have been used with them for this End* I say, I shall improve what has been
said by way of solemn Caution and Warning to all such as these. For there is
nothing more natural to carnal Sinners than basely to abuse the Doctrine of
Divine Grace and Mercy: and to take Occasion, from the Consideration of it, to
indulge their unruly Lusts and Corruptions. For whenever they hear this
Doctrine preached, namely, Where Sin has abounded, Grace has much more
abounded, (which Doctrine was delivered only for the Encouragement and
Consolation of such Sinners, as are in deep Distress and Anguish, and have
their Hearts broken, at the sight of their great Sin and Guilt before God) I
say, when they hear this Doctrine of Divine Grace, displayed in all the Glories
of it, they presently make a misapplication of it; and secretly say, This is
comfortable Doctrine indeed: For I see now that my Sins can never be too many
for God to pardon. Nay, the greater they are, the more illustrious will the
Grace of God appear at last in the Pardon and Forgiveness of them. And since it
is thus, says the ungrateful Wretch, I may safely continue still longer in my
Sins, and take my fill of sensual Pleasures; and am resolved to do so, and make
no doubt but the Grace of God will abound, at last, in my Pardon and Salvation.
And if the profane Sinner be in his Youthful Days, he will presume upon long
Life; and, from the Doctrine of Divine Grace, hope for the Mercy of God, after
a long Life spent in Sin and Rebellion against Heaven. But, O vain and deluded
Sinner! This is horrid Presumption in the sight of an holy, Sin-hating, and
Sin-revenging God. And therefore the blessed Apostle Paul, just after he had
delivered this comfortable Doctrine, for the ease of distressed Consciences,
foreseeing the infinite Hazard many would be in of abusing it to the vilest
purposes, solemnly warns all profane Sinners against this fatal Abuse of it, in
Romans 6. beginning. What shall we say then? shall we continue in Sin, that Grace
may abound? God forbid! Which is a form of Speech he frequently made use of* to
show his utter abhorrence of any great Iniquity, And therefore I now solemnly
say to all profane Sinners, and particularly to our graceless Children and
Youth; God forbid, That any of you should continue one Year, one Day, or so
much as one Hour longer in Sin, with hopes that the Grace of God will hereafter
abound in your Pardon and Salvation. And to set home this seasonable Caution,
this solemn Warning, I must beseech, and, in the Name of God, demand your
serious Consideration of a few things.

1. Consider, Your past Iniquities are very many, and exceedingly aggravated
already. For though some of you are but Young in Years, yet you are Old in your
Iniquities: For you have all been Transgressors from the Womb, and been guilty
of innumerable Sins every Day, since you have come to the Exercise of Reason.
And as all your Sins have been against Gospel Light and Grace, they have been
dreadfully aggravated on this account. And many of your Sins have been of the
most heinous Nature: such as Cursing, Swearing, Lying, Stealing, Profaning the
Name and Day of God, Uncleanness, and the like. So that every such Sinner, though
ever so young in Years, has infinite Reason already to make his Prayer to God,
in the words of my Text, O Lord, pardon mine Iniquity: for it is great. Again,

2. Consider, If you don't speedily repent and reform, it is not unlikely, God
may, in a little time, utterly forsake, and give you up to those most notorious
and scandalous Transgressions, which will quickly bring you to a most shameful
and ignominious Death, by the Hands of Public Justice. For have we not here,
before our Eyes, a most fearful Example of two miserable Men, and one of them
too in the very prime and vigor of Youth, who but a twelve month ago, it may
be, as little though it of ever coming to so ignominious a Death, as the most
secure of you all. But behold, by the just Judgment of God, they appear, in
this vast Assembly, with their Lives forfeited into the Hands of Public
Justice; and are under a Sentence of Condemnation to die in a few Hours, for
their notorious and scandalous Crimes. And unless you speedily repent and
return to God, and commit the keeping, both of your Bodies and Souls to Him, in
a way of well doing, you can have no security but this will be the miserable
portion of some or other of you, before you have seen the Revolution of another
Year. But suppose, after all the crying Sins your own Consciences are witnesses
to, you should escape the Hands of Public Justice: Yet,

3. Consider, It Is likely God will take you into his own Hands, and speedily
inflict his more immediate and more terrible Vengeance upon you. For this has
frequently been the dreadful Doom of such bold and Heaven daring Transgressors,
as many of you are. For did not Nadab and Abihu, Hophni and Phineas, die
suddenly in their Youth, for their horrid Profaneness and Impiety? Were not
Annanias and Sapphira suddenly struck dead, by the Hand of God, with a Lie in
their Mouths? And have you not read or heard of many others, whom God has made
the amazing Examples of his Vengeance, in this way? And were not all these
Examples intended by God for a solemn Warning to all others? O then think
seriously on them, you that upon every turn, are ready to imprecate the
Vengeance of God, and to wish you may either rot alive, or may die, or be
damned, or the like, if you either did, or would do, this or the other thing.
And, at the same time, consider how just it would be, for, God to take you at
your Word, and to send you into the Congregation of the Dead, with this visible
Mark of his fiery Indignation upon you

But suppose you should escape with Impunity in this World, and should live to
grow old in Years as well as in Sin; Yet after all,

4. Consider, It Is most likely God will deny you his Grace at last, and bring
the Damnation of Hell upon you in the long run. For the Prophet Isaiah has told
us* from the Mouth of God, in in Chap 65.20. That the sinner being an hundred
years old shall be accursed. And consequently the longer he lives in Sin, the
more aggravated will be his eternal Damnation. And Oh, that every Christless
and Graceless Sinner in this Assembly, and particularly the profane Children
and Youth in it, might be so impressed from these Considerations, as to be ready
to hearken to all the Warnings and Counsels that are given them from God, both
by his Word and Providence!

And here, upon this awful Occasion, I would, with all earnestness, beseech our
tho'tless Youth, and all others that are madly walking in the ways of their own
Hearts, and in the sight of their Eyes, to hearken to the solemn Warnings that
have been frequently given, by Condemned Criminals, at the Time and Place of
their Execution. For these are certainly Warnings from the Dead, if there are
any such given us in this World. What you may hear from these miserable Men, or
how far they may think it their Duty, in their dying Moments, to give Glory to
God, in this way, I know not But I am certain that some others when they have
been greatly awakened, at the near Prospect of Death and Eternity, have given
the most seasonable and solemn Warnings to their vain Companions, and to all
Spectators, to beware of those Sins which have led on by degrees to their
tragical End. And they are usually such as these. Their early Disobedience to
their Parents; Their resisting and grieving the striving Spirit of God: Their
Neglect of Prayer: Their Despising the Sabbaths of the Lord, and turning a deaf
Ear to the many Warnings and Counsels that were given to them in the Ministry
of the Word: Their profane Cursing and Swearing, and taking the Name of God in
vain: Their intolerable Pride: Their ungovernable Passion: Their frequent
running into bad Company: Their Drunkenness: Their Uncleanness: Their Theft,
and the like. And therefore as you would not fall after their fatal Example,
Oh! beware of these Heaven during Sins, which without a seasonable and through
Repentance, will inevitably lead to the like, or a much worse Destruction. And
let all those whose consciences witness to their own Guilt, in any of these
respects, be persuaded to fly instantly to the Blood of Christ for the Pardon
of all their past Sins. Pray earnestly for a new Heart: make an entire
Dedication of your selves to God now in and through the Lord Jesus Christ; and
commit the keeping of your selves to Him, in a way of well-doing. And in this
way you may reasonably expect the restraining, the sanctifying, and the
comforting Influences of God's holy Spirit while you live, and hope for eternal
Life in the World to come.

And this leads me now to the next Head of Improvement. And this is,

II. By way of Direction and Encouragement. First, To all such Sinners who are
in Distress and Anguish from a Consideration of the Greatness of their Sins.
And Secondly, to the poor condemned Criminals in particular.

1. I shall say a word for the Consolation and Encouragement of all such
Sinners who are in deep Distress and Anguish, from a consideration of the
Greatness of their past Sins. For there have been (and, doubtless there are at
this day) many poor Sinners, who, under very awakening Convictions, have had
such a doleful Prospect of the heinous Nature of their past Transgressions,
that they have been ready to conclude, they have sinned themselves beyond all
Hopes of Recovery; and that now there can be no Mercy in store for them. They
have sinned, it may be, against former Mercies and Means, and, perhaps,
notoriously broke their former solemn Vows and Engagements made to God in a
serious Frame: and the very tho'ts of these things are ready to drive them into
utter Despair. And therefore when they have gone to ask Counsel of the
Ministers of Christ, or any other experienced Christians, they have frequently
made these or the like mournful Enquiries. Did God ever forgive such a vile
Transgressor as I have been? one who has so often, and for so long a time, been
daring the Vengeance of Heaven against me? Is it possible, that such as I am
should ever obtain Mercy from God? Can there be any Grace in store for me? etc.
Now to every such distressed Soul I can answer, with all Assurance, in the
Affirmative, and say, Yes; God has forgiven many a Transgressor* as great as
you have been: For such were Manassah, Mary Magdalen, and many more. And it is
possible you may obtain Mercy, at the hands of God, as well as they. Nay, it is
very probable there is Grace particularly in store for you And this I will
venture to say further for your Encouragement, That if you heartily bewail and
lament your Sins before the Lord, the greatness of your past Sins will be so
far from being a hindrance to a Pardon, that they will rather move the Lord
speedily to take pity on you, under your distressing Circumstances. For the
Grace of God can as easily triumph over the greatest, as over the least
Unworthiness: And he is as ready to forgive the greatest Transgressions, to the
truly penitent, as to pardon the least Iniquity. And therefore if you will but
improve the Liberty you may take at the Throne of Grace, and plead with David
in the Text, For thy names sake, O Lord, pardon mine Iniquity* for it is great;
you may be sure of a gracious Answer For God himself, who cannot deceive, has
promised, That if we confess and forsake our Sins, we shall find Mercy. Prove.
28.13. And to encourage you to lay hold on this, and such like Promises, he has
further said, in Isai 55 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him, and to God, for he will abundantly pardon.

And this leads me now,

2. To direct my self to the poor Condemned Criminals in this Assembly. And
what a word of Encouragement does this Subject afford to you in your present
most deplorable Condition. Alas! miserable Men! we heartily mourn your sad
State and Doom. For though your Transgressions have been many and great and your
Iniquities have found you out, and you are to be cut off this Day, from the
Land of the Living; the one for a cruel Murder; and the other for a vile
Burglary and Theft, which is now made a capital Crime, by the wholesome Laws of
the Land; yet our Bowels are moved with the tenderest Compassion for you: and
we heartily wish and pray for your Eternal Salvation. But I must confess it is
with Fear and Trembling what the Event may be. For when we consider the great
Advantages you have had, since your Trial and Condemnation, first, in the mercy
of the Government, in sparing you so long from Execution; and then, in the
unwearied pains which some of the faithful Ministers of Christ have taken with
you: In the first place, to lay before you the miserable State you are in, by
the Breach of the first Covenant between God and Man; and, in the next place,
to give you a true Gospel Account of the New Covenant way to Eternal Life by
Jesus Christ: And when we consider that after all this, you have (especially
one of you) too frequently given way to Intemperance, and in the Excess of
Drink and Passion have often vented a Rage and Madness, far unbecoming the
state of true Penitents. I say, when we consider these Things, we cannot but
have a great Jealousy least the Grace of God has been bestowed upon you in
vain. But, O wretched Men! I pray you would not misconstrue this Plainness: nor
look upon it as an Effect of Ill Will, or of an uncharitable Temper, or as if I
mention these things to drive you now at last into a Despair of the Mercy of
God. No, God knows it proceeds from a sense of Duty, and from a tender
Compassion for your precious and immortal Souls; if now in the last hour or two
of Life, you may be brought to a saving Repentance. And therefore, if we can
minister any Light and Direction to you, under your present Darkness; any Word
of true Support and Comfort to your sinking Spirits; or be any ways helpful to
you in your speedy Preparation for Death and Eternity: The Searcher of all
Hearts knows how ready we are, to do all we can for you, in these Respects. And
ag^^ably, if your miserable and distressing Circumstances have now at last been
a means to revive the Convictions of God's Spirit in you, and thereby to bring
you into a deep Concern for the Salvation of your perishing Souls (which is our
earnest Prayer to God for you) then, what you have heard at this Time must
bring a rich Cordial to your fainting Souls. For have your Sins been very many
and great? Jesus the Son of God is a great Savior, and able to save to the
uttermost all that come to God by him. Are they of a crimson and scarlet dye?
There is merit enough in the precious blood of Christ to cleanse you from the
Guilt and Pollution of them all. And if you are tempted to question his
Willingness to save such vile Sinners as you have been: If you have now a
broken and contrite Heart in you, I can assure you from the holy Scriptures,
that God now invites, entreats, and commands you to come unto him for eternal
Life and Salvation. And you may go to him, under all your Sin and Guilt, and
even make use of the greatness of your Sins, as an Argument to move his eternal
Compassions toward you For, behold, now is the accepted Time: behold, now is
the Day of Salvation: though alas! This is the very last of your Days of Grace,
and this the last public Call you are ever like to have to Repentance and
Salvation, before you die. Oh then, miserable Men, fly to a SAVIOR now, as to
your only Refuge; fly to him instantly: for, behold, ETERNITY, ETERNITY is at
the Door: and you must, before this Sun is set, enter into an awful Eternity:
And now is the only Time you are ever like to have to prepare for that
Eternity. Oh then, I say again, fly to the Almighty JESUS this moment. Cast
yourselves down at his merciful Feet: Smite upon your Breasts, and let each of
you cry out, in Agony of Soul, God be merciful to me a poor Sinner. Beg of God
the deepest Repentance for all your past Sins, and particularly for the Sins
for which you stand Condemned to die: Plead with him for a new Heart: Be
earnest with him for a saving Faith in Christ. And when you have done this,
then lift up your Eyes to Heaven, and you may behold the Almighty REDEEMER,
with the Arms of his Mercy open to receive you And you may arise and run into
them for Eternal Salvation.

And, in particular, as you are now going to meet the King of Terrors, in the
most formidable Appearance, Oh! beg speedy Preparation for Death, that you may
be able to meet it with a suitable Frame of Spirit: That, in your dying
Moments, you may give Glory to God, by a most penitent Confession of Sin; by
expressing a lively Faith in Christ; by a steadfast Hope of eternal Life; and by
a cheerful Resignation of your Spirits into the Hands of our glorious God and
Savior. And in this way, though the Death of the Body may be ignominious and
shameful, the Reproach of it will be done away in the Day of Christ's
Appearing, when every true Penitent shall appear with him in Glory. But, Oh!
miserable Men! I cannot take my leave of you, 'till I observe to you, That if
after all the Means and Pains that have been used with you, both in private and
public, you should die in a state of Impenitency, with a reigning Enmity in
your Hearts against the Blessed God, and with an unforgiving Spirit toward
Men; which God forbid: then all the solemn Applications that have been made to
you now, and at other seasons, since your Condemnation, will serve only to
aggravate your dreadful Doom, at the Great Day, and your Eternal Misery in the
World to come. But while you remain fit subjects for it, our Prayers shall be,
that all may minister to your Eternal Salvation. AMEN.

The End of the SERMON.
APPENDIX.
THE sorrowful occasion upon which the foregoing very pertinent and pathetical
sermon was preached, is told us in the title page. One of these criminals,
namely, Matthew Cushing, was an unhappy youth, who had not seen twenty two
years in the world. I suppose there has not at any time been a criminal amongst
us more talked of, and whose circumstances have so rung through the town and
country. Many of the reports that have gone abroad, I am very sure are false
and groundless; for this reason, as well as to gratify the desires of some
serious persons, who would willingly know what effect all the means of grace
used with him had upon him, I shall endeavor to give a plain and faithful
account of his behavior after his condemnation, and at the time of his
execution, so far as it came under my knowledge and observation: And it may be,
the honor of God, and good of others may be something served by it.

He was born at Limerick in Ireland, of Roman catholic parents. What
impressions of religion he had received were in their way; but these were very
small, and next to none. He left his parents when he was about sixteen years of
age, but was never so happy as to fall in the way of religious instruction, or
a good example. And therefore when I first saw him after his condemnation, I
found him as ignorant as you can well suppose a rational creature to be, who
had ever lived in those countries that are called christian. But as he greatly
needed instruction, so he seemed to me to have a good natural capacity for it,
and to be very desirous of it. He entreated me to see him as often as I could,
and that it might be daily if I could spare him the time; and always received
my visits to him with all thankfulness. He likewise desired to hear the word of
God in public, which was readily granted him: And so he constantly attended the
Lecture on Thursdays, and on Lords-days where he chose for himself.

By the blessing of God on these means used with him, he in a little time
attained to some good degree of knowledge in the things of God and salvation;
though he was not able to read, which was a great hindrance to his progress in
knowledge, and made the labor of those that instructed him much the harder.
And when he thus became a little better instructed, he would speak of his
unhappiness in the want of a good education; and say of himself, that in time
past he knew little more than a bruit. No wonder then he was, (to use the
Psalmist's expressions) as a horse, or a mule, which has no understanding;
whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle. I mention this to excite
parents very carefully to bring up their children in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord, as one powerful means of restraint when they grow up: And to let
our catechized instructed youth know, that by their sinning against such a
religious education as they have been favored with, their sins become more
heinous in the sight of God, than the sins of others, such as he was.

The arrows of conviction also seemed at times to stick in him. He used
frequently to confess his sins, and bewail himself on the account of them with
crying and tears; speaking of himself as an overgrown sinner, for whom he was
afraid there was no mercy; and lamenting not only the sinfulness of his life,
but of his heart and nature as the source and spring from which all proceeded:
And was diverse times overheard in his prison chamber, in the night time
especially, earnestly pleading with God in prayer.

But at other times his behavior was with much levity and unconcernedness The
vain and inconsiderate people that resorted to the prison yard, and were almost
continually calling to and talking with him, were a great hurt and snare to
him; so that he was once or twice sadly overcome with strong drink; and being
of a very quick and hasty natural temper, he once and again fell into violent
transports of passion, wherein the language of hell which he had so used
himself to before, was uttered by him in a most shocking manner, and under a
kind of satanic impression.

By and by again he would bewail himself, and seemed astonished at the
prodigious wickedness of his own heart, the enmity, (or venom, as his own word
was) which he found there against God and holiness. After one such fit I
remember he said to me, He had carried himself so as to make every body hate
him, and he did not wonder at it, for he now hated himself more than others
could hate him. And added, That he now saw if it were possible for him to go to
heaven with such a nature as his, not changed and renewed, heaven would be no
heaven to him, but a place of uneasiness and misery rather.

Thus there were frequent struggles between strong convictions and raging
corruptions, till on the very day before his execution he fell into as bad a
frame is he had been in at all, wherein his tongue was as it were set on fire
of hell. This gave the greatest concern and anxiety of mind to those whom had
been laboring for his conversion, and using the means of salvation with him,
in hopes he might be found among the elect of God; and made them ready to give
up all hope concerning him, and begin to fear whether he would not even die
raging and cursing, or lay violent hands on himself before hand, as I know he
had been tempted to do.

But by degrees the transport went off, so that in the beginning of the
evening, he again appeared to be in a most humble, broken, penitent frame. A
Minister of the Town The Rev. Mr. Byles.
who now went in to see him, tells me, He never saw a man in so perfect an
agony. O Sir, said he to the Minister upon his going in, Can you think there
are any hopes of me? The Minister replied, I saw you in so good a frame
yesterday, that I began to conceive good hopes concerning you. He answered, --
But I have this day been cursing and swearing again! -- Oh! was there ever such
a wicked heart as mine? -- I see I cannot trust to my own resolutions! -- Oh! if
I should be in such a frame to morrow when I am to die! And the though it and fear
of this seemed greatly to distress him, and make him cry to God for help.

He now desired some body might read to him some suitable portions of the holy
scriptures, which was done till late at night: and the remainder of the night,
a great part of it at least, he spent* as those that watched at the place have
told me, in earnest prayer to God.

And now the awful and decisive day is come on, on which he appeared composed
and prayerful, and expressed a humble resignation to the will of heaven in his
death; declaring he mattere'd not what his body* suffered here, if it might be
well with his soul hereafter.

As he went to the place of execution, he was full of earnest short addresses
to heaven, such as these; Lord, be merciful to me a Sinner! -- I am an
overgrown Sinner! Lord GOD! search me! -- O turn my soul over and over! [By
which he meant that the work of grace in him might be a perfect and through
work] Lord, let my death be sanctified to all these people, that they may all,
every one of them take warning by me! He now spoke of his late sins, as the
most aggravated sins of his life, and lying most heavy upon him.

Being come to the gate at the end of the town, he looked up upon it and cried,
Lord! let the gate of heaven now be open to receive me, as this gate is open to
me to go through!

Being arrived at the place of execution, though he in some circumstances showed
such presence of mind as some were ready to wonder at, yet nothing I think that
could justly be called stupidity or hardness. He declared he was not afraid of
the death he was to suffer, only of appearing before his judge. With a loud
voice he warned the spectators of those sins and vices, which had filled up his
short life, and ripened him for the judgments of God. And when the public
prayer made on the occasion was over, to which he composedly attended, then he
fell into an agony, and in his agony he prayed; and never did I hear such
piercing cries go up to heaven, at which many hundreds were dissolved into
tears. With unutterable anguish he sent up such petitions as these, O Lord God,
be merciful to me a poor sinner! O Lord, save a perishing sinner, that is
perishing before God and man! Let me not perish in this world and in the other
too! And now he called to the spectators, O pray for me, for I an't able to
pray for my self! In these petitions he made Christ his plea and argument,
saying, Lord, save me through the means of thy Son Jesus Christ! His blood is
sufficient! His blood is sufficient! He came to save the chief of sinners. O
Lord God, draw me to thy Son Jesus Christ! -- So when the sorrows of death
compassed him, and the pains of hell gat hold upon him, and he found trouble
and sorrow, he called upon the name of the Lord, O Lord, I beseech thee to
deliver my soul. --

And thus I have given a plain narrative of matter of fact. I pronounce nothing
at all upon it. It becomes us to leave him in the hands of a sovereign,
righteous, and merciful God, whose judgment, and not ours, has the disposal of
him. There is no opportunity further to try the sincerity of his repentance.
Whether the strong man armed, who strove so violently to keep possession of the
house, was in the last conflict overcome and turned out, and the spirit of God
became triumphantly victorious, and rescued the prey from the mighty, we must
not know till the great day of the manifestation of all things.

If the case should be as bad as any may fear, and there was not after all a
true work of grace wro't in this miserable man, we may learn this from it, That
conversion, wherever it is wro't, is the work of free, sovereign, almighty
grace. It is not in the power of men or means to convert a sinner; nor is it in
the power of a sinner to convert himself. The fear of death and hell, in the
near views of them, will not work a saving sanctifying change in the soul. A
sinner may see his sins, and have great concern for them, and yet not hate them
so as to turn from them. He may see his duty, and yet not have a heart to do
it. He may see his danger, and yet run upon it. He may see the day of death and
judgment near; and yet not do any thing to purpose in the great business of his
salvation. -- Where then is that free will, and those powers of nature which
some so earnestly plead for? Therefore, O unconverted sinner, see and
acknowledge, God of his free grace must work all your works in you and for you.
If you have any tho'ts of turning to him, beg of him not to leave you to your
self. Be infinitely afraid of doing any thing to provoke him to take his holy
Spirit from you. Let Ephraim's prayer in the day of his conviction be yours,
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God.

To have done; I am hot without hopes God intends good to some souls by means
of this providence. I have observed in times past, some or other have been
awakened by the public discourses on such solemn occasions. And if what a
minister intends more particularly for the benefit of one, is set home by the
Spirit of God on another, free grace will still be glorified, and a soul saved.
We must leave it to God to show mercy to whom he will show mercy; and none may
find fault with his will. For my tho'ts are not your tho'ts, neither are your
ways my ways, says the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so
are my ways higher than your ways, and my thot's than your tho'ts.

Boston, October. 25. 1734. W. C.

FINIS.

