New England's LAMENTATIONS Under these Three Heads, The Decay of the Power of
Godliness; The Danger of Arminian Principles; The Declining State of our
Church Order, Government and Discipline.
With the Means of these Declensions, AND THE Methods of our Recovery.

By the Reverend Mr. JOHN WHITE, M. A. And Pastor of the first Church in
Gloucester.

To which are added, Reasons for Adhering to our PLATFORM, AND Answers to some
Objections against Ruling Elders, By another Hand.

As also, A Vindication of the Divine Authority of Ruling Elders, By A
Provincial Assembly of Presbyterian Ministers at London, in 1649.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by T. Fleet, at the Sign of the Heart and Crown in
Cornhill. 1734.

New England's LAMENTAITONS, Under these Three Heads, The Decay of the Power of
Godliness; The Danger of Arminian Principles; The Declining State of our
Church Order, Government and Discipline.
With the Means of these Declensions, AND THE Methods of our Recovery.

By the Reverend Mr. JOHN WHITE, M. A. Pastor of the first Church in Gloucester.

Recommended by several Ministers of Boston.

Rev. II. 4, 5. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against Thee, because thou have
left thy first Love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do the first Works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will
remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by T. Fleet, at the Heart and Crown, in Cornhill.
1734.

An Epistle RECOMMENDATORY.
HAVING been obliged with the Perusal of the following Sheets, and desired to
signify how far we approve them, We do freely declare our Concurrence with the
Reverend Author in the main Scope and End of the Work, and heartily recommend
it to those for whom it is designed, for their serious Consideration, and
Acceptance in the Lord.

The Performance discovers Solidity of Judgment, and a deep Seriousness of
Spirit, without Ostentation of Learning; and as the Author professes a high and
deserved Affection to these Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ, so we humbly
think he judges rightly of those Things which have at present a gloomy Aspect
upon their. Welfare and Prosperity, and points out several excellent Methods to
be taken to recover and preserve their Strength and Glory.

We believe what he here offers to the Public, is the Fruit of much Though It and
Prayer, and hope it may prove a seasonable Piece of Service to the Churches,
and be, by the Blessing of God, instrumental to stablish them in the Faith and
Order of the Gospel as they have been taught, and helpful to revive the Power
of Godliness in them, which is so sadly decayed.

We pray God to continue to this His Servant, Strength and Ability to do much
Service for Christ and his Church, and to crown his faithful Labors with
abundant Success; and especially to give him the peculiar Joy to see his own
Flock standing fast in the Lord, and flourishing in all those Fruits of
Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ to the Praise and Glory of God!

Peter Thacher, Joseph Sewall, Thomas Prince, John Webb, William Cooper, Thomas
Foxcroft.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To the Congregational Churches of Christ in New England.
Much Honored, Reverend, and dearly beloved in our LORD:
IN Who am one of the least and meanest of the Servants of Him, who is the
Political as well as Mystical Head of these holy Churches, have adventured (in
the following Essay) to endeavor the establishing your Faith and Order. And
although it may be thought a bold Attempt, and to Savor of a haughty Spirit, for
so obscure a Person to meddle with Things so far above me; I have this to say
by way of Apology, That had I a Heart no bigger than a Hen's ( who will be as
bold as a Lion in defense of her Chickens, when in apparent Danger) it is
enough to engage me, (through Strength of Affection to these Churches, and to my
own and others of the rising Generation) to make a vigorous Essay, for the
Faith and Order of these Churches of Christ, at a Time when there is danger of
a defection from both. But I may farther say, and I would speak it in all
Humility and Thankfulness, that I have hereto been emboldned and encouraged, as
well as herein assisted by the God of all Grace and holy Influences. And ye
Mourners in Our Zion, who are apt to despond, and be dispirited, raise up your
dejected Heads, and be of good Cheer, for there are more of the Reverend
Pastors of these Churches, hearty Friends to our Constitution, than you are
aware of. These Churches, as to the Faith and Order of the Gospel, are whole at
Heart. For the very Reverend Pastors, as well as the very Honorable Churches
at Boston, have in a late Council at Salem, ( at which Council there were no
less than Seven Churches belonging to that Town) made full Proof of their being
Friends to the Congregational Government. And there is no Reason to doubt, but
in the Country as well as in the City, there will appear a great Number of good
Friends to You, and your Faith and Order. Great Reason then have we to hope for
a more healthy and athletick Church State. If ye, O Holy Churches, will awake,
arise, and assert your Powers, and Privileges, in fully supplying your selves
with Officers according to Christ's Appointment; and do your Parts as to the
maintaining of Strict Discipline in the Churches, and manage Communion one
Church with another, according to the Rules in Our Platform: I am persuaded the
Reverend Pastors will be ready to encourage your Hearts, and strengthen your
Hands therein. For I trust their Eyes are open to see, that either we must
return fully to our Constitution, or suffer an utter Dissolution. And if any
thing I have now written, or have formerly done, may in any measure serve to
restore Our Churches to a healthy State; I shall be willing to bear all the
Invectives, hard Speeches, and rash unreasonable Censures, that the Enemies of
Our Faith or Order, can utter against me. I shall ask leave to offer some
Things that may serve to direct our Conduct, in such a Day of Temptation as
this is; wherein I have reference to Matters of Lamentation, an Secular and
Civil Accounts, as well as Ecclesiastical.

1. We shall do well to keep a strict Watch over our own Hearts, and that with
all diligence, as Prove. 4. 23. Let us not admit one disloyal Thought into Our
Hearts. Let us heartily Love, and Pray for, our Good and Lawful King, and all
the Royal Family: Remembering that our Sovereign, as well as the whole
Creation, is that, and only that, to us, which God is pleased to make them. Let
this serve to humble and quiet us, under our perplexed unhappy Circumstances;
that none of these Evils come unto us, without the Providence of God.

2. Let us Watch over one another, as we have solemnly promised in our Church
Covenant. I fear in all Our Churches there is a great defect, in keeping this
branch of the Covenant. How rare a thing is it, for Christians with a Spirit of
Meekness, to search out the Truth of those Scandalous Reports, ( which in a way
of Defamation, are handed from one to another, concerning the Members ( and
perhaps the Ministers) of Christ) in a way of Private, and Personal
Conferences, in order to their Vindication, if found Innocent, or Conviction,
and Reformation, if found Guilty. How uncharitable a thing is it for Christians
to defame their Fellow Members? and perhaps with an Air of Complacency. Such
are ill and foul Birds; they herein, are not as harmless as Doves. That Rule of
Christ is shamefully neglected by Professors; Mat. 18. 15. If thy Brother
trespass against thee, go and tell him his Fault between thee and him alone,
etc. And by reason of the neglect of this first Step of Discipline, there is a
great neglect of Government in the Church.

3. Let every one continue in his particular Calling: as, 1 Cor. 7. 20. I am
apt to fear, many among us, make too bold with that Rule. It is observable that
many have greatly been frowned upon by God, who have deserted their Calling for
another, perhaps, only more honorable, or Profitable. Every Christian should
be willing to be where God would have him be; to do what God would have him do;
and to suffer what God would have him suffer. On the Account of the present
scarcity of Money, many are under strong Temptations to leave their Trades: I
apprehend this will make bad worse. It will be but a leaping out of the
Drying Pan into the Fire. Keep to Duty, and leave the Event to God.

4thly. and lastly, Have a Care under your present Straights and Difficulties
that you don't Oppress one another. Prove. 28. 3. A Poor Man that oppresses the
Poor, is like a sweeping Rain, which leaves no Food. It is to be feared that
there is much Oppression in the Land. Our present Circumstances require that we
guard against it. We should account nothing worth getting in an unlawful way.
That which is honestly got, will spend well, but that which is gotten by
Oppression, brings a secret Blast and Curse with it.

Accept (I pray) this honest Offer for your Service, from a hearty lover of his
Country, and Friend to these Churches, both in their Faith and Order.

John White.

New-England's LAMENTATIONS, etc
SUCH as have at Heart the true Interests of New England, and especially of the
Churches therein, must needs be affected with the present Situation of the
Affairs thereof; and mourn in secret Places before the Lord. I shall endeavor,
depending upon the gracious Guidance and Influence of the Holy Spirit, to
exhibit,

1. The chief Matters of Lamentation.

2. The Means which have brought us into these lamentable Circumstances.

3. The Methods to be taken for our Relief.

As to the FIRST, I shall rank them under the three following Heads.

The Matter of our Lamentation is,

1. That there is so little of the Power of Godliness, with the Form.

We profess the Faith and Order of the Gospel; but does there want Proof as to
the Decay of the Life of Religion, or the Power of Godliness? No; this is more
than sufficiently proved by the Contempt cast upon Gospel Grace, Ministry, and
Ordinances. By the Unchristian Contentions in Towns, Churches, and Families, by
notorious Excesses in lawful Liberties, etc.

And that this is matter of Lamentation appears by what follows,

1. In a Professing Country such as are destitute of the Power of Godliness,
are no better than Hypocrites.

2. Such as are short of the Power of Godliness, have never experienced the
saving Efficacy of Gospel Administrations and Ordinances. The Gospel not being
a Savor of Life unto Life to them, is like to be a Savor of Death unto Death.

3. Such as have lived all their Days under Gospel Means, and after all die
destitute of Grace and the Power of Godliness; these go to Hell when they Die,
yea to the hottest place in Hell.

As to the MEANS leading to this Decay of the Power of Godliness, they may be
as follow.

(1) An ill treatment of the Spirit of Grace and Holiness.

Under this Head, consider a few Things.

(1) The planting of Grace in the Heart of a convinced and humbled Sinner, as
well as the actuating of it in the Heart of a Saint, is by the Agency and
Influence of the Holy Spirit; Application-Work being his proper Province. Tit.
3. 5. And renewing of the Holy Ghost.

(2) Provocations given to the Holy Ghost, tend to his withholding these
powerful Actings, and withdrawing these gracious Influences. Psalm. 81. 11, 12.
But my People would not hearken to my Voice, and Israel would none of me. So I
gave them up to their own hearts Lusts, and they walked in their own Counsels.

(3) No wonder then, that when a professing People do ill treat, grieve, vex
and resist the Holy Ghost, they fall under decays as to the Power of Godliness.
It Is grievous and vexatious to, yea a resisting of the Holy Spirit, when God's
Professing People violate the Covenant in any of its Branches; when they
neglect or Superficially perform the Duties of the Closet and Family. And when
they watch not over their Fellow Members in Love. When they profane the holy
Sabbath, stifle Convictions, and act contrary to their pious Resolutions, vow
and don't pay. And while they are cold and careless as to the Concerns of their
Souls, and Eternity; they are overheated, and deeply engaged in their
Affections, toward the Profits, Pleasures, and Preferments of the World: As
also when the Gifts and Graces of the Holy Spirit are slighted and despised,
and Men think it not worth while to take Pains in the use of proper Means to
obtain these: Don't mourn under the want of them: Nor hunger and thirst after
them: when in the mean Time they rise early, fit up late, and work till they
are weary and spent from Day to Day, to get the World. This their Way is their
Folly, and will soon bring Godliness as to the Power of it, under sad Decays.

2. An ungrateful neglect and contempt of the Holy Scriptures, and especially
the precious Promises thereof, tends to the Decay of Godliness in its Power.
Scripture Truths are the principal Means (by Divine Appointment) of the
Conversion of Sinners, as well as of the Confirmation of Believers. John, 17.
17. Sanctify them by thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. So Psalm. 19. 8. The Law of
the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul. The Precepts of the Word are the
Rules of a holy Life: And the Promises of the Word are the most potent
Arguments for, Motives and Encouragments to a holy Life. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having
therefore these Promises, (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all
Filthiness, of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of the
Lord. Faith laying hold on the Sufficiency and Faithfulness of God, as engaged
in the Promises, will fetch into the Soul, more and more of the Fullness of
Christ. For of his Fullness we receive, and Grace for Grace. John 1. 16.

3. Another Occasion of the decay of Godliness in the Power of it, is the
neglect or profane Observance of Gospel Ordinances. These are the Wells of
Salvation: And such as would have the Waters of Grace and Salvation, must
repair to, and draw out of these Wells, and that with Joy. Isa. 12. 3. When
Fruit, Trees, Grass, or Grain, (as in a Time of great Drought) want Moisture at
their Roots, they wither and fall under decay; so it is with Professors when
the Dews and Rains of the Holy Spirit are withheld. Such as would flourish in
Grace and Godliness, must wait under the Ordinances, for the conveyance thereof
from the Fountain to the Cistern through these Pipes. Isa. 40. last. They that
wait on the Lord, shall renew their Strength, etc. Gospel Ordinances, and
especially the Supper of the Lord, are shamefully neglected by multitudes,
notwithstanding the plain and positive Command of our dying Savior, Saying,
This do in Remembrance of me. Others ('it is much to be feared) do venture
without due Preparation, without Examination, and with an unreconcilable
Spirit: yea with reigning Malice, and secret Purposes of revenging Injuries,
real or supposed, as they shall have Opportunity. The special Ordinances
administered, as well as the Word preached, are a Sovour of Death unto Death, to
the unqualified and unprepared, as they are a Savor of Life unto Life, to the
penitent Believer. This should not affright Men from the Ordinances of the
Gospel; but quicken them to and in the Work of Preparation, and oblige to
engage therein, in the holy fear of God. Psalm. 89. 7. God is greatly to be
feared in the Assembly of his Saints: and to be had in Reverence of all them
that are about Him.

4. Inobservance of God's Footsteps in the Course of his common Providence,
occasions the Decay of the Power of Godliness. Christians may have sweet
Communion with God in his Providence, as well as in his Ordinances. There are
therein such evident Manifestations of God's Dominion, Wisdom, Power, Holiness,
Justice, Kindness and Faithfulness, as tends to draw forth holy Fear, Faith,
Love, Hope, Submission, and Patience, fervent Prayer, and grateful Praises.
Psalm. 107. 43. Whosoever is Wife, and will observe those Things, even they shall
understand the Loving kindness of the Lord. But Infidelity, and Inobservance
relating to Divine Providence, renders Persons as the Heath in the Desert; as,
Jer. 17. 6. And shall not see when Good comes.

5. Decays as to the Power of Godliness are brought on a Professing People, by
their restraining Prayer before God; as the Phrase is, Job 15. 4. Prayer is to
accompany the Word and Sacraments. The Promises are to be pleaded by Prayer.
There is all the Grace, Mercy and Peace we want, in the Covenant, and in the
great and precious Promises thereof: But we must wait upon God by fervent and
effectual Prayer, for the Communication of these to us, as our Case calls for.
And we have Leave to come with an holy Boldness to the Throne of Grace, and may
ask for Mercy, and find Help in every Time of Need. Such Christians must needs
be under sad Decays, who restrain Prayer. We must pray with all Prayer in the
Spirit: And when we know not how to order our Speech before God in Prayer, by
reason of Darkness, the Spirit of Supplication will help our Infirmities. It Is
a sad Sign, as well as Cause of the Decay of Piety, when Christians seldom
Pray, or when they don't Pray in Prayer: when they don't offer up strong Cries
and Tears: when they don't pray with Faith and Fervency. Such are the Prayers
which prevail, and obtain the Blessing.

6. and lastly, When a professing People cast off Fear, it is a sad Occasion of
the decay of Godliness in the Power of it; of which holy Job was accused, but
falsely in the 15. Chap. v. 4. Such as perfect Holiness, it is in the Fear of
God. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Such as make Progress in Holiness, they are careful to
cleanse themselves from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit. Fear has a powerful
Influence to restrain corrupt Affections and Passions; and preserve from
Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit. Job. 41. 25. When he raises up himself, the
mighty are afraid: by reason of breakings they purify themselves. The Fear of
the Lord is clean, Psalm. 19. 9. The stout-hearted Jailer could not forbear
trembling at the Earthquake, and was deeply concerned, and sorely distressed
about the State of his Soul, Acts, 16. 30. crying out to Paul and Silas, what
shall I do to be saved? And terrifying Fear and Trembling did take hold of, and
possess the Hearts of many stout-hearted Sinners, who were far from
Righteousness, in the Time of the late Earthquakes: especially the first Night.
Their Fear brought them to their Knees. How were the Places of public Worship
thronged! How many gave themselves to God, and his People by Covenant! Many
were added to our Churches: all which evidence the Efficacy of Fear. Multitudes
were apprehensive that the Day of Judgment was come. But alas! how sadly is
that Scripture verified by Multitudes in the Land, Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36. Turn
to the Place, Reader, and see if it be not thy Case. Through the Coworking of the
Holy Spirit, there was a great and saving Change wrought in Hundreds; yea
according to a Judgment of Charity, on Thousands in the Land. Hope, and Fear,
are the special Instruments the Holy Spirit uses in bringing Souls to God. What
greater Good can be hoped for than Heaven? What greater Evil can be feared than
Hell? Hope is heartned up by the Consideration of the merciful Nature of God,
his gracious Purposes, Promises, and Performances. And Fear is awakened by the
Belief of God's Justice, Holiness and Power. It was the Psalmist's Prayer,
Psalm. 9. 20. Put them in Fear, O Lord, that the Nations may know that they are
Men: That they are mortal, and accountable Creatures; that have precious and
immortal Souls, capable of eternal Happiness in Heaven, and liable to eternal
Misery in Hell. To have Fear awakened is of use for the worst of Men, to make
them fly from the Wrath which pursues them. For Evil of Punishment pursues
Sinners, and will certainly overtake them, if they don't speedily hide
themselves under the Shadow of Christ's Wing. And Fear is of use to the best of
Men, to breed Circumspection, and Caution. Christ taught his Disciples to Fear
Him who is able to destroy both Soul and body in Hell, and not Man, who kills
the body only. Presumption and carnal Security arise from our putting far from
us the evil Day. And the bringing it near is wont to beget the greatest
Solicitude what to do to be saved.

And for this end, I shall offer my Opinion, concerning the most amazing Event
in the whole Course of Providence, from the Beginning to the End of the World.
viz. the CONFLAGRATION, or Destruction of the Earth, that now is by Fire,
predicted most plainly, 2 Pet. 3. which being realized will excite Sinners and
Saints. Saints, in the 11. v. Seeing then that all these Things shall be
dissolved, what manner of Persons ought we to be, in all holy Conversation and
Godliness. Sinners, v. 14. Seeing that we look for such Things, be diligint,
that ye may be found of him in Peace.

As to the Season of this dreadful Event, as it has been generally received and
declared, viz. immediately after the final Judgment, I humbly dissent, and
shall offer some Arguments against it; as,

1. If it be at this Season, when Saints are safely housed in Heaven, and
Sinners closely imprisoned in Hell; I cannot see how this Event should be so
terrible, and amazing, or how the Apostle Peter could from this Consideration
fetch forcible and persuasive Arguments, for Reconciliation to God, and
excelling Holiness, as in the forecited Texts. What is there so terrifying in
setting an old House on fire, when the Inhabitants are far enough off, and out
of all Danger.?

2. If this will be the Season, none will by the Conflagration loose their
natural Life. For there is no natural Death, nor Resurrection from the dead
after the Final Judgment. But I will advance several Arguments to prove that
Millions of Lives will be lost at the Conflagration.

1. The World will be destroyed by Fire, in the same Sense that it was by
Water, 2 Pet. 3. 6, 7. Whereby the World that then was, being overflowed with
Water, perished: But the Heavens and the Earth which are now, by the same Word
are kept in Store, reserved unto Fire, against the Day of Judgment, and
Perdition of Ungodly Men. That is against that Day, when the Holy God shall
inflict a Punishment upon all ungodly Men, which shall be to their Perdition.
We read, 2 Pet. 2. 5. Bringing in the Flood upon the World of the Ungodly. The
ungodly World perished by Water; so they will by Fire. An Emblem thereof we had
in the Destruction of Sodom.

2. The Scripture speaks expressly to this Truth: as, Mal. 4. 1. For behold the
Day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the Proud, yea, and all that do
wickedly shall be stubble, and the Day that comes shall burn them up, says
the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither Root nor Branch. And they
shall be burnt to Ashes, v. 3. The Means of their Perdition, shall be the
Heavens and Earth all on a light Fire, Psalm. 50. 3, 4. Of this most terrible
Day speaks the Prophet Daniel, 12. Chap. 1. 6.

I apprehend the Season of this most awful Punishment will be, when Antichrist
will receive its deadly Wound, its utter overthrow, and ruin; and before the
happy State of the Church. As sure as Antichrist had its Rise, so sure will it
have its Ruin. It shall be gradually consumed, and then at length utterly
destroyed. Dan. 7. 26. 2 These. 2. 8. Some of the Thessalonians were troubled,
under Apprehensions that Christ's coming was very near, just at the Door, and
was what they had reason to expect every Day. The Apostle undeceives them in
the following Words; and tells them, that Antichrist must first have his Rise
and Reign, and then CHRIST will destroy him by the Brightness of his coming.
And although it is God's pleasure to secreet the particular Hour and Day of his
coming, that his Church may be kept in a wakeful, watchful Posture, might shake
off Security and Sloth, and be painful and prayerful, left Christ at his coming
should find them in a sensual Frame, and idle; Luke 21. 32. Yet there are some
Signs laid down in Mat. 24. and elsewhere, of his coming, and some Light given
us to discern the advances of this great and terrible Day of the Lord. For the
Space between the Rise and Ruin of Antichrist, is allowed by all to be Twelve
Hundred and Sixty Years. Sometimes expressed more obscurely by Time, Times, and
a half Time; as Dan. 7. 25. That is, Three Years and a half. Sometimes by Forty
two Months. Sometimes by 1260 Days. As, Rev. 11. 2. 3. Prophetical Days. i. e.
Years. Now if we can find out the Time when Antichrist Began, we may find out
his End. We find in 2. These. who it was that let, or hindered the Rise of the
Man of Sin; viz. the Romans Emperors. Therefore they can let no longer than
they reign. And as the Sagacious Mr. Joseph Mede observes, Augustulus the last
Roman Emperor, was deposed in the Year of our Lord 476: add hereto, 1260, and
the Sum Total is 1736. God has frowned upon the over curious Enquirers into
these secret Things, by disappointing them; and so he may upon Mr. Mede.
However if he err, he will not err alone; for many Divines fall in with him in
this Opinion. All that I shall add is, the Expiration of the 1260 Years, viz.
from the Rise, to the utter Ruin of Antichrist, must needs be near run out. And
it seems very probable that the Time of the Ruin of Antichrist, will be the
Season of the Destruction of the World that now is, by Fire. 2. These. 1. 8. 2
These. 2. 8. Immediately before this Day, all things will be as they were for
many Generations past. So it was in Sodom: They had a fair Morning; the Sun
arose and shone upon the Earth; nevertheless it was a dreadful Day to the
Sodomites. Christ will come as a Thief. And when they say Peace and Safety, (
in a way of self flattery) then sudden Destruction shall come upon them, as
Travel upon a Woman with Child, and they shall not escape. It Is probable that
this dismal Dispensation will preceed the happy State of the Church. For we
read, 2 Pet. 3. 13. Nevertheless we, according to his Promise, look for new
Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. Which Promise I
apprehend to be the same with the Promises in the Old Testament, especially in
Isaiah, concerning the abounding Light and Knowledge, Grace and Peace,
Prosperity and Safety of the Church of Christ on Earth; as, Isa. 11. 6. to the
end. So Isa. 65th. from the 17 v. to the end. So Isa. 66. 22, 23.

O then! let the secure World, drowned in sensual Pleasures, and sunk into a
deep Sleep of carnal Security; that flatter themselves by saying, The evil Day
is afar off; awake out of Sleep: And as you are hastening unto the coming of
the day of God; O! look out sharp for this dreadful Day, wherein the Heavens
being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with servent
Heat: the Earth also and the Works therein shall be burnt up. Give your selves
no rest till you are found of God in Peace. O! what manner of Persons ought we
to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness? Such as are found in their Sins
on that Day, will cry to the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them, and hide
them from the Wrath of the lamb: For the Day of his Wrath is come. As, Rev. 6.
The Generality of the Professing World will not take warning, as the Old World
did not, Luke 17. 26, 27, 28. Luke 21. 35, 36. For as a Snare shall it come on
all them that dwell on the face of the whole Earth. Watch ye therefore, and
pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man. The Old World had
Warning an Hundred and twenty Years before the Flood came, and even seven Days
before the Flood; but they took no Notice of the one or others, and are said
not to know of it, Mat. 24. 38, 39. For as in the Days that were before the
Flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in Marriage, until
the Day that Noah entered into the Ark, and knew not until the Flood came and
took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be. Some will be
heaping up Treasure for the last Days; as James 5. 3. to be burnt up: Others
will burn in inordinate and unnatural Lusts, till the Flame catch hold of them,
as in Sodom. Some of you may know something of the Terrors of that Day, by your
Horrors on that Night, when you felt the Shakes, and heard the Roars of the
Earthquakes. But you will find a vast Difference between the mere seeming
Appearance and the certain Reality of Christ's coming.

But what will become of the Godly in this dreadful Day? I answer in the Words
of the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 2. 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of
Temptation. He saved Noah, v. 5. and delivered just Lot. v. 7. He saved the
pious and prayerful, when he destroyed Jerusalem. By the Wonder-working
Providence of God, they had Liberty to go out of the Gates of Jerusalem, and by
the same Divine Hand were guided to Pella, and there preserved. And in this
Day, God will gather his Saints together, as Psalm. 50. 4. He will make up his
Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts. (That is,
they that feared the Lord, v. 16.) In that Day when I make up my Jewels; and I
will spare them as a Man spares his Son that serves him. There is a gracious
Promise made by God to his People, Dan. 12. 1. And at that Time thy People
shall be delivered. And as to the Manner of God's manifesting his Sufficiency,
Faithfulness and Love to his People, it appears to be by taking them up to
himself in the Air; as, 1 These. 4. 16. And at their Return they shall see with
Hearts full of Wonder and Gratitude, the Difference made by God between the
Righteous and the Wicked, as Mal. 3. 18. and shall tread on the Ashes of the
wicked, as Mal. 4. 3. Wherefore comfort one another with these Words, 1 These.
4. 18.

Indeed Sinners in Sion may well be afraid, and Trembling take hold of
Hypocrites, when God shall arise to judge the World; when the Earth shall
tremble and totter; when the Air shall be filled with Flame and amazing
Thunder; when the Frame of Nature shall be dissolved. And are there not Signs
of the near Approach of this great and terrible Day, both in the Kingdom of
Nature, and in the Kingdom of Grace?

1. In the Kingdom of Nature. Have there not been Earthquakes in diverse Places?
Have they not been multiplied beyond what any former Age has experienced? And
although in our Land we have been thereby (through the tender Mercy of a gracious
long-suffering God) more scared than hurt, yet other Places have been
dreadfully dissolated thereby. Again, have there not been unusual Lightnings,
so that the Heavens seemed to be in a Blaze? Has there not been unusual
Darkness at Times by Day, and at other Times surprising Lights by Night?
according to what is written, Luke 21. 11. And great Earthquakes shall be in
diverse Places, and Famines, and Pestilences, and fearful Sights and great Signs
shall there be from Heaven.

2. In the Kingdom of Grace. Is there not abundance of Security and Sensuality
in the visible Church? And don't the Wise, as well as the foolish Virgins begin
to slumber and sleep? And at what a low Ebb is Religion in the Protestant and
purest Churches? How unaccountable and amazing is it, that a Nation privileged
above any Nation under Heaven, (the Jewish Nation excepted) by being early
converted to the Christian Faith, and early reformed from Antichristian Errors;
and ever since singularly defended, and blessed by uncommon Measures of Gospel
Light and Grace; That this Nation, thus distinguished, should become a Sink of
filthy Lewdness and abominable Uncleanness! Yea, that the Sins of Sodom should
be found in Her. And not only so, but Soul destructive Errors are propagated
and spreading there, as, Atheism, Deism, Socinianism, and Arminianism! All
which evidence the sad Decay of the Power of Godliness. Surely we may think
that Satan's Time is but short, seeing he is come down in such Wrath, Rev. 12.
12. It is high Time for such as would not perish with the ungodly World, to
have no farther Fellowship with them in their corrupt Principles and Practices,
Lest they partake of their Plagues. 2. Cor. 17. 18. Wherefore come out from
among them and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean Thing;
and I will receive you, and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my
Sons and Daughters, says the Lord God Almighty.

Obj. What then, would you have us neglect and lay aside worldly Business? Ans.
No, by no Means. My Desire is that you don't any longer neglect the important
Affairs of your own and your Children's Souls. Neglect not Christ and Grace.
Comparatively speaking, Labor not for the Meat which perishes, but for that
Meat which endures to Everlasting Life. John 6. 27. Seek first the Kingdom of
God, and the Righteousness thereof. Our Affections should be moderated toward
worldly Possessions, and the Gratifications of the Senses. 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30,
31. But this I say Brethren, the Time is short: it remains, that both they
that have Wives, be as though they had none; and they that weep as though they wept
not; and they that Rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy as
though they possessed not; and they that use this World as not abusing it: for
the Fashion of this World passes away. Phil. 4. 5. Let your Moderation be
known unto all men; the Lord is at hand. See the Want and the Worth of a
Savior; and above all things, labor to know and win him, that you may at that
great and terrible Day of the Lord, (which is very near) be found of him in
Peace, without Spot and Blamless.

I come to the Third Thing, viz. to show,

3. The METHODS to be taken to recover or mantain the Power of Godliness.

1. Magistrates would do well by good Laws to suppress such Customs and Usages
of the Nations which tend to Lasciviousness, and carnal Security; and also to
the utmost of their Power, to promote, establish and support Religion, and
encourage those that teach the good Knowledge of the Lord.

2. Ministers would do well in Compassion to a perishing World, to use utmost
Care, Diligence and Zeal in plucking Sinners out of the Burning. Jude 2. 23. Of
some have Compassion, making a Difference; of others save with Fear, plucking
them out of the Fire. Sound Doctrine is plainly and powerfully to be preached;
and strict Discipline is impartially to be practiced.

3. Christians would do well to associate for religious Purposes. Prayer is a
principal Exercise to maintain the Power of Godliness. Solitary, in the Closet;
private, in the Family; and less Public, in the private Assemblies of the
Saints. And doubtless, for every Christian to have an intimate Friend, to whom
he may speak most freely, and upon Occasion unbosome himself unto, it may be of
Singular Use to maintain vital Religion. Eccl. 4. 9. Two are better than one.
v. 10. For if they fall, the one will lift up his Fellow; But woe to him that is
alone when he falls. They that fear the Lord, should often speak together;
and declaring what God has done for their Souls, is a special Means to quicken,
encourage and comfort others. God observes and approves this Communication,
Mal. 3. 16.

4. Parents may do much in maintaining the Power of Godliness; by being
Exemplary themselves, and by giving a Religious Education to their Children,
and to all under their Care.

Such young Persons as are brought up ignorantly, and in a disorderly Way,
seldom prove well. Such as have an irreligious Education, commonly prove
Plagues to the Towns, Families and Churches to which they belong. Such as are
well taught, well governed, and the Subjects of many Prayers, are wont to prove
great Blessings in their Generation.

To conclude this head, Let us all lament the Decays of the Power of Godliness,
and the principal Cause of it; the sorrowful withdrawing of the Spirit of all
Grace. Let us welcome the inbreathings and outpowrings of the Holy Spirit. Let
us cherish his Motions. Let us plead the Promises. Let us worthily partake of
Ordinances, and wisely observe Providence, taking due Notice of the Footsteps
thereof. Let us watch, and be sober. Let us avoid all Occasions of, and the
first Motions to Sin. Let us resist the Devil: Fear always: and Finally, Let us
love and wait for the coming of the Lord. In a Word, let us submit to God's
Dominion; depend upon his Sufficiency; take our full Contentment in his
Goodness; and devote our selves unto his Service for ever.

II. It is a Matter of Lamentation, That some of Our Young Men, and such as are
devoted to and educated for, the Ministry of the Gospel, are under Prejudices
against, and fall off from, important Articles of the Faith of these Churches,
and cast a favorable Eye upon, embrace, and as far as they dare, argue for,
propagate, and preach the Arminian Scheme. There are many dark Clouds hang over
New England, and the Churches of Christ therein; but I apprehend this to be as
dark and dismal as any. I am bold to say, that the Arminian Scheme is another
Gospel, than what Christ and his Apostles did preach. And consequently the
Propagators and Preachers thereof fall under the Curse pronounced by the
Apostle Paul, when under the infallible Guidance and immediate Inspiration of
the Holy Ghost; as Gal. 1. 8. But though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any
other Gospel unto you, than that we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. And for the greater Solemnity, and to show of what Importance it was,
and that it might make a deep Impression on Men's Minds, he repeats it in the
9th. verse. And is it not a lamentable Thing for Men to bring themselves and
others under the fearful Curse of God? But I am apprised it is my Work to prove
the Arminian Scheme or Principles are another Gospel than what Christ or his
Apostles preached, or than is revealed to us in the Holy Scriptures.

For the Proof of the aforesaid Assertion, I shall advance the following
Arguments.

1. Arg. The Arminian Scheme vacates that Scriptural Distinction of the Will of
God into secret and Revealed. We find this Distinction in Deuteronomy. 29. 29. The
secret Things, viz. of God's Councils or Decrees belong to God; but those
things which are revealed, belong to us, and our Children for ever; that we may
do all the Words of this Law. The Decree of God (say the Arminians) is God's
Purpose to save such as believe, repent, and persevere therein to the End of
Life; and also to Damn all such as persist in their Impenitency, and Unbelief
unto Death. And is not this the revealed Will of God? as in Mark 16. 16. He
that believes shall be saved; and he that believes not shall be damned. There
is a real Distinction between the secret, and the revealed Will of God.

The revealed Will of God shows what should be, what is Matter of Duty; the
secret Will of God shows what shall be as to the Event. With respect to the
secret Will of God, some are Vessels of Mercy, some of Wrath; Some are chosen
to Salvation, others are left. Yea, appointed to Wrath, as, 1 These. 5. 9. For
God has not appointed us to Wrath, but to obtain Salvation through our Lord
Jesus Christ. We may well with the Apostle Paul cry out, O the depth! These are
Acts of Sovereignty, beyond our Comprehension. And all the Account God is
pleased to give to us for the present of this tremendous Affair is, because
it is the good pleasure of his Will. Ephesians. 1. 5.

2. Arg. According to the Arminian Scheme, Faith is the Cause, at least the
Antecedent of Election; whereas according to the Gospel, it is the Effect or
Fruit. For this is their Opinion, that such as believe, and persevere in Faith
and Obedience, are elected to Salvation, which may rather be called
Postdestination than Predestination. For say they, as in the New Body of
Divinity concerning God's Decrees, it being much more equitable, that God
defers making any fixed Decree, concerning particular Men, until he sees the
Thread of their Lives, either in a course of Obedience or Disobedience, quite
run out. This Book rather deserves the Title of a Bundle of Errors, than of a
Body of Divinity: for the Principles therein contained, derive not their
Original from the BIBLE, but from Arminius. And if we observe what Authors this
is an extract from, it gives Occasion to remember those Words of Christ, Mat.
11, 25. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
Heaven and Earth, because thou have bid these Things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them unto Babes. So 1 Cor. 2. 26, 27, 28, 29. For ye see your
Calling, Brethren, how that not Many wise Men after the Flesh, not many mighty,
not many noble are called. But God has chosen the foolish Things of the World
to confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak Things of the World to
confound the Things that are mighty; and base Things of the World, and Things
that are despised, etc. that no Flesh should Glory in his Presence.

But to return to the Argument: Instead of God's working all things according
to the Counsel of his own Will, these Men (left God's Decrees or Prescience,
should incroach upon, or abridge Man's free will) assert He must wait until Man
has quite run out the Thread of Life, in a Course of Obedience or Disobedience;
and then He may have their good Leave to fix their State by a certain Decree.
How preposterous and absurd is this, to make the First Cause to wait upon the
Second; the Will of God, subservient to the Will of Man? And how contrary to
the Scripture, which asserts, as Romans 9. 11. For the Children being not yet
born, neither having done Good nor Evil, that the Purpose of God according to
Election might stand; not of Works, but of him that calls, v. 13. as it is
written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. And by this Means they make
the Decree, and the Execution of it contemporary. But on the contrary, the
Scripture asserts, that Faith is the Effect of Election. Sinners are drawn to
Christ in a way of believing, by the Cords of electing and everlasting Love,
Hos. 11. 4. My Sheep (says Christ) hear my Voice. So Act. 13. 48. As many as
were ordained to everlasting Life, believed. There is more than a Moral Swasion
required in order to Faith. Almighty Power must be put forth, as Ephesians. 1. 18.
viz. The same Power that raised Christ from the dead. A creating and quickening
Power. It is by the Efficacy and Causality of the Holy Spirit to Regenerate,
renew, and enable to believe. Christ is said to be the Author and Finisher of
Faith, Heb. 12. 2. It Is God that works in us both to Will, and to Do,
according to his good pleasure. And it is a day of God's Power, when of
unwilling any Soul is made willing, Psalm. 110. 2. And who are they that are
thus wrought upon? We are told, Romans 8. 30. Moreover whom He did predestinate,
them he also called, etc.

3. Arg. The Arminians Originate the Salvation of such as are saved, in the
free Motion, Option, and Determination of their own Wills. But the Scripture
declares quite the contrary. Such as are effectually called, it is according to
God's Purpose, Romans 8. 25. So Romans 9. 15, 16. I will have Mercy on whom I will
have Mercy: And I will have Compassion on whom I will have Compassion. So then
it is not of him that wills, or of him that runs, but of God that shows
Mercy.

4. Arg. The Arminian Scheme cannot be according to the Scripture; for this is
one Principle of it; That Christ has by his Mediation and Merits, restored
fallen Man to a Capacity of obtaining Eternal Life, by the well and wise
Improvement of the Stock, by this Means, put into his Hands. And so Christ
merited, that we might merit. It is not consistent with Divine Wisdom, to
entrust sinful, fallen Man, with a Stock, the well or ill Improvement thereof,
was of such Importance, both with respect to God's Glory, and Man's Happiness,
after he proved Man in the State of Innocence and Perfection, and found him
false and unable to stand. God did not put any Confidence in Man, in his best
estate; therefore, from all Eternity, he made Provision for the worst; laid in
the Covenant of Redemption, a firm Foundation for the Salvation of his Elect.
And the Foundation of God stands sure; the Lord knows who are his. And will God
put any trust in Man fallen? No; If he enters into a second Covenant, it is in
and by a Surety, even Jesus Christ, who is a Surety of a better Testament, Heb.
7. 22. Who among Men will take the Bond of a poor and insolvent Person, unless
he has a Bondsman? And is Man wiser than God? Is it consistent with God's
Wisdom, to leave it in the Power of Man, to frustrate all God's gracious
Intentions, and Methods for Man's Salvation? Yea, and the Death of Christ to be
in vain?

5. Arg. The Arminian Scheme is inconsistent with God's great End of saving
Sinners by Jesus Christ. viz. the Glory of God's sovereign, free, rich Grace.
This is God's professed and ultimate End and Aim; as, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. Having
predestined us unto the Adoption of Children, by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his Will; to the Praise of the Glory of his
Grace. So v. 11, 12. In whom we have obtained an Inheritance, being
predestined, according to the Purpose of him who works all things according
to the Counsel of his own Will: that we should be to the praise of his Glory,
who first trusted in Christ. Arminians take from free Grace, and give to free
Will. For what End think you, did God permit Man to fall? but because it gave
Occasion for the Exercise and Manifestation of the Riches of his Grace and
Mercy, in saving him by Jesus Christ.

6. Arg. This Way of Salvation opens a Door unto, and gives Occasion for,
boasting: But the Gospel way of a Sinner's Salvation excludes boasting. Romans 3.
27. Where is boasting then? it is excluded. By what Law? Of Works? nay, but by
the Law of Faith. According to this impleaded Scheme, Judas is as much beholden
to God, as Peter; And all the Reason that Peter is saved, and Judas is damned,
is because he wisely improved his free Will, and other Abilities; and Judas did
ill improve the same.

7. Arg. The Arminian Scheme takes from our justifying and saving Faith, an
essential Part of it, viz. our resting and trusting in Christ for Salvation.
Now this is essential to Faith; for Faith is many times described, by trusting
in Christ; as, Ephesians. 1. 12, 13. and elsewhere. But according to them, Faith is
only such an Assent to Gospel Truths, as is productive of obedience to the
Rules of the Gospel. Besides, according to their Principles, Christ has set
them upon their Legs; and they must shift for themselves: He has put them into
a Capacity, (to good purpose) to deal with God for eternal Life.

8. Arg. According to the Arminian Scheme, there is no need of a work of
Regeneration, or passive Conversion. For all Men are made alive by Christ: and
all that they need, is the well improvement of free Will, and self Sufficiency.
But Christ teaches an absolute necessity of a Work of Regeneration, John 3. 3.
which has various Denominations in Scripture; as the Law written in the Heart,
the circumcision of the Heart, a Heart of Flesh, a new Creature, the Divine
Nature, the Image of God, a Well of Water, Grace, etc. And without this, the
Heart will never be right with God; neither will there be more than the Form of
Godliness, nothing of the Power. We may as well act Rationally, without a
Rational Soul, as exercise Grace without a Supernatural Principle of Grace.

9. Arg. According to Arminian Principles we are justified by our Gospel
Obedience, and inherent Righteousness; not by the Righteousness of Christ
imputed by God, and received by Faith, according to the Gospel. Phil. 3. 8, 9.
Yea, doubtless, I count all things but less, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. And I do count them but dung, that I may win
Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own Righteousness which is of the
Law; but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of
God by Faith. So Tit. 3. 15. Not by works of Righteousness which we have done;
but according to his Mercy be saved us; by the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost.

10. Arg. According to this Scheme, there is no Assurance of Eternal Salvation
in this Life. But Christians may have Assurance long before they die. As, 2.
Cor. 5. 1. Ephesians. 2. 20. Why else are we commanded to make our Calling and
Election sure? as, 1. Pet. 1. 10. Christians in all Generations can give in
their Testimony to this Truth, from their certain, and sweet Experience. There
is the Joy of Faith, and the Joy of Salvation, which may be lost for a Time.
Hence David prays, as Psalm. 51. that it may be restored. Whence else flows
that strong Consolation spoken of, Heb. 6. 17. which the Heirs of the Promises
are made to partake of?

11. Arg. According to Arminian Princpiles, such as are in a State of Grace may
fall from it, and that totally, and finally. But this is not according to the
Scripture. Gal. 1. 6. Being confident of this very thing, that he that has
begun a good Work in you, will perfect it to the Day of the Lord. These saving
Gifts to his called ones, are without Repentance. The certain Perseverance of
Saints in Grace to Glory, is secured by that Golden Chain, Romans 8. 29, 30. Whom
he, etc. This sweet Truth is built upon a sure Foundation as the Immutability
of the Divine Purpose; the Infallibility of the Divine Promises; the
inseparable Union of Believers to Christ; the indwelling of the Holy Spirit in
every gracious Person. They know God and Christ too well Voluntarily to forsake
him; for the fear of God is in their Hearts. Christ their Surety, undertakes
that none shall pluck them out of his Hands. Therefore the Holy Apostle
triumphs, as Romans 8. 33. Who shall be able to separate us from the Love of God?
etc. So Heb. 6. 17.

12. Arg. The Arminian Scheme makes the way of Salvation so plain and easy,
that the Natural Man sees his Way plain before him: It Is only assenting to
Gospel Truths, and setting themselves to obey the Precepts, and imitate the
Examples of the Gospel. Yea, the Way is so plain, that the Heathen by a well
improvement of the Light of Nature, will not fail of Heaven. And is this the
straight Gate and narrow Way that we must strive to enter in? And are not the
Righteous scarcely saved? And are not the saved of the Lord few, a Remnant, and
that according to the Election of Grace? According to these Men, we have no
need to have one solicitous Thought, whether we are elected, or whether we are
regenerated, or have Union to Christ, or whether the Holy Spirit dwells in us.
The Gospel way of Salvation is full of Mysteries. We read, Romans 16. 25. of the
Revelation of the Mystery. So Ephesians. 1. 9. Having made known to us the Mysterty
of his Will. The way of Salvation by Faith, is above the Natural Man to
understand it; as it is above his Ability to comply with the Terms of it. It Is
supernatural, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural Man receives not the Things of the
Spirit of God: for they are Foolishness to him; neither can be know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. And to make the way of Salvation so
wide as that the Heathen can walk in it, is contrary to what Christ has taught
us, Mat. 7. 13, 14. And contrary to what is written Romans 10. 14. How then shall
they call on him on whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in
him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher?
And how shall they preach, except they be sent? And, how can they be saved,
unless they call upon him? as v. 13. They are without God, without Christ,
without Covenant, and consequently without Hope. For where there is no Vision,
the People perish.

13. Arg. The Arminian Scheme is very grateful and agreeable to the Sentiments
of Men in their natural State. They imbibe Opinions with great Pleasure; and
therefore they are not agreeable to the Gospel. The Gospel Way of a Sinner's
Salvation is what the natural Man is prejudiced against, and averse unto; for
it is Supernatural, it is above Humane Nature, and contrary to corrupt Nature,
Romans 8. 7. The carnal Mind is Enmity against God; for it it not subject to his
Law, viz. the Law of Faith, neither indeed can be. There is as great an
Aversion in the natural carnal Mind to Gospel Truths, as there is in the carnal
Will to Gosepl Rules. I proceed,

2. To enquire into the MEANS leading toward Arminianism: And I apprehend it
to be thus; Our young Men are apt to look upon old Books, as Men do upon old
Houses, to be of little Worth; because not built according to the new Mode. And
hearing some late Authors highly commended by those that are corrupted by them:
and these corrupt Books being very agreeable to a nice Taste, as to their
Language, and as agreeable as to the Matter, suiting their Proud and self
conceited Hearts, by exalting and extolling free Will, and self Sufficiency:
They presently and greedily suck in those Opinions, and never peruse our
professed Principles impartially and without Prejudice, and are ready to reject
them before they understand them. And these accursed, poisonous and Soul
damning Principles being wrapped up in sweet Language, are swallowed down and
retained. I come

3. To direct to the METHODS to save some from these destructive Paths, and to
recover others out of them.

1. In the first Place, being fairly possessed of the Principles of Faith,
professed by these Churches, I think you are bound to examine them strictly and
impartially, and see whether they be not agreeable to the Holy Scriptures,
(which are the professed Rule of the Faith as well as the Manners of all
Protestants) If they be not deduced from, and agreeable to, the Scriptures, you
may warrantably reject them, though professed by your Fathers. For I acknowledge
we are to call no Man, or Number of Men Father, or Master, so as to pin our
Faith upon their Sleeve. But if they are built upon the Holy Scripture, we must
believe, profess, and hold them fast at our Peril. Yea, it is our Duty to
content earnestly for the Faith.

2. Compare the Professed Faith of these Churches, with the Faith of Protestant
Reformed Churches abroad, and if agreeable to the Faith of the purest and
holiest Churches, we should be very slow in rejecting them; or rather should
hold them fast. For there is but one Faith, Ephesians. 4. 5.

3. Observe what are the Fruits and Effects of Preaching Arminian Doctrines in
Holland and Great Britain. Is God wont to pour down his Spirit with such
Preaching? I thing it has brought Religion (as to the Power of it) to a very
low Ebb. And good reason for it; for can we rationally suppose that the Holy
Spirit, (who alone it is that gives converting and saving Efficacy to the Word
preached) will co-work with Errors? by no means: it is the Word of Truth that he
joins in with: The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul, Psalm. 19.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing is by the Word of God preached.

4. Consider seriously of what is written 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. Because they
received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved. And for this
Cause God shall send them strong Delusion, that they should believe a lie, and
that they might be damned, who believe not the Truth.

My Dear Brethren! give me leave to address you with Warmth. Is it not a
fearful Thing to be under Darkness and Delusion, in an Affair wherein your
Souls and their eternal Felicity are so nearly concerned? O how sad is it to be
misguided, and to go to Hell, under strong Confidence of going to Heaven! To be
misled and wander in the Dark till you fall suddenly into the Ditch of Hell;
and not only destroy your selves, but to manage so as that it may be truly said
of you, the blind lead the blind, and they both fall into the Ditch. You had
better be Porters, yea Chimney Sweepers all your Days, than to have scores and
hundreds of damned Wretches cursing you bitterly in Hell, for guiding them into
the wrong way. You may be confident that your Opinions are right; as the Jews
were, that Christ was an Impostor, and not the promised Messiah; For had they
known, they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory. Yet it is with you as it
was with them, they did not know that they were right. But the Disciples were
able to say as in John 6. 69. And we believe and are sure, that thou art Christ
the Son of the Living God. So you may have a strong Confidence of Arminian
Principles, that they are Sound; but true Believers are able with boldness to
say, with the Disciples, we believe and are sure, they are corrupt and
poisonous Principles. I am able to say, as one said when disputing with
Quakers, I was a Quaker before I was a Christian: so I was an Arminian before I
was a Christian. But God of his infinite Mercy has brought me off from that
unsafe and false Way. And I can be positive in this Thing, that if I had an
hundred times as much Grace as I have, and were set by God in the State and
Circumstances as Arminians are (according to their Principles) set, and there
left, I should be as surely damned, as I am now alive. For Corruption in the
best is stronger than Grace: And are there not Snares laid for our Souls almost
every Step we take? And have we not to engage with the Old Serpent, the roaring
Lion, the Malignant Dragon? were not David, and Solomon, and Peter, fearfully
foiled in the Days of their Temptation? Our Strength is so weak, our Enemies
are so many, so mighty, so crafty; that we have need to watch, and be sober, to
be circumspect, and steadfast, to fight and Pray that we be not led into
Temptation, and overcome by Temptations. And if the strongest are left of God,
to the Power of Temptation, it will be an evil Day with them. Our Security is
in having the Holy Spirit to dwell in us, and by his powerful Aids and
Influences, to strengthen to Duty, and against Sin; and in having Christ our
Surety and Intercessor, who alone can recover us in a way of bitter Repentance,
and humble Reliance on him, when fallen; and He alone can keep us from falling:
for we are preserved in Christ Jesus, Jude 1. And we are kept by the mighty
Power of God, through Faith, unto Salvation, as in 1 Pet. 1. 4.

5. and lastly, Labor to know your Hearts, and State; and don't rest 'till you
have experienced a through Work of Conversion or Regeneration. To be thoroughly
convinced of Sin and Misery, and deeply humbled under the Sight and Sense of
it, and really regenerated, is the most effectual Security against corrupt
Principles or Practices; and especially against Arminianism; for it is Pride
that prompts thereto. Christians see that in their own Hearts, that Pride,
Baseness, and Falseness, that will effectually preserve them from these
Presumptions, and carnal Confidences. Men may go far in a Civil, Moral Way in
practicing the Externals of Religion: They may have strong Confidences of their
good Estate: They may advance far in Humane Learning, and yet be Strangers to
Regeneration: Witness that great and good Man Dr. Frank; an account hereof we
have of his own drawing up, and it has been lately published among us; when
about twenty four Years old, he experienced a sound Work of Conversion; and was
eminent as for Learning, so especially for Faith, Holiness, and Charity to the
Death. I will conclude by leaving one Thing more for your Consideration, viz.
Faith objectively, as well as subjectively considered, by how much the more it
has been tried, by so much the more gracious it is, according to what you find
in 1 Pet. 1. 7. That the trial of your Faith being much more precious than Gold
that perishes, etc. Now the Faith I am pleading for, has been tried, in ten
thousand Instances; and it has endured the Fire of Martyrdom. i. e. such have
who professed it. But I never understood that any have suffered Martyrdom for
the Arminian Faith. Will you then renounce a Faith that has been tried to the
quick, to embrace a Faith that never was tried? Far be it from you.

III. I come to the Third and last Instance I shall give as Matter of
Lamentation, and that is, The present weak and shattered State of Our Churches,
on the account of their Order, Government, and Discipline.

This is evident to every Person of Observation. Hence Particular Churches run
into Confusion. Many are aggrieved, and abide Year after Year in their
sorrowful Circumstances. And a farther Evidence thereof, is the Ineffectualness
of Councils to relieve the aggrieved, and to make Peace. As also Anti-Councils,
whereby contrary Results are given on the same Case, to the great Reproach of
Councils, and Blemish of Our Church Government, and discouragement of the
aggrieved, who are ready to lie under their Troubles as Remediless. Hence it is
that some Councils have persuaded the Church and aggrieved, to promise to
acquiesce in the determination of the Council, before they heard the Case, by
which their Consciences have been ensnared, and the Council turned into a
Solemn Arbitration. This therefore is Matter of just Lamentation.

I come to enquire,

2. Into the MEANS which have brought us under these Lamentable Circumstances.
In a Word, it is our being prejudiced against, and not attending to the Rules
and Principles of a Congregational Church, as laid down in our Platform: To go
from the Rule is Arbitrary; and to go against professed Principles, making our
Wills the Rule, is Tyranny. And when a People fairly possessed of Liberties and
Privileges, are thus dealt with, this leads directly to Contention and
Confusion.

1. These Churches have not attended the Rule, as to the complete Organization
of Churches. It Is the Privilege of a Church to choose its own Officers; as,
Plat. Chap. 10. Sec. 5. viz. the Power granted by Christ unto the Body of the
Church and Brotherhood, is a Prerogative and Privilege which the Church
exercises,

1. In choosing their own Officers, whether Elders or Deacons, etc. So Chap. 6.
Sec. 4. Of Elders some attend chiefly to the Ministry of the Word, as Pastors
and Teachers; some attend especially unto Rule, who are therefore called
Ruling-Elders. Now the want of these Officers, exposes Churches to
Arbitrariness, Contentions and Confusions. As also it renders the Government of
the Church, in some Cases impracticable. An Instance of all these great
Inconveniences, we have lately had in a Neighbor Church, where all possible
Endeavors have been used by the aggrieved, (a very great and valuable Part of
the Church) to have a Church-Meeting, and when there was great Occasion for it;
and yet it could not be obtained: They had not a Church-Meeting for about
fourteen Years: Whereas if they had been furnished with a full supply of
Officers, they might have easily obtained it, and by that Means put an end to a
long and very threatening Contention. Besides had the Pastor called the Church
together at their request, there being but one Elder, viz. a Teaching one, and
He the Party offending, it was not possible according to Congregational
Principles, to have proceeded to Judge and Censure therefore. For Ministers are
under no Ecclesiastic Government but in the Church, where they are Members as
well as Ministers. Now it is a Rule in the Congregational Government, as in
Plat. Chap. 10. Sec. II. no Church Act can be consummated or perfected, without
the consent of both; that is, the Eldership and Brethren. Now it is not at all
proper, that an accused and faulty Elder should be a Judge in his own Case;
therefore when He is the peccant Party, and no Ruling-Elders to join the
Brethren in an Act of Discipline and Censure, there cannot be a valid Act. And
so it is also when a Minister is the Accuser. Thus by the neglect of Ruling
Elders (so necessary in our Constitution) the Government is rendered weak; yea,
in some Cases impracticable. Therefore it was that when the Synod convened,
Oct. 15. 1679. to enquire what wanted Reformation in the Land, and to propose
Expedients therefore, in the 5th Place they say, It Is requisite that utmost
Endeavors should be used, in order for a full supply of Officers in the
Churches, according to Christ's Institution; the defect of these Churches on
this Account is very Lamentable, there being in most of the Churches only one
teaching Officer for the Burden of the whole Church to lie upon. The Lord
Christ would not have instituted Pastors, Teachers, Ruling Elders, (nor the
Apostles ordained Elders in every Church), Acts 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. if he had
not seen there was need of them for the good of his People; therefore for Men
to think they can do well enough without them, is both to break the second
Commandment, and to reflect upon the Wisdom of Christ, as if he did appoint
unnecessary Officers in his Church. Experience has evinced, that personal
Instruction and Discipline have been happy Means to reform degenerate
Congregations; yea, and owned by the Lord for the Conversion of many Souls. But
where there are great Congregations it is impossible for one Man besides his
Public Labors, fully to attend these other Things of great Importance, and
necessary to be done, in order to an effectual Reformation of Families and
Congregations. Thus the Synod.

2. Again, these Churches have reduced their Church State to great Darkness, by
not attending the Rule of Our Constitution in Councils. It has been the
Practice of Councils convened according to the second way of Communion in Our
Platform, who are only to hold forth Light, and give Advice, to usurp the Power
of Judgment in Matters of Fact, as also the Power of Admonition, in case of
Offense. Which to do is proper to the third way of Communion; and supposes that
a Church wants Correction for an Offense, and not merely Light and Counsel. And
by this Means the 3d way of Communion has been shut out, and not practiced.
This thing I am bold to say, has been the Occasion of all our Anti-Councils, as
well as the Occasion of the Contentions and Confusions Churches have been left
in, after all Endeavors used by neighbor Churches, by way of Councils.

3. I come to the last Thing, and that is, to the METHOD of our Relief.

1. Let Our Churches be advised to get completely furnished with
Church Officers according to the Platform. By this Time I hope ye see the
necessity of it. Arise, for this Matter belongs to you; and it is just Matter of
Offense if you neglect it any longer.

Remember, it is necessary in a Congregational Church: And the Ministers and
Members of these Churches would do well to get reconciled to every Part, and
Branch of the Constitution. Prejudices against, Aversions and Disaffections to
the same, have greatly threatened the utter Dissolation of these Churches. Our
Government is firm and strong; but if such as should keep it in good repair, do
weaken it, it is in danger of falling to pieces. A Brick House (be it never so
firm) if every Tenant takes out a Brick, in Time it will be weak, and shatter
to pieces.

1. Obj. Our Reverend Pastors are against it, and think, that the Office is not
of Divine Right.

Ans. 1. Ministers should reconcile themselves to the Congregational
Government, before they accept of the Pastoral Office in such a Church.

2. There are three Scriptures which may satisfy the dissatisfied, as to the
Divine Right of Ruling Elders; as Romans 12. 8. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 Cor. 12. 28. God
has set in his Church, Governments. These are Church Governors and distinct
from Teachers; who else can they be but Ruling Elders? Let such as have any
conscientious Scruples in this Affair, weigh in the Balance of the Sanctuary,
the Arguments brought for the Divine Right of Ruling Elders, in a Book entitled
Jus Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici; as also a Sheet not long since published,
entitled, The Divine Right of Ruling Elders; as also, a Rational and nervous
Letter lately published on this Argument. Enough is said in these to satisfy an
unprejudiced Mind as to their Divine Right.

3. It Is the Right and Privilege of the Brethren to choose their Officers; and
therefore if they be clear in the Matter, they should not be discouraged or
obstructed in the use of their just Liberties.

4. If the Reverend Pastors will be so Arbitrary, as utterly to refuse to call
the Church together to choose these Officers; I suppose the Church may look upon
themselves in that Case, and so far, to be without a Ruler; and may convene for
this Purpose, as when they have no Minister, to choose one. It must be a great
abuse of a Minister's Power, to obstruct the Church in the Exercise of that
Power or Privilege Christ has given them, for the preservation of their Peace
and Purity. Englishment cannot patiently submit to arbitrary Measures. Two Kings
within our Memory, have smarted for attempting it. One lost his Head, the other
his Empire. And will English Christians tamely submit thereto? Can they be
easy, when those who by Divine Appointment are to Minister to them for their
Spiritual Edification, Lord it over them who are God's Heritage? It Is
unreasonable for any to desire or expect it, and base for Christians to submit
to it.

Obj. 2. We would proceed to choose Ruling Elders, if there were any Men in the
Church fit for it.

Ans. It Is God's Work to fit Men for Offices in Church or State. It Is your Duty
to choose such as are best qualified, and depend upon God farther and more fully
to fit them. I remember as Introductory to our Election of Ruling Elders,
toward Thirty Years ago, I preached from those Words, Number. 11. 25. And the
Lord came down in a Cloud, and spoke unto him, that is to Moses, and took of
the Spirit that was upon him, and gave it to the Seventy Elders. There is the
residue of the Spirit to furnish for every Office of Trust to which one and
another is chosen. And in that the getting Ruling Elders was opposed by many in
Town and Church, I preached another Sermon from those Words in 2 Timothy 2. 25. In
meekness instructing those that oppose themselves. Reformations are commonly
attended with great Oppositions. Lay aside then I pray, your objecting, and
attend your Duty.

II. Let Discipline be prudently, strictly, and impartially exercised in
particular Churches. Negligence and Partiality herein is very hurtful to the
Peace, Purity, and growth of Churches.

III. Let Councils move in their proper Sphere: let them act agreeable to their
Nature, and the Rules laid down in the Platform. Let such as are called to give
Advice, and to hold forth Light, do that, and proceed no farther.

IV. Come into the Practice of the Third way of Communion, as laid down in the
Platform. When a Church is rent with Division among themselves, and lie under
any open Scandal, and yet refuse to consult with other Churches for healing and
removing the same, this is Matter of Offense; and the aggrieved making a
Complaint hereof to a Particular Church, this Church is in a Christian Manner
to make Enquiry, and demand an Account of the other Church, in order to their
Conviction and Admonition, if faulty, as in Plat. Chap. 15, or in order to
their Vindication, if Innocent. There has been in Times past, great Opposition
to the Practice of this Rule. But the late venerable Council held at Salem, saw
Cause to countenance the Practice of that way of the Communion of Churches, and
advised the aggrieved there, in case they receive not speedy Satisfaction from
the Reverend Pastor pursuant to the Result and Advice of safe Council, to apply
to a particular Church in the Neighborhood, as directly in the Third way of
Communion. Which Thing I humbly apprehend will prove of greater Service toward
the establishing these Churches, than any Thing done for Scores of Years. For,

1. It Is that Rule, and the wise practicing it, that wipes off the Reproach of
Independency from Congregational Churches. They are unaccountable, unless in
this way.

2. It Is this Rule that preserves Churches pure in their Communion one with
another. For if a Church gives Offense, and continues Obstinate in any sinful
way, and other Churches continue to hold Communion with such disorderly Church,
and don't Communion with such disorderly Church, and don't use all possible
Means to reclaim her, they are Partakers of their Sin. But there is no other
regular way to enquire into her Administrations, to convince her, and admonish
her, and separate her from their Communion, but this. Although one Church has not
Authority over another, yet Churches have power to preserve their Purity, and
to put a Church obstinately Offending out of their Communion; or else they must
hold Fellowship with her in a sinful way.

3. This Rule is necessary to the Peace of particular Churches, as it will
effectually relieve Persons aggrieved. There cannot much Peace be expected where
a great part of a Church, are gauled by Arbitrary Measures. But in this way
they must give Satisfaction, or sustain the Sentence of Non-Communion. And this
opens a Door for all aggrieved ones to resettle in an orderly way, in stated
Fellowship in some neighbor Church, as though they had been dismissed. 4. This
Rule does effectually hinder Anti-Councils, or having Councils against
Councils; of which there have been too many Instances, to the great Reproach
and Confusion of these Churches. For if aggrieved Persons are allowed to call
Councils, the Church has Power and Liberty to call them; and by this Means,
Anti-Councils come upon the Stage. But if the aggrieved make Complaint to a
Particular Church, there is no possibility of Anti-Councils. It Is therefore
much to be wondered at, that such mighty Opposition has been made against
introducing this Rule into Practice in these Churches. And it is matter of
Thankfulness that the way is prepared by the foresaid Council at Salem, for the
Practice thereof.

Obj. It may be objected, This Rule was not put in Practice in the early Days
of these Churches.

Ans. 1. Our Fathers were but Men, and had their Defects. Hence though they in
the Synod declared so fully for the full supply of Officers in the Church; and
this result of the Synod was approved by the General Court, recommending the
same to the serious Consideration of all the Churches; yet how shamefully was
this Expedient for Reformation disregarded by most of our Churches!

2. I suppose the true Reason why the 3d way of Communion was not practiced in
our early Days, was because then there was no Occasion for it. Churches were
more tender, and willing to receive Light, when offered by Councils called in
the Second way of Communion: And when it is thus, there is no Room for the
Practice of this Rule.

I shall add the following moving Considerations.

1. Our Church Government is too good to be thrown away. I am persuaded it is
nearer the Scripture, and better warranted and supported by it, than any Church
Government in the World. As to the Church of England, there is no Scripture
Foundation for their Hierarchy, as Archbishops, Lord-Bishops, Archdeacons,
Officials, Chancellors, etc. Of late, by one and another Masterly Hand, the
following Truth has been set in so clear a Light, that none but the wilfully
Ignorant can resist it, viz. That the Scripture Bishop, is no other than the
Pastor of a Particular Church. And it is an Innovation and Usurpation, that
they are dignified as they are in the Church of England. Besides, to take out
of the Hands of the Presbyters or Pastors, all Rule in the Church, is
unscriptural: for what is more plain, than that they who Watch for Souls, are
to Rule over them also? as, Heb. 13. 17. Their taking away from Churches the
Liberty of choosing their own Officers, is an intolerable Invasion of the Right
of Churches, as well as their introducing many unscriptural Ceremonies into
Divine Worship.

Again, the Presbyterian Government, I grant, has been accompained with eminent
Holiness; as Witness the Church of Scotland, Geneva, and many other Reformed
Churches. And I acknowledge there is but little Difference between them and us;
especially, if we have Ruling Elders, and practice the Third way of Communion.
Yet wherein we differ, I am humbly of Opinion we have the Scripture on Our
Side. Let any if they can, give a genuine Interpretation of the 1 Cor. 5. Chap.
and exclude the Brethren from having any Hand in Church Discipline and
Censures. Besides what is written, Mat. 18. Tell it to the Church; that is, say
they, to the Ministers. This is to put the Scripture upon the Rack, to make it
speak what we would have it. Let us then be thankful for our Constitution;
strictly adhere to, and Practice it.

2. Our Church Government, if strictly adhered to, will effectually answer all
the Intentions of Government. There is no Member in a Church, no Church in the
whole Consociation of Churches, though never so stubborn and obstinate, but must
submit, or sustain the dreadful Sentence of Non-Communion.

I shall conclude the whole with a few Words of Advice, or Counsel.

1. Let us be very thankful to God, who has hitherto secured for us Our Civil
and sacred Privileges, notwithstanding our great Barrenness and
Unprofitableness; yea, and our many and great Provocations. God is slow unto
Anger, and abundant in Goodness and Kindness. We have for an Hundred Years
enjoyed the Dispensation of the Glorious Gospel, in its Power and Purity, and
free from Persecution. What could God have done for this his Vineyard, which he
has not done, in order to our Fruitfulness?

2. Let us be warned against withdrawing from the Fellowship of these Churches,
until we find more pure Churches and Worship; and of a more Scriptural Faith
and Order. For any to break with, and break off from these Churches, because
their stubborn Wills will not submit to the just and regular Censures of the
Church to which they belong; or because they cannot have their Will, as to the
Place of their Worship; these deserve the Character of Heady and Highminded.
And if their unreasonable Desires are restrained by the Civil Government, then
they will turn Churchmen. Surely such Churchmen are guilty of Will Worship
with a Witness. These Converts are worthy to be called Children of Belial, who
rise up against Lawful Authority, and take Sanctuary in the Church. The Church
of England does too much Honor our Churches, when they account those worthy of
their Fellowship, who are worthy to be rejected by us. I would whisper in the
Ears of these thoughtless and unnatural Converts, not to say Apostates; Will
you rashly, and to have your Wills in lesser Matters, return to a State of
Bondage, when you enjoy matchless Liberties and Privileges? Will you take upon
you a Yoke which your gracious Predecessors could not bear? Will you bring a
Burden upon Posterity, which is intolerable, to humor and ease your selves?
Know, when the Yoke is once on your Necks, you must pay the Tithe, the Tenth
part of which you are apt now to think is too much for you to give, or your
Minister to receive. And do you think the vast Arrearages will not be
recovered, one way or another? I mean the vast Sums expended for the
Propagation of the Gospel: That is, for the bringing over our Churches to the
Mother Church!

3. Be kind to your Ministers; and don't give them any just Provocation to
desert you, or to endeavor to reconcile themselves to the Discipline and
Ceremonies of the Church. The Discount of the Bills of Credit has insensibly
and exceedingly hurt them in times past; and it is well if it be not so to this
Day with some. I am fully persuaded that Ministers Salaries ought in Justice to
be raised in Proportion to the Depreciation of the Bills of Credit; for the
Price of the Necessaries of Life rise in that Proportion. By no Means
discourage the Hearts, or weaken the Hands of your Faithful Ministers, who are
willing to spend and be spent, in the Service of your precious Souls.
Especially be cautious at this Juncture, when so great Temptations are laid
before them to desert you, and go home and take Orders.

4thly. and Finally, Study the Principles of your Faith and Order; be heartily
reconciled to, and be Zealous in the Defense and Practice of them. And as often
as any of Our Holy Churches do want a Pastor, I would advise them when treating
with any Candidate in order to Settlement, to know his Mind with respect to the
professed Faith and Order of these Churches; and proceed not to Election until
he has given his Assent to the one, and his Promise to Practice according to
the other. This indeed is implicitly done by his Acceptance of the Invitation
of a Congregational Church; but the more explicit, the better. And when the
Elders and Messengers of Neighbor Churches are (upon Invitation) convened, to
assist in the Solemn Separation of a Pastor to the Sacred Work of the Gospel
Ministry, in his Ordination; they would doubtless do well to satisfy themselves
here about, left they be found to lay their Hands too suddenly upon his Head.
To conclude, Let us then stand fast in the Liberties wherewith Christ has made
us free, Gal. 5. 1. Our Country thinks it worth while to spend many Thousands,
in the Defense of their Civil Privileges settled upon us by Charter; and are
not these Sacred Privileges of equal, yea of greater Worth and Value? O then,
let us contend earnestly for the Faith and Order of the Gospel, left we be
found to despise our Birthright, and to destroy our selves.

FINIS.
REASONS For adhering to our Platform, AS A RULE of Church Government, AND
OBJECTIONS Against Ruling Elders answered. In a LETTER to a Friend.
By another Hand.
SIR,
I Received a Message from you, that a Friend of yours desires to have some
Reasons (drawn up in Writing) to show why we should adhere to the PLATFORM as a
Rule of Church Government, at least till another and better be provided.

I wish a better Head were employed in assigning Reasons for it: But to gratify
you (in the interim) I shall give you the general Reasons inducing me to be of
the Opinion that we ought so to do. But first I premise, that whereas it is
objected, That the Scriptures are the only Rule both of Worship and Discipline,
and that it is both Sinful and Dangerous to set up humane Composures as our
Rule; I perfectly agree with the Objectors, and acknowledge that no humane
Composure ought to be received, which disagrees with the holy Scriptures. But
if the Platform must be rejected merely because it is of humane Composure; then
by the same Parity of Reason, not only the Association Principles but also all
Sermons, Confessions of Faith, practical Catechisms, and the like, are to be
rejected, these being also humane Composures. And it is very observable, that
the same Persons who are for rejecting the Platform, would at the same Time
have us subject to such a Government as they themselves shall from Time to Time
fancy to be agreeable to the Scriptures; not allowing us to judge for our
selves, whether it be agreeable to the Scripture or not; nor willing to be
governed or restricted themselves by any Rule, except the Scriptures in the
Sense they themselves understand them, or (which is one and the same Thing) by
any other than what agrees with their own Sentiments. And with this Allowance I
suppose the Pope himself could comply with the Scripture as the Rule of his
Government.

But that there ought to be a Platform extracted from the Holy Scriptures, as a
Particular Rule of Church Government, and that it is our Wisdom and Interest to
adhere to ours, at least till another and better be provided, is evident to me,
from the following Considerations, viz.

1. The Nature, Use and Ends of all Government necessarily implies ORDER: Order
cannot be preserved without known and certain Rules: The Duties of Rulers and
Ruled must be stated, circumscribed, and limited by a Rule; otherwise RULERS
may be Tyrants at pleasure, and SUBJECTS Rebel whenever they have Opportunity,
and neither of them be Accountable.

2. Though the SCRIPTURES are in themselves a perfect Rule, and the only Standard
by which all other Rules are to be tried; yet it is evident that through the
Darkness or Corruption of Men's Minds, this Rule is very diversely understood
and practiced upon, both with respect to Doctrine and Discipline. Hence the
Authors of the most corrupt DOCTRINES pretend to the Scriptures to support
their Tenets. So with respect to CHURCH GOVERNMENT, the Congregationalist, the
Presbyterian, the Episcopalian, yea, and even the Papist, pretend to Rule and
Govern according to the Scripture. So that they don't so much differ upon the
Question, Whether the SCRIPTURE shall be the Rule, as upon the Question how the
Scripture is to be understood.

3. Hence it follows, that without some Platform or Constitution, there can be
no orderly Government upheld. This appears to be agreeable to the Sense both of
Papists and Protestants, Episcopalians, Presbyterians and Congregationalists;
who all have their Platforms or Constitutions of Church Government.

4. The Church Government in this Country, is founded upon a particular Compact
or Agreement, wherein the Officers and Members of each particular Church
combine to set forward the Worship of God, and maintain the Discipline of his
Kingdom in a Way which they judge to be agreeable to the HOLY SCRIPTURES; and to
act in way of Consociation with other Churches of the same Principles, for
their mutual Good and Edification. Upon this Foundation were the Churches of
NEW ENGLAND first settled; and for their more regular Proceeding therein, the
PLATFORM (expressing their Sense of the SCRIPTURE relating to Church Order and
Government) was composed and consented to by the Churches in our primitive
Times: And this Form of Government is so far established, that our General
Consent to continue and abide in this Way, would secure to us the Privileges
of it. And this indeed is our only Barrier against Episcopacy; unless some
other Form of Government (not disallowed by the Crown) be received and embraced
by the Churches.

5. But if we slight the Method of Government in our Platform, and don't by
Agreement fix on another, it will follow, that either the Government of the
Church must cease, or a Government imposed and Enforced by Humane Laws must
succeed. I presume most certainly the Churches (so unhinged) must immediately
fall into an absolute Independency at first; and the Members of each individual
Church, must either be allowed to be under no Government but what will suit
with their own private Judgment on the Scriptures (which they may be tempted to
vary or alter as Occasion may offer;) or else a Power of Judging for themselves
as to the Meaning of the Scripture must be denied to the Brethren, and put over
to the Minister for him to Judge and Determine as he thinks fit, and to state
and fix the Boundaries both of his own Authority and the People's Obedience, as
he shall from Time to Time understand the Scripture. And who can tell how much
or how often his Judgment may also vary, upon Occasions or Temptations which
may offer? But such a confused State of Things cannot last long; a more certain
and regular Form of Government will quickly be found necessary; and perhaps a
Presbyterian Government may be sought after, but not found to be attainable.
May it not therefore be proper (before we part with our Platform) not only to
enquire whether the Presbyterian Constitution be more agreeable to the
Scripture; but also whether that Government can be set up and supported here,
unless some other Laws than we have hitherto had, be enacted, and do obtain the
Royal Approbation. That the Royal Approbation may be obtained in Favor of the
way of the Church of England, cannot be doubted; but that it will be obtained in
Favor of a Presbyterian Church Government here, seems hardly probable: which
if duly considered, it may well be wondered how Gentlemen (who would not be
willing that themselves or Posterity should be placed under Episcopacy) can
think of Departing from Our Own Platform; at least 'till another and better be
instituted in the Room thereof.

6. Our Platform was doubtless the Result of great Though It and Deliberation, and
of earnest Prayer and Supplication; composed and consented to by Men of as
great Learning, Piety and Prudence as any our Age affords; and such as had more
Knowledge and larger Experience of the State of the Church at Home and Abroad,
than perhaps any among us of the present Age have; and as careful of avoiding
humane Inventions as the best of us. Now the Platform agreed with their
understanding of the Scripture, not only then, but many Years after, when it
was revised by a succeeding Synod. And I am persuaded, if it were now
Impartially considered and compared with the Scripture, it would be found very
consonant therewith. And even that Part thereof which asserts the Office of the
RULING ELDER (which is as I suppose the most distastful to such as would
explode the Platform) agrees with the Scripture not only in the Judgment of the
Divines and Churches in New England in our purest times, but also in the
Judgment of the most famous Reforming Divines and Churches that have been in
other Parts of the World. Both the Necessity and Divine Authority of that
Office having been asserted by Divines vastly more in Number than those (among
Presbyterians and Congregationalists) who do or have decried it; and not
inferior to them in Learning, Piety or solid Judgment. I am told by a Gentleman
of Learning and Ingenuity, That the Protestant Churches of Geneva, France,
Scotland, Holland, and in general almost all the Churches of the Reformation
(except Episcopalians) have upheld this Office; and that it has never been
denied by any considerable Number of Protestant Churches (except as aforesaid)
till that about the Space of Fifty Years ago, a Number of Ministers rose up in
New England, who did oppose it.

Upon the whole therefore, though no Man's Conscience ought to be bound by this
or any other Platform, in any Matter which he verily believes to be contrary to
the Scripture; yet it seems impossible to conceive, how a particular Church can
uphold an orderly Discipline, or a Number of Churches form a Consociation,
unless they do unite in the Foundation-Principles of Church Government; or that
the Civil Authority prescribe the Rules or Canons of Church Government, and
enforce Obedience and Subjection thereto, as in the Case of National Churches.

From the foregoing Considerations laid together, I think it will appear to be
the Wisdom and Interest of all those who prefer our own Constitution before a
National Church Government, and its forcing Canons, steadily to adhere to our
Platform; at least till another and better be found, and (after mature
Consideration) consented to and agreed upon by the Churches.

And now because the Office of a RULING ELDER is an essential Branch of
Congregational Church Government, which if left out, quite alters the
Constitution, and changes the Government of the Church into a Monarchical Form;
and because I apprehend that the Prejudices that are taken against the
Platform, are principally upon this Head; I would now acquaint your Friend
(though this is further than his Request expresses) upon what Grounds I satisfy
my self respecting the Objections I meet with against that Office.

And,

1. Whereas it is objected, That the Generality of our Ministers do not hold
this Office to be of Divine Institution: To this Objection I oppose the
Judgment of former Divines (more in Number, and not less Capable of judging as
to the Meaning of the Scriptures;) as also the Judgment of several Divines now
Living among us.

2. Whereas it is objected, That according to Ephesians. IV. 8, 11, 12. the ordinary
Officers left by Christ in the Church, are only Pastors and Teachers; and
according to Phil. ^. 1. BISHOPS (or Pastors) and DEACONS are the only Officers
mentioned: I satisfy my self as to this Objection, by considering that the
Word BISHOP, PASTOR and SHEPHERD, signify one and the same Thing whenever
applied to Ecclesiastical Officers, and imply a Power of Teaching, Overseeing,
Feeding and Governing. The Word PASTOR is applicable to all Rulers whether
Civil or Ecclesiastical, and is so used in Scripture: and though the Word BISHOP
seems in a more appropriated Sense to belong to the Ecclesiastical Ruler; yet
under that Word so appropriated, is comprehended all Ecclesiastical Rulers,
Guides, Overseers, Shepherds; even as the Word Magistrate comprehends all Civil
Rulers of every Rank and Station. So that neither of these Expressions do
exclude any sort of Elder, Overseer or Ruler in the Church; but on the contrary
do include and comprehend them all. And though a Power of Teaching, Overseeing
and Ruling, may all be attributed to one Man; yet it does not follow that the
Power of Overseeing and Ruling must lie solely and absolutely in Him. For there
may be, and is, a Government where there is not a Lordly Power, (or which is
the same thing) Power in a Single Officer, which has no other Branch of
Government to Check and Control it.

3. Whereas it is objected, That we have not Men Capable, etc. If it be so
indeed that there are no Men in our Chuches that have Skill enough or Integrity
enough to Guide in the External Administrations of the Government and
Discipline of the Church; and Capable too of assisting, directing exhorting and
comforting their Brethren, as they may have Opportunity; our Degeneracy is very
Lamentable indeed: Our Churches have then none suitable for Service in
Ecclesiastical Councils. Every thing at Home and Abroad must be left to the
Prudence and Fidelity of the Ministers; and woe to that Church (if such a Thing
should happen) that falls under the Influences of a Minister no better
qualified than themselves.

4. I find an Assertion in a late printed Pamphlet, that the Keys of Doctrine
and Discipline were committed to the Apostles. And again, To be sure to the
same Persons is there committed the Ruling and Feeding of the Flock. The Author
refers to the last Chapter of Matthew. But would he restrain the Power of
Ruling to the Persons of the Apostles or to the Persons of Gospel Ministers as
their Successors in the Work of Teaching and Baptizing, and to them only; he
must then either prove the Government of the Church to be Monarchical, or else
that every Church is obliged to provide a Number of such Teaching Elders.

5. Another Objection is, That if we will hve Ruling Elders, we must provide
them Maintainence; and this some suppose would fright us out of the Notion of
such Officers. But to me it appears no way Formidable. For in the first place,
I don't believe that Double Honor principally intends Maintenance (as some
would have it, from 1 Timothy V. 17.) and the next Words prove no more than this,
that a suitable Reward is due, according to the Labor performed. It therefore
remains to be proved, that a Ruling Elder must spend his whole Time in the
Service of the Church, before he is entitled to a Maintenance from the Church.
But if a suitable and honorable Reward were assigned in proportion to their
Service; I believe no Body would have Reason to Complain; and abundance of Good
might be done, and Evil prevented, which would take up no great Quantity of
Time. And in extraordinary Matters, I see no reason but their Labors should be
handsomely rewarded.

Submitting the whole to the Censure of your Friend, (unknown to me) I rest

Your Friend and humble Servant.
June 20. 1732. Ambrose,

Apud Omnes ubique Gentes. Honorabilis est Senectus: Undo Synagoga, et postea
Ecclesia SENIORES habuit; Quorum sine Consilio nibil agebatur in Ecclesia: Quod
qua negligentia absolveret, nescio, nisi forte Doctorum Desidia, aut magis
Superbia, dum soli volunt aliquid videri.



A VINDICATION OF THE Divine Authority OF RULING ELDERS IN THE Churches of
Christ.

Asserted by the Ministers and Elders, met together in a Provincial Assembly,
November 2d. 1649. and printed in London, 1650. Beginning at Page to 48.
Transcribed out of the same Book.

Reprinted for Public Good. 1734.

A VINDICATION OF THE Divine Authority of Ruling Elders, etc. In Answer to an
Objection.
Object. BEcause it sets up a new Officer in the Church, which is a mere humane
Creature, having no Authority from the Word of GOD, nor was ever heard of in
the Church of Christ, till Calvin's Time, and that is the LAY-ELDER.

Answer. WE do here freely confess, that if we were of Opinion, as some are,
that the Ruling Elder has no Foundation in the Word of God, but is a mere
humane Ordinance, brought into the Church only in a prudential way; we should
heartily desire the utter abolition of him: For we are not ignorant, that the
Ruling Prelate was brought into the Church upon the same Account, for the
avoiding of Schism and Division, and afterward proved the great Author and
Fomenter of Schism and Division. And if we should decline the Ruling Prelate
and take in the Ruling Elder upon the same prudential Grounds, it were just
with God to make him as mischievous to the Church, as ever the Ruling Prelate
was: And therefore let us consider what may be said out of the Word of God, for
the Justification of this so much decried Officer. Yet first we cannot but take
notice that the Name of Lay-Elder was affixed to this Officer by way of
Reproach and Scorn, by the Adversaries of him, and that it ought not to be
continued. For though it be evident by Scripture, [ Heb. 13, 17, 24.] that
there is a great difference betwixt the Ministry, usually called the Clergy,
and the People commonly called the Laity; Yet it is also as manifest, that the
Scripture distinguishes them not by the Names of Clergy and Laity: for as much
as all God's People are therein styled the Lord's Clergy or Inheritance, [1
Pet. 5. 3. Jer. 10. 16.] and the Lord is called their Inheritance. And when
Persons are duly chosen from among the People to be Governors in the Church,
as such, they are no longer Laymen, but Ecclesiastical Persons. And therefore
we profess a dislike of the Name lay Elder, and conceive they ought to be
called either Governors in the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 23. or Ruling Elders: as 1 Timothy 5. 17. not because their Office is to rule alone (for the Teaching Elder
is a Ruler also,) Heb. 13. 17. 1 These. 5. 12. but because their Office is only
to Rule.

Now concerning these Ruling Elders we confess, Non quia soli, sed quia solum
praesunt.
that they are Officers somewhat new and strange to the Church of England; yet
not new nor strange to the Word of God, nor to the Primitive Times, nor (as all
know) to the Reformed Churches.

First, They are not new nor strange to the Word of God, neither in the Old
Testament, nor in the New. The Jews in the Old Testament, had two sorts of
Elders, Elders of the Priests, and Elders of the People; suitable to our
Teaching and Ruling Elders, as appears, Jer. 19. 1. And these Elders of the
People did sit and vote with the Priests and Levites in all their
Ecclesiastical Consistories, and that by divine Appointment. That they were
constituent Members of the great Sanhedrim, appears, 2 Chronicles. 19. 8. where we
read, that some of the chief of the Fathers were joined with the Priests, to
judge in the matters of the Lord. And howsoever, many things among the Jews
after the Captivity, did decline to Disorder and Confusion; yet we find even in
the Days of Christ and his Apostles, that the Elders of the People still sat
and voiced in the Council with the Priests, according to the ancient Form, as
is clear from Matthew. 26. 57, 59. Matthew. 27. 1, 12. Matthew. 16. 21. Matthew. 21.
23. Mark 14. 43. Luke 22. 66. De diverse. grad. Minist. Evang. cap. 11. p. 108.
And Saravia himself, who disputes so much against Ruling Elders,
acknowledges thus much: I find indeed, (says he) Elders in the Assembly of
the Priests of the old Synagogue, which were not Priests; and their Suffrages
and Authority in all Judgments, were equal with the Suffrages of the Priests.
But he adds, That these Elders of the People, were Civil Magistrates: which is
a poor Shift, directly against many Scriptures, which contradistinguish these
Elders from the Civil Magistrate; as appears, Acts 4. 5. Judge. 8. 14. Deuteronomy. 5.
23. Josh. 8. 33. 2 King. 10. 15. Ezra. 10. 14. And though it were possible,
that some of them might be Civil Magistrates, as some Elders among us, are
Justices of the Peace; yet they did not sit under that Capacity, in the
Ecclesiastical Sanhedrim, but as Ecclesiastical Elders.

And that the Jews also had Elders of the People, sitting and voting in their
inferior Consistories, appears (as we humbly conceive) from Acts 13. 15. Acts
18. 8, 17. Mar. 5. 22. In which places, we read of the Rulers of the Synagogue,
who were neither Priests nor Levites; and yet were Rulers in Church Matters,
and had Power, together with the Priests, of casting Men out of the Synagogue,
and of ordering Synagogue, worship, Joh. 12. 42. Acts 13. 15.

Now this, Association of the Elders of the People, with the Priests, in the
Jewish Church Government, was by Divine Appointment: For Moses first instituted
it, and afterward Jehosaphat restored it, according as they were directed by
God, Numb. 11. 16. 2 Chronicles. 19. 8. And it did belong to the Jewish Church, not
as it was Jewish, but as it was a Church; and therefore belongs to the
Christian Church, as well as Jewish. For whatsoever agrees to a Church, as a
Church, agrees to every Church. There was nothing Judaical or Typical in this
Institution; but it was founded upon the Light of Nature, and right Reason,
which is alike in all Ages.

But leaving the Old Testament, let us consider what may be said for the Divine
Right of the Ruling Elder, out of the New Testament. For this Purpose, we have
already produced three Places, which we shall now briefly open; and show how
the Ruling Elder is proved out of them. The Places are, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Romans 12.
7, 8. 1 Timothy 5. 17.

The first Place is, 1 Cor. 12. 28. And God has set some in the Church, first,
Apostles; secondarily, Prophets; thirdly, Teachers; after that, Miracles; then
Gifts of healing, Helps, Governments, diversities of Tongues; where we have an
enumeration of sundry Officers of the Church; and among others, there are
Helps, Calvin in locum. Chrysostom upon 1 Cor. 12. 28. Estius upon 1 Cor. 12.
28.
Governments. By Helps, are meant Deacons; (as not only our Reformed Divines,
but Chrysostom and Estius, and others observe,) and by Governments, are meant
the Ruling Elder: which that it may the better appear, we will propound, and
prove these six Things.

1. That by Governments, are meant Men exercising Government, the Abstract put
for the Concrete. The Intent of the Apostle, is not to speak of Offices
distinct from Persons, but of Persons exercising Offices. This appears first,
by the beginning of the Verse, God has set some in his Church; this relates to
Persons, not unto Offices. Secondly, by the 29, and 30. Verses, where the
Apostle speaks concretively, of those Things which he had spoken before
abstractively. Are all workers of Miracles? have all the Gifts of Healing? do
all speak with Tongues, etc? and so by Consequence, Are all Helpers, are all
Governors? And therefore it is, that the Syriack instead of Helps,
Governments, reads it Helpers, Governors.

2. That the Governor here meant, must needs be a Church-Governour. For it is
expressly said, that he is seated in the Church, and therefore the Civil
Magistrate cannot be meant by this Governor, as some would have it: partly,
because this is quite besides the whole Intent and Scope of the Chapter,
treating merely upon spiritual Church Matters, not at all of secular civil
Matters; and partly, because the Magistrate, as such, is not placed by God in
the Church, but in the Commonwealth; and partly, because the Apostle writes of
such Governors, that had at that Time actual Existence in the Church; and
neither then, nor diverse hundred Years after, were there any Christian
Magistrates.

3. That this Church-Governour is seated by God in his Church. It is a Plant of
Gods own planting, and therefore shall stand firm, maugre all Opposition. For
it is expressly said, God has set some in his Church, first Apostles, etc. then
Helps, then Governments.

4. That this Church-Governour thus seated by God in his Church, is not only a
Churchmember, but a Church Officer. For though it be a Question among the
Learned, whether some of the Persons here named, as the Workers of Miracles,
and those that had the Gift of Healing and of Tongues, were seated by God, as
Officers in the Church, and not rather, only as eminent Members, endued with
these eminent Gifts; yet it is most certain, that whosoever is seated by God in
his Church, as a Church-Governour, must needs be a Church Officer: for the
Nature of the Gift, does necessarily imply an Office. The Greek Word for
Governments, KUEPNSEIS.
is a Metaphor from Pilots, or Ship-Masters, governing their Ships; (hence the
Master of a Ship is called KUEPNTS, a Governor, Jam. 3. 4.) and it notes such
Officers as sit at the Stern of the Vessel of the Church, to govern and guide
it in Spirituals, according to the Will and Mind of Christ, which is the direct
Office of our Ruling Elder.

5. This Church-Governour thus seated by God in his Church, as a
Church Officer, is an ordinary and perpetual Officer in his Church. Indeed,
here is mention made of Officers extraordinary, as Apostles, Prophets; and of
Gifts extraordinary, as the Gift of Miracles, Healing and of Tongues: but here
is also mention made of ordinary Officers, perpetually to abide, as Teachers,
Helpers, and the Church-Governour, or Ruling Elder. And that this Officer is
ordinary and perpetual, appears from the perpetual Necessity of him in the
Church: for a Church without Government, is as a Ship without a Pilot, as a
Kingdom without a Magistrate, and a World without a Sun.

6. That this Church-Governour thus seated by God in his Church, as a perpetual
Officer, is an Officer contra-distinguished in the Text from the Apostles,
Prophets, Teachers, and all other Officers in the Church. This appears,

(1.) By the Apostles Manner of expressing these Officers in an enumerative
Form; First, Apostles; Secondarily, Prophets; Thirdly, Teachers; After that,
Miracles, then Gifts of Healing, etc.

(2.) By the Recapitulation, verse. 29, 30. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets?
Are all Teachers? Are all Workers of Miracles?

(3) By the Scope of the whole Chapter; which is to set down different Gifts
and Offices in different Subjects. It is said, verse. 8, 9. To one is given by
the Spirit, the Word of Wisdom; to another, the Word of Knowledge by the same
Spirit; to another, Faith, etc. And for this Purpose, the Apostle draws a
Simile from the Members of Man's Body: As there are different Members in Man's
Body, and every Member has it is different Office, and every Member stands in
need one of another; the Eye cannot say to the Hand, I have no need of thee;
nor again, the Head to the Foot, I have no need of thee; etc. So it is in the
Church Ministerial, which is the Body of Christ. God has set different
Officers in his Church; some ordinary and perpetual; some extraordinary and
temporary: And these different Officers, have different Offices; some to Teach,
others to Distribute to the poor Saints; others to Govern. Are all Teachers?
Are all Deacons? Are all Church Governors? and these have all need one of
another. The Teacher cannot say to the Deacon, I have no need of thee; nor to
the Church-Governour, I have no need of thee: But if all these Officers were in
the Pastor alone, and only, then might he truly say to the Deacon and Ruling
Elder, I have no need of thee. But now God has so set the Members in his Body,
which is his Church, that every Member stands in need one of another Help and
Support.

Object. If it be objected, that the Apostles had all these Offices and Gifts
here mentioned, eminently seated in them; for they were Prophets, Teachers,
Workers of Miracles; and therefore why may not all these be understood of one
and the same Person?

Answ. Though it be true, that the Apostles had eminently all these; yet it is
as true, that there are many here named, which had but one of these Gifts
formally seated in them: And it is also apparent, that some of the Persons here
named were distinct Officers in the Church, as the Prophet, and the Teacher.
Though the Apostles were Prophets and Teachers, yet the Prophet and the Teacher
were Officers distinct from the Apostles; and by a parity of Reason, so were
the Governors from the Apostle, Prophet, and Teacher: the Scope of the Apostle
being (as has been said) to set out distinct Offices in distinct Officers; are
all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? The Sum of what we have said
from this Scripture, then is this; That God has seated some Men in his Church
which have a Gift and Office to Govern, which are neither Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers, nor Pastors; and therefore they are Ruling Elders, which is the
Officer we are enquiring after.

Now this Interpretation which we have given, is not only the Interpretation of
Reformed Divines, both Lutherans and Calvinists, but of the ancient Fathers,
and even the Papists themselves, as appears by the quotations in the Margin
Gerbardus de Ministerio Ecclesiastico Calvin in locum, P. Martyr. in locum.
Beza in locum. Piscator in locum. Ambros. in locum. Chrysostom. in locum. Salmer. in
locum, Septimo loco ponit Gubernatores, id est, eos qui praesunt aliis, and
gubernant, Plebemque in Officio continent. Et Ecclesia Christi habet suam
Politiam, and cum Pastor per se omnia praestare non posset, adjungebantur illi
duo Presbyteri, de quibus dixit, Qui been praesunt, Presbyteri, duplici Honor
digni habeantur, maxim qui laborant in Verbo and Doctrina; Qui una cum Pastore
deliberabant de Ecclesia Cura, and Instauratione: qui ettam Fidei atque
honestae Vitae Consortes erant.
.

The second Text is, Romans 12. 6. 7, 8. Having then Gifts differing according to
the Grace given; whether Prophecy let us prophecy according to the Proportion
of Faith; or Ministry, let us wait on our Ministering; or he that teaches on
Teaching; or he that exhorts, on Exhortation: He that gives, let him do it
with simplicity; He that rules, with Diligence; He that shows Mercy, with
Cheerfulness. In which Words, we have a perfect Enumeration of all the ordinary
Offices of the Church. These Offices are reduced, first, to two general Heads,
Prophecy and Ministry, and are therefore set down in the Abstract. By
Prophecy is meant the Faculty of right understanding, interpreting, and
expounding the Scriptures. Ministry comprehends all other Employments in the
Church. Then these Generals are subdivided into the special Offices contained
under them, and are therefore put down in the Concrete. Under Prophecy are
contained, 1. He that teaches, that is, the Doctor or Teacher. 2. He that
exhorts, i. e. the Pastor. Under Ministry are comprised, 1. He that gives,
that is the Deacon. 2. He that rules, that is, the Ruling Elder. 3. He that
shows mercy: which Estius in Romans 12. (...) placet etiam hac part speciale
quoddam Charisma five Officium significari, and (...) dicatur iis qui ab
Ecclesia curandis miseris, potissimum agro. it is, prafectus est, (...) praebet
Obsequia velut etiam hodie fit in Nosocom^s; qui Sensus ^aud quaquam
improbabilis est.
Office pertained unto them, who in those Days had Care of the Sick. So that in
these Words, we have the Ruling Elder plainly set down, and contra
distinguished from the teaching and exhorting Elder (as appears by the
distributive Particles, EITE O DIDASKON EITE O PAPAKALON, Whether he that
teaches; whether he that exhorts; whether he that rules, etc.) And here
likewise we have the Divine Institution of Ruling Elders: for so the Words hold
forth; Having then Gifts differing according to the Grace that is given unto
us; and thus also in the third Verse, according as God has dealt to every Man,
etc. This Officer is the Gift of God's free Grace to the Church for the Good of
it.

Against this Exposition of the Text it is objected by those that oppose the
Divine Right of the Ruling Elder, that the Apostle speaks in these Words, not
of several Offices in several Persons, but of several Gifts in one and the same
Person; for he says, having then Gifts differing according, etc. But we Answer:

1. That the Word Gift is often in Scripture taken for Office; as Ephesians. 4. 8,
11. When he ascended on high, he led Captivity Captive, and gave Gifts unto
Men, and v. 11. He shows what these Gifts were, some to be Apostles, some
Evangelists, etc.

2. That the Apostle in the Protasis speaks not of several Gifts, but of
several Offices, and these not in the same, but in several Members, ver. 4. As
we have many Members in one Body, and all Members have not the same Office. And
therefore the Apodosis, must also be understood not only of several Gifts, but
of several Offices, and these in several Subjects. And this further appears, by
the very Similitude which the Apostle here uses, which is the same he used, 1
Cor. 12. from the Body natural, wherein there are many distinct Members, and
every Member has its distinct Office; and so it is in the Church of Christ.

3. These Gifts here mentioned, and the Waiting upon them, do necessarily imply
an Office in whomsoever they are; and therefore they are set down emphatically
with an Article, EITE O DIDASKON O PPOISTAENOS. He that has the Gift of
Teaching, and Exhorting, and Ruling, and waits upon this Gift, what is he but
a Teacher, Pastor, and Ruling Elder? And this must either be granted, or else
we must open a Door for all Members of the Church, even Women, not only to
preach and teach, but to rule also, and to wait upon Preaching and Ruling. This
Truth is so clear, as that the Papists themselves being convinced of it, do say
upon this Text, that the Apostle here first speaks of Gifts in general;
Cornelius a lapide, in Romans 12. 6, 7, 8.
and secondly, applies these Gifts to Ecclesiastical Officers, v. 6. and
afterward directs his Exhortation to all Christians in general.

The third Text for the Divine Right of the Ruling Elder, is, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let
the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double Honor, especially they
who labor in the Word and Doctrine. For the understanding of which Words, we
will lay down this Rule; That every Text of Scripture is to be interpreted
according to the Literal and Grammatical Construction; unless it be contrary to
the Analogy of Faith, or the Rule of Life, or the Circumstances of the Text:
otherwise, we shall make a Nose of Wax of the Scriptures, and draw qaidlibet ex
quolibet. Now according to the Grammatical Construction, here are plainly held
forth two sorts of Elders; the one, only Ruling; and the other, also laboring
in Word and Doctrine. Give us leave to give you the true Analysis of the Words.

1. Here is a Genus, a General, and that is Elders.

2. Two distinct Species, or Kinds of Elders, Those that rule well, and those
that labor in Word and Doctrine; as Pastor and Doctor.

3. Here we have two Participles, expressing these two Kinds of Elders, Ruling,
Laboring; the first do only rule, the second do also labor in Word and
Doctrine.

4. Here are two distinct Articles, distinctly annexed to these two
Participles, OI PPOESTOTES, OI KOPIOENTES. They that rule, they that labor.

5. Here is an eminent discretive Particle, set betwixt these two kinds of
Elders, these two Participles; these two Articles evidently distinguish one
from the other, viz. MALISTA, especially they that Labor, etc. And where-over
this Word MALISTA is used in the New Testament, it is used to distinguish Thing
from Thing, or Person from Person; as Gal. 6. 10. Phil. 4. 22. 1 Timothy 5. 8. 1 Timothy 4. 10. Tit. 1. 10. 2 Timothy 4. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 10. Acts 20. 38. In all which
Places, the Word [ especially] is used as a discretive Particle, to distinguish
one Thing from another, or one Person from another; and therefore being applied
here to Persons, must necessarily distinguish Person from Person, Officer from
Officer. It is absurd to say, (says Dr. Whitaker) that this Text is to be
understood of one and the same Elder Whitak. in Pr^lectionibus suis, ut refert
in Refutatione Dounami. Sheervodius, cited by the Author of Altar Damascen.
cap. 12. page 925, 926.
. If a Man should say, All the Students in the University are worthy of double
Honor, especially they that are Professors of Divinity; he must necessarily
understand it of two Sorts of Students. Or if a Man should say, All Gentlemen
that do Service for the Kingdom in their Counties, are worthy of double Honor,
especially they that do Service in the Parliament; this must needs be
understood of different Persons. We are not ignorant, that Archbishop Whitgift,
Bishop King, Bishop Bilson, Bishop Downam, and others, labor to fasten diverse
other interpretations upon these Words, which would be over tedious here to
rehearse. Only thus much we crave leave to say, which we (...) may be seriously
weighed; That all other Senses that are given of these Words, are either such
as are disagreeing from the Literal and Grammatical Construction, or such as
fall into one of these two Absurdities, either to maintain a Nonpreaching
Ministry, or a Lazy-preaching Ministry, to deserve double Honor. Archbishop
Whitgift Whitgift against Cartwright.
by the Elder that rules well, understands a Reader that is not a Preacher. Dr.
King In a Sermon of his in Print.
, a Bishop ruling, and not preaching: which is to say, that a Non-preaching
Minister deserves double Honor. Dr. Bilson D. Perpetua Eccl. Gubernat.
says, that the Words are to be understood of two Sorts of Elders, and that
the Meaning is; That the Elder that rules well, and preaches, is worthy of
double Honor; especially they that Labor, that is, that preach abundantly,
that do KOPIAN, Labor as a Water-Man at his Oar: which is as much as if he had
said, that a lazy Minister, or a seldom-preaching Minister, deserves double
Honor. For all Preachers are in Scripture required KOPIAN, to Labor
abundantly, 1 These. 5. 12. 1 Cor. 3. 8. where the same Word is used that is
here expressed. If the Apostle had meant to have distinguished them by their
extraordinary Labor, he would rather have said, OXTHOUNTES, than KOPIONTES for
otherwhere he uses OXTHOS, as a Degree of painful Labor, [2 Cor. 11. 27. 1
These. 2. 9.] above KOPOS, which is ^ut for common Labor, Romans 16. 12. Dr.
Dow^am and others, interpret the Words of one and the same Elder, thus; The
Elders that rule well, are worthy of double Honor, especially they that
Labor; that is, (say they) especially they laboring, or especially because
they labor. And so they make their laboring to be the chief Cause of their
double Honor. But this Interpretation is against the Eternal Meaning: for the
Greek is not EI KOPIOSIN, if they Labor, but ALISTA OI KOPIONTES, especially
they that Labor. Here is a Participle with an Article, and a discretive
Particle, which can never be rightly and literally translated causatively. And
therefore we conclude, Beza in 1 Timothy 5. 17. Piscator in locum. Cal^. in loc.
together with our Reformed Divines, that this Text, according to the proper
and Grammatical Construction of it, does hold forth unto all unprejudiced
Christians, a Ruling Elder, distinct from a Teaching Elder, which is the Thing
we undertook to prove.

FINIS.

