Mr. Chauncy's Artillery-Election SERMON, June 3. 1734.

Character and Overthrow of LAISH considered and applied. A SERMON Preached at
the Desire OF THE Honorable Artillery-Company In Boston, June 3. 1734. Being
the Anniversary Day For their Election of Officers.

By Charles Chauncy M. A. Pastor of the First Church in BOSTON.

Judges 18.9, 10. And they said, arise, that we may go up against them: for we
have seen the land, and behold it is very good -- When ye go, ye shall come to
a PEOPLE SECURE, and to a large land --.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNELLAND and T. GREEN, for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhill. 1734.

A Caution against Security.
JUDGES XVIII. 27, 28. And they -- came to LAISH, unto a people that were at
quiet and secure, and smote them with the edge of the Sword, and burnt the city
with fire. And there was no deliverer, because they were far from ZIDON.


SO many annual seasons, have, through the divine goodness, revolved over us,
wherein we have been invited into the house of the Lord, to wait upon him, that
the military exercises of this day might be sanctified with the word and
prayer, that it is difficult fixing on a subject, su^ed to the occasion, that
has not been quite exhausted. I could think of no words more proper to employ
our meditations, than those I have now read: And perhaps they were never more
pertinent than at present; when rumors of war do sound in our ears, and our
condition is such a poor defenseless one, that our enemies may with ease come
to us, and smite us with the edge of the sword, and burn our city with fire:
Nor upon a surprise, could we have a deliverer, being at so great a distance
from our ZIDON.

THE words are a plain historical narration: and in them we may take notice of
these four things.

I. THE City here spoken of. II. THE Character given the Inhabitants of it.
III. THEIR being conquered and totally overthrown. IV. THEIR having no
deliverer, being far from ZIDON.
I. WE may take some brief notice of the City here spoken of. And this was
LAISH. It was formerly called LESHEM Context Ver. 25
; and after its conquest by the Danites, DAN ibid.
, in honor to the memory of the Patriarch of this name, from whom this tribe
descended. In later times, when the Romans had extended their dominions to
these eastern parts of the world, it was called PANEAS, and made the Metropolis
of two considerable Provinces. And from Philip the Tetrack, Son of Herod the
great, who very much enlarged and adorned it, it was called CAESARIA-PHILIPPI,
after his own, and the Emperor Tiberius Caesar's name. Bp. Patric^ on Joshua
19.4^.


IT lay in the uttermost northern border of the land of Canaan, opposite to
Beersheba in the uttermost southern border. From whence that saying we so
frequently meet with in Scripture, when they would express the whole length of
Canaan, from Dan to Beersheba. Aff^m^^. A^r^^at. o^ J^^h^a 19.4^. Bp. Patrick
in com^^^ Ver. 29.


It Is situation was pleasant; at the foot of the hill Libarus, in the plain of
Te^ob, near the place, where the two fountains Jor and Dan running into one,
make the celebrated River Jordan. Durch An^^tat in loc. and J^^hua 19.4^.


WE have no particular account of the bigness of this City It was probably of
but small extent: Yet was it seated in the midst of a large, fine and fertile
country, from whence they supplied themselves with all manner of provisions.
The spies sent forth from the tribe of Dan to search the land, do therefore
unite in that Report about it, v. 9. -- We have seen the land, and behold, it
is very good. V. 10. When ye go, ye shall come -- to a large land: -- a place
where there is no want of any thing in the earth. -- But I will not detain you
too long upon what is less pertinent to the design I have in view. Wherefore,

II. WE may now consider the character here given of the inhabitants of LAISH.
And they came to LAISH, unto a people that were AT QUIET AND SECURE. We have
much the same account in v. 7. They dwelt CARELESS, -- QUIET AND SECURE. That
is to say, they did not perplex their minds with concern about their enemies;
had no sense of danger; were though it less of a surprise, and without expectation
of any sudden assault. Being at peace with their neighbors, and having been
so, perhaps a long time, they had settled into habitual security, dwelt without
fear, and knew no uneasiness from an apprehension of being liable to be
destroyed.

AND as the effect of this careless temper, they were shamefully negligent of
their own safety; had taken no care to keep up a martial spirit, or encourage a
knowledge in the art of war. Probably they had no disciplined soldiers; none
used to military exercises; none acquainted with the management of the spear,
the sword or bow; or that had either skill or courage to speak with the enemy
in the gate. Or if they were ever so expert and valiant, it was to little
purpose, having neither forts nor batteries, nor any other strong holds to
defend themselves. Perhaps they had never been at the expense of erecting
fortifications; or otherwise, they had carelessly suffered them to fall into
ruin, and were now in no posture of defense. The passes into their city were
all naked and unguarded; they were altogether unprepared for an attack, and
every day liable to be surprised and taken: And yet they were as calm and easy,
and as safe from danger in their own apprehensions, as though they had been ever
so well guarded; and in circumstances to defend themselves against the most
powerful enemy.

THIS is the character of the inhabitants of LAISH: thus careless and secure
were they. And two things are mentioned in my context, which might contribute
hereto.

I. THEY had their dependence on ZIDON for protection and security. Several
hints are given from whence we may collect this. In the latter part of my text,
it is said, There was no deliverer because it was far from ZIDON. And in the 7.
v. it is recorded of the spies, that they found it was far from the ZIDONIANS.
It looks as though the ZIDONIANS were the great protectors of the LAISHITES;
their chief strength and security. Perhaps they were a COLONY planted from
ZIDON, still under their care and jurisdiction. They are said v. 7. to have
dwelt after the manner of the ZIDONIANS. i. e. They imitated their customs, and
conformed to their way of living; one very natural account whereof is, their
having originally sprang from them. To be sure, the ZIDONIANS were at amity
with them, firmly attacht to their Interest, and in readiness to engage on
their behalf against all opposers.

Now the ZIDONIANS were a large and powerful people; well able to defend
themselves, and upon timely notice to protect the city of LAISH. And upon this
account, they might be off their guard, and in their own opinion free from
danger. However weak and defenseless in themselves, they were yet easy;
depending upon the strength of ZIDON; not considering their distance from that
place; and that they might be surprised and destroyed, before they could call
in their assistance. Perhaps they flattered themselves, their enemies would not
dare attempt an expedition against them, while they knew they were the friends,
and it may be the Government of a people so powerful as were the ZIDONIANS.

2. THEY had no Magistrate in the land to put them to shame in any thing, as we
read in v. 7. There is no need of understanding these words in the most rigid
sense, as if there were none among the LAISHITES clothed with civil Authority;
But only that there was wanting a due care in Magistrates to execute the trust
reposed in them: One flagrant instance whereof, was, their being themselves
easy, and suffering the People to be so too, while their Country lay in a
wretched defenseless state; exposed to every invader, and liable to be taken
from them. It belonged to those who were the heads of the People, to provide
for their safety and security. They should have been sensibly touched with
concern to behold their weak and shiftless condition, and taken effectual care,
by warlike preparations, to place them in a posture of defense. They should
have put the People to shame in consideration of their faulty ease and
security, while naked and unfortify'd; and encouraged their coming into
measures to strengthen their borders against the attempts of their enemies And
their not being so tho'tful of this as was proper and becoming, was no doubt
one great reason of their living in such unguarded circumstances.

I shall only add, this carelessness of the People of LAISH, was a Character
very disgraceful. It Is recorded in my Text to their dishonor; as an argument
of their want of policy, and a due regard to their own safety. And it is really
a reproach to any People, considering the lusts of Men, and the wars and
fightings every where arising in the world here from, to neglect securing
themselves against invaders. It was owing to this that LAISH was destroyed. If
they had been strengthened with walls and bulwarks; if they had encouraged
among them a number of men of valor, expert in war, that knew how to keep rank
and withstand an enemy, the DANITES would have been discouraged from any
attempts against them. 'Twas the careless, secure posture they were in, that
invited them to enter their land; and it must be ascribed chiefly to this, that
they so easily smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt their city with
fire: Which leads me,

III. To consider the conquest and overthrow of LAISH. And they came to LAISH,
-- and smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt the city with fire. Two
things are here worthy of notice. (1.) The persons making this conquest. (2.)
The conquest it self.

1. THE persons making this conquest. And these were the DANITES: Not the whole
tribe, who, so long ago as when they entered Canaan, were above sixty thousand
men Numb. 26.43.
; but only a small regiment chosen out of the rest upon this occasion. They had
before (as became the subtilty of DAN, who was as a serpent by the way) sent
out spies to search the land, and inquire into the posture of its inhabitants:
And from the account they brought of their strange security and unguarded
condition, they concluded six hundred men, expert and valiant, and well fitted
with weapons of war, would be sufficient to make an easy prey of them. A small
force it should seem to enter into an enemies country! and this upon a design
of making themselves masters of it: But knowing their circumstances before
hand, that they should find them careless and at ease, and in no posture of
defense; they wisely thought a handful of men would be able to surprise and
take them.

2. The conquest it self. And this was great and surprising. It Is said, they
smote them with the edge of the sword, i. e. the inhabitants of LAISH. And this
they did, it should seem, without limitation or distinction. Their eye did not
pity, nor their hand spare; but they greedily fell upon them, and made a most
awful and universal slaughter. As Israel was commanded to do to Amalek, they
slew both man and woman, the infant and the suckling. Having drawn the sword,
they did not return it back, till they had destroyed both male and female, the
high as well as the low; the young man and the virgin; the (...) also, and the
man of gray hairs. A most astonishing destruction! -- O the distress of the
poor frightened and amazed people! -- How bitter were their shreiks and cries!
-- how doleful their dying groans and agonies! -- But what still heightens the
horror, the city was set into flames, and consumed to ashes. For so it follows,
and burnt the city with fire.

IT may look as though the DANITES were herein wanting to themselves and their
own interest. But possibly they did this in the heat of battle, when men's
tho'ts an't about them, and they are wont to neglect their own future
advantage: or which is more probable, they might set the city on fire, the more
to surprise the people, to strike them with the greater terror, that they might
obtain a more easy conquest over them.

AND in this action of theirs against LAISH, we have a remarkable
accomplishment of an ancient prophecy concerning Dan. We read, Deuteronomy. xxxiii.
22. And of Dan, he said, Dan is a lions whelp. And in this expedition he proved
himself to be so. i.e. He resembled a fierce and courageous young lion. It
follows, He shall leap from Bashan. Dan had no inheritance near Bashan. The
comparison therefore lies in his being like a lion leaping on Bashan. "'It Is one
property of the lion to leap upon his prey, and fasten his nails and teeth into
it: And so did the DANITES suddenly leap, as it were from one end of Canaan to
the other, and seize upon the city of LAISH". And no doubt, this is the thing,
the spirit of GOD had in view in this prophetic description. And it is a good
illustration of the jewish story, that this event, so many hundred years,
before its accomplishment, should be made one of the main strokes in Dan's
character.

BUT here arises a question of some importance, and that is

HOW could the DANITES, without great wickedness, barbarity and injustice, thus
come upon the LAISHITES, and totally destroy them?

IF we consult our context, we shall find, the great reason of their
undertaking this expedition was, that they might have a more commodious
Settlement. That which they possessed already was too scanty; they were by the
Amorites pent up into a narrow compass: and 'twas this that obliged them to
seek out for better quarters elsewhere, at least for part of their tribe; and
that led them to go up against LAISH, having received a favorable report of
their land. But where is the justice of warring against this people, and taking
away their lives, that they might seize upon their properties, and inherit
their land? What right does the want of a good settlement in one people, give
them to invade the possessions and destroy the lives of another, who are
favored in this respect? Surely it can convey none at all: and if it was all
that could be said in defense of this action of the DANITES, that they wanted
an inheritance, it would deserve no better a name than wicked violence; the
most barefaced robbery and murder.

LET it therefore be observed,

THE whole land of Canaan (within the bounds of which lay the city of LAISH,
with all its territories,) was firmly conveyed by deed of gift from the GREAT
SOVEREIGN of the World, to ABRAHAM, and his POSTERITY, to be their possession
forever. To this purpose we read, Genesis xii. 6, 7. And ABRAM passed through the
land --. And the CANAANITE was then in the land. And the LORD appeared unto
ABRAM, and said, UNTO THY SEED WILL I GIVE THIS LAND. The same promise is very
particularly repeated, Chap. xiii v. 14, 15. And the LORD said to ABRAM, --
lift up now thine eyes and look from the place where thou art, northward, and
southward, and eastward, and westward. For all the land which thou see, TO
THEE WILL I GIVE IT, AND TO THY SEED FOR EVER. And in the xv. chap. 18. v. we
have recorded a most explicit and formal grant of this land. In that same day
the LORD made a covenant with ABRAM, saying, UNTO THY SEED HAVE I GIVEN THIS
LAND, from the river of Egypt, unto the great river, the river Euphrates. And
when THE SEED OF ABRAHAM were multiplied into a great people, we find the
blessed GOD thus bespeaking them, Exodus vi. 8. And I will bring you into the
land, concerning the which I did swear to GIVE IT, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob; and I WILL GIVE IT YOU FOR AN HERITAGE. From these texts it appears
plain, that the land of Canaan was given of GOD to the people of Israel; and
that the grant was several times repeated in the most ample and solemn manner.

Now the infinite GOD having the first and most absolute and indisputable title
to this whole earth, a grant of any part of it from him must convey the best
and surest claim; a title paramount to all others, and that will remain good
against every other claim, how long so ever any persons of any nation or
character may have been in possession of the land thus conveyed. For all
nations as well as particular persons, originally hold what they possess, under
GOD as maker and Lord-proprietor of the world: and therefore they are at best
but tenants at evil; and he may at his pleasure make over a right to other
persons: nor may any dare say to him, what do thou?

FROM these premises, it may be affirmed, though the city of LAISH and the land
bordering thereon, were possessed by those who had long been inhabitants of
Canaan; yet that they were not the true owners of what they had in possession.
The city they lived in, and the lands they had under improvement, were the
property of the feed of Abraham, freely granted and confirmed to them from the
great Lord of the whole earth: and they had a right to enter upon possession of
what had been thus given them, whenever they saw fit. And as the DANITES, who
were the posterity of Abraham, and one of the tribes of Israel, were now in
want of a good settlement, there was no obstacle in the way of their coming to
LAISH, if they were able to conquer and turn them out of their land. And though
in the doing of this, they might be instrumental of taking away their lives,
yet might they warrantably do it: for the people of Israel, of whom the DANITES
were a part, not only had a title to the land of Canaan made over to them, but
were commanded and encouraged by the great GOD, to go and take possession of
the land, as we may see at large, in the first chap. of Joshua. And over and
above this, they were empowered to destroy the old inhabitants of the land, as
is plain from a great number of texts, which we are all acquainted with, in the
series of the mosaic history. And it looks as if the supreme majesty had
manifested it to be his mind, that his people Israel should be the executioners
of his wrath upon the simul inhabitants of Canaan, the measure of whose
iniquity was now full.

THE case before us is therefore an extraordinary one. What the DANITES did,
would in any other people, have been utterly unlawful; a great piece of
injustice and iniquity: but a warrantable action in them, because the sovereign
GOD had vacated the right the inhabitants of Canaan had to their possessions,
and conveyed it away from them to the Israelites: and over and above this had
constituted this people his Deputies, to punish their iniquities, which had
ripened them for destruction.

NATIONS and cities should learn herefrom the dreadful evil and danger of sin;
and be afraid to go on commiting it, hardening themselves against GOD, least he
should be provoked in his holy and righteous providence, to bring them to ruin.

THEY should also take heed of encouraging themselves, from this action of the
DANITES, which was out of the common course of things to take up arms against
others. If necessitated hereto in order to redress Injuries, or defend
themselves when unrighteously invaded, or for any other wise and good cause,
they may do well to make use of force: it is consonant to the reason of things,
and perfectly consistent with the laws of our holy religion* Though it is contrary
to both, for nations to act in conformity to the pattern of these DANITES, i.
e. to make war with a people and take away their properties and lives, without
provocation, or having been abused by them: unless with the men of Israel they
could produce a warrant from heaven, to justify their warlike proceedings. But
I must not enlarge here, it is time we proceed now,

IV. To consider, their having no deliverer, because they were far from ZIDON.
Several times in this chapter particular notice is taken of the distance of
ZIDON from LAISH. The spies from the tribe of Dan, presently got acquainted
with this, and set a special mark upon it, v. 7. And no doubt upon their
return, this was one encouraging article in their report to their brethren. And
now that they had gone to LAISH, and taken and destroy^d it, an emphasis is
laid upon this; there was no deliverer, because they were far from ZIDON.

THE least that can be gathered from hence is, whatever was the condition of
LAISH, yet that the DANITES were aware of the strength of ZIDON: and at the
same time well appris'd of their being in league with LAISH, and in readiness
(at least if applied to herefor) to send a sufficient force to guard and
protect them. Their greatest concern therefore seems to have been, to carry on
their design against LAISH so secretly, as that it might not be known, nor if
possible so much as suspected. And this they were under advantage to do, by
reason of the distance between LAISH and ZIDON. These two cities were not very
remote from each other; yet were they so far asunder, that with due care and
caution, the men of Dan might come against LAISH, without the knowledge of
ZIDON. And it was owing to their policy in thus coming against them, that they
were not disappointed in their attempt. If they had proclaimed their design;
advanced toward the city by slow and leisurely steps, giving warning of their
approach; the men of LAISH would doubtless have had help from ZIDON. But
falling upon them suddenly, without the suspicion of the ZIDONIANS, and while
the LAISHITES themselves were tho'tless of danger, they at once destroyed them:
and this, without any deliverer. Says my text, there was no deliverer, because
they were far from ZIDON.

AND herein appears, in the strongest light, the folly of the people of LAISH,
in suffering their city to lie so shamefully exposed to enemies.
Notwithstanding the strength of ZIDON, and their dependence on them for
protection and defense, we see they were totally destroyed. And there is no
place weak and defenseless in it self, but is equally liable to be surprised
and taken, let the power that is their chief guard and safety be ever so
formidable, if it be at a distance.

THE APPLICATION now remains.
AND the use I would make of my text shall be, to recommend a due concern and
care that our TOWN and LAND may be both put and kept in a suitable posture of
defense.

IF it may not be said of us at present, as of the men of LAISH, that we are a
people at quiet and secure, it is because we have but very lately awoke out of
that deep security, which seemed universally to reign in all parts of the
country. To what else can it be ascribed, that so little of a martial spirit
has been visible among us in the days that are not far past? so strange a
neglect to become acquainted with warlike exercises? so shameful a disregard to
the appointed days of muster, by officers as well as soldiers? To what else
can it be attributed, that our frontiers have been settled in so scattered a
manner? and that the people inhabiting them are so generally at ease, while
they lie naked and unguarded, and in case of an unexpected assault, in no
condition to defend themselves? And what other account can be given of that
miserable poor state, in which the chief bulwark to the whole Province has been
reduced? and that the Forts and Batteries in this and our other Seaport Towns,
have been suffered gradually to decay, till at length they have fallen to the
ground?

THESE are certainly instances of a temper and conduct, as far from reflecting
honor upon us, as they proclaim a sad neglect of our own safety. If a number
of Spies had been sent from those who wish us no good, to search our land, and
inquire into the posture of its inhabitants, they must with the Men from the
tribe of Dan when they came to LAISH, have seen the people of the land, how
they dwelt careless, quiet and secure: And the report they would have made upon
their return, must have been like that which the Spies in my context made to
their brethren, Arise that we way go up against them, for we have seen the
land, and behold, it is very good. When ye go, ye shall come TO A PEOPLE
SECURE, and to a large land. And if from such a report, unhappily spread abroad
about our land, our enemies should, without noise, engage in a design against
us, and so carry it on, as on a sudden to surprise this first City of our
Province, what might we expect, but to be smote with the edge of the sword, or
to have our city burnt with fire, or to be laid under some heavy Contribution?
Nor could we, in such a case, expect any relief; being so far from ZIDON the
chief place of our hope and defense

It Is upon this account we behold with pleasure the reviving of a martial
spirit in our land; the care that has lately appeared in many of our officers,
to acquaint themselves with military exercises; to acquire a laudable skill in
the management of warlike weapons, and to gain the character of well
accomplished soldiers. Nor does it afford us less satisfaction to see a
concern and endeavor among our magistrates as well as people, to repair our
decayed castle and batteries, and put them into a condition of being a security
to us.

THESE look like good omens, and yield a hopeful prospect, now that there are
such commotions among the powers of Europe, and danger lest our KING and NATION
should engage in a war, that would make those our enemies, who look with an
envious eye upon us, and may have it in their hearts to make an expedition
against us.

IN a day of such doubtful expectation it will not be though it unseasonable,
earnestly to recommend a care, to exert our selves for our own safety and
security.

OUR CAPTAIN GENERAL will not therefore take it amiss, if we humbly express our
wishes, that such may be honored with commissions in the militia from time to
time, as are of a known character for their loyalty to their king and love to
their country; for their courage and activity; for their martial genius and
accomplishments; for their strict regard to temperance, discipline and good
order. And while we behold such at the head of our regiments or companies, we
thankfully acknowledge the wise care of our CHIEF COMMANDER, in conferring
honor upon well chosen persons: as hereby we are encouraged to hope, that
military skill and valor, together with sobriety and a due decorum, will be
promoted among our soldiers: than which nothing will more tend to make our
militia our glory, as well as strong defense.

SUCH as wear commissions under our CAPTAIN GENERAL, our Colonels, Majors,
Captains, and other officers, are next to be applied to. And as there is just
reason to expect you should be men of valor, expert in war, and well skilled
in all the exercises of the military art; we doubt not you will be ambitious in
these regards, to approve your selves well accomplished commanders. We trust,
you are sensible, a due care to excel in military knowledge, and to make your
selves masters of the art of war, will reflect greater glory upon you, and more
tend to support the dignity and authority of your posts, than mere honorary
titles. And being your selves thoroughly acquainted with the martial art, we
shall depend upon your care and fidelity to diffuse this useful knowledge through
our whole militia. And as with great strictness you have endeavored to know
the state of your several wards, how they have been provided with arms and
ammunition, we flatter our selves you will take a like care to instruct our
soldiers in the use of their arms; how to keep rank, and with art and ease to
put and keep themselves in the best posture as well to offend an enemy, as to
defend themselves. In order whereto, you will not fail to call them together,
as you are empowered: nor upon the appointed seasons of training, will you pass
away the time in mere appearance; but employ your soldiers in such warlike
exercises, as may happily tend to increase that skill and valor, which may fit
them for service, whenever in the providence of God, you shall be called to
fight for the lives and properties, and cities of your country.

AND it were to be wished, our soldiers would more generally attend their duty
upon the known seasons of muster. There is not indeed so great a neglect in
this regard, as in the days that are not far past; nor is the appearance of our
militia so shamefully thin and shattered: yet it is not so large and honorable,
as it might and ought to be. And would it not have a happy tendency to increase
the number, and inhance the beauty and glory of our companies, if persons of
circumstances and character would give their attendance? Nor need they be
ashamed to be seen in arms upon our days of training It would soon become
reputable, and be esteemed an honor, if masters as well as servants, if
gentlemen as well as those in lower life, would for a while more generally
appear in the habit of soldiers, upon military days. And if nothing else will
oblige hereto, it is pity but the fines on delinquents should be increased. They
are found, as stated at present, to be insufficient to answer the good end aim
at. And we cannot but hope, as there is a wholesome law requiring an appearance
in arms on days for training, care will be taken to guard it with a still
heavier penalty: this being a thing so reasonable in it self, and so necessary
to support the honor of a law, without a regard to which, our country must
unavoidably be in a very unsafe condition.

AND as we seem united in a concern for the security of the province in this
juncture of affairs, it may be humbly offered, whether it would not tend to our
honor as well as the safety of our trade, which is now become so considerable,
if measures were concerted in order to our having some guard upon our coasis.
In case of a rupture, we are not likely to suffer more in any thing than by
rapine and violence on the sea. A certain harbor most strongly fortified, not
many hundred miles from this place, lying in the way of all our vessels as they
go and come upon foreign voyages, will doubtless be the resort of a number of
privateers, from whence they may run out, and make fearful depredations on us A
matter not unworthy of our serious consideration: nor is our interest more
deeply concerned in any one thing. And it looks as though we should very much
neglect our own security, if for want of some naval guard, we should suffer it
to be in the power of every little Pickeroon to make a prey of our vessels.

IT may now be expected I should address the HONORABLE COMPANY, at whose
desire I stand in this place.

Gentlemen,

WE greatly rejoice to see you growing in reputation, by the handsome
additions, that have, within these few years, been made to you: and heartily
wish you may go on increasing in number and glory; and that from your body, as
from a seminary for martial accomplishments, our land may be furnished with men
expert in war; fit to stand at the head of our armies, and lead and command in
a day of battle.

How soon such a day may come upon us GOD only knows. It looks as if it would
not be long, before those will be our enemies, who may give us occasion to see,
who have proved their armor; who in the military order have skill and courage;
are best able and will be most active and resolute in defending their country.

AND will it not be a disgrace to this ancient company of the (...), if from
among them there should not appear a number of men, each like the son of a
king, for martial skill and valor?

YOU are by profession soldiers; and by charter, as it were a school to teach
and propagate the military art: wherever therefore in our land, there may be
wanting a warlike spirit and dexterity, we may justly expect to find it here.
Nor will any thing more tend to heigthen the glory of your company, than the
display of a singular and extraordinary expertness in all instances of martial
valor and knowledge.

IN order whereto,

YOU will no doubt judge it needful to take care, who you admit into your
number: being always cautious of those who may have a greater regard to
artillery treats and a few legal exemptions, than to accomplish themselves to
serve their king and country.

YOU will also be so wise as to make choice from time to time, of well
qualified officers; men of a martial genius; of known skill and courage; able
both to instruct and command, and that may appear a (...) at your head.

NOR will you upon your stated trainings, think it enough to be seen in arms
only to make a goodly show: but you will carefully attend the exercises proper
to such days, not merely for diversion, but with a view to accomplish your
selves with yet superior dedegrees of skill in the military art; and this, that
you may be prepared to serve GOD in serving your country, whenever in
providence you shall be called hereto.

WITH such aims we would hope, you have now put on your armor: and we
accordingly wish you a blessing out of the house of the Lord; commending your
persons and the affairs of this day to the direction and care of heaven;
beseeching the almighty to make you strong and courageous; to furnish you with
martial skill and good conduct; and so every way accomplish you, as that you
may be the beauty of our Israel, our safety and defense.

AND let nothing be ever seen among you, that shall stain your glory. Always
beware of sin; and arm your selves against all temptations to it. And as
becomes christian soldiers, be temperate in all things. And if it should be
found, that the entertainments which ordinarily conclude your days of training,
endanger a breach of the great law of sobriety, you will doubtless do well to
take the matter into your serious consideration: And since they plainly run
into an expense, that is no ways balanced by the service they do toward
promoting true military skill and valor, where would be the inconvenience, if
they were laid aside? at least, if they were less frequent, or better guarded
with strict cautionary rules and penalties?

IN fine, forget not your spiritual warfare. Often think, how many the enemies
are that war against your souls; how powerful their strength; how deep their
policy; how indefatigable their pains, that they may pain you forever: And O
beware of their devices! Always be upon your guard; -- and fight courageously
for your precious and immortal souls.

AND let this be the care of us all. We have every one of us, young and old,
men and women, many spiritual enemies to withstand, and finally conquer; or we
are undone forever* And O let us take heed of carelessness and security: Let us
realise our danger, be continually upon the watch, and resist steadfast in the
faith all that seek to destroy us.

AND though we must look to fight against not only flesh and blood, but
principalities and powers, and the rulers of the darkness of this world, and
spiritual wickednesses in high places; yet let us not be disheartened. JESUS
the almighty Savior, is our chief leader and commander: And as he has spoiled
principalities and powers, and made a show of them openly, we may reasonably
hope, while we fight manfully under him, to come off conquerors and more than
conquerors.

ONLY as he has directed, Let us take to ourselves the whole armor of God. --
Let us get acquainted with the use of those weapons that are not carnal, but
spiritual; and mighty through God, for pulling down of strong holds. -- Let us
take heed of entangling our selves with the affairs of this life, that we may
please him who has chosen us to be soldiers. And as good soldiers of Jesus
Christ, let us endure hardness. Let us be sober, vigilant, circumspect. -- And
let us do all that we can to stand; praying always with all prayer and
supplications in the spirit.

AND in the exercise of these military virtues, let us faithfully employ our
selves even to the death. Never let us desert our post, or fly from our
colors; neither let us fight as those that beat the air, but with true life
and vigor, as those that are in earnest, and fight for their souls and a never
ending eternity. And if by surprise, or through the subtilty of our adversaries,
we should get a foil in one (...); let us take heart, and reinforce the battle:
or if we should gain the field; let us not lie by careless and secure, but be
ready for a new onset. And thus let us go on fighting the good fightt of faith,
till we have overcome through the blood of the Lamb and then will our glorious
Head and Leader, confer upon us a crown of life. For these are the words on
which he has encouraged us to hope, Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I
grant to sit with me in my throne even as I also overcame, and am sit down with
my father in his throne, Amen.

FINIS.

