Serious Reflections on late Public Concernments in these Churches.
By Nathaniel Stone, A. M. And Pastor of the Church in Harwich.
December. 24. 1734.
I Observe, in an Ordination Sermon Preached at Colchester about two year ago,
a Lamentation made, that we have sew or no stated and known Rules of Discipline
in our Churches. This is also said to have been the Lamentation of a worthy
Divine lately deceased there. How general this Lamentation is, I know not; nor
do I know any ground at all for it. I thought we had not been without such
Rules, since we have Bibles; how regardless soever we be, as to practical
conformity to them. I suppose we are not by profession, Roman Catholics: if we
be, the Council of Trent has provided us with Rules. But if we be Protestants,
it seems as if we should own no other than the LORD to be our Lawgiver, as
Isai. 33.22. that he has made full provision for us, has given us his Law and
Testimony, according to which we must ever speak and act, as in Isai. 8 20. Has
therein provided a thorough furniture for the Man of God, as 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
Nor has CHRIST directed his Ministers to teach the People any other Rules than
what are therein contained, as in Mat 28.20. I had thought that the Legislative
Power had been lodged entirely in CHRIST our Lawgiver as well as Judge; that
Ministers, Churches, Councils, etc. had nothing to do to make Rules for
Government or Discipline; but were ever to keep close to the Rules that CHRIST
has made for us. If he has provided a thorough furniture for the Man of God,
what has he left for us to do? Can we mend his Work, make his furniture still
more thorough? Did he not know the present state of these Churches when he gave
his Laws? Has he accordingly appointed us to suit Laws for our present
Circumstances? In Civil Government indeed, Ordinances of Men are to be made and
obeyed, as 1 Pet. 2.13. But where is a word of any such allowance in the Church
of CHRIST? It seems as if our blasphemous Pride, leads us to a conceit that we
can perfect his Laws, whenas indeed we have nothing to do but to learn them,
govern by them and obey them. If indeed we differ in sentiment about the
meaning of these Laws or Rules, or are at a loss as to the application of them,
in matters of importance, we have the light of Nature and Scripture both
directing us to apply for light to Councils, whose work it is, not dogmatically
to determine Cases (as has been of late the way) but themselves to seek for
Light by Prayer and other means, and having themselves obtained Light, to lay
it before them that send for them. Quest. But what if they will not receive
Light when offered to them? Answ. The way in that Case is plain: Means must be
used with them, and Patience exercised toward them; and if yet they will not be
informed till their sin arise to Heresy or Scandal, CHRIST plainly tells us
what is to be done with them, whether they be particular Persons, or whole
Churches, in 2 These. 3.6, 14. and Tit. 3.10.

Quest. But what if Christians be uncertain whether what they have against
their Ministers or others, amount to Scandal or no; may they not send for
Councils, and, having raked up what they can against them, lay it before the
Council, that they may see whether it may not amount to Scandal?

Answ. (1) This is indeed the late way, and is expressly cross to Lev. 19.16.
And no way agrees with the disposition of a citizen of Zion, in Psalm. 15.3. (2)
In case of uncertainty as to what amounts to Scandal, Councils may be called to
search for Light, whereby to determine the case, without throwing reproaches on
any that are suspected to have done what amounts thereto. Cannot a case be
supposed and determined without an antiscriptural application of it to any
particular person?


It is wonderful to see what pleas are made about the Platform, in a late Print
called New-England's Lamentations. There be indeed good things in it;
particularly, what is judiciously said of the pernicious Principles of the
Arminians. But how very exceptionable are many things in it? For instance, in
Page 35, that the Churches may choose Ruling Elders, in opposition to their
Pastors judgments. If so, those Words are, no doubt, to be inverted in Heb.
15.17. So in pa. 42, about a Minister's promise before Settlement, which
certainly can never be made by any that have the exercise of Reason and
Conscience; for who can with safety, promise to govern according to the
Platform, whenas its not unlikely, that after a time he may find things in it
that to him appear, in no wise to agree with the holy Oracles. In that case
certainly that word must take place in Acts 5.29 We ought to obey God, rather
than man Again, as to what is called the Third way of Communion: if I
understand what is intended by it; there appears no Scripture warrant therefore.
When ever a Church comes to be evidently Heretical or Scandalous, there needs
no Councils or Synods in that Case. The Churches are bound in duty, ipso facto,
to deny Communion with them, according to that plain and solemnly expressed
precept, in 2 These. 3.6. without waiting for the interposition of any Council
or Synod, what is said in the Platform notwithstanding, though the Composers of
it are readily acknowleged to have been wise and holy Persons. Nor do I object
against Synods expressing in a Platform, their present Sentiments as to the
Scripture way of Church Discipline; yet certainly none may impose these
Sentiments on the Consciences of others as if binding to them. Indeed, so far
as appears, hardly any one Church ever complied fully with the Platform; but
varied, some in one thing, some in another, some in many, according (as is in
Charity to be supposed) as they apprehended the Platform to vary from the
Scripture.

Whatever Pleas are made for any Platform, or Synodical determination, if we be
indeed Protestants we must ever appeal to the Law and Testimony, as in Isai.
8.20 as our only Rule in the concernments of Religion. It was the Bereans duty,
not to take the Sermons even of the Apostles upon trust, but must search the
Scripture, as the Touchstone by which to try them, as in Acts 17.11. and it is
evidently ours also, both as to the Preaching of Ministers, and Determinations
of Synods, Councils, etc And every Christian must be allowed to make a Judgment
for himself, whether that be Scriptural which is said by others so to be. Nor
need there be difficulty in variety of sentiments about the meaning of
Scripture, while we exercise the Charity required in Rom 14.1 and Col. 3.12, 13.

What appears in a late Print of October. 21. 1734. concerning a Salem Pastor,
and Councils on the Case, is surprising. Where there is and long has been a
Positive Charge made by no less than three neighboring Pastors, of gross
iniquity, as Lying, Fornication, etc. in the Pocheh Church; the Ministers, in
conformity to the Antichristian Pecheh Assembly, will by no means regard it.
No, they say, they are willingly ignorant, are at too great a distance. Yea, in
their general Convention, have declared, that they cannot look on themselves
proper Judges; and yet contradictorily, in practice say the quite contrary; for
they judge the Case, and determine that Church innocent, by their communicating
with them in special Ordinances, as they have opportunity. But as to other
Churches (as Sandwich and Salem) where nothing of Scandal appears in the
Pastors, abundance of Pains is taken, by Councils upon Councils, to find out
something to fasten on them; whenas its evident that neither Councils nor
Churches have any thing to do with sinful actions in Ministers (or (...)
either) unless they amount to Scandalous Iniquty, and that proved too, as in
Deuteronomy. 19.15. What have they to do with humane infirmities, since we read as in
Jam. 3.2. Ecel. 7.20. and Phil. 3.12. If such Sins were publicly in an
Ecclesiastic way to be animadverted on, there would be no time to spare from
Church dealings and Councils animadversions from Age to Age.

It Is doubtless evident, as the Sun at noon, that a Pastor may certainly know
of many sinful infirmities in some of the Members of his Church; yea, have
abundant ground for fears and jealousies of scandalous Sin practiced by them,
yet unless he has proof may in no wise publish them; nor then neither, unless
those feared Sins amount to what is scandalous; nor yet then, unless the
Persons cannot be brought to Repentance by more private means. Much less may
Elders be so dealt withal, as is evident from that special guard on their
names, in 1 Timothy 5.19. And how inexcusable then are Councils, harping on their
fears and jealousies of which they speak in their Print, without any proof, and
in direct opposition to that Precept in Lev. 19.16.

If Scandal has been given, in the Salem case, (nothing of which appears) as
much has been offered in the Proposals, as any Christians can Scripturally
desire. On that supposition, Satisfaction and Compensation are plumply offered.
Yea, the Pastor declares that he has ever stood ready therefore. Nor is there a
word objected against the Truth of this his Declaration. And what occasion then
for such numbers of Councils of numerous Churches in them on the Case!

Who would ever have imagined, that the meaning of those words in 1 Cor. 9.22.
was, that Ministers should make public Confessions of their humane frailties,
had not Seventeen Churches given that as the Exposition of them! But I have
done, only adding, that I verily believe that the eminently great Causes of
these strange wanderings in the Churches, is want of deep, solemn and frequent
pondering on, and begging for insight into those Holy Oracles, which are
appointed to be as a Lamp to our Feet, and a Light to our Paths, and
accordingly to be meditated in both Day and Night; and that from hence it is
that some are countenanced in the Ministry, whom the Scripture plainly forbids
to meddle with it; others rightfully in it, reviled in opposition to plain
Divine Commands; with other evils, too many to be enumerated, though greatly to
be lamented.

FINIS.

