The Complaint of James Alexander and William Smith to the Committee of the
General Assembly of the Colony of New York, etc.
Mr. Chairman;
I. IT is with the utmost Regret, that we attend this Committee in the Quality
of Complainants; but the Matter of it too nearly affects us and the Liberties
of this Country, to be buried in Silence. Had our personal Interests been
solely concerned, we might have rested in a patient Expectation of a personal
Remedy in some other Way: But when the Liberties of a Country are at Stake, and
the Civil Enjoyments of a People sap'd at the very Foundation of them, it
behooves every Man that loves his Country to cry out and give public Warning of
the Danger. This Duty incumbent upon all, engages us in particular, to inform
you, That in the Term of April last, we, in the Case of John Peter Zenger, then
depending in the Supreme Court, filed Exceptions to the Commissions of the
Justices there: The Tenor whereof follows.

The Attorney General, against John Peter Zenger. Upon an Information for a
Misdemeanour.
Exceptions humbly offered by John Peter Zenger, to the Power of the Honorable
James De Lancey, Esquire to judge in this Cause.

The Defendant comes and prays Hearing of the Commission, by Virtue of which
the Honorable James De Lancey, Esquire claims the Power and Authority to judge in
this Cause, and it is read unto him in these Words;

GEORGE the second, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To Our trusty and welbeloved James De Lancey,
Esquire Greeting We reposing especial Trust and Confidence in your Integrity,
Ability and Learning, have assigned, constituted and appointed, and We do by
these Presents assign, constitute and appoint you the said James De Lancey, to
be Chief Justice in and over our Province of New York, in America, in the Room
of Lewis Moris, Esquire Gi^ing and by these Presents gran^^ng unto you, full Power
and lawful Authority, to hear, try and determine all Pleas whatsoever, civil,
criminal and ^i^t, according to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of Our Kingdom
of England, and the Laws and Usages of Our said Province of New York, (...)
^^ing repugnant thereto, and Execution of all Judgments of (...) said Court to
award, and to make such Rules and Orders in the said Court, as may be found
convenient and useful, and as near as may be agreeable to the Rules and Orders
of Our Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer in England. To have
hold and enjoy the said Office or Place of Chief Justice in and over Our said
Province, with all and singular the Rights, Privileges Profits Advantages,
Salaries, Fees and Perquisites unto the said Place belonging, or in any Ways
appertaining, in as full and ample Manner as any Person heretofore, Chief
Justice of Our said Province bath held and enjoyed, or of Right ought to have
held and enjoyed the same, To you the said James De Lancey, for and DURING OUR
WILL AND PLEASURE. In Testimony whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be
made Patent, and the great Seal of Our said Province of New York to be hereunto
affixed. Witness. Our trusty and welbeloved William Cosby, Esquire Our Captain
General and Governor in Chief of Our Provinces of New York, New Jersey, and
Territories thereon depending in America, Vice Admiral of the same, and Colonel
in Our Army, etc. at Fort George in New York, the Twenty first Day of August,
in the seventh Year of Our Reign, and Anno Domini, 1733. Which being read and
heard, the said John Peter Zenger, by Protestation not confessing nor submiting
to the Power of any other Person to judge in this Cause, does except to the
Power of the Honorable James De Lancey, Esquire aforesaid, to judge in this Cause,
by Virtue of the Commission, aforesaid, for these Reasons, viz.

1 st. For that the That such AUTHORITY is so granted, see Chief Justice De
Lancey's Charge to the Grand Jury of the 15 th of January, 1733.
Authority of a Judge of the King's Bench, in that Part of Great Britain called
England, by which the Cognizance of this Cause is claimed, is by the said
Commission granted to the Honorable James De Lancey, Esquire aforesaid, only
during Pleasure; whereas that Authority (by a Statute in that Case made and
provided) ought to be granted during good Behavior.

2 d. For that also by the said Commission, the Jurisdiction and That such
AUTHORITY is so granted, see Chief Justice De Lancey's Charge to the Grand Jury
of the 15 th of January, 1733.
Authority of a Justice of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, in that
Part of Great Britain, called England, is granted to the said James De Lancey,
Esquire which Jurisdiction and Authority, cannot be granted to, and exercised by,
any one of the Justices of the King's Bench.

3 d. For that the Form of the said Commission, is not founded on, not
warranted by, the Common Law, nor any Statute of England, nor of Great Britain,
nor any Act of Assembly of this Colony.

4 th. For that i^ appears by the Commission aforesaid, that the same is
granted under the Seal of this Colony, by His Excellency William Cosby, Esquire
Governor thereof; and it appears not, that the same was granted, neither was
the same granted, by and with the Advice and Consent of His Majesty's Council
of this Province; without which Advice and Consent, His said Excellency could
not grant the same.

Wherefore, and for many other Defects in the said Commission, this Defendant
humbly hopes, that the Honorable James De Lancey, Esquire will not take Cognizance
of this Cause, by Virtue of the Commission aforesaid.

James Alexander, William Smith.


The Exception to the Commission of Mr. Justice Philipse was in these Words
following, viz.

The Attorney General against John Peter Zenger. Upon an Information for a
Misdemeanour.
Exceptions humbly offered by John Peter Zenger, to the Power of the Honorable
Frederick Philipse, Esquire to judge in this Cause.

The Defendant comes, and prays hearing of the Commission, by Virtue of which
the Honorable Frederick Philipse, Esquire claims the Power and Authority to judge
in this Cause; and it is read unto him in these Words.

GEORGE, the second, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To Our trusty and welbeloved Frederick
Philipse, Esquire Greeting: WHEREAS it is Our Care that Justice be duly
administered to all Our Subjects within our Province of New York, and
Territories depending thereon in America; and We reposing especial Confidence
in your Integrity, Ability and Learning, have assigned, constituted and
appointed, and We do by these Presents assign, constitute and appoint you the
said Frederick Philipse, to be second Justice of Our Supreme Court of
Judicature for Our Province of New York, in the Room of James De Lancey, Esquire
Giving and granting unto you the said Frederick Philipse full Power and
Authority with Our other Justices of Our said Supreme Court, to hear, try and
determine all Pleas whatsoever, civil, criminal and ^i^t, according to the
Laws, Statutes and Customs of Our Kingdom of England, and the Laws and Usages
of Our said Province of New York, not being repugnant thereto, and Executions
of all Judgments of the said Court to award, and TO ACT AND DO ALL THINGS WHICH
ANY OF OUR JUSTICES OF EITHER BENCH OR ^ARON OF THE EXCHEQUER IN OUR SAID
KINGDOM OF ENGLAND MAY OR OUGHT TO DO; and also to assist in the making such
Rules and Orders in Our said Court as shall be for the Good and Benefit of Our
said Province, and as near as conveniently may be to the Rules and Orders of
Our said Courts in Our said Kingdom of England. TO HAVE HOLD AND ENJOY the said
Office or Place of second Justice of Our said Supreme Court in and over Our
said Province of New York; together with all and singular the Rights,
Privileges, Salaries, Fees, Perquisites* Profits and Advantages thereto now or
at any Time heretofore belonging or in any ways of Right app^rtaining, unto You
the said Frederick Philipse. FOR AND DURING OUR PLEASURE. In T^stimony whereof
We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patent, and the great Seal of Our
said Province of New York to be hereunto affixed. Witness Our trusty and
welbeloved William Cosby, Esquire Our Captain General and Governor in Chief of Our
Provinces of New York, New Jersey and Territories thereon depending in America.
Vice Admiral of the same, and Colonel in our Army, etc. At Fort George, in
New York, the Twenty first Day of August, in the seventh Year of Our Reign,
Annoque Domini, 1733. Which being read and heard, the said John Peter Zenger,
by Protestation not confessing nor submitting to the Power of any other Person
to judge in this Cause, does except to the Power of the Honorable Frederick
Philipse, Esquire aforesaid, to judge in this Cause, by Virtue of the Commission
aforesaid, for these Reasons, viz.

1 st. For that the Authority of a Judge of the King's Bench, in that Part of
Great Britain, called England, by which the Cognizance of this Cause is
claimed, is by the said Commission granted to the Honurable Frederick Philipse,
Esquire aforesaid, only during Pleasure; whereas that Authority (by a Statute in
that Case made and provided) ought to be granted during good Behavior.

2 d. For that also by the said Commission* the Jurisdiction and Authority of a
Justice of the Court of Common Pleas at Westmi^ster, in that Part of Great
Britain, called England, is granted to the said Frederick Philipse, Esquire which
Jurisdiction and Authority cannot be granted to, and excercised by, any one of
the Justices of the King's Bench.

3 d. For that the Form of the said Commission, is not founded on, nor
warranted by, the Common Law, not any Statute of England, nor of Great Britain,
nor any Act of Assembly of this Colony.

4 th. For that it appears by the Commission aforesaid, that the same is
granted under the Seal of this Colony, by His Excellency William Cosby, Esquire
Governor thereof, and it appears not, that the same was granted, neither was
the same granted, by and with the Advice and Consent of His Majesty's Council
of this Colony; without which Advice and C^ns^nt, His said Excellency could not
grant the same.

Wherefore, and for many other Defects in the said Commission, this Defendant
humbly hopes, that the Honorable Frederick Philipse, Esquire will not take
Cognizance of this Cause, by Virtue of the Commission aforesaid.

James Alexander. William Smith.


2. Upon filing these Exceptions, we expected to be heard, as it was our
undoubted Right by Law to be. And in Justification of our Conduct, we offered
to prove, That the Subject by Law has a Right to take such Exceptions, if be
thinks the Commissions illegal. We also offered to prove, That the Exceptions
taken were warranted by Law, and Valid. But the Judges were pleased to say,
That they would neither bear us, nor allow the Exceptions: But (as we conceive)
most arbitrarily and illegally caused to be entered in the Minutes of the Court,
the following Order.

At a Supreme Court of Judicature, held for the Province of New York, at the
CityHall of the City of New York, on Wednesday the sixteenth Day of April,
1735.
PRESENT, The Honorable James De Lancey, Esquire Chief Justice. The Honorable
Frederick Philipse, Esquire Second Justice.

James Alexander Esqand William Smith, Attorneys of this Court, having presumed
( NOTWITHSTANDING THEY WERE FOR WARNED BY THE COURT OF THEIR DISPLEASURE, IF
THEY SHOULD DO IT) to sign, and having actually signed and put into Court,
Exceptions in the Name of John Peter Zenger, thereby denying the Legality of
the Judges their Commissions, though in the usual Form, AND THE BEING OF THIS
SUPREME COURT. It is therefore ORDERED, That for the said CONTEMPT, the said
James Alexander and William Smith be excluded from any further Practice in this
Court, and that their Names be struck out of the Roll of Attorneys of this
Court.

per Cur. James Line, Cl.

Mr. Chairman;

3. This Order is the Ground of Our Complaint. There are sundry Things in it
which weshall take Notice of, in order to entitle our selves to the Relief of
this Honorable House: The public Interest of this Colony is greatly concerned
in the Consequences of this Order; and for our own Parts, we think it exceeding
hard to be deprived of our Subsistence, merely for having done our Duty.

4. This a surprising Thing to us, that the Gentlemen who made this Order,
could proceed the Length they have done. The good Opinion we were willing to
entertain of them disposed us to think, That they would never have done their
Country and us so great an Injury. Could any Man have thought, that they would
have denied the Subject a Liberty to take an Exception to their Commissions,
when his Right to do so, is so clearly founded in Reason and Law? He must be
but little acquainted with the Laws of England, who could possibly make a
Doubt, Whether the Subject had such a Right? But these Gentlemen, without
Question, had seen that Matter fully treated of in the Case of Mr. V^n Dam, in
his Plea to the Jurisdiction of the Justices of the Supreme Court, to ^^oceed
in a Course of Equity. The Argument on that Head had been delivered to one or
both of them in Manuscript, before the Day appointed for hearing thereof, and
had been long printed before they made the abovesaid Order. In that Argument,
from page 14, to 35, the Right of the Subject to take such Exception, is
established upon such Principles as have not yet been shaken, nor do we suppose
that the Reasons and Authorities there offered will ever be answered. The
Substance of what is there printed, would have been repeated in the Case of
Zenger, had not these Gentlemen thought fit to CONDEMN us and the Exceptions
UNHEARD. This surprising Method of Conduct, is not to be warranted by the
Practice of any Country, but where ARBITRARY POWER prevails, and where TYRANTS
rule and SLAVES obey. How unwarrantable such a Precedent, in an English Court
of Justice is, and what is the plain Tendency of it among a free People, needs
but little Penetration to discover.

5. Nothing can be more evident, than that by the Laws of England, the Subject
may in all Courts plead to the Jurisdiction (12 Co. 53.) This was the Opinion
of My Lord Coke; and if what that Oracle of the Law said, was true, it cannot
but be esteemed a bold Act in our Judges, not only to deprive the Subject of
that Right, but also to inflict one of the most severe Punishments, for their
modestly claiming it.

6. It is said in Capt. Streater's Case ( State Trials, The 2d Edit. is used in
this Argument except in this Quotation, which is to be found in 2d Vol. page
209. of 2d Edition.
Vol. 1. page 750.) That our Forefathers left us a Law, by which we might
demand Justice, and not be necessitated to make use of Friends to beg Justice;
and in Proof of it quotes Mirror, Chap. 3. 6. of Exceptions to the Power of a
Judge, thus it is, Sir. I demand the Hearing and Sight of your Commission, by
which you claim Jurisdiction over me.

Anno 13 Edw. I. Chap. 3. When any Man is impleaded before any Justices, and
does allege an Exception, praying that the Justices will allow it; which if
they will not allow, etc. he shall require the Justices to put to their Seal,
etc.

My Lord (says Capt. Streater) this Law of England is a Law of Freedom and a
Law of Freeme and not of Slaves; it is a Law that setleth a Right in its
Subjects.

7. Thus has the Law and Liberty of the People, been always understood to be in
our Mother Country. And in the same Book and Chap. cited by Capt. Streater, (
Mirror Chap. 3. 6.) it is further said, that the Party may plead thus: Sir, I
appeal from this Commission, because it makes no Mention of the Cause, for
which I was brought to Judgment, or not of that Point; or, because you have no
Cognizance in such a Point; or, because it is vicious, and that may be diverse
Ways, as if it be not Sealed with the King's Seal of the Chancery; for none is
tied to yield Obedience, according to the Laws and Customs of the Realm, to the
King's Privy Seal, or to the Seal of the Exchequer, nor unto any other Seal,
but only to the Seal which is assigned to be known of the common People, and
especially in Jurisdictions and original Writs, if not for the King only. Or it
may be vicious, because the Seal is counterfeited or falsified; or, because the
King is not named in the Writ, be not being out of the Kingdom, nor in Ward;
or, because the Writ contains Summons in the Action where it is personal; or,
Attachment where the Action is mixed or real; or, because the Seal is not
fastened to the Parchment, but one may remove it, and take it from it at his
Pleasure; or, because the Writ was brought too late, or too soon; or, because
it has ^^^ure, or Interlining, and Diversity of Hands and of Words, or false
Latin; or, because the Writ is written upon Paper, or Parchment which is
forbidden; or, for Default found in the Writ, as the Omission or Transposition
of a Word, Syllable or Clause, as it is of abateable Writs; or, because the
King dred before the Writ was brought; or, because the Writ is false in the Day
of the Date; or, because the Commission requires the Association of one who is
not present; or, because the Writ was never sealed; or, because the Fact was
not done within his Jurisdiction; or, in a Plea not there determinable; or,
because the Judge bath not Power or Conusance, either of the Quality or the
Quantity of the Thing. --

This single Authority proves, not only the Right of the Subject to take such
Exception to the Commissions of Judges; but also shows many Causes and Grounds
for it. And what was here above 500 Years ago declared to be Law, was, in the
Case of Mr. Van Dam, proved by many Reasons and Authorities, to have been the
Law in all past Times; and also, that it still is the Right of the Subject, and
the Law of the Land to this very Day.

8. But as the Cause of Mr. Van Dam was a Civil Cause, and the Examples there
given, to prove the Right of the Subject to plead to the Jurisdiction, and to
take Exception to a Judge's Commission, are chiefly taken from Causes of the
same Nature; therefore, to bring the Matter more home to the Case of our Client
Zenger, we beg Leave to add here some modern Examples, even in criminal Causes,
that prove the same Point. And the same Examples will also clearly prove, that
a Council's signing such Plea, or Exception, which he thinks pertinent to his
Client's Cause, cannot, consistent with Reason or Law, be termed a CONTEMPT; as
has groundlessly been suggested against us in the aforesaid Order.

9. But we must first observe here, that it is a Rule in Pleading (as in Regula
P^^^itandi 56) That all special Pleas (which those to the Jurisdiction
particularly are) ought to be signed by Council, otherwise it is a sufficient
Objection against them, (which Rule is exemplified in State Trials, Vol. 3.
page 229. and in Vol. 4. page 212, 213, 214.) From whence we may infer, that
when a Plea to the Jurisdiction, made by the Advice of Council, is offered, or
received, it consequently is to be esteemed signed by Council, though it is not
expressly mentioned, to be signed by Council.

10. The first modern Case we shall mention, is the Case of Fitzbarris (State
Trials, Vol. 3. 229) who, in the Year 1681, was indicted of High Treason. That
Man offered to plead to the Jurisdiction of the King's Bench (whose Powers our
Judge^ seem to claim by the common Law) but the Judges there were so far from
thinking it a Contempt in him, to offer to plead to their Jurisdiction, that
they assigned him several of the best Council in England to draw it, and gave
him three Days Time for those Council to draw that Plea in, which Plea those
Council drew, and brought it into the King's Bench, and prayed that it might be
received, and it accordingly was received, and the Attorney General demurred to
it, and the Council for the Prisoner joined in Demurrer.

I believe none will say, that the Time in which this Example happened, was the
most favorable to the Liberty of the Subject; yet even then it was looked upon
to be lawful to pread to the Jurisdiction of the King's Bench, the highest
Court of Common Law of ordinary Jurisdiction in the Kingdom; and it was not
esteemed any Crime or CONTEMPT for a Lawyer to sign and file such Plea.

11. A second Example to this Purpose, is the Case of the Lord Delamere (State
Trials, Vol. 4. 212.) who was tried for High Treason, in the Year 1685. a Time
when Arbitrary Power threatened the Destruction of the Constitution, and which
brought about that Revolution, which soon followed. In that Case the Lord
Delamere offered a Plea to the Jurisdiction of the Lord High Steward, and the
Peers commissioned to try him; but his Plea was objected to, for want of
Councils Hand to it; whereupon he prayed to have Council assigned him, to put
it in Form, and to argue it, which was agreed to be allowed him, if he had them
ready; the Lord High Steward saying, If the Lord Delamere insists upon having
his Council heard, it is not fit for me to refuse bearing what they can say;
and afterward, If you insist upon it to have your Council beard, GOD FORBID
THAT I SHOULD DENY IT! Upon which it may be observed, that though this was in the
Year 1685. three Years before the Revolution, and a very bad Time, yet even
JEFFERYS then Lord High Steward, was so far from thinking Council criminal to
sign a Plca to the Jurisdiction, that it was allowed the Prisoner to get
Council to do it, and it was objected to, for being without Council's Hand; and
least it may be supposed he might be Guilty of Condemning unheard, he, even
JEFFERYS, in an apparent Horror at such a Thing, says, God forbid that I should
deny to hear his Council!

12. But if it should be objected, that the Pleas in these two Cases, were not
to the Judges Commissions, nor to the Being of those Courts, but tended only to
oust or deprive those Courts, of the Jurisdiction of those particular Causes,
we shall offer two other Examples.

In the Year 1686, two Years before the Revolution, King James the second
erected High Commission Courts, and made the Lord Chancellor JEFFERYS and other
Instruments of Arbitrary Power, whose Names are now infamous, to be the Judges
thereof; before which Court, by Virtue of one of these Commissions, the Bishop
of London was cited, for not obeying the King's Command to suspend Dr. Sharp,
for preaching against Popery. When the Bishop appeared, he demanded a Copy of
their Commission. JEFFERYS told him, it was on Record, and to be bought for a
Penny in every Coffee-House in Town; the Bishop said, he had not seen it, and
begged some Time to advise with Council what to answer; and they, even they,
gave him a Week, and in five Days afterward, he came and begged a Fortnight
more, and they also gave it to him, to advise with Council. At the Time last
appointed, the Bishop came with four Council, and a Plea ready drawn, to their
Jurisdiction, and offered that Plea; and the Bishop said, he was told, That to
plead such Plea, was a Right every one has to make use of, when he finds it for
his Advantage, and says, my Council tell me, That Tour Proceedings in this
Court are directly contrary to the Statute Law, and are here to plead it, if
Tour Lordships will admit them. Upon which the Lord Chancellor JEFFERYS said,
We will neither hear Tour Lordship, nor Your Council, We are satisfied of the
Legality of Our Commission.

Upon which it may be observed, That though those Council had advised, signed,
and were ready to argue in support of that Plea to their Jurisdiction, which
was to their Com^issions and whole Power; yet it does not appear, that even
this infamous Chan^^llor JEFFERYS gave them the least harsh Word, for so doing
(though, to his p^^petual Shame, he refused to hear the Bishop or his Council to
that Plea,) but admitted those Council afterward to argue upon the Merits of
the Cause. This appears by Vol. 3. of Kennet's History of England, page.. 458.
etc. and State Trials, Vol. 4. page 846. etc. and History of the Reign of the
Stewards, 711.

13. The second of these Examples is in the Year 1687. one year before the
Revolution, before the High Commissioners, Chancellor JEFFERYS, and others: The
Case was thus; King James the 2d commanded the University of Cambridge to admit
a Papist to the Degree of Master of Arts, which they refused to do; and for
that Contempt were cited before the High Commission. They appeared by their
Vice Chancellor, and eight of their Senate. Whereupon the Vice Chancellor
prayed, and bad Time to answer, with Leave to put the Answer in Writing, and
with Council, and by what Council be pleased. At the Time appointed they
pleaded to the Jurisdiction of the Court, both as to that particular Case they
were cited for, and as to the whole Power of the Court, by setting forth the
Act of 16 th of Charles the first, that enacted, that no such Court as that
should be afterward held. Which Plca was received, and read, and when read,
the Chancellor JEFFERYS asked, if it was signed? Whereupon it was answered, Tes
My Lord; and then the Matter was taken into Consideration for a Week: But it
appears not by this Case, that even that wicked Man, the Chancellor JEFFERYS,
ever so much as thought, that those Council acted amiss, for advising or
signing of that, or the former Plea in the Bishop of London's Case: Though in the
last Case, to the shame of that Court, JEFFERYS pronounced the Judgment of it,
which was, That, as a Mark of His Majesty's and their Lordships DISPLEASURE,
they thought fit to appoint, that the Vice Chancellor should be thenceforth
deprived of that Office. All which appears in the 4 th Vol. of the State
Trials, from page 250. to 259.

14. These Authorities, with what is referred to in the Argument of Mr. Van
Dam's Council, are a full Proof, that it is by Law the Right of the Subject to
take Exception, either to the Jurisdiction of the Court, or the Commission of a
Judge. And if this be the Right of the Subject, how consistent is it with the
GREAT CHARTER to deny it to him? It is said there, Nulli negabimus, nulli
differemus Justitiam vel Rectum. We will deny no Man, we will delay to no Man,
Justice or Right.

Now this Law was made our Birthright (see My Lord Coke's Comment. upon 2 d
Inst. 56.) And to observe this Law, not only the King, at His Coronation, but
all his Judges of Common Law, are or ought to be sworn. And if this is the
Subjects Right, what Judge, without Violation of his Oath, can deny it? And how
can it, consistent with either Reason, Law or common Sense, be termed a
CONTEMPT to claim that Right? Or for Council to sign and file Exceptions in
Consequence of that Right?

15. In the next Place we observe, that the Suggestion, in the said Order, That
the Exception denis the Being of the Supreme Court, is altogether without Truth
and groundless. Had the Supreme Court no other Foundation than the Judges
Commissions, there might have been some Truth in that Suggestion. In such Case,
to deny the Lawfulness of their Commissions, would be to deny the Being of the
Court: But it is well known, that the Being of the Supreme Court has a quite
different Foundation.

16. It was, till lately, understood to have been founded on Ordinances,
several of which have been made from Time to Time, either to give or continue
its Being, the last of which was published in the Supreme Court, in the
Presence, and by Order, of these Gentlemen, and bears date no longer ago than
the 19 th March, in the sixth Year of His present Majesty's Reign. But suppose
it to exist or have its being by the Common Law, as some have lately imagined,
and which seems to be Mr. Chief Justice's Opinion (see his Charge to the Grand
Jury of 15 th January, 1733. page 4. Gentlemen, -- [whole Paragraph to] --
now.) Yet in either Case, it does not derive its Being from the Commissions of
the Judges, but wholly from the Ordinance, or Common Law; and therefore to deny
the Lawfulness of their Commissions, cannot, consistent either with Truth or
Reason, be called a Denial of the Being of the Supreme Court.

17. Now the Exceptions deny only the Legality of the Judges Commissions, and
neither affirm or deny any Thing, with respect to the Supreme Court. But both
special Matter pleaded, and the Conclusion, are express to that Commission,
whereof Hearing was given, as will appear to any one that reads them. We
insisted, that the Exceptions did not deny the being of the Supreme Court, at
the Time that the Order was published, and though Mr. De Lancey was pleased then
to acknowledge (with great Truth) That the Court might well exist, though the
Commissions of the Judges were unlawful; yet when we prayed, that the Order
might be amended in that Point, our Request was not granted, but the Order was
suffered to remain as it had been entered. Which Conduct in these Gentlemen,
first in declaring that the Exception denied the Being of the Supreme Court,
when it did not, and making it a Ground of so severe a Sentence; and
afterward, when this Matter was objected to them, and it was admitted, That
the Court might exist, though all the Commissions were unlawful (which of it self
plainly implys, that the Denial of the Legality of the Commissions, was no
Denial of the Being of the Supreme Court) we say, after all this, still to
continue that Suggestion, so plainly repugnant to Truth, as a Reason of their
Sentence, carries with it a more heavy Imputation, than we wish we had Occasion
to take Notice of.

18. Again, in the next place, we would humbly ask, whether any Thing can be
more Arbitrary, than these Gentlemen's pretending to make the Notification of
their Displeasure to be the Rule of our Conduct? Is not, or rather, ought not
the Law to be the only Rule of their and our Duty? Indeed, had they received
their Commissions from the French King, who assigns no other Reasons for his
Mandates, Writs, or Commands, than, Car tell est notre Plaisir, or for such is
our Pleasure; they might in this Point have been excused by the Example of
their Master, and the Arbitrariness of his Government. But for Judges,
pretending to act by Commission from the King of Great Britain, who could give
no Authority, but to act according to Law, and who themselves were, or ought to
have been sworn, to judge according to that Rule; for them, we say, to set up
their Pleasure or Displeasure, as a Rule of Conduct, in the Supreme Court of
Common Law in this Country, and avowedly to make that any part of the Reason of
so severe a Sentence, we believe is not to be paralleled by one Example within
the British Dominions, unless in such Reigns as that of King James the second,
and in such Courts as the High Commission Court, or Star Chamber, and by such
Judges as the cruel JEFFERYS, and others, whose Names will be transmitted to
the latest Posterity with Infamy and Reproach. What can be more astonishing in
a free Country, than for Judges in the Seat of Justice, executing the most
sacred Trust that is delegated by Mankind, who in the Execution of their
Offices, ought to be divested of all Motives either from Pleasure or
Displeasure, Favor or Fear; who cannot suffer the least Mixture of these, to
sway their Judgments, or influence their Determinations, without Violation of
their Oath and sacred Trust; for Men, under such solemn Obligations, to do
right to every Man, according to Law, for such Men, to make either their
Pleasure or Displeasure, the Rule of their Conduct! -- to own it without
Blushing or Remorse! -- nay, to record it in the Supreme Court of this
Province, as a Reason of so severe a Sentence! -- It seems to us so shocking as
to leave no Room for an Apology!

19. These Gentlemen have been so unhappy, as either to have no Precedent to
warrant their Proceedings, or, only such as are taken from the worst of Men, in
the worst of Times. The Bishop of London's Exception, or Plea to the
Jurisdicction of the High Commission Court, was indeed rejected and condemned
un^^^rd: The Vice Chancellor of Cambridge was suspended from his Office, and
the Displeasure of the Court i^ assigned as a Reason of that Sentence. Doctor
Fairfax, a Fellow of a College at Oxford, for vive voce (not by Council)
disputing the Authority of the High Commissioners, boldly to their Faces in
Court, was first suspended, and afterward when no Arts or Threats, in public
or private, could persuade or force him to submit to their Authority, they
struck out his Name from among the Fellows of the College, and gave this for
Reason of their so doing, viz. For as much as you have denied the Authority of
the Court, and have refused to obey the Bishop of Oxon, etc. And these are the
nearest Precedents that we have hitherto found of such Proceedings. But he must
be a great Stranger to the History of England, who does not know how the
Injustice of these Proceedings was resented, and what an Influence they had
upon the Revolution which soon followed: Yet in neither of the Cases cited,
were the Council silenced or debarred of their Practice, for signing such Pleas
or Exceptions. In this Point, our Judges seem to have acted beyond Example, and
have done, perhaps, what no Judge of Common Law ever ventured to do before.

20. These Gentlemen, in that Point, we believe are truly an Original; they
seem to have found out some new Law for this Young Country, and such as its
ancient Mother Country has never heard of: They will not suffer their
Commissions to be disputed or tried, whether they are legal or not, though the
Law requires their Commissions to be published, and the Hearing thereof given,
for that very End: Indeed in this they acted not without a Precedent; The High
Commission Judges, and some others that we could mention, acted in the same
Manner. Sometime our Judges can say, that they have their Authority by the Law,
(see Mr. De Lancy's Charge, 15 th January, 1733.) But then they insist upon it,
that we should take their Word for it, for they will let no Man examine that
Point but themselves.

21. Is not this in consequence to say, We know our Authority to be so good,
that We are incapable of erring in that Point? We know We are so impartial,
though in our own Case, that all the Provisions for Appeal to superior Judges,
as to Us in this Point, are impertinent, needless and useless; and to Doubt of
this, and to claim the Means of Appeal, which is the Right of the Subject from
all other Judges ((...) the dernier Resort, which We pretend not to be) is so
high a Contempt of Our Knowledge, that it deserves a Punishment next to Death,
which depriving a Man of the Means of Living We know to be?

22. Thus the Right and Liberty of the Subject, in one of its most effential
Articles, is broke in upon; and that Remedy, which, by Law, is in every Man's
Power, against an illegal Authority, entirely taken away: For, if a Commission
issue to try my Life, not according to the Law of the Land, but by the
Discretion or will of my Judges, and I may not except to that Commission, and
show it to be unlawful, what Security have I by the Great Charter, that I shall
not loose my Life, but by the Verdict of my Peers? If a Commission Issue to
take away my Estate, by the Discretion or Pleasure of a Court, if I may not
except to that Commission, and show it to be illegal, what Security can I have
of a Trial by Jury, and the Law of the Land? Many such Commissions as these
have issued in Times past, witness the Commissions to the President and Council
of the North, etc. (4 Inst. 243.) which have produced much Rum and Confusion in
the English Nation. What has been may be, and in all Probability will be, if
the Example our Judges have given be drawn into Consequence. And if such a
Commission should issue what Security has the Subject against being utterly
ruined by it, if he may not be allowed his Exception? And if he cannot take
such Exception, but by the Help of a Lawyer, and his Lawyer cannot defend him
against such illegal Commission, but with the Loss of his Livelihood, and the
Ruin of his Family; how deplorable must the Case of the Subject be? How
destitute and helpless! For what Lawyer will dare to undertake his Defense? And
what Motive can induce him to it, when he knows. That the very Attempt to serve
his Client, will have no other Effect than his own Ruin? What a Wound is given
by this Arbitrary Proceeding, to the Liberties of this Country! In consequence
of this Proceeding, Life, Liberty and Estate, are at once seized into the Hands
of Arbitrary Power: For if the best Commission upon Earth is not to be
disputed, and Lawyers must be silenced for daring to attempt it, then the very
worst Commission in the World may soon be obtruded upon a People. For, if it be
a Crime to except to a good Commission, and so grievous a Penalty is annexed to
the doing of it, who will dare to except to a bad one, when no Man can know,
but the Judge may declare the most illegal Commission to be good? Such were the
High Commissions granted in 1686, by King James the 2 d. two Years before the
Revolution, and such were they declared to be, by the Stature that gave King
William the Crown. But yet Chancellor JEFFERYS, and the other High
Commissioners, the Instruments of Arbitrary Power in that Day, had the Front to
declare. We will neither bear you nor your Council in the Matter, Note that the
Words between these Marks [] were intended to be spoken, but were omitted by
mistake.
[ we are sciently satisfied of the Legality of our Commissions, otherwise we
would not be such Fools as to sit here; we know our Proceedings are according
to what has been done formerly; we have an original Jurisdiction, or (in other
Words of the same Meaning?) we have our Power from the Common Law.] And they
barefacedly gave their Master's and their own DISPLEASURE, as Reasons for their
Determinations. When Things come to that pass, then all Protection from the Law
Ceases, and no Remedy against the greatest Injustice and Oppression is left,
but that which is natural, and which then was taken; we mean, The unalienable
Right of the People, to defend themselves against their Destroyers. It Is from
denying the Subject the Benefit and Privilege of the Law, that Insurrections
and Tum^l^^ have been often raised. It Is from such bold and dareing Attempts
upon the Liberties of a People, that Revolutions have spring; and particularly
the latest and most glorious in the British Nations, which prosured a
Re-establishment of our ancient Rights, and secured their Continuance, by the
Settlement of the Succession in the Illustrious House of Hanover.

23. How necessary therefore is it, that the Guardians of our Liberties,
should, in the present Case, look diligently into the Causes of the general
Difcontent, that prevails within this Colony, and in particular into this? And
apply those Remedies to these Grievances, that art within their Power; Not only
as they regard that Peace and Prosperity, which will naturally attend the
secure Enjoyment of our Liberties, but as they would prevent the bitter
Consequences that may follow the Neglect of so plain a Duty.

24. Though it is the undoubted Right of every Englishman, to call into Question
the Commission of (...) Judge, yet it is a Maxim in our Law, That any Man may
renounce (if he pleases) a Matter of Law in his Favor. It Is upon this
Distinction, that our past Conduct, in respect of our different Clients, has
been diversified. In the Supreme Court we never advised an Exception but in one
Case before, and that was in the Case of Mr. Van Dom, who excepted to the Power
of the Judges to proceed according to a Course of Equity. Here ^^ght also to
have been said. -- And afterward excepted to Judge Philipse's Commission, soon
after the Date of it, for Persons nearby the same with these in Zenger's
Exception.
We advised it then, because we thought that Exception necessary for his
Safety, and the Good of the Country.

25. We advised Zenger's Exception for the like Reason; but we have always
omitted it, where we saw our Clients Safety did not require it. Mr. Van Dam's
Exception would not be of any Service to Mr. Zenger, nor will Mr. Zenger's
Exception be of any Service to any one that shall hereafter be prosecuted in
the same Manner, unless such Person will take such Exception in his own
particular Case. We ever thought it lawful for any of our Clients, to bring
the Commissions of the Judges to the Touchstone of the Law: But we never
thought it so necessary as in this Case. We conceived the Innocence of our
Client, no sufficient Security, while we esteemed the Governor his Prosecutor,
who had his Judges in his Power. We had too much Reason for Caution from the
Conduct of the Chief Justice. We heard, how His Honor had vented his
Displeasure against him, when he accidentally met him in the Streets, on a
Sunday before his Arrest. We had been near Witnesses to sundry warm Charges,
and moving Addresses, to several Grand Juries, plainly levelled against Zenger,
and with Intention to procure his Country to Indict him. And we saw his Name
amongst that Committee of Council, which conferred with a Committee of this
House, in order to procure a Concurrence to condemn some of Zenger's Journals,
without giving him an Opportunity to defend them. We heard that the Chief
Justice was a principal Manager upon that Conference, and spoke much on that
Occasion. We saw his Name among those who issued that Order of the Council,
which commanded the Magistrates of this City to attend the Burning of some of
those Journals; and which sets forth, that they bad been condemned by the
Council to be burnt by the Hands of the common Hangman. We much doubted of the
Legality of these Extraordinary Proceedings, of the Chief Justice, and the Rest
of the Council. We saw the Chief Justice's Name, among th^^e, who issued that
Extraordinary Warrant, by which our Client was apprehended. We had seen his
Want of Moderation, in demanding Security in Eight Hundred Pounds, when Zenger
was brought before him, on his Habeas Corpus, though the Act only required Bail
to be taken, according to the Quality of the Prisoner, and the Nature of the
Offense, and though at the same Time, the poor Man had made Oath before him, That
be was not worth Forty Pounds, besides the Tools of his Trade, and Apparel. We
had heard the Chief Justice declare, in the fullest Court we had then ever seen
in that Place, That if a Jury found Zenger Not Guilty, they would be perjured;
or Words to that Effect; and even this before any Information in Form was
lodged against him, As for Justice Philipse, we had been sold, how vigorous and
Active he had been, in the General Assembly, to procure the Concurrence of that
House, with the Council, in the Order for burning of Zenger's Papers; even
before they were legally Condemned; and Addressing the Governor to issue a
Proclamation, with Promise of Reward for the Discovery of the Writers of them;
and in an Order for Prosecuting the poor Printer. We wish we had no Occasion to
repeat these Things, to show the Motives of our Conduct; had we not been
obliged thereto, In Order to vindicate our selves we had much rather that they
had been buried in Silence: But under these many Forewarnings, what could we,
what ought we to do for our Client? Surely every Thing that was lawful and
likely to contribute to his Safety. And in taking the Exception, we conceived
some Benefit would accrue: For, had the Exception been allowed, the Dependence
of the Judges on the Governor (which we thought dangerous to our Client) would
be in some Measure removed, and the Judges have stood more indifferent between
the real Parties; Had it been overruled, yet we had Reason to think, that it
might have proved some Check to an exorbitant Stretch of Power; because, That
if in the dernier RESORT, the Commissions had been judged illegal, any Abuse
offered, after Exception taken, might have rendered the Judges, not only
civilly, but criminally, answerable for their Conduct.

26. Thus either Way, some Advantage was expected, which would have been
entirely lost, if the Validity of the Commissions had been admitted, by
pleading to the Merits of the Cause, without taking the Exception. Hence, with
a sincere Regard to the Safety of the Poor Man, whose Cause we had undertaken,
we advised, and signed, and filed the Exceptions. And had we done otherwise,
our Consciences must have reproached us, with a Breach of Trust, and Neglect of
Duty: Yet neither the Lawfullness of the Action, nor the Uprightness of our
Intention, could screen us from the Resentment of these Gentlemen. We might
have been innocently mistaken, in supposing an Exception would lie, when it
would not, or for Causes not sufficient; and by Law should have deserved no
Censure for offering them. The Business of the Judges in such Case would have
only been, to have overruled our Exceptions, and saved us the Benefit of them,
in the last Resort, if we had thought they would have been of Service to us.
But in this Case, whether the Exceptions were valid or not, was no Ways
determined. The Offense was in offering any Exception at all, and it is for
this only that we are Sufferers. The honest Defense of Our Client in that
Point, was Crime enough with these Judges, to merit what is next to a Capital
Punishment. A respectful Proposal of a Matter of Law to their Judgment, that
had a Tendency to bridle lawless Power, was by these Gentlemen treated, as
Cause sufficient, to deprive us at once of the Fruits of many Years hard and
laborious Study, to dispossess us of an extensive and profitable Practice.

27. It was then full two and Thirty Years, since one of us had first applied
to the Study of the Law (a Time near equal to the whole Age of either of these
Judges) and who for several Years had been one of the oldest Practitioners at
the Bar here; the other of us did not want two Months of Ten Years standing
there, and had had a good Share of Practice for several Years, before either of
these Judges were known to have had any Knowledge of the Law, or pretended to
have made it any Part of their Study. What has been our Character and
Reputation for Ability, of Integrity, in our Practice, and Morals, belongs not
to us to declare: But we hope, our being employed in almost all the Causes
within this Colony, of any Importance, that have depended for several Years
last past, may, as to those Points, in some Measure, witness in our Favor. Yet
no Regard to our Age, to the Experience of so long Practice* to our Innocence,
our Integrity, or Abilities; no Concern for the Interest of our Clients, who
had a Right to our Assistance; nor the public Administration of Justice, which
demanded our Help; no Tenderness or Compassion for our Wives, our many
Children, with which it has pleased God to bless us, which as well as our
selves, had a Right to be provided for, by our honest Industry, could withhold
and restrain these Gentlemen, from exercising the most severe Act of Power,
that perhaps has been ever committed.

28. We have not in all our Reading found, and believe these Gentlemen cannot
produce, any Example of such a Conduct, from the History of England, in the
worst of Times. They may indeed produce Examples of Silencing Attorneys, for
notorious Villainy, or Ignorance, in their Profession. They may possibly also
find some, and but few Examples of doing the like for other Grimes; as for
Instance, one Brown, convicted of Lybelling, was fined 1000 Marks, and struck
out of the Roll of Attorneys: But (because this Crime being neither Villainy nor
Ignorance in his Profession) the Injustice of that Part of the Sentence was
taken Notice of by the House of Commons, and for that, among other Arbitrary
Acts, as the Hindering the Publishing of a weekly News Paper, and putting People
to their Habeas Corpus to be bailed, without just Cause, and discountenancing
the People in Petitioning the King for a Parliament; They, in 1680, resolved to
impeach the Judges, and did impeach Chief Justice Scrogs, the most guilty
Person, and had they not been prorogued, and Chief Justice Scrogs displaced,
and another put in his Room, before the House sat again, they probably would
have prosecuted their Impeachment against him.

29. America possibly may furnish some Examples of the Silencing of Attorneys,
as, we have heard, did happen in the Case of one Mr. Carter, in Parhadoes, who
was silenced by Governor Louther, a Man famous, not for his Virtues; and we
have heard that Mr. Carter recovered several Thousand Pounds Damages in
Westminster Hall, for that Arbitrary Act.

30. Note that the Information we had of those Circumstances in Italick
Letters, in this Paragraph, was not true; but the Paragraph will be, as we
believe, agreeable to Truth, after the Italick Words are struck out.

We have been since informed, that it was the Assembly of NewJersey that
complained of Lord Cornbury, and that Coll. Morris (then one of that Assembly)
was the Drawer of the Complaint, and also that be went to England, against a
then former Go ernour, at his own Expense, and was successful; which Facts, we
believe, gave rise to the Mistake in the Information we had of this Matter, and
which Information we believed to be true, at the Times of our Complaint.


We have heard also that Mr. GORDON was by the Lord CORNBURY silenced in
NEW JERSEY, when he was Governor of that and this Province, and that this
Injury done to Mr. GORDON, made one of the Articles of Complaint against that
Governor, which Coll. MORRIS took a Voyage to ENGLAND, at his own Expense to
exhibit against him; at a Time when this Country groaned under the Weight of
the Arbitrary Proceedings of that Governor and his Instruments; at which Time
the People were made to despair of Relief, by Reason of his great Interest; And
what was more, his being first Cousin to the then reigning Queen; But Coll.
MORRIS proved successful, not withstanding all the Difficulties be bad to
surmount: For, upon the Articles exhibited by him to Queen ANNE, against this
Her near Relation, he was turned out with Disgrace; Queen ANNE declaring, That
it should never be said, that she would countenance, even her nearest
Relations, in oppressing her People; and neither his Nobility, his great
Interest* (...) his near Relation, to the Queen, did protect him, from the
legal Suits of the Subjects here, whom he had injured. Upon which Suits, he lay
near three Years in the Custody of the Sheriff of NEW YORK, after the End of
his Tyranny, as much despised as he had before been dreaded.

31. We believe this Province can afford no Example of such a Treatment, though
there had been the same Occasion for it before this Time. We remember that in
the Year 1725, in the Case between the French Church and Mr. Ron, Mr. David
Jamison, Mr. V^rn^n, and one of us, filed an Exception or Plea to the Power of
Governor Burnet, to take Cognizance of that Cause. Yet, though he overruled our
Exception, he did not silence, or give us so much as a harsh Word, but heard
all we had to say in Support of the Plea, before he overruled it. Again, in the
Cafe of Mr. Philipse, at the Suit of Mr. Quinby and others, about the same
Time; though Mr. Murray, after the Hearing and Pronouncing of the Decree, offered
an Exception to the Power of His said Excellency, to judge or decree as
Chancellor, who patiently heard all that Mr. Murray had to say in Support of
it; yet Mr. Burnet did not silence Mr. Murray, or testify the least Resentment
of his Conduct in that Particular; but said, be was sorry, that be bad not made
the Exception, before Mr. Philipse bad sichmitted to the Jurisdiction of the
Court, and if be bad, that it should have been considered, and bad its due
Weight.

32. Though these Gentlemen, of whom we complain, may say, That these Things
were done before they had any Standing in the Law, or pretended to have studied
it: Yet they could not but have heard of these Cases, their nearest Relations
having been, in some Measure, concerned in one or other of them. And though some
Things done at that Day, gave some Dissatisfaction, yet the Mildness of that
Administration, in these Particulars, will be a standing Evidence of the
Unhappiness of the present Times, into which we are fallen.

33. We shall only add here, that in the Case of Mr. Van Dam, on two several
Occasions, though Exceptions were signed by Mr. Chambers as well as our selves,
and though indeed we had no Reason to boast of the kindest Usage from the two
puisne Judges, upon these Occasions; yet they did not think fit to take away
our Bread from us, for those Pieces of Service done to our Client. We would ask
these Gentlemen, If it was not just to silence Mr. Chambers and us then, what
has made it lawful and just for them to silence us in the present Case? And if
it was just, to silence us for signing and filing the Exception for Zenger, why
did they not silence Mr. Chambers and us, for signing and filing the Exceptions
for Mr. Van Dam? These Gentlemen would do well to reconcile their Conduct in
these two Cases.

34. That we were perfectly innocent, and did our Duty in the Case of Zenger,
is what we have the clearest Sense of. That the Law was with us, in the Right
of the Subject to take an Exception, is what we will steadfastly maintain; and
challenge these Gentlemen to prove the Contrary. Had we erred; must a Man loose
his Livelihood for an innocent Mistake? Must his Brains be beat out, because
they are not cast in the same Mould with another Man's? Had we been guilty of a
Contempt, as is groundlessly pretended; is there no Proportion between
Offenses? Is there no Distinction between Punishments? Must we be put to
starve, or to seek our Bread in a new Country, or in a new Manner of Life, for
one Contempt? If these Things are to be tolerated, and to escape a public
Rebuke, and a private Recompense, hard will be the Case of Lawyers, who are
sworn, To use their Offices according to their Learning and Discretion. Yet, by
this Rule, we must not be permitted the Use of either. Instead of consulting
our Law Books, and doing what we think consistent therewith, for the Benefit of
our Clients, we must study in GREAT MEN'S CAUSES, only what will PLEASE the
Judges, and what will most flatter Men in Power. Instead of doing, what our
Honor and a good Conscience, and our Client's Safety demand of us, we must do
only what will least hazard the present Support of our Families, and save our
selves, om Wives and our Children, from Starving. Is this a Condition fit for
these to continue in, whose Business it is to defend the Rights of the People?
If the Lawyers are not safe in the Discharge of their Duty, can their Clients
be safe in Trusting them? If we are to be Slaves, is it possible that the
Country can be free? Surely, never was an Act of Oppression, under the Color
of Law, ever done within this Colony, that cried louder for the Animadversion
and severe Resentment of the Representatives of a free People than this!

35. These Judges might, with as much Justice, have burnt all our Law Books, as
to have deprived us of the Use of them; and have destroyed our Deeds, and taken
away our Houses and our Lands, as to have taken away the Liberty of Exercising
our Employments, which were as dearly bought as any Thing we enjoy. We came not
to them but by the Way of an expensive Study of several Languages, Arts and
Sciences; our Abilities for them were the Purchase of many Years hard and
costly Labor; we were duly admitted to our Practice, we ever used it with
Fidelity and a good Conscience, and with what Acceptance, and Esteem of our
Country, we doubt not but that a Thousand Witnesses can declare. What we had
thus gotten, could not lawfully be taken from us, but for some notorious Crime,
which our worst Enemies hitherto have not laid to our Charge. And we may
venture to say, that we still have, notwithstanding the Act of these Justices,
as much Right to live and maintain our Families by our Callings, as any
Merchant, Husbandman or Tradesman in the Country. And we have as good a Title
to be relieved against any Injury done to that Right, as any other Men. It
would doubtless have been esteemed a crying Grievance, if these Gentlemen had
ordered the Warehouse of any Merchant in Town to be stopped up, and disabled
him from any farther carrying on of his Trade, whereby he supported and
maintained his Family; or if they had ordered the Farm and Instruments of
Tillage to be taken from any Husbandman in the Country, or if we suppose that
they had only disabled him from Improving his Lands, and raising Bread for
himself and his Family; if they had blocked up the Way to a Miller's Mill, or
broke down his Dam, and hindered him from grinding; if they had taken away the
Tools of a Carpenter, or shut up a Tanner's Pits, and spoiled his Leather; and
reduced these Men with their Wives and Children to a Necessity of Perishing for
Want of Subsistence; and all this, not for having done any unlawful Act, but,
for doing their Duty, and that which they were bound to perform by all possible
Obligations, both sacred and humane: We say, if our Judges had done all or any
of these things, the Injustice of such Proceedings would have lain open to
every Man's Observation; but no less than all this is contained in the Injury
of which we complain, and much more, in that not only our selves and our
innocent Families are great Sufferers, but the public Administration of
Justice is greatly obstructed, and great Numbers of Persons, who are our
Clients, are much injured, either in the Recovery or Defense of their just
Rights by this Arbitrary Proceeding, and we doubt not, but that it has appeared
to a Demonstration, from what has been said, that the Act of these Judges in
debarring us from our Practice, merely for having tendered an Exception to
their Commissions, is also, in its Nature and Tendency, destructive to the
Liberties and Properties of the People of this Colony.

36. We are clearly of Opinion, that when Judges act uprightly and do justly,
they have a Right to all the Honor due to their Stations: But when they act
otherwise, in plain Defiance of Common Law and Common Sense, the injured have a
Right to complain; and if the Injury be of a public Nature, have a Right to
demand the Aid of the Representatives of a free People against them.

37. Perhaps these Gentlemen, who have done us this Wrong, and whom we accuse
of having greatly injured their Country thereby, may buoy up themselves in
their Wealth, their Power, their Friends, and Alliances, and may think, that
under the Umbrage of these, they may do what they p^^^^^, and not be called to
any Account.

38. But, Mr. Chairman, no Man is too great for the Notice or above the Reach,
of the Representatives of a free People. If our General Assembly will but exert
that Authority that they have, by Law, a Right to, they may make the haughtiest
Sinner tremble before them; an Inquiry into the Conduct of public Officers is
properly their Business; and a public Resentment of their Misconduct (permit
us to say it) is most certainly their Duty.

39. The Parliament in England has always been thought the proper Court to
animadvert on the Misconduct of the Judges. In stead of repeating ^nstances of
this, we shall beg Leave to read a Speech, made by Sir Francis W^^^^ington, an
eminent Lawyer, in the House of Commons, and the Opinion and Resolutions of
that ^^^se* in the Year 1680, near the End of King Charles the second's Reign;
(...) the Moose of Commons thought proper to enquire into the Conduct of the
Judges, and to impeach the then Chief Justice Scroggs. It Is in State Trials,
Vol. 3. page 222.

Mr. Sp^^^^r:

In the Fron^ of MAGNA CHARTA it is said, Nul^^ N^g^^imus, (...) De^er or Deny
Justice to no Man, To this the King is Sworn, and with this the Judges are
entrusted by their Oaths.

I admire what they can say for themselves, if they have not r^^d this Law,
they are not fit to sit upon the Bench, and if they have, I had almost said,
they deserve to loose their Heads.

Mr. Speaker,

The State of this poor Nation is to be deployed, that in almost all Ages, the
Judges, who ought to be Preservers of the Laws, have endeavored to Destroy
them; and that to please a Court Faction, they have by Treachery attempted to
break the Bonds asunder of MAGNA CHARTA, the great Treasury of our Peace; it
was no sooner past, but a Chief Hubert de Bourg.
Justice in that Day, persuades the King, he was not bound by it, because he
was under Age when it was passed. But this sort of Insolence, the next
Parliament resented, to the ruin of the pernicious Chief Justice.

In the Time of Richard the Second, an unthinking dissolute Prince, there were
Judges that did Insinuate into the King, that the Parliament were only his
Creatures and dependedon his Will, and not on the Fundamental Constitutions of
the Land; which treacherous Advice proved the ruin of the King, and for which
all those evil Instruments were brought to Justice. In his late Majesty's Time,
his Misfortunes were chiefly occasioned by the Corruptions of the Long Robe,
his Judges by an Extrajudicial Opinion, gave the King Power to raise Money upon
an Extraordinary Occasion without Parliament, and made the King Judge of such
Occasions. Charity Prompts me to think, they thought this a Service to the
King; but the sad Consequences of it may convince all Mankind, that every
illegal Act weakens the Royal Interest* (...) ^^^^^^our to introduce (...)
Dominion in ^^ose Realms, is the worst of Treasons; because while it bears the
Face of Friendship to the King, and designs to be for his Service, it never
fails of the contrary Effect.

The two great ^illars of the Government, are Parli^^^^^^ and J^^^es, it is
this gives us the Title of Freeborn Englishmen, for my Notion of free
Englishmen is this, that they are ruled by Laws of their own making, and tried
by Men of the same Condition with themselves. The two great and undoubted
Privileges of the People, have been lately invaded by the Judges that now fit
in Westminster Hall; they have espoused Proclamation against Law; they have
discountenanced and opposed several legal Acts that tended to the sitting of
this Honorable House; they have grasped the Legislative Power into their own
Hands, as in that Instance of Printing; the Parliament was considering that
Matter, but they, in the Interim, made their private Opinion to be Law, to
supersede the Judgment of this House; they have discharged Grand Juries, on
purpose to quell their Presentiments, and shelter great Criminals from Justice;
and when Juries have presented their Opinion for the sitting of this
Parliament, they have in Disdain thrown (...) at their Feet, and told them,
they would be no Messengers to carry such Petitions, and yet in a few Days
after, have encouraged all that would spit their Venom against the Government;
they have served on Ignorant and Arbitrary Faction, and been the Messengers of
Abhorrences to the Kim.

Mr. Speaker,

What we have no^ ^o do, is to load them with Shame, who bid Def^^nce, to the
Law; they are guilty of Crimes ^^ai^st Nature, against the King, against their
Knowledge, and against Posterity. The whole frame of Nature does loudly and
daily Petition to G^d their Creator; and Kings, like God, may be addressed to
in like Manner by ^^tition, not Command. They likewise knew it was lawful to
Petition; Ignorance can be no Plea, and their Knowledge aggravates their
Crimes. The Children unborn are bound to Curse such Proceedings, for 'twas not
Petitioning, but Parliaments they abhorred. The Atheist pleads against a God,
not that he disbelieves a Deity, but would have it so. Tresilian and Belknap
were Judges too; their Learning gave them Honor, but their Villainies made
their exit by a Rope. The End of my Motion therefore is, That we may Address
warmly to our Prince against them; let us settle a Committee to enquire into
their Crimes, and not fail of doing Justice upon them that have perverted it,
let us purge the Fountain, and the Streams will issue pure.

The Resolutions of the House of Commons upon the said Report.
1. That it is the Opinion of this House, that the Discharging of the Grand
Jury of the Hundred of O^^^^ston in the County of Middlesex, by the Court of
King's Bench, in Trinity Term last before the last Day of the Term, and before
they had finished their Presentiments, was arbitrary and illegal, destructive to
Public Justice, a manifest Violation of the Oaths of the Judges of that Court,
and a Means to subvert the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and to introduce
Popery.

2. That it is the Opinion of this House, That the Rule made by the Court of
King's Bench, in Trinity Term last, against Printing of a Book, called, The
Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome, is illegal and arbitrary, thereby usurping
to themselves Legislative Power, to the great Discouragement of the
Protestants, and for the Countenancing of Popery.

3. That it is the Opinion of this House. That the Court of King's Bench, in
the Imposition of (...) on Offenders of late Years, have acted Arbitrarily,
Illegally and Partially, favoring Papists and Persons Popishly affected, and
excessively oppressing his Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

4. That it is the Opinion of this House, That the refuseing sufficient Bail in
these Cases, wherein the Persons committed were bailable by Law, was illegal,
and a high breach of the Liberties of the Subject.

5. That it is the Opinion of this House, That the said Expressions in the
Charge given by the said Baron Weston, were a Scandal to the Reformation, and
tending to raise Discord between his Majesty and his Subjects, and to the
Subversion of the Ancient Constitution of Parliaments, and of the Government of
this Kingdom.

6. That it is the Opinion of this House, That the said Warrants are Arbitrary
and Illegal.

The Resolutions of the Commons for the Impeachment of the said Judges.
Resolved,

That Sir William Scroggs Knt. Chief Justice of the Court of Kings Bench, be
impeached upon the said Report, and the Resolutions of the House thereupon.

Resolved,

That Sir Thomas Jones, one of the Justices of the said Court of King's Bench,
be impeached upon the said Report, and Resolutions of the House thereupon.

Resolved,

That Sir Richard Weston, one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, be
impeached upon the said Report, and Resolutions of the House thereupon.

Ordered,

That the Committee appointed to prepare an Impeachment against Sir Francis
North, Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, do prepare Impeachments
against the said Sir William Scroggs, Sir Thomas Jones, and Sir Richard Weston,
upon the said Report and Resolutions.

Ordered,

That the said Report and several Resolutions of this House thereupon be
printed; and that Mr. Speaker take Care in the Printing thereof apart from this
Day's other Votes.

Accordingly, Jan. 5. Articles of Impeachment were actually brought in against
Sir William Scroggs; and the said Articles were Engrossed, and carried up to
the Lords by Lord Cavendish: But the Parliament being soon after Prorogued,
this Affair was dropped; however, it was thought proper to remove Scroggs from
being Chief Justice; which was done with all the Marks of Favor and Respect,
being allowed a Pension for Life. But a Parliamentary Censure did not hinder
the Court from Preferring others; who had been censured a little before; as may
appear by these Votes of the House of Commons.

October 29. 1680.
Resolved,

That Sir Francis Withins, by promoting and presenting to his Majesty an
Address, expressing an Abhorrence to Petition his Majesty for the calling and
sitting of Parliaments, has betrayed the undoubted Rights of the Subjects of
England.

Ordered,

That Sir Francis Withins be expelled this House, for this High Crime, and that
he receive hi Sentence, at the Bar of this House, upon his Knees, from Mr.
Speaker.

(which he received accordingly)

Nov. 13. 1680.
Resolved,

That Sir George Jefferies, Recorder of London, by traducing and obstructing
Petitioning for the fitting of this Parliament, has betrayed the Rights of the
Subject.

Ordered,

That an Humble Address be made to His Majesty to remove Sir George Jefferies
out of all Public Offices.

Mr. Chairman;

40. The Proceedings of Parliament against the Judges, in the Cases mentioned
by Sir Francis Winnington, are too well known to need repeating, and so
terrible were the Resentments of those Parliaments, that Men must think Judges
strangely infatuated, who deny or delay Justice or Right, or attempt to tread
under Foot, the Rights, Liberties and Privileges of a People, to introduce
absolute Dominion or Will and Pleasure over them. What Is the Duty of
Parliaments to do in that Case, is the Duty of the General Assembly here to do;
and those that suffer in the Defense of the Liberties of this Country, by the
Arbitrary Proceedings of Judges, or other Men in Power, have a Right to fly to
their Protection, and it highly concerns them, to do what in them lies, to put
a Check upon those Men, whose Actions not only have a pl^i^ Tendency to put
Chains upon the People, but also to subvert the very Foundation of all the
Rights and Liberties of the Country. If these Things are suffered, then it may
be said, The dying Liberties of a Country are at their last Gasp! If the
Arbitrary Will of Men is set up in the Chief Seat of Justice, and the Law it
self is made to bow down before it, and Lawyers are silenced for dareing to
undertake its Defense; If the Cause of the Oppressed is condemned unheard, and
the Law it self not suffered to speak in his Favor; If the Pleasure or
Displeasure of a Court is declared to be the Rule of Right and Wrong, instead
of the known Laws of the Land, it is then high Time for the Guardians of the
Laws and Liberties of a People, to rise up and exert themselves, in a vigorous
Discharge of their great Trust.

41. We are loath to declare what we think these Gentlemen deserve: We wish
their Amendment, not their Destruction. But we humbly request, that this House
would come to such Resolutions upon this Case, as they shall think just and
necessary, for the Preservation of the Rights and Liberties of the People; that
such Measures may be taken, as, that we may be restored to the Liberty of our
Practice; that our Clients may have that Service from us, which they have a
Right to demand; and the Public Administration of Justice, that Help which we
are able to afford; and that we may have the Means of common Justice, for
Recovering such Damages from these Gentlemen as we have suffered, or shall
suffer, until we are restored to our Employments.

42. These Things, by Law, we think we have an undoubted Right to demand; and
as Members of the Community represented in this General Assembly, we conceive
we have a Right to have redressed in this Way; and have no reasonable Prospect
of speedy Relief in any other. If we had, we should not have waited for the
Sitting of the General Assembly. We desire nothing from this honorable House,
which is not in their Power to bestow, and which, from the Justness of our
Cause, we hope we have the highest Reason to expect. We trust that no Power or
Interest ( that we expect will be warmly opposed to us) will be able to smother
or stifle our Complaint, or delay the Relief we seek for. The Duty that we owe
to our Country, our Clients, and our Families, demanded this Application. And
if we have any Ways erred in the Matter or Manner of it, we hope the Importance
of the Cause, and our great Sufferings, will excuse it.

43. It Is not long since one of us, had the Honor to be called upon, to give
an Opinion upon an important Point before this House; what Influence that
Service may have had upon the Cause of the present Complaint, is hard for us to
determine; but our Hope is, that our Country, whose Good we have always
sincerely consulted; Here Mr. Smith took Notice, that that Opinion was demanded
and given upon his Sincerity and Honor.
and as we have been called upon, have publicly served, will not deny us its
Protection, nor suffer us to be crushed for our faithful Adherence to its
Interests and honest Discharge of our Duty.

New York, s^.
In Obedience to an Order of the Honorable the General Assembly, dated the
24th Day of October last, James Alexander and William Smith, being duly sworn
(...) the holy Evangelists, on their Oath de declare, That the proceeding Paper
contains a true, full and complete Copy of the Complaint which they offered to
the Committee of Grievances, against the Judges of the Supreme Court, and of
all that they offered and said before the said Committee on the 23d Day of
October last, at the House of Mr. John D'honneur, by Way of Complaint against
the said Judges, to the Best of the Knowledge of these Deponents. EXCEPT that
in the 22d Paragraph some Words are inserted between these Marks [ ] which were
designed to have been said in that Place, but they believe they were by Mistake
omitted to be spoken. And EXCEPT that the Words Mr. Chairman were oftener spoken
than what appears by the proceeding Copy. And EXCEPT some Words spoken
extempore, the Substance of which they believe is contained in the Marginal
Note on the last Paragraph. And EXCEPT the Marginal Notes and Numbers of the
Paragraphs, which have been since added. The ^^ponents DECLARING, that what
they said extempore, before and after the Complaint, in excepting to Judge
Philipse' s being one of the Committee, and other Exceptions then made
extempore, not having been reduced to Writing before they were offered, they do
not esteem any Part of their said Complaint; neither is it in their Power to
remember exactly what was said on that Occasion, nor do they conceive it was
the Intention of the General Assembly, to order the Delivery of a Copy of that
to the Judges. And farther the Deponents say not.

Ja. Alexander. Wm. Smith.

Sworn the Twenty seventh Day of December, 1735. Before S. Johnson.

