Mr. Cotton's SERMON, At the ORDINATION of his Brother.

Ministers of the Gospel should speak, not as pleasing Men, but GOD, who tries
their Hearts.

A SERMON Preached at the Ordination of the Rev. Mr. Ward Cotton, At Hampton,
in New Hampshire, June 19th. 1734. When he was Ordained a Colleague-Pastor with
the Rev. Mr. Nathanael Gookin, Pastor of the first Church there.

By JOHN COTTON, A.M. Minister of the Gospel in Newtown.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, 1734.

An Ordination SERMON.
I. THESE. II. iv. But as we were allowed of GOD to be put in Trust with the
Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing Men, but GOD which tries our Hearts.


WE have in our Context, an Account of the Apostle's manner of preaching, and
his comfortable reflection upon his entrance in, among the Thessalonians. And
as he had the testimony of his own Conscience to his integrity, so he could
appeal to the Thessalonians, how faithfully and successfully be, and Silas, and
Timotheus, his fellow helpers in the work of the Lord, had discharged their
Office. Tou your selves, brethren, know our entrance in unto you, that it was
not in vain. Its no little comfort to a Minister of the Gospel, to have his own
Conscience, and the Consciences of others witnessing for him, that he se^ out
well, with good designs, and from good principles, and that h^s preaching has
not been in vain; that is, say some, it was not vain in the matter, we did not
preach about vain, useless and unprofitable niceties and speculations, but our
preaching was substantial, sound and solid, such as was most likely to profit
our heaters. It was not vain in the manner (say others) it was not undertaken
^^shly, and without a Call, nor managed in a slight and vain manner.

BUT the expression may more particularly point at these two things, (1) That
the divine power accompanied their ministrations, and confirmed them in the
faith that heard it, and the gracious assistances vouchsafed to them, confirmed
them in the expectation of success. And, then (2) That their expectations were
not disappointed, but answered in the great success given to their ministry;
for the word vain when it is applied to the messages, the Ministers of Christ
bring, signifies the not accomplishing the great ends for which they are sent.
It is used to this purpose, in Isa. 55.11. The word that goes out of my mouth
shall not return to me in vain, but prosper, etc.


WE may hence learn that where Ministers are regularly called to, and
faithfully discharge their duty, their labors are commonly attended with more
or less of sooness, either sooner, or later, for Conversion and Edification.
They have the promise of Christ's gracious presence with them, and if they are
faithful, they shall have the presence of his power to strengthen them, and of
his blessed spirit to succeed them.

THOUGH sometimes they may not have any great visible success at present,; yet
it may comfort such, that there may be good done by their ministry
notwithstanding, and if they done reap the fruit of the seed they sow, they who
come after them may But if it should be so, that neither they, nor their people
reap fruit, their ministry shall not be in vain with reference to themselves;
for they shall be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, though Israel be not
gathered.

IN the 2d v. the Apostle tells them of the great difficulties which he
encountered at his first coming among them to preach the Gospel, but yet these
did not at all discourage him from preaching the Gospel with constancy and
resolution. He was notwithstanding bold in God to speak unto them the Gospel of
God. He was inspired with an holy boldness, and went on courageously in his
work, notwithstanding any opposition that was made against him, or ill usage he
met withal, from any of these to whom he was sent. It was a zealous boldness
in the cause of GOD, and proved convincing unto many. It is one necessary and
commendable qualification in the Ministers of the Gospel, in order to the
making their ministry successful, that a wise, humble, zealous and convincing
boldness be found with them in their delivering the truths of GOD unto their
People. We were (says the Apostle) bold in our God, to speak unto you the
gospel of God.

IN my Text, and the verse immediately preceding it, he tells as something of
the manner of his preaching, that it was with great simplicity and godly
sincerity; for our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleaness, nor in
guile; but as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, even
so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God which tvieth our hearts. We may here
Note, that the Apostle calls his preaching an Exhortation; doubtleso because a
great part of his preaching was (as ours ought to be) applicarory and
exhortatory, earnestly and affectionately exciting the hearers to cleave unto
the truths, whether doctrinal or practical, delivered to them.

HE declares to them, that it was the sincere and uncorrupted Gospel that he
preached, and ex^orted them to believe and obey. His design was not to set up a
saction, to draw men over to a party, but to promote pure Religion, and
undefied before GOD and the Father. The Gospel he preached, was without deceit;
it was not of ensnaring and seducing error, not suited to the corrupt opinions
and wicked inclinations of Men, Nor was it of Uncleanoss; his Gospel was pure
and holy, worthy of its holy Author, tending to discourage all manner of
imperity: Nothing that he either preached or practiced, did countenance or
encourage men in the gratification of their lusts, as did the erroneous
preaching of the false Apostles. And as the matter of his preaching was Pure,
so the manner of his speaking was without guile, i e. he did not seek himself
under a pretense of acting for GOD and his glory, nor propound his own worldly
advanarge as his ultimate end. He had not sinisters aims, but was in reality
what he seemed to be. The Ministers of Christ should not only preach the pure
word of GOD, but preach is purely, in simplicity of heart, and with a single
eye at the glory of GOD, without looking at, or having any regard to base
sinister ends, or byrespects.

HE would assure them, that his main design was to approve himself to GOD, that
he might have the divine approbation; not so much, or at all, regarding to
please Men, but only in subordination to GOD. And in the words read, he gives
us the reasons or motives inducing him to it. (First) He was put in trust with
the Gospel, allowed of God to be so. GOD f^^ed him for this high and honorable
trust, and improved him therein; and he looked upon both as a favor and honor
done him by the great GOD. The other motive was the consideration of GOD's
emniscient and all-seeing eye upon him, as well knowing that the
heart-searching GOD was a witness both of his Doctrine and Conversition
acquained with his aims and ends, and therefore he so preached not as pleasing
men, but God.

AND what is there that can, or should more powerfully excite the Ministers of
Christ, to the faithful discharge of their duty, than the consideration of the
honor and weight of the great trust reposed in them, and the eye of an
heart-searching GOD continually upon them!

HE goes on in the two next verses, to produce the evidences of his sincerity;
the First is, that he did not use flattering words, to gratify the lusts and
humors of men, to gain their favor or good opinion of him nor did he flatter
them in their sins. Flattery in any, is very odious; but more especially is it
so in the Ministers of Christ. They should be plain-he^^ed and faithful in
their dealings with men, because flattery about things of a spiritual nature is
most pernicious and fatal. Secondly, He did not use a Cloak of Covetousness; he
had no covetous disign in his Ministry; he did not propose to gain any outward
or worldly advantage to himself. He solemnly appeals to GOD, who searches the
heart, as a witness of the truth of this. He also declares, how free he was
from all ostentation and vainglory: He did not seek or desire applause from
men, nor indeed so much as due respect in a fitting maintenance from them, though
he does at the same time assure them, he did therein remit of his Right, seeing
as an Apostle of Christ, he might be burthen-some, i. e. chargeable to them, by
exacting a fit and honorable Support from them, which some might be too ready
to think, would be too great a burden for them to bear. We may from hence Note,
that though the Ministers of Christ, may and should have a due respect to their
own honor and reputation, yet eagerly to seek after respect and esteem, does
savor too much of vanity and vain glory. We may also learn, that though the
Ministers of the Gospel have an undoubted fight to an honorable Support, yet
it may be a point of prudence in them to remit that right, for some special
reasons.

THE Apostle proceeds in our Context, to give an account of his humble, holy,
meek, courteous and affable behavior among them, by all expressing his render
Love and Affection to them, in which he has set an example for all Christ's
Ministers to follow.

HAVING thus opened and paraphrased upon the Text, and Context, I come to the
DOCTRINE which I design for our present Instruction and Improvement, viz.

DOCTRINE.
THAT the Ministers of Christ, or such as are allowed of GOD to be put in trust
with the Gospel, should make it their great care, study, and endeavor, so to
speak, not as pleasing Men, but GOD, who tries their Hearts.

THERE are two Propositions contained in this Doctrine, I. THAT some are
allowed of GOD, to be put in trust with the Gospel. II. THAT such stould make
it their great concern and endeavor, so to speak, not as pleasing men, but
GOD, who tries their Hearts.


PROP. I. SOME are allowed of GOD to be put in trust with the Gospel.

AND these are Christ's Ministers, regularly called and set apart to the work
of the Gospel Ministry. The Lord Jesus Christ has instituted a standing
Gospel Ministry in his Church, to continue to the end of the World. It is his
Sovereign Will and Pleasure, that there should be an Order of Men to represent
his Person, publish his Laws, exhibit the promises and administer Seals and
Censures; this is evident from the promise of Christ's presence to be with his
Ministers to the end of the World, Matt. 28.20. and because the reason of such
an institution of Men to this service will always continue. Now with these is
the Gospel entrusted; they are allowed of GOD to be put in trust with the
Gospel. It is GOD, who raises them up, who gists and qualifies them for serving
their Generation in the Gospel of his Son, and inclines their hearts to engage
therein.

THEY are authorized from Christ, the King and Head of his visible Church and
People, to discharge the Office of Gospel Ministers. They receive their
Commission from ^^m. And they are introduced into their awful Station by
Persons authorized by Christ thereunto. They are by the Imposition of the Hands
of the Presbytery, and solemn Prayer, set aper to the Gospel Ministry, and so
bro't under solemn bonds and obligation, and endowed with all the privileges
and powers ^ha be^^^^ that sacred Office. They hereby become true Ministers of
the Lord Jesus Christ, according to the direction and ins^^^: ^^^t the Gospel;
and so they are put in trust with the Gospel are commissioned to preach the
glad tidings of Salvation (...) ^^^^able World. The Ministry of Reconciliation
is given to them, 2. Cor. V. 18. The word of reconciliation committed to them,
ver. 19. and they are Ambassadors for Christ, as we read in the 20th ver. Now
then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ; stead, be ye reconciled unto God. Their Office is here set
forth under the name of an Embassage; We are Ambassadors for Christ. The Lord
Jesus Christ was himself an Ambassador sent from GOD, to establish a Covenant
of peace betwixt GOD and Men; he treated with and entreated Sinners to be
reconciled unto GOD. The Son of GOD, the Prince of peace, came to minister to
Men, and make peace between GOD and them. All the while he was on Earth, he was
performing, as it were, the work of an Ambassador to Men. He is now exalted to
GOD's right hand, and comes not to the world personally any more, unti^l he
shall come to Judge the World. He is now Head over all things to his Church, he
is King and Lord of his People; and he now allows us sinful worms (such is his
condescension and grace) to be put in trust with the Gospel; he sends such
forth into the World as his Vicegerents and Ambassadors, to manage the affairs
of his Kingdom among Men, to publish the Gospel of reconciliation, the
proclamations of peace, to the apostate, rebellious children of Men, and to
propose the conditions of peace, and terms of reconciliation We read in the
10th Chap of Luke, that when Christ sent out his Disciples to preach the
Gospel, he said to them, Into whatsoever House ye enter, first say, Peace be to
this House. The Gospel is called the Gospel of Peace, Rom X. 15. and of Grace,
Acts XX. 24. where the Apostle says, But none of these things move me, neither
count I my life dear unto my self so that I might finish my course with joy,
and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel
of the grace of God. Ministers of the Gospel are sent to preach Peace by and
through Jesus Christ, to offer a Covenant of peace and reconciliation, to make a
proclamation of pardon to guilty condemned Rebels. They act in Christ's name,
on his behalf; he gives them their instructions, puts words into their mouth^.
The solemn Charge given to them at their Ordination, is in the Name of Christ;
they preach the Gospel in his Name, and so with authority and power. And what
they deliver agreeable to the Oracles of GOD, it is the word of GOD and not of
Man, and accordingly to be attended to, and regarded by us In his Name they
invite Sinners to come to him for life; in his name they command them to
repent, believe and obey the Gospel. In the name of Christ they administer the
holy Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper. In his name they reprove,
rebuke and exhort. Thus are the Ministers of the Gospel in Christ's stead
treating with Men, being allowed of GOD, and put in trust with the Gospel to do
so. Some are thus favored and honored of GOD.

BUY this may suffice for the first Proposition: We may now make some
Improvement of it, before we pass to the next.

AND USE. I. HOW thankful should we be for the Divine Compassions herein
expressed and manifested toward us miserable Sinners!

IT is wonderful condescension in the great GOD, that he will have any thing to
do with us in a way of Mercy. After our Apostasy from GOD he might justly have
cast us off for ever, have got himself everlasting honor and glory, in making
us the flaming Monuments of his Justice. The Curses of the Covenant violated by
us, might have forever fallen on our guilty Heads, and GOD and his Throne been
clear and guileless forever; but the Bowe's ^o. Divine compassion yern'd
toward us, and the Lord in his pity and love has redeemed us When we were cast
out in the open Field to the loathing of our Persons, he then said unto us,
Live, and the time was a time of Love. Yea, from eternity had the blessed GOD
thoughts of Mercy, concerning us, and in the fullness of Time sent his dearly
beloved Son, to become our Surety, and to make Satisfaction to offended
Justice; which he has effectually done by his obedience, sufferings and death:
So that GOD may now be Just, and yet justily and save miserable perishing
Sinners. But who now must ma^a^^ the treaty of peace and reconciliation, to be
upheld and carried on with such? The Augels might have been commissioned for
this design and purpose and it would have been an extraordinary favor to have
had offers of peace and reconciliation made to us by them; but yet such has
been the divine goodness and condescension, that the Lord appoints and
authorizes some of our fellow creatures, of the same make and frame with
ourselves, whose terror may not make us afraid, to treat with us about the
great concerns of our precious and immortal Souls, to show to us the way of
life, and persuade us to walk therein. How gracious is his condescension, and
how thankful should we be for it! how much more suitable and agreeable is it to
us, than to have been treated with by Angels, though far superior to us, who
would rather have terrified and amazed, than instructed and persuaded us? Their
appearance might have been very awful to us; has it is not likely their Mission
would have been so suitable to us in our present corrupt, and infi^m state. We
should have been, it is probable, more ready to fly from and avoid them, than
(...) of a familiar converse with them: which we may now have with those, whom
the Lord has commissioned to make tenders of peace and salvation to us, who are
Men subject to like passions with ourselves, Men who must be saved in the same
way and method others are; Men that have the same workings of sin and unbelief
that you have, that may be exercised with the same temptations, you are, and so
may be by experience the better qualified to guide and direct you, under those
doubts and difficulties and temptations, that may perplex and distress you.
They are or should be easy of access, that you may freely and readily go to
them, and lay your Cases before them for Advice and Direction. Perhaps they may
be able to comfort you with the same comfort, wherewith they themselves have
been comforted of the Lord. They Will be instrumental to help you over and through
the very difficulties that they themselves, it may be, have been conflicting
with. They can more feelingly sympathize with you in your days of distress and
trouble. In many other ways they may be serviceable to you; surely then, you
should be very thankful to GOD, that your Eves see teachers, to whom you can
with an humble freedom have Access, and make known your fears and desires, when
and as frequently as you please.

SUCH condescensions of the grace of GOD, should be very thankfully
acknowledged by us; that GOD should send to us some of our brethren to preach
repentance and remission of Sins, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by
them offer salvari. on to us on such reasonable Terms, and by them so
familiarly urge us to a complvance with them. Glory and praise to GOD in the
highest should be ascribed, for such good will toward Men.

USE II. WE may from what has been said infer the honor and regard there is
due to Christ's Ministers.

THEY are worthy of double honor, as they represent the glo^^^us and incarnate
Son of GOD. From him they receive their messages, their commission and
instructions, They are his Repeaties, act under him as their king and master.
They ought certainly then, to have suitable honors and regards paid to them.

THE word of GOD enjoins it, that such be honorably sapp^^^ed, and that they
be highly esseen'd, loved and obeyed, (...) they watch for your Soul, as those
that most give an Ac^^ ur, that they way do it with say and not with Ones.

I might infer

USE III. THE sin and danger of abusing the Ministers of Christ.

Do they speak to us in the Name of GOD, by his Authority? Do they represent
the head of the Church, the blessed GOD incarnate and enthroned in our Jesus?
Must it not then be very sinful and dangerous to abuse them!

LET me warn all who hear me, to beware of this. Surely your Ministers have
Work and Business enough, lying upon their hearts and hands; you need not add
more. And know it, their Lord and Master, will tenderly and highly resent any
indignities offered to his Ambassadors. Abuse of Ambassadors, sent by Earthly
Kings, has ever by the Law of Nations been highly resented; we read also in
Scripture of its being so. Let us then be ever cautious and afraid of abusing
or injuring the Lord's Ministers. Let us be always disposed to cover their
infirmities, and to make the most charitable construction of any thing said or
done by them, that some may be disposed to improve to their prejudice; and be
always cautious how we report what we hear concerning them, which it may be is
altogether groundless. Let us be very careful how we treat the Ambassadors of
Christ.

Again, USE IV. WITH what solemnity and reverence should we attend to their
Instructions. If they come to us in Christ's Name, how concerned should we be
to give a due entertainment of their messages, that are of infinite moment and
concern to us all.

USE V. AND lastly here, Let us pray for the Lord's Ambassadors, that GOD would
qualify them for their Work, that he would assist and prosper them in it. That
the hand of the Lord may be with them, that many may believe and turn unto the
Lord.

BE thus asking the presence and blessing of the Lord, with all his Servants in
the Ministry: and let me recommend this duty in a particular manner to This
Church and Congregation of the Lord, with respect (First) to your worthy and
beloved Elder Pastor; that GOD would restore and confirm his health, and yet
grant a door of utterance to him, that he may still labor among you in the
word and doctrine, and be continued a rich blessing to you, and that GOD would
santify the awful swam in his being so taken off from his work among you; and
that those divine supports and consolations may be vouchsafed to him, which may
delight and refresh his Soul in the multitude of his thoughts within him: And
then, let me in the next place recommend this duty, with respect unto him, who
may be allowed of GOD this day, to be put in trust with the Gospel, and to whom
the care of your precious Souls is to be committed. We trust he is given to you
this day in answer to your prayers; and you must now more than ever bear him
upon your hearts in your humble and fervent supplications to GOD for him. He is
this day devoting himself to your service, to be your Servant for Christ's
sake, to spent, and be spent for you. It is an awful Charge he is now going to
receive from the Lord concerning you. He needs and he desires your Prayers. I
beseech you then, Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love
of the Spirit, that ye strive together with him in your prayers to GOD for him;
that his Service in the Gospel may be accepted of the Saints; that he may come
to you with joy by the will of GOD, and be refreshed; that he may come to you
in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ; that he may be made
faithful to Christ, and to your Souls; that he may speak not as pleasing Men,
but GOD the searcher of hearts; that he may be a happy instrument in the hands
of GOD, of turning many here from the error of their ways, that many may be
awakened and quickened by his Ministry, and brought savingly home to GOD, and
that the Saints and Children of GOD may be edified and built up on their holy
faith; in short, that he may have many Seals of his Ministry among you, who may
be his joy, and crown of rejoicing in the Day of Christ's appearing. To
encourage your thus praying, let me tell you, your prayers for him may be
greatly serviceable to the success of his Ministry among you. O beg of GOD to
give the increase, with whom alone it is, and to whom alone the praise must be
ascribed. Cry to GOD day and night for the success of his labors among you,
that he may not labor in vain and spend his strength for naught, that the word
dispensed by him may be a savor of life unto life, and not of death unto death
unto any of you. In this way you may hope to have his Ministry made truly
profitable to your Souls, and if the Lord shall please to make it so, he can
desire no greater comfort or honor in this World.

HAVING thus considered and improved my first Proposition; I proceed to the
other.

PROP II. THAT such as are allowed of God to be put in Trust with the gospel,
should make it their great care, study and ead^^^ us, so to speak, not as
pleasing Men, but God, who trick our bents.

HERE I shall enquire, and as briefly as I can show.

1. What may be meant or employed in GOD's trying our bearts, 2. What by our
speaking, not as pleasing Men. 3. When we may be said to speak, as pleasing
God. And then

4. and lastly, Why we should make it our great concern and endeavor, so to
speak, not as pleasing Men, but GOD.
I am to show,

1. WHAT may be implied in God's trying our hearts. And,

1. THIS certainly implys in general, that God is omniscient. That all things
are naked and open before the eyes of that GOD, with whom we have to do, even
the thoughts and intents of the Heart. That his eyes are as a flame of fire,
running to and fro through the earth, beholding the evil and the good; that he
may show himself strong on the behalf of those whose hearts are upright with
him. That he searches the hearts and the reins of the children of men, that he
may give to every one according to their ways and the fruit of their doings.
Hereby may be meant that the great GOD has a perfect knowledge of all persons
and things, and sees them all, even that which is most hidden and secret: That
there is not a word in our tongue, nor a thought in our heart, but he knows it
altogether.

Again,

2. GOD's trying our hearts may imply and mean his critical inspection and
regard, as to the ends and designs we propose in undertaking the work of the
Ministry. When we engage in the work of the Ministry, or any other business of
importance, we have our several aims, ends and designs; and we are too prone to
be led and carried on by corrupt and smister views and designs, and to have no
sincere aims at the advancement of the glory of GOD, or the good and benefit of
others. But now, the omniscient God critically regards the views and ends,
which govern and influence us in the prosecution of our duty. And this may be
meant by his trying our hearts, that the Lord does especially and accurately
look to the ends we propose and are governed by, in the undertaking and
prosecuting the work and duty incumbent on us in our several places and
starion; and especially in the awful starion, of the Ministry.

I proceed now to enquire

2. WHAT may be meant by cur speaking not as pleasing Men, Or, when we may be
said, to speak not as pleasing Men. Before I answer, I would briefly premise;
that in some cases, we should and ought to please Men. We find that the Apostle
himself in some cases sought to please Men. 1 Cor. X 33. But he pleased not
Men, nor should we, when it stands in competition with pleasing GOD. Otherwise
the rule takes place with all, which we have given us in Romans XV 2. Let every
one of us please his neighbor, for his good to edification. The Ministers of
the Gospel may and should endeavor to choose our acceptable words, that may be
pleasing to their hearers. They may endeavor to please Men, in their speaking,
so they do but faithfully and plainly tell them their duty. And indeed this
should be pleasing to Men; but alas it is too often very unpleasing and
ungrateful. But to proceed, by way of Answer,

1. WE speak not as pleasing men, when we bear our Testimony against the Sins
they live in. Such as are in a carnal unconverted state, are not pleased with
our so speaking. We speak, not as pleasing such, when we faithfully warn them
to abandon the evil ways and practices they are living and indulging themselves
in. When we tell them, such ways lead down to the chambers of death, and that
they are hastening to a damnation that slumbers not; when we tell them of the
snares, fire and brimstone and an horrible tempest that shall be the portion of
their cup, unless they repent and turn; when we declare to them that if they
cease not wandering out of the way of understanding, they shall go down to the
congregation of the dead, have their portion appointed them with hypocrites and
unbelievers, where they shall weep and wail and gnash their teeth forever; when
we declare to them, This will be the end of the way they are walking in, and
solemnly warn them to forsake the paths of the Destroyer; When we thus will not
let them go on quietly in their sins, we then speak, not as pleasing Men. And
such will not regard what we say, because we don't speak smooth things to them,
but hard sayings which they cannot bear. They Would mind us, if we would prophesy
smooth things to them, flatter them in ways of sin, and let them go on
securely. Of such the holy prophet Isaiah complained in his time, in the 30th
Chap. This is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not bear
the law of the Lord, which say to the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets,
prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy
deceits, get you cut of the way, turn aside cut of the path, cause the holy one
of Israel to cease from les^ve us. They forbid the Prophets speaking to them in
GOD's Name, and dealing faithfully with them. One says Mr. Henry.
upon this place, It was their privilege, that they had seers among them, but
they did what they could to put out their eyes; they had prophets among them,
but they did what they could to stop their mouths, for they made them uneasy in
their wicked ways. The prophets told them of their faults, and warned them of
their danger, and they could not bear that: they must speak to them smooth
things, must flatter them in their sins, and say they did well, and there was
no harm, no danger in the course of life they lived; let a thing be never so
right and true, if it be not smooth, they will not hear it, but if it be
agreeable to the good opinion they have of themselves, the' it be never so
false, and never so great a cheat upon them, they would have it prophesied to
them. They were for being let alone to do as they pleased, and therefore bid
their faithful monitors to stand out of the way; but the faithful prophets of
the Lord will not be diverted from using such expressions as are proper to awaken
sinners, though they may perhaps be displeasing enough to them; such must be
told, that GOD is holy, and they shall find him so, sooner or later, whether
they will hear, or whether they will forbear. Thus he.

BUT this may suffice for the first particular; the Ministers of Christ speak,
not as pleasing men, when they bear their faithful testimony against the
vicious ways and courses they indulge themselves in and warn them of their
danger of a damnation to be trembled at, if they die in their sins.

Again.

2. WE speak, not as pleasing men, when we are from time to time earnestly and
faithfully calling on, and urging them to their duty. When we are, from one
time to another, admonishing men for their neglects of duty, and calling on
them to keep the commandments of GOD diligently; to deny themselves, take up
their cross, and follow the Lord Jesus Christ; to renounce their lusts, to cut
off their right hand, and to pluck out their right eye sins. To be called on,
to exercise such mortification and self-denial, is not at all pleasing to the
corrupt and carnal hearts of men: They don't love to be urged to that which is
so contrary to the natural bent and disposition of their hearts. It is not
therefore pleasing to them, to urge them to the duty of repentance, to hate and
forsake their beloved I sis; nor to the duty of believing in Christ, to
renounce all righteousness of their own, and come to Christ, poor and
miserable, blind and naked, and venture their eternal salvation on his merits
and righteousness alone, to take his yoke and burden on them; this is a hard
saying, it is not at all pleasing to them: Nor is it so to be urged to
obedience, to a strict observance of the commands of GOD. They ^are not to be
so restrained. They choose to walk at large. Such restraints are not (I say) at
all pleasing to them; and therefore when they are urged to a strict regard to
the will and command of GOD, as to a sober, righteous and holy living, i^ is
not pleasing to them. There is no one instance of duty, we can urge them ^o a
compliance with, but what their carnal hearts have a strong reluctance to.

THUS then we speak, not as pleasing men, when we are from time to time calling
and urging them to their duty.

BEFORE I dismiss this enquiry, I might here particularly say; the Intemperate
man does not care to have his intemperance rebuked and declaimed against. He
cares not to read or hear of the many woes deno^nc'd against him for his
rioting and drunkenness, though he is told from the word of GOD, that it will
at the last bite like a serpent, and sting like an adder.

THE unchaste and filthy don't love to be admonished for their unchaste and
filthy practices, though the word of GOD declares they shall never inherit the
kingdom of God.

THE unrighteous don't love to be so often rebuked for their injustice and
oppression, and told of the wrath it exposes them to.

THE liar don't love to be reproved for his lying and false speaking; though
the word of GOD says, such must ^ave their part in the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, where they shall never get one drop of water to cool their
wicked tongues, which they so vilely employed in their life time.

THE covetous don't love to be rebuked for their inordinate and anxious regards
to the world, and things of it; though they are like for ever to neglect the
one thing needful, for the sake of this world and so l^^e their Souls (by their
folly) more worth than a thousand worlds.

THE profane person don't like to be reproved for his daring wickedness; though
he impreca^es on his own head the (...) wrath and vengeance of a jealous GOD,
and must swelter under it to an eternity, if he don't reform, and dread to take
GOD's holy name in vain.

THE Sabbath breakers; such as are vain, rude and disorderly on GOD's holy day,
don't care to hear the frequent reproofs given them in the name of the Lord;
though if they should escape punishment from men, they cannot escape the righteous
judgment of GOD, who is ^ealous for the honor of his day, and will not let any
profanations of it go unpunished. And so I might go on, as to several other
instances of wickedness, alas! too common in the age in which we live, with
respect to which men cannot patiently bear to hear their wickedness reproved,
and the wrath of GOD denounced against them, which will certainly fall upon
them, without a remarkable and through repentance and reformation.

BY thus dealing with the children of Men in the public dispensation of GOD's
holy word, we may be said to speak not as pleasing men; when we thus reprove
them for their wickedness, warn them of their danger, and urge them to reform,
and do their duty, as they would avoid a most fearfully aggravated
condemnation, which will else belong unto them.

BUT this may suffice in answer to the second enquiry, when we may be said to
speak, not as pleasing men.

I procced to the third Enquiry.

3. WHEN may we be said to speak as pleasing GOD?

Briefly here.

WE may be said to speak as pleasing GOD, when we propound the glory of GOD,
and the best good of immortal Souls, as the great end of our speaking.

WHEN we endeavor plainly and faithfully to inform men of their duty, to show
them their sin and misery, and need of a Savior. First, we must tell them of
their miserable and undone condition, because of the f^rst apostasy, of their
being righteously involved in the guilt of it, and of their exposedness to the
wrath of a righteous GOD while they continue in their natural stare, and of
their inability to help and save themselves. We should then tell them of the
hope there is before them, of the provision made for them in the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is able and willing to s^ve them to the ut^e^most. That there is
therefore hope cone^ning them, though their sins may have been of a crimson
^^lour, and scarlet dye; that if they will confess and forsake them, and turn
to the Lord, they shall find mercy and be ab^ndantly pardoned. They m^st be
told, that they are of themselves, poor and miserable, blind and naked; that
they must come to Christ humbly sensible thereof, renouncing all righteousness
of their own, and be willing to venture the salvation of their Souls, on the
merits and righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ. That they must receive him
as their Lord and King, as well as Savior; to have every sin and lust
mortified and subdued in them. That they must make an entire sincere surrender
and dedication of themselves to the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of their lives: And
make his glory their governing design and aim, and the word of GOD their
constant rule; and see to it, that they walk circumspectly, humbly and
prayerfully. When we thus speak to our hearers, we speak as pleasing GOD, who
has no pleasure in the death of the sinner, but had rather he would turn and
live. It is therefore pleasing to him, to see his Ministers thus endeavoring
to rescue poor miserable sinners from the destruction they are in such danger
of, to see and hear them warning men of their danger, and setting before them
the terrors of the Lord and his dreadful wrath; and persuading and urging them
to fly for refuge to lay hold on the hope in the Gospel set before them, to be
working out their own Salvation with fear and trembling, to be making their
calling and election sure, to do with their might whatsoever their hand finds
to do, to work while the day lasts, and make sure of an interest in the favor
of GOD; to mind thus the things of their everlasting peace, before they are hid
from their eyes Such speaking is pleasing and acceptable to GOD, because it is
the way and means he has in infinite wisdom instituted for the awakning,
quickening and converting of men; and it is especially ple^^ing to him, if we do
by so speaking sincerely endeavor to advance his glory, and the everlasting
advantage of the precious Souls commi^ed to us; so shall we act up to the great
design of GOD in pu^ting us into the Ministry, than which nothing can be more
pleasing and acceptab^e to him. And thus I have briefly shown, when we may be
said to speak as pleasing GOD.

I come now to show,

4. and Lastly WHY we should make it our great concern and endeavor, so to
speak, not as pleasing men, but GOD. We see this was the Apostle's great
concern and care, and it should be ours.

In should be so, if we only consider, that we cannot else be the faithful
servants of the Lord Jesus Christ.

WE shall not be faithful to the trust reposed in us, if we don't make this our
great concern and endeavor.

MINISTERS of the Gospel are Christ's servants by office; and as servants, they
are to please their own master. If I pleased men, says the Apostle, I should
not be the servant of Jesus Christ, Gai 1. 10 And this made the Apostle have
regard not only to his doctrine and outward conversation; but the inward aims
and intentions of his heart; and expecting the reward of his labors more from
GOD than men, he therefore sought to please GOD rather then men, and approve
his heart unto him. And herein he reflects on those fa^so Apostles, that sought
to please men, that preached the law of Moses to please the Jews; or others
that perverted and abused the doctrine of the Gospel to gratify the lusts of
men. This our Apostle dared not to do; nor should any of the Ministers of
Christ now: for it is required of such, that they be found faithful, I Cor. IV.
2. Now we can never be so, if our great care be to please men; we shall then be
afraid to deal plainly, closely and faithfully with them: We shall be loath to
disturb them in their security; shall choose to let them go on in their evil
ways, undisturbed, rather than incur their displeasure, and so we shall prove
unfaithful to GOD, and the Sou^s of men, and thus bring the guilt of blood upon
our own heads. Ezekiel. XXXIII 7. 8. O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto
the house of Is^ael, therefore thou shall bear the word at my mouth, and warn
them from me. When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou ^all surely die,
if thou do not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall
die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require AT THINK HAND. But if, on the
contrary, we are faithful in dr^^vering the whole counsel of GOD, if we speak
whatsoever the Lord has commanded us, we shall keep our selves clear from the
blood of all; as we see in the 9th ver. Nevertheless if thou warn the wicked of
his way to turn from it, if be do not turn from his way, be shall die in his
iniquity, but thou have delivered thy Stul.

SURELY then, for these reasons, it should be our preat concern and endeavor
to speak, not as pleasing ^^en, but GOD who tries our hearts; for, if when we
shall be called to give up our account to our omniscient and heart-searching
Judge, we should be fo^nd unfaithful, we shall bring or, our selves a most
aggrava^ed and intolerable condemnation.

I shall now make sou^e Application of this Proposition.

And,

USE I. We may infer from what we have heard that it will be no great wonder,
if Mir^^ius should in^n^ the a^spleasure of men. No^ning ha^ a g^ea et tendence
to do it, than a close and faithful dealing with the^^ (...) will be no wonder,
in their corrupt and carnal minds be frened, and galled thereo^-Christ's
Ministers then may expect, if they deal faithfully with men in their public
dispensa ions, or personal applications, to roil the spiri^s of some; and
perhaps the great enemy of Souls may set in and endeavor to ^^^udice them
against their Ministry, and so make it ^^t ever unprofitable to them.

We may infer,

USE II. HOW faulty such are, who are mainly, or too much concerned to please
men. Indeed as I have already hinted, Ministers should endeavor to choose our
acceptable words, and be concerned so to manage their public performances that
they may be pleas^^g as well as profitable. But they should never prophesy sine
^^ings, slatter men in their evil ways, or be afraid of offending any by plain
and faithful de^^^g. Nor should we take any pleasure in gratifying the i^n^^.
^ars of men. We should always carefully avoid s^on a style or language as
savours of vanity and affectation, which too often gra^^y's the I ching ear,
and is poorly accommodated to serve ^he parishing souls of men. I will reci^e
here the words of an eminent divine D. Bates.
not impertinent to my present purpose. The affectation (says he) of W^t and
slanting eloquence frustrates the end of preaching, which is to convince
sinners of their guilt and misery, and by the conviction of conscience to make
them sly to the sanctuary our blessed Savior for protection; parely, because
those things that da^er the fancy, are not proper so effect the conscience:
light trimmings of language, gaudy expressions, g^^ming points of W^t, please
the imagination; but conscience is ex^^ted and inflamed, by representing
eternal things with powerful plainness and in a solemn manner. Thus he. -- Very
(...) then are such Ministers as study more to please the Hor^^^, than pront
the Souls of Men.

USE III. Hence, the Ministers of the (...) could be above a^ things ^^^ernd to
please GOD, and app^^^e their elves, to him, as those that have (...). They
^^st ond^a^^ (...) to d^^^^ce their ^uty, (...) will (...) and (...) they give
d^w, or not. They should by all prudent methods endeavor to secure and
maintain an interest in the hearts and affections of their People; but if they
cannot do it without being unfaithful to GOD, and the Souls of Men, they had
better lose their affections, though they suffer in their worldly interest, than
incurr the displeasure of their holy Judge.

USE IV. PEOPLE should then be willing to be freely and saithfully dealt with
by the Ministers of the Gospel.

IF Ministers cannot else be faithful to GOD, and the Souls of Men, surely they
ought never to be in the ^east offended at their plain and faithful dealing
with them. They do it, because necessity is laid upon them; and Woe will be to
them, if they don't so warn and call upon Men. They see to their grief a
necessity of it, because of the carnal security of the greater part of those,
who have the Gospel preached to them. And it is the consideration of this, that
moves them at one time and another to be preaching Terror to you. We can take
no pleasure in it; it is the most unpleasant part of our work in the Pulpit. It
would be much pleasanter, to be encouraging your progress in the good ways of
the Lord, and to be preaching lectures of Consolation to you, and setting
before you the pleasures and joys of the world you are going to. (And blessed
be GOD, this may be seasonably done also.) But it has been and is matter of
sorrowful observation, that there is generally more need of awakning
discourses, of setting before our People the terrors of the Lord and his wrath,
because generally the greater part of our Congregations are carnally secure and
careless about the concerns of their Souls, and a preparation for Death and
Judgment. And it is for the sake of such in our Congregations, that we are from
one time to another dispensing the warnings of the Lord. And would to GOD, all
his people may be made willing to be freely and faithfully dealt with by the
ministry they sit under, and take it as the greatest instance of kindness and
love from their Ministers. If the spirit of the Lord, and his blessing does
ever accompany his word so dispensed, as such preaching is acceptable and
pleasing to GOD, so will it be to the Souls of those awakned and exci^ed to
their duty by it.

USE. V. THE last Use shall be a word of exhorta^ion.

And here I shall address my self,

1. To my reverend Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry. And,

2. To him who is this day to be put in trust with the Gospel.
1. TO my reverend Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry.

SUFFER me with all humility to recommend the example of the blessed Apostle
here, for our imitation.

WE learn something of our duty from what we have heard: And would to GOD, we
might be enabled so to discharge it, that we may be able to say, as the Apostle
does here with his Brethren, and as he says in Romans 1.9. GOD is my witness,
whom I serve with my Spirit in the Gospel of his Son. It will be much for our
comfort and honor, to have this testimony of our Consciences for us. And this
we shall have, if we are diligent and faithful in the discharge of our
ministry. We know it is required in Stewards (and therefore of us) that a man
be found faithful. Let us be so then in declaring the whole counsel of GOD, and
giving to every one their portion in due season.

LET us often consider the state and circumstances of our respective flocks and
charges, and accommodate our selves to them in our public administrations, by
way of reproof and warning, counsel and comfort, as we apprehend they may stand
in need thereof. Let us always beware of any fear of Men, that may bring a
snare. Let us not be afraid of the faces of men, but faithfully deliver the
messages and warnings of GOD to them, whether they will hear, or whether they
will forbear. And alas! How many are there still, who are dspos'd to say, as the
Prophet Jeremiah's hearers did, Jer. XLIV. 16 As for the word that thou have
spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not harken unto thee. It is truly
a very sad consideration, that not withstanding all the calls and admonitions
which have been given, not only from the word, but amazing providence of GOD,
there are so many yet settled on their lees, and going on incorrigibly in their
evil ways, and will not be reclaimed. What need have we to bestir ourselves,
with respect to such, and do our ut^ermost to pluck them as brands out of the
burning! And let us encourage those who are asking the way to the Heavenly
Zion, with their faces thitherward, and help them forward in the way of life,
as workers together with GOD. Let us do what we can to help them over their
difficulties and discouragements, greatly concerned that their convictions may
issue in their saving and t^o^o' conversion to GOD.

AND let us follow all our sincere and faithful endeavous with our humble and
fervent Prayers, to GOD, that we may be not only faithful, but if the Lord,
please, successful; that we may have cause to rejoice with respect to many, yea
all of our dear people, in the day of the Lord, that we have not run in vain,
nor labored in vain.

I shall now shut up all,

2. WITH a word to my dear Brother, at whose request I stand here this day. You
are now coming into the service of the Gospel and of the Sanctuary, to which
you have been devoted from your childhood, if the Lord would be pleased to
qualify you therefore, and accept you therein. And we would sain hope, that it
has pleased the Father of Lights, from whom comes down every good and perfect
gift, not only to bestow on you desirable gifts and accomplishments for the
work of the ministry, but also his renewing, sanctifying grace in an early
conversion to GOD; and that so a happy foundation is laid, for your future
serviceableness in the sacred and solemn work you are now engaging in: And we
hope and trust, it is in answer to the many fervent prayers of those concerned
with and for you, that a door is here opened for your entrance into this part
of the Lord's vineyard.

I persuade my self, it has been your great concern, and earnest desire, that
you might be sanctified of GOD, and so be fi^ted for your master's work and
service here. I am persuaded, that the consideration of the duties and
difficulties attending the important station you are entering into, does this
day fill your heart with no little fear and care; so that you may now be ready
to cry out, Who is sufficient for these things?

BUT be not discouraged; the grace and strength of Christ shall be surfficient
for you. Exercise a lively faith in that gracious promise, and live upon it,
Marth. XXVIII. 20. Lo! I am with you always.

UNDER all the discouragements you may mere with, let this promise be a great
support and comfort to you. You may expect to meet with various and heavy
tr^als, difficulties and temptations, that may be not a little discouraging and
perplexing to you, and which you may be at present a stranger to: Even your
very faithfulness in the discharge of your duty, may expose you to some. But
yet resolve, that by the grace of GOD helping you, you will as you are able
faithfully warn Men of their sin and danger, and excite them to their duty, and
do your utmost to gather them under the wings of their Savior, before the
things of their everlasting peace shall be hid from their eyes. Pie much in
prayer to GOD to his gracious presence with you, to succeed you in your work.
You must give your self not only to the ministry of the word, but unto prater.
You must b^ a Man of prayer, often wrestling with GOD, and resolving not to let
him go, un^il he bless you, and those also of your Charge, whom you will be
often ear^y (...) in the Arms of your faith and prayer, to GOD, for his
Blessing to descend upon. O plead often with ^^n ^he many grace (...) promises,
upon which he has caused you to hope, for your self, and for the Souls of your
people; and beg that you may not labor in vain, and spend yo^ strength for
naught, that the word you preach may not be a savor of death unto death to
any, but of life unto life to all. Give no offense in any thing, that the
Ministry be not blamed. 2. Cor. VI. 3.
Let your life and conversation witness for you, that you believe and live the
doctrines you preach; so will you be an example to the believers. And if you
thus take heed to yourself and to your ministry, you shall save you self, and
may hope to save those that hear you. We trust that from a sincere love to the
Lord Jesus Christ, you will feed the sheep, and feed the lambs of this Flock;
and we wish that we may see and hear of remarkable tokens of his presence with
you, and among this people, the care of whose precious and immortal Souls, we
are now going in the name and fear of GOD, the searcher of hearts, to commit
unto you. Our sincere wishes for you, upon this solemn occasion, are, that you
may not come into this awful station with the guils of any iniquity cleaving to
you; that GOD would be at peace with you, and now speak peace unto you; hat He
would take away your filthy Garments, and cloth you with change of raiment,
and that when we shall presently lay our hands on your trembling head, the Holy
Ghost may descend and seize on your Soul, and fill it with a new, pure and
heavenly life and vigor, and those divine impressions, that you never felt in
all your life before: That He may rest upon you in his gracious, sanct fying,
enlightening and assisting influences and operations, to enable you to the
faithful discharge of the great work you are now engaging in: That you may
approve you self faithful to Christ and the So^^s of this people; so will you
be a swee^ s^vour of Chirist unto GOD, in them that shall be saved, and in them
also that shall perish. But GOD of his infinite marev grant, that none of this
^lock may perish from under your ministry, but that you may be able in the day
that is aproaching, to say: Here am I, Lord, and all the Souls, which were
committed to my charge.

In fine, WE wi^h you may be, for many year^ yet to come, a faithful and
successful labourer in this p^r of the Lord's harvest, a great blessing and
comfort to the Rev elder Pa^or as well as to the Flock, and that when your
ministrations in the Temple of GOD here, shall be finished, ^o^ may give up
your account with joy and not with grief, and may hear from the mouth of your
Judge, that blessed Euge, He^^ ^^ne good and faithful Servant, enter ^^om into
the joy of thy Lord! ^^d having been wise, and turned many to righteousness,
may you ^^^ne as the brightness of the firmament, and as a star for ever and
ever, Amen and Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page. 4 line 5 for are, read care p 20. l. 7 r R^m I o^^^


