Mr. Cabot's Fast SERMONS, April 18th. 1733:

The Nature of Religious Fasting Opened.

IN Two short DISCOURSES Delivered At Thompson in Kellingley, Connecticut
Colony. On a Day of public FASTING and PRAYER. April 18. 1733.

By Marston Cabot, V. D. M.

Jer. XLIV. 10. They are not humbled even unto (...) Day. --

(...) Dei (...), qui Religionis causa sus^^pitur et ad Religionis Officia
commodius expedianda.

P. Van. Mastricht. BOSTON: Printed for JOHN ELIOT in Orange Street at the
South End of the Town. MDCCXXXIV.

PREFACE.
GOD who is the only adequate Object of divine Worship, has been plea^'d in his
inspired Oracles to prescribe the Means of it that are truly acceptable to
himself; among which that o^ a religious Fast is justly to be e^t^emed none of
the least. We have sufficient Light in the Word of God to instruct us in the
Nature of the Duty, and the Manner of it is Performance, together with the Time
and other Circumstances which have a necessary Relation to this extraordinary
Service; and the Exampl^s (not a few) on sacred Record, of the great Zeal of
God's People exerted in the discharge of this Duty, are l^st for the Imitation
of his Church in all succeeding Generations to the End of Time.

We in this Land are favored with pious Rulers, who (among other Ways) express
their tender Care of us in appointing annual Fasts to be observed with a Spirit
of true Devotion.

It was on such a Day as this that the ensuing Discourses were delivered by our
dear Brother to the People of his own Charge: and are now at the urgent Desire
of many of them made public from the Press. The Reverend Author was peculiarly
induced to this Essay from the melancholy Observation there is had of
Christians defectiveness in their attending on Fast Solemnities. The Sermons
need no Recommendation of ours: We are persuaded they will make their own Way
into the World; especially since they are upon an uncommon Subject, and but
rarely known to be published, as also that they are so well adapted to instruct
and assist People in "fasting to God, and in keeping such a Fast as be has
chosen".

And now we heartily implore the Blessing of Heaven to accompany these, and all
other the faithful Endeavou^s of his Servant to promot^ the best Interest, and
advance the Kingdom of Christ; that he may not spend his Strength for ^ought
and in vain.

John Fisk, Eben. Williams.
Kellingley, May 22. 1734.
The Nature of religious Fasting Opened, etc.
Sermon, I.
ZECHARIAH VII. 5. -- Did ye at all Fast unto me, even to me?


THE blessed God did not leave the World to the Guidance of natural Light and
Reason, that they might find him purely by his Works of Creation; but bestowed
upon them the inestimable Blessing of supernatural Revelation, thereby to bring
Mankind to a more distinct and full Knowledge of their Duty. But it is
observable, that the Revelation which God was pleased to make of his Mind, was
gradual and various. He discovered his Will unto the Fathers at sundry times,
before the Deluge by Enoch and Noah: After the Flood by Abraham, Jacob, Moses
and all the Prophets; and in diverse manners; sometimes by immediate
Inspiration; sometimes by a lively Voice; sometimes by Signs and Wonders from
Heaven, sometimes by Dreams which are the Images or Resemblances of things
presented to the Fancy in Sleep; and frequently by Visions, which (as they
stand in Contra-distinction to Dreams) are the Representations of things made
to the open and waking Eye; for this Reason it is though it the Prophets in old
time used to be styled SEERS. In this last sense Almighty God revealed much of
his Will to the Jewish Nation and People by the Prophet Zechariah: He was a Man
authorized, and commissionated by Heaven, to call them to Repentance, and
agreeable to the Power he was vested with, and the true notation of his Name
which is one mindful of the Lord, he was very observant of what he had received
of the Lord to be delivered unto them.

Hence, we find him in the beginning of this Book exhorting the Jews to return
to God, assuring them (in his Name and Fear) that If they did so the Lord of
Hosts would return to them, but (it seems) they were obstinate in their evil
Courses, and refused to return. Now in this Chapter wherein our Text lies we
hear the Captives of Babylon maing Inquiry about their annual Fasting, as V^r.
1, 2, 3. And it came to pass, in the fourth Year of King Darius, that the Word
of the Lord came unto Zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth month, even in
C^^s^^^; when they had sent unto the House of God, Sherezer and R^g^ (...) ^^en
to pray before the Lord, (as the marginal Reading (...) at the Face of the
Lord; to seek his Face and Favor. (...) s^^^k unto the Priests which were in
the House of the Lord (...) ^^d to the Prophets, saying, Should I weep in the
f^fth Mo^^ (...) ^^s If as I have done these so many Years. And the^ (...)
^^s^er, ver. 4, 5. Then came the Word of the Lord o^^ (...) s^yi^g, Speak unto
all the People of the land and to t^^ (...) ^^^y fasied and m^u^^d in the fifth
and seventh Mont^, (...), ^^^^^ve^ty Years; Did ye at all fast unto me, even to
me?

Henry. Pool. Clark.
Perhaps the fifth Month here mentioned may have a Reference and All sion to
burning the magnifient City and Temple in Jerusalem in that Month; and the
seventh Month, the treacherous D^^th of G^deli^^ (the famous P^tron and
Commander of the J^ws) by the Hands of Ishma^l, as the sacred Story informs us:
These days might be cerebrated as anniversary Fasts, in Remembrance of those
sorrowful F^c^s. But this is not material to my present design. -- All the
Strength and Force of the Quaery which contains our Text (as I conceive) lies
in this, whether or no they did sanctify their Fasts and keep them in a due and
solemn Manner; not so much, whether these Fasts were regular, and ought to be
observed, but since they did fast, whether they kept such Fasts as they ought
to have done, and conscientiously attended the Solemnity of such Seasons; for
indeed supposing a Fast ^o be never so strictly enjoined by the Authority of
Heaven, yet if it is not sutably observed, it is so far from being grateful and
pleasing to God, that it is very offensive and odious in his Sight: And so the
brief Sense of the Words will run in this Strain. -- Indeed you might pretend
to keep a Fast, but you were not real and sincere in the matter: What you did I
esteem at a very low rate; for the Essentials of the Duty were wanting: Ye did
not do it in a religious and solemn manner, and therefore ye did not fast at
all: Ye did not bring your Hearts to your Work, and therefore to tell you the
Truth, the whole amount of all your Services is NOTHING.

Here Is not only a Declaration of their Insincerity and Hypocrisy in their
Fasting, but a most severe Reprimand given them by God himself for their
professing to engage in a Business which they were not hearty in, that is to
say, for fasting but not unto God. The Question (Did ye at all fast? --)
carries as much in it, and by the Repetition (unto me, even to me) is plainly
seen what a vast Stress God laid upon it; and therefore for their
Non-observance of their Duty they justly merited a Reproof from him.

Now since whatsoever Things were written aforetime, were written for our
Instruction and Admonition, who live in the last Ages of the World, the Rebuke
in our Text may be of Service to us on this Day; which is consecrated and set
apart for religious Fasting and Prayer. Agreably,

In handling these Words I shall observe,

DOCT. That such People as don't fast in a religious and solemn Manner,
certainly fall under the Rebuke of Heaven.

PROP. I. There are some People that don't fast in a solemn and religious
Manner.

They fast but not unto God. The Jews (it seems) were notoriously guilty in
this Point; and (it may be) there are some Professors of Christianity that are
not entirely clear,

But here I must Enquire --

Enq. When may a People be said to fast, but not in a solemn and religious
Manner?

1. When they are only external and superficial in their Fasting.

When they personate the Saints, put on a Vizard as it were only to act a part
of Piety. There were some such People in the Days of our Savior, as we read
Matthew. 6.16. Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites of a sad
Countenance: for they disfigure their Faces, that they may appear unto Men to
fast: Verily I say unto you they have their Reward. And long before this, we
have a very just and natural description of them by the evangelical Prophet,
Isai. 58.5. Is it such a Fast that I have chosen, a Day for a Man to afflict
his Soul? (a plain Allusion to Lev. 16.29. And this shall be a Statute for ever
unto you, that in the seventh Month in the tenth Day of the Month, ye shall
afflict your Souls. --) Is it to bow down his Head as a Bulrush, and to spread
Sackcloth, and Ashes under his Feet; will thou call this an acceptable Day to
the Lord? q. d. Certainly ye can never have the Face to do it; for you know in
your own Consciences it is not so. And yet it is to be feared, there are some
to be found in our Day, and Age of the World; that seem to wear a demure and
unpleasant Countenance; affect a sad, and s^ournful Way of Speaking; or an
indecent Garb, Gesture etc. Indeed it is true, it is highly unsuitable to the
Solemnity of Fasting, to see People full of Mirth and Cheerfulness, even as at
other Times. Hence is that of the Prophet, Isai. 22.12.13. Ard in that D^^ did
the Lord God of Hosts, call to Weeping, and to Mourning, and (...) Baldn^ss,
and t^ girding with Sackcloth, and behold Joy and Gladness, staying O^^n, ard
kiling S^eep, eating Flesh and dri^king Wine. Let (...) eat and wi^k ^or to
morrow we shall die. -- But to affect a gloomines^ of Countenance, Speech and
Behavior, is not the least (...) or Argument of the Sincerity o^ our Fasting;
but rather a P^^^^ t^ the contrary. Such then as carry the Marks of their
Fastings, and Humiliation only in their Face, Tongue, or Gesture, may be said
to fast, but not unto God: They fast to themselves, and with a Design t^ impose
on Man who takes an Estimate of them only from what is visible and apparent;
but they don't fast unto God, who takes Cognizance of the Heart, and passes a
most righteous Judgment on all Persons, and Things whatsoever. As it was spoken
to the Jews in the verse immediately following our Text, ver. 6. And when ye
did eat, and when ye did drink, did ye not eat to your selves, and drink to
your selves? Or be not ye they that do so? You did it to answer your own
Purposes, and not with an Intention to serve and honor God. See Hosea 7.16.
They return but not to the most high: They are like a deceitful Bow.

2 When they rest in the have Confession of their Sins.

Some People there are when they pretend (...) fast, will freely acknowledge
themselves to be Sinners, and it may be Sinners before the Lord exceedingly,
but it is mere Lip-service, and does not proceed from the Heart. It is not
because they have any real Sense of the infinite Malignity of Sin, as it
disparages the Excellencies of God; debases and degrades their Natures, as it
defiles their own Souls, and terminates in their everlasting Ruin; but such
People do it because it is customary to do it; they don't like to be singular,
and out of the Mode of the Country, but would join with others in their devout
and humble Acknowledgements at such a Time. --

Now such as rest satisfied and contented with this, only with saying 'I am a
sinful Creature, I know I am a wicked Person, 'for I was born a Sinner, and in
Sin have I lived all my Days. Nay though they should confess themselves to have
been even the chief of Sinners; yet this is no certain or conclusive Evidence
that they sanctify a Fast, or keep it in a sacred and religious Manner; for
though indeed Confession of Sin is a Duty incumbent on us in a peculiar Manner
when we fast, yet it must be a good Confession, arising from a true Sight and
Discovery of Sin; a deep Shame for it, and the utmost Abhorrence and
Detestation of it; all which must be accomp^ny with our most vigorous
Endeavors to abandon it; and hence in such Places of HOLY WRIT, as we are only
commanded to confess our Sins; it must be supposed that we are likewise
injoined to forsake them; because it is by this that we shall obtain pardoning
Mercy. Read Isai. 55.7. Let the ^^^ked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man
his Thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy on him,
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. And Prove. 28.13. He that
covers his Sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes shall
have Mercy. And what God has thus put together in his WORD, no Man may presume
to put asunder.

(3.) When they are contented with a partial Reformation, and that either as to
Matter or Manner.

1. When People are satisfied with a partial Reformation as to the Matter.

There are some People that will not only confess their Sins, but will seem to be
grieved and troubled for them; and correct what has been amiss; but when they
come to reform, they will take care they don't do too much at it; perhaps they
will comply with one Part of their Duty, but then they will take the Freedom to
cull and choose among the Commands, to find out which will carry least
Repugnance to their Complections and Constitutions, or best fall in with their
Interest to observe: They will very gladly hear the Preacher as Herod did John
the Baptist, and do many things in Religion, but not all: They will keep
Herodias, indulge some secret and pleasing Vice, notwithstanding all that is
offered to the contrary. They will not be unjust, covetous, unclean, etc. but they
will be intemperate, or if they be not intemperate they will be profane, or if
they be not profane, they will be uncharitable, rash, and censorious as to
their Neighbor; or if they be not uncharitable, they will be false and
deceitful; and thus I could easily run through every Duty, and observe the like
Inconsistency, and Variation from the GRAND RULE which we all profess to
conduct our selves by.

People's Religion is not uniform and regular. Some are not far from the
Kingdom of God, i. e. they have many good things found with them, and
(methinks) it is a thousand Pities that they have any bad ones to darken the
Luster and Beauty of their Virtues. -- That they pull down with one hand, what
they build up with the other, and undo what they have done.

Now such People as rest satisfied and contented with rectifying some
Miscarriages be^ not all, cannot be said to fast in a religious and sacred
Manner; for though indeed it is happy for us, if we can obtain the Victory over
any one Lust or Passion, yet it is our Duty to labor to mortify every one, and
therefore it ought to be our highest Ambition. This was the Spirit and Temper
of the Man after God's own Heart. See Psalm. 101.3. I will set no wicked thing
before mine Eyes: -- And Psalm. 119.128. -- I have every false Way. Not this or
that but every one. Below this we should not rest satisfied, for the Apostle's
Reasoning will remain eternally good. James 2.10, 11. For whosoever shall keep
the whole Law, and yet offend in one point is guilty of all. For be that said,
Do not commit adultery; said also do not kill. Now if thou commit no adultery,
yet if thou kill, thou art become a Transgressor of the Law.

(2.) When People are satisfied with a partial Repentance as to the M^^^^ of it.

The Jewish Nation and People were extremely formal and ceremonious in their
Worship, but their Heart was wanting; Isai. 29.13. Wherefore the Lord said,
Forasmuch as this People draw near me with their Mouths, and with their Lips do
honor me, but have removed their Heart f^^^ from me, and their Fear toward me
is taught by the Precept of Men. This our blessed Lord observed to the Jews in
his Day, Matthew. 15.7, 8, 9. Ye Hypocrites, well did Esaias prophesy of you,
saying, This People draw^th nigh unto me with their Mouth, and honors me
with their Lips, but their Heart is far from me. But in vein they do worship
me, teaching for doctrine the Commandments of Men. And it is to be feared these
Words are awfully verified in Christian Professors at this Day. God is near in
their Mouth but far from their Reins. Their Heart is not right with God,
neither are they sound in his Statutes. They are not unhinged from themselves.
It is true what they do is required by God, and perhaps they will comply with a
considerable Part of their Duty; but yet it is not from right Principles and
for right Ends. They don't repent and turn to God in the Way which he has
prescribed: They don't repent in a Way of Humility, Faith, and Prayer. They
don't turn to God with the whole Heart, and Soul; in Obedience to his Precept;
and with a pure Aim, and Intention of advancing his Glory^ In a Word, SELF is
the prevailing Principle in their Breasts.

Now it is for ever the Way and Manner of doing a thing in Religion that stamps
a Value on it, and gives it the Denomination of virtuous or vicious; so that
without doubt People may repent (nay perform every Duty in Christianity) as to
the external Part, and yet for Want of doing it in a proper Manner, it is of no
Significance or avail. Agreably we find God insisting much on this in the
sacred Oracles. Deuteronomy. 26.16. This Day the Lord thy God has commanded thee to
do these Statutes, and Judgments: thou shall therefore keep and do them. How?
It follows, with all thine Heart and with all thy Soul. Parallel to this is
that Text, Prove. 23.26. My Son give me thine Heart, -- and the true Reason we
have assigned in 1 Samuel 16.7. -- For the Lord sees not as Man sees; for Man
looks on the outward Appearance, but the Lord looks on the Heart. For the
Lord searches all Hearts, and understands all the Imaginations of the
Thoughts: If we therefore seek him with our Heart, he will be found of us, but
if that be wanting he will cast us off for ever. This is the Life and Soul in
every Duty.

Some People there are, that will seem to confess their Sins to Almighty God
very freely, (it may be with Tears in their Eyes) They will bitterly lament
their Pride, Covetousness, their Uncharitableness, their Malice, Envy, etc. and
if a Judgment were to be pronounced according to present outward Appearance,
one would think them to be honest and sincere in these Things; but alas! how
soon do we see their Practices run counter to all their Prayers, Fasting and
Humiliation? This is a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation --
especially considering what admirable Helps and Advantages we are all under to
lead holy Lives.

4. When their Repentance is only transient and temporary.

Repentance (whatever some may think of it) is not a slight Action; the Work of
a Day that is presently over; but it is a very great Work, the Business of a
Person's whole Life: The Reason is most plain and obvious to every one's
Understanding; because we are contracting new Guilt and Defilement every Day
that we live; and therefore there is need of daily Repentance; nevertheless it
is to be feared that some People are ready to satisfy themselves with a general
Repentance; They are for dispatching the Work at once; their Goodness is of
very short Duration and Continuance. Thus we read concerning Ephraim of old,
Hosea 6.4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah what shall I do unto
thee? for your Goodness is as a morning Cloud, and as the early Dew it goes
away. It vanishes almost as soon as it appears.

To day possibly they will be extremely religious, sober, and devout, to morrow
we shall see them pursuing their former evil Ways: To day perhaps they will not
be persuaded to eat any thing or drink any thing save just to supply the
Necessities of Nature; anon we shall find them drowned in sensual Excesses: To
day grave, and mortified in their Aspect, and Deportment to a very great
Degree; to morrow just the Reverse; full of Levity and Vanity. Briefly, to day
Precisians, to morrow Libertines and Latitudinarians.

To speak in plain Language; Such People as these do only fast for a while;
that they may return to their Sins with greater Looseness and Extravagance;
just like a Course of Water that has been stopped for some time, it becomes more
rapid and violent when the Dam is taken away; so these return with greater
Greediness after the Restraint which was laid on them is off. But thus it is
happened to them according to the true Proverb; as a Dog returns to his
Vomit, so a Fool returns to his Folly, (or as the Margin has it, Iterateth,
i. e. repeateth his Foolishness) Which the Apostle cites from the wise Man,
with some Addition and Enlargement; 2 Pet. 2.22. -- The Dog is turned to his
own Vomit again; and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire. What
was spoken to the Jewish People, may with great Pertinency be applied to them;
Isai. 58.4. Behold, ye fast for Strife and Debate, and to smite with the Fist
of Wickedness; Ye shall not fast as ye do this Day, (or as it might perhaps be
better rendered, Ye fast not, at this Day: Ye fast not at all) to make your
Voice to be beard on high.

Now surely such People as these, that pervert the manifest Intent and Design
of Fasting; and instead of crucifying their Lusts, it eventually serves only to
inflame them; such cannot be said to fast in a religious and solemn Manner, no
pious and good End is promoted hereby, but on the other hand, their Fasting is
prejudicial, as it serves to confirm and harden them in Sin, and render them
obstinate: It makes their blind Eyes blinder; their hard Hearts harder. Sin
revives and gains St^^ngth; they forget all their Vows, and turn from the holy
Commandment; and so their Condition is most desperate. The latter End is worse
with them than the beginning.

Consider what I say, and the Lord give us a right Understanding in all Things!
AMEN.

The End of the First SERMON.
The Nature of religious Fasting Opened, etc.
Sermon, II.
ZECHARIAH VII. 5. -- Did ye at all Fast unto me, even to me?


HAVING in the former part of this Day endeavored to show when a People may be
said to fast, but not in a religious and solemn Manner, it is very proper and
requisite that I pass now to make Enquiry.

Enq. When may a People be said to fast in a religious and solemn Manner?

1. When there is a very deep Humiliation and Contrition of Soul for Sin.

Indeed there may be some sort of Shame and Humiliation, even in carnal and
unsanctify'd People, wro't by the common Operations of the divine Spirit,
whereby they are made sorry, not after a godly but a worldly sort, for they
only fear the doleful Effects of God's Vengeance. They are not humbled for Sin
as it is against the great GOD; a Violation of his holy Law, and as it is
exceeding sinful in it is very Nature, but only as it is destructive of their
Happiness. Now this Sorrow is entirely legal, and in the Language of Divinity,
it is called ATTRITION: Thus Ahab, Judas, etc. have been humbled; but where
Humiliation is evangelical; sincere and acceptable to God, it will be inward,
real and very powerful, it will proceed from a strong and sensible Conviction
of the evil Nature and Demerit of all Sin; and of their base Ingratitude
toward God, as well as a most bloody Cruelty to their own precious Souls.
Hence when they come to make Reflections on themselves for their Sins, they
will be deeply sorrowful therefore; They will not only express their Concern in
a few external ^^gns of Grief and Sorrow, by Sights, Tears, or Gro^ns; but they
will feel their Hearts burdened with Sin, and oppressed with the heavy Load of
Guilt lying on them, their Spirits will be wounded. How doleful those Accents?
Psalm. 38.2 -- 6 For thine Arrows stick fast in me: and thy hand pr^sseth me
sore. There is no Soundness in my Flesh, because of thine Anger: neither is
there any Rest in my Bones because of my Sin. For mine Iniquities are ga^e over
mine Head: as an heaty Burden they are too heavy for me. My Wounds sti^k and
are corrupt, because of my Foolishness. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly,
I go mourning all the day long.

Thus they will weep sorely; weep with all bitterness of Heart; mourn like a
Dove; and chatter as a Swallow as did Hezekiah. Their Sorrow will be a most
pungent, afflictive Sorrow; such a Sorrow as hares the Sin so much, that they
now prefer Death to the Embraces of Lust. Behold, and see if there be any
Sorrow like unto their Sorrow! --

Now such People as are thus sorrowfully affected, and moved with a Sense of
Sin, may be said to fast in a sacred Manner. They certainly present Sacrifices
well pleasing to Heaven. Psalm 51.16, 17. For thou desire not Sacrifice, else
would I give it: thou delightest not in Burnt-Offering. The Sacrifices of God
are a broken Spirit: a broken and a contrite Heart, O God, thou will not
despise. For thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth Eternity, whose
Name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy Place; with him also that is of an
humble and contrite Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble and the Heart of
the contrite ones. To this Man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a
contrite Spirit, and that trembles at my Word.

2. When there is an earnest seeking Reconciliation with an offended Majesty.

And if we are duly humbled for Sin, this will necessarily ensue; we cannot help
imploring a speedy Reconciliation with God whom we have offended. Now in order
to this, we must review our Conduct; carefully examine into our past Life and
Actions; search and try our Ways; ingenuously, and freely acknowledge our
Offenses; manifest our Hatred of them; judge and condemn our selves before God
on the Account of them. We must likewise renew our Friendship with the Lord
Jesus Christ by a true Faith, grounding our entire Hopes of obtaining divine
Mercy in the Merits of his most precious Blood and Sacrifice; and to all this
we must oblige our selves by the most strict Obligations to depart from
Iniquity; to deny ungodliness and every worldly Lust, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly; adorning the Doctrine of God our Savior in all Things
for the future. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, as in Job 34 31. -- I
will not offend any more; If I have done Iniquity, I will do no more. What have
I to do any more with Idols?

Now such People as earnestly seek a thorough Reconciliation with God in this
Way may be said to fist in a religious and solemn Manner. Indeed it is true, we
ought every day to seek Reconciliation, with God through his dear Son (for who
can understand his Errors?) but it is requisite in a special Manner when we
keep a Day to Fast, and pray to the Lord; then to make Renovation of our
Friendship and Peace which we have violated in a great Variety of ^nstances.
This is very agreeable to God, proper and suitable to the Occasion of the Day,
and an Evidence of our Heartiness in what we are engaged in.

3. When there is a solemn Renewal of Covenant with God.

We find this practiced in ancient times, 2 Kings 23.2, 3. And the King went up
into the House of the Lord, and all the Men of Judah, and all the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem with him, and the Priests, and the Prophets, and all the People,
both small and great: and he read in their Ears all the Words of the Book of
the Covenant which was found in the House of the Lord. And the King stood by a
Pillar and made a Covenant before the Lord to walk after the Lord, and to keep
his Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes, with all their Heart,
and with all their Soul, to perform the Words of this Covenant that were
written in this Book: And all the People STOOD TO THE COVENANT. They said Amen
to it; and consented to the Conditions of it. And so we read, 2 Chronicles. 34.30,
31, 32. And the King went up into the House of the Lord and all the Men of
Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the Priests, and the L^vites, and
the People great and small: And he read in their Ears all the Words of the Book
of the Covenant, that was found in the House of the Lord And the King stood in
his Place, and made a Covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to
keep his Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes, with all their
Heart, and with all their Soul, to perform the Words the Covenant which were
written in this Book. And he caused all that were present in Benjamin and
Jerusalem, to stand to it, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, DID ACCORDING TO
THE COVENANT OF GOD, the God of their Fathers.

Thus it was the good old Way to renew Covenant with God; and this was
registered undoubtedly for our Imitation. We must remember that the Word is gone
out of our Mouth: We have sworn to be true and faithful to the King of Heaven;
and we cannot go back unless we draw back unto Perdition. When we vow a Vow
unto God we must not defer to pay it, for he has no Pleasure in Fools,
therefore we ought to pay that which we have vowed. Better is it that we should
not vow, than that we should vow and not pay. Now in order to a due and regular
Discharge of t^^ Part of our Duty, we must be unfeignedly sorry, and grieved
for our Perfidiousness and Baseness: Pricked at the Heart because we have so
frequently, and shamefully broken Covenant with God. We must bind our selves
more strictly to fulfill the vast Bonds and Engagements which we have laid our
selves under. We must unreservedly, and cheerfully acquiesce in the Dispose of
our selves; and submit to the Terms of the Covenant which we have entered into
with God and one another. And how weighty and solemn a Transaction is this? --
It seems therefore this is one Way to sanctify a Fast and observe it in an holy
Manner.

Agreably (as I am informed) some Churches in the Country make it a Practice to
have the Church Covenant read and renewed in Public on Fast-Days, that so
People may see their manifold Defects; be humbled for them; and led to reform
what has been amiss in any of their Conduct and Convers^tion; and I cannot but
think it would be well if this Custom universally obtained in our Churches.
Certainly we have sufficient Precedent for it; and it might (by the Blessing of
God) be one happy Expedient for promoting a glorious REFORMATION. -- A Thing
long wished and prayed for! -- Thus I believed, therefore have I spoken.

4. When actual Repentance and Reformation follow on our Days of F^sting and
Prayer.

Whether we were sincere and hearty in our Fast Solemnities can be known only
by our after-Life and Converse in the World. It is a most infallible Rule, by
their Fruits ye shall know them. When People appear to be extraordinary zealous
and devour, free ^o exclaim against all Sin and Immorality, on Fast-Days, and
yet run in these very Irregularities a while after against which they so lately
cried out; what can any one judge but that their Fasting was only in show and
appearance; therefore if after the Fast Day is over the good Fruits of it are
visible in our Lives and Practices, then we fast to some Purpose. If our
Fasting be a means to create in us a greater Hatred of all Sin, and inspire us
with a more ordent Love to God, his Ways, Worship, and Ordinances; If our
Fasting inclines and disposes us to be more humble, more patient, more
charitable, more holy and heavenly minded; if we are henceforward the more
fruitful in Works of Piety and Virtue; it demonstrates to all about us that we
fasted in a religious and divine Manner.

In fine,

When we turn from all those Ways of Hypocrisy and Wickedness in which we have
hitherto indulged our selves; and labor to attend all Duty that we have
hitherto lived in the Omission of; and such Duties as we have observed, to be
more accurate and conscientious in the Discharge of them for the time to come:
Such as we have performed well to endeavor to discharge better: Then we keep a
Day to the Lord our God; and shall be owned and accepted by him. If we do well
shall we not be accepted? Verily, When our Fasting and Devotion is finished,
the Work is not done; but indeed so far is it from that, that the most
difficult and necessary Part does then begin, which is to see that we regulate
our selves wisely; and that all our Actions be correspondent to our solemn
Consecration of our selves unto God, and Pretensions to Piety. This is entirely
consonant to the Account of this Matter as it is laid down in the inspired
Writings. Isai 58.6, ^. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? to loose the
Bands of Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens, and to let the oppressed go
free, and that ye break every Yoke. Is it not to deal thy Bread to the Hungry,
and that thou bring the Poor that are cast out to thy House? When thou see
the Naked that thou cover him, ^and that thou hide not thy self from thine own
Flesh? And in Verses 9, 10 of this Chapter which contains my Text. Thus
speaks the Lord of Hosts, Execute true Judgment, and show Mercy and
Compassions every Man to his Brother; and oppress not the Widow, nor the
Fatherless, nor the Poor, nor the Stranger, and let none of you imagine Evil
against his Brother in your Heart.

And now. What do'n the Lord our God require of us (to prove the Sincerity of
our Fasting) but to do justly, to love Mercy, and walk humbly with our God.
This for the first Proposition.

PROP. II. Such People as don't fast in a religious and solemn Manner certainly
fall under the Rebuke of Heaven.

This will appear by considering the Nature of an hypocritical Fasting.

Now, this is no other than a most horrible Attempt to impose on God who cannot
be deceived, and will by no means be mocked. It is no small Disparagement to
the glorious Perfections of the divine Nature; especially the Attribute of
God's Omniscience. Certainly if we have any just and suitable Apprehensions of
the supreme Being, we must needs conclude that if we pretend to fast in a
religious Manner, but don't do it, we play the Hypocrite with God; act in
disguise, and expose our selves to his severe Displeasure

This is likewise evident by remembering the sad Providence of God that many
times befall such in the pretent Life, as are not sincere and hearty in their
Fasting. For this Cause, viz. for not duly sanctifying a Fast, some it may be
are sick and weak, are deprived of the greatest Comforts and Endearments of
Life, and are exercised with exceeding sharp Trials. Indeed it is true, all
things come alike to all, and we know neither Love nor Hatred by all that is
before us. Such as are the greatest Sufferers are not always the greatest
Sinners, but yet we have good Reason to think God does frequently punish People
for their Hypocrisy and Wickedness even in the Life that now is This we know,
that God will avenge the Quarrel of his holy Covenant. Great Babyl^n has been
totally destroyed long ago, though in it is Day it was the Glory and Wonder of the
Universe. In like Manner, Jerusalem the Place where God fixed his Temple, which
was the Joy of the whole Earth, is laid desolate. And this we know, that Fools
because of their Transgressions and because of their Iniquities are afflicted.
Perhaps indeed God sometimes reserves almost all their Punishment to a future
State, but though there may be some Exceptions as to individuals or particular
Persons, yet it is very commonly otherwise, and especially if we consider
Persons as combined and formned into Societies; and possibly this may be the
unhappy Case of a whole Body of People (at least the Generality of them) that
they don't fast in a religious and s^cred Manner. Now, whenever it is thus they
may expect that these terrible Judgments that have been inflicted on others
will come upon them likewise, the present State being the only State to punish
them in, as they are a People. Shall not God visit such a People as are equally
guilty with a like Punishment even in this Life? Shall not his Soul be avenged
on such a Nation?

To add no more;

The blessed God has been pleased to signify his Resentment of People's
hypocritical Managements in his HOLY WORD. Particularly we may turn to that
Text, Isai. 1.11, -- 15. To what purpose is the Multitude of your Sacrifices
unto me? says the Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings of Rams, and the Fat
of fed Beasts and I delight not in the Blood of Bull^cks, or of He^goats. When
ye come to appear before n^^, who has required this at your Hand to tread my
Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an Abomination unto me, the
New Mons and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with, it is
Iniquity, even your solemn Meeting Your New Mons and your appointed Feasts my
Soul bateth: they are a Trouble unto me. I am weary to bear them. And when ye
spread forth your Hands, I will ^^de mine Eyes from ^ou^: yea, when ye make
many Prayers, I will not bear you: Your Hards are full of Pl^^^. ^ut I must
proceed in improve what has been celivered this Day.

APPLICATION.
1. What we have heard serves to s^ow to us or when the (...) Rebuke is like to
fall.

It Is on those that fast in Word and Tongue only, not indeed and in Truth; that
make great outward Pretenses of Sanctity and Holiness, but don't take Care to
li^e amirerably thereunto; that confess their Sins over and over again, but
don't use their best Endeavors to forsake them; or that relinquish some
particular Vices that are possibly disagre^ble to their natural Humor, and
Inclination; and opposite to their secular Interest, (and to give the finishing
Stroke in their Character) their Goodness is very transient and uncertain.

Now such as these are virtuous (if indeed they may be so denominated) to
invert the Apostle's Words, nor willingly, but by Constraint, and they shall
surely fall under the Wrath and Anger of Almighty God. If they are spared and
forborne, we are not to imagine it is because he in the least likes, or approves
their Actions, but it is only to fill up the Measure of their Iniquiries and
ripen them for the most dismal Punishment. See Lev. 26.21 -- 24. And if ye wale
contrary unto me, and will not bearken unto me; I will bring seven times more
Plagues upon you according to your Sins, etc. God will set his Face against
such a People for Evil. The Wrath of God will burn against them like Fire till
they are utterly consumed. Thus their Iniquity will finally prove their eternal
Ruin.

II. What we have heard serves likewise to show to us who are the happy People
that stand fair for the Lo^^ and approbation of Heaven.

For certainly if God is highly displeased with such as fast, but not in a
religious and solemn Manner, then we may conclude he will commend and applaud
those that are found in the contrary Practice; such as rent their Hearts in
pieces for their Sins, that are filled with the most bitter Remorse and
Confusion at the Remembrance of their past Guilt; that humble themselves before
God, and repent in Dust and Ashe^, whose Fasting sets a keener Edge on their
Devotions, turns to the Nourishment of their Souls, and growth in Grace; the
Mortification of whose Spirit is joined with that of the Flesh, and (to
complete all) whose Reformation i^ uniform, universal, and darable. Such as
these are not only an Ornament to Religion, and a Joy to all good People, but
the Favorites of Heaven, the Delight of God's own Heart: They stand proper
Candidates for caelestial Honors and ^re^erment, and accordingly God will
reward them with the Joys of Paradise (...) where all Tears shall be w^^ed from
their Eyes: (...) ^^erlasting Joy (as a Crown) shall be fixed on their
righteou, Heads. These shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and Sighing,
shall flee away; for in God's Presence there is Fullness of Joy, and Pleasures
for evermore.

III. What we have heard should put us upon the most impartial Examination of
our selves this Day.

Self-Examination is a Duty always incumbent on us, but especially on
Fast-Days. This is a Season wherein it is most beautiful. Let us all therefore
retire within our own Bosoms, and soberly ask our selves, What have we been
doing these many Years that God has spared us in the World? We have had a space
for Repentance and many solemn Warnings against our evil Courses, and loud
Calls to a thorough Repentance and Amendment of our Lives, but may it not be
said concerning us, I gave them a space to repent, and they repented not: They
are not humbled even unto this Day! We have it is true fasted many a time, and
pretended to humble our Souls before God but to what good Effect? Can we say
that we are more circumspect and unblameable in our Conduct as to God and Man?
Do we reap any spiritual and saving Benefit by all our Fasting and Prayers? Can
we find that our Souls grow the more healthy and prosperous? In all this time
have we fasted unto God, even unto God? Certainly such Queries as these put to
our Consciences and a comfortable Resolution of them are of the greatest
Importance in the whole World.

IV. What we have heard should therefore prevail with us to fast in a sared and
religious Manner.

The Words of the inspired Apostle deserves a special Remark on this Occasion,
Romans 14 6. He that regards the Day, regards it to the Lord; and be that
regards not the Day to the Lord, he does not regard it. -- If we don't answer
the Design of our Fasting to what Purpose is it to fast? Verily, It is a mere
piece of Mockery, hardens us in our vicious Courts; gives Satan (our avowed
Adversary) a mighty Advantage against us, and is distastful both to God and Man.

What Arguments shall I use to urge and persuade us to a due Sanctification of
a Fast? Two only I shall mention at this time. --

I. God is exceeding desirous of it.

He waits upon us that he may see us a humble, holy and reformed People; a
peculiar People zealous of all good Works. His Bounty (in the various
Expressions of it) is designed to lead us to unfeig^ed Repentance. God
earnestly beseeches and wishes our Reformation, his Bowels yern toward us, and
he is extremely loath to abandon us to our own foolish Choice, i. e. to final
Destruction. How pathetic that Language? Jer. 13.27. -- Will thou not be made
clean? When shall it once be? Agreeable hereto is that in Hosea 11 8, 9. How
shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? How shall I
make thee as Adma^? and set thee as Zebo^m? Mine Heart is turned within me, my
Repentings are kindled together. I will not exe^ute the Fierceness of mine
Anger, I will not return to destroy Ep^^aim; for I am God, and not Man, the
holy One in the midst of thee, and I will not enter into the City. Most
woundrous Words these! The Almighty seems to be at a stand (as it were) how to
manage.

And now shall not we all strive to gratify God, who is continually doing Good to
us, especially when we do hereby so very much consult our own greatest
Interest, and Felicity. Certainly if we have the least Spark of Gratitude or
Ingenuity in our Breasts, or any true Love to our selves, we shall present our
Souls and Bodies to him.

2. Our own Circumstances at the present Day require this at our Hands.

The Face of Affairs looks black and dismal whithersoever we cast our Eyes,
whither on Nations, Kingdoms, Cities, Towns, particular Societies, or Churches.
How melancholy to take a survey? -- What Feuds, Animosities, Dissentions, etc
are almost every where? -- Surely not a little of our GLORY is departed from
us! And none can tell what Changes are in the right hand of the most High.
Truly the Prospect is most dull and cloudy! If we turn our Tho'^s on our selves
and remember our Miscarriages, we have reason to fear our Prosperity will not
continue a great while, but that Thunder, and Earthquake, and great Noise with
Storm and Tempest, and the Flame of devouring Fire do await us, that Drought
and Sickness, and the doleful Alarms of War are not far off. -- Happy they who
are prepared to meet God in the Way of his terrible Judgments! -- Now all these
Calamities (which we feel or ^^^r) are procured by our Wickedness, and hence we
can rationally expect to have them removed or prevented, and the Marks of
divine Favor vouchsafed us unless we speedily and heartily turn to the Lord
our God. Shall Not we all therefore learn Wisdom, at least for this time, and
readily fall in with that most gracious Invitation? Hosea 6.1. Come and let us
return unto the Lord: for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitt^n,
and he will bind us up. Of the same Tenor is that in Chap. 10.12. S^w to your
selves in Righteousness, reap in Mercy: break (...) your fallow Gro^^d: for it
is time to se^k the Lord, till be come and rain down Righteousness upon you. O
let it not be said concerning any one Soul of us, as concerning those in Verse
11, 12. of the Chapter before as. But they refus^d to (...), and (...) away the
Shoulder, and stopped their Ears, that they should not hear. Yea, they made
their Hearts as an Adamant-Stone, lest they should hear the L^^, and the W^^ds
which the Lord of Hosts, has sent in his Spirit by the former Prophets,
therefore came a great Wrath from the Lord of Hosts.

And now to close all --

O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel our Fathers, keep these Things for
ever, in the Imagination of the Hearts of thy People, and prepare their Hearts
unto thee! AMEN.

FINIS.

