Mr. Barnard' s Election SERMON, May the 29th. 1734.

The Throne Established by Righteousness.

A SERMON Preached Before his EXCELLENCY Jonathan Belcher, Esquire His Majesty's
Council, AND THE Representatives of the Province OF THE Massachusetts Bay in
New England, May 29. 1734.

Being the Day for the Electing His Majesty's Council there.

By John Barnard, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Marblehead.

Isai. i. 27. Zion shall be redeemed with Judgment, and her Converts with
Righteousness. BOSTON: Printed MDCCXXXIV.

In Council, May 30. 1734.
Ordered,
THAT Benjamin Lynde and Thomas Hutchins^^, Esqrs. give the Thanks of this
Board, to the Reverend Mr. John Barnard, for his Sermon Preached to the General
Assembly, on the Day of Election of Counselors, and desire a Copy thereof in
order to its being Printed.

Thad. Mason, Dep. Secr.

An Election Sermon.
PROVE. XVI. 12. The Throne is established by Righteousness.


THAT the Supreme Ruler of the World is to be acknowledged in all our Ways, and
more especially in all the grand and important Concerns, whether of Public
Societies, or ^f Private Persons, is a Principle that stands in the strongest
Light, to the natural Reason and Con^cience of every Man, who is not ^unk into
the lowest Stupidity, and the vile^t A^h^i^m. It was the prevailing Force of
this Truth, upon the Minds of our renowned Fore Fathers, impressed with ^ firm
Belief of a God, and his governing Providence, that led them into the Religious
Solemnities of this Day: they saw ^ow necessary, the concurring Influence of
the great GOD, and a steady Observation of his wise and good Laws, were, to the
Establishment of their Government, both in the choice of proper Persons, to be
as strong Rods for a Scepter to rule over them, to lead them into the be^^
concerted Laws, and afford the desired Success, unto all their mature Debates,
and wise Administrations; and therefore they looked upon it as their incumbent
Duty, to improve some Part of this Day of the Gladness of their Hearts, because
of their valuable, and distinguishing Privileges, in Acts of Religious
Worship, humbly, and earnestly, to ask the Divine Direction and Blessing, and
meekly to receive Counsel from the Sacred Oracles, as in the particular
Elections before them, so in all the Affairs of the Government, throughout the
ensuing Year; that they, and their Posterity might be a People highly favored
of the Lord, and the good Land they had taken Possession of, might be as a
Garden which the Lord has watered*

Through the tender Mercy of the most High to us, (whatever Revolutions have been
brought upon the Form of the Government, since the first founding the British
Empire in this distant Part of the World,) we are yet in the full Possession,
not only of all the Privileges which belong to Englishmen, as the happy
Subjects of Great Britain, but over and above, of such peculiarly valuable
Ones, (and it may be of all that our Circumstances would bear of the former,)
confirmed to us, by a Royal CHARTER, from the ever memorable King William, as
sufficiently demands it of us to go on, in imitating the laudable Example of
our pious Ancesto^s, in our thus assembling to worship the Lord our God.

And since it has pleased God, by the Mouth of your Exc^llency, and his
Majesty's honorable Council, to call ^e (the very least of the Ministers of
the Lord,) to stand and wait this Day, at His holy Altar, and present your
Offerings to the Divine Majesty, and set the Counsel of God before you, as
collected from the Dictates of right Reason, and Revelation, I trust you will
overlook my Weakness, and bear with my Liberty and Freedom of Speech; wherein,
I hope, I shall not go out of my own Line, nor, while I keep within the Bounds
of my Duty and Office, offer any thing that shall be just matter of Offense. I
am very sensible, the Times, we are fallen into, are attended with such
peculiar Circumstances, as render it very difficult to speak out some necessary
Truths, with any Certainty, and Plainness, without being liable to the severe
Censure of such as may possibly think themselves too nearly concerned in them,
or the more feeble Exceptions of little Wit lings, who will attempt to
criticize upon what they scarce understand. However I trust I shall not be so
unfaithful to your Excellency, and the honorable Board, and much less so to my
great Master, to whom I must be accountable, as to forbear expressing myself,
upon the Subject before me, as becomes my Relation, and the Place I stand in,
at this critical Juncture, according to the best Light I shall receive from the
Fountain of Truth; at which I am sure no one ought to be offended.

The Words I have read, for the Foundation of my present Discourse, are
enrolled among the Proverbs of Solomon, the great and the wise King of Israel.
And because we have here the Sentiments of one so renowned for Wisdom, beyond
all that went before him, or have come after him, we may reasonably expect to
find in these few Words the true Arcana Imperii, the deepest Mysteries, and the
best Policies, by which a Government stands firm, and unshaken, as a Rock,
against the Roaring of the Sea, and the Dashing of its Waves.

The Throne is established by Righteousness. Though we are not to expect much of
Connection and Dependence, among Adages, yet we may observe some considerable
Relation between several verses, in my Context, in which the royal Teacher lays
down his Aphorisms about Kings, and the Thrones which they sit on; wherein he
rather gives Direction, than recites an History, and more truly informs them
what they ought to be, than what they always are; and so places the most
beautiful Picture, in full View before them, to excite a laudable Ambition in
their best Endeavors to copy it.

A divine Sentence, says he, Verse 10.
is in the Lips of the King; his Mouth transgresses not in Judgment. The
Hebrew is, Divination in the Lips, etc. That is, he speaks Oracles; A great
Sagacity and piercing Judgment to discern dubious and difficult Cases. Mr.
Pool. in (...)


his Determinations in Judgment should be as though we had enq^ired of the
Oracles of God, for the clear Discovery of the Truth, and the certain Direction
in all weighty Matters, that there may be no Error or Mistake, in his
Administrations; as one under the Influence and Inspiration of God; with whom
is the just Weight and Balance, (as he adds in the next verse,) that is the
Power to discern clearly, and determine justly. Such, in some good measure, was
the admirable Foresight, and clear Discernment of Solomon himself, which (...)
his admiring Subjects with the deepest Veneration, r^^dred his Name famous in
distant Lands, and brought the Queen of the South, from her far Country, to
hear, and applaud his Wisdom.

He goes on, (in the Verse where my Text is,) to observe, that it is an
Abomination to Kings to commit Wickedness. To be sure, it ever ought to be the
constant Practice of the Rulers of a People to manifest their utmost hatred of
all Wickedness, or of every thing that is unrighteous and oppressive to their
People. It should be the fixed Temper of God's Vicegerents on Earth, to have
all perverting of Right in the greatest Abhorrence and Detestation. It should
be an Abomination to Kings to commit, or do wickedness, either Themselves, or
by their Ministers and under Officers. For what is done by every Officer, under
the Supreme, with his Allowance and Connivance, is said to be done by him,
whose Authority they bear; and as the Glory of their wi^e and regular Conduct,
in the faithful Discharge of their Office, reflects Honor upon their
Principal, so the Odium and Discredit of their mean, and base, and unrighteous
Management of the Trust reposed in them, will forever finally center in him,
from whom they derive their Authority. And therefore as Kings, and Rulers,
should have all Wickedness in such Detestation, as never to allow Themselves in
any, so should they be very careful whom they derive their Authority to, and
not suffer others under them to prey upon their People, by any Acts of
Injustice, and Oppression.

And we may observe a very strong and cogent Reason given for this, in the
Words of my Text. For the Throne is established by Righteousness.

The Throne, the Ensigns of Royalty are here put for Royalty it self; and the
Badge of the highest Power, is substituted for the whole Power of Dominion,
Rule, and Government; because all flows from the Throne as its Fountain. So
that the Throne does not mean only the royal Seat, but the royal Power; and
that in all the branc^es of it, wheresoever, or in what Channel soever* it
flows. It denotes the Government among a People, be it of what Form it will,
and includes in it every Person that has a Hand in the Administration, whether
in making Laws, or in the Execution of them, (...) Power being included in, and
derived from, the Supreme.

The Throne is Established; The Word The Printer asks the learned Author's
Pardon, and his Reader's Excuse, for the Want of Hebrew Types.
here used, is in the passive Voice, and the future Tense, as Grammarians
speak, the Throne will or shall be established, be made strong and sure, abide
firm and unmoved It Is probable that from this Word is derived our English Word
Cone, which also is the same in the (...) Latin, with their proper
Terminations. As a (...) to be the best contrived Figure for Stability, (...)
is least liable to be shaken with the blasts of Wind and Tempest, or overturned
by any Accident; being broad at Bottom, and still lessening inwards as it
ascends, and the Center of its Gravity every Way equally distant from the
Circumference, which renders its Position firm and steady; so the Throne, or
(...), rendered safe and secure, calm and (...) is very much put out of the
Power of any Accidents, ordinarily, to overthrow, or hurt it;

By Righte^^sness, as it is wide, and every way extended Base, which upholds,
and supports, and keeps all in their proper Place, and in a due Poise, tending
to the Center of Unity; and admits of no Excrescences of Oppression, Fraud, and
Violence, in a mis-use of Power, betraying of Trust, sacrificing the Public to
a private Interest, or other Instances of Wickedness, as a mighty dead Weight
projecting aloft, to a constant Tottering, and final overthrow of the whole
Fabric. Critics observe, that the Word here used, is of a more extensive
signification than mere Justice in dealing, and rather comprehends in it all
moral Duty to our Fellow Creatures. The Hebrews have another Word which is more
strictly confined to Justice and Equity, and by this in the Text, they
understand the whole moral Rectitude of our Actions and Words; of our Actions,
that they be just and right, fit and convenient, necessary and becoming,
suitable and expedi^nt; of our Words that they be true, and bear a perfect
Agreement with what they are intended (...) they be faithful and constant, and
we abide by (...) and Engagement. So that, as it is here used, we may suppose
it to mean the Eq^^ty and Justice, the Truth and Fidelity of the Government,
not only of Kings, who have the Throne (...) to them, but of all that are
raised to any seat of (...), and Honor, and Service in the Government.

And w^ll may the Throne, or Government, be said to be established by
Righteousness, when this is such a Basis as stands every Blast, and endures the
shock of Ages; and bears the nearest resemblance to the Throne of the most high
God Himself, whose visible Images Earthly Rulers are: and ^^^refore the
inspired Psalmist says, Psalm. xcvii. 2..
Righteousness and Judgment are the Habitation of His Throne. The Dominion and
Government of God, inhabits, or dwells, as in an impr^gnable Palace, being
secure in the perfect rec^^^ude of His Nature, and Administrations; and were it
possible any unrighteousness should be ^ound in Him, it would soon undermine
the very Foundations of his Empire, and lay the most beautiful Pile in amazing
Ruins.

Thus you see what lies before me, namely the consideration of the Throne, or
Government, the Establishment of it, and the means leading to it;

THE THRONE IS ESTABLISHED BY RIGHTEOUSNESS;

And therefore I shall reduce what I have further to say upon these Words into
this plain Method:

I. I shall offer somethings concerning the Nature of Government; which I here
understand by the Throne.

II I shall consider what it is for the Throne, or Government, to be
established.

III I shall take a view of that Righteousness by which the Throne, or
Government is established.

IV Lay before you some Evidence that the Throne, or Government, is, and will
be, established by Righteousness.

I begin with the First of these, Viz.

I. To offer some things concerning the Nature of Government, which is here
intended by the Throne. And there are these things considerable with respect
thereto, namely, the Original, the Form, the personal Right, and the Ends of
Government.

1. The first Thing I would observe here is, the Original of Government, and
whence it takes its Rise. And I doubt not to say, That it is from God, who is
the God of Order and not of Confusion: That is to say, that, upon Supposition
that Mankind dwell together in Societies, which the humane Nature cannot well
avoid, it is not a matter of Liberty and Freedom, and left to the Option and
Choice of the Will of Man, whether there shall be Government, or no, or whether
there shall be any Rules for the regulating of that Society* but it has the
stamp of the Divine Authority upon it, and comes to us with a thus faith the
Lord.

This the Voice of Nature plainly declares to us. Forasmuch as the Divine
Sovereignty, and unerring Wisdom, has formed, and fitted, the humane Nature for
Rule and Government, and necessitated it to it, this may be justly looked upon
as the Voice of God to Mankind; because the Almighty's adapting his Creatures
to a particular End, is one way of making known His Mind and Will concerning
them; and every true dictate of right Reason, is no other than God speaking to
his rational Creatures, by the inward Sentiments of their own Mind. Thus it is
that they, who are destitute of the written Law, are a Law unto themselves, as
the Apostle expresses it, Romans xi. 4.
The Law or Will of God being written upon their Hearts, and legible, in some
measure, by the Candle of the Lord, which he has lighted up within them.

It Is very evident, the Nature of Man is formed for Government, and
necessitated to it, from that Power of Reason and Understanding that is in him,
his fixed Bent to Society, and the many Weaknesses and Imperfections that
attend him.

Through the distinguishing Favor of the Almighty, He has, by His Inspiration,
given us Understanding, and made us wiser than the Beasts of the Field, or the
Fowls of the Air; and thus He has form^d us capable of acting by Rule, which
sufficiently intimates His Will to us, (...) we are not left to live and range
at Large, b^t that we keep ourselves within due Bounds, and walk by Rule; and
this necessarily supposes some certain Rule for us to regulate ourselves by.

And because Society is the natural result of Reason, in a dependent Being, and
he (...) all in himself, and be Master of an unbounded (...), and unlimited
Power, or be void of all true Reason and Knowledge, that can subsist by himself
without having (...) Regards to an other; therefore it is necessary, (...)
Agent, who yet falls short of Perfection, should (...) ^^bjection, not only to
such Laws as m^re especia^ly re^ate to his Conduct to his Maker, but such also
as have a more particular Referrence to his Fellow Creature, to whom he stands
related, on whom he has some dependence for the necessaries, and conveniences,
of the present Life, and all adapted to the nature of that Society of which he
is a part; and this clearly infers the Superiority of Some to give Law, for the
well ordering of the Society, and the subjection of all to those Laws,
according as they have a special referre^^e to them: And what is this but
Government:

Thus I doubt not but Government would have been necessary to Man, even in a
state of Innocence; because Society would then have been as agreeable to his
ration^^ Nature, and more delightful to his pure Mind, and as necessary to him
upon many Accounts, as now; and, in the midst of all his Purity, he would still
have remained but a ^allible Creature; all of which would have required a Rule
su^^ed to direct his Actions, in the several Relations ^e would sustain, and
Businesses ^e would have been employed in: and this infers Government; though,
probably, (...) different, in its kind* from what is to be found in the World,
in our Day* In short, the Fifth Commandment, as well ^s others, of the moral
Law, would have been in forces, and obligatory upon the innocent Creature.

Yea; doubtless, there is Government among the holy Angels; and the Account
which the Sacred Scripture gives us of, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities,
Powers, Angels, Archangels, and the like, in the invisible World, is well
understood by learned Men, as intending, not the different Species, but the
different Orders, among them.

However, since Sin has broke in upon the World, and vitiated the humane
Nature, there is but so much the more Reason and Necessity for Government among
Creatures that are become so very weak, and depraved; to restrain their unruly
Lusts, and keep, within due Bounds, the rampant Passions of Men, which else
would soon throw humane Society into the last Disorder and Confusion. For if
all Men were left to live, and act, as they please, it is undoubted, the
different Views and Interests, Humors and Passions of Mankind, and these often
excited by false Principles, and strongly moved by a corrupt Bias upon the
Mind, would unavoidably produce a continual ^arr and Strife, a constant
Endeavor in every one to promote his own, and gratify Self, and so a perpetual
Praying of the Stronger upon the Weaker; and no Man would be able to call any
thing his own, nor be secure of his Life and Limbs, from the Rapine, and
Violence, of his Fellow Creature; and by how much the Views, Interest, and
Passions of Men, are more numerous, appropriated, and strong, by so much would
they become f^rcer upon one another than the Beasts of Prey. And does not this
necessitate Laws to tame this fierce Creature, to bound his Appetites, and
bridle his Passions, that he may not be injurious to his Neighbor! Who is the
Man, that would be willing that all the Injury of ungoverned Lust and Passion
should fall upon himself? And what is the Re^olt of all this? but that there be
a legislative Power, to enact such Laws, and an executive one, to put the Laws
in Force, and compel to Obedience to them, lodged somewhere, as shall be best
adapted to the Order, and Preservation of the Society. And this is Government.
Thus the light of Nature shows us the Reason, and Necessity, of Government; and
this Voice of Nature is the Voice of God. Thus it is that vox populi est vox Dei.

But besides this, God Almighty has sufficiently manifested his Will to
Mankind, by His Word; and therein plainly declared to all, that are advantaged
with the Divine Oracles, that it is His Sovereign Pleasure, That there be
Government among Men. Hither look all those Passages, in holy Writ, which more
directly speak of Civil Rule, Authority, and Power, as derived from God. Thus,
Prove. viii. 15, 16.
By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice; by me Princes rule, and Nobles,
even all the Judges of the Earth. By Me, that is, by my Authority and
Appointment, it is, that there are any Kings, Princes, Nobles, and Judges of
the Earth; that is, that there is Rule and Government among Men. Thus the
Apostle tells, Romans xiii. 1.
The Powers that be are ordained of God; there is no Power but of God. That is,
the Power, the Authority, the Rule it self, as well as the Subject invested
with it, is of God, who has ordained it, appointed it, as His sovereign Will,
that there should be such. And hence, though GOD Himself was in a peculiar manner
King in (...), yet He appointed a visible Head over them, and sent Moses, His
Servant, to be a Ruler, and Deliverer to them: Acts vii. 37.
and he directed them D^ut. xvi. 18.
to make Judges, and Officers, in all their Gates.

Hither also look all those Places in the Sacred Scripture, that direct Civil
Rulers to the faithful Discharge of their Office; as in my Text, and Context, a
divine Sentence is in the lips of the King, his Mouth tra^sgresseth not in
Judgment: it is an Abomination to Kings to commit Wickedness; the Throne is
established in Righteousness: And all such as direct Mankind in their Carriage
toward them, as, that Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of
thy People Exodus xii. 28.
: and that command every Soul to be subject to the higher Powers Romans xiii. 1.
: that require us, to submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the
Lord's sake; whether unto the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them
that are sent by him 1 ^et. ii. 13, 14
: that assure us, he that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God;
and let us know the Penalty of unreasonable Resistance, that they that resist
shall receive to themselves Damnation Romans xiii. 2.
.

So that we see, the Original of Government is from God, who has taught it, to
Mankind, by the Light (...) natural Reason, Hence is that of Hesiod, Ex (...):
and thus Homer, (...).
and plainly required it, in His holy Word. And that there are any, who walk in
the Shape of Men, that do not diligently attend to the voice of Reason, nor
enquire after Understanding, but sit down contented in the most abject
Stupidity, scarce distinguishing themselves from the Brute, by any true Acts of
Reason, it no more an Objection to Government's being a true Dictate of Nature,
than one Man's shutting his Eyes would be, against the Sun's being risen, when
all, who have their Eyes open, walks in the full Light of it.

2. The second thing I proposed to offer something upon, under the Head of
Government, was, the Form of it. And here the Enquiry is, What Form of
Government is chiefly to be regarded by a People? Since Government originates
from God, and is of Divine appointment, is there any particular Form of Divine
Ordination? Or if not, what Form shall a People put themselves under as most
eligible?

To the First of these Enquiries, I think there is no great difficulty in
Answering, That I know of no particular Form of Civil Government, that God
Himself has, directly, and immediately, appointed, by any clear Revelation, of
His Mind and Will, to any People whatever. The Scripture speaks of Civil Rulers
under the several Denominations that were in use, at that Day; but it no where
directs to, and enjoins, any one Scheme of Civil Government, even upon God's
own peculiar favorite People; but we find, when they became a settled Nation,
in the Land which God had promised to their Fathers, it was the People's own
Choice to come under a Monarchical Form of Government, and they said, 1 Samuel
viii. 19, 20.
Nay, but we will have a King over us; that we also may be like all the
Nations, and that our King may Judge us, and go out before us, and fight our
Battles* And though there was some manifestation of the Divine Displeasure
against them, for their asking a King, yet this was not for their assuming that
particular Form of Civil Government, but for their throwing off the Theocracy,
they and their Fathers, had so long experienced the Benefit of.

So that it is evident God Almighty has left it to the natural Reason of
Mankind, in every Nation and Country, to set up that Form, which, upon a through
Consideration of the Nature, Temper* Inclinations, Customs, Manners, Business,
and other Circumstances of a People, may be thought best for them. And hence it
is that some Nations have though it it best for them to keep the Power of
Government in the Hands of the Body of the People; while others have thought
fit to lodge it in the Hands of their chief Families and Nobles; others again
have devolved the Weight of the Government upon a single Person; leaving it
wholly with Him to assign what Part, to what Persons, he pleases; and another
People have looked upon it most advisable, for them, to take a middle way
between these Extremes, and have laid up the Honors of Government, in a single
Person, as their Supreme Head, to flow from him down to all the Members; and
then have divided the Weight and Burden of it, between this single Person, a
Body of Nobles of his creating, and a Select Assembly of their own choosing; by
which Means, Sovereignty is so happily tempered with Righteousness and Mercy,
and Will and Pleasure directed and limited by Liberty and Property, as to guard
against Tyranny on the one Hand, and Anarchy on the other. Though neither of
these Schemes, nor any other that may be though it of, are immediately and directly
of Divine Appointment, yet so far as any, or all of them, are the Result of
right Reason so far it may be said of them, that they are of God. Thus, the
Powers that be, be they what they will, meaning Government, are ordained of
God. And as every People are left to their Liberty to constitute what Form of
Civil Government, all things considered, may appear best to them, as to any
thing to the contrary from the Law of God, so, doubtless, it remains with any
civil Society to alter, and change, the Form of their Government* when they see
just Reason for it, and all Parties are consenting to it.

But if there be no particular Form of Civil Government appointed by God, and
every Nation and People are left to their own Prudence to establish what Form
they please, which Form and Scheme is best? If this Enquiry means, What Form is
best, considered absolutely, and by it self? I answer, That Form which is best
accommodated to all the Ends of Government. What That is, may be though it an hard
Question, and it is not my Business to determine it. Though I would observe,
that, possibly, it may be a just Answer to the Enquiry, to say, that it is an
improper Question; because there can be no Government without a People, or
Subject of it; and the good, or ill, Qualities of it, can fall under no
Consideration, but as Government stands related to its Subject; so that the
Circumstances of a particular People must come into Consideration, to determine
what is best. If the Question mean, what Form is relatively best? I answer,
That which will suit the People best: which requires a through Knowledge of
them, their Situation, Produce, Genius, and the like, to resolve. If still it
be insisted on, what Form is best for our selves? To this I answer, were we
absolutely free to choose for ourselves, it must be left to the wisest Heads,
the greatest Politicians among us, and those best acquainted with the People,
and Country, to advise upon it: but as we are not at Liberty now to choose, I
can readily Answer, that Form of Civil Government is best for us, which we are
under; I mean the British Constitution. And this I can say, not only because we
are a dependant Government, but because were I at full Liberty, I should choose
to be (as, blessed be God, we are,) of the Number of the happy Subjects of
Great Britain, whom God has blessed above all People upon the Face of the
Earth, in the Felicity of their Constitution: and I look upon my self happy,
that I know not of a single true New England Man, in the whole Province, but
what readily subscribes to these Sentiments, and hopes we shall continue, to be
the genuine Members of that glorious Constitution, throughout all Ages.

3. Another thing I am to offer something upon, is, the Person, or Persons,
invested with the Authority of the Government. And here it may be Enquired,
who, among the Children of Adam, has a Right to take the Reins into his Hands?
Where shall we find the Right certain and indisputable? And whence does this
personal Right and Claim arise? or who gave this Person, and not another, the
Authority to preside over, and give Law to his Brethren and enforce Obedience?
I scruple not to Answer; This Right is found, in whomsoever the Government
constitutes and appoints to be their Ruler, or Rulers; There, and There only,
is the certain Claim, full Right, and lawful Authority; and thence does it
derive: And this, upon a due Consideration of things, will appear to hold good,
let the Form of Civil Government be of what Kind it will. For,

If we consult Strength and Force, and trace them to their utmost Extent, we
shall find, that, (however unlikely they may be thought, upon a cursory View,
to agree with this Principle, yet,) upon a more through Examination, they
resolve themselves, at last, into Compact, and Agreement. For, (upon
supposition of what is called Government founded in Conquest,) it is very
evident that there must be a Conquest to found the Right in it; and a Conquest
necessarily supposes one of these two things, either that there is an entire
Destruction of the contending Party; or else that they come to Terms of
Submission. If the Conquest consist in ^n entire Destruction of the Enemy,
there is an End of all Civil Government over them; for the dead hear not the
Voice of the Oppressor, and there the Servant is free from his Master; but if
they come to Terms of Submission, (the very hardest of which supposes a Right
to Life, and the Necessaries of it, and such further Accommodations as the
Conqueror, in his Clemency, shall allow, which is a submitting to Mercy, and
surrendering upon Discretion,) it is apparent the Right to rule over them is
founded in Compact; though the strength of the Arm has made the Terms harder for
those who are forced to submit, than, possibly, they would have been otherwise.
Mere natural Force and Power gives no Person a Right to rule over another, and
all Pretensions to Rule, founded in this only, without Consent, will forever
leave the Government to be bandyed about by the perpetual Cuffs of contending
Rivals, and endless Revolutions, from every bold Usurper, that has got the
longest Sword, and the strongest Arm; and he that is forced to resign to Day,
may recover Strength eno' to Morrow; or where Strength fails, Stratagem and
Craft may succeed, and carry the Game. And who sees not that, while the Royal
Ball is thus tossed about, and catch who can, the State will become giddy with
a continual Whirle, and all things run into such Confusion as oversets the
Foundations of Government. He ^eareth the Sword, not the Sword him.

He therefore that sits upon the Throne of Empire must have a moral Right, and
lawful Authority, to Rule; and this moral Right must be either natural to him,
and what he was born with; (I mean, now, antecedent to an Act of the
Government's conveying such a Birthright to any Man;) or it must arise from an
immediate Divine Appointment; or lastly, flow from the Election or Consent of
the Community.

Some have been so vain as to attempt to find out a natural Right, to Dominion,
belonging, unalienably, and indefea^ibly, as they call it, to such or such a
particular Person; to support which they carry us up to the Patriarchal Scheme,
as it is termed, or rather A^amitical, and imagine, that, because the first
Father of Mankind had a natural Right (as they say) to rule his Descendents,
that therefore Kings have a natural Right to rule over their Subjects. But what
if the First Man had a natural Right to Dominion over those that descend from
him? Would not this necessarily infer these two things, namely, that this Right
be continued in the next Male Heir, in a lineal Descent, to the Worlds End; and
that this Male Heir, in a lineal Descent, be an absolute Monarch over all
Nations, States, and Kingdoms in the Earth; the first of which has been
impossible to be put in Practice this many Hundreds, yea Thousands, of Years;
the other as impossible to consist with the Tempers and Interests of all
Nations: which shows the Absurdity of the Scheme, upon their own Principles.
But I very much doubt the Validity of the Principle, That the First Man, were
he living, would have a natural Right to rule all his Descendants. That he
would have a natural Right to rule his own Family, whether Descendants, or not,
is very readily acknowledged, and so has every Man now; but then it is to be
remembered, that there is a very wide Difference between a Man's Ruling his own
immediate Family, and his Ruling over an other Man's Family. For the immediate
Children of the first Man, upon their becoming Heads of Families, would have
the same natural Right to govern their own, as A^am to govern his; by which
means the Grand Children are unavoidably freed from all Subjection to a
Sovereign Dominion, over them, in their GrandFather, that is inconsistent with
the natural Sovereignty of their Father; and the Great-Grand-Children would be
yet at a greater distance from Submission to the Will and Pleasure, the Rule
and Authority of the Great-GrandFather* from whence it appears that the Power
of the first Man lessens so much every Descent, by a new Sovereign coming upon
the Stage, of equal natural Right with himself, that, by the Fourth Generation,
he could have no Government over them; though the latest Generations while he
lived, would be under Obligations to the profoundest Veneration, Respect, and
Honor, to him, as their Progenitor: if therefore he ever become the Sovereign
Lord over all his Descendants, it must be by the Consent of the several Heads
of Families, making Choice of him as the proper^st Person to bear rule over
them, and giving up so much of their own Power over their Families, to him, as
is necessary for the general Benefit of the public Society, they are now
formed into. And this I think entirely overthrows the Patriarchal Scheme, and
the whole set of fine Thoughts built upon it.

Others have endeavored to find out such a Divine Right, for civil Rulers, as
is wholly exclusive of all Election, or Consent of the Community; and have
fancied, that they derive their Power immediately from God, by a particular,
and immediate Designation of them Personally, to their high Office; from whence
they conclude their Power unalienable, and their Authority absolute, and
unlimitted, as well as their Persons unaccountable. But these also have greatly
failed in their Attempt.

For, besides what I have already observed, that it has pleased God to leave
the particular Form of civil Government to humane Prudence; which infers, the
Designation, of the Person to his Office, is from Man also; so far are we from
having any Proof of such a Divine Right, in our Day, as, that when the Lord of
Hosts Himself gave some particular directions, to His peculiar People, about
the King that should reign over them, and solemnly consecrated* with the holy
anointing Oil, both S^ul and Davin* successively, to the Throne of Israel, they
were first presented to the Choice of the People, and their Right to take the
Power into their Hands, and Administer in the Affairs of Government, was by no
means thought good, until they had obtained the Suffrages of their Brethren: as
is very clear from the sacred History Compare 1 Samuel* ix. 15 with 1 Samuel x. 1^.
and xi. 15. and compare 1 Samuel xvi. 13 with 2 Samuel ii. 4. and v. 2, 3.
And hence the Apostle Peter, calls the civil Government, an Ordinance of Man;
1 P^^* ii 13.
because both the Form of it, and the particular Persons invested with the
Power, are purely (...), and result from the Reason and Prudence of Nations and
Societies of Men.

So that after all that is said, the Right to rule, takes it is Rise from the
C^usa (...) R^p. principal^s ^st (...), (...) Obl^gati^. Alst.
Consent, and Agreement, that is the Choice and Election, of the Community,
State, or Kingdom. And whether they reserve the Power to themselves to elect
anew, succ^ssively, as in some Kingdoms; or fix the Succession unreservedly in
such a Line, to perpetuity; or whether they establish the Line of Succession
with certain Limitations and Salvos* and reserve to themselves the Power, upon
fitting Emerg^ncies, to make what Alterations may be thought needful; it
amounts to the same thing; and He, and He only, has the Right to rule, to whom
the Government commits the Power, and Authority. And He, whom the Government so
sets up as their Ruler, Head and King, so far has a Divine Right, as God, in
His holy and wise Providence, mediately, by the Voice, Consent, Agreement and
Constitution, of that particular Nation and People, over whom he reigns, has
raised him to such or such a Place of Dignity and Power; and consequently, and
in like manner, all that, by Virtue of the Constitution, derive their Authority
from the supreme Ruler. And so far the Powers that be, as denoting the
particular Person, in whom the Authority is lodged, as well as the Power it
self, or Government, are ordained of God. This, I think, is sufficient to
establish the Divine Right of Kings, and fix the Claim, in Opposition to such
turbulent Spirits, as are uneasy at the Disappointment of their secret Views in
another; and gives all to civil Rulers that is due to them, as visible Images
of the Deity, in their royal Authority, though not so in their original Right to
Empire. Thus, the most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to
whomsoever He will Da^.iv. 17.
; and pulls down One and sets up another, at His Pleasure. Psalm. lxxv. ^.


4. I am now to ^onsider what are the great Ends of Government. And here I must
observe, that the ultimate and supreme Ends of ^overnment, are the same with
the last End of all Creatures, and all their Actions; that God i^ all things
may be glorified: but then the subordinate End, and that which is the main, as
it respects Man, is the common Good of the Society, State or Kingdom.

It is beneath the Dignity of a rational Agent to act for no End; and it is
contrary to Reason, and Religion, to propound any but a good one; and the Good
aimed at cannot be appropriated to this or that Set or Party, of Men, in the
State, without having a suitable Regard to others; but must necessarily extend
to the whole Body, otherwise it would soon be ^^bversive of it self. For let us
consider the Ends of Government as having Respect either to the Ruler, or
Ruled, seperately taken.

If, on the one Hand, we could suppose the Good, Benefit, and Advantage of the
Throne, or Ruler, were the ^ole Ends of Government, this would introduce
Tyranny, Oppression, Injustice, and, by Degrees, prove the Overthrow of the
State* For while civil Rulers either through mistake of their End, or want of
Rectitude to act up to it, appropriate all unto themselves, and seek only their
own Grandeur, the making of their Families, and the gratifying of their own
Appetites, and Passions; while their constant Cry is, give, give, and they
cannot content themselves without their Subjects Vineyard, and snatch his Ewe
Lamb from his Bo^ome, and exert their Authority to suppress all that they think
stands in their way; whether by placing them in the Front of the Battle, to
fall by a foreign Hand, or proceeding against them with an apparent solemn
Form, but real Prostitution, of Justice, or dispatching them with a Bow-string;
it is evident that they will be no better than roaring Lions, and ranging
Bears, which gradually devour up their Subjects, and their Substance, till
there is no more to give, or none to give it: or else, the continual
Oppressions, which make wise Men mad, will produce such Ferments, and Tumults
among the People, as in Time, to shake off the Yoke, and free themselves from
the Tyrant.

Possibly, there have been some so giddy with Power, as to imagine that the
whole Body of their People were made for no other End, but their Use and
Service, as if Issachar's Fate G^n. xlix. 14, 15 ^
in the most literal, and full, meaning of it, belonged to them, to be as a
strong Ass, couching down between two Burdens, and bowing their Shoulders to
bear; and they have not wanted of mean and despicable, Sychophants, who have
gaped after some Scraps of their Power, to flatter them into such a fond
Opinion of themselves, that they were absolute, unaccountable, uncontrollable,
and that their Subjects Lives and Fortunes were at their entire Disposal, and
their own Will was the only Law to them. But the World has often had full
Experience, that such false Ends of Government have issued in the Destruction
of it; and those, who have been most forward to offer their Necks to the Feet
of Princes, have given Conviction, how little able they were to resist the
Force of Nature in them, when they themselves have began to feel what they
meant for others.

One would be ready to think it hardly possible for any, who are not destitute
of the Understanding of Men, and lost to all true Reverence to the Deity, to
entertain such a monstrous Conception, That God Almighty, the wisest, and the
best of Beings, should make whole Nations of Men, and bring them together in
Societies, for no other End, but the promoting the Honor, the increasing the
Riches, and nourishing the L^sts of any single Person, or any particular Set
of Men.

On the other Hand, if the Good of the Subject, considered as distinct from
that of the Ruler, were the End of Government, what would the Consequence of
this be, but A^archy, wild Disorder, and universal Confusion? Which would be as
destructive to Government as the hottest Tyranny could be. For the civil Rulers
of a People have not only their Interests in many Respects, twisted together
with the Subjects, but some things which belong to them, in a peculiar Manner,
as Rulers, which are very essential to the Support of Government; I mean, their
distinguishing Honor, their Authority and Power, their more special Security,
and the like; and if these Interests which are appropriated to them, should not
be duly consulted, in the Administration, their Glory would soon become dim,
their Authority be trampled on, and their Persons liable to the insult of every
one that had more Sense than Understanding, and more of Passion than either:
And any one may easily see where this would End.

So that it is the Good of the whole Community both Rulers and Ruled in
Conjunction, that is the great and main End of Government; and therefore we
find Dr. Tillotson thus expressing himself, Vols 1. page 39.
The great End of Government is, to preserve Men in their Rights, against the
Encroachments of Fraud and Violence. To preserve Men, not this or that Person,
or this Set of Men, only, but the whole Body of Mankind, and every individual
Member of the Body Politic. Hence I suppose arose that Maxim, Salus Populi est
suprema Lex, the Safety and Welfare of the whole, (not the Subjects only, as
some are ready enough to understand it,) is to give Law to the Government, and
to be preferred to the separate Interest of any particular Person whatever. As
the Rights, Liberties, Defense, Protection, and Prosperity of the Subjects are
to be consulted; so the Honor, Majesty and Authority, of the Ruler are to be
considered as, unitedly the Ends of Government; and though, possibly, the first
may be though it the Primary, and the latter the Secondary Ends, yet cannot they
well be separated without the Destruction of the Government. And this I think
is sufficiently taught us, in the holy Scriptures, as when the civil Ruler is
styled the Breath of our Nostrils Lam. iv. 20.
; which speaks his Dignity and Authority, and the Eminency of his Station, and
how necessary he is to the very Existence of a political Body; that were He to
dye Officially, as well as Personally, the Body Politic would as assuredly die
with him, as the natural Body does at the ceasing of the Breath of our
Nostrils; from whence doubtless is that Maxim, in our English Law, the King
never Dies, that is the Regal Authority never dies. Thus also he is styled, the
Light of Israel 2 Samuel xxi. 1^.
, and the Light of the Morning 2 Samuel xxiii. 4.
, to notify to us how essential he is to the Well Being of a People; that when
this Light is quenched, such a People would walk in Darkness, and stumble, and
fall, not knowing whither they went. Thus, he is said to come down like Rain
upon the (...) Grass, and as showers that water the Earth Psalm. lxxii. 6.
; which further expresses the Dependence of the Prosperity and Flourishing of a
People upon their civil Rulers, as the springing of the Grass, and the Fruits
of the Earth, have their Dependence upon the Showers of Heaven. Hence also our
Savior has styled them Benefactors Luke xxii. 25.
; and the Apostle of our Lord assures us, in plain Terms, he is a Minister of
of God to thee for good Romans xiii. 4.
; and as if all were too low, the Almighty says of them, I have said ye are
Gods Psalm. lxxxii. 6.
.

Having thus offered some things upon the Nature of Government, I now proceed
to the Second Thing proposed, which was,

II. To show, what it is for the Throne, or Government, to be established. And
I need not to enlarge upon this Head, nor would the Time allow it; it shall
suffice therefore only to hint at Things; It does not mean that the Throne
only, or him that sits upon the Throne, or the Supreme Ruler of a People, shall
be established; that is, that the chief Seat of Government, be so fixed as to
admit of no unreasonable Alterations, and sad Changes and Revolutions. For though
this is to be considered as a very essential Part of the Establishment, of the
Throne, yet this alone is not all that is intended. As the Throne includes the
whole Government, so the Establishment of the Throne means, the Establishment
of the who^e, so far as is necessary to the Well^being of the Community. Thus
the Establishment of the Throne carries in it, the Firmness and Stability of
the State; that it be fixed upon solid Foundations, and that all the Parts of
it be well cemented and put together. Hence the P^almist says, (...). cxxii. 3,
5.
Jerusalem is builded as a City, that is compact together; there are set the
Thrones of Judgment, ^he Thrones of the House of David. Jerusalem there means
the whole Body of that People, State, or Kingdom, and their Throne was
established, by their being, as a City, compact together; that is firmly united
in all their Parts. So, when the several Branches of the Authority closely
adhere to the Supreme Head, and return all to it, as their Original, as the
Rivers, fed by the Sea, return thither; when the Rulers are most firmly united
to the People, in their most tender Affection, and jealous Concernment for
their Good, as the common Fathers of their Country; and when the People are as
closely united to their Rulers, in their profound Honor and Respect to their
Persons, and dutiful Obedience to their Lawful Authority, then is the Throne
said to be established.

The Stability of the Throne further includes in it, the Success of the
Administrations, both for the Preservation of the Regalia, and the Security of
the Rights of the Subject, and the promoting of the good Order and Virtue, the
Humanity and moral Honesty, the Peace, Harmony and Unity of the State, and the
Flourishing of the whole, in Wealth, Honor, and Renown. Thus the Throne, or
Government, becomes established at Home, and fears no Revolutions to its
Disadvantage; but, amidst all the Vicissitudes, and Changes which humane
Affairs are subject to, it remains fixed upon its strong and steady
Foundations: and though the Wisdom of the State may see Reason to make some
Alterations, in some Particulars, yet they will only be for the greater Beauty,
Proportion, and Durableness of the whole

And while the Government is thus established at Home, it is capable of
enduring the Shock of Accidents from Abroad, and fears not to be insulted, or
devoured, by any foreign Adversary, but its Renown goes forth into distant
Lands, and their Terror falls upon all that think Evil against them. Thus, Isa.
live. 14.
In Righteousness shall thou be established, thou shall be far from Oppression,
for thou shall not fear; and from Terror, for it shall ^or come nigh thee. So,
when, in the admired Reign of Solomon, Israel enjoyed Peace among themselves,
and rested from their Enemies round about, and was made greatly to prosper, it
is said, 2 Chronicles. ix. 8.
Because thy God loved Israel, to establish them forever, therefore made He
thee King over them, to do Judgment and Justice. And this leads me into the
Third thing proposed, Viz.

III. To take a View of that Righteousness by which the Throne or Government is
established. I have already observed that Righteousness is to be understood as
comprehensive of the Social Virtues; and it is to be remembered, that I am now
to consider it, as it relates to the Throne, or Government, and not to private
Persons; that is I am to consider the public Righteousness of a Nation and
People. And here it will be fitting that I should distinctly view it in its
several Aspects, upon the Ruler, and upon the Ruled, and both together: in all
of which, I hope, I shall approve my self a Minister of Jesus Christ preaching
Righteousness.

1. I am to consider Righteousness, as it relates to the ^uler, or governing
Part of the State; by whom, I mean, both the Legislative and Executive Powers,
in their several Stati^^s, and Branches. The God of Israel said, the Rock of
Israel ^pake, He that rules over M^n, must be just, ruling in the Fear of God
2 Samuel xxiii. 3.
And there are several things to be considered* as peculiar to Rulers, which
are so many Parts of that Righteousness, which has a happy Tendency to
Establish the Throne. As,

(1) An acting upon, and preserving, the Constitution, in all the main Branches
of it. What ever be the Constitution, or Form of Government, among a People, it
is what they have chosen for themselves. For all Government, as we have seen,
is finally resolved into Choice, and Consent* And however the Descendants of
the first Founders may groan, under the Burden of those Inconveniences, which
their Fathers either did not foresee, or could not prevent, yet it is certain,
(with a proper Salvo to the natural Rights of Mankind, which it is the End of
all Government to preserve,)^ one can have any Right to act contrary to the
fundamental Laws of that State, till all Parties concerned agree upon such
Alterations as are thought needful; and then those Alterations become wrought
into the Constitution, and are a certain Rule for all the Parts of the
Government to go by, in their future Administrations. For where, (as in mixed
Government especially,) there are peculiar Rights and Powers belonging to the
Throne, and some peculiar Rights and Privileges belonging to the People; and
where, again, the Rights and Powers of the Throne are branched out, and divided
among the several Partners in Rule, to each their proper Portion; nothing is
more plain, than that, Righteousness requires, that no one invade the Right
that peculiarly belongs to another. For this is the very Notion of Injustice,
between Man and Man; and it makes no Alteration in the Nature of Right and
Wrong, Justice and Injustice, ^o carry this up, from private Persons, to those
of a (...) Character. So that it is the first Point of Righteousness in a
State, to act upon the Constitution; because every Part of the Government,
(whether we consider Kings as Supreme, or Governors ^et over a People by him,
or such Branches of the Legislative, or Executive Power, as are necessarily
included in the Constitution, as well as the Body of the People,) have as full
and just Right, Title, and Claim, in and to that Part of Power, or to those
Privileges, which are assigned and made over to them, in the very Foundation
of the Government, as any Man has, or can have, to what he calls his own; and
consequently, it is the Demand of Righteousness, that these Powers, and
Privileges be preserved in their proper Channels, without the use of any
secret Craft, or open Violence, to dam up the Current, or divert its Course
another Way. That is to ^^y, that Rulers are to govern according to Law. Hence
when the Kingdom was founded in Israel, Samuel wrote* the Manner of the Kingdom
in a Book, and laid it up before the Lord, 1 S^m. x. 25.
that it might be their MAGNA CHARTA, the fudamental Constitution of the
Kingdom, and the standing Rule of their Government for the future. Thus where
there are peculiar Regalia belonging to the Throne itself, as a sacred
Enclosure around it, which serves to set Majesty alo^t, in full View, and yet
at an awful Distance, that by too near Access and Familiarity, it may not grow
contemptible, Righteousness requires that every part of the Government pay a
profound Reverence, and come not near to touch the royal Prerogative: in which
sense, may well ^e applied, the Words of our Savior, Matt^. xxii 21.
Render unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's: they belong to Caesar, and
therefore cannot be taken from him, without the highest Injustice, as to Caesar
himself, in divesting him of his appropriated Royalty, so to the State, in
bringing Majesty into Contempt, which unavoidably weakens the Government Hence
is that political Axiom, Amissan Aut^oritatem Magi^^ratus, so (...)
.

Thus, where the Constitution provides, what may be called, a Balance of
Power, by distributing the several Branches of Power to such particular parts
of the Government, as may have a happy Tendency to prevent the Encroachments of
Sovereignty, and the Insults of the Populace, there Righteousness requires
Rulers to act up to the Powers committed to them, without assuming (...) to
than belongs to them, in their particular Station; and all things are carefully
to be avoided, which tend to w^^ken any particular Branch of Power, and render
those who are rightfully possessed of it, incapable of exerting themselves,
according to their Original Trust* because this would be a depriving one part
of the Government of ^^s Due; and, however craftily the Design may be (...),
will, in the end, issue in such a Sway of Power ^ne way as will overs^t the
Government. Thus it will be ^ound, upon examination, an equal departure from
the (...) of Righteousness, to wrest the Sword out of the Hand of him to whom
the Constitution has committed it, as to snatch the Purse from those that have
the keeping of it. And whether these things be considered as in an independent
Stat^ or in a dependant Government, and their several Powers as arising, from
their original Incorporation, or subsequent royal Grants, I fear, they will be
sound, as taking from another, and appropriating to themselves, what does not
belong to them; and I very much doubt whether any political Views, and fetches
of Wit, will be sufficient to justify such an apparent Falsehood in Trust, and
Injuriousness to their Neighbor* to be sure, such would be far from the
Character of David, of whom it is said, He fed them according to the Integrity
of his Heart, and guided them by the Skilfulness of his Hands. Psalm. ^xxviii 72.


Thus Righteousness in Rulers requires them to adjust all the Parts of their
Administration to the true Rights, Liberties, and Privileges, of the Subject.
These are various in their Kind, and more or less, in Number, and Degree,
according to the Nature of the Constitution, and are inwrought into it; and
every Subject has a just Claim to the Benefit of them, as his proper
Inheritance, contracted for by his fore Fathers, and it may be, dearly bought
and paid for, and left to him, in a long Descent; as a Pledge of their paternal
Wisdom, and Affection. There is nothing a People are more tender of than These;
they look upon the Security of their Persons, and Interest, and the Comfort of
their Lives, as dependant upon them; and therefore will not be persuaded easily
to part with them, but say to such as attempt to invade them, as Naboth to
(...), 1 Kings xxi. 3.
the Lord forbid it me that I should give the Inheritance of my Fathers unto
thee. How jealous were the old Romans, that brave People, of their Privileges?
At what a Price did they hold them? And how greatly could they glory in them?
Thus Lysias says, Acts xxii. lat. E^d.
with a great Sum obtained I this Freedom; and Paul boasts, but I was free
born: and this made the chief Captain so much afraid of his Usage of Paul, when
he knew he was a Roman, and so careful to preserve (...) afterward, because it
was Death by the Roman Law for any in Authority to violate the Roman
Privilege. Mr (...) in Loc.
No Sum would be though it too much to be given for the peculiar Privileges o^
some People, nor can they be defended at too dear a Rate; and therefore These
ought to be preserved inviolate, and not easily given up, to the ambitious
(...) of such as imagine, it can never be well with th^^selves, till they have
full Liberty to prey upon their Bre^^^en. Hence it is the highest Point of
Righteousness, in the Rulers of a People, the primary Design of whose
Institution was to secure the Community in their Rights, to be very careful to
maintain entire and untouched, those natural, and civil, Liberties, and
Privileges, which are the Property of every Member of the Society; and to
guard against the dark Designs of those who are secretly endeavoring to
undermine, or more openly attempt to destroy them; or through the Rashness of
their Counsels, (...) Stubborness of their Spirit, will rather choose to ha^^^d
the sacrificing of them, than lay aside their own Will and Humor. It is no new
thing, for Persons of a boundless Ambition, and close Designs, to foment a
popular Clamor about Liberty and Property, as if all was in danger, under the
best of Administrations, by which they delude an unthinking People, and wind
themselves into their high Opinion of them, as the only Patriots of their
Country, while they mean nothing less than what they make the greatest Noise
about, and only make use of this politic Fetch to get upermost, and rule with
the more uncontrouled Sway. Thus Absalom could caress the meanest of the
People, and say to every Man 2 Samuel xv. 2, 3, 4*
See thy matters are Right, but there is none deputed of the King to hear thee;
O, that I were made Judge in the Land, that every Man which has any Suit or
Cause, might come unto me, and I would do him Justice. Do him Justice! It Is
likely, indeed, he should do him Justice, who could be guilty of so great a
Wi^kedness as to accuse, and drive from his Throne, his own Father, as well as
royal Master; but this was the governing View, whatever was the Pretense, that
every Man might come to me: so all might but bow down to him, he cared not for
Father, King, or Country. And, it may be, no where had the Rulers, of a People,
more need to place a strong Guard, than against such dark laid Designs, which
are founded in the Affections, and Jealousies of of the People, and in which
they are most easily deceived. Nor is it exceeding Difficult to discover the
Cheat, by their Readiness to give up all, rather than not have their Humor
gra^ified: so Solomon discovered the true Mother of the Living Child from the
pretended one. 1. Kings iii. 25.


Only while Rulers put on Righteousness as a Robe, and Justice as a Diadem, in
the Preservation, and Defense, of this part of the Constitution, it seems
necessary that these two Rules be observed, namely, that what they so
vigorously defend be a real Privilege worth contending for, and that they
truly have a Right to it.

2 Another Branch of Righteousness, in Rulers, requisite to establish the
Throne, is the providing Righteous, good, and wholesome Laws. The first Notion
of Government is, a Right to enact and then to execute, certain Laws, for the
regulating the Society: and wherever this Legislative Power is lodged, it is of
the highest Consequence that the Laws themselves be just and righteous;
because, since the Government is to proceed by them, if the Rule it self be not
Straight, what ever is measured by i^ must needs be Crooked. If the Foundations
be out of Course, what can even the righteous Man himself do? Rulers must
therefore be very careful that all their Laws be righteous ones, least the
subsequent Acts, founded upon them, be oppressive and injurious, and they
involve themselves in all the Guilt of putting them in Execution. David's
Command to Joab, to place U^iah in the Front of the hottest of the Battle, and
retire from him that he may be smitten, and dye, possibly, may sufficiently
excuse Joab, while he was ignorant for what Crime his Master had ordered this
as a Punishment, but the Murder is charged home upon David, 2 Samuel xii. 9.
thou have killed Uriah the Hittite, with the Sword, ^^d slain him with the
Sword of the Children of Amm^n.

Thus, one of the first things the Law is to provide for, seems to be the
Establishment, and Ascertaining, of the Value of the Medium among a People,
that they may have a sure Rule to go by, in all their Commerce, and Business.
And here, I cannot but think it worth while to transcribe a Passage or two,
from that great Ca^uist, the Rev. Mr. SAMUEL WILLARD; Body of Div. p. 707.
There ought (says he,) to be one Standard, to regulate the Prices of things
by, if Men would observe Righteousness in the Way of Commerce. -- Though the
Prices of things may rise, and fall, still -- every thing is to be valued by
one Standard; otherwise it is impossible that Honesty should be maintained --
The wise Man tells us that Money answers all things; -- it will not only
pr^cure any other thing, but it is the Standard for the Settlement of the Value
of every thing else, as to its Currency among Men. Thus he. And how necessary
is it that this Standard be fixed and certain, nay it is not a Standard without
it be so; and, I presume, this can be done only by Law, or the civil Authority
putting a certain Value upon that which is Money, properly so called, that all
other things may be redu^ed to it as to a certain and Straight Rule. It was the
positive Law of God, (yet in it self a moral Precept;) Levit. xix. 35, 36.
Ye shall do no Unrighteousness in Judgment, in Mete yard, in Weight; in
Measure: just Balances, just Weights, and a just Ephah, and a just Hin, shall
ye have. And so my Context says, the just Weight, and Balance, are the Lords.
They are what God strictly requires. Are Gods Work, made by His Direction and
Appointment, so as no Man can corrupt, or alter them, without violating God's
Right, and in carrying His Displeasure. Po^l in Loc.
They are His Weight, and Measure, and not to be altered by Man, at Pleasure.
And if the Weight, and Measure, by which Men deal out to their Neighbors, must
be just, certain, and invariable, much more ought that to be so which is the
Standard of all others, and the only sure Rule by which to proportion the Value
of every thing; which it cannot be, while it is left to every Man's Discretion,
Justice or Probity, to lengthen, or shorten, to widen, or contract, to add to,
or take from, it, as may best suit with his particular Occasions. Till a
Government have made the Balance even, and the Weight, Meteyard, Ephah, and
Hin, of such a certain size, that every Man may know what certain Rule to go
by, in dealing with his Neighbor, it will be left to each Person to act as he
pleases; and when every Man is left at such a lawless Liberty, it will not be
to be wondered at, if some that cannot help it, are forced to accept of the one
Half of the Weight and Measure that others can demand; or if what was but an
Our (...) a while ago be grown up to a Pound anon, and the Nail stretches it
self to a Yard; I mean the Variations of all Measure will be without Bounds,
because the Medium that proves them is it self variable; and there will as
certainly ^e a Progression in the Variation, in the diminishing Hand, let the
Quantity of the Medium be more or less, as that there are Men that buy, and
sell, and hope to get Gain. What the Consequents of this must be (...) a People
needs, no great Foresight to determine. And where the Fault of all the
Confusion brought upon such a People, will at last be found to lie (though it
might have taken it is Rise from humane Frailty, and Mistake, but becomes
greatly aggravated by the Continuance of the Error after the Discovery of it,)
every one may plainly see.

However, this seems pretty certain, that where ^a Standard, and fixed Measure,
of all Commerce, is provided by the State, it will not be in the Power of any
merchantil^ Craftiness to alter it; which I think is apparent in all Kingdoms,
and Governments where there is a fixed Standard; or if some might, possibly,
find their Interest in little Variations from the Standard, yet, the Government
has done its Duty, and so far acted righteously, as to provide a known,
certain, and unvariable Rule to go by. In short, all I plead for is
Righteousness; that a People ought to have a stated Measure, a fixed Medium,
and there can be none but what the Law makes so. Having thus provided a public
Standard, in their Medium,

The next thing seems to be, the Legislature's reducing all things, which the
Members of the Community may be concerned about in the way of Barter, and
Exchange, to Number, Weight, and Measure, that there may be no door left open,
for Persons of no Principle, or Conscience, or Honor, (and such there will be
in every State,) to impose upon their Neighbors, in the quantity, as perhaps,
they may, after all imaginable Care to prevent it, in the quality, of their
Goods. This is that Righteousness which the Divine Oracles calls for, when it
assures us, That diverse Weights are an Abomination to the Lord, and a false
Balance is not Good Prove. xx 23.
: and lays its Injunctions upon us, D^ut. xxv. 13, 14, 15.
Thou shall not have diverse Weights, a great and a small; nor diverse Measures,
a great and a small; but thou shall have a perfect, and just Weight, and a
perfect, and just Measure shall thou have.

Thus the Righteousness of the Ruler is seen, in the Laws being calculated, to
encourage all that is virtuous and laudable, and to banish whatever is any ways
injurious to the State, or to the Person, Name, and Interest of any particular
Member of it, that they may be a Terror to Evil doers, and a Praise to them
that do Well. Their Righteousness is displayed, in so tempering the Laws, that
they may equally take hold on the Great and Small, and not be Traps to one, and
open Doors to another; that one may not be burdened, and another eased, but
that all Parts of the Body, may proportionably bear the Weight, and render it
Light; and in adjusting all their Acts and Laws, to the Temper and Genius, to
the Condition and Circumstances of the People To which End, a very great Regard
is to be paid to ^he Divine Laws, not only Moral, but Judicial, as far as the
Condition of a People will admit, as the Result of the highest Wisdom and
Rectitude.

And as Righteousness must enter into the Nature of the Laws, so into the
Sanctions of them also; that they may be duly confirmed, and enforced, and
that the Penalty be proportioned to the Nature of the Crime, considered, in its
self, and in its Circumstances, as they more or less affect the Preservation of
the Peace, and Welfare, of humane Society, and every Member of it.

3. A third Instance of the Righteousness in Rulers, by which the Throne is
established, is, the due Execution of the Law, and dispensing the Rewards of
the Government; For all of this is but distributive Justice.

Thus, there is Righteousness required in the due Execution of the Laws. A
State or Kingdom has a Right to see all their just Laws obeyed, and therefore
is the Sword put into such and such Hands, jointly, or separately, that
Obedience may be enforced, and they may be governed according to Law; and*
perhaps, it may be as great a wrong to the Government, not to put the Laws in
Execution, as to make none. The wilful Neglect, therefore, of Executing the
Law, by those to whom it belongs, will be looked upon, as the Betraying an
important Trust, and Dissolving of the Government. For, should the Laws be ever
so good, if they are suspended, or the executive Power acts contrary to them,
it is evident the Design of the Rulers Office is perverted. The Sword,
therefore, must not be ^heath^d, but drawn, and made use of, to punish the
bold, though there may be room for Mercy to the unwilling, Offender; that Vice
and Disorder may be suppressed, and Virtue and good Manners may be encouraged.
Hence the Apostle says of the Civil Ruler, Rom* xiii. 4.
he ^eareth not the Sword in vain; he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to
execute Wrath upon him that does evil.

And then Righteousness goes into the Administration, in the strict Observation
of Law and Justice Magistratus ^^im debet esse Ju^ (...). Al^t.
in all matters of Judgment, whether civil, or criminal. Hence is that, Judges
shall thou make thee, and they shall judge the People with just Judgment; thou
shall not wrest Judgment; thou shall not respect Persons, neither take a Gift;
for a Gift does blind the Eyes of the Wise, and pervert the Words of the
Righteous* that which is altogether just shall thou fellow, Deuteronomy. xv^ 18* 19,
20.
The Law must be impartially executed, without Favor to the wealthy and great,
or a false Pity to the poor and unhappy: no particular Affections, or Distaste,
or Aim at private interest, should be allowed to Sway in Judgment; lest the
Righteous should be condemned, and the Guilty cleared; and so Judgment be
turned into Gall, and the Fruits of Righteousness into Hemlock.

Thus, Righteousness requires a due Distribution of the Rewards of the
Government, in the Promotion of Persons to Places of Honor, Trust, and
Service. Here, therefore, the Advice of Je^hro to Moses, is to be observed*
provide, out of all the People, able Men, such as fear God, Men of Truth,
hating Covetousness, and place them over them Exo^. xviii. 21.
. The Favors of the Government are not to be distributed promiscuously, much
less to any for unwearied hunting after them, and least of all to them that
have the Impudence to offer at the purchasing of them; The Emo* ^^verus
strict^y forbad the Sale of Places, saying, Necesse (...) qui Emit, v^rd^t.
because this will bring on the sacrificing of Merit, and the Prostitution of
Justice; but the Distribution should be made to able M^n; Men suitably
qualified, furnished with Wisdom and Knowledge, Sagacity and Penetration,
Fortitude and Resolution, Vigor and Diligence, Chastity and Purity of Manners,
proportioned to the Duties of their Station, and equal if it may be, to the
Weight that is laid upon them H^n^r (...) A^b^tur (...) acti^ni ^^^t^tis.
.

How unrighteous would it be, in those who have the Power of dispensing such
Favors, to call to the Council Board, such as have not so much as a general
Knowledge of the Nature of Government, and are Strangers to the Constitution,
the State, and Interests of their Country? Or to place upon the Bench, in the
Seat of Judgment, such as know nothing of the Law, nor how to apply it, but
must be wholly directed by those who are too ready to think it their Business
to bend the Law to their Interest? How odious would it be to see, a Man of no
Principles, and dissolute Manner^, ^et to Watch over others, to preserve them
within the Bounds of Religion and Morality? This would not only be very
impoliti^k, but unrighteous, and an unfaithful Dealing out of the Stock to
unmeet Persons, from whom little or no real Service could be reasonably
expected.

Besides there is some Regard to be had to the outward Circumstances of Men,
that they be able Men; able to support the visible Honor and Dignity of their
Station. For there is something considerable in external* Pomp and Grandeur;
and a Figure, answerable to a Man's Station, goes further than every one is
aware of to uphold Government itself. If, therefore, (in Places purely
honorary, and much more of great Trust and Service,) Promotions are made, from
the lowest of the People, to serve a turn, whose straight Circumstances, low
Education, and mean Employment, as well as personal Incapacity, cannot comport
with the Dignity and Majesty, the Grandeur and State, of the Post they sustain,
this would be so far from distributive Justice, that it would be a doing the
Government one of the greatest Injuries For a State, or Kingdom, ever designs
their Rewards to the most worthy, and have a just Right to the Service of the
ablest Heads, and best Hands; and it must, therefore, come vastly short of
Righteousness, for secret Ends, to prefer such as are incapable, to Men of
known Ability, and Experience, Courage and Fidelity; and would be no greater
Kindness to the Persons themselves, than the hang^ng out of Solomon's Fool, as
an object of Derision, Pr^^. xxvi. 1.
Honor is not seemly for a Fool: and Prove xix. 10.
Delight is n^^ s^emly for a Fool, much less for a Servant to have rule over
Princes. The stupid Thing would make but an unseemly Figure encircled with the
gay Trapings of a private Life; but what a despicable one would he then appear
in, surrounded with the majestic Ornaments of public Honors ill placed? and
what a S^^^k would it give to a thoughtful Mind, to see such a Servant, one of
a servile Spirit, and born to be under Command, taking upon him to rule over
Princes, Men of a more noble, enlarged, and superior Mind?

Such a Distribution of the Rewards of a Government, would unavoidably bring it
into Contempt, at home, and abroad. For, the common People, (who have scarce
any thing else to keep them at a Distance, and procure their Respect, and
Veneration, but the Impressions which outward Grandeur makes upon their Minds,)
would be very apt to grow too familiar, and despise the Men, whom they find
upon a Level with themselves, in their Capacity and Circumstances. And Men of
real Worth, and Distinction, will hardly brook it to be ranked with those who
are, upon all Accounts, so much below them; nor can they easily bear to have
their brighter Understanding overruled, in matters of Importance, by a perfect
Silence, or numerous Hands of such as scarce understand their Actions. When it
comes to this, that the wicked rise, Men hide themselves, as Solomon speaks,
Prove. xxviii. 28.
ashamed to be seen in their Company, an^ afraid (...) the wild Effects of
their Rise. Nor will a Man of Wisdom, and Probity, (much less others,) who
would readily ^^y himself out to preserve the Dignity of Government, always be
able, with his utmost Care* to distinguish the F^ather from the Head that wears
it. This was what Solomon complains of in his Day, Eccl. x. 5, 6, 7.
T^ere is an Evil which I have seen under the Sun, as an Err^r which proce^d^^h
from the Ruler; Folly is set in great Dignity, and the Rich (in Mind, as well
as Purse.) sit in low Places: I have seen Servants upon Horses, and Princes
walking, as Servants, upon the Earth.

4. Another Branch of Righteousness in Rulers, by which the Throne is
established, is that of Communicative Justice: which, indeed, is no other than
a Part of that positive Justice by which we render to every Man his Dues: and
is therefore the Payment of a Debt, and not an Act of Grace and Favor. Though
there is much of Righteousness in the Gratuitous Rewards, conferred upon those
that faithfully serve the State, in the Senate, or in the Field; yet this of
the Payment of due Debts is pure Righteousness, and what is most strongly
enforced by the light of Nature, and Revelation. For all the Laws of God, which
demand this Righteousness between private Persons, equally concern the Public,
which has its Debts.

And here may be considered the Debts of the Government, which necessarily
arise from the Nature of things, and become due by Virtue of special Services
done by Those that are called to devote themselves to the Public, though there
should be nothing, in particular, covenanted for. For all Government
necessarily includes in the Foundation of it, the Support of itself; and
cons^quently of its chief Officers, who are taken off from attending upon their
own private Concerns, to wait upon the Public. For, who goes a Warfare at his
own Charge? as the Apostle argues in a like Case 1 Cor. ix. 7.
. Nor can it be supposed, that those who devote their Thought and Time, to
direct and rule, to protect and defend the State, and secure the Interest of
others, should have no just Right to a S^^^ort, equal to the Station they are
in, and the Figure they ought to make. Though doubtless, it belongs to the
generous Prudence of the Government to Judge of the Quantum, yet not so whether
a Support is due: and where there has been any Hope given, of any particular
Sum, by those who have a Right to give it, this will in Reason and Conscience,
be looked upon to amount to the Nature of a Promise, from which I cannot see
how they can recede. With respect to this Debt, founded in the very Nature of
Government, the Word of God gives us (...). Thus our blessed Savior Himself
directs (...) paying of Tribute (...) xvii. 24, 25.
, and commands us to (...) caesar the things that are Caesar's Matthew. xxii. 21.
: and the (...) our Lord says, (...) xii^. 6.
For this Cause pay you (...) they are God's Ministers, attending continually
(...) thing. Which shows us the Obligation (...) Conscience and Honor, from
Religion and (...) afford a proper Support unto them. And (...) us Neb. v. 18.
, That he had not required the Bread (...), because the Bondage was ^eavy upon
this (...) plainly speaks his Right to the Bread of (...), though he saw Ca^se,
in his fa^herly (...) to exact it, under their present Difficulties. (...), it
may very reasonably be concluded, (...) of a People has a Right to his Bread,
or a (...) equal to his Character. And hence, as it (...) according to
Righteousness to withhold it from (...) it is due, nor from his Heirs, after
his (...) a Right to what was due to him during (...) neither can (...) be
Righteous for the Bread of (...) our to be left at such Uncertainties, as to
have (...) Dependence upon the Will or Humor of (...) ^hatever; and therefore
we find Justice and (...) ^ling all Governments to ascertain the Dues, (...)
the Fees of their Officers: and how it can (...) agreeable to the Rule of
Righteousness, to have (...) ^ranches of the Government certainly provided
(...) what is thought a proper Stipend for their (...) those who have it in
their Power to fix the Wages, making their own secure, while some of the
greater and more significant Branches are left precarious and dependant, I
confess is beyond me to see. Doubtless, while the Bread of the Governo^r is
more secure, and Caesar knows what is the Tribute he is to receive, that he may
not exact more, or others think themselves at Liberty to pay less, there will
be Room left for any State to confer more ample-Rewards for his greater Honor
and Encouragement.

Here also are considerable the public Debts that arise from Contract and
Promise; whether to Private Persons, for any Labor and Service done, or to
Persons of a public Character, who have their Established Fees. As each of
these have, some Way or other, their Demands upon the Government, so the Rule
of Righteousness by which the Public, as well as private Persons, are to
proceed, is that, Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in
the Power of thine Hand to do it; say not to thy Neighbor go, and come again,
and to morrow I will give thee, when thou have it by thee Prove. iii. 27, 28.
. And as there should be no needless Delay in the Payment, so have they a just
Right to the Fees or Stipe^d settled upon them, usq* ad Vaborem, to the full
Value of the Establishment; and no Change of the Species into another, of much
less Value, though of the same Denomination, can by any Rule of Righteousness, be
looked upon as Just, because, so much less in Value as that other Species is,
so much do they come short of receiving their due Debt, in full Weight. And
however some may not be able to help it, yet will it be esteemed nevertheless
oppressive to them. The Rule of Righteousness here, is that, Matthew. xviii. 26.
I will pay thee all; and that, our Money in full Weight. Ge^. xliii. 21.


Here also may be considered, the Debts of a State that are due upon Bond. And
(besides what may be borrowed by a State of their Neighbors upon plain Bond,
which no one will question their Obligation to refund;) I suppose, of this
Nature are the Notes issued out by any State, upon Emerg^nt Occasions, which if
well founded, and suitably guarded, may, perhaps, be of great Advantage to the
Government. These receive their whole Value from the Act of that partic^^^^
(...) by which they are E^^^ted, by which Act that (...) becomes bound to the
Receiver* to Exchange them for M^^ey by such a ^^rtain Time: and because the
Time of Redempti^n^s one of the Main things that gives any real Value to them*
and without which their Worth would be but imaginary* ((...) is evident, in
that no Man of Thought would have any thing to do with such Notes as carry in
them no Time for Payment,) therefore no one can suppose it agre^ble to the Rule
of Righteousness to postpone the ^^xed Time; because by the same Rule it may be
postpo^ed one Year, it may for ever; which would amou^^ ^o a (...), and be a
cancelling the Bond, at one Dath, without Payment.

5. A fifth Branch of Righteousness in Rulers, by which the Throne is
established, is the Defense ^f the S^^te, the Preservation of its Pea^^* and
Prom^^ing of its Prospe^ity. The Safety, Peace, (...) of a State or Kingdom,
are some of the main Ends of ^overnment, and ^ence it is but Right^ousness in
Rulers, in these Regards, (...) ^rue to (...) Trust, and use their best
Endeavou^^ (...) they may be promoted. Thus Kings should (...) in
Righteousness, and Princes Rule in Judgment, that they man ^e as a hiding Place
from the Wind, and a C^^^rt from the Tempest, as Rivers of Water in a dry
place, and the S^adow of a great Rock in a weary Land: as the Prophet speaks,
Isa xxxii. 1, 2.

Thus, they are obliged, in Righteousness, to take care of the Defense of their
People from foreign En^mies; and that by all proper Endeavors to prevent the
Mischiefs of a War, by guarding against giving any just Occasion to ^ neighbor
State to take up Arms against them; by cultivating a good Understanding with
them; and bearing* as far as is consistent with the End of Government, with
(...) lesser and more common Disputes and Contests, which often happen between
Subjects ^f bordering (...); and by suppressing that Ambition and Thirst of
Empire which would embroil their Subjects in War and Blood. To this End also
should they be careful, according to the Condition and Ability of their People,
to provide for War in a Time of Peace; as, by proper Magazines of Armament and
Stores of War, that it may not be said there is neither Spear nor Sword, found
among them; so, by securing their exposed Coasts and Borders with such
Bulwarks, as may render them the more formidable, and make it more difficult
and hazardous for any Enemy to make a Descent upon them. For it will be looked
upon, not only as an Act of Imprudence, but of Unrighteousness, for those who
are entrusted with the care of their Defense, ^o leave their Subjects open and
unguarded, and, by this means, invite an ambitious Neighbor to make his
inroads, and insult over them, through their supine Neglect. Thus Asa took care
to provide fenced Cities, with Walls and Towers, Gates and Bars, while the Land
had ^est 2 C^r. xiv. 6 7.
.

Thus also, Righteousness obliges to a prudent Tho'tfulness how to preserve the
State in Peace at Home, and that not only by good and wholesome Laws, but, by a
particular Care, not to lay any unreasonable and grievous Burdens upon the
People, or by a timely Removal of them, if any such should happen; agreeable to
the Advice of the Old Men to Reho^^^m (...)
. And it will be incumbent upon the several Rulers of a People to do their Part
to promote the Peace in their several Towns and Districts, and not allow
themselves to stir up Emulations, and Strife, and foment Contentions and
Factions, and form Parties, with a View to the promoting of themselves to
greater Honor; and when such uncomfortable things happen, it lies with them
timely to suppress them, either b^ showing the People the Unreasonableness of
their Actions, and the Falseness of the Principles they go upon; and, by
prudent keeping from any share in the Government such turbulent Spirits as
cannot be easy except they have (...) or finally, if all other Means ^ail, by
exerting their Authority to subdue them.

Thus Righteousness obliges them to seek the Wealth and Prosperity of their
People. For therefore are they set over them, that they may (...) them in a
(...), and be as the clear ^^ining of the Sun after Rain. Hence it is recorded
of M^rdecai, after his Advancement in the P^rsian Court, that he was accepted
of the Multitude of his Brethren, seeking the Wealth of his People Esth. x. 3.
And Nehemiah could appeal to God in those terms, Think upon me O God, for
Good, according to all that I have done for this People. Neb. v. 19.
The Flourishing and Prosperity of a People will ever lie near the Heart of a
true Father of his Country, and is to be promoted, by rendering the Government
easy and supportable, by pres^rving the just Rights of the Subjects, by a free
Course of Law and Justice, by due Incouragment of Labor and Industry, by
proper Premiums for serviceable Manufactures; by suppressing all that tends to
promote Idleness, and prodigal wasting and Consuming of Estates; by a due
Testimony against all Fraud, and Deceit, and Unrighteousness in Dealings; by
cultivating Frugality, and good Husbandry, and using due Care, as far as lies
in their Power, that their Export be at least equal to their Import. These, and
the like, will have a very great Tendency to the Prosperity of a People, which
therefore very much lie upon the Rulers, in Justice to them, to take Care of.

6. A further Instance of Righteousness in Rulers is, a strict Observation of
Leagues and Treaties with neighbor Nations. States and Kingdoms generally have
some relation to, and Dependence upon, one another, (...) well as private
Persons: and as Society cannot be maintained, amon^ private Persons without
Government, or their Covenanting to submit themselves to such or such
Regulations; so neither can States and Kingdoms uphold a profitable
Correspondence with one another, without Treaties, Leagues, Contracts, and
Terms of Agreement; which are, to those Nations, the Laws by which they are to
govern themselves, in their Conduct to each other. Sometimes these Leagues and
Treaties are entered into for the sake of carrying on a Trade, which may be
advantageous to both Parties, in the Consumption of the surplus Manufacture of
the one, and the supply of the Wants of the other. Such was the League between
Solomon and Hyram. 1 Kings v. 12.
Sometimes such Contracts are made to strengthen themselves, by Alliances,
against such Nations and People as they may have just Cause to be Apprehensive
o^* As the League between A^ab, and Benhaded. 1 Kings xx. 34.
Or whatever be the Motives of neighbor Nations entering into Treaties, and
Contracts with one another, this is certain, that it is a plain moral Duty
carefully to observe all the Articles of Agreement, and preserve the Treaty
inviolable. For this is no other than Truth to their Word and Promise, which
gathers Strength the nearer it approaches the Throne; for where the Word of a
King is, there is Power, to make it good; and as Solomon says in the Verse
following my Text, Righteous Lips are the Delight of Kings, and they love him
that speaks right. It is therefore articled against Antiochus Epiphanes, for
which he is stigmatized with the Brand of a Vile Person, Dan, xi. 23.
that after the Leag^e made with him, he shall work d^^eitfully. The King's
Mouth should not transgress in Judgment, by making Use of Leagues and Treaties
to en^^^re their Neighbor Kingdoms with a Punic Faith, and the more easily
overrun them, as has been the Manner of some of Infamous Memory. But,

7. I must add, that Righteousness in Rulers is to be manifested in the
Preservation of the Religious Rights of a People: that every Man may be left
free and undisturbed in the Profession of his Religion, that is not
inconsistent with the Welfare of the State. For surely Men have a natural Right
to worship God, in that Way which their own Conscience stimulates them to, as
most pleasing and acceptable to Him. And though proper Pains are to be taken with
the Erroneous, to convince their Reason and Understanding, yet Civil Rulers are
not to assume a Power to decide Articles of Faith, and appoint particular Modes
of Worship, and compel any Man, by external Force, to the Belief of the one, or
Practice of the other; but they are to imitate the laudable Example of Gallio,
the Deputy of Achaia, in whose Commendation it is recorded, that in a religious
Controversy, he determined with himself Act. xvii^* 15*
I will be no Judge of such matters.

Civil R^ler^ are to be nursing Fathers to the Church, by the^^ ^wn bright
Example of undi^^embled Religion, by taking Care that Religion be upheld, and
that God is Worshipped, and by suppressing all that tends to root out Religion
from among them; for when that goes, the Strength and Beauty of Government goes
with it. Religion is calculated for the Benefit of States and Kingdoms, as well
as particularly Persons; and the Influence of it is so great to the public
Welfare, (as is seen in the one Instance of Righteousness I am speaking of,)
that it greatly concerns Rulers to be Religious themselves, and to use their
best Endeavors that their Subjects may be so too. Plato could say, (...)
Magistr^tus Religio^^st.
Though I do not think our holy Religion will be a Loser by searching it to the
Bottom, and making all the Objections that can in Reason, be brought against
it, but it will shine the clearer, and be established the stronger, when it is
seen that it can endure the Trial, and overcome all Opposition; yet I doubt the
running upon the Christian Religion with Banter and Ridicule, with Flout and
Jeer, with Railing and Scurrility, which so unhappily chimes in with the
Depraved Inclinations of Mankind, and gives such a Titillation, to the wild
Imagination which is easily hurried away with the Laugh, will go far in
banishing all Religion out of the World; which seems to be the last and
strongest Effort of diabolical Policy in the Satanic Agent of the present Age;
if God in infinite Compassion to Mankind do not prevent it. Here therefore the
Rulers of a People are to exert themselves, and prevent such Insults upon our
holy Religion. The Heathen (said Dr. Tillots^n Vol. 1. page 40.
) would never suffer their God's to be reviled, which yet were no God's; and
shall it* among the Professors of the true Religion, be allowed to any Man to
make a Mock of Him that made Heaven and Earth and to breath out Blasphemies
against Him who gives us Life and Breath and all things. Surely, Rulers in a
Christian state owe it unto that in^arnate Word and Wisdom of God, from whom
they receive their Authority, to assert His holy Religion and ^efend it from
Contempt; and they owe it unto their People, who are to be protected from
Insult in their Religions as well as civil Rights; so should they be Shields of
the Church.

Thus, the civil Ruler should preserve the Rights of the Christian Church, not
only by countenancing their Assembling to Worship, their Choice of their
Officers, and their Church Administrations, but by encouraging their
Associating in Councils, and Synodical Assemblies, for the mutual Benefit of
all the parts of the Church of Christ, and the Communion of Churches, which is
so necessary to their Well being. Thus, they should speak comfortably to the
Ministers of the Lord, as it is recorded of H^z^kiah, he spoke comfortably to
all the Levites that taught the good Knowledge of the Lord. (...)
And since those that teach the good Knowledge of the Lord are greatly
instrumental to preserve the Peace of the State, and promote the Honor and
Obedience which the People pay to their Rulers, by preaching the Laws of Christ
which strongly enjoin these Duties, it is but just in the civil Ruler to show a
decent Respect to the Minister of Christ, and remember the Honor that belongs
to him in his Place and encourage him to his Work; and not as some little Minds
are too apt to do, who, as soon as they are raised to a small Figure in the
State, think they must rule in the Church also, and therefore enter a Contest
with their Minister, and excite such as now have some Dependence on them to a
disrelish of his Person, Gifts, or Performances, that if possible they may
subdue him to their Humor, and by that means bring the People where they dwell
to what Terms they please.

Thus the civil Ruler should secure the Rights of the Church by taking Care of
the Support of it is Officers, who have a Right to their Maintenance, by the
Light of Nature, and the Law of the Gospel, if there were no Promise from their
People. Thus Hezekiah, commanded the People to give the Portion to the Priests
and Levites, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord. 2 C^ron.
xxxi* 4.
And where the Difficulties of that Order of Men are peculiarly great and the
one Half the Value of what they might expect and has been promised to them, is
not paid them, through a Defect in an uncertain Medium, and they have no Ways to
help themselves, (but the very asking of Justice of their People is the certain
Road to a Quarrel, which puts an End to their Opportunities for Service,) while
all others can allevi^te the Difficulty, by Advance upon their Labor and
Wares, and even their Interest, it seems a Point of Justice due, to so great,
and, I trust I may say, valuable a Branch of the Community; and the Obligation
thereto is the stronger where the Government, has though not designedly, brought
the Difficulty upon them to secure them from Oppression; by particular
Provision in the Law for them, proportioning their Stipend to some certain
Standard, that the Quarrels about it may cease, and they and their Offspring
may not be made contemptible by their Poverty, nor the Offerings of the Lord be
despised because of the mean and low Circumstances of them that present them.
This I thought fitting to observe, not for my own sake, who through the Favor of
God, and Kind^^ss of my People, need is not, but in Compassion to my poor
Brethren through the Country, who suffer for want such particular Provision for
them.

I pass,

II. To consider Righteousness as it relates to the Ruled, or governed part of
the State. And what is needful here may be reduced to these Heads, of Honor,
Obedience, Maintenance, Defense, and Prayer, w^^^h are so plain, that I need
not to enlarge upon them.

1. The first Branch of Righteousness in the Subject, is the paying all due
Honor to the Ruler. For the peculiar Characters of the Deity upon them, beyond
what is to be found upon other Men, in their Authority and Dominion over
rational Agents; and the special Relation they stand in to the Subjects, as
Fathers to their Country, shows that it is an Act of Righteousness to give the
highest civil Honors to them, proportionable to their Rank and Station. This
Honor is to be paid to them in the inward Love and Affection we are to bear
them, the high Opinion and Esteem we are to entertain of them, and the very
great Veneration and awe of the Mind to them: hence is that Prove. xxiv. 21.
My Son fear thou the Lord, and the King. This Honor is to be manifested, in
our outward Behavior, by our speaking honorably of them, treating them with
the greatest Deference, with all the customary Marks of Respect, and observing
our due Distance. Hence says the Apostle, Fear God, Honor the King 1 Pet. ii.
27.
This Honor is to be paid to them for the sake of their Office, and should be
greatly increased from their personal Worth, and the Superiority of their
Powers, and their filling and honoring their Station with a wise and prudent,
righteous and just, generous and paternal Management.

2. Another Instance of Righteousness in Subjects is Obedience to their Rulers.
If it be righteous in the Ruler to make good and whol^om Laws, it is equally
righteous in the Subject to obey them. Hence says the Apostle, Tit. iii. 1.
Put them in mind to be Subject to Principalities and Powers, and Obey
Magistrates. Obey them in the Ex^cution of their Office, and in their Laws,
even all of them, that do not interfere with the prior Obligations every Man
lies under to obey God rather than Man. For it cannot be supposed that any Man
should, nor indeed can he, give up this Right, because it is not at his own
Disposal; nor ^ay any Man rightfully assume what belongs to another, much less
what belongs to God. But all the Judicial Laws of a State, (as well as plainly
moral ones) that are calculated to promote their Peace and Flourishing, the
Support and Defense of the Government, and the like, wherein the Rights of the
great Lord of Conscience are not specially concerned, are readily to be obeyed.
For thus the Word of God teaches us, Romans xiii 1.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers; and ^er. 5
ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake Yea though
the Law should prove injurious, as possibly it may, to a particular Person,
when it designs the Good of all, yet it is to be submitted to; and if all fair
and lawful Means, can not bring an innocent Person off from the Penalty he has
unhappyly fallen under, it must be endured without any Resistance; because
every Man has so far resigned up his own private Thoughts of Right and Wrong,
in civil Matters, to the public Judgment of the Ruler, in a legal Process, as
to be determined by it.

^her Instance of Righteousness in the Subject, ^^nourable Maintenance and
Support of the Throne, (...) I considered this under mother Head, as the hose
who have the legal Power of conferring the (...), and Payment of the Debt of
the Government; (...) it is to be considered as the Duty of every (...)
subject, upon whom the Tax is levied, for the (...) the Treasury. This the Body
of a People o^e Rulers, who lay ou^ their Time and Strength, ^^ility and
Opp^rtunities in their Service, to bear (...) of their Support, without
thinking much of (...) Pittance that falls to every Man's Share. This (...)
Nature requires, ^om. Xiii. ^*
R^nd^r unto all their Dues, to whom Tribute is due And as the Taxes which
(...) for the Support of the Rulers, and other (...) Government, are to be
proportioned, in (...), upon the Subjects, by those who have the of the
Assessment, so should every Man look upon (...) bound, in Justice, with
Cheerfulness, to do hi^ (...) the honorable Support of their Rulers, (...)
Murmurring and Complaint, or necessitating a (...).

^readiness to defend the Person and Authority of the (...) justly due from the
Subject. For, as the Civil (...) in the very Nature and Design of his Office,
is set (...) Defense of the Subject's Person, and Rights, natu^^l, and
religious, against any foreign Adversary, or (...) Foe; so it is but just that
the Subject should be upon all pr^per Occasions to Protect the Person, (...)
the Authority of their Rulers, against all unjust (...) that may be made upon
them. This they (...) do by carefully avoiding Factions, Seditions, (...), and
seasonably discovering such as they may (...) of. This is the Advice of
Solomon, Pr^^. xxiv.21.
My Son, (...) not with them that are given to Change. And when (...) happen
that their Rul^rs are exposed in the (...) of Rio^s at home, or form an open
Enemy (...) strip them of their Authority, their Hands, and expose to the
greatest Hazards, in Defense to their (...) and Government, saying as the Men
of Israel to David, 2 Samuel xviii 3.
Thou art worth Ten thousand of us. And well may they be reproached with their
Valor and Fidelity, and be looked upon as worthy to die, who will not expose
themselves to any Hardships and Dangers to keep their Master the Lord's
anointed. 1 Samuel xxvi. 15, 16.


5. The last Instance I shall mention of Righteousness, in Subjects to their
Rulers, is their earnest Prayer to God for them. That Wisdom and Skill which
are profitable to direct* that Courage, Resolution and Vigor, which are
necessary to prosecute the Affairs of Government, come down from the Father of
Lights; the Care and Burden, the Labor and Toil, the Fatigue and Perplexities
of Government are undertaken and born with, for the Benefit of the Subject* the
whole Community reaps the Advantage of the Wise and Just Administrations of
their Rulers; all of which loudly calls upon the Subjects, as a righteous Debt,
to be importunate in their daily Supplications to Heaven on the behalf of them
that have the Rule over them: that the Supreme Ruler of the World, in whose
Hands are the Hearts of Kings* Princes, and Nobles, would cause the Spirit of
Government to rest upon them, furnish them with Wisdom, and largeness of Heart,
to know how to go in and out before his People, choose out a right Way for them,
and crown their Administrations with desired Success, for the Preservation of
the Peace, and Advancement of the Prosperity of their People, for the
Suppressing of Disorder, and the Encouragement of Virtue, and pure and
undefiled Religion; that they may sit down under their Shadow with Delight, and
be greatly refreshed with their benign Influences, and there may be none to
make them afraid. Thus prays the Psalmist, Psalm. lxxii. 1.
Give the King thy Judgments, O God, and thy Righteousness unto the Kings Son.
And thus the Apostle of our Lord has taught us, ^. Tim. ii. 1.
I exhort -- that Prayer* ^e made -- for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority, tha^ we may lead a peaceable and qui^k Life, in all Godliness, and
Honesty.

3. The Third, and last thing, under this Head, is to consider the
Righteousness which promiscuously belongs both to Rulers and Subjects. And here
it may ^uffice only to hint at two things, viz.

(1) First, Righteousness in Dealings one with another. That is, That no Man go
beyond, or defraud his Brother in any Matter, either by Unfaithfulness in the
Trust committed to them, respecting any Business, or Disposition of any
Interest, or by falsifying their Word and Promise; by unreasonable detaining
the Hire of the Labourer, or wasting another's Time that should have been spent
in his Service; by overreaching another in Bargains and Contracts and Sales,
imposing upon their Ignorance, or preying upon their Necessity; by palming
false War^s, defective Merchandise, and unperfected Manufactures, for good and
perfect; by over Charges, and false Accounts, and deceitful Reckonings; by
unjust and litigious and expensive Law Suits; or by any other Way in which one
Man may be*a sufferer from another. And here, the Rule by which every Man is to
proceed in his Dealings is that, All things whatsoever ye would that Men should
do unto you, do ye even so unto them. A^^t^c. vii. 12.


(2) A public Spirit; which is every Man's seeking the good of the Whole. This
was one of the Master Virtues of the old Romans, and possibly, more than any
one thing, contributed to their greatness. And it is but a Peic^ of Justice in
every Member of a Community, to be sined with a generous Resolution of Soul to
(...), and his Interest to the Public, and look ^^on his all, as a part of,
and belonging to the whole; and, not by a disordered and fordid Temper,
appropriate the Nourishment so to himself, as to bring on a Stagnation in any
(...) of the political Body, which will endanger the whole. The Apostle's Rule
is that. 1 Cor. x. 24.
Let no Man seek his own, b^^ every Men another's Wealth. No Man was born for
himself, but for Mankind. A contracted narrow selfish Spirit will unavoidably
be guilty of Injustice; for while such an (...) can see nothing but Self
Interest, he is blind to hi^ Neighbors. And he that withholds from the Public
its due, what Right has he to the Benefits of the Community? A public Spirited
Man will ever be a just Man; and his generous Soul will expand itself in great
and noble Actions for the service of his Country; especially in those extensive
Services of sounding, and endowing, of Schools, and Colleges, where the rising
Generation are in a peculiar Manner, trained up and fitted for public
Usefulness. Thus they return into the Public a part, at least, of what they
have amassed under the advantages of it; and leave behind them lasting
Monuments of the Largeness of their Hearts. How famous will the Name of HOLLIS,
that Man of a truly Undisguised and Generous Soul, be to all succeeding
Generations! May his noble Example provoke others, and su^^ among ourselves, in
particular, as have equal Capacity, and stronger Obligations, to a noble
Imitation. This is that Righteousness which establishes the Throne, on which
the Security and Happiness of a People has a great Dependence. But I must pass
to the last Head, viz.

IV To lay before you some Evidence that the Throne is, and will be established
by Righteousness. And I need only to sum up the Evidence under these Heads.

1. That this will render the Throne or Government firm and stable within it
self. For when their Constitution is acted upon, all due Honors are paid to
the Rulers of a People, and their Rights, Liberties, and Privileges are
securely enjoyed, their Persons are free from Insult, and their Property from
Encroachments by Fraud or Violence.; while none but good and wholesome Laws are
Enacted, and these duly Executed, to the Suppressing of all Disorder and
Immorality, which for ever is more or less detrimental to the State; while Men
of an excellent Spirit are preferred, and Merit is ^u^^^bly rewarded, and every
Man reaps the Benefit of the Services He does for the Public; while the
Administrations are calculated to promote the Peace and Flourishing of the
Government, and every Man is in the Possession of (...) truly valuable
religious Liberties; while every Man is careful to treat his Neighbor by the
Laws of Justice, and a Public Spirit (...) through the whole Community; what
would the necessary Result of all this be, but the Stability of the Throne and
Government at home? For what could there be among such a People to render them
uneasy? The Prince would smile under the Weight of the Crown, and the Burden of
Empire, because they sit easy upon him. The People would Salute their Rulers
with their joyful Acclamations, Let the King live for Ever, because of their
safe Possessions, and quiet Habitations. There would be nothing to stir up
Mutiny and Sedition, or provoke them to Conspiracies, or to make them so much
as entertain a secret Wish for a Change, in the Person of their Rulers, or, in
their Constitution. If a malignant Spirit should happen to start up in some
By-Nook or Corner of the Land, he would not find Materials to work upon,
because every Man would sensibly perceive himself safe, under the Shadow of his
own Vine and Fig Tree, and that he eats the Fruits thereof with Joy and
Gladness of Heart.

So that from the very Mention of these things it is apparent, that the Throne
is established, the Government is safe and the Persons of their Rulers secure.
Then, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. xxxii. 16, 17, 1^
Judgment shall dwell in the Wilderness, and Righteousness remain in the
fruitful Land; and the Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the Effect of
Righteousness, Quietness, and Assurance forever; and my People shall dwell in a
peaceable Habitation, and in sure Dwellings, and in quiet resting Places: when
Righteousness shall ^e the Girdl^ of his L^yns, and Faithfulness the Girdle of
his Reins, then, the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb; and the Leopard shall lie
down with the Kid; and the Calf, and the young Lion* and the Fatling, together;
and a little Child shall lead them; and they shall not hurt nor destroy in all
my holy Mountain* xi. 5* 6, 9.
Whereas, the Reverse of this Righteousness will ^navoidably, sooner or later,
bring on Rapine and Violence. Tyranny and Oppression, Murmuring and Discontent,
Contempt of Authority, and trampling upon Laws, Tumults, Seditions,
Conspiracies, which will shake the Foundations of the Throne, and, if not
timely prevented, prove the Overthrow of the Government.

2. This Righteousness will procure them Admiration Reverence, and Fear from
abroad, and this will establish the Throne. For the distant Prospect of the
continual fresh and untarnished Glories of the Rulers; and the happy Liberty,
Riches, Flourishing, and Unity of the Subjects, will naturally raise the
Admiration of surrounding Nations, as rare, and great things do, and extort
from them the Transport of the southern Queen, upon the View of Solomon's
Glory, 1 Kings x. 8,9.
happy are thy Men, and happy are these thy Servants, -- because the Lord loved
Israel therefore made ^e thee King over them, to do Judgment and Justice. And
who could contemplate the Steadiness of their Counsels, the Evenness of their
Conduct, and the Regularity of their Behavior, without an inward Reverence,
saying Deuteronomy. iv. 6,8.
Surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding People; for what Nation
is there so great, that has Statutes and Judgments so righteous. As this would
tend to draw Foreigners to them, and enlarge their Trade, and promote their
Prosperity; (for who would not choose to dwell with such a righteous and happy
People?) so the perfect Harmony and Agreement among themselves, their regular
and prudent Provision for their own Defense, and the generous Concern for the
Public running through all their Actions, would render them formidable to all
that behold their comely Order, united Force, and displayed Banners: And while
there is nothing among themselves to move any to call in a foreign Power; and
Alliances, Treaties, and Leagues of Friendship and Commerce, are inviolably
maintained; the Seeds of War, (the Lust of Empire, and Revenge of Injuries,)
are rooted up, and they will have but little Cause to be apprehensive of a
foreign Adversary.

Whereas, on the contrary, Unrighteousness, in Tyranny and Oppression, in
Seditions and Tumults, and the ^ike, invite a foreign Enemy; and a perfidious
Breach of Articles provokes them to revenge their own Cause. Thus, S^lomon
observes, Prove. xiv. 34.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a Reproach to any People.
Righteousness renders them loved, honored, and feared, both at home, and
abroad, and so exalts them, establishes their Throne, and very much sets them
out of the Reach of Danger; while the want of it, renders them despicable, and
obnoxious, makes their Throne totter, and their Government unstable, and they
become an easy Prey to their own Feuds, and an adjacent Adversary.

3. This Righteousness will be the most direct Way to the divine Protection and
Blessing. If there were no natural Influence in this Rectitude and Purity of
the Manners of a People, to establish the Throne, yet such a Blessing might
rationally be expected from the Conduct of Divine Providence. For thus God
Almighty has been wont to favor a righteous Nation, and encompass them with
his Protection as with a Shield; and His overruling Providence has been a
Pillar of Fire to them to enlighten them in a Time of Darkness, of a Cloud to
defend them, in times of Danger. And many are the Promises of God in His holy
Word to this Purpose; Thus, in my Text, the Throne shall be established by
Righteousness; thus, Prove. xxv. 5.
take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be established
in Righteousness; ^o, Prove. xxix. 4.
the King by Judgment establishes the Land, the King that is faithful Judges
the Poor, his Throne shall be established forever. This was God's Covenant to
his People of old, Deuteronomy. xxviii. 1 -- 9.
If thou will hearken diligently unto the Voice of the Lord thy God, to observe
and do all his Commandments, the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all
Nations of the Earth; -- the Lord shall establish thee an holy People unto
himself; and all the People of the Earth shall be afraid of thee. Thus we read,
Isa. live. 11, 12, 13, 14.
I will lay thy Stones with fair Colors, and thy Foundations with Sapphire; I
will make thy Windows of Agate, and thy Gate of Carbuncles, and all thy Borders
of precious Stones; and all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great
shall be the Peace of thy Children: in Righteousness shall thou be established,
thou shall be far from Oppression, for thou shall not fear; and from Terror,
for it shall not come near thee. Isa. xxxiii. 5, 6, and 15, 16.
The Lord is exalted for ^e dwells on high, He has filled Zion with Judgment
and Righteousness; and Wisdom and Knowledge shall be the Stability of thy Time,
and Strength of Salvation: he that walks Righteously, and speaks Uprightly,
he that despises the Gain of Oppressi^ns, that shakes his Hands from holding
of Bribes, and stops his Ears from hearing of Blood, and shuts his Eyes
from seeing Evil; he shall dwell on high, his Place of Defense shall be the
Munition of Rocks; Bread shall be given him, and his Waters shall be sure. And
let me add that, in Psalms lxxii, init: which contains the Description of a
Righteous Nation, and the Blessing of God upon it. Give the King thy Judgments,
O God, and thy Righteousness unto the King's Son; he shall Judge the People
with Righteousness, and the Poor with Judgment; the Mountains shall bring forth
Peace, and the little Hills by Righteousness; he shall save the Children of the
needy, and break in Pieces the Oppressor; -- he shall come down like Rain upon
the mown Grass, as Showers that water the Earth; in his Days shall the
Righteous flourish, and there shall be Abundance of Peace. so long as the Moon
endur^th; -- they that dwell in the Wilderness shall bow before Him, and his
Enemies shall lick the Dust. And what greater Assurance can we have of the
Establishment of the Throne?

Thus God dealt not only with his own People, but when Pagan Rome was renowned
for Righteousness in their Administrations, and a public Spirit influenced
them in their Actions, how happy were they within themselves, and glorious in
the Eye of the World? till Luxury and Covetousness, Pride and Ambition, brought
on Unrighteousness, in their several Orders, and then they sunk in Minutes, who
in Ages rose.

And how can it be expected otherwise? Shall the Thrones of Iniquity have
Fellowship with Thee, which frames Mischief by a Law? Will such a Nation as
this be the Darling Heaven? And shall their Throne be established? Who can
reasonably look for such a thing? When Wickedness gets into the Place of
Judgment, and Iniquity into the Place of Righteousness, it may well be feared
that the most High will take such a People into his own Hands, and make such
Di^treints upon, as shall c^st them dear for every Act of Unrighteousness; for
th^' H^nd join in Hand yet shall not the Wicked go unpunished; and that He will
not give over punishing them? If they refuse to be reformed, till, by giving
them up to their own Counsels, and leaving them to the ways of their own Heart,
(grievous Oppressions and civil Discords, a mad Zeal, and a perve^^e Spirit,)
the Foundations of their Throne be torn up, and they become a ruinous Heap: of
which the Jewish Nation are a (...) Monument.

Having thus gone through the several Heads I proposed to speak to, I shall leave
the more particular Application to be made by Those who are more especially
concerned; and only say,

And now, O Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to do
Justice? Righteousness is the great comprehensive Duty, considered in our
public Relation; and we have seen what it is, and the vast Influence of it to
our Establishment. Give me leave then, much Honored, to press this important
Duty upon the Government, and especially upon those who are concerned in the
Elections of this Day.

My Fathers, Great is the Trust that is repo^ed in you; Great are the
Expectations of God, and His People from you; and Great the Qui^quid a ^o^is
minor extim s^it,
Major (...) ^o^is Domin^^s minatur:
Omns (...) Rigno graviore Regnum est. Sen.

Account you have to give how this Opportunity is improved.

I look upon it as an unspeakable Privilege we enjoy, by Virtue of the Royal
Charter, above the Inhabitants of Great Britain it self, that the
Representative Body of this People, in Conjunction with his Majesty's Council
in Being, have the Power and Liberty to choose the succeeding Counselors; and
if it were only for this, our Charter may well be esteemed as an Hedge about
us, and much too valuable to be parted with; what ever may be the secret Views
of some that would bring us into a Light Opinion of it. So thought that Great
and Just Man, who far so long the Prime Minister of our State, when,
apprehensive of the Danger we were in of losing our Charter, he gave that
generous Order to his Son, then in England, which, Sixteen ^^ars ago, we were
publicly informed of, upon this Occasion Dr. C^lman's El^c. S^rm. 1718. page ^
. (...) honor that his Son, in making him instrume^^ (...) ^^rve (...)
Liberties, and now has further (...) before ^ the People, in placing him at the
(...) the Government among us. And when we (...) ^ur Excellen^^ not only as one
of the Sons of our People, but, the (...) of such a Father, and under his dying
Charge, we (...) doubtless, with safety repose our Confidence under yo^^
Shadow, and have nothing to fear, from your Admin^strations, that will be
detrimental to the true Interests your Native Country, the Place of your
Father's Sep^chre. The distinguishing Grace of our Royal Master, filling the
reserved Posts of (...) Governmen^ with our own Sons, as well as (...)
favorable Answers to us, in Cases that have (...) some Uneasiness: our
Superiors, may fully convince us that our real Libe^ties are in no Danger,
unless we make them so, under Reign of so much Righteousness and Clemency; the
happy Fruits of the Match of the Prince of Orange with Daughter of (...); and
may the late Intermarriage (...) the same (...) with a Daughter of Great
Britain, (...) to the confirming the Throne in Righteousness, and us in the
Privileges (...) derive from the Glorious King WILLIAM It (...) therefore with
the Great and General Assembly of the Province, under God, to render us safe
and happy, by the Rectitude and Justice of their Proceedings: the first (...)
to which is in the Choice of proper Persons to fill the Council Board

The Nobles of Great Britain, after all the stir the sometimes has been made by
the Commons, about Liber^^ and Property, have generally, if not always, been
the strongest Bulwark to the Subjects Liberties, and have mad^ the best Stand
when Encroachments upon them have bee^ attempted; and I doubt not but his
Majesty's honou^abl^ Council of this Province, who are a Medium between the
Sovereign, and the People, are generally as vigoro^^ Defenders of the Subject's
just Liberties, as strenuous A (...) of his Majesty's royal Prerogative.

We may always have the Council filled with the ablest and l^^t Men in the
Country, Men of Probity and undi^^en^^^d Religion, which only will keep a Man
steadily Just under all T^mptations; Men of the best Knowledge and
Understanding in the State and Interests of their Country, Men of a plain and
open Integ^^ty, that despise Craft, and hate Insincerity, and abhor an unjust
Action; Men of Courage and Resolution that will dare to appear on the behalf of
Righteousness* Men of the best Interests, who, however ready they are to serve
the Public with them, cannot easily be persuaded to sacrifice them to the
Humors of such as may be set over us, or to entail such Difficulties upon
their Posterity, as they dread themselves. Not only is this honorable Council
necessary, as the ablest Heads, to the framing our Laws, but without them it is
not in the Power of any that may be over us to constitute Judges, Justices, or
Sheriffs, nor to make any Disposition of our Money; so that neither can our
Treasures be improved, our Persons sei^ed, our Causes, Civil or Criminal,
tried, but in such a Way, and by such Persons, as they shall approve of. Happy
Privileges! And whose Fault will it be if we have such Counselors, as either
are not able to advise, or cannot be trusted. If such are chosen to that
honorable Board as may, and ought to be, we may safely confide in them, and
have nothing to fear from their Abuse of Power, or ill Disposition of our
Treasures: but if such as are destitute of all personal Qualifications, and of
low and mean Fortunes, should be chosen to that important Trust, we have all to
fear that is the natural Result of Weakness and Dependence.

Suffer me, upon this Occasion, to mind you of the Words of that great Man,
whose masterly Hand delineated the earthly Ruler in the bright Characters of
Gods Mr. Pemberton's Scrm. page, 196.
Elections, (said he) must not be made by personal Favor. None must be chosen,
nor overlooked, barely because they are not Friends to these, or Enemies to
those. Be not led in your Choice by secret Suggestions in a Corner, where one
Man may be ca^onized, and a better reprobated: but be governed by the known
Characters of Men, that are generally approved of. This was the ancient Rule,
take Men known among your Tribes, Ibid page 188.
The Rule of Elections many times is (...) serit, Capacity, and Integrity, but
some other Considerations, that rather argue Persons unfit, than qualified for
Service. Such, as have too much the command of the public Voice, will have
this Man preferred, because he is of the right Party, -- though wholly destitute
of Wisdom, Pro^ity, and a true Genius for Government. On the other side, this
and that Man must be laid aside, as unqualified, only because, -- he has not
just the same Set of Thoughts with some others, who would fain set up for the
first Ministers of State, and Masters of Policy: these despair to carry on
their own private, dark Designs by them; they cannot make them their Tools*
speak through them, and act by them. And by this Means it comes to pass the most
worthy are rejected, and not improved; while the unworthy, the weak, the halt
and blind are exalted. Thus he.

And may I add, if ever such an unhappy thing should happen, as that those, who
are entrusted with so great an Interest, and in which the Welfare of this
Country is so much concerned, should suffer themselves to be so much imposed
upon, as, instead of choosing the best and ablest Men, to attempt to weaken His
Majesty's Council, by calling to that honorable Board, Men utterly unqualified
for so high a Station, that they may be the more easily managed, be kept under
the Influence, and improved to promote the secret Designs, of those that
advanced them; FAREWELL THE GLORY OF NEW ENGLAND. For it would be next to
impossible that such should be able either to choose out a right Way for us, or
prevent the Designs of those that would lead us wrong; but either their
Weakness, and narrow contracted View of things, or their mean and low and
criminal Regards to them that set them up, and can pull them down, would expose
us to such rash and hasty Measures, which intri^guing Men may have on Foot, as
would render us obnoxious to the just Resentments of those we have our
Dependence on, and greatly ^ntangle and embarrass all our Affairs. And, besides
the ^ndignity and Affront to Majesty, to make mean Men its Companions, and
Children its Advisers, would it not be an (...) of the greatest Unrighteousness
to the Country, and have the most direct Tendency to unsettle the Government,
so to betray such an important Trust? Yea, what more severe Threatening has God
Himself denounced against a People, than that, I will give Children to be their
Princes, and Babes to rule over them? Isa. iii. 4.


That there has been a Struggle in the Country, for several Years, is too
evident to be denied. But I fear it would puzzle the ablest Head to give a good
Account of it, and say, for what we have spent so much Treasure, lost so much
Time, gained the Displeasure of our Superiors, and kindled ^^^isions among our
selves. What have we got; (...) are we in Pursuit of; that is equal to all
th^^? Have any of our essential Privileges, as Britains, or New^England Men,
been struck at? Blessed be God, and (...) to our gracious Sovereign, these
remain yet firm (...).

My Fathers, we be^e^ch you, suffer not a Party Cause to influence you this
Day; but dare to be true to your God, to your King, and to your Country, in
choosing such for his Majesty's Council, as both can, and will, support their
Character, answer to their Station, and approv^ themselves loyal to their
Sovereign, and faithful to the best Interests of their Country; that are Men of
too big Souls, and too strongly fortified with the steady Principles of
Righteousness, to be overawed by the Chair of State* or meanly model^ed by the
most leading among the Tribunes of the People. Ever be jealous of those that
are obstinate in Trifles. And look upon such as the most unfit to influence you
in your Choice, who can bid such open Defiance to Heaven, as, when they have in
a solemn Manner called upon the Ministers of the Lord to enquire of God on
their Behalf, to turn their Backs upon the religious Solemnities, and retire to
their ^^cret Chambers, to form a Party to accomplish their Designs Is it not
because there is not a God in Israel, that they go to enquire of the God of
Ekron?

How many solemn Warnings have, once and again, both formerly and lately, been
given, by the faithful Ministers of the Lord, against those things that have
the most melancholy Aspect upon us, and greatly threaten the Desolation of our
Country? And give me leave to address you in the Words of Jehosaphat, Hear me,
O Judah, and ye Inhabitants of Jerusalem, believe in the Lord your God, so
shall ye be established; believe His Prophets, so shall ye prosper. 2 C^ron.
xx. 20.


Forgive me, if I observe to you, that my greatest Fears arise from the
threatening Aspect the want of Righteousness has upon our Land.

As for that Unrighteousness which is to be observed in the Private Life, there
seems to be a Necessity of further Provision in the Law to prevent it. And
particularly, what we fear will be the Consequence of the public Notes being
called in, at their appointed Time, before particular Persons have discharged
their Obligations, arising upon them, seems to require timely Provision, to
guard against the Oppression and Injustice which, probably, will ensue. But
this has been set in so good a Light, and spoken to with such Cogency, by the
very Rev. Dr. COLMAN, in his late Discourse, preparatory to a Fast, that I
shall say nothing further concerning it.

As to public Righteousness, the Righteousness by which the Throne is
established, This has been set before this honorable Assembly; and it will now
lie, with those more especially concerned, to view over the Instances that have
been named, and see whether there is nothing that wants to be amended; and to
enter upon the Business of the Year with this first Act of Righteousness, an
unbiased Choice of his Majesty's honorable Council, that it may be a happy
Token of the Rectitude of the Administrations, throughout the whole of it.

O remember the awful Commination of God to his People of old, Isai. i. 21, 24*
How is the faithful City become an H^rlot? It was full of Judgment,
Righteousness lodged in it; but now, -- Therefore, faith the Lord, the Lord of
Hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah; I will ease me of mine Adversaries, and
avenge me of mine Enemies.

But surely, His Salvation is nigh unto them that fear Him, that Glory may
dwell in our Land: Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace
have embraced each other; Truth shall spring out of the Earth, and
Righteousness shall look down from Heaven; yea, the Lord shall give that which
is good, and our Land shall yield its Increase, Righteousness shall go before
him, and place our Feet in His Way Psalm. lxxxv. 9 --
Then shall thy Light break ^orth as the Morning, and thy Health shall spring
forth speedily; and thy Righteousness shall go before thee, and the Glory of
the Lord shall be thy Rereward Isai. lviii. 8.
: and for Brass I will bring Gold, and for Iron I will bring Silver; I will
also make thy Officers Peace, and thy Exactors Righteousness; Violence shall no
more be heard in thy Land, Wasting nor Destruction within thy Borders, but thou
shall call thy Walls Salvation, and thy Gates Praise Isai. lx. 17, 18.
: then shall they use this Speech in thy Land, and in the Cities thereof, Jer.
xxxi. 23.
(with which Benediction I conclude,) THE LORD BLESS THEE, O HABITATION OF
JUSTICE, AND MOUNTAIN OF HOLINESS.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 7. Mar. r. ii. 14. p. 11. Mar. for (...) p. 24. l. 9 r. none. p. 29. Mar.
l. ult. r. incurring. p. 33. l. 3. after for,. and their. p. 34. l. ult. add
the before ^^merous. p.42.l.23.r. Agents. l. ant^p. r. Religious. p. 48. l. 27.
r. fired.


