THE CHARGE OF The Honorable James De Lancey, Esqr. Chief (...) Province of
New York, TO The (...) Grand Jury for the City and County (...) ^^esday the
15th of October, 1734
The NAMES of the JURORS are as follow, viv.
James Roosevelt, Abraham Lynsen, John Groesbeck, Nathaniel Marst^^, jun. Peter
de Peyster, Banand Reynders, George Thomas, Stephen Cortland. Robert Wats,
Foreman, John Moore, David Clarkson, Enoch Stephenson, James Fauiezer, Abraham
Boelen, Anthony Duane, James Livingston,
Printed at the Request of the said GRAND-JURORS.
Gentlemen of the Grand Jury;
YOU are now met here for the Service of this City and County, and in order
that you may be better enabled to perform this Service, and discharge the Duty
inc^^^bent on you, I shall say something to you of the Oath you have taken, to
declare the Nature of it, and what is required thereby, at your hands, and then
I shall proceed to mention and explain to you some of the Offenses that are to
be the subject of your Enquiries.

Before I enter into the Particulars of your Oath, it may not, I think, be
improper to say something, in the first place, of the Nature of Oath^ in
general.

An Oath then is a Religious Asseveration, by which we either Renounce the
Mercy, or imprecate the Vengeance of Heaven, if we speak not the Truth. This
appears from the form of words in which it is expressed, to wit, So help you
God. This is looked upon as the most Sacred Tie, the strongest Band on Men's
Minds, the surest and best means to find out and discover the Truth; for it is
not to be imagined, though some few may possibly be found so hardened in sin,
that Men in general will be so daring as to appeal to the GOD of Infinite
Knowledge and Power, for the Truth of what they say, and yet Corruptly and
Wilfully Perjure themselves. Gods Infinite Knowledge must discern the Crime,
and by his Power he will certainly punish the Breach o^ his express Command
which he has given, Ye shall not Swear Falsely by my Name, Neither shall thou
Profane the Name of thy God, -- He that Swears unto his Neighbor, and
disappointeth him not, though it were to his own Hindrance, is part of the
Character of a Just Man, and one who should dwell in the Tabernacle of the
Lord, -- Even the Heathens have abhorred Perjury as an Odious Crime, looking on
it as the greatest Impiety toward their Gods, and a Dissolution of the
strongest Band of Human Society, of which many Instances might be given; but I
rather choose to exhort you to your Duty by Motives drawn from the Precepts of
the Law of GOD.

NOW, as to your OATH, the first Things required in it, are Diligence in your
Enquiries, and Truth in your Presentiments. You shall Diligently Enquire, and
True Presentment make. Diligence is to spur you on in finding out Offenders,
that their Crimes may be Detected, and that they may be brought to Condign
Punishment, according to their Demerits, and Truth is to be your Guide, the
Compass you are to steer by, that the Innocent be not called into Judgment, and
that the Guilty escape Not.

AND this Enquiry is to be of all such Matters as shall be given you in Charge,
or shall come to your Knowledge; for as you are chosen from the different Parts
of this City, it is to be presumed, that you must have heard of most Things
which happen within it.

NEXT follows, The King's Counsel, your Fellows and your Own, you shall keep
Secret. By the King's Counsel is to be understood the Evidence of the Witnesses
who are brought before you, which ought not to be disclosed by any of you, but
is to be kept Secret, and concealed from the Party concerned, and all others.
For, though possibly at this time there may not be sufficient Evidence against an
Offender, yet upon a farther Enquiry and Examination, a succeeding Grand Jury
may find Matter enough against him to ground an Indictment on; and therefore
the Particulars ought to be kept Secret, l^st the Discovery prove an Occasion
of the O^ escaping. As you are to keep the King's Counsel, so are you (...)
^ellows and your Own to keep Secret. You are Not to Reveal, for the same
Reasons, what has been (...) or Advised among your Selves; for besides the
Obligation of your Oath, it is an Offense punishable by Fine and Imprisonment,
for any of the Grand Jury to disclose the Persons Indicted, or the Evidence
against them.

THE Next thing considerable in your Oath is, The Temper of Mind you ought to
bear in all your Enquiries. You are not to suffer Malice or Ill Will so far to
prevail with you, as, without just Cause, to Present an Innocent Person,
neither ought Love, Fear, Favor, Affection, Reward or Hopes thereof, sway you
to leave any thing Unpresented; for your Oath ought to outweigh any
Considerations: And you ought to Present things Truly, as they come to your
Knowledge. Truth is the Rule you are to walk by, and is the most Essential part
of your Duty, and if of so much Consideration in the Service to which you are
now chosen, that it forms the Beginning and Conclusion of the Oath you have
taken. And all this that is required of you, is to be performed according to
the best of your Skill and Knowledge.

Now as some general Notion of what the Law declares to be Offenses, is
requisite to this End, it is the Office of Us who sit here, to assist and
direct you. And this leads me to mention some Particulars.

Gentlemen;

We commonly divide Offenses as they relate to the Persons against whom they
are committed; and they are said to be either against the Supreme Being, GOD,
or against MAN. As to Offenses against God, they may be considered under Two
Heads. They are either such as, although in themselves they are Crimes of the
deepest Dye, yet as they have not so direct a tendency, as some others, to
Subvert Civil Society, our Laws have not provided Punishments suitable to them,
but they are left to that Tribunal at which they are most properly Cognizable,
and to that Judge to whom Vengeance belongs. Or, Secondly, They are such as
at the same time that they are high Offenses against God have also an immediate
and manifest tendency to Overthrow the Peace and Des^^^ the Well-being of every
Community. The latter (Gentlemen) are the Object of Human Laws; Not that these
can add any weight or Authority to the Divine Law, but because Temporal
Punishments being nearer in view, are apt to work more strongly on weak and
inconsiderate Minds than the distant, though far greater Punishments of another
Life. Under this Head I think it not improper to place Perjury, or Breach of
Oath, which I touched before. This is a Crime of a most Odious and Detestable
Nature; it is the highest Indignity and Affront to God, and it loosens and
dissolves the Bands of Society; for if Men lay aside all respect to the
Obligation of an Oath, there must be an end of all Con^s of Judicature: We have
no other Mean to judge of Right or Wrong, Truth or Falsehood; nor any Security
left for our Lives, Liberties and Properties; All must run into Confusion, when
the Reverence for this Solemn Appeal to Almighty God is once extinguished in
Men's Minds. This cannot be too often ^nculcated, and requires your utmost
Diligence.

Offenses against Man, are of Two sorts, they are either more immediately
against the King, or more immediately against the Subject.

Offenses against the King more immediately, are High-Treasons are Misprisions
of Treasons. Under this Head I shall only mention are s^^t, and that is Levying
War against the King; and to this Purpose I shall read a Paragraph or two ^ut
of Howk^s's He^s of the Crown, Chapter of Treasons, Sect. 23, and 25. where
recounting what Acts shall be said to amount to a Levying of War against the
King, he says, That not only these who directly Rebel against the King, and
take up (...) ^c^ (...) him, but also in many other Cases, those who in a
Violent are I^ble Manner with-stand his Lawful Authority, or endeavor to
Reform his Government, are said to Levy War against him." And that "these also
who make an Insurrection in order to Redress a Public G^^^^ce, whether it be a
real or pretended One, end of their own Authority (...), with Force, to Redress
it, are said to Levy War against the King, although they have no direct Design
against his Person, ^^s^^th as they Insolently invade his Prerogative, by
Attempting to do that by Private Authority, which he ^y Public Justice ought
to do, which manifestly tends to a down right Rebellion. As where great Numbers
by ^^^ce Attempt to Remove certain Persons from the King, or to lay violent
Hands on a Privy Counselor, or to Revenge themselves against a Magistrate for
Executing ^^s Office, or to bring down the Price of Vic^als, or to Reform the
Law or Religion, or to pull down all B^^dy-Houses, or to Remove all Enclosures
in general, etc.

I Now Proceed to those Offenses more immediately against the Subject.

The highest of these is Petty Treason, which is, where a Wife Murders her
Husband, or a Servant his Master. Now because of the Obedience they owe, and
the Subjection they are under, respectively, the Law loo's upon this as a
higher Crime than any other Murder.

Next to Treasons are ^elonies. And herein, first, of Homicide, which is the
^^ling of a Man, ^s the word imports: Every ^cide is Voluntary or Involuntary.
Of Voluntary Homicides, the fast (...) Murder, which is the ^^l^mo^s killing of
another with Malice forethought; this is a very h^m^s Crime, and in the
Indictment is frequently and To be done by the Instigation of the ^vil, and as
Not having the Fear of God before his ^s. The Law of God says, Thou shall do no
Murder, and declares, Whosoever sh^dd^th Man's Blood, by Men shall his I leed be
shed: If one give another a Mortal Wound, whereof he dies within a year and a
Day, this is Murder, if done Maliciously. Of Malice there are Two sorts,
Express or employed. Express is, where it is known, and may be proved, that
there was a former G^u^ge, some pre^dent Ill Will between the Parties. Employed,
is, when one Man kills another without any (...) Provocation. And here it is
proper to observe, That No (...). No Words, No Language, though never so
Opprebious and (...) will justify or excuse Murder. If a Prisoner by the hard
Usage of the (...), come to an Un^^^ly End, it is Murder.

(...) ^r is another sort of Voluntary Homicide, as where two Men (...) of a
sudden, without any Malice prec^nt, and in the S^uffle one of their ^^^rn.

Of Homicide Involuntary, some are per Infortunium, i. e. by Mischance, as a
Man cutting down a Tree, which accidentally falls upon another, or the Ax flies
from the Helve and kills a stander by, this is Chance-medley, or Homicide by
Misadventure.

Some are of Necessity, and of several sorts; First, In Execution of Justice,
as an Officer that executes a Criminal in pursuance of a Judgment of a Court
that has legal Jurisdiction. Secondly, For Advancement of Justice, as where a
Sheriff is going to Arrest a Person indicted of Felony, he may justify the
Killing him, if he will not suffer himself to be Arrested, but defends himself,
so that the Officer cannot take him without killing him.

Some Homicides are justifiable, as if any Person Feloniously attempts to Rob
or Murder another in or near the Highway, which is a common Passage that ought
to be free and open to all Travelers, he may justify the killing him. The
same of an Attempt in the Night, to Rob a House; for a Man's House is his
Castle, and the Law allows him to Defend himself in it, se defendendo, for the
Killing a Man in the just Defense of Ones Self, is a Homicide Excuseable. This
is founded on a Primary Law of Nature, which teaches us to be watchful of our
own Preservation, and so excuses Resistance against an Unlawful Attempt on our
Lives. But herein the Law is very careful not to give way to the sheding of
Blood; for no one is excusable in this case, if he could by any means avoid it,
without endangering himself, and he is obliged by our Law to retire back to the
Wall, before he may make use of this Law of Self-Preservation, unless he be so
fiercely assaulted, that he cannot. This ought always to be done (...)
Moderamine inculputae tatelae, m^erly to preserve his own Life.

In all cases of Homicides, the Law chiefly respects the Intention; for
effectio tua nomen impo^^ operi^^^, i. e. The Intention give the Denomination
to every Action; and this is so much regarded by the Law, that Persons
incapable of any, can^ commit Murder, as a Madman, for no Action can be
imputed to him, or properly be called his, and the killing another is not
Felony in him, it is his Misfortune, and the Hand of God is upon him, but a Man
that is N^ compos mentis, i. e. of unsound Mind, his own Act, shall not be so
excused, as a Drunken Man, if he commits Murder, his incapacity of Mind shall
not avail him, because he brought it upon himself, it was his own Folly; and
therefore the Law will supply the Malice, and he shall be hanged; Omne Crimes
ebrietas et incendit et de^^t; i. e. Drunkenness enflames and discovers every
Crime; and no Man shall be allowed to excuse one Crime by another. These are
the several kinds of Homicides, some whereof induce Forfeiture of Life, (...)
and Goods, as Murder, s^m of Goods only, and are said in our (...), to be
excuseable, because they have their Pardon of course, as ^cide, in ones just
Defense, or by Misadventure; and some of neither, (...) are called Homicides
justifiable.

I shall speak next of Felonies against the Habitation or Dwelling of a Man,
the first of these is Burglary, which is, where one in the Night time breaks
and enters the Dwelling House of another, with intent to commit a Felony,
although he carries nothing away, yet it is Burglery; for as the Day is
designed for Man to Work and Labor, so is the Night for his Rest, to e^able
him the better to go through the Business of the Da^* and then the Law takes
his Goods into its more immediate Care and Protection, in order to their
greater Security: There must be a breaking; to take out a P^ne of Glass Window,
unlock the Door, draw the Latch, or make a hole in the Wall, these are all
Breakings. A Man lies in one part of the House, his Servant in another, and
between them there is a Door latch'd, and the Servant in the Night time draws
the Latch, and enters his Masters Chamber to Murder him, though he does not
effect it, yet it is Burglary. As there must be a breaking, so there must be an
entering: Stepping over the Threshold, putting in the Hand, or a Hook, or a
Pistol, within the Door or Window, all these the Law calls Entrings. A Thief
broke a Pane in a Glass-Window, and took our Goods with a Hook, this was found
to be Burglary. Several Men come to commit a Burglary, one breaks and enters,
the others stay at the Door, or at the Corner of the Street, to watch; they are
all guilty of Burglary: This by Law shall be adjudged the breaking and entering
of them all.

Arson is another Felony against the Habitation of a Man. If any do voluntarily
and maliciously burn the Dwelling House of another, this is called Arson, and
is Felony. One Maliciously burns his own House to the intent to burn another's,
if his own be only burnt, then it is a high Misdemeanor; if the others also,
then it is Felony.

The next Felony I shall mention, is Robbery, which is a Violent and Felonious
taking away from the Person of another, Money or Goods, to any Value, putting
him in fear. If a Thief, with or without a Weapon drawn, bid me deliver my
Purse, and I do it, it is a Taking sufficient to make it a Robbery. If a man
seeking to make his escape, cast his Purse into a Bush, or let his Hat fall
off, the Thief takes them up, it is Robbery. Taking in the Presence of the
Party, is, in Law, a Taking from the Person. If several come in Company
together to Rob, the one only actually does it, and the others are at some
distance, yet all are guilty of the Robbery.

These Felonies that I have mentioned, are called Mixed Larcenies. Simple
Larceny is the Felonious and Fraudulent taking away by any Person, of the the
mere Personal Goods of another, not from his Person, nor out of his House; if
this be above the Value of Twelve Pence, it is grand Larceny, if under, petty
Larceny, for which the offender shall be whipped. If two steal G^^ds to the Value
of Thirteen Pence, this is grand Larceny in both. If one Person at several
times, at one time steals four Pence, at another six Pence, at another three
Pence, from one Person, in all amounting to above twelve pence, it is said, all
these put together in one Indictment, amount to grand Larceny, and Judgment of
Death must be given, unless in cases where Clergy is not taken away.

Most of these Offenses that I have mentioned are Capital. I shall only take
Notice of one or two which are not Capital, and then dismiss you And first, of
Offenses which amount to an actual Breach of the Peace, they any of two kinds,
1st, Such as may be committed by one or two Persons. 2dly, Such as require a
greater Number. Of the first sort are Assaults and (...) these, if done to
Persons of Note, or may have any ill Conse^^^nces, are worthy of your Enquiry.
Of the second sort, are Riots and ^^^^^ful Assemblies. A Riot is, when three or
more Persons, do meet to do (...) unlawful Act of a private Nature, and
actually do it; for if it be of a Public Nature, it may amount to that species
of High Treason, I before mentioned; but if they meet and do it not, then it is
an unlawful Assembly.

Gentlemen, I shall conclude with reading a Paragraph or two out of the (...)
Book, concerning Libels; they are arrived to that height, that they (...) for
your Annimad version, it is high time to put a stop to them; (...) at the Rate
things are now carried on, when all Order and Go^^^ment is endeavored to be
Trampled on. Reflections are cast upon Per^^^ of all Degrees, must not these
things end in Sedition, if not timely (...) ^enty you have seen will not avail,
it becomes you then to (...) Offenders, that we may in a due course of Law be
enabled (...) if you, Gentlemen, do not interpose, consider whether (...) that
may arise from any Disturbances of the Public (...), may not, in part, lie at
your door?

Hawkings in his Chapter of Libels considers three Points, 1st, What shall be
said to be a Libel, 2dly, Who are liable to be punished for it. 3dly, In what
manner they are to be punish^d. Under the first, he says, Sect. 7. Nor can
there be any doubt, but that Writing which defames a private Person only, is as
much a Libel as that which defames Persons entrusted with a Public Capacity,
inasmuch as it manifestly tends to create all Blood, and to cause a Disturbance
of the public Peace; however, it is certain, that it is a very high
aggravation of a Libel, that it tends to scandalize the Government, by
reflecting on those who are entrusted with the Administration of public
Affairs, which does not only endanger the public Peace, as all other Libels
do, by stiring up the Parties immediately concerned in it, to acts of Revenge,
but also has a direct tendency to breed in the People a dislike of their
Governors, and incline them to Faction and Sedition. As to the second Point,
he says, Sect. 10. It is certain, not only be who composes or procures another
to compose it, but also that he who publishes, or procures another to publish
it, are in danger of being punished for it; And it is said, not to be material
whether he who disperses a Libel, knew any thing of the Contents or Effects of
it, or not; for nothing could be more easy than to publish the most Virulent
Papers with the greatest Security, if the concealing the purport of them from
an illiterate Publisher, would make him safe in the dispersing them. Also, it
has been said That if he who has either Read a Libel himself, or has heard
it Read by another, do afterward Maliciously Read or Repeat any part of it in
the presence of others, or lend or show it to another, he is guilty of an
Unlawful Publication of it. Also, it has been holden, that the Copying of a
Libel shall be a conclusive Evidence of the Publication of it, unless the Party
^n prove, that he delivered it to a Magistrate to examine it, in which case
(...) ^ubsiquent is said to explain the Intention precedent. But it seems to be
the better Opinion, That he who first writes a Libel, dictated by another, is
thereby guilty of making it, and consequently punishable for the bare Writing;
for it was no Libel till it was reduced to Writing.

Gentlemen,

You must have heard of two Scandalous Songs that are handed about, it is your
Duty to enquire the Author, Printer and Publisher of them. Someties heavy
half-witted Men get a knack of Rhyming, but it is time to break them of it,
when they grow Abusive, Insolent and Mischievous with it.

THESE (Gentlemen) are some of the Offenses which are to make Part of your
Enquiries, and if any other ^ould arise in the Course of your Proceedings, in
which you are at (...), or conceive any Doubts, upon your Application here, We
will ass^^ and direct you.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford in New York, 1734


