A Divine and Supernatural LIGHT, Immediately imparted to the Soul by the
SPIRIT of GOD, Shown to be both a Scriptural, and Rational DOCTRINE; In a
SERMON Preached at Northampton. And Published at the Desire of some of the
Hearers.

By Jonathan Edwards, A. M. Pastor of the Church there.

Job 28.20. -- Whence the^ comes wisdom? and where is the place of
understanding?

Prove. 2.6. The LORD gives wisdom.

Isa. 42.18. Look ye blind that ye may see.

2 Pet. 1.19. -- Until the day dawn and the day star arise in your hearts.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN.

M, DCC, XXXIV.

The PREFACE.
I A^^ sensible that ^y co^se^ing that the fol^lowing Discourse of (...) be
published, ^eeds Excuse; but yet (...) think it with the while for ^e, (...) to
excuse my self, by declaring how backward I was to is, and how much I was
urged, and that I was (...) with to do it, more to gratify others* and (...) at
promoting the Interest of Religion* and the Good of Souls, than by any thought
I had of any Honor that I should get by it: for such things, (...), ordinarily
make less Impression upon the ^eaders, to alter their thought of the Author,
and his (...), than the Authors generally think for. They at whose desire, and
upon whose Account chiefly, this Sermon i^ printed, are already acquainted with
the Circumstances of the Matter; and if any others should happen to see it, and
should think it worth their while to read i^, I shall only desire of them, that
they would put as favorable a Construction upon my herein appearing in Print,
as they can; and that they would read the following Discourse with Cando^r, and
without Prejudice against it, either from an Idea of the Author's Forwardness
and Ostentation, or the Unfashionableness of the Subject. As to you, that are
the People of the F^ock, of which CHRIST has called me to the Oversight, I
have no Reason to be jealous that you will have any Prejudice against this
Discourse, upon either of these mentioned Accounts, to stand in the way of your
duly weighing, and considering, and suitably entertaining the things treated of
in it. I have Reason to bless GOD, that there is a more happy Union between us,
than that you should be prejudiced against any thing of mine, because it is
mine; And however the subject is out of M^de in the World, it is doubtless your
peculiar Happiness, that you have been so thoroughly instructed in such like
Doctrines, even from your Beginning: and I rejoice in it, that Providence, in
this Day of Corruption and Confusion, has cast my Lo^ where such Doctrines,
that I look upon so much the Life and Glory of the Gospel, are not only o^n'd,
but where there are so many, in whom the Truth of them is so apparently
manifest, in their Experience, that any one who has had the Opportunity of
Acquaintance with them in such matters, tha^ I have had, must be very
unreasonable to doubt of it. It is pleasant to me to read discourses on such
Subjects, and to see such Doctrines well treated of in Books, but much more
pleasant, to see them clearly exemplified. If what is here offered to you*
shall be a means further to establish you in such Truths, and to make those
among you, that yet remain in spiritual Darkness and Blindness, sensible of
their Misery, and stir them up earnestly to seek after this spiritual and
divine Illumination; and shall be for the Comfort and Edification of those that
have Experienced it, I shall have great Reason to rejoice, and be thankful: and
I desire your earnest and continual Prayers for me, that I may be the
Instrument of much such Good to you, and Glory to GOD therein.

THE Reality of Spiritual Light.
MATTHEW XVI.17. And JESUS answered and said unto him, blessed art thou Simon
Barjona; for Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father
which is in Heaven.


CHRIST says these Words to Peter, upon Occasion of his professing his Faith in
him as the Son of GOD. Our Lord was enquiring of his Disciples, who Men said he
was; not that he needed to be informed, but only to introduce and give Occasion
to what follows. They answer, that some said he was John the Baptist, and some
Elias, and others Jeremias or one of the Prophets. When they (...) ^hus given
an Account, who others said (...) was, CHRIST asks them, who they said (...)
was. Simon Peter, whom we find always zealous and forward, was the first to
answer; be readily replied to the Question, Thou art CHRIST the Son of the
living GOD.

UPON this Occasion CHRIST says as he does to him and of him in the Text: In
which we may observe,

1. THAT Peter is pronounced blessed on this Account. Blessed art thou -- Thou
art an happy man, that thou art not ignorant of this, that I am CHRIST the Son
of the living GOD. Thou art distinguishingly happy. Others are blinded, and
have dark and deluded Apprehensions, as you have now given an Account, some
thinking that I am Elias, and some that I am Jeremias, and some one thing, and
some another; but none of them thinking right, all of them misled. Happy art
thou, that art so distinguished as to know the Truth in this Matter.

2. THE Evidence of this his Happiness declared; viz. That GOD and he only had
revealed it to him. This is an Evidence of his being blessed.

First, AS it shows how peculiarly favored he was of GOD, above others. q. d.
How highly favored art thou, that others that are wise and great Men, the
Scribes, Pha^isees, and Rulers, and the Nation in general, are left in
Darkness, to follow their own misguided Apprehensions, and that thou should
be singled out, as it were by Name, that my heavenly Father should thus set his
Love on thee (...) Bar-jona. This argues thee blessed, that thou should thus
be the Object of GOD's distinguishing Love.

Secondly, IT evidences his Blessedness also, as it intimates that this
Knowledge is above any that Flesh and Blood can reveal. This is such Knowledge as
my Father which in Heaven only can give: It is too high and excellent to be
communicated by such Means as other Knowledge is. Thou art blessed, that thou
know that which GOD alone can teach thee.

THE Original of this Knowledge is here declared; both negatively and
positively. Positively, as GOD is here declared the Author of it. Negatively,
as it is declared that Flesh and Blood had not revealed it. GOD is the Author of
all Knowledge and Understanding whatsoever: He is the Author of the Knowledge,
that is obtained by human Learning: He is the Author of all moral Prudence, and
of the Knowledge and Skill that Men have in their secular Business. Thus it is
said of all in Israel that were wise-hearted, and skilled in Embroidering, that
GOD had filled them with the spirit of Wisd^m. Exodus 28.3.

GOD is the Author of such Knowledge; but yet not so but that Flesh and Blood
reveals it. Mortal Men are capable of imparting the Knowledge of human Arts and
Sciences, and Skill in temporal Affairs. GOD is the Author of such Knowledge by
those Means: Flesh and Blood is made use of by GOD as the mediate or second
Cause of it; He conveys it by the Power and Influence of natural Means. But
this spiritual Knowledge, spoken of in the Text, is what GOD is the Author of,
and none else: He reveals it and Flesh and Blood reveals it not. He imparts
this Knowledge immediately, not making use of any intermediate natural Causes,
as he does in other Knowledge.

WHAT had passed in the preceding Discourse, naturally occasioned CHRIST to
observe this* because the Disciples had been telling, how others did not know
him, but were generally mistaken about him, and divided and confounded in their
Opinions of him: but Peter had declared his assured Faith that he was the Son
of GOD. Now it was natural to observe, how it was not Flesh and Blood, that had
revealed it to him, but GOD; for if this knowledge were dependent on natural
Causes or Means, how came it to pass that they, a Company of poor Fishermen,
illiterate Men, and Persons of low Education, attained to the knowledge of the
Truth; while the Scribes and Pharisees, Men of vastly higher advantages, and
greater knowledge and sagacity in other matters, remained in Ignorance? This
could be owing only to the gracious distinguishing Influence and Revelation of
the SPIRIT of GOD. Hence, what I would make the Subject of my present Discourse
from these Words, is this

DOCTRINE, viz. That there is such a thing, as A SPIRITUAL and DIVINE LIGHT,
immediately imparted to the S^ul by GOD, of a different Nature from any that is
obtained by natural Means.

IN what I say on this Subject at this Time, would

I. SHOW what this divine Light is.

II. HOW it is given Immediately by GOD, and not obtained by natural Means.

III. SHOW the Truth of the Doctrine.

AND then conclude with a brief Improvement.

1. I would show what this spiritual and divine Light is. And in order to it
would show,

First, IN a few things what it is not. And here,

1. THOSE Convictions that natural Men may have of their Sin and Misery is not
this spiritual and divine Light. Men in a natural Condition may have
Convictions of the Guilt that lies upon them, and of the anger of GOD, and
their Danger of divine Vengeance. Such Convictions are from Light or
Sensibleness of Truth: that some Sinners have a greater Conviction of their
Guilt and Misery than others, is because some have more Light, or more of an
Apprehension of Truth, than others. And this Light and Conviction may be from
the Spirit of GOD; the SPIRIT convinces Men of Sin: but yet nature is much more
concerned in it than in the Communication of that spiritual and divine Light,
that is spoken of in the Doctrine; it is from the Spirit of GOD only as
assisting natural Principles, and not as infusing any new Principles. Common
Grace differs from special, in that it influences only by assisting of Nature;
and no^ by imparting Grace, or bestowing any thing above Nature. The Light that
is obtained, is wholly natural, or of no superior Kind to what mere Nature
attains to; though more of that kind be obtained, than would be obtained if Men
were left wholly to themselves. Or in other Words, Common Grace only assists
the Faculties of the Soul to do that more fully, which they do by Nature; as
natural Conscience, or Reason, will by mere Nature make a Man sensible of
Guilt, and will accuse and condemn him when he has done amiss. Conscience is a
Principle natural to Men; and the Work that it does naturally, or of it self,
is to give an Apprehension of right and wrong; and to suggest to the Mind the
Relation that there is between right and wrong, and a Retribution. The Spirit
of GOD, in those Convictions which unregenerate Men sometimes have, assists
Conscience to do this Work in a further Degree, than it would do if they were
left to themselves: He helps it against those Things that tend to stupify it,
and obstruct its Exercise. But in the renewing and sanctifying work of the HOLY
GHOST, those things are wrought in the Soul that are above Nature; and of which
the^e is nothing of the like kind in the Soul by Nature* and they are caused to
exist in the Soul h^^^^ually, and according to such a stated Constitution or
Law, that lays such a Foundation for E^^^cises in a continued Course, as is
called a (...) of nature. Not only are remain^ng Princi^^^ (...) to do their
work more freely (...) but those Principles are restored that were utterly
destroyed by the Fall; and the mind thence-forward habitually exerts those acts
that the Dominion of Sin had made it as wholly destitute of, as a dead Body is
of vital Acts.

THE Spirit of GOD acts in a very different manner in the one Case, from what
he does in the other. He may indeed act upon the Mind of a natural Man; but he
acts in the Mind of a Saint as an indwelling vital Principle. He acts upon the
Mind of an unregenerate Person as an extrinsick occasional Agent; for in acting
upon them he does not unite himself to them; for notwithstanding all his
Influences that they may be the Subjects of, they ^re still sensual having not
the Spirit. Jude 19^^* But he unites himself with the Mind of a Sa^^, takes him
for his Temple, actuates and influences him as a new, supernatural Principle of
Life and Action. There is this Difference; that the Spirit of GOD in acting in
the Soul of a Godly Man, exerts and communicates himself there in his own
proper Nature. Holiness is the proper Nature of the Spirit of GOD. The HOLY
SPIRIT operates in the Minds of the Godly, by uniting himself to them, and
living in them, and exerting his own Nature in the Exercise of their Faculties.
The Spirit of GOD may act upon a Creature, and yet not, in acting communicate
himself. The Spirit of GOD may act upon inanimate Creatures; as the Spirit
moved upon the Face of the Waters, in the Beginning of the Creation: So the
Spirit of GOD may act upon the minds of Men, many ways, and communicate himself
no more than when he acts upon an inanimate Creature. For Instance. He may
excite Thoughts in them, may assist their natural Reason and Understanding, or
may assist other natural Principles, and this without any Union with the Soul,
but may act, as it were, as upon an external Object. But as he acts in his holy
Influences, and spiritual Operations, he acts in a way of peculiar
Communication of himself; so that the Subject is thence denominated Spiritual.

2 THIS spiritual and divine Light don't consist in any Impression made upon
the Imagination. It Is no Impression upon the Mind, as though one saw any thing
with the bodily Eyes: It Is no Imagination or Idea of an outward Light or Glory,
or any Beauty of Form or Countenance, or a visible Luster or Brightness of any
Object. The Imagination may be strongly impressed with such things; but this is
not spiritual Light. Indeed when the Mind has a lively Discovery of spiritual
things, and is greatly affected by the Power of divine Light, it may, and
probably very commonly does, much affect the Imagination: So that Impressions
of an outward Beauty or Brightness, may accompany those spiritual Discoveries.
But spiritual Light is not that Impression upon the Imagination, but an
exceeding different thing from it. Natural Men may have lively Impressions on
their Imaginations; and we cant determine but that the Devil, who transforms
himself into an Angel of Light, may cause Imaginations of an outward Beauty, or
visible Glory, and of Sounds and Speeches, and other such Things; but these are
Things of a vastly inferior Nature to Spiritual Light.

3. THIS spiritual Light is not the suggesting of any new Truths, or
Propositions not contained in the Word of GOD. This suggesting of new Truths or
Doctrines to the Mind, independent of any antecedent Revelation of those
Propositions, either in Word or Writing, is Inspiration; such as the Prophets
and Apostles had, and such as some Enthusiasts pretend to. But this spiritual
Light that I am speaking of, is quite a different thing from Inspiration: It
reveals no new Doctrine, it suggests no new Proposition to the Mind, it teaches
no new thing of GOD, or CHRIST, or another World, not taught in the Bible; but
only gives a due Apprehension of those things that are taught in the word of
GOD.

4. IT IS not every affecting View that Men have of the Things of Religion, that
is this spiritual and divine Light. Men by mere Principles of Nature are
capable of being affected with Things that have a special Relation to Religion,
as well as other Things. A Person by mere Nature, for Instance, may be liable
to be affected with the Story of JESUS CHRIST, and the sufferings he underwent,
as well as by any other tragical Story: He may be the more affected with it
from the Interest he conceives Mankind to have in it: Yea he may be affected
with it without believing it; as well as a Man may be affected with what he
reads in a Romance, or see's acted in a Stage Play. He may be affected with a
lively and eloquent description of many pleasant things that attend the state
of the Blessed in Heaven; as well as his Imagination be entertained by a
romantic description of the pleasantness of Fairy Land, or the like. And that
common belief of the truth of the things of Religion, that Persons may have
from Education, or otherwise, may help forward their affection. We read in
Scripture of many that were greatly affected with things of a religious nature,
who yet are there represented as wholly graceless, and many of them very ill
Men. A Person therefore may have affecting views of the things of Religion, and
yet be very destitute of spiritual Light. Flesh and Blood may be the Author of
this: One Man may give another an affecting view of divine things with but
common assistance; but GOD alone can give a spiritual Discovery of them.

BUT I proceed to show,

Secondly, Positively, WHAT this spiritual and divine Light is.

AND it may be thus described, A true sense of the divine Excellency of the
things revealed in the Word of GOD, and a conviction of the truth and reality
of them, thence arising.

THIS spiritual Light primarily consists in the former of these, viz. a real
sense and apprehension of the divine Excellency of things revealed in the Word
of GOD. A spiritual and saving Conviction of the truth and reality of these
things, arises from such a sight of their divine Excellency and Glory, so that
this Conviction of their truth is an effect and natural consequence of this
sight of their divine Glory. There is therefore in this spiritual Light,

1. A true sense of the divine and superlative excellency of the things of
Religion; a real sense of the excellency of GOD, and JESUS CHRIST, and of the
work of Redemption, and the ways and works of GOD revealed in the Gospel. There
is a divine and superlative Glory in these things; an Excellency that is of a
vastly higher Kind, and more sublime Nature, than in other things; a Glory
greatly distinguishing them from all that is earthly and temporal. He that is
spiritually enlightened truly apprehends and sees it, or has a sense of it. He
don't merely rationally believe that GOD is Glorious, but he has a sense of the
Gloriousness of GOD in his Heart. There is not only a rational belief that GOD
is holy, and that Holiness is a good thing; but there is a sense of the
Loveliness of GOD's Holiness. There is not only a speculatively judging that
GOD is gracious, but a sense how amiable GOD is upon that Account; or a sense
of the Beauty of this divine Attribute.

THERE is a twofold Understanding or Knowledge of Good, that GOD has made the
Mind of Man capable of. The First, that which is merely speculative or
n^ti^nal* As when a Person only speculatively judges, that any thing is, which
by the Agreement of Mankind, is called Good or Excellent, viz. that which is
most to general Advantage, and between which and a Reward there is a
suitableness; and the like. And the other is that which consists in the sense
of the Heart: As when there is a sense of the Beauty, Amiableness, or Sweetness
of a thing; so that the Heart is sensible of Pleasure and Delight in the
presence of the Idea of it. In the former is exercised merely the speculative
Faculty, or the Understanding strictly so called, or as spoken of in
Distinction from the Will or Disposition of the Soul. In the latter the Will,
or Inclination, or Heart, are mainly concerned.

THUS there is a Difference between having an Opini^n that GOD is holy and
gracious, and having a sense of the Loveliness and Beauty of that Holiness and
Grace. There is a Difference between having a rational Judgment that Honey is
sweet, and having a (...) of its sweetness. A Man may have the (...), that
knows not how Honey tastes; but a M^n cannot have the Latter, unless he has an
Idea of the taste of Honey in his Mind. So there is a difference between
believing that a Person is Beautiful, and having a sense of his Beauty. The
Former may be obtained by hearsay, but the Latter only by seeing the
Coun^enance. There is a wide difference between mere speculative, rational
Judging any thing to be excellent, and having a sense of its Sweetness, and
Beauty. The F^rmer rests only in the Head, Speculation only is concerned in it;
but the Heart is concerned in the Latter. When the Heart is sensible of the
Beauty and Amiableness of a Thing, it necessarily feels Pleasure in the
Apprehension. It is implied in a Persons being heartily sensible of the
Loveliness of a thing, that the Idea of it is sweet and pleasant to his Soul;
which is a far different thing from having a rational Opinion that it is
excellent.

2. THERE arises from this sense of divine Excellency of Things contained in
the Word of GOD, a Conviction of the Truth and Reality of them: and that either
indirectly, or directly.

First, Indirectly, and that two ways.

1. AS the Prejudices that are in the Heart, against the truth of divine
things, are hereby rem^ved; so that the Mind becomes susceptive of the (...)
F^rce of rational Arguments f^r their Truth. The Mind of Man is naturally full
of Prejudices against the Truth of divine Things: It is full of Enmity against
the Doctrines of the Gospel; which is a disadvantage to those Arguments that
prove their Truth, and causes them to lose their Force upon the Mind. But when
a Person has discovered to him the divine excellency of Christian Doctrines,
this destroys the Enmity, removes those Prejudices, and sanctifys the Reason,
and causes it to lie open to the Force of Arguments for their Truth.

HENCE was the different Effect that CHRIST's Miracles had to convince the
Disciples, from what they had to convince the Sc^^bes and Pharisees. Not that
they had a stronger Reason, or had their Reason more improved; but their Reason
was sanctified, and those blinding Prejudices, that the Scribes and Pharisees
were under, were removed by the sense they had of the Excellency of CHRIST, and
his Doctrine.

2. IT not only removes the Hindrances of Reason, but p^sitively helps Reason.
It makes even the speculative Notions the more lively. It engages the attention
of the Mind, with the more Fixedness and Intenseness to that Kind of Objects;
which causes it to have a clearer View of them, and enables it more clearly to
see their mutual Relations, and occasions it to take more Notice of them. The
Ideas themselves that otherwise are dim, and obscure, are by this Means
impressed with the greater Strength, and have a Light cast upon them; so that
the Mind can better judge of them. As he that beholds the Objects on the Face
of the Ear^^, when the Light of the Sun is ^ast upon them, is under greater
Advantage to ^iscern them in their true Forms, and mutual Relations, than he
that sees them in a dim Starlight or Twilight.

The Mind having a sensibleness of the Excellency of divine Objects, dwells
upon them with Delight; and the Powers of the Soul are more awakened, and
enlivened to employ themselves in the Contemplation of them, and exert
themselves more fully and much more to Purpose. The Beauty and Sweetness of the
Objects draws on the Faculties, and draws forth their Exercises: So that Reason
it self is under far greater Advantages for its proper and free Exercises, and
to attain its proper End, free of Darkness and Delusion. But,

Secondly, A true sense of the divine Excellency of the Things of GOD's Word
does more directly and immediately convince of the Truth of them; And that
because the Excellency of these Things is so superlative. There is a Beauty in
them that is so divine and Godlike, that is greatly and evidently
distinguishing of them from things merely human, or that Men are the Inventors
and Authors of; a Glory that is so high and great, that when clearly seen,
commands Assent to their Divinity, and Reality. When there is an actual and
lively Discovery of this Beauty and Excellency, it will not allow of any such
Thought as that it is an human Work, or the Fruit of Men's Invention. This
Evidence, that they, that are spiritually enlightened, have of the Truth of the
things of Religion, is a Kind of intuitive and immediate Evidence. They believe
the Doctrines of GOD's Word to be divine, because they see Divinity in them, i.
e. They see a divine, and transcendent, and most evidently distinguishing Glory
in them; such a Glory as, if clearly seen, don't leave Room to doubt of their
being of GOD, and not of Men.

SUCH a Conviction of the Truth of Religion as this, arising, these Ways, from
a sense of the divine Excellency of them, is that true spiritual Conviction,
that there is in saving Faith. And this Original of it, is that by which it is
most essentially distinguished from that common assent, which unregenerate Men
are capable of.

II. I Proceed now to the second Thing proposed, viz. To show how this Light is
Immediately given by GOD, and not obtained by natural Means. And here,

1. IT IS not intended that the natural Faculties are not made Use of in it. The
natural Faculties are the Subject of this Light: And they are the Subject in
such a Manner, that they are not merely pasive, but active in it; the Acts and
Exercises of Man's Understanding are concerned and made use of in it. GOD in
letting in this Light into the Soul, deals with Man according to his Nature, or
as a rational Creature; and makes Use of his human Faculties. But yet this
Light is not the less immediately from GOD for that; though the Faculties are
made Use of, it is as the Subject and not as the Cause; and that acting of the
Faculties in it, is not the Cause, but is either implied in the Thing it self,
(in the Light that is imparted) or is the Consequence of it. As the Use that we
make of our Eyes in beholding various Objects, when the Sun arises, is not the
Cause of the Light that discovers those Objects to us.

2. IT IS not intended that outward Means have no Concern in this Affair. As I
have observed already, it is not in this Affair, as it is in Inspiration, where
new Truths are suggested: for here is by this Light only given a due
Apprehension of the same Truths that are revealed in the Word of GOD; and
therefore it is not given without the Word. The Gospel is made Use of in this
Affair: This Light is the Light of the Glorious Gospel of CHRIST 2. Cor. 4.4.
The Gospel is as a Glass, by which this Light is conveyed to us. 1 Cor. 13.12.
Now we see through a Glass -- But,

3. WHEN it is said that this Light is given immediately by GOD, and not
obtained by natural Means, hereby is intended, that it is given by GOD without
making Use of any Means that operate by their own Power, or a natural Force.
GOD makes Use of Means; but it is not as mediate Causes to produce this Effect.
There are not truly any second Causes of it; but it is produced by GOD
immediately. The Word of GOD is no proper Cause of this Effect: It don't
operate by any natural Force in it. The Word of GOD is only made Use of to
convey to the Mind the Subject matter of this saving Instruction: And this
indeed it does convey to us by natural Force or Influence. It conveys to our
Minds these and those Doctrines; it is the Cause of the Notion of them in our
Heads, but not of the sense of the divine Excellency of them in our Hearts.
Indeed a Person cannot have spiritual Light without the Word. But that don't
argue, that the Word properly causes that Light. The Mind cannot see the
Excellency of any Doctrine, unless that Doctrine be first in the Mind; but the
seeing the Excellency of the Doctrine may be immediately from the Spirit of
GOD* though the conveying of the Doctrine or Proposition it self may be by the
Word. So that the Notions that are the Subject matter of this Light, are
conveyed to the Mind by the Word of GOD; but that due sense of the Heart,
wherein this Light formally consists, is immediately by the Spirit of GOD. As
for Instance, that Notion that there is a CHRIST, and that CHRIST is holy and
gracious, is conveyed to the Mind by the Word of GOD: But the sense of the
Excellency of CHRIST by reason of that Holiness and Grace, is nevertheless
immediately the Work of the HOLY SPIRIT. I come now,

III TO show the Truth of the Doctrine; that is to show that there is such a
Thing as that spiritual Light that has been described, thus immediately let
into the Mind by GOD. And here I would show briefly, that this Doctrine is both
scriptural, and rational.

First, IT IS SCRIPTURAL. My Text is not only full to the Purpose, but it is a
Doctrine that the Scripture abounds in. We are there abundantly taught, that
the Saints differ from the Ungodly in this, that they have the Knowledge of GOD,
and a sigh^ of GOD, and of JESUS CHRIST. I shall mention but sew Texts of many;
1 John 3.6. Whosoever sins has not seen him, nor known him. 3 John 11. He
that does Good, is of GOD; but he that does Evil, has not seen GOD. John
14.19. Th^^ world sees me no more; but ye see me. John 17.3. And this is
Eternal Life, that they might know thee, the only true GOD, and JESUS CHRIST
whom thou have sent. This Knowledge, or sight of GOD and CHRIST, cannot be a mere
speculative Knowledge; because it is spoken of as a seeing and knowing, wherein
they differ from the Ungodly. And by these Scriptures it must not only be a
different Knowledge in Degree and Circumstances, and different in its Effects;
but it must be entirely different in Nature and Kind.

AND this Light and Knowledge is always spoken of as immediately given of GOD
Mat. 11.25, 26, 27. At that time JESUS answered and said, I thank thee O Father
Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes; even so Father, for so it seemed
good in thy sight. All things are delivered unto me of my Father; and no Man
knows the Son but the Father; neither knows any Man the Father, save the
Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Here this Effect is ascribed
alone to the arbitrary Operation, and Gift of GOD, bestowing this Knowledge on
whom he will, and distinguishing those with it, that have the least natural
Advantage or Means for Knowledge, even Babes, when it is denied to the Wise and
Prudent. And the imparting the Knowledge of GOD is here appropriated to the Son
of GOD, as his sole Prerogative. And again, 2 Cor. 4.6. For GOD who commanded
the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give the
Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of GOD in the Fac^ of JESUS CHRIST. This
plainly shows, that there is such a thing as a discovery of the divine
superlative Glory and Excellency of GOD and CHRIST; and that peculiar to the
Saints: and also that it is as immediately from GOD, as Light from the Sun: and
that it is the immediate Effect of his Power and Will, for it is compared to
GOD's creating the Light by his powerful Word in the beginning of the Creation;
and is said to be by the Spirit of the LORD, in the eighteenth verse of the
preceding Chapter. GOD is spoken of as giving the Knowledge of CHRIST in
Conversion, as of what before was hidden and unseen in that Gal. 1.15, 16. But
when it pleased GOD, who separated me from my Mothers Womb, and called me by
his Grace, to reveal his Son in me --. The Scripture also speaks plainly of
such a Knowledge of the Word of GOD, as has been described, as the immediate
gift of GOD Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine Eyes, that I may behold wondrous
things out of thy Law. What could the Psalmist mean, when he begged of GOD to
open his Eyes? was he ever blind? might he not have Resort to the Law and see
every Word and Sentence in it when he pleased? And what could he mean by those
w^ndrous Things? was it the wonderful Stories of the Creation, and Deluge, and
Israel's passing through the red Sea, and the like? were not his Eyes open to
read these strange things when he would? Doubtless by wondrous Things in GOD's
Law, he had Respect to those distinguishing and wonderful Excellencies, and
marvel us Manifestations of the divine Perfections, and Glory, that there was
in the Commands and Doctrines of the Word, and those Works and Counsels of GOD
that were there revealed. So the Scripture speaks of a Knowledge of GOD's
Dispensation, and Covenant of Mercy, and Way of Grace toward his People, as
peculiar to the Saints, and given only by GOD, Psalm. 25.14. The Secret of the
LORD is with them that fear him; and he will show them his Covenant.

AND that a true and saving Belief of the Truth of Religion is that which
arises from such a Discovery, is also what the Scripture teaches. As John 6.40.
And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one that SEES the Son,
and BELIEVES on him, may have everlasting Life. Where it is plain that a true
Faith is what arises from a spiritual sight of CHRIST. And John 17.6, 7, 8. I
have manifested thy Name unto the Men which then gave me out of the World --.
Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou have given me, are of thee;
for I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have
received them, and known surely that I came out from thee, and they have
believed that thou did send me. Where CHRIST's manifesting GOD's Name to the
Disciples, or giving them the Knowledge of God, was that whereby they knew that
CHRIST's Doctrine was of GOD, and that CHRIST himself was of him, proceeded
from him, and was sent by him. Again John 12.44, 45, 46 JESUS cried and sai^,
^e that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me; and be
that sees me sees him that sent me. (...) a Light into the World, that
whosoever Believes ^n me should not abide in Darkness. There Believing in
CHRIST and spiritually Seeing him, are spoken of as running parallel.

CHRIST condemns the Jews, that they did not know that he was the MESSIAH, and
that his Doctrine was true, from an inward distinguishing Taste and Relish of
what was divine, in Luke 12 56, 57. He having there blamed the Jews, that
though they (...) discern the Face of the Sky and of the Earth, and Signs of
the Weather, that yet they could not discern those Times; or as it is expr^^sed
in Matthew, the Signs of those Times; He (...), yea and why even of your own
selves, judge (...) not what is right? i. e. without extrinsick Signs. Why have
ye not that sense of true Excellency, whereby ye may distinguish that which is
holy and divine? Why have ye not that savor of the things of GOD, by which you
may see the distinguishing Glory, and evident Divinity of me and my Doctrine?

THE Apostle Peter mentions it as what gave them (the Apostles,) good and well
grounded Assurance of the Truth of the Gospel, that they had seen the divine
Glory of CHRIST. 2. Pet. 1.16. For we have not f^ll^wed cunningly devised
Fables, when we made known unto you, the Power and Coming of ^ur Lord JESUS
CHRIST, but were Eyewitnesses of his Majesty. The Apostle has Respect to that
visible Glory of CHRIST which they saw in his Transfiguration: That Glory was
so divine having such an ineffable Appearance and semblance of divine Holiness,
Majesty, and Grace, that it evidently denoted him to be a divine Person. But if
a sight of CHRIST's outward Glory might give a rational Assurance of his
Divinity, why may not an Apprehension of his spiritual Glory do so too.
Doubtless CHRIST's sp^ritual Glory is in itself as distinguishing, and as
plainly showing his Divinity, as his outward Glory; and a great deal more: for
his spiritual Glory is that wherein his Divinity consists; and the outward
Glory of his Transfiguration showed him to be divine, only as it was a
Remarkable Image or Representation of that spiritual Glory. Doubtless therefore
he that has had a clear sight of the spiritual Glory of CHRIST, may say, I have
not followed cunningly devised Fables, but have been an Eyewitness of his
Majesty, upon as good Grounds as the Apostle, when he had Respect to the
outward Glory of Christ, that he had seen. But this brings me to what was
proposed next viz. to show that,

Secondly, THIS Doctrine is RATIONAL.

1. IT IS rational to suppose that there is really such an Excellency in divine
things, that is so transcendent and exceedingly different from what is in other
things, that if it were seen would most evidently distinguish them. We cannot
rationally doubt but that Things that are divine, that appertain to the supreme
Being, are vastly different from Things that are human; that there is that
Godlike, high, and glorious Excellency in them, that does most remarkably
difference them from the things that are of Men; insomuch that if the
difference were but seen, it would have a convincing, satisfying influence upon
any one, that they are what they are, viz. divine. What Reason can be offered
against it? Unless we would argue that GOD is not remarkably distinguished in
(...) from Men.

IF CHRIST should now appear to any One, as he did on the Mount at his
Transfiguration; or if he should appear to the World in the Glory that he now
appears in in Heaven, as he will do at the Day of Judgment; without doubt, the
Glory and Majesty that he would appear in, would be such as would satisfy every
One, that he was a divine Person, and that Religion was true: And it would be a
most reasonable, and well grounded Conviction too. And why may there not be
that Stamp of Divinity, or divine Glory on the word of GOD, on the Scheme and
Doctrine of the Gospel, that may be in like manner distinguishing and as
rationally convincing, provided it be but seen? It Is rational to suppose, that
when GOD speaks to the World, there should be something in his Word or Speech
vastly different from Men's Word. Supposing that GOD never had spoken to the
World, but we had Notice that He was about to do it; that he was about to
Reveal himself from Heaven, and speak to us immediately himself, in divine
Speeches or Discourses, as it were from his own Mouth; or that he should give
us a Book of his own inditing; after what manner should we expect that he would
speak? Would it not be rational to suppose, that his Speech would be exceeding
different from Men's Speech, that he should speak like a GOD; that is, that
there should be such an Excellency and sublimity in his Speech or Word, such a
Stamp of Wisdom, Holiness, Majesty, and other divine Perfections, that the word
of Men, yea of the wisest of Men, should appear mean and base in Comparison of
it? Doubtless it would be thought rational to expect this, and unreasonable to
think otherwise. When a wise Man speaks in the Exercise of his Wisdom, there is
something in every thing he says, that is very distinguishable from the Talk of
a little Child. So, without doubt, and much more, is the Speech of GOD, (if
there be any such Thing as the Speech of GOD,) to be distinguished from that of
the wisest of Men; agreeable to Jer. 23.28, 29. GOD having there been reproving
the false Prophets that prophesied in his Name, and pretended that what they
spoke was his Word, when indeed it was their own Word, says, The Prophet that
has a Dream, let him tell a Dream; and he that has my Word, let him speak my
Word faithfully: WHAT IS THE CHAFF TO THE WHEAT? Says the LORD. Is not my Word
like as a Fire, says the LORD, and like a Hammer that breaks the Rock in
Pieces?

2. IF there be such a distinguishing Excellency in divine things; it is
rational to suppose that there may be such a thing as seeing it. What should
hinder but that it may be seen? It Is no Argument that there is no such Thing as
such a distinguishing Excellency, or that, if there be, that it cannot be seen,
that some don't see it; though they may be discerning Men in temporal Matters. It
is not rational to suppose, if there be any such Excellency in divine Things,
that wicked Men should see it. It Is not rational to suppose, that those whose
Minds are full of spiritual Pollution, and under the Power of filthy Lusts,
should have any Relish or Sense of divine Beauty, or Excellency; or that their
Minds should be susceptive of that Light that is in its own Nature so pure and
heavenly. It need not seem at all strange, that Sin should so blind the Mind,
seeing that Men's particular natural Tempers and Dispositions will so much blind
them in secular Matters; as when Men's natural Temper is melancholy, jealous,
fearful, proud, or the like.

3. IT IS rational to supp^se that this Knowledge should be given immediately by
GOD, and not be obtained by natural means. Upon what account should it seem
unreasonable, that there should be any immediate Communication between GOD and
the Creature? It Is strange that Men should make any matter of difficulty of it.
Why should not He that made all things, still have something immediately to do
with the Things that he has made? Where lies the great difficulty, if we own
the B^^ng of a GOD, and that he created all things out of Nothing, of allowing
some immediate Influence of GOD on the Creation still. And if it be reasonable
to suppose it with Respect to any Part of the Creation, it is Especially so with
Respect to reasonable intelligent Creatures; who are next to GOD in the
Gradation of the different Orders of Beings, and whose Business is most
immediately with GOD; who were made on Purpose for those Exercises that do
respect God, and wherein they have nextly to do with God: for Reason teaches
that Man was made to serve and glorify his Creator. And if it be rational to
suppose that GOD immediately communicates himself to Man in any Affair, it is
in this. It Is rational to suppose that GOD would reserve that Knowledge and
Wisdom, that is of such a divine and excellent Nature, to be bestowed
immediately by himself, and that it should not be left in the Power of second
Causes. Spiritual Wisdom and Grace is the highest and most excellent Gift that
ever GOD bestows on any Creature: In this the highest Excellency and Perfection
of a rational Creature consists. It Is also immensely the most important of all
divine Gifts: It Is that wherein Man's Happiness consists, and on which his
everlasting Welfare depends. How rational is it to suppose that GOD, however he
has left meaner Goods and lower Gifts to second Causes, and in some sort in
their Power, yet should reserve this most excellent, divine, and important of
all divine Communications, in his own Hands, to be bestowed immediately by
himself, as a thing too great for second Causes to be concerned in? It Is
rational to suppose that this B^^^ting should be immediately from GOD; for
there is no (...) or Benefit that is in it self so nearly related to the divine
Nature, there is nothing the Creature receives that is so much of GOD, of his
Nature, so much a Participation of the Deity: It Is a Kind of Emanation of GOD's
Beauty, and is related to GOD as the Light is to the Sun. It Is therefore
congruous and fit that when it is given of GOD, it should be nextly from
himself, and by himself, according to his own Sovereign Will.

IT IS rational to suppose, that it should be beyond a Man's Power ^o obtain
this Knowledge, and Light, by the ^^eer Strength of natural Reason; for it is not
a Thing that belongs to Reason, to see the Beauty and Loveliness of spiritual
things; it is not a speculative thing, but depends on the Sense of the Heart.
Reason indeed is necessary in order to it, as it is by Reason only that we are
become the Subjects of the means of it; which means I have already shown to be
necessary in order to it, though they have no proper causal Influence in the
Affair. It Is by Reason, that we become possessed of a notion of those Doctrines
that are the Subject Matter of this divine Light; and Reason may many ways be
indirectly, and remotely an Advantage to it. And Reason has also to do in the
Acts that are immediately consequent on this Discovery: A seeing the Truth of
Religion from hence, is by Reason; though it be but by one step, and the
Inference be immediate. So Reason has to do in that accepting of, and trusting
in CHRIST, that is consequent on it. But if we take Reason strictly, no^ for
the Faculty of mental Perception in general, but for Ratiocination, or a Power
of Inferring by Arguments; I say if we take Reason thus, the perceiving of
spiritual Beauty and Excellency no more belongs to Reason, than it belongs to
the Sense of feeling to perceive Colors, or to the Power of seeing to perceive
the Sweetness of Food. It is out of Reason's Province to perceive the Beauty or
Loveliness of any thing: Such a Perception don't belong to that Faculty.
Reason's Work is to perceive Truth, and not Excellency. It Is not Ratiociation
that gives Men the Perception of the Beauty and Amiableness of a Countenance;
though it may be many ways indirectly an advantage to it; yet it is no more Reason
that immediately perceives it, than it is Reason that perceives the Sweetness
of Honey: It depends on the Sense of the Heart. Reason may determine that a
Countenance is Beautiful to others, it may determine that Honey is sweet to
others; but it will never give me a Perception of its Sweetness.

I will conclude with a very brief Improvement of what has been said.

First. THIS Doctrine may lead us to reflect on the Goodness of GOD, that has
so ordered it, that a saving Evidence of the Truth of the Gospel is such, as is
attainable by Persons of mean Capacities, and Advantages, as well as those that
are of the greatest Parts and Learning. If the Evidence of the Gospel depended
only on History, and such Reasonings as learned Men only are capable of, it
would be above the Reach of far the greatest part of Mankind. But Persons, with
but an ordinary Degree of Knowledge, are capable without a long and subtle Train
of Reasoning, to see the divine Excellency of the things of Religion: They are
capable of being taught by the Spirit of GOD, (...) well as learned Men. The
Evidence that is this Way obtained, is vastly better and more satisfying, than
all that can be obtained by the Arguings of those that are most Lear^^^ and
greatest Masters of Reason. And Babes are as capable of knowing these things,
as as the wise and prudent; and they are often hid from these, when they are
revealed to those. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. For ye see your Calling Brethren, how that
not many wise Men, after the Flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called.
But GOD has chosen the f^olish things of the World --.

Secondly. THIS Doctrine may well put us upon examining our selves, whether we
have ever had his divine Light, that has been described, let into our Souls. If
there be such a thing indeed, and it ben't only a Notion, or Whimsy of Persons
of weak and distempered Brains, then doubtless it is a thing of great
^mportance, whether we have thus been taught by the Spirit of GOD; whether the
Light of the Glorious Gospel of CHRIST, who is the Image of GOD has shined
into us, giving us the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of GOD, in the Face
of JESUS CHRIST; whether we have seen the Son, and believed on him, or have
that Faith of Gospel Doctrines that arises from a spiritual Sight of CHRIST.

Thirdly. ALL may hence be exhorted, earnestly to seek this spiritual Light. To
influence and move to it, the following things may be considered.

1. THIS is the most excellent and divine Wisdom, that any Creature is capable
of It Is more excellent than any human Learning; It Is far more excellent, than
all the Knowledge of the greatest Philosopher, o^ Statesmen. Yea the least
Glimpse of the Glory of GOD in the Face of CHRIST does more exalt and enoble
the Soul, than all the Knowledge of those that have the greatest speculative
Understanding in Divinity, without Grace. This Knowledge has the most noble
Object that is, or can be, viz. the divine Glory, and Excellency of GOD, and
CHRIST. The Knowledge of these Objects is that wherein consists the most
excellent Knowledge of the Angels, yea, of GOD himself,

2. THIS Knowledge is that which is above all others Sweet and Joyful. Men have
a great deal of Pleasure in human Knowledge, in Studies of natural things; but
this is nothing to that Joy which arises from this divine Light shining into
the Soul. This Light gives a View of those things that are immensely the most
exquisitely Beautiful, and capable of delighting the Eye of the Understanding.
This spiritual Light is the dawning of the Light of Glory in the Heart There is
nothing so powerful as this to support Persons in Affliction, and to give the
Mind Peace and Brightness, in this stormy and dark World.

3. THIS Light is such as effectually influences the Inclination, and changes
the Nature of the Soul. It assimilates the Nature to the divine Nature, and
changes the Soul into an Image of the same Glory that is beheld. 2 Cor. 3 18
But we a^ with pen Face beholding as in a Gl^ss the Glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord. This Knowledge will wean from the World, and raise the Inclination to
heavenly things. It will turn the Heart to GOD as the Fountain of Good, and to
choose him for the only Portion. This Light, and this only, will bring the Soul
to a saving Close with CHRIST. It conforms the Heart to the Gospel, mortifies
its Enmity and Opposition against the Scheme of Salvation therein revealed: It
causes the Heart to embrace the joyful Tidings, and entirely to adhere to, and
acquiesce in the Revelation of CHRIST as our Savior: It causes the whole Soul
to accord and Symphonize with it, admitting it with entire Credit and Respect,
cleaving to it with full Inclination and Affection. And it effectually disposes
the Soul to give up it self entirely to CHRIST.

4. THIS Light and this only has its Fruit in an universal Holiness of Life. No
merely notional or speculative Understanding of the Doctrines of Religion, will
ever bring to this. But this Light as it reaches the bottom of the Heart, and
changes the Nature, so it will effectually dispose to an universal Obedience.
It shows GOD's worthiness to be obeyed and served. It draws sorth the Heart in
a sincere Love to GOD, which is the only Principle of a true, gracious and
universal Obedience. And it convinces of the Reality of those glorious Rewards
that GOD has promised to them that obey him.

FINIS.
[Taken from the Excellent Dr. Watts's HYMNS]
The Humble enlightened, and Carnal Reason humbled: Or, The Sovereignty of
Grace, Luke 10.21, 22.
THERE was an Hour when CHRIST rejoiced,
And spoke his Joy in Words of Praise;
Father, I thank thee, mighty God,
Lord of the Earth and Heavens and Seas.
I thank thy Sovereign Power and Love,
That crowns my Doctrine with Success;
And makes the Babes in Knowledge learn
The Heights, and Breadths, and Lengths of Grace
But all this Glory lies concealed
From Men of Prudence and of Wit:
The Prince of Darkness blinds their Eyes,
And their own Pride resists the Light.
Father, it is thus, because thy Will
Chose and ordained it should be so;
It Is thy Delight to abase the Proud,
And lay the haughty Scorner low.
There Is none can know the Father right,
But those who learn it from the Son;
Nor can the Son be well received,
But where the Father makes him known.
Then let our Souls adore our God,
That deals his Graces as he please;
Nor gives to Mortals an Account
Or of his Actions, or Decrees.

