Dr. Wigglesworth's Two public Lectures On the Trial of Spirits, April 22 and
29. 1735.

A seasonable Caveat against believing every Spirit: with some Directions for
trying the Spirits, whether they are of God.

Given in Two Public LECTURES In the Hall of Harvard-College at Cambridge, N.
E. April 22 and 29, 1735.

By EDWARD WIGGLESWORTH, D. D. And Hollisian Professor of Divinity.

BOSTON: Printed for D. Henchman, at the Corner Shop over against the Brick
Meeting House in Cornhill, 1735.

A Seasonable CAVEAT Against believing every Spirit.
1 JOHN IV. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether
they are of God: because many false Prophets are gone out into the World.


THE Words before us contain two Things, viz.

1. A solemn Caution from the holy Apostle to all Christians, not to believe
every, Spirit, but to try the Spirits, whether they are of God. That is, not
presently to believe every Pretender to divine Revelations to be under the
Conduct of the Spirit of Truth, because he himself had Confidence enough to
affirm it: but to examine first what Right such Persons could make out to such
Pretenses; and not to receive the Dictates of any Man as divine Oracles,
whatever specious Pretenses he might make, without sufficient Reason to believe
him a Teacher sent from God. 2. We have a very good Reason for the Caution
given, viz. Because many false Prophets were gone out into the World: because
many who set themselves up for Teachers, and delivered the Devices of their own
Hearts, or the Suggestions of the wicked one, yet pretended that they spoke
only as they were moved by the holy Ghost.
From the Words we may observe, 1. That during the Lives of the Apostles
themselves there were many false Pretenders to divine Revelation. Many false
Prophets are gone out into the World; deceitful Workers, transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ 2 Cor. 11.13.
. This was indeed a notable Instance of the strong Delusion to which Mankind is
liable; or else of the Corruption and desperate Wickedness of the Heart of Man:
that any should dare to venture upon so vile an Enterprise, while the Apostles
themselves were living, who had the Gift of discerning Spirits; who had
Authority eno' with all true Christians to expose such Impostors; and who had
so much Power with God, as sometimes to inflict Diseases, and even Death
itself, on the Children of the Devil. But yet it was no marvel (as the Apostle
Paul speaks 2 Cor. 11.14, 15.
) for Satan himselt is transformed into an Angel of Light. Therefore it is no
great Thing if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of
Righteousness, whose End shall be according to their Works. It would be beside
my present Design, to enquire who these false Prophets were; or what false
Doctrines or pernicious Practices they introduced. It Is enough that my Text
expressly tells us, there were such; and that the Number of them was not small.
2 We may observe, that there were sufficient Means for the People of God to
know that these false Pretenders to divine Revelations were not of God. For it
would not have been a serious, wholesome Charge, but a cruel Mockery in the
Apostle, to bid them try the Spirits, whether they were of God or not; if there
had been no sufficient Means or Rules for them to discern the Spirit of Truth
from the Spirit of Error by. The Apostle gives them a Rule in the following
Verse, peculiarly suited to discover the false Prophets of his own Time: and
there is enough in the holy Scriptures, to enable us to detect such Impostors
in all Ages; whatever strong Delusions they may be under themselves, or
whatever Deceivableness of Unrighteousness they may think to conceal themselves
under from others. 3. We may observe, That it was a Thing of dangerous
Consequence, even for those who believed the divine Authority of the Doctrines
taught by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, to think other Teachers also to be of
God, who were not so. I shall have occasion in the Progress of this Discourse,
to give some Instances of the dangerous Consequences of such a Mistake; and
therefore I shall forbear mentioning any at present. It will sufficiently
justify the making such an Observation from the Text, only to say, that the
Apostle wrote this Epistle to such as would never have become Christians, if
they had not thought the Doctrines taught by Jesus Christ and his Apostles to
be of divine Authority; and yet, that the Apostle apprehends them to be in
danger from false Pretenders to divine Revelation: otherwise the Warning in my
Text would have been needless, the Apostle's Rule of Trial in the following
verse of no Signisicancy, and the People of God disquieted and alarmed for
nothing. And therefore we way observe, 4. That it is the Duty and Interest even
of those who believe the divine Authority of the Doctrines taught by Jesus
Christ and his Apostles, to examine the Claims of any other Pretenders to
divine Revelation; and not to yield to their Authority, unless there appears
good Reason to suppose it divine. That it is their Duty is evident from the
express Charge of the Apostle, to try the Spirits whether they were of God.
And, that it is their Interest, is no less evident from the dangerous
Consequences of the neglect of it; which must be supposed to render such a
Charge necessary.


And now to apply these Observations to our present Purpose.

If there were many false Pretenders to divine Revelations even in the Apostles
days, it will be no Marvel at all, if there be such in ours: but we may well
expect it now, when there is no body qualified like the Apostles to expose and
explode such vain or impious Pretenses.

And if it was the Duty and Interest of Christians then, while the
extraordinary Gifts of the holy Spirit were very frequent, not to submit
themselves to the Authority of any Pretender to divine Revelations, before they
had tried and examined, whether he were of God or no; it must much more concern
us, to take heed to our selves, and be suspicious of all Pretenders now, when
the extraordinary Gifts of the holy Spirit are generally supposed to have
ceased.

And if while the Canon of Scripture was yet imperfect, the People of God did
not want sufficient Means and Rules to distinguish between the Spirit of Truth
and the Spirit of Error; we may very well suppose our selves thoroughly
furnished unto this Work now.

Since then we have Reason enough to expect Pretenders to divine Revelation and
Authority in our days. I shall enquire,

I. Whether there really are any such? And if there be; since we are so much
concerned and have such good Encouragement to endeavor to try the Spirits, I
shall examine,

II. Whether they are of God or no? Here then,

I. I am to enquire, Whether there are any Pretenders to divine Authority and
Revelation in our Days! Now under this Inquiry I shall have nothing to do with
such as teach any Religions manifestly contrary to the Religion taught us in
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. For since I have long ago proved
them to have been given by Inspiration of God; and since the God of Truth
cannot deny or contradict himself; it is very plain that no Religion can be of
God, which is evidently contrary to that taught us in the Scriptures. And
therefore I have nothing to do under this Question, with the Religions of the
Mahometans or Heathen. Or if I had, they have both been formerly considered and
discharged.

Again, since I have long ago proved the Inspiration of the Scriptures of the
New Testament as well as of the Old; I have nothing to do with the Jews
neither, whom we don't charge with false Pretenses to divine Revelation, but
only with a false Construction of the True Oracles of God.

All that I have to do therefore under this Head, is only to enquire, Whether
among those that call themselves Christians, and admit that the Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament were given by Inspiration of God, there are any that
pretend to divine Revelations themselves; or that set up any thing else as of
equal Authority with the Scriptures.

And here the Answer is obvious, That among those Christians that call
themselves Protestants there is a certain Sect (and perhaps some particular
Persons who do not denominate themselves from any Sect) that pretend to divine
Revelations: And that the Romanists generally arrogate a Spirit of
Infallibility to their own Church; and pretend to have preserved sundry
Traditions of the same Original and Authority with the holy Scriptures. Now
since these Pretensions are not only known and acknowledged, but earnestly
contended for, by the Parties or Persons charged with them, there is no need of
insisting here.

II. It only remains, that according to the Caution given in my Text, we belive
not these Spirits till we have tried whether they are of God; which was a
second Thing proposed.

But an Examination of them all would lead me into a larger Field than I
purpose to enter at this Time.

My only Business will be with those Sects or Persons, who come under the
General but (as it is commonly now used) most ^^^ivocal and Indefinite Name of
Protestants, who maintain that God is pleased, in our days, to discover
religious Truths and Duties to His Children by immediate Revelations. In
opposition to which I shall endeavor Two things, viz.

1. To show that it is exceeding unlikely that God should do so: And 2. To try
the Spirits of these modern Pretenders to divine Revelations, by such Rules as
the Word of God suggests to us. By which, I think, it will appear, that they
must be numbered with the Prophets against whom we are cautioned in my Text.
1. I am to show, That it is exceeding unlikely, that God should discover
Religious Truths and Duties to any of his Children in our days by immediate
Revelation: And that because it is altogether needless, and would be of no use,
but very dangerous if he should.

I am not going here to dispute, whether God is ever pleased in these days upon
special occasions, to impress the Spirits of any of his Servants with strong
Apprehensions of some Events, which it may be of great Importance to themselves
or others, to have some previous Intimations of; but only whether he is pleased
to discover religious Truths and Duties to any of them by immediate Revelation:
which I suppose he is not.

1. Because it is altogether needless that he should. For a Discovery of
religious Truths and Duties by immediate Revelation must be either the same
with the Discovery contained in the holy Scriptures, or another, But another
Discovery of religious Truths and Duties, than that contained in the holy
Scriptures, cannot be by divine Revelation; unless God could contradict
himself. For I have formerly proved, that the Sciptures of the New Testament
give us a full and faithful Account of the Truths and Duties taught by Jesus
Christ and his Apostles. Now the Apostle Paul solemnly curses him that should
presume to preach any other Gospel than that of Christ, even though he were an
Angel from Heaven. Gal. 1.7, 8. From whence it plainly follows, that if a
Discovery of religious Truths and Duties should now be made to any Man by
immediate divine Revelation, it must be the some, at least in Substance with
the Discovery already contained in the Scriptures. And then what Necessity can
there be of it? For why may not all the Ends of divine Revelation be answered
by a Discovery of the Nature and Will of God committed to Writing, and
sufficiently attested to be of divine Original; as well as by a new immediate
Revelation? It would be very unreasonable to pretend, that a Man cannot
understand Truth and Duty by an external written Revelation, if it be but full
and clear enough, as thoroughly as by an inward immediate one. Now that the
Revelation contained in the Scriptures is so full as to teach every thing which
God requires us to believe or to do, in order to obtain eternal Life; and so
clear that, if we would but take the same prudent Methods that are necessary to
understand almost any other Book or Matter of Importance, we need not be at any
Loss about it; is manifest from what the Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy 3 15, 17.
that the holy Scriptures are able to make us wise unto Salvation, through Faith
which is in Jesus Christ: and that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished to all good works by them. So that there can be no Pretense of a
Necessity of new immediate Revelations to give Men a better Understanding of
the important Truths and Duties of our holy Religion.

Nay, in this Respect a standing written Revelation has the Advantage of an
inward immediate one, which is but a transient thing; and so both the Matter
and the true Import of it may in a great measure wear out of Memory by length
of Time: Whereas inspired Writings are standing Monuments of the Will of God,
to which we may have Recourse upon every Doubt or Failure of Memory; and we are
furnished with abundant Helps to understand the true Design and Import of them,
of which we must be destitute in Case of any Obscurity in a transient
Revelation. Now if a Man may be more certain to have an abiding thorough
Knowledge of his Duty from a standing written Revelation, than from an
immediate transient one, then it appears in a stronger Light still, that there
can be no Pretense of need of immediate Revelations to fill us with the
Knowledge of our Duty; since we are much better provided for already in that
Regard, by a perfect standing Revelation of the Will of God conveyed to us in
the holy Scriptures.

Objection But perhaps it will be objected here, That the Scriptures speak much
of the natural Darkness and Blindness of our Minds, and of their Inability to
discern the Things of the Spirit of God, until God who commanded the Light to
shine out of Darkness, shine into our Hearts to give the Light of the Knowledge
of them. And what can this intend less than a Necessity of immediate Revelati.
ons?

Answer. To which I answer; That though it be a great Truth, that the
Understanding of Man in his natural State is so much blinded, that without the
gracious Influences of God's Holy Spirit it will never apprehend divine Truths,
in such a manner as that the Heart shall be suitably affected and the Life
governed by the Apprehension of them; yet that immediate Operation of God upon
Man, which is now necessary to remove the natural Blindness of his Under
standing, and make him capable of discerning divine Truths aright, is not an
immediate Revelation of divine Truths to his Understanding; but only a gracious
Removal of those Impediments which would not have suffered his Understanding to
perceive those Truths in a spiritual manner, whatever way they might be
revealed to him in, whether mediately by the written Word of God, or
immediately by inward Revelation. So that this operation of the Spirit of God
upon Man, which is now necessary in order to a right understanding of divine
Truths, does not at all affect the manner of the Revelation of those Truths;
but it only affects the Faculty wherewith alone we can apprehend them, after
what manner soever they are revealed. And therefore no Plea for the Necessity
of immediate Revelations can be founded upon the Illuminations of the Spirit of
God, so often spoken of in the Scriptures.

Again, as an immediate Revelation of religious Truths and Duties is not at all
necessary to give any Man a competent Understanding of them; since this End is
much better provided for by the standing Revelation contained in the Holy
Scriptures; so neither is it necessary, to assure Men that such Truths and
Duties are of divine Original. For this also they have better Assurance of from
the Scriptures, than they could well be supposed to have from immediate
Revelation.

Our Lord himself prefers the Testimony of the Scriptures before the Testimony
of one rising from the dead Luke 16.31.
. And the Apostle Peter, though it the Testimony of the Scriptures a more sure Word
of Prophecy than what was delivered by a voice from Heaven 2 Pet. 1.19.
. And the Matter is too plain almost to admit of any Dispute, with respect to
the Scriptures of the New Testament in particular (to say nothing here of those
of the Old) that the Witness God was pleased to bear to the Religious Truths
and Duties contained in them, by Signs and Wonders, Miracles and Gifts of the
Holy Ghost (not once or twice, but for a whole Age together) is a much more
rational and satisfactory Evidence of the divine Authority of them, than an
immediate transient Revelation of the same Truths and Duties to any particular
Person, without such Signs following to support the Credit of it, well can be.

Now if neither so distinct a Knowledge of religious Truths and Duties, nor so
good Assurance of their divine Original, can reasonably be expected by
immediate Revelations, as we have already by the holy Scriptures; I think it
will not be easy to conceive, what Need there can now be of any such
Revelations. For the great Ends of a Revelation are, to give us a sufficient
Knowledge of what we are to believe and practice, and sufficient Evidence that
it is God who requires these things at our hands: both which are done already,
in the best manner that can be, by the holy Scriptures.

But perhaps it will be thought, That though there be no absolute Necessity that
religious Truths and Duties should now be made known to any Man by immediate
Revelation, yet it might be of very good Use, if they should; especially to
such as are to be Instructors of others: That a sense of the immediate
Operation of the Spirit of God upon their Souls, in revealing divine Things
unto them, would very much affect their Hearts, and so fire them with a greater
Zeal and Activity in their Master's Service. Which brings me to say,

2. That such immediate Revelations would be no more useful than they are
necessary, Indeed there is no doubt to be made, but that they would warm the
Heart and raise the Passions for a Season: but there is little Raeson to think,
that the Heat would prove lasting; and none at all to imagine, that it would
make an habitual Change in the Will and Affections. For God's presenting Truths
to the Understanding by immediate Revelation, and his bowing the Will and
Affection to a Compliance with Duty, are Two as different Actions as can be;
and have no necessary Connection at all with each other.

Accordingly we find, that many who have at times had immediate Revelations,
have yet lived and died very wicked Men. Thus Balaam who had often heard the
words of God, and seen the Visions of the Almighty Numb. 24.4.
yet still continued to love the ways of Unrighteousness as well as ever, even
after that the dumb Ass speaking with Man's Voice, had forbidden the Madness of
the Prophet 2 Pet. 2.15, 16.
And so our Savior himself tells us in Effect, that many that have cast out
Devils, done many wonderful Works, and prophesied in his name, shall
nevertheless depart from him in the day of Judgment with the Workers of
Iniquity Math. 7.22.23.


In short, God has given us sufficient and abundant Evidence of the divine
Authority of the holy Scriptures; and in some respects better than any Man can
well be supposed to have of the Divinity of a transient Revelation. And
therefore as for them who will not hear or regard Moses and the Prophets, Jesus
Christ and his Apostles, we are far from having any Reason to think, that they
would be effectually persuaded or wrought upon by an immediate Revelation: And
so such immediate Revelation would only serve to raise a sudden Commotion in
the Soul, and could be of no Use or Advantage at all to the Interest of Piety
and Religion in it. But I proceed to say,

3. That an Expectation of modern Revelations of religious Truths and Duties to
any of the Children of God, would certainly be extreme dangerous: and that both
to many of the supposed Subjects of such Revelations, and to many others also.

1. It would be very dangerous to many of the supposed Subjects of such
Revelations. For though we have all the Reason in the World to think, that God
(who has given to Men a power of communicating their Tho'ts to one another, in
such ways as that they may know assuredly from whom the Communication comes)
can never want means Himself to make known his Mind to any of his Children so
effectually as that they may be as certain that the Revelation is from God, as
they can be at any time that they hear the Words of their most intimate
Friends, when they are before their Eyes speaking to them; and though it be not
unreasonable to think, that if any Person had been once favored with a true
divine Revelation, he would know the Operations of the Spirit of God too well,
to be ever after imposed upon by the Suggestions of the Devil: yet
notwithstanding these Concessions'tis very obvious, that were it once taken for
granted, that God did in these days make immediate Revelations of religious
Truths and Duties to some of his Children, without attesting the Divinity of
those Revelations, by the Gists of Prophesy and Miracles, or some other way
equally satisfactory (which he has never been known to do in later Ages) the
great Adversary of Souls might soon take the Advantage of it, to impress
Delusions upon the Minds of many well disposed Persons, who had never yet had
any divine Revelations, with so much Force and Subtilty, as to make them really
think themselves inspired of God; when in truth they were only made to believe
Lies by the Craft and Power of the Devil. And that there would be real and
great danger of such fatal Impositions from the Father of Lies, if an
Expectation and Belief of modern unattested Revelations should once prevail; is
evident, not only from the Reasonableness of the Supposition, but also from
what was Matters of Fact not much more than Twenty Years ago: when great
Numbers of People, first in France and afterward in England (and some of
considerable Learning and Knowledge too, and of unblemished Life) were so far
drawn away by the Devices of Satan, as to think themselves under the immediate
Operations and Illuminations of the Holy Spirit; until at length in that
Confidence they ventured so far at Prophesies and Miracles, as to quite spoil
the Credit of their supposed Inspirations.

But these things may suffice for the Danger to which an Expectation and Belief
of modern Revelations of religious Truths and Duties would expose the imagined
Subject of such Revelations. It only remains that I say,

2. That such an Expectation and Belief would be extreme dangerous to many
others also. For if some of the Children of God were now imagined to be
favored with immediate Revelations; then whatever they were supposed to speak
unto us by Revelation, ought not to be received as the Word of Man, but as the
Word of God. And here a Difficulty would arise how we should know, who spoke by
Revelation, and who did not? For unless we could know this, we should be at an
utter Loss whose Words we ought to receive as Oracles of God. And therefore for
our Conduct in this difficult Affair, we must either make it a Rule to believe
every one, whom we looked upon as a good Man, to speak by immediate Revelation,
as often as he was pleased to affirm he did, and we upon Enquiry into
Circumstances could find no Design of Fraud: Or else every one who pretended to
be favored with divine Revelations, must come recommended to us by such
Evidences of a divine Mission as might satisfy a reasonable Enquirer, that he
spoke not in the Words which Man's Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches.

Now unspeakable Mischiefs would follow to Mankind upon the former of these
Supposals. For if we were to believe every one, whom we looked upon as a good
Man, to speak by immediate Revelation, as often as he had Assurance enough to
affirm he did, and we upon Enquiry into Circumstances could find no Design of
Fraud (besides the strong delusions such Men would be liable to themselves, as
was observed under the foregoing head) it would open a Door for every bold
Impostor, who could hypocritically make a fair show of Religion, to impose upon
us almost any Imaginations of his own Heart which he pleased. And in such a
State of things there would soon be a Multitude of Instances of good Men drawn
away by such Deceivers, to act directly contrary to the Will of God revealed in
the Scriptures.

And that this is not a groundless Surmise, but a well founded Supposition, I
think we may easily satisfy our selves, by considering the tragical Story of
the Man of God, who came out of Judah by the Word of the Lord unto Bethel, as
it is reported 1 Kin. 13. He was commanded of God to prophecy against the
Altar of Bethel; and was also charged to eat no Bread, nor drink Water, nor
turn again by the Way that he came v. 2, 9.
And if he could be under any Doubt, whether God was the Author of these
Charges or no, it must be entirely taken away by the Fulfillment of the Sign
which the Lord had spoken, in the renting of the Altar and the pouring out of
the Ashes; and by the withering of the King's hand, and the restoring of it at
his Prayer v. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Upon this he withstands the King's Invitation, though enforced with the Promise
of a Reward; and says unto him, If thou will give me half thine House, I will
not go in with thee, neither will I eat Bread, nor drink Water in this place
Verse 7, 8.
. And yet notwithstanding this Resolution, no sooner comes the old Liar of
Bethel, and says unto him, I am a Prophet also as thou art, and an Angel spoke
unto me by the Word of the Lord, saying, bring him back with thee into thine
House, that he may at Bread and drink Water Verse 18.
; but the Man of God belioving him upon his bare Word, without any Evidence of
a divine Mission, transgresses the express Command of God to himself through such
Credulity, goes back with him, eats Bread and drinks Water in his house, and is
slain by a Lion (upon his Return) for his Disobedience to the Ward of the Lord
Verse 19, 24.
. Now if one who was a Prophet might be so seduced to act directly contrary to
an express Command of God to himself, confirmed with such Signs following: by
taking another to come with a contrary Revalation from God, upon his own bare
Affirmation, without any sufficient Evidence: how much easier may we well
suppose it, for Multitudes of Men of honest Minds, who are neither Prophets nor
the Sons of Prophets, to be drawn into Apprehensions and Practices (especially
in Matters of positive Institution) directly contrary to the Revelations of the
Will of God contained in the holy Scriptures; if they should presume any Men in
our days to be favored with divine Revelations, only upon their own pretending
to it, without God's bearing them Witness in any way whatever.

And now upon the whole; if it be altogether needless, and would be of no good
Use, but of such dangerous Consequences (as we have heard) for any of the
Children of God in our days, and under the Circumstances of our modern
Pretenders, to have religious Truths and Duties discovered to them by immediate
Revelation, I think, we need not be at any Loss at all, to conclude they have
not. For it would be contrary to all the natural Notions we have of the divine
Perfections, and to all the Discoveries God has made of himself in his Word,
to imagine Him exposing His Children to fatal Dangers, without any Necessity,
or proposing any Advantage to them by it.

And if to these Considerations we add, the frequent Warnings we have in the
Scriptures, of false Apostles, deceitful Workers, transforming themselves into
the Ministers of Christ, and endeavoring to seduce, if possible the very
Elect; and that we are therefore wisely cautioned and charged in my Text, not
to believe every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God; I think,
we may safely set it down for a Rule, that we ought not to give heed to any
Man's Pretensions to divine Revelations of religious Truths and Duties, unless
he produces such Evidences as may be a reasonable Satisfaction to us, that the
Spirit of God is in him.

If it be demanded, what Evidences are sufficient to give us such a
Satisfaction? I must defer the Answer till God shall give another Opportunity.

LECTURE II.
1 JOHN IV. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether
they are of God: because many false Prophets are gone out into the World.


THE Enquiry now before us is, What Evidences are sufficient to give us a
reasonable Satisfaction, that any Man who pretends to have religious Truths and
Duties discovered to him in our Days by immediate Revelation, has the Spirit
of God in him of a Truth? The Answer to this Enquiry will lead us into the
second Thing proposed, which was,

To try the Spirits of our modern Pretenders to divine Revelations, whether
they are of God or no, by such Rutes as the Word of God suggests to us.

And here I think I may truly affirm,

1. That me ought not to rest satisfied in any thing short of such Evidences as
those by which God was pleased to bear Witness, to Moses and the Prophets, to
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, in ancient Times.

I say, that nothing short of such Evidences as these, ought to satissy us now:
because that God has as tender a Care of His Church now as ever; and from the
frequent and solemn Warnings of our blessed Lord himself, and his Apostles, the
Church of God seems to be in as much Danger now as ever of Deceivers. And
therefore we cannot suppose it to be the Will of God, that his People should
give Credit to Pretenders to divine Revelation now, upon weaker Evidences than
he expected, that they should do so in more ancient Times.

Especially if we consider, that we have no Intimations in the New Testament,
that after the Canon of it should be completed, we were to expect any more
holy Men of Goa speaking or writing to us, as they should be moved by the Holy
Ghost. But instead of this, the Canon of the New Testament is sealed up with
that awful Commination Rev. 22.18, 19. I testify unto every Man that hears
the Words of the Prophesy of this Book, If any Man shall add unto these things,
God shall add unto him the Plagues that are written in this Book. And if any
Man shall take away from the Words of the Book of this Prophesy, God shall take
away his Part out of the Book of Life, and out of the holy City, and from the
things that are written in this Book.

Whereas if we look back to the Times of the Old Testament, we shall find, That
though Moses says, ye shall not add unto the Word which I command you, neither
shall you diminish ought from it. Deuteronomy. 4.2; yet he also says, Deuteronomy. 18.15. The
Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy
Brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken. Now whether we understand
this Prediction of Moses, as the learned Grotius and some others do; not of any
single Person, but of a Succession of Prophets, as the Exigencies of the Church
in the several Ages of it, during that Dispensation should call for: or whether
we understand it accerding to the more general Opinion of Expositors, to intend
(especially at least, if not only) Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, who
alone resembled Moses in that which was the chief part of his Character as a
Prophet, viz. in giving Laws in the Name of God, and being the Author of a Body
of instituted Religion: Which ever way we take it, it is a plain Declaration,
that Prophesy should not cease with Moses, but that the People of God might
still expect further. Revelations from him, for a great while to come.

And certain it is, That from this or other such Predictions in the Old
Testament, both Jews and Samaritans, how much soever they differed in other
Points in our Savior's time, yet were well agreed in this; that the Messiah
whom they expected, was to be a Prophet. I know, says the Woman of Samaria,
Joh. 4.25. that Messiah comes which is called Christ; when he is come, he will
tell us all things. And when our blessed Lord had fed a great Multitude of Jews
with Five Loaves and Two Fishes; then those Men, when they had seen the Miracle
that Jesus did, said, This is of a Truth that Prophet that should come into the
World. John 6.14.

Once more, the mavelous Descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Disciples of our
Lord on the day of Pentecost (as the Apostle Peter assures us, Act. 2.16, 17.)
was nothing but what was spoken by the Prophet Joel 2.28.
Joel, And it shall come to pass in the last days (says God) I will pour out
of my Spirit upon all Flesh: and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophesy,
etc.

To conclude, Upon the sealing up of the Canon of the Old Testament, when the
Spirit of Prophesy was to be with held for a season, God charges His People,
Mal. 4.4. Remember the Law of Moses my Servant, which I commanded him in Horeb
for all Israel, with the Statutes and Judgments. And yet he had told them but
a little before Mal. 3.1.
, That the Lord whom they sought should suddenly come to his Temple. And he
adds here Mal. 4.5.
, Behold I will send you ELIJAH THE PROPHET, before the Coming of the great and
dreadful day of the Lord.

Now upon the whole, if we compare the many plain Intimations in the Old
Testament of the Return of the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit of God in the
Days of the New, with the profound Silence of the New Testament as to any new
Effusions of the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, after the New
Testament-Canon should be completed; and especially if we consider how all
Expectation of any such Thing seems to be cut off in the last Chapter of the
Revelation; I think the least Effect it can have upon us, must be, to heighten
our Suspicions of any Pretenders to immediate Revelations of religious Truths
and Duties from God in our Days; and to render it reasonable for us to expect
rather more than less Evidences that the Spirit of God is in them, than those
by which he was wont to bear Witness to his extraordinary Messengers in the
Days of the Old and New Testament. And this brings me to consider, what those
Evidences were.

Now the Evidences by which God was pleased in ancient Times to bear Witness to
his extraordinary Messengers, were principally such as these.

(1.) Sometimes the Bestowment of an Ability to foretell Things to come; or to
do such Works, as it cannot be supposed, that God would enable, or even suffer,
Men to do for the Confirmation of Falsehoods in Religion; or both.

Both these Evidences certainly concurred in Moses: The Passages of Scripture
which prove it, are too many, and too well known, to need to be mentioned. It
is highly probable also, that both these Evidences concurred in most, it not
all, the Prophets that followed Moses during the Times of the Old Testament.
For as to all those whose Writings remain, we are sure, either from their own
Books which are still in our hands, or from Hints given us elsewhere in the
Scripture, that they foretold things to come. And as for others of them, who
have left no Writings upon sacred Record, such as the Man of God from Judah,
mentioned in the preceding Discourse, Elijah the Tishbite, Elisha etc.) we are
nevertheless expressly told, both of their Predictions, and of their Miracles.
And if we consider the Severity of that Law, Deuteronomy. 18.20. The Prophet which
shall presume to speak a word in my Name, which I have not commanded him to
speak, -- even that Prophet shall die; and the Rule which God gives in ver. 22,
how the People should know the Word which the Lord had not spoken; we may very
well conclude that God always enabled his Servants the Prophets (at least in
their beginning to speak in his Name, before their Authority could be
established by the Fulfillment of their Predictions) to give some convincing
Sign to those that heard them (it there was Occasion for it) that they had a
Command from God for what they said: As we are assured, he did in the Cases of
Moses, of the Man of God from Judah, of Elijab and others Vid. Exodus, 4.1 Kin.
13. and 17.


And therefore when our Savior Jesus Christ resents it, that the Scribes,
Pharisees and Sadducees once and again asked a Sign of him, even a Sign from
Heaven Mat. 12.38.-16. I.
; it could not be because he judged it unreasonable, that the People of God
should demand a Sign, of one who speaks to them in the Name of the Lord, before
his Mission from God had been proved by any Sign, or any thing else equivalent
to a Sign: Nor could it be because he judged it reasonable, that He himself
should be believed to be a Teacher sent from God, without any other Evidences
of it than his own bare Word. For he says in Contradiction to any Surmise like
the First of these, Joh. 15.24. If I had not done among them the Works which
none other Man did, they had not had Sin; And in Opposition to the latter he
says, Joh. 10.37, 38. If do not the Works of my Father, believe me not: but if
I do, though ye believe not me, believe the Works. And therefore we must suppose,
that the true Reason of our Lord's Displeasure was, because the Scribes,
Pharisees and Sadducees (who came tempting him, and asking a Sign) very well
knew, that He had formerly done so many and such mighty Works, as were
abundantly sufficient to satisfy any, but those who were resolved not to be
satisfied, of his Mission from God. For besides all his wonderful Works which
they had seen or heard of before, when they came to ask a Sign of Him the first
time, he had been casting out a Devil; upon which the Pharisees said, this
Fellow does not cast out Devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. Mat.
12.24. And before they came to Him the second time, He had been filling four
thousand Men, beside Women and Children, with seven Loaves and a few little
Fishes. Mat. 15.34, 38. and yet, as if this was a Work not worth regarding, the
Pharisees with the Sadducees came and desired him that he would show them a
Sign from Heaven, Mat. 16.1. We need not wonder then, that our Lord was angry
at the Unreasonableness and wicked Perverseness of these Men. And that I have
assigned the true Cause of his Anger is manifest, not only from what has been
observed above, but also from His own Expostulation with them, Mat. 16.3. O ye
Hypocrites, ye can discern the Face of the Sky, but can ye not discern the
Signs of the Times?

I think I need not say any more concerning the mighty Works with which the
Mission of our Savior Jesus Christ was consirm'd from Heaven. Nor need I say
any thing of His Prophesies, which are so well known, and have been so exactly
fulfilled.

I shall only add concerning his holy Apostles, in the Words of the Author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 2 ver. 3.4. That the great Salvation which at
first began to be spoken by the Lord, was confirmed to us by them that heard
him; God also bearing them Witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and with
diverse Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost.

But these things may suffice for the First Way in which God was sometimes
pleased in the days of the Old and New Testament to bear Witness to his
extraordinary Messengers. I proceed to say,

(2) That God sometimes testified the divine Mission of His Servants the
Prophets, by doing some wonderful Work himself for the Confirmation of it.

Not the Prophets, but God Himself sometimes gave a Sign. Thus he declares he
will do to the House of 'David, for the Consirmation of His Message by the
Prophet Isaiab, Isa. 7.14. And thus he did also in the Case of the Prophet
Jonah: for the Lord prepared a great Fish to swallow up Jonah, and Jonah was in
the Belly of the Fish three days and three nights. And the Lord spoke unto the
Fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry Land. Jon. 1.17.-2.10. Now though the
Scriptures have not informed us, how the Ninevites came to the Knowledge of
this wonderful Work of God, yet we are certain from the Scriptures, that they
are not ignorant of it, and that this was a Sign to them of the divine Mission
of the Prophet. For we read, Luke 11.30. That as Jonah was a Sign to the
Ninevites, so shall also the Son of Man be to this Generation. That is (to
borrow the Words of Dr. Hammond, with a little Alteration) As the Preaching of
Jonah in the Streets of Nineveh, attested with the Miracle of having been three
days in the Whale's Belly, and then being cast upon the Shore alive, was an
Assurance to them, that without Repentance they should speedily be destroyed:
so shall the Preaching of Christ to the Men of this Age, attested with his
Death and Resurrection after three days, be a certain Forerunner of
Destruction to you that believe not. Upon which we may observe, That even our
blessed Savior Jesus Christ Himself had this Evidence also of His divine
Mission, as well as the others abovementioned. For not only did He Himself
prove his Mission from God by Prophefies and Miracles; but God also gave
Assurance of it unto all Men in that He raised Him from the dead. But I hasten
to say,

(3.) That sometimes the 'Proof of the divine Mission of God's extraordinary
Messengers might be fetched from Antecedent Prophesies concerning them.

This Sort of Proof our blessed Lord Himself don't think it unbecoming the
Dignity of His Person and Offices to have Recourse to. For after he had said,
Joh. 5.36. The Works which the Father has given me to finish, the same Works
that I do, bear Witness of me, that the Father has sent me; He adds Ver. 39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal Life, and they are
they which testify of me; and again Ver. 46. Had ye believed Moses, ye would
have believed me: for he wrote of me.

And this was the Case of John the Baptist, who had been spoken of under the
Name of Elijah by the Prophet Malachi Mal. 4.5.
; and whose Birth and Service had been foretold to his Father by an Angel, and
a Sign given to confirm the Prediction Luk, 1, 13, 20.
And all these things were noised abroad throughout all the Hill Country of
Judea. And all they that heard them, laid them up in their Hearts, saying, what
manner of Child shall this be Verse 65, 66.
? In fine, though the People say of John, that he did no Miracle, yet they add,
that all things that he spoke of Christ were true Joh. 10.41.
: which was an Acknowledgment that John had the Gift of Prophecy.

And now upon the whole: Since God has always (so far as we can learn from
Scripture) given some such Evidences as these of the divine Mission of His
Servants, when He expected, that Men should believe that they speak by
Revelation from Him; since our Savior Jesus Christ himself though it it necessary
to have Recourse to such sort of Proofs that the Father had sent Him; and since
it is reasonable for us to expect rather more than less Evidences that the
Spirit of God is in such as pretend to immediate Revelations from him in our
Days, than those by which he was wont to bear Witness to His extraordinary
Messengers in the Days of the Old and New Testament; I think we may very fairly
conclude, that till the modern Pretenders to divine Revelations can either
prove, that they and their Mission have been foretold somewhere or other in the
Scriptures of the Old or New Testament; or can make it appear that God Himself
has given some sufficient Sign of their Mission from Him, like that of
Delivering Jonah from the Whale's Belly, or the Raising up our Savior from the
Dead; or till they can satisfy us, that they themselves are endued from on high
with the Gists of Prophecy or Miracles, or both, to support the Credit of their
pretended Revelations; Or can give us some other as good Evidences as these,
that God is with them of a Truth; they must allow us, in obedience to the
Warnings and Cautions given us in the Scriptures, to number them with Men under
strong Delusions, or with false Prophets and Ministers of Satan. And to these
Things I must add,

2. That upon Supposition that any modern Pretender to divine Revelation should
give any Sign or Wonder; yet if the Doctrine which it is wrought in
Confirmation of, should be manifestly contradictory to any Article of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, according to which Men are to be judged at the last
Day; or should be notoriously Wicked in its Nature; or evidently tending to
open the Door to all manner of Wickedness, by ridding us of that Fear, not of
Man only but of God also, which is the Beginning of Wisdom; Though the Sign
should be such an one, as that if it had been given for a better Purpose, we
should hardly (if at all) have been able to distinguish it from a Divine
Miracle; Yet in such a Case the Falseness or Wickedness of the Doctrine
designed to be established by it, would be a sufficient Pooof, that the Wonder
was not of God, but of the Devil.

For we are not more certain that God is powerful, than we are that he is also
wise, just, good, and true. And therefore the seeming Greatness or Difficulty
of any Work can never persuade us to believe it an Effect of Divine Power, if
it be wrought to confirm a Doctrine, which we certainly know to be inconsistent
with God's Wisdom, Justice, Truth or Goodness. But on the contrary, a certain
Knowledge of the Wickedness of the Nature or Tendency of any Doctrine; or of
its Contradictoriness to such Revelations of the Will of God as can never be
reversed, (because Men are to be judged according to them at the great Day) and
which God has born Witness to by Signs and Wonders, Miracles and Gifts of the
Holy Ghost for an whole Age together; will be a sufficient Reason for us to
account any Wonder wrought in Confirmation of such a Doctrine to be only a
lying Wonder wrought by the Wicked one. For in such a Case it must be more
evident, that the Doctrine is false or wicked, than it can be, that such a
Wonder could be wrought by nothing less than divine Power.

And as it is plain to Reason, that no Sign or Wonder can be sufficient to give
Credit to a Doctrine, when it is more evident, that the Doctrine is false or
wicked, than it is, that such a Wonder could be wrought by nothing less than
divine Power; so it has been the Opinion of several pious and very learned
Men, that it appears from Scripture, that God may sometimes permit such Wonders
to be wrought for the support of Doctrines notoriously false or wicked, as can
be distinguished from the Effects of a Power truly divine by nothing but the
evident Absurdity or Vileness of the Doctrine they are designed to give Credit
to. This Opinion they found upon that Passage, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. If there arise
among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of Dreams, and gives thee a Sign or a
Wonder, and the Sign or the Wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee,
saying, Let us go after other Gods (which thou have not known) and let us serve
them: Thou shall not hearken to that Prophet, or that Dreamer of Dreams: for
the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your Grd with
all your Heart, and with all your Soul. Hence they suppose (and I think very
justly) that God might (to prove His People) suffer a false Prophet to give
such a Sign or Wonder, to entice them to Idolatry, as could not be
distinguished by any thing but the Design of it, from a true Miracle: because
the Service of the Heathen Gods was so absurd and wicked, and contradictory to
the Light of Nature, as to be alone sufficient to destroy the Credit of any
Wonders, that could be wrought to seduce those into it who were acquainted with
the Reasonable Service of the true God.

3. Another Way in which the Credit of any wonderful Works, how great soever,
may be destroyed, is by God's exerting a superior Power in Contradiction to
them.

Thus He did in ancient times by the Wonders of the Magicians of Egypt; whom he
suffered to withstand His Servants Moses and Aaron for some time; and to do, or
seem to do, some wonderful Works like to theirs; for Aaron cast his Rod upon
the Ground, and it became a Serpent, and so did they Exodus 7.10, 12.
: and Aaron stretched out his hand over the Waters, and the Frogs came up and
covered the Land of Egypt. And the Magicians did so with their Enchantments,
and brought up Frogs upon the Land of Egypt Exodus 8.6.7,
. But though He suffered the Magicians thus to contend with His Prophets, yet he
gave the Victory clearly on his Prophets Side. For: Aaron's Rod swallowed up
their Rods Exodus 7.12.
; and when the Magicians endeavored by their Enchantments to bring forth Lice,
as Aaron had done, they could not; but were forced to own before Pharaoh, that
it was the Finger of God Exodus 8.18.19.
; and from that Time forward strove no more for Victory. So that there was no
Danger, that either Israelites or Egyptians should be led into any Error by the
Wonders of the Magicians; because God immediately enabled his Servants to
contradict and confound them, by more wonderful Works on the other side: And
therefore in this Case, it was not at all inconsistent with the Wisdom or
Goodness of God, to permit the Devil to do mavelous Things; because He took
effectual Care to prevent any Body's being necessarily and fatally misled by
them, and rendered His own Power more observable and glorious, by suffering the
Magicians to contest with Him for a time. And if God ever should, for wise and
holy Ends unknown to us, in our Times, or in Ages to come, suffer any false
Pretenders to divine Revelations, after the working of Satan to support their
Pretensions with such Signs and Wonders, as could no other way be distinguished
from the real Effects of divine Power; we may safely confide in his Goodness,
that He would, as in the Days of Moses, exert a superior Power in
Contradiction to them; and not suffer those who receive the Love of the Truth
that they may be saved, to be overborn with such strong Delusions.

I shall only add,

4. That we can never safely depend upon it, if we are Strangers to a Man's
Character, that he comes with a Message by immediate Revelation from God to us,
any further than He confirms the divine Authority of such Message by some
sufficient Evidence.

For I have proved in the foregoing Discourse, that some very wicked Men have
heard the Words of God, and seen the Visions of the Almighty, and prophesied in
his Name. And yet, if we should believe such a Man to come unto us by the Word
of the Lord, without his giving any sufficient Proof of a divine Mission at
that time, only because we have known or heard, that he has sometimes been
favored with divine Revelations; we cannot be secure, that we shall not be
served, as the Man of God from Judah was by the Old lying Prophet of Bethel. It
is not enough therefore, that we be persuaded, that a Man has sometimes been
favored with immediate Revelations from God: but we ought also to be
satisfied, that he is not under the predominant Power of Covetousness or Pride,
or any other corrupt Affection, but is one that truly fears God: Or else we
cannot safely trust him upon the Credit of former Revelations, any further than
he gives sufficient Evidence of the divine Authority of every particular
Message, which he may presume to come to us with in the Name of God.

And now upon the whole: If you should ever hear of any New Messiah, or if any
pretended Prophets should come forth into the World in our days: the Thoughts
which have been offered at this time may be improved, as so many Directions for
your Assistance, in trying the Spirits whether they are of God.

I therefore desire you would be careful to remember, what I hope has been
sufficiently proved above; and what I recapitulate on purpose to refresh your
Memories: namely,

That you ought not to rest satisfied with weaker Evidences of the divine
Mission of Pretenders to Revelations from God in our Days, than those with
which God though it it necessary to bear Witness to Moses and the Prophets, to
Jesus Christ and His Apostles in ancient Times.

That even some of these are not alone of Force enough to command your Assent;
but that you ought also to take in the Consideration of the Nature and Tendency
of the Doctrines to which they may be designed to give Credit; and of the
Conduct of the governing Providence of God with respect to them.

That the manifest Wickedness of the Nature or Tendency of any pretended New
Revelation; or its Contradictoriness to such Ancient Revelations of the Will of
God, as are never to be reversed, and as have been confirmed by Signs and
Wonders, Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost for an whole Age together; will
be sufficient to spoil the Credit of any Sign or Wonder which may be wrought
for its Support; and to prove that such Sign or Wonder was not of God, but of
the Devil.

That the Credit of any wonderful Work will likewise be destroyed, if God
should exert a superi; our Power in Contradiction to it.

In fine, that when you are in any measure Strangers to the moral Character of
a Pretender to divine Revelations, you cannot safely trust him upon the Credit
of former Revelations; but may reasonably expect, that he should give
sufficient Evidence of the divine Authority of every particular Message, which
be may presume to come to you with in the Name of the Lord.

And to these things you ought to add a Conscientious Endeavor to do the Will
of God, so far as you know it; and servent Prayers in the Name of Christ that
God may have no Cause to send you strong Delusion, that you should believe a
Lie.

If you shall observe these few Directions, I trust you will not be carried
about with diverse and strange Doctrines, but will be established upon the
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ Himselfing the chief
Corner Stone.

To conclude: If some should suppose these Directions to be needless, and
others should apprehend them to be too rigid; I think I cannot answer both
better than in the solemn Words of our Blessed Lord, viz. If any Man shall say
unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not. For there shall arise
false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great Signs and Wonders,
insomuch that (if it were possible) they should deceive the very Elect. But
take ye heed: Behold I have told you before Math. 24.23, 24, 25. Mark 13.23.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 5. l. 1. for imperfect read incomplete. P. 12. l. 2. for raise read rouse.
P. 12. l. 8. read Affections. P. 12. l. 15. for Ways read Wages. P. 14. l. 10.
read Matter. P. 23. l. 1. read If I do.
Advertisement.
There is now preparing for the Press, by the Author of the preceding
Discourses, etc may shortly be published, An Enquiry into the Truth of the
Doctrine of the Imputation of Adam's first Sin to his Posterity.


