THE ESPOUSALS OR A Passionate Persuasive to a Marriage with the Lamb of God,
WHEREIN The Sinners Misery AND The Redeemers Glory is Unvailed in. A Sermon
upon Genesis 24.49. Preached at N. Brunswyck, June the 22d, 1735.

By Gilbert Tennent, A. M. And Minister of the Gospel there.

Qui Christum neisct, nil est si cetera discit,
Qui Christum discit, sat est si cetera nescit.
NEW YORK, Printed by J. Peter Zenger, 1735.

Courteous Reader;
THIS Discourse (which is now somewhat enlarged) treats upon the grand Scope of
the whole Gospel, and the great Errand of the Ministry thereof. For Christ's
sake, I beseech thee to read it thoroughly, without prejudice, examine it
strictly by the holy Scriptures, before thou pass thy Judgment, consider it
seriously without Partiality, and comply with its Design quickly without delay;
in so doing thou will honor God, save thy own Soul, and much refresh my Heart,
and I shall neither loose my poor pains in Writing, nor thou in Reading, which
may God grant for Christ's sake Amen. I conclude and remain thy Servant in the
Redeemer Jesus.

THIS Discourse (which is now somewhat enlarged) treats upon the grand Scope of
the whole Gospel, and the great Errand of the Ministry thereof. For Christ's
sake, I beseech thee to read it thoroughly, without prejudice, examine it
strictly by the holy Scriptures, before thou pass thy Judgment, consider it
seriously without Partiality, and comply with its Design quickly without delay;
in so doing thou will honor God, save thy own Soul, and much refresh my Heart,
and I shall neither loose my poor pains in Writing, nor thou in Reading, which
may God grant for Christ's sake Amen. I conclude and remain thy Servant in the
Redeemer Jesus.

G. TENNENT.

THE ESPOUSALS OR A Passionate Persuasive to a Marriage with the Lamb of God,
etc.
Genesis 24.49. And now if you will deal kindly and truly with my Master, tell me:
And if not, tell me, that I may turn to the right Hand, (...) the Left.


CHristian Friends and dear Brethren, my Errand to you this Day from the great
God the Father of Jesus, resembles that of Eliezer of Damascus, Abrabam's
Servant, who was sent to woo a Wife for his Masters Son: Brethren I come a
wooing in the Name and Behalf of Christ my great Master the Kings Son.

My Business with you to day is to persuade you to be speedily and sincerely
espoused to the Lamb of God, the Lord Jesus Christ. And (...) That I may not
miss my Errand, and (...) of desired Success. What Abraham's Servant proposed
by Way of cautious Supposition, viz. that peradventure the Woman would not be
willing to follow him, verse. 5. I have Reason to use as Matter of doleful
Complaint and bitter Lamentation over many of you, whom former Attempts have
failed to persuade to this Marriage, and also as an Excitement to awful fear
and passionate concerns now.

Abraham's Servant was engaged or bound by Oath to be faithful in the Business
he was sent about, verse. 9. And you know Brethren, I am under a solemn
Ordination Oath, to be faithful to God and you; this I hope will excuse for my
endeavor to deal with you in good earnest.

Again in the Context you may observe, that if the Servant used faithful
Endeavors, and the Woman would not be persuaded then he was to be clear from
his Oath: So, Friends, if after all the endeavors I can use to persuade and
reclaim you, ye still continue obstinate, I shall be free from the Oath I have
taken, and from your Blood.

Abraham's Servant had good Success, the God of his Master prosper'd his Way;
Rebeca, readily consented and said I will go, verse. 58. O that there may be
found here some Rebeca, Lydia, or Zacheus, who is willing to consent to Day to
a Marriage with the Lord Jesus.

Isaac being a Type of Christ, some Interpreters make this fetching of a Wife
for him, to signify the Espousing of the Church to Christ, by the Agency of his
Servants, the Ministers, hence the Church is called the Bride, the Lambs Wife,
Christ the Bridgroom, Job. 3.29. Whose great Business, it is to persuade poor
Souls to consent to embrace him as their Lord and Husband, in an everlasting
Marriage Covenant, its hardly credible that this Story would have been Resolved
in so minute Circumstances, had not a nobler and more mysterious Marriage been
designed to be represented by it.

Under this view the Text presents to our Considerations, the 2. Propositions,
viz.

1. That the Ministers of Christ are Spokesmen for the Marriage of their
Masters Son, -- and. 2. That they are grieved to see their Master's Marriage
hang in Suspense.
I return to consider the first Propos. In Explaining of which, I shall
endeavor to show the Analogy between a Spokesman in a temporal Marriage, and a
Ministers Property's and practice in negotiating a spiritual Marriage, between
Christ and Souls, and so improve it; the Analogy, I think, consists principally
in the following Particulars.

1. A Spokesman should be skillful, able with apt Expressions to set forth the
Lovers Excellencies; so a Minister should be no Novice, but like Apollos,
Mighty in the Scriptures, and thereby able in some Measure to speak forth his
Redeemers Praise.

2. Acquainted with his Person; for how can they commend him whom they do not
know: So should Ministers know Christ and the Truth as it is in him; otherwise
they speak but faintly for him. The Secrets of the Lord are with those that
fear him, and he will remember his holy Covenant.

3. True to his interest, a Spokesman should be a familiar Friend of the Lover,
and faithful to his Cause; Abraham's Servant was such whom he appointed to get
a Wife for his Son: And so must the Ministers of Christ be, Joh. 15.14.15. 1.
Tim. 1.12. And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, for that he counted me faithful
putting me into the Ministry. Jer. 23.31. I am against these Prophets, that
smooth their Tongues, Vide Poli Synopsin in Locum.
So the English Annotations and other learned Interpreters Vide Henery in Locum.
render the Word USE as our Version has it.

4. A Spokesman uses a Variety of Arguments, to alure the Love of the Person
he treats with to his Master, drawn from his personal Merit and great
Affluence: So the faithful Ministers of Christ Labor to win the Affections of
undone Sinners to him, by setting forth his Greatness, Goodness, Suitableness,
Absolute Necessity, Transcendent Excellency, and inexhaustible All suficiency.

5. A faithful Spokesman is grieved to see his great Master slighted, and his
most pregnant Arguments, and his persuasive Adresses fail of desired Success;
he cannot be contented with telling of his Narrative without seeing it take
Effect, this our Text confirms, -- So a godly Minister is not satisfied with
the Performance of Preaching as a Task, and the Observance of Sinners attent
upon it, unless he can perceive some Signs of the Effects of his Preaching,
some Signs of Sinners consenting to embrace the Redeemer.

6. A faithful Spokesman will not only Address the Woman to whom he is sent,
but also make Application to Heaven, for Direction and Success, this did
Abraham's Servant, verse. 12. And he said, O Lord God of my Master Abraham, I
pray thee send me good Speed this Day, and show kindness unto my Master
Abraham. So do the Ministers of Christ bow their Knees to the most high God, of
whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is Named, and vehemently entreat for
Guidence and Succe^^. Permit me, kind Hearers, to supplicate the supreme
Majesty, in the Words of Abraham's Servant, with some small Variation. O Lord
God of my Master Jesus, send me good Speed this Day, and show Kindness unto my
Master; in causing some poor Sinners consent to a Marriage with him.

7. A Faithful Servant, if he succeeds in his Negotiation, returns the due
Honors of his successes to God, so did Eliezer, verse. 27. And He said, blessed
be the Lord God of my Master Abraham, who has not left destitute my Master of
his Mercy and of his Truth: So the Heart of a faithful Minister, when he sees
poor Sinners return to their offended Sovereign, and Kiss the Son with the
deepest Homage, Affection and Obedience, beats in his Bosom with joyful
Transports and grateful Emotions of undissembled praise to God, God and the
Lamb that fits upon the Throne.

8. The Spokesman of a Prince or great Man, offers Bracelets or some rich Love
tokens to the Person his Master makes his Court to, in Order to demonstrate his
Masters Greatness and Love, and to gain the Woman's consent, verse. 22. So the
Ministers of Christ offer in their Masters Name, the Sealings of the Spirit,
the Jewels of the Covenant, to such who will consent to the Marriage of the
King's Son. But

9. When he cannot prevail, he returns to his Master, and gives him an Account
of his Treatment; this a pious Writer takes to be the Scope and Drift of our
Text. So the poor Ministers of Christ, when you will not hear their wooings,
but slight their Lord and all the Offeres of his Love, are obliged with
sorrowful Hearts and weeping Eyes to complain to their Master, now, of your
doleful Stupidity and cruel Obstinacy, and must in the great Day, unless ye
repent, Witness against you, the Offers of Life they have made to you, the
Arguments they have used with you to Embrace them, and your obstinacy against
both. -- But I proceed to the Improvement in a 4 fold Use of Information,
Examination, Conviction, and Exhortation. -- -- and,

1. Does the eternal Son of God offer himself in Marriage to poor undone
Sinners. O surprising Condescension! O stupendous, Stoop of Humble Majesty and
amazing Mercy! O the Breadth, the Length, the Depth of the Love of Christ which
passes Knowledge! Admire all ye Host of Heaven and Earth at this! 2. How great
is the Ingratitude, how unaccountable the Folly, and destructive the Madness of
these who will not be charmed and alur'd by such Love to consent to a Marriage
Covenant with the God of Glory. What will such be able to plead in their own
Vindication at the Redeemer's Bar? Will Not Confusion cover them as a Garment, and
silence seal their guilty Lips? For how shall we escape if we neglect so great
a Salvation. Heb. 2.3, If he that despised Moses's Law, died without mercy,
under two or three Witnesses: Of how much sorer Punishment, suppose ye, shall
he be thought worthy, who has trodden under Foot the Son of God, Heb. 10.28.29.
But I hasten to the

2. Use which is of Examination. Sinner, it is of the last Necessity, both in
Regard of the regular Performance of Duty, and the Reception of reasonable
Comfort in this World, and thy eternal Safety in the next, that thou be
acquainted with thy present State, and know whither thou be espoused to Christ
or not. One Messenger after another has been sent to treat with you, about a
Marriage to the Redeemer, and now I ask you in the Name of the Eternal God, my
Lord and Master, have you been persuaded to consent to the Terms of this
Marriage Covenant? Yea or Not. How stands the Cause, poor Sinner, between the
great God and thee. to help thee to the Knowledge of this, I shall propose some
few examinatory Signs, by which I earnestly request you to try your selves
impartialy, without previous bias, speedily without delay, thoroughly and
conclusively without further suspense, and solemnly as in the presence of the
just Judge of Heaven, and Earth.

1. Have you ever been made feelingly Sensible of your Distance from Christ, of
the absolute Need of Union to and Communion with him, and of your unworthiness
of and inability to attain this great Benefit? Luke 15.17. Mat. 5.3. Joh. 15.5.

2. Have you been divorced from Sin in the Course of your Disposition and
Action? For you may as easily unite Heaven and Hell, Light and Darkness, as
Christ and Sin (habitually) governing or indulged in one Soul. 1. Joh. 3.8. He
that commits Sin, is of the Devil. 1. Joh. 5.18. We know that whosoever is
born of God, Sins not. 2. Cor. 6.15. And what concord has Christ with
Belial?

3. Have you consented to the Terms of the Covenant of Marriage, viz. These of
Self-denial, and taking up the Cross? Luke 9.23. Is your consent free, full,
and habitual? Ps. 110 3. Philip. 3.8. Ps. 119.112.

4. Have you had Communion with Christ by his Word and Spirit? This is a
Natural and nesscesary Consequence of a vital Union, can you say with the
Apostle, 1. John, 1.3. And truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ? Know ye what it is by Experience to have the Kisses of
the King, his Love spread abroad in your Hearts, so that you could say with the
Spouse, my beloved is mine, and I am his, he feeds among the Lilies? Know ye
by Experience what it is to be Sealed hy the Spirit and to cry Abba Father, to
have the new Name, the white Stone, and to eat the bidden Mannah? Cant. 1.2.
and 2.16. Ephesians. 1.13. Romans 8.15. Rev. 2.17. Romans 5.1. -- 5.

5. Do you conscientiously Labor through the Conrse of your Conversation, to
be conformed to the Law, the Love, and the Life of Jesus? 1. Job. 1.6. If we
say we have fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, (i. e. Go on in a Course
of Wickedness, which is fitly compared to Darkness, because it springs from the
Darkness of the Understanding, seeks the Darkness of Concealment, tends to and
often issues in the Darkness of Damnation) we lie and do not the Truth.

I proceed to the 3d, Use, viz. Of Conviction. Alas what Reason is there to
fear that many of you are Strangers to these Experiences and posess'd of the
very contrary Dispositions. -- for

1. Are there not some of you who always imagined you had an interest in
Christ, and never have been distressed with a sorrowful, Sense of your being
wholly without him, and have never had any more then a Speculative and
Historical Knowledge of the Necessity of an Interest in him? And are there not
some who are so far from a just Sense of their unworthiness of, and Inability
to attain this; that the cry up the free will of Man, and think to make up the
Breach, between God and themselves, by their duty's, at least in Part? Hence
they are easy, when they Pray with some Affection, and take more Care to avoid
in their after Practice those Sins which caused their Uneasiness, and then
imagine the Matter is adjusted, the Debate ended, the Storm over. Ah, poor
deceived Souls? Ye are they who seek Justification, by the Works of the Law!
But, pray, remember and consider, that all such are under the Curse: Gal. 3.10.
And that Israel, who sought after Righteousness this Way, did not attain it,
but were found Fighters, against God. Romans 9.30. -- 32. and Romans 10.3.

2. Are not some of you so far from being divorced from Sin, in Disposition and
Action, that you cleave the Father to it in Heart and Practice, justify and
extenuate your Wickedness as much as you can, glory in your shame, and scoff at
strict Holiness, make Provision for the Flesh. -- Or pursue the World with
greater Eagerness and Inordinacy then before? Are there not many of you in whom
some worldly, fleshly, or ambitious lust habitually governs? Does not this
prove to your Faces, that you are dead Men, rather espoused to Satan then to
Jesus? Joh. 8.44. Romans 6.16. Pro. 28.13. Philip. 3.18. Romans 8.6. 1 John 2.15.

3. Are there not some who are so far from consenting to the Terms of Marriage,
viz. Self-denial and taking up the Cross, That they grumble and mutter Reproach
privately, or belch out Blasphemy openly, against strict Religion, and will
have the Way to Heaven, broad and wide? And therefore that the Wisdom of the
Father and Fountain of Truth, was mistaken forfooth, when he asserted the
contrary! Luke 13.24. And instead of denying themselves, and taking up the
Cross, lay the Reins upon the Necks of their Lusts, and contrive a Cross for
others, while in the mean Time, they stoutly contend, that it is only the
Weakness of Christians that brings a Cross upon them, which they say might be
prevented by prudence and moderation. As if the ancient Prophets, Christ and
his Apostles had all missed the Matter, both in Doctrine and Practice, till
these worldly wise Men came upon the Stage, to set Things to rights! Our dear
Lords informed his Desciples, that he came not to send Peace on Earth, but a
Sword; to set at variance a Man against his Father, and the Daughter against
her Mother, and the Daughter in Law, against her Mother in Law. And that a
Man's Foes should be those of his own Household. Mat. 10.34, -- 36. He also
told them, that the World would hate them because they were not of the World;
but chosen out of it. Joh. 15.19. Mark. 13.13. No, no, say these Men, it is
because of their imprudencies they are hated. Note, by the Way, that I don't
pretend to justify any real imprudencies in any, but only endeavor to
Demonstrate, that the Enmity of the Wicked against the Godly springs from
another Source. The inspired Apostle testifies of Cain, that he hated his
Brother, because his own Works were Evil and his Brother's Righteous. 1 John
3.12. But, I uppose, if Cain had been to plead his own Cause, or these Men to
commense his Attorneys, he and they would have told another Sorry, viz. That it
was for this or that Fault he hated him. The Apostle Paul afferts, 2 Timothy 3.12.
That all who will live godly in Christ Jesus will suffer Persecution. Yes, say
these prudent Men, it was so in the Apostles Times, when the World was almost
Pagan, but that Passage is not aplicable to these Christian Times. In Answer to
which, I shall only propose a few Questions, to these moderate Men.

Quest. 1. Is the Devil turned Christian, in reality, these gospel Times?

Quest. 2. Is the Nature of Man different from what it was 1700 Years ago?

Quest. 3. Are the Terms of Christianity altered from what they were in the
Time of Christ and his Apostles? If so, then a smooth Scene opens, then these
Men have found out a New and easy Way to Heaven; but they must show their
Authority before we believe them, their great Names, blustering Figures, and
bold saysoes will hardly gain our implicit assent, or gull us out of our
Senses, though they were as much renowned for Piety and Learning as the old
Pharisees their Predecessors. Again are there not many whose consent, to the
Terms of Marriage is but constrained through a Pang of legal Distress; partial,
attended with Exceptions against this or that Duty, or Dificulty, which pinches
upon their worldly Credit, carnal Ease, or temporal Interest; transient, only
for a sudden fit or good mood and away, but donot run through the Vein of
their Dispositions and series of their Practice What can be said of these, but
that they are wretched Hypocrites, notwithstanding their Pretenses? 2. Kings.
5.18. 1. Sam. 15.9.14. Hos. 6.4.

4. Are not some so far from Communion with God, that they rave out against the
Mentioning of any such Thing, as mere Cant, Enthusiasm, or the Dreams of a
deluded Fancy, disordered Brain, overheated Imagination, or melancholy
Constitution? To whom we may justly apply the Words of the Apostle Paul. 1.
Cor. 2.14. and Jud. 10. Are not many so far from having the Satisfactory or
assuring Experiences of God's Love to their Souls, that they doubt or deny such
a Thing to be attainable, though the sacred Scriptures plainly assert it in very
numerous Places, a few of which I shall mention. 2. Cor. 13.5.1. Cor. 2.12.
Rev. 2.17. Romans 8. 38.39. Col. 2.2.1. Joh. 3.19. Heb. 6. 11. Heb. 10.22. Is not
this a fine Story of these People, that because they have not found these
Evidences of the divine Favor, therefore no others have or may! See what
horrible arrogance and self-love or rather selfhatred is in these Men, who make
themselves the Measures and Standards of all Mankind! They are, forsooth, the
ne plus ultra, arrived to the utmost Reach of the human Nature and devine
Favor, in Point of Improvement and Experience; O horrible! And this they hold
probably with a View to prop up their false Hope. Perhaps, Friend, the Reason
why thou do not know these Tokens of the divine Love in thy Self is, because
thou art yet in a State of black Nature and spiritual Death, and then certainly
you cannot know what is not; Nothing, is not an Object of Knowledge. But is not
it uncharitable for you to Measure every Man's Corn by you own Bushel?

5. Are not some of you so far from conscientiously laboring through the
Course of your Life, to conform to the Law and Life of Jesus; that ye quarrel
at the Strictness of the Former, and neglect to Copy after the Later, making
Exceptions like Naman the Syrian? 2. King. 5.18. Do ye not in the Course and
general Tenor of your Dispositions and Practice, sin against Conscience by
breaking the Law and Counteracting the Life of the Redeemer, and thereby prove
that ye have no Marriage Union to or interest in him but on the contrary are
under the Curse? For he that is in Christ has Crucified the Flesh, with the
Afections and Lusts of it. Gal. 5.25. He that says he abides in him ought
himself so to Walk, even as he Walked. 1. Joh. 2.6.

But I proceed to the,

4. Use, which is of Exhortation, I beseech you poor unconverted Sinners, that
ye would at last be persuaded to accept of Christ as your Lord and King, and
abandon other Lords and Lovers, And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with
my Master, tell me, and if not, tell me, that I may turn to the right Hand or
to the Left. To move you to a Compliance with this Entreaty, I shall propose to
your Consideration the following Arguments or Motives; which may the Great and
good God, in whose Hands the Hearts of all Mankind are, and who can turn them
as the Streams of Water, in the South, bless to your Edification and Salvation.
And first, pray, consider WHO it is that woos you, and see if he has not all
the amiable attractable Qualifications which may influence our Love, Desire or
Hope.

For 1. He is a Husband honorably descended, both as to his Human and Divine
Nature, and (1) As to his human Nature he descended from the Tribe of Judah,
the most Famous of the Tribes of Israel, and from the royal Family of David;
he is the Branch that sprung from the Stem of Jess. (2) As to his Divine
Nature, he is the Son of the eternal God, the Ancient of Days, the Father of
Eternity, the Fountain of all Good and Excellency. Prove. 8.22.23.


2. A great and glorious Husband, the Brightness of his Father's Glory, the
express Image of his Person, Heb. 1.3. The King of Kings, the Lord of Lords,
the only Ruler of Princes, the King of Glory, the Lord strong and mighty, the
Lord mighty in Battle. Ps. 24.8. Would not ye then, poor Sinners, be Married to
this blessed God. And now if you will deal truly and kindly with my Master tell
me, --

3. A Rich and All suficient Husband, Ephesians. 3.8 Unto me who am less then the
least of all Saints, is this Grace given that I should Preach among the
Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of Christ. Now the Riches of Christ are
unsearchable in three Respects, viz. of Knowledge, Depth, Description, no human
Understanding could ever have found out this Way of Salvation by a Redeemer,
and as all the Wants of Creatures can never draw the Fountain of his Fullness
dry, so it exceeds the Art of Men and the Tongues of Seraphs to describe it.
Riches are a common attracttive of marriage Love. Behold, Sinner, here is an
Incomprehensible, Inexhaustible, Universal and Eternal Ocean of Boundless and
Botomless, Fullness and Riches in Christ Jesus! Here is Light to direct thee,
Life to quicken thee, Love to refresh thee, and Power to protect thee, a Balsam
to heal thee, clean Raiment to cloth thee, and refined Gold to enrich thee!
Is. 55.1.2. Rev. 3.18. And will thou not O Man, O Woman, be espoused to this
Jesus? And now if you will deal truly and kindly with my Master tell me, --

4. An allknowing Hushand, he knows the particular Places of his Peoples
residence their outward Circumstances and inward Distresses, the Depth of their
spiritual Maladies and the Strength of their malignant Enemies, and how to send
suitable, seasonable and effectual Succors and Remedies to Rescue and heal
them. He sees his Peoples secret wrastlings and will not hide his Ear at their
breathing and their Cry. Lam. 3.56. Acts. 9.11. Heb. 4.13.

5. An allpowerful Husband, a God of absolute and infinite sovereignty and
solemn Majesty, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, he does what he pleases
among the Armies of Heaven and among the Children of Men. Men and Devils are
subject to his control, the Winds and Seas obey his Word. Hence he is able to
guard his feeble Spouse against all the violent Assaults of Hell and Earth. O
how safe and secure are those who are gathered under the Wing and into the
Bosom of this Almighty Redeemer! And now if you will deal kindly and truly with
my Master tell me, --

6. An every-where-present Husband, all the united Force of Men and Devils
cannot separate him from his Spouse, he accompanies his poor People in the
greatest Difficulties, when all other Helps and Friends fail! As Bishop
Beveridge observes in his Thesaurus Theologirus, He was with Abraham on the
Mount, with Noah in the Ark, with Israel in the red Sea, with Daniel in the Den
of Lions, with the three Children in the Fire, and with Jonah on the Water,
with Peter in Prison: Tho they Environed him about with strange Walls, yet there
was still a Passage open toward Heaven which neither their Art, Strength or
Malice could obstruct. O Sirs, what a blessed Friend and incomparable Husband
then is this Lord Jesus, other Friends and Relations may be far from us in our
sorest distresses ignorant of our oppressing Maladies, or, if they knew them,
unable to heal them: But behold Sinner, behold the glorious condescending,
compassionate and powerful Lord Jesus! He knows his People in the Furnace of
Affliction, is present with them when all other Friends forsake them: Smiles
sweetest under the World's Frowns. O he arises with healing under his Wings,
upon them in the lonely Desert when far distant from all Relations! Hos. 2.14.

7. A Beautiful Husband, Beauty is a common Atractive of Marriage Love. Now our
Lord Jesus, is fairer then the Children of Men, the Beauty of Heaven, the Rose
of Sharon, the Darling of God, the Wonder of Angels, the Lilly of the Valeys,
the chief among ten Thousand! There is nothing but what is lovely in him, and
in him is a perfect concurrence of all created Excellency, and divine Glory.
The Beauty of Creatures is finite, fading, imperfect, deceiving, ensnaring. But
the Beauty of Christ is infinite, perfect and eternally Orient; without Want or
Diminution through all the numberless Periods of eternal Time. Will you not
then, poor Sinners, give your Consent to be esponsed to this beautiful Jesus?
And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my Master, tell me, and if not
tell me, that I may turn to the right Hand or the Left.

O Sinners, the Beauty of all Creatures is Blackness and deformity, when
compared with Christ's transcendent Execllency He is white and rudie, the
Standard bea^^ amongst ten Thousand! His Head is as the most fine Gold, his
Locks are hushy and black as a. Peaven, his Eyes are as the Eyes of Doves, by
the Rivers of Waters washed with Milk, and fitly set. Cant. 5.10. Let us
therefore with holy Paul, account all Things as Dross and Dung for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of this amiable Lord Jesus. Philip. 3.8.

8. Christ is a Prudent Husband, his Love is not a femine Fondness, but a
masculine rational Love, which pursues the properest though not always the
pleasantest Measures to secure and advance the best Good of the beloved Object:
Hence whom he loves he chastneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives.
Heb. 12.6.7. This wholesome Kind of Discipline is best suited to subdue our
stuborn Natures and perverse Lusts.

9. A loving Husband, his Love has these three remarkable Properties, viz.
Eternity, Transcendency, and Efficacy, and (1) His Love is Eternal, both a
part ante, and a part post, as divines say, i.e. both before and after. As it
sprung from Eternity, so it will continue to it. Pro. 8.31. -- Joh. 10.28. (2)
Transcendent, expressing it self in high and honorable Thoughts of his People,
and in indearing Expressions of, and to them. Is. 26.4. Mal. 3.17: Cant.
2.14.4.8.5.2. (3) Effectual, his Love brought him out of the Bosom of his
Father, that Seat of inexpressible Honor and Pleasure, into a miserable World,
there to endure a Scene of unconceivable and unutterable. Anguish, in Order to
save his People from perpetual Pains, Respecting this Love we may justly use
the A postle's Exclamation. Ephesians. 3.18.19.
And may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the Breadth, and
Length, and Depth, and Height, and to know the Love of Christ which passes
Knowledge. i.e. to get an apprehensive Knowledge of it, seeing that a
compresensive View is there) of impossible Attainment, does not this Jesus
coming to you in a Sea of Blood, merit your Esteem and Affection? Can you be
unkind to such a Savior? And now, if you will deal kindly and truly with my
Master tell me, and if not, tell me, that I may turn to the right Hand or to
the Lest

10. Christ is an indulgent Husband, no temporal Husband will bear with such
infirmities in his Spouse as the blessed Jesus. Jer. 3.14. Turn O backsliding
Children, says the Lord, for I am Married unto you: And I will take you one of
a City, and two of a Family, and I will bring you to Zion. O the unshaken
astonishing Patience and permanent Affection of the gracious Lord Jesus! See
Ps. 89.31.32.33. If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments. Then
will I visit their Transgression with the Rod, and their Iniquity with Stripes;
nevertheless, my loving Kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer
my Faithfulness to sail.

11. A beneficient Husband, no Husband under Heaven gives such a dowry or
joynter as Christ, by him his People are made Heirs of God, Heirs of Grace,
Heirs of Glory, have an unalienable Claim to a Kingdom, which can never be
moov'd. Romans 8.17. -- 1 Pet. 3.9. Jam. 2.5. O wonderful! Who is able to
conceive or express the Greatness, the Vastness, the Glory, the Beauty, the
Necessity, and Excellency of this Inheritance! Who can by searching find out
God, or know the Almighty to Perfection? Says Zophar; it is high as Heaven,
what can thou do? Deeper then Hell, what can thou know? The Measure thereof
is langer than the Earth, and broader then the Sea. Job. 11.8.9. Now God
himself is the Portion of his People, Genesis 15.1. All the Perfections of His
Nature are engaged to advance their eternal Interest, his Wisdom is theirs to
guide them, his Power to guard them, his faithfulness to support them; his Love
to ravish them, and his fullness to supply them. Why then will ye not be
espoused to this beneficent Jesus ye indigent Sinners? And now if ye will show
kindness, etc.

12. An everlasting Husband, Hos. 2.19. And I will botrotb thee unto me
forever, in Righteousness and in Judgment and in loving Kindness and Mercies.
Death cutts the Sinews, and breaks the Bonds of all natural Relations, they lie
entoomb'd in the Grave, abandoned to perpetual Oblivion; but infread of
disolving, Death strengthens this spiritual Relation, for it brings the longing
Soul into the immediate embraces of its dearest Lord and Husband; and wafts it
into a bright World of perfected Spirits. O is not it worth thy Labor to seek
an interest in this Redeemer who is such an Almighty and everlasting Friend and
Husband? And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my Master, tell me.

2, Consider who it is, this King of Glory makes his Court to, see if they have
not the most contemptible Qualities? For,

1. They are Persons of mean Descent, their Father was an Amorits and their
Mother a Hittite. Ezekiel. 16.45. Joh. 3.6. Yea rather, they are of their Father
the Davil for his Works they will do. Joh. 8.44. 2. Of base Quality, Dust,
depraved* Dust Potsherds of the Earth such as have neither goodness nor
strength. Romans 3, 10. -- Joh. 15.5. 3. Indigent Persons, in Respect of
Condition, such as have not a Bit of Bread to eat, nor a Rag of Clothes to put
on, nor a Farthing in their Purse. Rev. 3.17. Those that are rich are wont to
be coy in Courtship. But what madness is it for you, Sinners, to be coy, when
the rich and all sufficient Jesus makes Court to you, who are as poor and
beggarly as Sin and Death can make you. Would not you count it a Piece of
unaccountable Rudeness and Folly, if a beggarly scullion Girl, who had scarce
Clothes to her Back would show much Coyness and Backwardness, when a great
Prince, of noble Blood and great Wealth, made repeated and earnest Suit to her,
offered to advance her to royal Dignity and Cloth her with Cloth of Gold? O
unhappy Sinners, this is your foolish Practice! Christ offers you great Things
on your compliance with the Terms of Marriage. Though ye have lain among the
smutty Pots of Sin, yet if ye will be espoused to Jesus, you may be Clothed
with Gold of Ophir, and all your Garments made to Smell of Myrrbe, Aloes and
Cassia, out of the Ivory Palaces. Ps. 45.8.9. You may be Adorned like the Dove,
whose Wings are cavered with Silver and her Feathers with yellow Gold. Ps.
68.13. 4. They are impotent Persons, unable to do any Thing that is great or
good, being dead in Sins and Trespasses. Ephesians. 2.1. There is none of you that
does good, no not one. Romans 3.2. Joh. 15.5. 5. Black and deformed Persons,
lying in the open Field in their Blood, as Spectacles of Shame and Misery.
Ezekiel. 16.6. From the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, covered with
Bruises and putrefying Sores. Is 1.6. Strange that the Beautiful and all
suficient Jesus should make Love Addresses to such poluted Creatures, the
proper Objects of Loathing and Abhorance, spread the Skirt of his Affection
over them, and say to them live! And Stranger yet if possible that such
abandoned, helpless, loathsome Creatures should reject and make light of his
wooing Motions, as it is to be lamented the most do! Mat. 22.5. 6. They are
hateful Creatures, filled with Enmity and Spite against the Father of Jesus.
Romans 8.7. Against himself, Luke 19.14. We will not have this Man to Reign over
us. Against his Law, Ps. 2.3. Let us break their Bands asunder, and cast their
Cords from us. Against his People, Gal. 4.29. But as then he that was Born
after the Flesh, persecuted him that was Born after the Spirit, so it is now.
7. Even when renewed, but peevish backsliding Creatures, apt to offend him, and
unable to requite his Love, Jam. 3.2. Every unconverted sinner is posess'd of
these doleful Dispositions, and yet the Lord Jesus woos them and wants to be
gracious to them, O amazing Condescension! Is. 30.18. Again:
3. Consider how Christ woos you, viz.

1. Variously; sometimes mediately, by his Servants, and sometimes immediately
by himself; he gives you Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, he writes
you the great Things of his Law, and that in Lines of Blood, alas that they
should be esteemed as a vain Thing! I fear that awful passage of the Prophet
Jeremiah, Chap. 7.25. -- 29. may be with too great Reason applied to the Body
of this People. But Christ Jesus not only sends his Servants to woo and warn
you, but he comes himself to invite you. Rev. 3.20. 2. Patiently, he bears with
many Afronts Delays, Refusals, and yet repeats his Love adresses; which
considering his Majesty and our meanness is very admirable! Is. 30.18. 3.
Passionately, by the most endearing Compellations. Cant. 5.2.48. by the most
persuasive Arguments drawn from his sufferings and the surprising Love he
expressed in them: Thus he draws with the Cords of a Man, with Bands of Love,
and by the most pungent Expostulations, kind Entreaties, and doleful
Lamentations. Ezekiel. 18.31. Mat. 11.28. Mat. 5.40. -- And 4. Pray, ponder in
your Hearts for what it is he woos you; is it that he may gain any Benefit by
you? No, no, that is impossible! For he is self-suficient and absolutely
perfect. Our goodness extends not to him, neither is it any gain to him that we
are righteous. Ps. 16.2. Job. 22.3. Deuteronomy. 32.4. He is a Rock, his Work is
perfect, for all his Ways are Judgment, a God of Truth, and without Iniquity,
just and right is he. Ps. 16.11. Thou will show me the Path of Life, in thy
Presence is fullness of Joy, at thy right Hand are Pleasures for evermore. And
does the blessed Jesus so importunately woo such worthless Dust as we, not for
his but our everlasting Benefit, as though his Happiness depended upon our
compliance, and will we not hear this Bird of Paradise, this Dove of Heaven,
and comply with his gracious and compassionate calls? O the Strange and
unparalelld Madness, the dreadful Stupidity and unkind Barbarity of a wretched
World? who will not listen to and comply with this charmers Voice!
Blessed Savior, how dear and compassionate is thy Love! How pure and
astonishing thy rich Grace! O it is amazing that the whole Earth does not shut
their Ears against the soothing but ensnaring Charms, and their Eyes from
beholding (with inordinate Desire) the fading false black Beauties of this
World's Sirens, and follow after this blessed Lamb of God! O the transcendant
Beauties of his Person! The spotless Perfection of his Obedience! The
unfathomable and tremenduous Depths of his sufferings! The unstained Purity of
his Laws! The ravishing Charms of his Love! The dazzling Beauties, Glories and
Splendours of his unshaken Kingdom! Thou art altogether Lovely dear Lord! Thy
Voice, thy Lips, thy Love, are sweet! who would not Love thee O King of Saints!
Blessed Savior, and is this thy gracious and generous Design in all thy
importunate, Solicitations with thy poor Creatures, only to make them Happy and
Glorious in thy love, and will we not embrace thee and be espoused to thee!
Blush O Heavens, and be astonished O Earth, and be desolate and horribly afraid
ye Mountains, at this rueful, wretched brutish, barbarous wickedness!

Dear Lord! We are unworthy to wash the Feet of thy meanest Servants, and do
thou envite us to thy Table, yea to thy Bosom, in order to enjoy the Kisses of
thy Marriage-Love? And will we reject the Invitation? God forbid! God forbid!
And now, Sinners, If ye will deal kindly and truly with my Master, tell me, and
if not, tell me; why halt ye, poor Souls? why do ye linger and delay in so
important a Concern? Pray what Objections have you against a speedy Marriage
with my great Master? -- For,

1. Is not his Person amiable? To those that believe, I am sure he is precious,
how little Beauty so over ye see in him that ye should desire him, he is
notwithstanding the Desire of Nations, the Admirations of the Saints, and
Angels, both of the Church militant and tryumphant. Is. 9.6.

2. Are not his Service and Proposals rational? Pray what Faults can you find
in his Laws? The Rules of his Government, which are so marvelously adjusted, to
represent the Perfections of his Nature, and illustrate the Honors of his
Government, so consonant to the unbiassed Reason of Mankind, and so subservient
to promote their greatest and best Interest? Which, while they exalt our Reason
to a just pre-eminence over Sense, in the mean Time, indulge us in every decent
Liberty, Innocent and Honorable Sweet, and only restrain us from that which is
at once the shame and reproach of our rational Nature, the Disease and Death of
our imortal Souls; and are not the Terms of the Gospel, alike Easy and Equal
worthy of God to propose and suitable to us to perform by his Assistance and
Influence? -- And,

3. Is not his Love unsearchable? Ephesians. 3.18, 19. would not his painful
Suffering for you, in Name, Body and Soul, gain your worthless, Love? O
horrible Ingratitude! O cruel barbarous hard hearted World! And will ye treat
the Blessed, Blessed, bleeding Jesus thus? Then remember to your Conviction or
Confussion, that an ANATHEMA MARANATHA will be (so continuing) your eternal
Portion. 1. Cor. 16.22. And that as your Sin in rejecting a Savior's Love,
surpasses the Wickedness of Pagans and Devils, who never had the Offer of it,
and thus is blacker than Hell it self; So your plagues will be wonderful,
except ye Repent. Joh. 3.19. Jam. 4.17. Mat. 10.15. Joh. 15.22.

4. Is not Marriage to him equal and of absolute Necessity? Is not it equal and
rational, that we who are dependant Creatures should obey our Sovereign's
Commands and comply with his entreating Calls? Especially when so much for our
Honor and Benefit as the present Case realy is. But if this will not induce you,
an absolute Necessity should constrain you to be espoused to Christ, for unless
you be divorced from your Lusts, and Married to him, you will be Damned to all
Eternity. Heb. 12, 14. Joh. 8.24. Joh. 3.36.

5. Is not his Dowry inestimable? 2. Cor. 4.17. For our light Affliction which
is but for a Moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of
Glory. Now to give this Argument the greater Force and Energy, consider what
this happiness which Christ offers to those who are willing to be espoused to
him contains. Now there are these (2). Ingredients in it (1) a Privation of
every Evil, and (2) a Possession of every Good.


1. I say there, is a perfect and perpetual Privation of or freedom from every
Evil, both of Sin and Punishment, which we either feel or fear in this World,
which particularly appears in the following Instances.

1. There is a Freedom from all Heart Corruptions, as well as Defects of Speech
and Practice, which are a great grief to the People of God in this World. Romans
7.24. There is not the least Inclination in the Inhabitants of that City of the
great King, to swerve from the golden Rule of Righteousness. Ephesians, 5.27. Rev.
21.27. Rev. 22: 15.

2. From all outward Temptations to Sin, whither from Satan or wicked Men, then
shall that malicious Accuser of the Brethren be perfectly bruised down under
their Feet, and they set far above the Reach of his envenomed Arrows; and
wicked Men fixed in their everlasting Tophet, where they shall be no more able
to blast the Names of the Redeemed of God, with their malicious Speeches, or
grieve then Hearts by their beastly Practices. Romans 16.20. Luke 16.26. -- And.

3. From all defects of their religious services, which they at present groan
under in this vale of Grief and Imperfection; their Hearts will never be out of
frame any more in divine Worship, obstructed by wondrings or hardness, but he
carried out toward the amiable God, in an uninterrupted everlasting Transport
of Affection to and complacency in him. Is. 64.6.

4. From the Imperfections of their Graces; their faith will be turned into
sight, there will be no more doubtings of the goodness of their State, the
continuance of their Father's Love, or of the Power and prevalence of their
temporal and ghostly Enemies to all Eternity. Their Desire and Hope will expire
in the full and final Enjoyment of the longed for Good. Their sorrows shall be
turned into Joys which are unspeakable, Glorious and Everlasting. Their Sobbs
into Songs, their doleful Complaints into cheerful and perpetual Hosannas. Rev.
5.8.9. -- 13.

5. From the innocent Infirmities of Nature, such as Hunger, Thirst, Weariness,
Maims, Blemishes, their Bodies will be Spiritual, Beutiful and Glorious, like
the Body of Christ, which on the Mount of Transfiguration shone like the Sun.
They shall be perfect in strength, quick and unwearied in their Motion like the
Seraphims. Phil. 3.21. 1 Car. 15.44. Mat. 17.2.

6. They shall be perpetually freed from all the penal Fruits of Sin. From all
pain and anguish both of Body and Mind. Never shall any Cloud arise in that
serene Heaven, to perplex their Minds, nor any Disease or Death in these
Regions of Immortality and Life, to pain their Bodies. Rev. 7.17. And,

2. There is a Possession of all Good, that is or can be the Object of a
reasonable Desire or Hope, issuing Principally from the Sight and Enjoyment of
God.

Here we see darkly as in a Glass, but there we shall see Face to Face. 1 Cor,
13.12. In this Vission of God, the Understandings of the Glorified will be
Entertained with the noblest Discoveries of Truth, which is their proper Good.
They shall be inexpreshbly delighted with beholding the charming Glories of the
divine Nature, the transcendent Beauties of his Word, and the surprising
Harmony of his Works.

There the deep Designs of his unsearchable Wisdom in his unchungeable Purposes
(which stands like Mountains of eternal Brass) shall be opened, and the
unstained Honors of his Sovereign and unerring Providence, (through all its
mazy Labrynths) in bringing every of these to their timely Births shall be
unvailed, and shine with the brightest Beauties, like the richest Jewel
imbossed in the purest Gold.

There the blessed Jesus seated on a Throne of great Glory, (...) with all his
mediatorial Beauty and Excellency, will be rapturously Admired, and reverently
adored, by all the shining Ranks of prostrate Saints and Seraphims, and the
Honors of his Dying but victorious Love perpetually Sung with the sweetest
Accents by all the heavenly Hosts. Rev. 5.9. Rev. 14.1. -- 4.

There surely redeeming Grace shall appear in its proper Lusture, the ancient
Councils, concerning it, be fully discovered, and their seasonable
Accmplishment sweetle displaid, in which all the Atributes of the Deity. But
particularly his unsearchable Wisdom, inflexible Justice, inviolable Truth, and
transcendant Love, shall receive their peculiar and harmonious Honors, and
shine with the strongest Light. Ps. 85.10. Mercy and Truth are met together,
Righteousness and Peace have Kissed each other. The Glories of his unsearchable
Wisdom, will be fully opened in contriving a Scene so well suited, to
illustrate the Honors of the divine Nature, and conciliate the seemingly
jarring Attributes of it, viz. His Mercy and Justice, that the Latter being
satisfied the Former might be displaid. Of his involable Truth in inflicting
the Penalties anexed to the Breach of the first Covenant. Genesis 2.17. Of his
inflexible Justice, in afflicting his own Son to death, reather then Sin should
go unpunished. Is. 53.5. Of his transcendent Love, in punishing his beloved
Son, rather than the Sinner should perish. 1. Joh 4.10. And as the
Understanding of the Redeemed will be delighted with beholding the most
excellent Truths, as has been hinted before, so their Wills shall be ravished
with embracing the supreme Good, the blessed God himself as their eternal
Portion, from this will issue perpetual Joy, and Praise, Peace, and Purity,
unexpressible and glorious. But besides these Things mentioned there will be
Accessories to the happiness of the Saints, arising from the Beauty of the
Place, the Charms of its Inhabitants, and Perpetuity of its Duration.

Behold, poor Sinners, the Stately glorious and joyful Triumphs of Emanuel's
Country! Look how the Rivers of pious Love and perpetual Joy of pure peace and
perfect Pleasure rove in endless circles through the whole Land! See there is
the Tree of Life, the Bread of Heaven, the Angel's Manna! Sinner, look
eastward, westward, northward, and southward, all this will God give thee, if
thou will be but espoused to his Son, the blessed Lord Jesus, and will not ye?
Sinners! will not ye? What are ye quite Deaf to or have ye wholly lost the
Impressions of Conscience, Reason and Sense? Is your self-Love quite Dead
within you, and will ye not seek your own happiness? O have these Things no
Impression upon you! O hard Hearts! What shall be done for you poor Sinners, in
order to make you wise to Salvation? Alas, will no Arguments persuade you?
Well may the gracious God pity and perswaide you, who will not pity your selves.
But I proceed to consider the.

2. Proposition, viz. That the faithful Servants of Christ, are grieved to see
the Treaty of their Master's Marriage hang in suspense. This was the sad source
of the pious Prophet's mournful Complaints, Is. 49 4. -- I have labored in
vain, I have spent my Strength for naught, Is. 53.1. who has believed our
Report? And to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? Micha. 7.1.2. Woe is me,
for I am as when they have gathered the Summer Fruits, as the Grape gleanings
of the Vintage: There is no cluster to Eat. My Soul desired the first ripe
Fruit; the good Man is perished out of the Earth, and there is none upright
among Men.

Now to hold any Thing in Suspense, is to remain undetermined in our Choice
concerning it, to halt between two Opinions, wavering sometimes to one Object
and sometimes to another.

That too many are guilty of this pernicious Practice appears from both
Scripture and Reason. 1. King. 18.21. And Elijah came unto all the People, and
said, how long halt ye between two Opinions; if the Lord be God, follow him;
But if Baal, then follow him. and Rev. 3.15, 16. I know thy Works, that thou
art neither cold nor hot: I would thou were cold or hot. So then because thou
art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my Mouth. Zec.
1.11. -- And behold all the Earth sits still and is at rest. The stillness
of many about the concerns of their Souls, whose lives are notwithstanding very
broken and miserable, their indifference about heavenly Things, both in Speech
and Practice and in the mean Time their eager Pursuit of Earthly, both by
unseasonable, yea, everlasting Discourses, about such Trash, and by their
sinful Contrivances and inordinate Labors to amass great worldly Treasurs,
notwithstanding of their contrary Profession, Pretenses, Obligations, are too
plain Proofs of the Proposition, to be denied by any rational Man.

The general Causes of this Suspense, are these following.

1. Ignorance, both of the Nature of God, true Religion, and their own Danger.
If Men had just Apprehensions of the blessed God, and perceived the beautiful
attractive Perfections of his Nature, they could not (even the dullest Souls)
but be fired and charmed with his ravishing Glories, and freely choose him as
their Master and Portion; in like manner, had Men but true Notions, of the
Nature, Necessity, and Excellency of Religion, they would doubtless make it the
Object of their voluntary Choice and Matter of their persevering Practice,
because its Precepts contain such Beauty and Equity in them, its promises such
Springs of Sweetness, and its threats such Majesty and Terror. Were unhappy
Sinners but thoroughly shaken off the Lees of their carnal Security and false
Hope, and made sensible of their present danger and misery, they would no
longer be lukewarm and indifferent, but endeavor to take Heaven my Storm.
Mat. 11.12. O Sinner, see and consider the danger of ignorance represente in
dreadful Colors in the following Places of Scripture, Is. 27.11. -- For it is
a People of no Understanding: Therefore he that made them will not have mercy
on them, and, he that formed them will show them no favor. 2. These. 1.7.8.9.
-- When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels in
flaming Fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with everlasting
Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power.

2. The Love of Sin, this is conatural to us, because we were shapen in
Iniquity. Ps. 51.5. Job. 14.4. Is. 48.8. Job. 11.12. Joh. 3.6. Hence we have a
strong yea brutish proness naturaly to commit it in despite of Reason, and
Conscience. Jer. 8.6. Every one turns to his Course as the Horse rusheth into
the Battle. see Prove. 7.22. Is. 1.3. This corrupt bias being so inveterate and
strong, is therefore dificultly broken, and so a powerful prejudice against the
Sinners compliance with the Terms and Performance of the Duties of Religion.

3. The Policy of Satan, 2. Cor. 4.4. The God of this World, (so the Devil is
called catchresticaly because of his usurped and extensive Dominion) has
blinded the Minds of them which believe not, least the Light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them. The Devil
tells them, that there is no great evil in in small Sins. I mean those that are
reckoned such, not that any Sin can be in it self small, no, unless there can
be found a small or little Deity. The Sins must needs be great, that are
committed against him. The Devil will listen in to their Ears, that there is no
great hurt in neglecting the Hearing of the Word sometimes, and other Duties of
Religion, and in taking worldly Discourse on the Lord's Day, and keeping bad
Company. As also that there is no such Difficulty in Religion, as some strict
Preachers and People profess. Again, that God is merciful* and that Christ has
died for the worst of Sinners, that it is needless for them to take pains about
Religion, in their prime and strength (for that he suggests, would be to bid
adue to all Pleasures) seeing they can secure their happiness by a late
Repentance. Now after Satan has hardened them in Sin after this Manner, if they
chance to be awakened by the Word, or Providence, he quickly alters his Note,
and tells them that the Day of Grace is over, or that they have committed the
unpardonable Sin; their Iniquities are too great to be forgiven, and therefore
that its too late to repent. If they had begun sooner in the Service of God, or
sinned less against him they might have expected Mercy from him; but now their
Sins are so great that they had as good leave of striving, they must perish. To
antidote these poisonous destructive Delusions of the Devil. I shall referr you
to the following Scriptures, which you may read at your leisure. Romans 6.23.
Romans 10.17. Is. 58.13. Pro. 13.20. Luke 13.24. Ex. 34.7. Joh. 9.39. Ecles.
12.1. Pro. 3.17. Pro. 1.24.28. Pro. 29.1. Is. 1.18. Mat. 11.28. Mat. 18.11. Is.
42.3. Ps. 25.11.

4. The Cares of the World, either to enlarge (as the Sea) or preserve their
Possessions, choke their good Inclinations, break the Chain of their religious
Meditations, and make them but lukewarm, Galeos or deceitful Demases in the
Affairs of Religion. Alas there be many Martha's now adays (but few Mary's) who
are careful and troubled about many Things. Luke 10.41. (Marimnas kai turbadze
peri polla.) But in the mean Time neglect the one Thing necessary, which is
infinitely more worth than them all, viz. The securing their eternal Happiness
in the proper Season of it, the Word Merimna, imports such cares as divide and
distress the Mind, thus are not the Hearts of many, separated from God and
grievously perplexed with a Variety of vexations Cares about this vain
perrishing World, while in the mean there is a deep silence and unconcerndness
about their deathless Souls. O Sirs, what will be the End of these Things, see
Amos. 6.1. and Zeph: 1.12. and Ephesians. 5.5. 1 John 2.15.

5. The Examples of the Grafty and Rich, from which they are apt to infer
this; other People, the wise and great are easy about their Souls, and why may
not I? Surely they know more about these Things then I do. Answ. Yes, you may,
if you will be: content with the same Fate Luke 6.25. Woe unto you that are full:
For ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that Laugh now; for ye shall mourn and weep.
See 1. Cor. 1.26.27. Not many wise Men after the Flesh, not many noble, are
called. But God has chosen the foolish Things, of the World, to confound the
wise; and God has chosen the weak Things of the World to confound the Things
which are Mighty; what if they have a little more Knowledge, their abuse of it
makes them but more like the Devil, their Father, who is an inteligent but
wicked Spirit.

6. Presumption, either that they are right already, or shall surely be so
afterward, though they have no scriptural Ground for either. Is. 57.10,

7. Error in Opinion about the Nature of Religion, or rather the Preparatives
of it, viz. That there is no necessity of that trouble, and Distress of Soul,
which faithful Ministers urge in Order to Conversion, according to the Current
of the Scriptures. Jer. 4.3. Joel. 2.12.13. Jam. 4.8.9. Mat. 5.4. Mat. 11.12.
etc. -- But their natural Atheism and Self love, or rather Love of Ease,
inclines them secretly to Question or openly to oppose the most plain and clear
Testimonies of Scripture in this Case.

Now the Reasons of Faithful Minister's Sorrows and grief upon this Account are
these, viz.

1. Because this suspense is dishonorable to their Master, an affront to his
Person, it is as if they questioned whether he were preferable to their Lusts
and fading Enjoyments. A Contempt of his Authority, ( Mat. 6.33. but seek
first, etc.) Armed with the most dreadful Threats. 1. Cor. 16.22. An abuse of
his Mercy adorned with the richest Tenders and Triumphs of free Love. Joh.
3.16. Now the greater Affection true hearted Ministers have to their great
Master, in Proportion is their Grief for his abuse, which inclines them to Use
with sobing Hearts, the passionate Language of Eliezer, with their Hearers, And
now if you will deal truly and kindly with my Master tell me, and if not, tell
me, that I may turn to the right Hand or to the lest. -- And,

2. Destructive to Souls, Rev. 3.15.16 The greater Value they have for the
Souls of Men, the clearer Views they have of the happiness, Sinners slight, and
of the comprehensive Ruin they are hastening to, by their indifferenc and
wickedness, the more in Proportion must be their Sorrows: Who can be an
unconcerned Spectator of such a doleful Tragedy? Who can without Indignation
and Pity behold foolish Sinners selling their Souls, for very Trifles of no
Moment or Duration, into eternal Pains; ah, its enough to draw pity from a
Rock, and to make a Heart of Iron bleed. And now if ye will dral truly with my
Master tell me, --

3. Disappointing to their Labors, O! must it not be wounding to their Hearts,
to see their Prayers unanswered, their Sermons lost, and all their Desires and
Labors blasted with Disappointment? To travel and bring forth nothing but
Wind, to Sow upon hard Rocks, or on the faithless Waves, to find by sad
Experience that Sinners will not be persuaded to forsake the Ways of Sin and
Death, and accept the Life set before them! O! how does it grive the poor
Ministers of Christ, to see their dear Lord slighted, and all the Offers of his
pure and precious Love despised? While in the mean Time, Sin, Satan and the
World findd easy access to the Heart, these base Rivals of our Redeemer, though
of a viperous brood and destructive tendency, are passionately caressed,
readily admitted and their Motions punctually obeyed, while Christ Jesus the
Lord of Glory, who has the best Right to our Hearts and Obedience, is basely
rejected and kept without the Door of the Heart, until his Head is wet with the
Dew, and his Locks with the Drops of the Night. Cant. 5.2. How can the faithful
Ministers of God, the Sons of Levi, and all the Sons of Zion, keep from
bewailing and sobbing over such infatuated Souls, in the passionate peircing
Strains of Mourning Jeremiah. Jer. 9.1. Oh, that my Head were Waters, and mine
Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep Day and Night, for the Slain of the
Daughter of my People.

I come now to the Improvement. And,

1. Is Suspense in such important concerns so unreasonable in it self, so
grieving to godly Ministers, so offensive to God their great Master, and so
distructive to the Souls of Men; Why then, Sinners, in the Name of God, will ye
be Guilty of it? And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my Master, tell
me, and if not tell me. --

But who are Guilty of this perverse Practice? I Answer.

1. All you fleshly People, who make Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the the
Lusts thereof. Romans 13.14.

2. You idolotrous Worldlings, whose chief Love is set upon this vain. World,
who care for it and pursue after it as your chief Good, while in the mean Time,
you basely trifle with God and your poor Souls, and mind not the Afflictions of
Joseph. Amos. 6.6. Do not all Men mind their own Things, and few the Things
that are Jesus Christ's, Philip. 2.21.

3. Ye secure and semiconvinced Sinners, either who never have been awakn'd out
of your dead Sleep, or but half awakned and relapsed again to your Perdition,
who have put your Hand to the Plow, and looked hack like Lotts Wife, to the
World or your other Lusts, ye are not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven, neither
shall ye ever enter into it, or possess it so continuing; no, ye are possessed
with seven Devils here, and may expect a fearfully agravated Damnation
hereafter, Luk, 17.33. Heb. 10.38.39. Luke 9.26. Mat. 11.44.45. If ye continue
in impenitence.

4. You halvers in Christianity, who do something and suffer something, but not
enough, ye first or second table Christians, who either cry up the possitive
Duties of divine Worship, and in the mean Time, for all your pharisaical Show,
Grimace and Ceremony, neglect Morality and the Duties you owe to your
Neighbor: For all your Show of Christianity you would bite and cheat your
Neighbor if you could do it handsomely, so as to escape discredit. O! ye
wretched, fairfac'd smoothtongu'd but soul false hearted Hypocrites! You are
the bane and pest of Christianitey. O! Ye whited Sepuleres! Its you who under a
Pretense of Friendship wound Religion to the Heart, and leave it bleeding and
gasping for Life. Pull of your Paint and Masks, ye Hypocrites, and appear like
what ye are, incarnate Devils; its better for the People of God to have
roaring, raging Devils, than Devils in disguise; what can such as ye expect,
but to be Cut asunder by the Sword of God's Justice and sunk in the Damnation
of Hell. Mat. 24. 51. Mat. 23.29.33. Others cry up Morality as sufficient,
while they neglect the positive Duties of devine Worship. Thus as the Legs of
the Lame, as Solomon observes, are not equal, so the Life of a Hypocrite is not
uniform. He has not a Respect to all God's Laws, and so in truth, has a real
Regard to none of them, seeing they all spring from the same source, are of the
same tendency, and enjoined by the same Authority, and consequently has Reason
to be ashamed of his Hope, and distressed about his present danger. The
Generality of Hypocrites are like Badgers, of whom it is said that their Legs
are of an unequal Length; so the Dispositions and Practices of Hypocrites are
not in the general Course holy and heavenly, but Ambitious, fleshly, or
worldly, for all their fair shows, and good Moods. See Mat. 5.20.46. Ps. 119.
6. Is. 58.2.4.

5. Ye Careless Galeos, who matter not whither Zion, sink or swim, if ye can
but secure your worldly Honor and Interest; what do you think ye halting
Hypocrites that there is any Spark of saving Grace in you? No surely, otherwise
you would have a hearty Love to and deep Concern for the Interest of
Christianity. Ps. 137.5, 6. Ye Earth worms, and worldly wise Men, know that the
Lord Jesus hates and loathes you, and will reject you at last with abhorrence if
ye continue in this indolent Course. Rev. 3.15. 16. God will destroy and
confound the Wisdom of the Wise, and catch them in their own craftiness. 1.
Cor. 1.19.20.27. 1. Cor. 3.19. That awful Passage of the Apostle Paul to the
Romans 1.22. May be applied to many (who are called the Wits of our Age) viz.
That while they profess shemselves Wise, they become Fools.

6. You slothful Balams, who content your selves with good Wishes, Wishes
without good Actions, ye are halters in Christianity; how long will ye Sleep
you Slugards, when will ye arise out of your Sleep? Pro. 6.9. What can ye
expect to get by your laziness and loitering but shame and rags; if the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the Violent (and none but they) take it
by Force, how can ye ever expect to attain it then in your present Course, if
many shall seek to enter into the straight Gate, and shall not be able, how
doleful then is your Condition! For is not it reasonable to conclude, that you
are of the Number of those who seek and shall not find, viz. Who seek so
seldom, so coldly and indifferently as if ye asked a denial rather than a
blessing? If we should run so as to attain, 2. Cor. 9.24. How do you think you
will ever attain who never run? We are bid to strive to enter into the straight
Gate. (agonid s^esthe eiselthein diates stenes pules.) The the Word Agonizesthe
signifies to strive as in an Agony; is your laziness like this ye slothful
Hypocrites? why halt ye between two Opinions? If the Lord be God, serve him,
but if Baal, then follow him. 1. Kings. 18.21.

7. You Agrippa's, who are but almost persuaded to be Christians, and
therefore can expect to be but almost saved, is not it pity that for the want
of a little more Labor and Experience you should loose all your Prayers,
Tears, Sighs, Desires, Endeavors, and perish for ever? Gal. 5.7. Ye did run
well, who did hinder you, that ye should not obey the Truth? See Is. 58.2. Hos.
6.4. Heb. 6.4.

8. You deceitful Saul's, who satisfy your selves with resolving well for the
future, though ye perform not your Resolutions, like the hypocritical Israelites,
who are forward enough in making fair Promises but false and Faithless in the
performances, of them. Deuteronomy. 5.27. Go thou near, and hear all that the Lord our
God shall say, -- And we will hear it, and do it. Now how they accomplished
these fine Purposes you may learn from the Testimony of Moses, who was an Eye
and Ear Witness of their perverse Carriage. Deuteronomy. 21.27. For I know thy
Rebellion, (says he) and thy stiff Neck: If you will consult the Context you
may find that the Israelites Resolution flowed from a frightful Sense they had
of the Terrors of God's Majesty, when he appeared in flaming Glory upon Sinai's
Mount, when that massy Hill and all the neighboring Earth shook at its deep
Foundations like a Leaf shaken with the Wind, at the awful Presence, and bowed
beneath the Burden of a God, (as Doctor Watts expresses in his lyrick Poems)
when the Israelites heared the groaning Heavens above, and felt the laboring
trembling Earth beneath, and saw Sinai clad with Flames and Smoke before them,
to a greater Degree then ever Vesuvius or Etna, were it could not but raise an
Earthquake of shivering Horror in their Bosoms, strik their Minds with a a
solemn dread, and seize their Faces with a dying Pale; then they want to enter
into a peaceful Treaty with Jehova (though at a Distance) in haste, and promise
to obey his Laws, for they saw it was fearful to fall under his angry rebukes.
So you, no doubt, in Sickness or some other Distress, when under the dismal
Apprehensions of a gloomy Eternity, have taken up Resolutions to serve God and
amend your Lives, which it is probable you forgot when you grew well, and that
Scene of Terror vanished. O horrible ingratitude! Like to that of the wicked
Israelites mentioned. Ps. 78.34.36.37. When he slew them, then they sought him:
And they returned and enquired early after God. Nevertheless they did flatter
him with their Mouth, and they lied unto him with their Tongues. For their
Heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. O
Sinner, what will your unperformed Resolutions Signify, but to prove that your
wickedness has been committed against light, contrary to your Judgment and
Consciences, and therefore that ye deserve and may expect to posess (except ye
repent) the greater Damnation? Joh, 3.13. Why halt ye therefore between two
Opinions, if the Lord be God serve him, and if Baal, then follow him. And now
if ye will deel kindly and truly with my Master tell me, and if not, tell me.
--

9. You delaying Felixes, who put of your repentance from Time to Time, in
pretense for a convenient Season, which you are never like to get, if you do
not improve the present; for it will be continually worse and worse, with you
instead of better and better, as you foolishly imagine your; Hearts will
gradually grow harder, the Devils Possession of you stronger, your Inclinations
to Sin will be greater, and by consequence your Disposition to Piety less, and
the great and jealous God its probable will be provoked to forsake and abandon
you utterly, because of your obstinate Wickedness. Ezekiel. 24.13. Rev. 22.11. And
then woe to thee that ever thou was Born* It Is you delaying Sinners who hold the
Marriage of Jesus in Suspense; its you unhappy Souls, who halt between two
Opinions, God and Baal, Christ and your Lusts, and thereby sordidly dishonor
the blessed God, grievously Distress the Hearts of his faithful Servants, and
cruelly Damn your own Souls, except ye repent speedily, and close with Jesus,
to which you are frequently and earnestly invited. Is. 55.6.2. Rev. 3.20. --
Genesis 6.3.

10. You profane Herd of hardened Mortals, who have brazen Fronts and Iron
Hearts, who dare defy Heaven and storm Hell, you are the Persons also who are
Guilty before God, of this halting and suspense; for whatsoever Enmity is in
your Wills, or Scoffs on your foul Tongues, against powerful Religion, yet you
can not but approve of it secretly in your Judgment, and more sedate Thoughts
of Things, and privately Wish sometimes you were possessed of it, only the
Difficulties that attend it, especially the Beginnings of it, scare you, cross
your carnal ease, and therefore you cannot think with Complacence of an
imediate compliance with the Terms of Christianity, but still prorogue this
grand Affair of Debate from one Time to another. Hear, poor Sinners, the great
Doctor of the Gentiles speaking apositely to your Cafe. Gal. 6.7.8. Be not
deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a Man Sows that shall he also
reap, for he that Sows to the Flesh shall of the Flesh reap Corruption.

And now, Sinners, let me expostulate with you in the Name of the eternal God,
if ye will deal kindly and truly with my Master, tell me, and if not tell me,
that I may turn to the right Hand or to the Left. Why halt ye miserable and
infatuated Sinners? Are you in suspense who is the best Master, which is the
most rational Work, and which is the best Wages? Is there any Comparison
between an usurpin Tyrant, and a rightful amiable Lord? Between the Beauties of
Holiness, and Horrors of Darkness? Infinite Excellency, and the most flagrant
Impiety?

Is there any Comparison between real and perpetual Liberty, and the most
abject Slavery? Between the brightest Light, and the most opake darkness? The
purest Pleasure, and the most intense Pain? The most glorius Life, and
ignominious Death? The Embraces of God, and the Embraces of Devils? Between the
sweet Society of Angels and Saints, and the horrid Shrieks of damned Spirits?

My Brethren, can the momentary Pleasures and perishing Profits of Sin
balance the everlasting Racks of the Damned in Hell for it? Is there any
Comparison between the immortal God, and your temporary Profits? The Beautiful
Jesus, and your sordid Lusts? If there is none, then why linger ye, why halt
ye? If you will deal truly with my Mastter tell me. -- Do ye ever intend poor
Sinners, to be espoused to Christ? Probably you will say, yes. Why not now then?
Is not Christ as Beautiful now as ever he was or will be? Are not your Souls as
precious now as ever they will be, Holiness as excellent, Sin as sordid,
Eternity as great, and Heaven as glorious? Way halt ye then unhappy Sinners,
and linger in the dangerous Sodom of a State of Nature? Haste ye escape for
your Lives to Christ, and be espoused to him, otherwise ye shall surely perish
in the Burnings of his unquenchable Vengeance. But to be more particular, I
beseech you for Christ, to consider the following expostulatory Arguments. And,

1. Does not the God that made you, and the Redeemer that bought you, deserve
to be served before the Devil, who hates you with the most malignant hatred?
Why halt ye then, poor Sinners? If ye will deal truly with my Master, tell me,
--

2. Should not the best Bargain be first made? The greatest Interest first
Secured? And is their any like that of the endless Happiness of your never
dying Souls? Why halt ye then in so plain and self-evident a Case? If ye will
deal kindly with my Master tell me, --

3. Can you be safe and happy too soon? No surely; you do not think you can be
Rich too soon. Then why halt ye, Sinners? And now if you will deal, etc.

4. Have not you delayed and halted long enough already? Are not you ashamed of
it? I am sure you have Reason; and will ye delay any longer yet? O
unaccountable perverse madness! Have not ye readily in the mean Time obeyed
Satan and your Lusts? Followed their Beck, and pursued their deadly Dictates
with haste and Alacrity? And will ye shut your Ears with the deaf Adder,
against the Charms of your Creator and Redeemer, courting you in the most
condescending strains, in Order to confer upon you Liberty and Life? O strange
madness!

5. Is it not Dangerous, and does it become a wise Man to expose his greatest
Interest to the utmost Hazard for mere Trifles? Is not this the present Case?
Why halt ye then, poor Sinners? And now if you will deal kindly and truly with
my Master tell me, and if not tell me. --

6. Without a full Compliance all your Labor is lost, its only he that endures
to the end that shall be saved. Alas, have ye done and suffered so many things
in vain, if it be yet in vain?

I shall conclude this Discourse, with offering in all Humility a word of
Advice to Saints and Sinners. -- And.

1. Let me Address the Saints of God; are ye indeed espoused to Jesus, and have
you experienced the Signs I before mentioned, -- Then,

1. Praise God for his free Grace, distinguishing Love, in advancing you to so
Honorable a Relation to his Majesty; Which ye were neither able to merit or
requite: For who has made thee to differ from another? and what have thou that
thou have not received? 1. Cor. 4.7. 2. Humbly rejoice in this great
Privilege, which opens Springs of Consolation suited to to all the various
Duties, Difficulties and exigencies of Life; for from Christ as a Husband, thou
may expect.
1. Protection in Danger. The Man Christ will be a hiding Place to you from the
Wind, and covert from the Tempest. Is. 32.1. He will cover thee with his
Feathers, and under his Wings shall thou trust, his truth shall be thy Shield
and Buckler. Ps. 91.4. Deuteronomy. 33.26. -- 29. there is none like unto the God of
Jeshurun who rides upon the Heaven in thy help, and in his Excellency on the
Sky. The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting Arms. --
Happy art thou, O Israel! Who is like unto thee, O People saved by the Lord,
the Shield of thy help! And who is the Sword of thy Excellency!

2. Provision in want, or a supply of thy Necessities. Philip. 4.19. But my God
shall supply all your need, according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus.
Ye may expect while ye continue in the Duties of Obedience, a competent measure
of the precious Things of Heaven, the Dew and the Deep that coucheth beneath,
the chief Things of the ancient Mountains, and the precious Things of the
lasting Hills, and also the good Will of him that dwelt in the Bush, with them
Which can only make rich, and add no sorrow with it, Deuteronomy. 33.13 -- 16. Pro.
10.22. Your Bread and Water shall be made sure, such a Portion of this World's
Goods shall certainly be conferred upon you as suits the Promotion of your best
good; and would any reasonable Man desire more? Therefore cast all your Care
upon him, for he cares for you. 1. Pet. 5.7.

3. Direction in Doubts, he has promised to send his Spirit to lead his Spouse
into all Truth; and he has been as good as his Word: In dark Days he speaks
light and heat into his Peoples Hearts, by his Word and Spirit, and makes them
hear a Voice behind them, saying, this is the Way, walk ye in it; for he is the
wonderful Councellor, the mighty God of Hosts, the everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace, the great Prophet of his People, who can make the Heart of the
rash understand Judgment, and the Tongues of the Dumb speak his praise. When
this great Apostle descended from Heaven to Earth, then did the Day Spring from
on high visit us, and the Sun of Righteousness shine upon us. But to return
from this Digression, the blessed Prophet Christ Jesus follows after his poor
wandering Sheep by his Word, Providence, and Spirit, when lost in the doleful
Deserts of Sin, he hears their bleathings, and heals their wounds carries them
in his Arms to his fold, and warms them in his Bosom, when almost frozen dead
with cold; the secrets of the Lord are with those that fear him, and he will
remember his holy Covenant.

4. A Discharge of their Debts; he by his meritorious Passion has answered the
Demands of the Law, opened a Covenant of Peace, and brought in everlasting
Righteousness. Romans 3.25. Dan. 9.24. Gal. 2.19. And by his prevailing
Intercession, he applys the Benefits of it, and prevents new Breaches. 1. John
2.1. If any Man Sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous. If the Law, Conscience, and Satan brings Charges and Arrests against
you; you must send them to your Husband; for its not the Wifes business to pay
Debts.

5. Strength to perform Duties and vanguish Enemies. Is. 40.31. Is. 41.10. Romans
16.20. 1 Cor. 10.13.

3. Walk Worthy of it; as ye have received, Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him.
Col. 2.6. Consider and Practice the following Duties.

1. Preserve the Marriage Covenant inviolable, take the Cup of Salvation and
pay your Vows to God, Ps. 116.13.14. Beware of the ungrateful murderous
Madness, of committing spiritual Whordom with your Husband's Servants, Jer.
2.12.13. Jer. 3.1. And any that have been guilty this way, let them speak in
the Spouses Language Hos 2.7. I will go and return to my first Husband, for
then was it better with me then now.

2. Honor your Husband's Name, by thinking highly of it, Cant. 1.3. By
speaking seasonably and boldly for it, Prove. 25.11. A word fitly spoken is like
Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver. Pro. 10.21. The Lips of the Righteous
feed many. Prove. 15.7. The lips of the Wife disperse Knowledge; but the Heart
of the Foolish does not so. Col. 4.6. Let your Speech be always with Grace,
seasoned with Salt. Mat. 12.35: A good Man out of the good Treasure of his
Heart brings forth good things: And an evil Man out of the evil Treasure
brings forth evil Things. 1. Joh. 4.5. They are of the World, therefore speak
they of the World, and the World hears them. Also, by being grieved at the
Reproaches which are cast upon it, Ps. 69.9. Ps. 119.136. We should cry to God
in the Language of zealous Joshua, Jos. 7.9. And what will thou do unto they
great Name.

3. Love his Person with a strong and effectual Love, Cant 5.10. 1. John 3, 18.
This the dignity of his Person, your Relation to him, as well as your present
Comfort, and eternal Interest require.

4. Obey his Laws evangelically, universally, uniformly, cautiously,
resolutely, Mat. 5.3. Romans 1.9 Ps. 119: 6, Ps: 119, 112. Prove. 4 14. Dan. 3.17.

5. Submit to his Providence reverently, patiently, cheerfully. Jam. 4.10.
Jam. 5.10. Jam. 1.2.

6. Attend upon his Ordinances as your sweetest Entertainments, let the
Tabernacles of God be ever amiable to you, follow the flock of Christ, and feed
your Kidds besides the Shepherds Tents. Ps. 84.1.2. Cant. 1.8.

7. Respect his People as your chosen Companions. Ps. 16.3. Mal. 3.16.

8. Advance his Interest as your proper most honorable pleasant and profitable
Work, with the strongest Ardours and unwearied Labors Ps 137.5.6. Jam. 5.20.
Joh. 4.28.29. Dan. 12.3.

9. Improove his Goods for the Service of his Cause and Support of his People,
as Talents entrusted for that end, without purloining or perverting them to
mean selfish sordid Purposes; for you must quickly give an Account of your
Stewardship. Luke 16.2. Mat. 13.12. Hos. 10.1. Israel is an empty Vine he
brings forth Fruit to himself.

10. Eye his Glory as your Mark in all your Actions, whither natural, civil or
religious. 1. Cor. 10.31.

But I pro^^ed to offer a Word of Advice to ungodly Sinners in the following
particulars, which, if ever you would be espoused to Jesus, you must comply
with. -- And.

1. You must break of your Sins by righteousness, and your iniquities by
showing mercy to the poor. Dan. 4.27:

2. Rent your Hearts and not your Garments, and turn to God with fasting,
weeping, and mourning, Joel. 2.12, 13. Cleanse your Hands, ye Sinners, and
purify your Hearts, ye double Minded, be afflicted and mourn and weep, let your
laughter be turned into mourning and your Joy into heaviness, Jam. 4.8. -- 10.

3. Be diligent and attentive in hearing the Word, Heb. 10, 25. Frequent and
fervent in praying to God for this mercy, Act. 8.22. and solemn and serious, in
poring upon your present Misery, and these motives I have proposed in this
Discourse, Ps. 50, 22. Which may the all-powerful God bless to your speedy
Conviction sound Conversion and eternal Salvation. I conclude with the Advice
of the Apostle Paul to the Philipians and Hebrews, Philip. 2.1. -- 6. and Heb.
3.7 8. If there be therefore any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort of Love
if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies; fulfill ye my Joy,
that ye be like minded having the same Love, being of one Accord, of one Mind.
Let nothing be done through Strife or vain Glory, but in Lowliness of Mind, let
each esteem other better then themselves. Look not every Man on his own Things,
but every man also on the Things of others.

Wherefore, as the holy Ghost says, to Day if ye will hear his Voice, harden
not your Hearts.

FINIS
Advertisement.
PRinters often excuse themselves for Errata's with the Absence of the Author,
not understanding the Language, etc. But the following, and any other literal
Mistakes which the candid Reader may observe, the Printer acknowledges to be
due to his Carelessness, in trusting too much to his Journey-Man.

ERRATA.
Page Line For Read 1 15 Christam neisct Christum nescit 6 22 the -- these 7 14
they -- they will 8 18 attent -- attend 10 9 Offeres -- offers 12 29 nesscesary
-- necessary 14 7 the -- they 25 Father -- faster 16 17 uppose -- suppose 19 6
later -- latter 20 5 attractable -- attractive 24 Would -- will 22 27 strange --
strong 23 25 Want -- wane 24 16 femine -- feminine 27 6 botroth -- betroth 34 2
would -- will 8 Confussion -- confusion 38 13 sweetle -- sweetly 39 4
understanding -- Understandings 17 glorious -- glory's 42 4 oubtless --
doubtless 15 my -- by 16 consiber -- consider 45 1 Galeos -- Gallios 6 turbadze
-- turbaze 47 26 make -- make 48 8 grive -- grieve 50 23 to have roaring -- to
have to do with roaring 52 19 not it -- it not 27 agonid^^r^sthe eiselthein
diates agoniz^sthe eiselthein diates 53 16 are -- were 57 10 usurpin --
usurping 62 5 bleathings -- bleatings 24 vanguish -- vanquish


