Dr. Douglass's Practical HISTORY OF A New Epidemical Eruptive Milary Fever,
with an Angina Ulcusculosa, etc.

THE Practical HISTORY OF A New Epidemical Eruptive Miliary Fever, with an
Angina Ulcusculosa Which Prevailed in Boston New England in the Years 1735 and
1736.

By William Douglass, M. D.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed and sold by Thomas Fleet, at the Sign of the Heart and
Crown in Cornhill. 1736.

TO A Medical Society in Boston.
Gentlemen,
THIS Piece of Medical History does naturally address it self to you,
considering that I have the pleasure of being one of your number, that you have
been fellow laborers in the management of this distemper, and therefore
competent judges of this performance, and that where difficult or extraordinary
Cases have occurred in any of your private practice, I was favored to visit
the Patients in order to make a minute clinical enquiry: in short, without your
assistance this piece would have been less perfect, and not so well vouched.

As this distemper continues to spread and prevail in several Towns of this and
the neighboring Provinces, I thought it might prove a piece of humanity and
benevolence, if after many months diligent observations made in most of the
varieties which occur in this Illness, I did endeavor to reduce them to some
easy distinct Historical and Practical Method. The vanity of appearing as an
Author or writer was no inducement, because we all know that in a plantation
life neither honor nor credit are to be acquired by writing. It is not
published by way of a Quack bill to procure Patients and their money, as has
been the practice of some void of modesty and truth; because the Distemper is
almost over in Boston, and while it prevailed here I could not well have
attended more patients than what I had from time to time under my care, and
make with attention the proper observations at the same time.

A secondary reason for my writing is, to induce some Gentlemen of the
profession in our other Provinces and Colonies, where this distemper does or
may prevail; to give some account of its appearance with them, in order to
discover what influence, progress of time, varieties of climate and Soil may
have in the phoenomina of this disease. This method, of taking things
originally that is from the life, if pursued (but by abler hands) in the
Epidemical Distempers which may from time to time happen amongst us, may be of
considerable advantage in Physic.

A Speculation that is a novelle might have been composed sooner, but not a
real History: for as amongst Naturalists, many repeated observations and
experiments are requisite to form established truths or conclusions; so it
ought certainly to be in the practice of Medicine, where no affair of
Speculation or curiosity, but the life and death of a fellow Citizen is the
object of our enquiry.

Yours, etc. William Douglass.

The Practical History of a new Epidemical Miliary Fever with an Angina
Vlcusculosa.
THIS Distemper did emerge 20th. May, 1735. in Kingston Township 50 Miles
Eastward from Boston; it was no foreign importation, Kingston being an inland
place, of no Trade or considerable communication. The first seized was a child
who died in three Days Illness; about a Week thereafter in another Family at
four Miles distance, three Children were seized successively, and died also the
third Day; it continues spreading gradually in that Township, seizing here and
there particular Families with that degree of violence, that of the first
circiter forty decumbents none recovered as we were informed. It was vulgarly
called the Throat Illness, or a Plague in the Throat, and alarmed the Provinces
of New England very much. Some died of a sudden or acute Necrosis; but most of
them by a Symptomatick affiction of the Fauces or Neck; that is by
Sphacelations or corrosive Vlcerations in the Fauces, or by an infiltration and
tumefaction in the Chops and fore part of the Neck, so turged, as to bring all
upon a level between the chin and sternum, occasioning a strangulation of the
Patient in a very short time.

After a few Weeks it spreads into the neighboring Townships, but with more
mildness. The first appearance that we can recollect of it in Boston, was 20th
August on a Child of Capt. Stannys at the North End; having white specks in the
Throat, and a cutaneous efflorescence: A few more in the same Neighborhood
were seized in like manner, about the same time. Toward the end of September
it appeared in several parts of the Town, with a complaint of soreness in the
Throat, Tonsils, swelled and speckt, Uvula relaxed, slight Fever, flush in the
Face, and an Erysipelas like efflorescence on the neck, chest and extremities;
but being of no fatal or bad consequence, nothing more than a common cold was
suspected. Our first alarm was from a young Man How Aet. 20. in the beginning
of October: His History runs thus; He was lately arrived from Exeter to the
Eastward, where his Brother died of this Illness; his Symptoms were great
prostration of Strength, a speck in one of the Tonsils, colliquative Sweats,
Pulse not high and full, but low, hard, stringy, unequal and more frequent than
natural, deglutition good to the last, no Sphacelation in the Throat, no
eruption; from a rash inconsiderate opinion of forcibly quelling the Malignity,
he was thrice let Blood, had some Emeticks and Catharticks adminstred, and by
profuse evacuations was gradually reduced, so as to die of a gentle decay of
natural Strength, the 6th Day of Illness.

Beginning of November it spread considerably in Boston, especially amongst
Children, with more violent Symptoms, and severals die of it in various
Periods: it seemed to be at the hight, as to Numbers ailing and quantity of
Deaths, the second Week of March; that Week there were 24 Burials, whereas
communibus annis in that Season they are only 9 or 10 per Week.

It is generally in so considerable a Degree more favorable in Boston, than in
the Townships where it first prevailed; that many can scarce be persuaded of
its being the same Distemper: It is nevertheless essentially the same, there is
no Symptom, even the most malignant that has appeared in New Hampshire, but
what the like has occured in Boston. Perhaps Boston dry healthy air, good
feeding, constitutions less Psorick, and the better management of the Sick,
favored us; the reasons for its proving more mortal in the other Towns, may
be, the Country woodland and fresh water damps, (the Sheep in fenny lands are
most susceptible of and suffer most by the Rot) their coarse Food, salt Pork
diet, Psorick Constitutions, (which is one of the principal Endemial
distemperatures in New England) bad Lodgings, and that mischievous Practice of
using this Distemper with profuse evacuations, whereby the laudable and
salutary cuticular eruption has been so perverted as to be noticeable only in a
few, and in these it was called a Scarlet Fever; the great prostration of
Strength essential to this Distemper is so much increased, as to render Nature
an under match for the assaults of this Illness and its consequences. In fact
to the Eastward in some Country Towns, at certain times have died 1 in 3 of the
Sick, in others 1 in 4, in scarce any fewer than 1 in 6, whereas in Boston not
above 1 in 35 have died.

As in most Epidemical acute Illnesses, especially eruptive Fevers, (witness
the Small Pox) so in this, are very many varities or degrees, from the most
gentle and benign to the most malignant. Symptoms did vary chiefly from
something inscrutable in the Constitutions of Families and Persons; the
Scropholous and Psorick were the most susceptible of it, and did suffer most by
it; the Regimen had a considerable influence, here some who might have survived
the natural Symptoms did succumb by profuse U. S. and other evacuations, one of
the most essential Symptoms of this Distemper (as before hinted) being great
prostration of Strength. In so great variety it is not possible to give any
concise scholastic description, which may comprehend all: We shall therefore,
as a Standard first describe the most frequent sort, as it appeared in good
constitutions.

A previous listlesness and languishing countenance for a Day or two, or some
other praenuncia as u. g. wet Nurses loosing their Milk. The first attack is
somewhat of a chill or shivering; soon after follows Head ache or some other
versatile spasmodick pains, as pain in the back, joints, side, etc; a vomiting
or nausea, or in some constitutions which are not easily provoked to vomit,
only a certain uneasiness or sickness at Stomach; at the same time the Uvula
but chiefly the Tonsils were tumified, inflameded and painful, with some white
specks; then follows a flush in the Face and some miliary eruptions there, with
a benign mild Fever, the same esflorescence soon after appears on the neck,
chest and extremities; the 3d or 4th Day, Eruption is at the hight and well
defined with fair intervals; the flushing goes off gradually, with a general
itching; and in a Day or two more the cuticle scales or peels off, especially
in the extremities: At the same time the cream colored sloughs or specks in
the Fauces become loose and cast off, and tumefactions there do subside. The
Tongue from the beginning is fur'd as in a Mercurial ptyalism, urine high
colored, Blood by U. S. more florid than natural, in the whole course of the
Distemper a very great prostration of Strength, and faintness upon recovery,
nervos pains and weakness in the joints, particularly in the neck, wrists and
ancles; universal tenderness to the touch; a tickling guttural cough, some
short Hectic flushings, and loss of enbon point. As in the Measles there is a
peculiar smell, so in our Distemper the effluvia from the Patient have a proper
smell; in Children as if troubled with Worms, in grown Persons the rancid smell
of foul Bed Linen. The alvine excrement is of a dark cast and very fetid.

This Standard kind when left to nature, with a warm soft Regimen, had
generally an easy and salutary course in six or seven Days; but when by a hot
cordial method, or on the other extreme, by being too much exposed to the cold,
or by officious profuse evacuations Nature was difturbed in her Work; the
Distemper was protracted, or some consequential ails from an imperfect
defecation ennsued.

Where Nature required any assistance, the principal intentions were with
regard to the cuticular eruption and the ulcuscula in the Throat. Any Affection
of the Throat does frequently produce a natural ptyalism: Mercurials used with
discretion are a kind of specific in such like ulcers and ulcuscula, and in
fact here they moistened the Throat and Mouth, stopped the spreading of the
ulcuscula, and promoted the casting off of the sloughs; and as an accessory
advantage (the Patients being mostly Children) destroyed Worms: amongst all its
preparations Calomel answered best, the gentle vomiting or few stools that it
occasioned in some, did not confound the natural course of the Distemper:
Turbith proves generally too strong a revulsion, and the Eruption is thereby
too much diverted; this Distemper did not well bear any other evacuations but
Mercurials. Any detergent Gargle, with an addition of the Tincture of Myrrh and
Aloes, was of good use, especially for the Vlcuscula, and did promote the
discharge of a ropy Phlegm lodged in the Fauces. As to the cuticular
efflorescence, it was not a scarlet suffusion, but a miliary palpable eruption,
or in lieu thereof in some constitutions a continued gentle breathing Sweat;
and in a very few, who have naturally a liberior transit us by the Pores than
is usual, no sensible cuticular excretion; in all the morbid effluvia
discovered themselves by their peculiar smell: These were with good effect
solicited by Snake-root Tea; or (as in some Persons) where this did occasion
an ardor or burning heat, instead of a breathing mellow Sweat, Sp. C. C. or any
other volatile Spirit in small Herb Teas answered well. Blisters and
Suppedanea, in the beginning where Symptoms were not violent, occasioned a
protracted Eruption; in some immediately upon their application, the Eruptions
vanished or became less vivid. When the Eruption began to decline a few loose
Stools were very refreshing. The Patient being up, and having recovered a
competent degree of Strength, is to be purged once or twice, to carry off any
feculency that may have remained in the Blood and Juices.

For a more distinct conception of the varities in this Distemper, they may be
reduced to three Classes.

I. Those who die the first, second and third day of Illness, by an
irremediable Necrosis of the Economy: in such the Seizure is generally sudden,
a sinking pain at the Stomach, an extreme prostration of Strength, a titubating
low pulse, in some a stupor, in others a delirium, in some children
convulsions, and all of them generally die dozie: they are attended with some
colliquation, as continued vomiting, purging, profuse Sweats, bloatedness of
the habit, an infiltration like that of the Mumps vulgarly so called, one or
more of these: in general the texture of their blood and juices is much
destroyed and rendered an incoherent puddle of corruption; in fact immediately
upon (sometimes before) their exit, they have an intolerable faetor. In this
Class U. S. and other evacuations did accelerate death.

II. Those where the distemper has its common or ordinary course; here the 6 or
7 day seems to be critical, and the Symptoms of death or recovery do generally
then begin to manifest themselves. Some by peculiarity of constitution, and
from improper administrations do die or have an incipicent recovery sooner:
others for the like reasons or some particular accidents (u. g. if about the
time of regular monstruation, the complicated fret occasions worse Symtoms, and
of longer continuance) have this period protracted and in such (where death is
inevitable) the Symptoms of death may continue a day or two longer, that is the
Patient may die the eighth or ninth day. All who continue Ill after that
period, belong to the third Class, that is of consequential ails.

The Symtoms of bad Omen in this Class, are very great prostration of strength,
dejection and despondency of mind, titubating low pulse, incessant vomitings
purgings or sweats, Tonsils much inflamed endangering strangulation, the specks
in the Fauces of a brownish or leaden color, or ragged and jagged, a continued
jactantia in some, in others a stupor, refusal of assumenda even of diluting
common drinks, a dry parched skin, Eruptions appearing and disappearing
alternately, Eruption universal of a dark redish cast continuing crude many
days (because in this as in all eruptive Fevers, the darker or more livid the
efflorescence, the more malignant) where the miliary pustles are large,
distinct and pale like a chrystaline Smallpox; where strong Cordials and
Alexipharmicks have been used, the face, eyelids, arms, hands, legs, feet
swell, and are of a dark red complexion, as in the most malignant Smallpox; in
children if the velum Palati be much affected, with an ichorous discharge by
the Nose; where many mucous linings are expectorated, resembling the cuticle
raised by Vesications; when pus was brought up, where no sloughs or
exulcerations could be seen in the Pauces; where without any difficulty in
swallowing, this affection has reached down the Bronchia unto the Lungs with
the Symptoms of a New England Quinsey, and was erroniously deemed such: the
deeper in the Thorax the complaint the greater the danger: in some young
children with scarce any appearance in the Throat, spreading Ulcers did form
behind the Ears in the place where Infants have a natural Issue or running. In
some the Tongue did throw off a slough or Exuvia, retaining the impressions of
the Papillae; being a Mucus inspissated, and of the same nature with those
mucous linings expectorated from the Bronchia or Oesophagus. Some have had
impostumations in the Fauces, with a fatal strangulation, while others have
escaped by the discharge of Ichorous curdly matter. Some especially of the
adult female kind, have had Hysterical or Nervous Suffocations; but of no bad
consequence, unless officiously and ignorantly treated with U. S. and other
evacuations.

The Fever is seldom too high, sometimes it is too low for a thorough laudable
Eruption. If the Fever is too high, if the patient is plethorick or accustomed
to U. S.; take away some Blood but with discretion; if the Tonsils are much
inflamed with great pain and difficulty in swallowing, use U. S. in the
Jugulars, Epispafticks ad Nucham, encourage the Eruption, or its succedaneum a
breathing sweat; a profuse sudor is equally to be avoided as a continued
Diarrhaea, either of them confound the distemper in its natural course. In case
of colliquations give ol. Cinamomi, decoct. Alb. Elixir Vitriol, torrified
Rhubarb and the like. As to the specks or sloughs in the Fauces (they cast of
in course in the benign kind) Mercurials inwardly, and the Gargles before
mentioned topically, are useful; the practice in some Country places of
separating them forcibly by spatulas is hurtful, because the irritation
occasioned thereby induces a further flux upon the part, and the sloughs form
again worse conditioned than before. Where the Brain is affected as in
Vigiliae, jactantia, delirium, Coma, stupor, etc; glysters, Vesicatories and
suppedanea are to be used. Where faintness or great prostration of strength,
give toasted Bread soaked in some generous Wine and Water, or volatile Spirits
in their common drinks; Bezoars, Testacea and the like are of no use, the Shop
Cordial Juleps and mixtures are only sugared drams. To enumerate all the other
accidental Symptoms which do happen here, in common with other acute diseases,
would be trifling.

III. Consequential ails, which may be enumerated as in the following articles.

1. The natural Effects of an intense corrosive scorbutic like colliquation of
the Blood and Juices. Anasarcous swelling or blotedness of the face, in some to
that degree as to shut up the Eyes; the same Oedemetous swellings in the
extremities, in a few an Infiltration in the Scrotum, in some Petechiae, Purple
spots, scorbutic like sugillations upon the leaft scratch or bruise;
hamorrhages of all sorts, by the Nose, from the Lungs in expectoration, by
Stool, by Urine, Profluniums in Women tempore non debito; these are dismal
phanomina in the state of any acute Fever, u. g. Small Pox, and scarce any
recover; but in our distemper being only short temporary consequential ails,
scarce any of them proved mortal, but gave way to a soft milk diet, in some to
Cortex Peruw. or Elixir Vitrioli in others; a Girl aet. 14. with haemorrhages
of several sorts, with Purple spots, and scorbutic like sugillations,
recovered, notwithstanding of a very loose Regimen. N. B. These were not to be
attributed to the Mercurial administrations, because they equally happened to
those who had taken no Mercury.

2. Where the desecation has not been complete, from want of natural strength,
or from catching cold, or from undue evacuations: the reliquiae were thrown off
by Vrtications, by Vesications in several parts of the Body, by serpiginous
eruptions chiefly in the face, by purulent Pustules, by Boils, by swellings and
impostumations in the groin, armpits and other parts of the Body. The most
frequent consequential ail of this kind is, when from cold received, the glands
and cellulary tegument called the panicula adiposa in the fore part of the neck
becomes infiltrated and obstructed; if not soon resolved by the continued fotus
of warm woollens and hot animating applications; the induration increases and
spreads every way, so as to suffocate some, in others they sphacelate and
become Ulcers mortal or of difficult cure: thus a few have died with us in
Boston, but many in the Country. By catching cold likeways the Tonsils have
afterward inflamed and come to suppuration: In a young Woman the Tonsils and
Uvula being much ulcerated, did unite and coalesce into one mass and remain so;
this might have been prevented by frequent gargling.

While these indurations are only in the form of Kernels as they are vulgarly
called, woollen mufflers, Empl. de Ranis cum Mercurio and the like, with gentle
Catharticks, soon resolves them. Cataplasms in this case have done much
mischief; because so soon as they are become cold, they act as a chilling damp
upon the part, and destroy its vitality. When they arrive to the state of
putrid flaccid Ulcerations, digestives and soft fomentations intenerate
tenerate the part and occasion the Ulcer to spread; spirituous animating
desiccative dressings have done better. Exposing the part to the cold, either
in state of Tumefaction only, or in the subsequent exulcerations aggravates the
ail.

3. From the violence which the Nerves have suffered in this Illness; even
where the Symptoms were apparently mild, they all complain of great faintness
and Universal weakness, particularly in the joints-Some Women have Hyfterick
affections, in a few upon recovery imbecility of mind or silliness, in some
stammering or loss of Speech for a few days, some have had short fits of
Melancholy, some were seized with Epileptick fits, but not so as to become
habitual. All these disorders soon vanished, as the Patient recovered his
Strength in course of time, and by the help of a restorative cordial Regimen
and diet.

4. Other consequential ails in common with other fevers; particularly where
the Strength of nature has been much impared by the distemper it self, or by
immoderate evacuations, the Patient is left in a languishing weakness. Where
the Eruption has been impeded by being exposed to the cold, or by unseasonable
V S. or Catharticks; the patient falls into Hectical wastings, fatal to some in
a very short time. All who underwent immoderate evacuations, were a long time
in recovering of their Strength.

SCHOLIA or some general remarks upon the whole.

1. This seems to be a new kind of Epidemical discase. It is not the same with
the Aphthae which have at times prevailed in Holland, as described by Forestus,
and mentioned by Boerhaave in his Colleges. Tournefort says there is a
distemper not uncommon in the Levant, viz a Carbuncle or plague sore in the
bottom of the Throat; it carries off children in a few days, but does not
affect grown People as does ours. Capt. Morton of late Plymouth Colony, who
wrote many years ago his New. England Memorial, says that an. 1650. a disease
in the Mouth and Throat prevailed, which proved mortal to many in a short time;
but he does not describe it, and mentions nothing of a Fever. In Boston
November 1719. a slight milary fever chiefly with children, but was over in two
or three days, unless by catching cold it continued appearing and disappearing
alternately for some days longer; there was no complaint of the Throat, and no
deaths ensued. It is not the same with the sore Throats which are observed from
time to time in some of our Country Towns, especially in the Winter season:
these are Endemial and constitutional, being tumefactious and exulceratious
with fluxion in the Fauces and Neck; proceeding from an intense scropholous,
scorbutic, or Psorick habit (in such subjects vesications by Cantharides did
putrify) without any Eruptive fever: ours have generally an Eruptive fever or
tendency that way, so that of those who have died in Boston, not above one in
seven died of any Throat ail, but of this fever. It is however observable that
the Serophulous and Psorick, are most susceptible of this distemper, and suffer
more remarkably.

2. This Epidemical distemper is no creature of the Seasons, it having
prevailed from May 1735. when it first emerged, the whole year or all the
Seasons round. It is no produce of peculiar climates and soils, because it has
made its appearance in various places from Pemaquid in 44 N. Lat. to Carolina
Southward, and as we are lately informed, it is in our West India Islands. It
is remarkable that in damp places, as near large Ponds, fresh water Rivers,
woodlands, and the like, it has done the greatest execution, as does the Rot
amongst Sheep in fenny Lands.

It is not personally infecting after the rate of the Plague, Small Pox, etc.
where every Person is susceptible, excepting a very few anomolous
constitutions. Children are the most obnoxious to any infection; but with us
several Children in the family, where the distemper appeared, have escaped: it
is true where it happens in a family, it frequently seizes severals, as is the
case with our Country Peripneumonick Fevers, and our Autumnal remitting slow
Fevers, which cannot be said to be contagious. The distance in time of
Infection to be supposed received from a sick Person, to the time of the
distemper's appearing in the supposed infected, could never, with any
reasonable allowance of latitude, be reduced to any rule, as in Smallpox,
Measles, etc. We have Anatomically inspected Persons who died of it with so
intense a faetor from the violence of the disease, that some Practioners could
not continue in the room; but without being infected our selves or carrying it
into families. Many children without reserve, frequent the houses and chambers
of the sick, and escape. It does therefore proceed from some undiscovered
quality of the air, affecting only peculiar constitutions of persons and
families: notwithstanding of its being generally favorable, it proves fatal to
certain families; many families for this reason have buried all or most of
their children, u. g. Boynton of Newbury-Falls lost his eight children, at
Hampton-Falls in 5 families died 27 Persons.

3. This is a very anomalous Illness, some complain a day or two before they
are confined, some are seized as it were instantaneously, it is generally most
severe with these last. In some a soreness of the Throat and darting pain
there, reaching the Ears, is previous to all other Symptoms; in others the
common Symptoms of a fever appear, before any inflammation or specks are
perceivable in the Fauces. Some have a sore Throat without any perceivable
cruption, only a gentle breathing continued Sweat, or an increased insensible
perspiration with the peculiar smell of the morbid effluvia. Some (but very
few) have the cuticular eruptions without any sloughs in the Throat; only the
Tonsils, Uvula, and velum Palati, tumified and inflamed; and in a few, a
purulent discharge from some parts deeper than the Fauces, that is lower than
the sight can reach, these are not without danger. Many of those who died early
of a Necrosis, had no tumefaction, inflammation or specks in the Throat.

The time of Eruption is very uncertain; in a very few it preceeds the soreness
of the Throat, in a few it goes pari passu with the affection of the Fauces;
but generally it is (not much) later than the first complaints of the Throat,
in a young Woman it was later by 14 days.

In ruddy complexions the efflorescence is very discernable; it is not so
distinctly perceivable in Brunets, Indians, and Negroes; unless the miliary
Eruption have a considerable Relievo as in some, they generally scale and peal
notwithstanding. Sometimes it appears only in the cheeks, sometimes only a few
clusters in the extremities. Sometimes the suffusion was scarce miliary and
vanished insensibly by becoming gradually paler without scaling. Where the
Miliary Eruptions were considerable, the extremities peel in scraps or strips
like Exuviae; in one or two the nails of the fingers and toes did cast off. The
period or continuance of Eruption is sometimes prolonged by weakness of nature,
by undue evacuations, or by the Patients being exposed to the cold.

4. In some who were very slightly affected, their Illness was of a much
shorter continuance, than is described in the Standard kind. Most of those who
died of the Physician died by immoderate evacuations. As to the deaths, only a
few were occasioned immediately by any distemperature of the Throat; they were
generally the effect of the Fever, either by an immediate Necrosis at first
seizure, or by the ordinary fatality of Fevers, or by consequential ails. In
Boston at a medium of the last eight healthy years (1723. 1724. 1725. 1726.
1727. 1728. 1732. and 1733) in the Months of October, November, December,
January, February, March, April to 18th May, died pr. an. 268 Whites and
Slaves; this year in the same space of time died 382, is 114 extra deaths, and
may be resonably charged to this Illness, it being otherways a healthy time: of
these 114. about 71 cases came to my knowledge, whereof in the first period
died 35, in the second period 28, and of consequential ails, 8. Of these 71,
only about 10 can be said to have died of sore Throats. Of these 71 only 9 were
upwards of 14 aet. According to the nearest estimate I can make in round
numbers, about 1 in 35 have died, that is about 4000 Persons in Boston have had
this distemper, which is about one 4th part of the Inhabitants.

5. The Summer 1735 was unusually wet and chilly with many Easterly winds, in
the Summer and Autumn it prevailed and was very mortal in several Country
Towns. In Boston it began in Autumn, but did not prevail until Winter, which
was not rigid with hard frosts as is usual, but with a very disagreeable chill
in the air, especially in the Month of March last, in which Month was our
greatest Mortality.

6. Most Malignant distempers affect to throw off their malignancy by some
Emunctory. The despumation of this acrid inqination of the juices in our
distemper, that is, its natural Crisis, seems to be by the patent and salutary
Emunctories of the Fauces and skin. In corrosive taints, u. g. Venereal and
others, a Mercurial ptyalism and sudorifick decoction of the woods, answer
best; this gave us the hint of promoting the tendency of nature in our Illness,
by Mercurials, and gentle breathing Sweats a bed; which with good management
seldom failed, excepting where the Necrosis was irremediable from the beginning.

Some affiction of the Throat seems to attend most kinds of Eruptive Fevers. In
the Smallpox (even where the pustules and other Symptoms were in the smallest
degree) they all complain of a soreness of the Throat, but without ulcerating.
In the Measles there is a hoarsness, and soreness of the Throat. In ours
besides the soreness, tumefaction, and inflammation in the Fauces; there are
specks or sloughs of a mellow white or Cream color, like those on the inside
of the cheeks in a Mercurial ptyalism; the Scrophulous and Venereal ulcers in
the Throat are yellow; Aphthae are more of the nature of phlyctenae; many of
our Patients complain of a copperish taste or peppery smart in the Throat, as
they express it.

7. As in all other distempers so in this there do sometimes happen violent
Symptoms, merely from the Regimen and Medicines used; which on that account are
not of that bad consequence, as if they had proceeded from the distemper in its
natural course u. g. in some constitutions a Turbith bolus operates with
violence, so as to occasion shiverings, torsions of the Bowels, and Spaims, as
if the Patient were moribund: Calomel even in very small doses seizes the
Mouth of some to a very considerable degree of inconveniency.

8 We did not observe any genuine second seizures. It is true, being Winter
Season, many common sore Throats, that is, relaxations of the Uvula and
inflammations of the Tonsils; have passed with the less observing
practitioners, for the genuine Epedemick and were used accordingly; such have
afterward had this Illness, and was erroneously called a second seizure. N. B.
Our Epidemick is attended with no cough, unless when complicated with a cold or
some old habitual Tussis: upon recovery, it leaves frequently a small
catarrhous colliquation or cough, but of short continuance.

In some after being well, upon catching cold, the Tonsils have been inflamed
even to suppuration; in others the Uvula and Velum Palati infiltrated and some
phlyctenae or common Aphthae, have appeared. Such have also by some been deemed
as second seizures, and used as such.

After a long continuance of cold chilly Weather, there set in suddenly warm
Weather hot as mid Summer. May 25th, 26th, etc. several children, who formerly
had this Eruptive sever, have an efflorescence or miliary eruption by the heat,
as is not unusual with children in hot weather: this was by mistake of some
practitioners and others, called a second seizure.

9. No conditions of Mankind were exempted (in our Epidemical Autumnal
dysentery A. 1734. the Negroes escaped) Europeans, West India Islanders,
Indians and Negroes, of all ages, were equally subject to it: but, as in most
Epidemical diseases, it affected Children and the younger Persons more
generally.

10. This is a Real History of the distemper as it appeared in Boston
New England, taken clinically from the life and not copied. There is no stroke
or clause, but what I can vouch by real not imaginary cases. It is founded only
upon observations or phaenomina, that is upon the Symptoms that appeared in the
course of this Epidemical disease; it must therefore be of permanent truth.

FINIS

