Merchandise and Hire HOLINESS TO THE LORD.

The Merchandise of a People HOLINESS TO THE LORD.

A SERMON, Preached in part at the Public Lecture in Boston, July 1. 1725. In
part at a private Meeting for Charity to the Poor, March 6. 1726. And now
published as A Thank-Offering to GOD for repeated surprising Bounties from
LONDON for Uses of Piety and Charity.

By Benjamin Colman, D. D. And Pastor of a Church in Boston.

2 Cor. ix. 9. He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the Poor, his
Righteousness remains for ever. BOSTON, in New England, Printed by J. Draper,
in Newbury-Street, 1736.

To the HONORABLE Samuel Holden, Esquire of LONDON:
SIR,
THE generous Things You have been doing from Year to Year for my Country; for
many of the Churches of Christ in it, whom You have enriched with Means of
sacred Knowledge and practical Religion; and for the pious Poor in it, both
Ministers and Others, who have tasted of your Bounties and their Souls have
blessed You; have led me into this open Acknowledgment, to the Glory of God,
from whose Hands we would receive what You and Others have sent us from Time to
Time, an Odor of a sweet Smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God.

Sir, I hold my Self highly indebted to the Governing Providence of a gracious
God, which led me in my Youth from my Native Land to see That of our Fathers
Sepulchers; and in my Way thither was pleased to strip me of the Little I had,
that I might be invited by the excellent Saint your dear Mother, who took in
the Stranger, and for a Course of Years together regarded him as a Son, while
her Soul longed after You at Riga.

What the Holy God was then doing I could little know at the Time, but He has
made me to perceive since, "That He led me into Mr. Parkhurst's House, and from
thence to Bath, to bring me into a more immediate and extensive Acquaintance
with Persons of Distinction for Learning and Religion, for my greater
Usefulness in the Times that have passed over me, and to be the Hand through
which his purposed Benefactions to our College, to many of our Towns and
Churches, and to many poor Members of Christ in these Parts, should flow.

By the Help of God, I humbly hope that I have willingly done the Part of a
faithful Almoner, as well in advising when I have been writ to as in observing
the Directions of Those who have entrusted me; which is all the Honor I may
pretend to in the Administration of this Service, which is abundant by many
Thanksgivings to God; some of which You have seen and read, as from the Hand of
worthy Ministers, so One especially from the Angelick Pen of a Mrs. Gerrish of
Cambridge.
Gentlewoman, who in the School of Affliction made a Proficiency in Grace and
sacred Science, even beyond all that the School of the Prophets among us has
been able to boast! and as soon almost as She had wrote what I sent You, lay
down and died in perfect Peace.

I know Sir You are no Stranger to the Profusion of Bounties which for a Course
of many Years our College received from the most pious and munificent Thomas
Hollis, Esquire whose worthy Heir has soon followed him to the Grave, after he had
made a good Addition to the Foundations laid by his Uncle, and adorned us with
a rare Orrery; and now we have the Tidings of the Death of John Hollis, Esquire the
worthy Brother of our great Benefactor, and a Heir with him of the same Grace;
who was also a Father to poor Orphans here, as well as at Home.

And if it were permitted me, I would now have named Another, a younger
Gentleman, whom God has enriched with all Bountifulness usward; of whose
Liberality our Churches and our Poor have heretofore largely tasted; and this
Year brings me the Joy of an Order from him for schooling, clothing, feeding
and lodging of twenty Indian Children at Hossatonnoc, a Tribe who have lately
received the Gospel with a marvelous Joy, and are now under the Pastoral Care
of the Reverend and Learned Mr. John Sargent.

You will easily think, Sir, how placid the Surprise of such a Benefaction is,
and though I see not how the Donor of so public a Charity can be kept secret, any
more than a City set on a Hill can be hid; yet the Thing ought to be told to
the Glory of God, and in this open Manner I would let the hidden Donor know the
Sense we have of the Goodness of GOD to us through Him, and our Prayers for Him,
that his Father which sees in secret will reward him openly.

I own, Sir, that I mean a Dedication of the following Discourse to this
nameless Benefactor also, who would account it an Honor to be named after You;
Whom God has set in the Chair among your Brethren the Dissenters, and honored
You before the Greatest Men at Court as well as in the City, for Wisdom,
Modesty and Integrity.

That your Days may be multiplied, even cross to your own Wishes of a speedy
Entrance on a better Life; for your greater and longer Usefulness in your
Generation, and your more abundant Reward in the Day of Christ; and that a
gracious God may also please to multiply Grace and Peace unto our Other
Benefactors, is the hearty Prayer of,

SIR, Your most Obliged Friend, and very Humble Servant, Benjamin Colman.
Boston, May 5. 1736.
To the Gentlemen of the Town of Boston, who usually attend the weekly Lecture,
And to Those in particular who attend the Quarterly Meetings for Collections
for the Poor in Cornhill.
Gentlemen,
WHEN the following Discourse was preached to You, a part of it at the public
Lecture, and a part in your more private Meeting, You were then addressed in
the Close of those Sermons in the following Words, which I think good now to
bring to your Remembrance, and also to lay before Others.

I speak unto a Trading Town, and I thank God unto a People used to Charities
and liberal Things. Need I provoke you to Emulation by what is written of the
Men of Tire? And God forbid that they should rise up in Judgment against Us,
and condemn us. Shall not your Merchandise and your Hire be Holiness to the
Lord, when theirs was so, when the Gospel came among them! Surely we have
carried our Profession as high, and our Obligations are at least as great as
Those of Tire and Sidon.

One natural Benefit of Trade and Commerce to any People is, that it enlarges
their Hearts to do generous Things. God grant that every Thing of that Nature
done among us or by Others for us, may be so done as to carry in their Front
the glorious Inscription of HOLINESS TO GOD. So let it be in your secret Gifts
and Distributions, so in your private and more bountiful Subscriptions and
Collections, whether they be for God's Poor or for his Worship. And I wish the
Proposals which were lately printed for the yearly Gathering a small Stock or
Fund in particular Congregations for pious and charitable Uses, might find
Acceptance in our Churches, and prove a happy Means of fulfilling my Text among
us.

But there is one Thing, the Work and Duty of the present Day, which I may not
omit, if I would be just either to my Text or to my Country; which is -- That
your Merchandise and Hire must be for Them which dwell before the Lord, to eat
sufficiently and for durable Clothing. How shall it be called Holiness to the
Lord without this? You must make Conscience of supporting your Ministers, who
serve in the Sanctuary and at the Altar of God. Money falls, you all raise your
Merchandise, and you are unjust to Christ and his Misters, (that is to say
unholy) if you do not raise their Support. It is impossible that They should
eat sufficiently, or have Clothing for their Families, if their Support rise
not while all your Trade and Hire rises after so prodigious a Manner. This is
to your poor Ministers, like a hundred little Streams uniting on them, and
bearing them away as with a Flood; or like a sweeping Rain that leaves no Food.
You must up instantly or it will wash away the Field of God, his Worship from
off the Face of the Land. You must minister more of your rising Hire to the
Temple of God, or let drop any Pretense to my Text.

This Matter belongs in the first place to the Government over us, who have had
it under Consideration in their present Session 1725.
and piously resolved, That it is the Indispensable Duty of the several Towns,
Precincts and Parishes of the Province, to make such Additions to the Salaries
or Maintenance of their respective Ministers, as may honorably support and
encourage them in their Work: The Court did therefore most earnestly recommend
a speedy and cheerful Compliance with this their Judgment, to the several
Congregations and Religious Assemblies within the Province.

To Them it indeed belongs nextly and more immediately, whose Profession in a
Church State is this Holiness to the Lord; and it is the Duty of the respective
Members in every Congregation to see to it that their Merchandise and Husbandry
be so, and that their Pastors have Meat sufficient and durable Clothing. -- For
with what Face and Conscience shall every One of you rise a Penny or a Shilling
in your Hire and Merchandise. Year after Year, and not rise also in the Support
of your Ministers? I leave it to the Heart of every Merchant and every Labourer
to judge in this Thing. Since that Day many or most of our Churches have made
considerable Additions to the Support of their Ministers, but in very few
Places I think in a just Proportion to the Fall of Money, and the Rise of
Goods. So that every New Year or two calls for a new Provision; such is our
miserable sinking Condition; alas without Prospect of any Remedy! May the Dews
of Heaven come down more abundantly on the Places that consider of it!


I have but one Word more to add in this public Audience, and that concerns the
College; to mind you that the many great and prudent Benefactions made of late
Years to that Society, have (I trust) this Inscription of Holiness to the Lord
upon them. The Bounties of the pious Mr. Hollis in particular, his humble
Offerings to Christ and his Munificence to us, his Lectures and devoted
Students wear This on their Forehead. "The LORD raise up of our Sons for
Prophets, and of our Young Men for Nazarites. That our Sons may be as Plants of
Righteousness; and our Garners full, affording all Manner of Store! Happy the
People that are in such a Case, yea happy is that People whose God is the Lord."

The Address to You, with which the Sermon closed in your private Meeting, was
in the following Words,

Finally, Should our Merchandise and Hire be Holiness to the Lord? it gives a
special Countenance to, and puts great Honor on, your present Meeting. This
Evening Lecture is on a double Account holy to God; as in Respect of the
Religious Exercise of Worship so also in Respect of our intended Collection for
the Poor. The Design and Intention of our present Meeting is entirely sacred to
Christ and to his Poor. We come to cast our Mites into the Lords Treasury for
the Use of the Widow and the Fatherless. Let us seek the Divine Grace that we
may so worship, and so give, as becomes Holiness; in holy Manner, with holy
Frames, from holy Principles, for holy Ends, to the Increase of holy Fruits in
our Hearts and Lives, to the Glory and Praise of God.

Write now, if you please, Holiness to the Lord on these Doors Deacon
Williams's in Cornhill.
, here opened to us for the sake of Charity and Devotion; which two will never
fail, no not when Faith and Hope shall cease, within the Holy of Holies. The
Rich are invited hither, not for their own so much as for the Poors sake. The
Bowels of the Poor are refreshed by Thee, Brother, in your calling the Rich to
your House: It is to feast the poor, the maimed, the lame and the blind, and
Thou shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just.

This Meeting is a Witness that our Widows and the Fatherless are not neglected
in the daily Ministrations. By Inclination you are led, and some of You more
especially are by The Deacons of the Churches.
Office bound, unto this Service. And God is not unrighteous to forget this
Labor of Love, which you are showing to his Name, in ministering to his Saints.

We have had a hard and long Winter March 6. 1726.
, which some may think has impoverished the Town, but God has carried us through
it, and provided for the Poor. Yet they must needs be left the more bare and
necessitous, and laden with little Debts it may be, which you Brethren are now
met to pay, with a willing Mind; that they may begin a New Year with
Thanksgiving to God on your behalf. -- I need not urge you to what you are so
ready of your selves. You are met for this very End, to pray us to accept the
Gift, and to continue in this Fellowship of ministering to the Saints. Like
Titus, I am desired in my Turn to minister unto the finishing in you the Grace,
which God has long since begun. And God is able to make all Grace to abound
toward you, that ye always having Alsufficiency in all Things, may abound to
every good Word and Work. -- Now He that ministers Seed to the Sower, both
minister Bread for your Food, and multiply your Seed sown, and increase the
Fruits of your Righteousness, being enriched in every Thing to all
Bountifulness, which causes through us Thanksgiving unto God.

OUR Merchandise and Hire HOLINESS TO THE LORD.
Isaiah xxiii. 18. And her Merchandise, and her Hire shall be Holiness to the
Lord.
TIRE is the City here spoken of; and a very good and great Word it is that is
here spoken of her. It is a Prophecy of the Conversion of the Tyrians by the
preached Gospel; and how they should use their Wealth in the Day when God
should convert them. And what is here written concerning them is for our
learning, being a Direction and Precept to us, that our Merchandise and Hire
should be Holiness to the Lord.

Tire was a Gentile City of great Antiquity, and Renown for Trade and Wealth,
situate on the Mediterranean Sea, near to the Lot of the Tribe of Asher. It
was built by some Colony of the Zidonians, and is therefore in our Context
called the Daughter of Zidon.

In David and Solomon's time we find the Tyrians faithful Allies and Friends of
Israel. And as one well observes, Trading Cities seldom prove dangerous Enemies
to their Neighbors; for they acquire and maintain their Grandeur, not by the
Conquest of others, but by Commerce with them.

The Inhabitants of Tire were now grown the most skilful in Sea Affairs of any
in the World. About the ninth Year of Hezekiah, Salmanezer the Assyrian invaded
and besieged them both by Sea and Land. By Sea they beat the Assyrian and
Phaenician Fleet of sixty Sail, with twelve Ships only. This gave 'em a Name
for War as well as Riches, and made 'em the Terror of the Ocean. The Assyrian
Army then blocked 'em up by Land; for Old Tire was built upon the Continent,
and the new City afterward upon an Island; which Siege they bare for five
Years, and were at last delivered by the Death of Salmanezer. Upon this Success
they were puffed up with new Pride, and grew hau'tier than ever, which provoked
the Holy God to utter the Burden and Prophecy against them, in the Chapter
before us, wherein is foretold, 1. The miserable Overthrow of the Tyrians by
Nebuchadnezzar and the Chaldean Army; and 2. Their Restoration, like their
Nei'bours the Jews, after seventy Years; when they should recover their ancient
Liberty, Trade and Riches again -- This is the Danger and Misery of Places of
Commerce, that as they grow rich and opulent they also grow sensual, profane
and insolent, unjust and unrighteous; and so forfeit the Blessings of
Providence, and incur its dreadful Judgments; as Tire did.

Nebuchadnezzar found it a hard piece of Work to conquer Tire See the learned
Dr. Prideaux's Connection of the Old and New Testament.
. He began its Siege about two Years after the Destruction of Jerusalem and the
Captivity of Judah. It held him thirteen Years before it was taken, when he
took a terrible Revenge and utterly rased it. An Account of this is given us by
the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. xxix. v. 18. Son of Man, Nebuchadnezzer King of
Babylon caused his Army to serve a great Service against Tire; every Head was
made bald and every Shoulder was peeled; yet had he no Wages nor his Army for
Tire, for the Service that he served against it. The short Account of this
Matter is, "That the Tyrians finding him too hard for them by Land, while yet
they were Masters by Sea, they built themselves a new City on an Island about
half a Mile distant from the Shore, into which they removed the most and best
of their Effects; so that when Nebuchadnezzar entered the old City, after his
long Seige and hard Service of thirteen Years, he found no Riches, no Spoil in
the Place, to repay him for his vast Expense or to reward his Soldiers; the
Inhabitants having passed with their Stores into the new City, which was
afterward a most mighty Maritime Power and Mart of the Nations, still called
TIRE; rising as a Phaenix from the Ashes of her Dam. -- It is probable, says
the noble Historian, that after the King of Babylon had destroyed the Old Town,
those that retired into the new one came into Terms and submitted to him; and
so continued in a state of Restraint and Servitude to the Babylonians and
Persians for Seventy Years; although they were not captivated and dispersed, were
not carried away to Babylon and Chaldea, as the Jews were.

Such was the Accomplishment of the Burden of Tire uttered by Isaiah! So it was
laid waste, at which all her Ships are called to howl. This was the End of the
joyous City, whose Antiquity was of ancient Days, her own Feet carried her
away! her Pride and Highness of Spirit, the Sin of rich and thriving Places did
it! for it presently runs a Place into Irreligion, Sensuality and
Unrighteousness. The same Pride, that cast down the Angels; and destroyed Sodom
in her Fullness of Bread, leaving the polluted Cities as the Image on Earth of
everlasting Burnings; laid Tire, the crowning City, desolate; whose Merchants
were Princes, and her Traffickers the honorable of the Earth: The LORD OF
HOSTS did it to stain the Pride of all Glory.

These things are written for our Warning; for a warning to the Maritime Powers
of Europe, to England and Holland in particular, on whom the Ends of the World
are come. So criminal is the Pride of Life in the Eyes of a Holy God, and
odious! See it in the Judgment of Tire, as the most eminent Instance, Ezekiel
xxviii. init. " Son of Man, say to the Prince of Tire, Thus says the LORD GOD,
Because thine Heart is lifted up, and thou have said, I am a God, (a kind of
Neptune, God of the Seas) I sit in the Seat of God, in the midst of the Seas:
Yet thou art a Man and not a God, though thou set thine Heart as the Heart of
God: Behold thou art wiser than Daniel (who had it seems such a Name and Fame
for Wisdom, through the Kingdoms and Provinces of the East, that it might pass
for a Proverb among them, " as wise as Daniel) and with thy Wisdom and
Understanding thou have gotten thee Riches, Gold and Silver into thy
Treasuries, and thy Heart is lifted up; (art a golden God in thy own Eyes,
making thy Gold thy Hope, and saying to it, "Thou art my Confidence!")
Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold I will bring Strangers upon thee, the
Terrible of the Nations, and they shall draw their Swords against the Beauty of
thy Wisdom, and they shall defile thy Brightness; they shall bring thee down to
the Pit, and thou shall die the Deaths of the Slain in the midst of the Seas:
thou shall be a Man and no God in the Hand of him that slays thee.

All this God bro't on proud and hau'ty Tire for her Sins. But in the Close of
the Chapter, where my Text is found, we have "a Time fixed for the Continuance
of her Judgment, and a Prophecy of the Recovery of her ancient Glory," v. 15.
Tire shall be forgotten seventy Years, according to the Days of one King; after
the End of seventy Years shall Tire sing as an Harlot: By the Days of one King
we must understand the Succession of one Family of the Monarchs of Babylon,
Nebuchadnezzar, his Son and Grandson; and by her singing again as an Harlot, we
must understand, her Return to her State of former Prosperity, Merchandise and
Traffic; and her using all Arts and Means (as she had done before) to draw
Trade and Customers to her: Like as an Harlot that has been sometime under
Restraint and Correcrection for her Leudness, when she is at Liberty again
returns with a violent Bent to her old Arts of Temptation See Henry in loc.
; Such was Tire when at the End of 70 Years she recovered Freedom, Trade and
Riches. She did all she could to allure the Commerce of the Nations to her
again; the Tyrians were as much set upon worldly Gains, were as inordinate in
their Desire and Love of Wealth, and in taking all Methods to get it, as they
had been before; and rejoiced in their Acquisitions as heretofore. This is the
Harlotry here imputed to her, an inordinate Lust after Riches, and Pleasure in
it; which in Scripture is called spiritual Fornication. And accordingly the
Prophet goes on to brand and expose Tire for her Love of Money, v. 16. " Take
an Harp and go about the City, thou Harlot that have been forgotten! make sweet
Melody, sing many Songs that thou may be remembered. Nothing can be more
elegant than this predicting" the various Artifices and even dishonest
Practices, whereby the City of Tire regaining her Liberty, would return into
her wonted Commerce with all the Nations, and entice the Merchants of the Earth
into their usual Dealings with her. So she turned to her Hire, and committed
Fornication with all the Kingdoms of the World upon the Face of the Earth, v.
17.

But then in the last Verse of the Chapter, which is my Text, there is one Word
of Good concerning Tire; one Word of Grace respecting her; and that is -- "That
having recovered her rich and opulent State, a Time would come wherein She
should make a better Use of it than she had done formerly; she should in
Process of Time come to use it religiously, to the Honor of God and in his
Service; "Her Merchandise and her Hire would then be Holiness to the Lord: And
this is explained in the following Words, It shall not be treasured and laid
up; neither as Misers hoard up their Bags, nor as the proud and vain lay out
and lay up their Moneys in Fineries and Jewels; but " her Merchandise shall be
for them that dwell before the Lord, for the Support and Maintenance of
Religion and the Ministers of it; for them to eat sufficiently, and for durable
Clothing.

What more could we hope to hear of Jerusalem the Holy City, at any time! or of
any other City of God in Gospel Times! -- What more than this, "Her Merchandise
and her Hire shall be HOLINESS TO THE LORD? The High Priest of God, in his
Attire of Holiness and Glory, on the great and solemn Day, wore no more sacred
Inscription than this was! yet this shall be written on the Merchandise of
Tire! mavelous Word! written for the Generations to come, and that the People
to be created should praise the Lord.

But when was this to be? and wherein should it be so? -- Why, In the Day when
Tire, and other Nations, should come, 1. Not to treasure up their Gains, from a
Spirit of Covetousness, or of Ambition and Pride, or of Confidence in their
Riches; but 2. when their Gains by Trade should be devoted to God's Honor and
employed in his Service, in Works of Piety and Charity; for the Establishment
and Support of the House and Worship of God, and for the Relief of his Poor:
for sufficient and durable Food and Clothing for the Pastors and the Poor of
Christ's Flocks.

But, was there ever such a Time as this, for New Tire? and when was it? -- I
answer, There were such Times; and two Periods may probably be referred to;

First, The Time of Judah's Return out of Babylon, when though the seventy Years
of Tire were not quite expired, yet new Tire had attained more than fifty Years
Growth, and was able to furnish the Jews toward and assist them in their
rebuilding of the City and their second Temple. The Tyrians actually did this,
partly in Obedience to the Edict of Cyrus, to whom they were subject, and
partly from Interest and Inclination, having been Fellow Sufferers with and in
the Captivity of Judah Accordingly we read in the Book of Ezra, of Meat and
Drink, and Oil given to them of Zidon and of Tire, to bring Cedar-Trees from
Lebanon to the Sea of Joppa; according to the Grant by the Hand of Cyrus King
of Persia. Chap iii. 7. So early was the Merchandise of new Tire Holiness to
the Lord, for the rebuilding of his Temple, and for the furnishing of his
Priests and Worshipers. And it is greatly to be observed to the Honor of the
Tyrians, That as the Fathers in old Tire had a special Hand in Materials for
building the first Temple, so had their Posterity in the second.

But secondly, The Prophecy in my Text looks to be sure to some Time long after
the Return of the Jews from Babylon; even to the Days of the Messiah and the
Conversion of some in Tire by the preached Gospel. The Prophecy plainly
supposes that Tire would for a long Term of Years return into her old Course
and Way of living, and continue Pagan; though in a Way of Trade it might be
friendly to the Jews their Nei'bours. In this there was little or no Religion;
their Idol Gain and worldly Wealth was served in it. But in the Day of the
Conversion of the Nations to the Christian Faith, Tire also received the
Gospel. And then it was that her Merchandise and Hire became Holiness to the
Lord, being used by a Number of Gods chosen and called there in the Services of
true Religion and Godliness, the Support of his Worship, Ministers and Poor.

In Nehemiah's Time we read of the Men of Tire dwelling at Jerusalem, and we
may suppose from that Time to the Day of Christ many a Gift and Offering from
Tire to the Altar of God at Jerusalem; wherein the Words of David in the xlv
Psalm might be fulfilled, as they doubtless were in his own Day; " The Daughter
of Tire shall be there with a Gift.

In Christ's Time we find many of Tire and Zidon better disposed to have
received Him and his Gospel than the Men of Israel; for if his mighty Works had
been done among them they would have repented in Dust and Ashes.

In the Days and Acts of the Apostles we find Christians at Tire, Chap xxi. 3,
5. with whom Paul tarried seven Days, and who through the Spirit warned him of
his Danger and Sufferings if he went up to Jerusalem; and when he departed from
them they bro't him on his Way with their Wives and Children, so reverend and
fervent was their Love to him for the Gospels sake, till he was out of the
City, where they kneeled down on the Shore and prayed, and took Leave one of
another. After this Christianity flourished in this trading City, and then her
Merchandise became devoted, in part, to the Worship and Glory of Christ.

So that we plainly find in my Text, 1. A Prophecy of the Conversion of the
Tyrians. 2. How they should then use their Wealth; that it would be consecrated
to God in pious Uses, and holy to his Worship. 3. This Spirit and Example of
the Tyrians is for the Learning and Imitation of other Places, Cities and
Countries, among the Gentiles. Let the Christians of Tire teach us, that where
ever the Gospel is received, in the Love and Power of it, it will bring forth
this good Fruit; the Merchandise and Hire of the People will be Holiness to the
Lord. So Christians should use their Estates in the Service of God, and unto
pious Uses, and count that best laid up, which is so laid out. Both the
Merchandise of the Men in Trade, and the Hire of the Men of Labor, should be
devoted to God. The Tithe was so under the Law, and there is a Due (and surely
an equal one) under the Gospel.

New Tire has the Honor of teaching us this under the New Testament; and in
all Places of the World, through all Ages, the Gospel is to be thus honored. As
it is written, Zech. xiv. 20. In that Day there shall be upon the Bells of the
Horses Holiness unto the Lord; yea every Pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be
Holiness to the Lord of Hosts.

And here let me pause and observe to you, The Advantage that trading Places
have beyond others by their Merchandise and Commerce; and the Obligation they
are under to improve their Advantages, for getting and propagating the saving
Knowledge and Worship of God. This was Tyre's Happiness and Benefit by her
Situation for Traffic. She was much the more known to Israel, and knew so much
the more of her God and Worship, than other Places. Her Merchandise put her in
the Way hereof. Many a Man of Tire went a trading to Jerusalem, and heard of
the true God, his Law to and his Works for Israel, and saw his Sanctuary, the
Order and Worship of his House.

Many of the Jews also were led to Tire by their Trade, where they accidentally
spoke of the Lord God of their Fathers, his Worship, Laws and Works. Other
Places it may be took up strange and odd Notions of that separate People, as a
singular sort of Folk; but the Tyrians saw they were a wise and understanding
People, had Statutes and Judgments most righteous, and excelled other Places in
Sobriety and Justice as well as in Devotion. And who knows what Influence this
might have on that Degree of Union, which there was between Jerusalem and Tire
in the Days of David and Solomon? 1 Kings v. 6. My Servants shall be with thy
Servants.

But this we know, That Christianity has been greatly served by Trade and
Merchandise, by means whereof a great Part of the World has been gospelised.
For the Knowledge of Christ has been propagated by Trade far and near. The
Earth and Sea have thus helped the Church, and as Daniel foretold it would be,
Many have run to and fro' (cross the Ocean) and Knowledge has been increased.
God has used the Loadstone and the Mariners Art in the Service of Christ, and
the Ends of the Earth have seen his Salvation.

And to add yet one more Benefit of Commerce; it enlarges Peoples Hearts to do
generous Things, for the Support of Divine Worship and Relief of the Poor. We
always see most of this in Places of Trade. And so it has been from the first
Days of Tire, of whom we read, " The Daughter of Tire shall be there with a
Gift: She first and more free of her Gifts than others. This is most natural to
Places of Commerce; Something to give and a Heart to give. May it be always
found so in trading Places! but especially we wish them a Heart to make the
best Gift, Themselves with their Estates, and this in the best Manner; as the
Churches of Macedonia are celebrated for ever for doing, 2 Cor. viii. 1, -- 5.
The Riches of whose Liberality abounded in their deep Poverty, praying the
Apostles with much Entreaty that they would accept the Gift, and take upon them
the Fellowship of ministering to the Saints; first giving their own Selves to
the Lord, and then to the Apostles by the Will of God. "When Converts join
themselves to the Church then they come with a Gift, devoting their Seed and
Substance together with their Persons, Gifts and Powers, to his Service and
Glory.

It is high Time I now come to the Doctrine which my Text leads me to enlarge
on, which is,

" That the Merchandise and Hire of a People, their Trade and worldly Business,
their Gains and Riches, should be Holiness to the Lord.

The Enquiries under this Doctrine must be 1. Into the Meaning of the Phrase,
Holiness to the Lord. 2. When the Traffic and Wealth of a People may be so
called? 3. Why it must be so?

I. The Meaning of this Phrase, Holiness to the Lord must be looked into. And
the first time that we find it used, than which there could not have been found
any more eminent, was the Divine Order concerning the High Priests Vestments,
his Garments for Glory and Beauty, wherein he was to approach before the Lord,
and minister unto Him upon the most solemn Occasions: Exodus xxviii. 36, 37,
38. Thou shall make a Plate of pure Gold, and grave upon it like the Ingravings
of a Signet, Holiness to the Lord: And thou shall put it on a blue Lace, that
it may be upon the Mitre, upon the Forefront thereof; upon Aaron's Forehead,
that he may bear the Iniquity of the Holy Things which the Children of Israel
shall hallow in all their Holy Gifts; And it shall be always upon his Forehead,
that they may be accepted before the Lord.

Now we may observe in this first Appointment of this Title and Inscription,
that it plainly was meant to signify, 1. The infinite Holiness of the God of
Israel, and of Christ the great High Priest of our Profession. 2. The Holiness
of the Priesthood and Ministerial Office, their special Consecration to holy
Ministrations, and their special Obligations to be Holy to the Lord. 3. The
Holiness of God's Worship, and that all his People must take Care to be very
holy in all their Approaches to Him, in all the Institutions of his Worship.
Psalm xcix. The Lord is great in Zion, and high above all People: Let them
praise thy great and terrible Name, for it is Holy; Exalt the Lord our God, and
worship at his holy Hill; for the Lord our God is Holy.

So that in this Title Holiness to the Lord we have 1. the Holiness of God: 2.
a Consecration to Him, or the Separation of a Person or Thing to holy Uses: 3.
Actual Use and Employment therein: and 4. in a special Relation to his Worship.

1. Holiness to the Lord supposes, and in the highest manner declares, as in
shining Capitals of Gold, the infinite, unutterable, incomparable,
inconceivable Holiness of Jehovah, the only true God; that He is the Holy One,
and alone Holy, glorious in Holiness, the thrice Holy; and there is none Holy
like Him or beside Him. This is his Glory in both Testaments Isaiah vi. 1, 2,
3. Revel. iv. 8, 9.
, in his Temple above and in that below: " I saw the Lord sitting upon a
Throne, high and lifted up, and his Train filled the Temple: Above it stood the
Seraphims, covering their Faces, and One cried unto Another and said, Holy,
Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts! the whole Earth is full of his Glory. And if
the blessed God were not Himself thus Holy, why and how should Persons and
Things be called Holiness unto Him.

2. It speaks a Consecration of Persons and Things to God, a separation of them
to his more immediate Service and Glory, to be of holy Use according to his
Will. So Aaron and the Priesthood were of old separated and devoted to God, and
therefore had this Name written on them, Holiness to the Lord. So the Sabbath
is consecrated Time, and in the Hebrew called Holiness to the Lord, Exodus xxxi.
15. In like manner the very Fruit of the Trees in the fourth Year were holy to
praise the Lord withal: Levit. xix. 24. The Hebrew Word is Holiness; being
given to the Priests and to the Poor. And the same is said of the Vessels of
Silver and Gold, Brass and Iron, in Jerioo. Josh. vi. 19. Thus Israel was
Holiness to the Lord (Jer. ii. 3) by the Covenant of Circumcision, their
Dedication to God therein; and in like Manner do all Christian People by their
Baptismal Dedication to God wear the same Words, as on their Foreheads.

But moreover, 3. Holiness to God imports the actual Use and Improvement of
Persons and Things in the Service of God and to his Glory. When Aaron put on
his Mitre it was actually to officiate before the Lord. He was then in a more
special manner to intend, design and act for, the sanctifying God's Name in
holy Ministrations. De facto there was Holiness to the Lord in his right
Dispositions, and Discharge of his Office: Else the Priesthood and Worshippers
profaned the Holiness of the Lord which be loved. Mal. ii. 11. Otherwise, in
their set Office ("in the Discharge of their Office to which they were set
apart") they sanctified themselves in Holiness. 2 Chronicles. xxxi. 18. Then, and
then only, were they Holiness to the Lord, in Deed and in Truth. And so are we
to Christ, if we are holy in Heart and Life; if we live to Him in all holy
Conversation, as in our Baptism we have bound our Selves.

4. And lastly, This Motto, Holiness to the Lord, has a more particular Regard
to the Worship of God, his Ministry and Sanctuary, his Ordinances and
Institutions. So Israel as Worshippers, and Aaron as a Priest, and the Sabbath
as the Day of weekly Worship, and the First Fruits as offered in Worship, were
dignified with this Style of Holy to the Lord. So when we by the Grace of God
devote, use and employ our Souls and Bodies, our Gifts and Powers, our Time and
Estate, in the Services of Religion, and for promoting his Worship, they become
Holiness to the Lord. We become in our Persons as Temples of the living God,
and God is sanctified in us as in them that draw nigh to Him; and our Powers of
Mind and Body, with the Fruit of our Bodies, our Time and Estate, our Interest
in the World and our Influence among Men, are as so many Offerings to God at
his Altar, which consecrates the Gifts.

Having thus enquired into the Meaning of the Phrase Holiness to the Lord, I
come new to enquire,

II. When the Traffic and Wealth, Merchandise and Business of a Person or
People may be so called? To which I answer in three general Heads,

1. When Men seriously devote, dedicate and consecrate, first Themselves and
then of their worldly Substance, a due Part, to the Glory and Service of God.
2. When what is so consecrated to God out of our Estates is actually used and
employed in his Service, according to his Will, in Acts of Piety and Charity.
3. Always provided that what we so devote and use is acquired honestly and
righteously in God's Fear and Way, and is given by us with a spiritual Mind and
Heart.

I Then is our Merchandise and Trade, Wealth and worldly Business, Holiness to
the Lord, when we seriously devote, dedicate and consecrate, a due Part of our
Substance, together with our Selves, to the Glory and Service of God.

First, I must say our Selves, for the Person must be sacred and dedicated to
God before his Estate will be so; the Person is first holy and then his Gift.
This is the Order of Nature and of Grace 2 Cor. viii. 5. Matthew. xxiii. 17.
; for which is greater, the Gift or the Giver! how much less is a Man's Estate
before God, than the Man himself? according to the Apostles just Estimation of
the Macedonians and their ministering to the Saints, 'Who first gave their own
Selves to the Lord. God looks to a Man's Heart and Soul in all his Offerings to
Him, whether of Praise or Alms. It is the Person who wears upon his Forehead
the Inscription, Holiness to the Lord. If the Person be unholy before Him, his
Sacrifice is an Abomination. He profanes and pollutes his own Gift; as Cain did
his Offering, bringing it with a wicked Mind. If we have not given our Selves,
our Hearts to God, we may give all our Goods to feed the Poor, or give it to
the Church, (for Them that dwell before the Lord) and yet there will be nothing
of Holiness in the one or in the other 1 Cor. xiii. 4.
.

Yet the Estate must go with the Person, as it is in Marriage; and it has
pleased God to espouse unto Himself the Soul that gives it self to him; Jerem.
iii. 14.
I am married to you, says the Lord.

The first Offering from Man that we read of, acceptable to God, was the Person
with a part of his Estate; I mean Abel's Offering. Cain also bro't of the Fruit
of the Ground, but God had no Respect to his Offering because he had not first
given himself to Him. Abraham having resigned up Himself to the Divine Will and
Call, gave his Tithe of all unto the Priest of the most High God; the famous
Type of his Lord and Savior, after whose Order Christ is a Priest for ever;
and he was blessed by him. So Jacob vowed, first that the Lord should be his
God, and then a Tenth of all that God should give him. So David having first
rendered his Heart to God in Flames of Devotion, then gathered vast Stores
which he consecrated for a Temple to the Name of the Lord; and his Princes
followed his Royal Example, 1 Chronicles. xxix. 16.17. " O Lord our God, all this
Store that we have prepared comes of thine Hand, and it is all thine own: I
know also my God, that Thou triest the Heart and have Pleasure in Uprightness:
As for me in the Uprightness of my Heart have I willingly offered all these
Things, etc. Here was the Offering of the Man after God's own Heart. And we
find in the Gospel when the young Man came and offered Himself to Christ, our
Lord demanded of him also the Use of all his Estate, and he went away
sorrowful. It is added, for he had great Possessions Matthew. xix. 22.
: He might then, one would think, have been the more ready to have given freely
to the poor out of it: Or, did he think his Riches of more Price than himself?
poor Soul! it seems as if he would not have offered himself to Christ, had he
though it himself half so good as his Possessions! his going away sorrowful showed
that he was not sincere in the Offer of Himself. On the contrary Zacchcus being
a sincere Penitent, gave half his Goods to the poor, and Christ accepted of his
Person, and said to him, " Salvation is come to thy House Luke xix. 9.
.

So the first Christians Acts iv. 34, 35. v. 1, 2.
when they had given up Themselves to Christ in Baptism, gave in all their
Goods into a common Stock. It was on an extraordinary Occasion, and under an
extraordinary Effusion of the Holy Spirit The Churches Needs called for it, and
the Spirit of God directed to it. Ananias and his Wife had only given their
Names, not their Hearts; and keeping back part of the Price died for the
Sacrilege, and their Lying to the Holy Ghost. On the contrary, the Macedonians,
whose Praise is in all the Churches for Evermore, having given both their Names
and Hearts to Christ, gave liberally of their Estates for the Relief of the
poor Saints, even beyond their Ability. Thus was their Merchandise Holiness to
the Lord. Neither will the Estate do without the Person, all his Heart and all
his Soul; nor the Person do (if that could be) without the Estate, for it will
go with the Heart and Love. -- But I prevent my self on the second Answer to
the Enquiry I am upon:

II. Our Merchandise and Wealth is Holiness to the Lord, when what is
consecrated and devoted out of our Estate, is actually used and employed in the
Service of God, according to his Will. "When thou vowest a Vow, defer not to
pay; why should God be angry at thy Voice Eccles. v. 4, 5, 6. Psalm lxxvi. 11,
? Vow and pay to the Lord thy God! let all that be round about Him bring
Presents unto Him that ought to be feared. Present thy Self, and then remember
that thou have implicitly and virtually, if not most explicitly and expressly,
vowed to him his Dues out of thy Estate. Bring these Presents to Him as long as
thou live, in their returning Seasons, Better it is that thou should not
vow, than that thou should vow and not pay.

It is to be feared that many Christians do not eno' apprehend and consider,
that their worldly Estate enters into their general Vow, and is always a Part
of it, in their Self-Dedication to God. But God's Part is holy to Him whether
we consider it or no; and if we render Him his Part, the whole is sanctified
unto us. There is not Holiness to God written on our Persons, Faculties and
Powers, nor on our Estate, till both one and the other are used to holy Ends
and Purposes, in actual Ministrations to the Glory of God. But if we are
actually honoring God with our whole Man, Soul and Body, the Powers of the
one, and the Endowments of the other, the Spirit of the Living God dwells and
rules in us, and has graven on us, as in Letters of Gold, Holiness to Himself.
And if we are honoring the Lord with our Substance, and with the First Fruits
of our Increase, we may read with Pleasure the same Inscription on our Estates,
and others may see it on us. 2 Cor. iii. 2. Ye are our Epistle written in our
Hearts, known and read of all Men: Ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle
of Christ, ministered by us, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the
Living God; not in Tables of Stone, but in fleshly Tables of the Heart.

Now if it be asked, Wherein a Part of our worldly Estate is to be used to the
Glory of God? it is easily answered in the two general and known Instances,
Works of Piety and Charity. The first is the very Thing in my Text, and the
other is like unto it, and never to be separated; the first is a more direct
Expression of Love to God, the other to our Neibour; on which two hang all the
Law and the Prophets, and consequently the whole of Holiness to the Lord is
contained in them.

First then, Our Wealth and worldly Business is Holiness to the Lord, when with
a true and right Heart it is used and employed in Works of Piety toward God,
for the Support of his Worship. When it is for them that dwell before the Lord
to eat sufficiently, and for durable Clothing. That is to say, When Men make
Conscience of giving unto God a due Proportion out of their Estates for the
Support of Religion and the Maintenance of God's Ministers, to feed and clothe
them, and that sufficiently and honorably; eno' to eat of plentifully, and to
clothe their Families decently, and leave something to them when they die. --
The Tithes of old were such a Provision for the Levites. And as they that
served at the Altar lived of it, so has the Lord ordained that they who preach
the Gospel should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. ix. 14. The Bread of Ministers is
the Bread of God, and we must allow Him to be a good Householder, and to keep a
good Table. He does not feed his Household by Miracles, but by his reserved Dues
out of the Estates of his People. He will have it done by their Hands, that
they may do Him Duty and Homage, and pay him Tribute. There is always a part of
your Moneys, whereof he says to you, " Whose Image and Superscription is this?
and you must answer, It is Gods. Then render to God the Things that are his.
Matthew. xxii. 21. Do it by ministering out of your Estates to his House and
Worship, according to the Ability which he gives you.

When People expend prudently and piously for the setting up, and carrying on,
the Worship of God where they live, or in other Places; or in sending the
Gospel to People destitute thereof, and perishing for lack of Knowledge; and in
making Provision for a more private Instruction of Children in such Places;
their Wealth in this Use of it becomes Holiness to the Lord. It comes into a
Relation to divine Worship, even as Aaron and the Holy Things of old belonging
to the Tabernacle. -- But unto such Works of Piety for the Support of God's
Worship, we must add

Secondly, Works of Charity and Mercy, which are as much in themselves, and
render us as much, Holiness to the Lord, as the other. These belong to the
second Table of the Law, as those to the first. Pity to the poor and needy, in
Obedience to God and Conformity to Him, is Piety and Sanctity in his Sight.
They are the Lords Receivers as well as his Priests, and we have them always
with us. And the pious poor are among his spiritual Priests, rich in Faith,
chosen of God and called. He that gives to them, for their comfortable Eating
and Clothing, with a right and charitable Frame of Spirit, lends to the Lord,
and honors Him with his Substance. These are spiritual Sacrifices with which
God is well pleased. There is Worship and Incense, an Odor of a sweet Smell in
them, as well as in Offerings at the Altar of God. The Alms of Believers go up
for a Memorial before God, with their Prayers; as did those of Cornelius. The
Great High Priest, at the Golden Altar within the Vail, presents the one and
the other in the Cloud of Incense, his own Merits and Intercession. He, the
Holy One of God, was Holiness to the Lord above all the Sons of Men; and his
Miracles of Mercy were like his Prayers and Devotions beyond number, and alike
honorary to God. God will have his poor fed, as well as his Ministers. And why
not? are they not together Heirs of his Kingdom? and has he not put them
together again and again, the Levite and the Poor Deuteronomy. xvi. 11, 14. xxvi.
11.13.
, in his Peoples rejoicing before him on his solemn Feasts?

But give me leave more particularly to prove, by three or four Arguments, that
Works of Charity to the poor are proper Holiness to the Lord.

1. They are Obedience to the Law of God which is most holy. The Word of God is
the Rule of Holiness, and one of its grand Rules and Laws to us is Alms-deeds,
and acts of Charity. These are an eminent Branch of that Holiness which the
Lord requires, Zech. vii. 9. Thus says the Lord, Show Mercy every one to his
Brother. Only let what we do be done in Obedience to God, for his Glory, and
with a pure Respect to his Will, not to be seen of Men; having true Compassion
one of another, loving as Brethren, pitiful, courteous, tenderhearted Matthew.
vi. 1. 1 Pet. iii. 8. Ephesians. iv. 32.
; otherwise there is no Holiness to the Lord, nor Reward from our Father that
is in Heaven.

2. To give to the poor out of our Estates is Holiness to the Lord, because it
is our Conformity to God and Christ in their Bounties and Mercies to the
indigent and miserable. Conformity to the Holy God is Holiness, but Compassion
and Mercy to the poor is Conformity to God; who makes his Sun to rise and his
Rain to fall on the evil and on the good; Be ye therefore perfect as your
Father in Heaven is perfect. Mat. v. 45, 48. So Christ approved Himself to be
the Holy One in the Days of his Flesh, by filling up his Life with Acts of
God-like Charity and Mercy. They cried after Him, laid themselves in his Way,
and he healed them all. This was Holiness to his Father, and in the Sight of
Men, and we should lay up in our Hearts his memorable Words, Acts xx. 35. It is
more blessed to give than to receive.

3. A right and charitable Disposition is the Fruit of the Holy Spirit in us,
and therefore can be no other than Holiness to the Lord. "The Fruit of the
Spirit is Love Gal. v. 22. Phil. ii. 1. Col. iii. 12.
. There is much of the Spirit of God in Bowels of Pity to one another. " If
there be any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies. The Communion
of the Holy Ghost, and the Communion of Saints, is experienced and exhibited in
these Bowels, which we are therefore exhorted to put on, as the Elect of God,
holy and beloved; and because this Charity is the Bond of Perfectness. See the
Argument and Demonstration of the Apostle James on this Head, Jam. ii. 15, 16.
If a Brother or Sister be naked, and destitute of daily Food; and one of you
say unto them, Depart in Peace, be you warmed and filled: notwithstanding ye
give them not those Things which are needful to the Body; what does it profit?
q. d. What Fruit, what Evidence of any true Holiness is there, in a Soul or
Life destitute of the Fruits of Charity.

4. Is the Sabbath and its Worship Holiness to the Lord? So are Charities and
Mercies. There is such a Sanctity in these, that they belong to and are a Part
of the Sanctification of the Sabbath. Yea such Regard is had by God to an Act
of Mercy to our poor Nei'bour, that He has made his own Worship to vail and
give place thereto for the Time Matthew. xii. 7. Luke xiv. 5.
. " Go ye and learn this, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice. Which of you
having an Ox or Ass fallen into a Pit, will not straightway pull him out on the
Sabbath day? And if a good and devout Man must show this Mercy to his
Brute-Creature on the Sabbath day, the Holiness of God directing him so to do;
how much more must not Acts of Compassion and Mercy to our poor and needy
Brethren, and to the necessitous Members of Jesus Christ, be esteemed by the
Lord of the Sabbath to be Holiness to himself? The Zeal for God's House and Day
eat up our Holy Savior, but more his Zeal for an Act of Mercy to a poor Woman;
Luke xiii. 10, -- 17. He was teaching in one of the Synagogues on the
Sabbath Day, and behold there was a Woman which had a Spirit of Infirmity
eighteen Years, and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up her Self:
And when Jesus saw her, be called her to him and said to her, Woman thou art
loosed of thine Infirmity! And he laid his Hands on her, and immediately she
was made straight, and glorified God. Tell me now which was most Holiness to
the Lord, the Sermon of Christ on that blessed Sabbath, or this his Act of
Healing the poor Woman? truly both alike.

Moreover, Offerings out of our Estates, and Collections for the poor, do both
belong to the Temple of God and to his Sabbaths. St. Luke tells us of a
Treasury Luke xxi. 1, 2, 3.
of God in the Temple of old, and that on a Time as Christ was looking on the
rich Men that cast their Gifts into the Treasury, he saw also a certain poor
Widow who threw in two Mites, and said, " Of a Truth She has cast in more than
they all. So from Heaven the Lord Jesus still looks with Approbation and
Pleasure, on the free-will-Offerings of his Worshipers in his House of Prayer,
on Lord's Days and at other appointed Times; the poorer as well as the richer.
-- And so near a Kin are God's Worship and Contributions for the poor, that
they are joined by the Lord in Affinity, and equally declared to be Holiness to
Him, in that Apostolical Constitution and Direction 1 Cor. xvi. 1, 2,
, " Now concerning Collections for the Saints, as I have given Order to the
Churches of Galatia, so do ye; Upon the first Day of the Week let every one of
you lay by him in Store, as God has prosper'd him, etc. Your Prayers and
Hearing the Word this Evening At a quarter Meeting for Charity, the Lord's day
Evening, March 6. 1726.
are not more Holiness to the Lord than your Collection is. The same God has
said to us, " Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy, and has also said, '
to do Good and to communicate forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is well
pleased.

5. And lastly, The Promises made by God to those that are merciful and
bountiful to the poor, do abundantly declare that there is Holiness to the Lord
in true Acts of religious Charity and Mercy. He that is Holy would not be so
well pleased with our Charities to the poor and needy, if there were not much
Holiness in them. He has therefore blessed the merciful, and said that they
shall find Merey. He is not unrighteous to forget this Work and Labor of Love.
Not that there is any Merit or Desert herein, but there is of his own Holiness
in it. If it were not so, Alms would never come up for a Memorial before Him.
Nor would they be so remembered, mentioned and rewarded in the Day of Judgment,
as Christ has told us they will be; " Then shall the King say to them on his
right Hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the Foundation of the World; for I was hungry and ye gave me Meat, thirsty
and ye gave me Drink, a Stranger and ye took me its, naked and ye clothed me,
etc. These high and everlasting Rewards of the Charities of Saints, prove them
to be Holiness to the Lord. Blessed and Holy is he that has Part in these
Promises Matthew. v. 7. Heb. vi. 10. Acts x. 4. Matthew. xxv. 35. Rev. xx. 6.
.

And thus we have seen that the actual Use and Improvement of our Estates in
the Service of God, in Works of Piety and Charity, renders them Holiness to the
Lord. -- But there must be something added by way of Caution and Limitation,
and that is

III. Always provided that what we so devote and use is acouired honestly and
righteously in the Fear of God and in his Way; and is given by us with a
spiritual Mind, Heart and Affection.

1. What we have and give must be gotten in God's Way, which is the Way of
Holiness. If we go out of that we sin, and whatever we get in sinful Ways is
necessarily unholy before the Lord, and abominable in his Eyes. Now that what
we get may be acquired in God's holy Way,

First, Our Dependence must be on God for his Blessing to make our lawful
Endeavors prosperous; For it is the Blessing of God that makes rich, and it is
He that gives us Power to get Wealth; it is therefore profane and unholy to
act in our worldly Business but with a Dependence on the Governing and
overruling Providence of a wise and Sovereign God: James iv. 14. Go to now you
that say, To Day or to Morrow we will be here or there, do this or that, and
make Gain; Whereas ye ought to say, If the Lord will we shall do so. Let Jacob
teach us how to begin and go through the World: Genesis xxviii. 20. If God will be
with me in the Way I go, and give me Bread to eat and Raiment to put on.

Secondly, We must daily commit our worldly Affairs to God in Prayer, and more
especially at Times our more important Concerns and Interests. Our Lord has
taught us to bring these before God in our Prayers: We pray for them in that
Directory or Form for Prayer which he has given us, the fourth Petition in it.
We pray that of God's free Gift we may receive a competent Portion of the good
Things of this Life, and enjoy his Blessing with them. It is greatly for the
Glory of God, and for our temporal Interest and daily Comfort that we daily
pray for God's gracious Direction to us in, and for his Blessing on our worldly
Business: " That the Lord thy God may bless Thee in all the Works of thy Hand.
So Isaac prayed for his Son, " God give Thee of the Dew of Heaven, and the
Fullness of the Earth, and Plenty of Corn and Wine. And so Jacob prayed for
himself, " If God will be with me in the Way I go, and give me Bread to eat.
And so Moses for the Tribe of Levi, "Bless, Lord, his Substance: The less it
is, the more need to pray over it; for the Blessing of God can make a little go
far. The wise Agur has taught us what to pray for, " Feed me with Food
convenient for me. He is unholy and profane whose Prayer is not to God his
Heavenly Father, for these Things Deuteronomy. xiv. 19. Genesis xxvii. 28. xxviii. 20.
Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 11. Prove. xxx. 18. Matthew. vi. 32. 1 Timothy iv. 5.
. And they are sanctified to us by Prayer, which makes them Holiness to the
Lord.

Thirdly, We must keep from every sinful and wicked Way in our worldly
Acquisitions and Enjoyments, and govern our Selves by the holy Laws of Justice
and Righteousness, Sobriety and Temperance, and universal Obedience to the
Divine Law. Else all is unholy and unclean, and we forfeit God's Blessing and
provoke his Curse. It is only sincere, hearty, universal and persevering
Obedience to the holy Commandments of the Lord our God, that will render us
holy and acceptable in his Sight. Deuteronomy. xxviii. 1, 2, 3. If thou shall bearken
diligently to the Voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and do all his
Commandments, all these Blessings shall come on thee, -- Blessed shall thou be
in the City and blessed in the Field! blessed the Fruit of thy Body and the
Fruit of thy Ground! -- blessed thy Basket and thy Store! blessed shall thou be
when thou come in, and blessed when thou go out.

Fourthly, In Case a Person have acquired Riches in any unjust and unrighteous
Manner, by Deceit and Fraud, or by Extortion and Oppression; he must make his
Peace with God by Repentance, with deep Humiliation before Him for his
Wickedness; and if it be in his Power he must make Restitution; which if he
cannot do to the Persons wronged let him do it to the poor, beseeching God to
pardon him for Christ's sake and accept his Offering; and then his Merchandise
and his Charities shall be yet Holiness to the Lord, notwithstanding his past
Unrighteousness and Sin. See the Case of Zaccheus, Luke xix. 8. And Zaccheus
stood and said before the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my Goods give I to
the poor; and if I have taken any Thing from any Man by false Accusation, I
restore him fourfold: And Jesus said unto him, This Day is Salvation come to
this House. "When true Faith, Repentance and new Obedience comes to a House,
Salvation comes to it, however great the Sins of it had been before. Zaccheus
had been a Publican and an Extortioner, exacting more than was his right.
"Those Publicans had the Ear of the Roman Governors, and by a false Account of
Persons and Things could easily be injurious. This Chief among the Publicans
was also answerable (it is to be feared) for many Abuses of Power by those that
were under him But he here stood a Penitent before Christ, confessing and
seeking Mercy. A Change of Heart and Way, and Fruits meet for Repentance,
appear in his Words. A very large Proportion of these ill-gotten Goods he set
apart for Works of Piety and Charity. He could not refund to the Men in Trade
and Merchandise, whom he had wronged in the Seat of Custom: They were gone
hither and thither, and he knew 'em not nor was like to see some of 'em any
more: to those he could find he restored fourfold, the Residue he restored to
the Poor; and Christ accepted him as a humble Believer and true Penitent, a Son
of Abraham. -- Thus what we get must be in God's Way, the Way of Holiness. And
then

2. We must use it with a spiritual Heart and Mind. As, (to add unto much that
has been already said) We must daily praise and bless God for daily Bread, for
all our Receipts and Increase; we must give Him the Glory and render Him our
Thanks; " O God, I am not worthy of the least of all the Mercies, and of all
the Truth, which thou have showed unto thy Servant! for with my Staff I passed
over this Jordan, and now I am become two Bands. This was Holiness to the Lord.
-- We must earnestly desire and seriously resolve, by the Grace and Help of
God, to serve Him in Righteousness and Holiness before him, and with gladness
of Heart, with all the Good Things that a bountiful God shall see fit for us,
that the Lord shall be our God, and we will live devoted to him, and lay out
our selves to glorify him, and make it our Meat and Drink to do his Will. This
will be Holiness unto Him. -- The Abundance of all Things which the Lord our
God may give us richly to enjoy must be so far from charming our vain Minds and
chaining them down to the Things of Earth and Sense, that we must indeed make
Arguments and Motives of them, to raise our Hearts unto and fix them on the
Things that are unseen, spiritual and heavenly. From Men of the World which
have their Portion in this Life. -- As for me, I will behold thy Face in
Righteousness! I shall be satisfied when I awake in thy Likeness. Many there be
that say, Who will show us any Good? Lord, lift Thou up the Light of thy
Countenance upon us! Thou have put Gladness in my Heart more than in the Time
that their Corn and their Wine increased Psalm lv. 6. xvii. ult. Phil. iv. 11.
. -- Again, We must be ready, through Grace, to part with, and submit to the Will
of God in the loss of all worldly Things; learning in whatsoever State we are
therewith to be content, both how to be abased and to abound, to be full and to
be hungry. Let this be our Frame and Temper in the Acquisition and Use of our
worldly Estate, and God will write Holiness unto Himself on us and it.

Only it must be added, to the Glory of Christ, That our Persons and our Estate
are Holiness to the Lord only by Faith in his Holiness and Righteousness, who
is our Great High Priest within the Holy of Holies, ever living to make
Intercession for us, in whom and for whose Sake it is that repenting believing
Sinners are accepted as Holy in the Sight of God. Aaron within the Vail was the
eminent Type of Jesus entering by his own Blood. He is of God made to us
Holiness, and we the Holiness of God in Him. He, the Holy One of God was made
sin for us, that we Sinners may by Faith in Him become Holiness to the Lord.
With the Heart Man believes in Him unto Righteousness, and God is sanctified
therein while his Mercy abounds unto the Chief of Sinners. Coming to Him, we
are built up a spiritual House, a holy Priesthood. As He went to the Cross, he
said, " For their Sakes I sanctify my Self, that they may be sanctified. He was
separate from Sin, that we may come boldly to the Throne of Grace Hebrews x.
19, -- 22. 2 Cor. v. 21. 1 Pet. ii. 4, 5. Heb. vii. 26. Phil. iii. 9.
. Bear this in Mind, That no Saint is Holiness to the Lord from any inherent
Holiness in him, nor for any Works of Righteousness done by him, but for the
perfect and glorious Holiness of Christ reckoned to him.

And having thus said, When the Traffic and Wealth of a People is Holiness to
the Lord, I come (as was proposed) in the third and last place to enquire,

III. Why it must be so? Why our Merchandise and Hire should be bro't, with our
Selves, under a holy Consecration to God, and Use for Him.

I might easily enter into, and enlarge on, many Reasons of this Duty, which
are also Motives to it, and must pray you to give 'em a just Consideration, and
so make the Application of all that has been said every one to himself.

1. It is the highest End and best Use of Man and of all that belongs to him,
his first and last End, to be Holy to God. "The Earth is the Lord's, and the
Fullness thereof, the World and they that dwell therein. The Heavens, with all
their bright Inhabitants, serve to no higher End. " Angels are ministering
Spirits, sent forth to minister to the Heirs of Salvation from this Earth of
ours. Those Watchers and Holy Ones on High use and employ all their Powers and
Riches, in Bounties to the poor and needy Children of Men, the poor Saints
below. And can we do better than They to serve the Ends of Holiness, and the
Glory of God? " Whether they be Thrones, or Dominions or Principalities, or
whether we be higher or lower in Rank and Estate on Earth, all are created by
Him and for Him; to Whom be Glory for ever Psalm xxiv. 1. Heb. i. 14. Daniel
iv. 13. Col. i. 16.
.

2. This is therefore the prescribed, commanded Use of our worldly Riches, that
they be holy to God. "This is the Will of God in Christ Jesus concerning us,
and our Sanctification. God cannot will better concerning us, than that we and
all that belongs to us be holy to Him. This is his good and acceptable, his
royal and perfect Will. Let us put our Amen to it and say, " Father, thy Will
be done on Earth as it is in Heaven 1 These. v. 18. iv. 3. Romans xii. 2. Jam. ii.
8. 1 Pet. ii. 9.


3. It is the greatest Honor and Dignity put on us, and our worldly State,
that we and that be Holiness to the Lord. "This Honor have all the Saints, and
only They; praise ye the Lord. The Glory of God is his Holiness. He is the High
and Lofty One, whose Name is Holy Isai. lvii. 15. Dan. xii. 3. Deuteronomy. ii. 21.
. A Ray from his excellent Glory shines on Angels above, and on Saints on
Earth, and makes them Stars in his Firmament. This was the peculiar Honor of
Israel, "Ye shall be a holy People unto Me. God has not a brighter Stone in his
own Crown than his Holiness, nor a brighter Crown for the Head of Creatures
than to make them holy.

But it is remarkable, and the World may well wonder at the Beast, That the
vainest and proudest Creature on Earth affects this sacred and lofty Style, His
Holiness! He takes the Name of God in vain, in the most horrid and monstrous
manner, and the Lord will not hold him guiltless. The Man of Sin calls himself
His Holiness! was ever any thing more absurd, and yet more natural? Only the
Man of Sin durst take the most blessed and incommunicable Name. The jealous God
will consume that wicked One. Nothing on this side Hell can be further from the
Holiness of God. 2 These. ii. 4, 8.
The Scarlet Whore, drunken with the Blood of Saints, impudently and
blasphemously calls herself His Holiness! Monstrum, inform, ingens! No, the
Honors of Heaven go with the poor in Spirit, the meek and lowly and merciful.
All the Riches and Dignities of Kings are below these poor of Christ's little
Flock, to Whom it is the Pleasure of the Father to give the Kingdom.

4. Our worldly Goods will be vilely abused to the Dishonor of God, and the
Hurt of our Selves and others, if they be not holy to God. They are the Mammon
of Unrighteousness for want of this, and gender to all Ungodliness. They become
a Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof; the Fuel of Pride and
Vanity, Gluttony and Drunkenness, Lewdness and Uncleanness Or through
Covetousness they become Idolatry. The Love of Money is the Root of all Evil,
Sin and Sorrow, to our Selves and others; ruinous to our own Families, and also
to our Neighbors, by Dishonesty and Unrighteousness, Deceit and Fraud, Extortion
and Oppression. For where Charities and Mercies fail, and Works of Piety, the
forenamed odious Vices grow up in their stead, offensive to God and Man; Roots
of Bitterness, bearing Gall and Wormwood, all manner of Corruption and
Iniquity, Calamity and Mischief. But let our Merchandise and Hire be holy to
God, and all this is prevented, and our Goodness extends to the needy and the
excellent of the Earth, in whom should be all our Delight; and we become Eyes
to the blind, and Feet to the lame, and Fathers to the poor, and abundant
Blessings in our Generation Psalm xvi. 2. Job xxix. 11, 16. Philem. v. 7.
.

5. The Merchandise and Hire of Persons and Places should be Holiness to the
Lord, that the Lord their God may bless them in all the Works of their Hands.
The Way of Holiness is the Way of Blessing. God has promised to bless his
People in this his required Way. It is He that gives us Power to get Wealth.
Read his Promises to an Obedient holy People, Deuteronomy. xxviii. " All these
Blessings shall come upon thee, -- Blessed shall thou be in the City and in the
Field, etc. He has threatened to curse an unholy People in the same Instances.
If he blow upon 'em they are blasted. God justly impoverishes the Places that
rob him of his Offerings and Alms. To withold his Dues tends to Poverty. But
prove me now, says the Lord, if I do not pour out a Blessing, when you pay to
Me and mine my Part out of your Estates Deuteronomy. xxviii. 15, 16, 17. Hag. i. 9.
Prove. xi. 24. Mal. iii. 8, 12.
. Alas! says an excellent Divine, that Men have generally so little Faith in
God's Providence or Promises! Few believe Him when he says, " Let there be Meat
in my House that there may be eno' in your own! few can trust God as to the
Gains of Piety and Charity.

6. Our Merchandise and Hire should be holy to God, that so his spiritual
Blessing may come on our Souls. This lies especially in a spiritual Mind, and
heavenly Affections, and the Comforts of Grace: These are the perfect Gifts
from the Father of Spirits, and are more (infinitely more) than all present
Riches. God gives the Power to eat our Bread, and use it holily. To him that
has this Heart, he will add more Grace. He shall increase with the Increasings
of God. Thus the liberal Soul is made fat in Spirituals, and he that waters
is watered again. And well repaid is he that sowes in worldly Things, and reaps
in Spiritual: Like the Woman of Samaria who gave Christ a little common Water,
and received of Him a Well of living Water, within her Self, springing up into
everlasting Life. John iv. 14. Prove. xi. 25. Gal. vi. 8.


7. Let your Merchandise and Hire be Holiness to the Lord, and you shall have
Riches in Heaven. So our Lord proposed to the young Man that came to him. The
Promise is, " He that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life
Everlasting. The Promises of this Nature are multiplied Luke xiv. 14. xvi. 9.
xii. 33. Heb. x. 24.
in the Book of God, because our carnal Minds are so averse to the Belief of
them. But will Christ fail us in a Point that he has so often repeated? He has
said, Thy Father which sees in secret will reward thee openly. Thou shall be
recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just. Make to your selves Friends of the
Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when ye fail they may receive you into
everlasting Habitations. Provide Bags which wax not old, a Treasure in Heaven
that fails not, where no Thief approaches, nor Moth corrupts. -- These are
true Sayings of God, He is faithful that has promise. Both in our Devotions
and Charities we should have Respect unto the Recompense of Reward: Knowing
(says the Apostle) that in Heaven ye have a better and more enduring Substance;
Cast not away therefore your Confidence which has great Recompense of Reward.

You must be just to God and your Selves, and make these Reasons of your Duty
so many Motives to it.

You see 1. That the meanest Things may be of good and great Use to the Glory
of God; and the most contrary Things be made to turn to our Salvation. We may
so serve God and our Selves of Mammon, as to make it a Friend to Him and our
Souls. We may extract Holiness out of the Dirt and Clay of this World, the
thick Clay wherewith so many load themselves and bury themselves. God sits as a
Refiner and does this for us. Grace turns all it touches into Gold. It is a
Stone that attracts and fixes the very Iron to its Pole, which is Holiness,
Heaven and God. As Philosophy has found out the richest Virtues in the meanest
Herbs and Plants, so Divinity teaches us how to improve and use the mean Things
of this World to the most spiritual and heavenly Ends: And when we serve God
and our Souls of earthly Things, then are they indeed wisely and rightly used.

2. Let us be humbled for the ill Use we have made of our worldly Business and
Gains, our Abuse of them unto Unholiness and Sin. What is more Enmity to God
and our Selves than this? Men's worldly Affairs engross and eat them up! eat out
the Heart of that little Religion they profess. The Cares of the World and the
Deceitfulness (...) choke the Word. Men go, one to his Farm and (...) to his
Merchandise. God, and the poor, and their own Souls are forgotten and neglected
by them. They trust in uncertain Riches, and renounce the living God. They fall
into Temptations, and Snares, and many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown
them in Destruction and Perdition. They are filled, and they fill the World,
with all Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness Luke viii. 14.
Matthew. xxii. 5. 1 Timothy vi. 9, 17. Romans i. 29.
What a shameful Abuse is this of the Bounties of Providence! and a turning his
Glory into Shame!

3. See the Honor and Happiness of a religious People. They and all that
belongs to them are Holiness to the Lord. Blessed and holy is He that has part
in this. They are in God's Church here in the Image of Jesus, the great High
Priest of their Profession. They are a holy Priesthood, a spiritual House, the
Household of Faith. What can Angels be, and what can Heaven be more than this,
Holiness to the Lord? Jesus is this, within the Holy of Holiness, at the right
Hand of God. He calls his chosen into Fellowship with Him, and with his Angels.
His People are a Kingdom of Priests, a holy Nation. There are Garments of Glory
and Beauty provided for them, wherein shortly to enter the Holiest of all. So
the Apostle salutes and superscribes; -- 1 Cor. i. 2. 1 Pet. ii. 5, 9. Exodus
xix. 6.
To the Church of God which is at Corinth, sanctified in Jesus Christ, called
to be Saints; with all that in every Place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ
our Lord, both theirs and ours! I thank my God always on your behalf, for the
Grace of God that is given you by Jesus Christ.

4. and lastly, I beseech you Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that you present
your Selves, Children, Families, Substance, Gifts, Talents, all you are and
have, as living Offerings to God, holy and acceptable through Jesus Christ. How
should an unholy Person offer to God in a holy manner? The Person is more than
his Estate. Christ seeks not yours but you. The Soul is his, and all Souls are
so. There are the Riches of Souls, their noble Faculties and Powers with every
natural and acquired Gift; and what should be thy Gift to God but These! thy
whole Self; Body, Soul and Spirit, which is your reasonable Service. Prove.
xxiii. 26. My Son, give me thy Heart.

Next to thy Self are thy Children: Give these to God as thy best Riches, thy
richest Jewels. They are holy to Him by Covenant, as the Family of Abraham was.
This Blessing is come upon us Gentiles, through Faith in that Blessed Seed, in
Whom the Families of the Earth are blessed: and through Whom the Offerings (...)
the Gentiles are acceptable to God, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. What
can a Man give to God in Exchange for his Soul and the Souls of his House? will
he give his Estate, and think it will be accepted? I trow not.

God values our Hearts and Spirits above all our Silver or Gold, our Herds and
Flocks. If a Man would give all the Substance of his House instead of Love, the
Loves of his Soul and the Souls of his House, it would be contemned. Thousands
of Rams were a dogs-neck in lieu of the Love of one Soul.

We owe the first and greatest Piety and Charity to our Selves and at Home. We
and ours are made for ever, if we are holy to the Lord: But we are profane and
miserable without it.

The rich and the poor equally owe Themselves to God, and are equally able to
render it. The Lord is the Maker of them both, and they are alike acceptable to
Him. The one must be rich in good Works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate; and the other must be rich in Faith, Heirs of the Kingdom.

It is a holy Thing to give unto such as these, from Faith and Love which is in
Christ Jesus.

I will read you, the best Offering that any Man can make to God! read it and
make it, and I have done: Genesis xviii. 19. I know Abraham, that he will command
his Children and his Household after him, and they shall keep the Way of the
Lord; -- that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which He has spoken of him.

FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page 10. line 20. for Accidentally read Occasionally.


