Mr. Prince's SERMON Upon the DEATH of Madam OLIVER.

Precious in the Sight of the LORD is the DEATH of his Saints.

A SERMON Upon the Death of Mrs. Elizabeth Oliver, Relict of the HONORABLE
DANIEL OLIVER, Esquire Wednesday May xxi. 1735. Aetatis 58. Delivered At the South
Church in BOSTON, on the LORD's DAY after.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. And One of the Pastors of the said Church.

Rev. xiv.13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the Dead which Die in the LORD.

BOSTON: Printed by S. Kneeland and T. Green MDCCXXXV.

A Funeral SERMON UPON Mrs. Elizabeth Oliver.
PSALM. CXVI.15. Precious in the Sight of the LORD, is the Death of his Saints.


THE Words indeed are found in the midst of a Song of Praise: and it seems not
easy to descern their Connection, either with what goes before or follows them.
For the Psalmist was Blessing the MOST HIGH for hearing his earnest Prayer and
delivering his Soul from Death: and as He is uttering his Resolution to pay his
Vows in the Presence of all his People -- He suddenly brakes forth in this
surprising Exclamation -- Precious in the Sight of the LORD is the Death of his
Saints -- and then goes on with his grateful Promises to serve and honor his
Divine Preserver.

Perhaps He had his Eye on the vain Imagination of those who think the Glorious
GOD to be an unconcerned Spectator of the dangerous Case and Death even of the
Best of the Race of Men; that He has no regard to their Cries in their Times of
Danger; that He leaves them to the Chance of natural Causes; that whether they
live or dye, it is a trifling or indifferent matter with HIM; that as all things
in the present State seem to come alike to all, both to the Good and Bad, so He
makes no more account of the Life or Death of the one than of the other; and
that therefore there is no need of acknowledging his particular Providence,
either in the Death or Preservation of the Saints themselves.

In opposition to such wrong Tho'ts as these, which are apt to rise in the
sensitive Minds of Men, the Psalmist here declares his assured Judgment in the
words before us. Wherein are comprehended these two Propositions, viz.

I. That even the Saints of GOD are subject to Dye, as well as others. But II.
In this they differ, that their Death is Precious in the Sight of their LORD.
And for the clearing them I shall endeavor to consider these four Things, 1.
Who are the Saints of the LORD here intended. 2. On what account are they
called HIS Saints, 3. Why are they not excused from Dying. 4. and lastly, In
what respect is their Death Precious in his Eyes.


I. Who are the Saints of the LORD here intended.

Some Interpreters render the Word, as in our English Version, Saints Chald.
Sept. and Vulg. Lat.
Some the Pious Moller.
Some the Good and Godly Deod.
Some the Righteous Arab.
Some the Merciful Montan.
Some the Gentle and Kind Calvin.
Some the Beneficent Varii in Pol. Synops.
Some the Objects of the Love of GOD Jun. and Trem.
and some, his Favorites Dutch.


A learned Man observes, the Word imports, both Piety, Probity, Goodness,
Benevolence, Benignity and Beneficence. In Humane Kind it sometimes signifies
the Goodliness or Good which we receive, as in Isai. 40.6. at other times the
Pious and benign Affection, wherewith we do Good to others. Sometimes the
Septuagint translates the word by -- Righteous Genesis 32.10. Exodus 34.7. Isai.
63.7. Esther 2.9.
; Sometimes by Grace, but usually by Mercy Psalm. 4.4. Neh. 13.14.
; which the New Testament allows Mat. 9.13. Hos. 6.6.
. Hence the Godly are called Gracious or Merciful; viz. Those that have
obtained Mercy, Goodness, Piety, Grace and Benignity from GOD, and are Pious
also toward HIM, as well as Gracious, kind and merciful to others. ( Leigh.
Crit.)

In the

1. Place then, By the Saints are here intended, Those who are Sanctified by
the HOLY SPIRIT.

They are not merely nominal but real Saints; truly Sanctified or made Holy,
both in Spirit, Soul and Body. And as in the Economy of our Redemption, the
SON OF GOD was to Purchase all Kinds of Blessings for guilty and condemned
Sinners; the HOLY SPIRIT was to apply these Blessings, and among the rest this
great one of Sanctification to their depraved Natures.

As we derive from Adam, both the inspired Scriptures show us, and our
universal, constant Observation both of our selves and others, abundantly
confirms it, that the present Constitution of the whole Race of Men, is in a
moral sense, exceedingly depraved, as they are now formed or come into the
World. If in a moral sense, our Natures were neither Good nor Evil, but equally
indifferent to both; there would be an equal chance for an equal Number of
Virtuous and Vicious People on the Face of the Earth, or in every Country. But
the Experience of all Nations, Ages and Countries shows us, that the Virtuous
are comparatively few: And even these Virtuous Ones have for ever owned, and
have often indeed unhappily discovered the Vicious Inclinations in them.

Even Socrates Himself, one of the best and wisest among the Gentiles -- when a
Teller of Secrets that knew not who he was, nor what Life he lived; yet from
viewing the Lines of his Face, pronounced, that whoever He was, He was a Person
full of vicious Inclinations; the People laughed to see the Man's great mistake
in a Person of such transcendent Virtue: But Socrates cries out, The Man is
right: I (...) them all by nature in me, and it is only by the Power of Wisdom,
that I have corrected, and kept them under. (Cicero Tusc. and Lib. IV.)

Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one: What then is Man that
he should be clean? and He who is born of a Woman that he should be Righteous?
So say Job, Eliphaz, and Bildad, those most pious and wise Arabians; who lived
in the early Ages before the Giving of the Law by Moses, in some of the purest
Times the Earth has seen, and were as thoroughly acquainted with Humane Nature
as any others. David one of the holiest among the ancient Israelites,
confesses, and would have all observe it, that He was conceived in Sin and
shapen in Iniquity, Psalm. 51.5. And GOD Himself, who knows us perfectly,
declares, that the Imagination of Man's Heart is Evil from his Youth, Genesis 8.21.

To be conceived in Sin and shapen in Iniquity, is to be conceived and shapen
with prevailing Propensities to sinful Pleasures, and to sinful Tho'ts
Contrivances and Actions, in order to obtain those sinful Pleasures. Our sinful
Nature with its sinful Byasses, are derived from the Parent to the Offspring:
And how this moral Propagation is reconcilable with the moral Purity of our
CREATOR, is as easy to be apprehended, as how the Propagation of painful and
vile Diseases, is reconcilable to his Justice.

For, in short, the Sovereign GOD at first formed a wise and righteous Course
of Nature, wherein He would ordinarily extend his Influence; but would not be
obliged to hinder Men from perverting from its excellent Ends. He will usually
still act according to this Course of Nature: and if Men pervert it, the Sin
and Blame derives from them, and not from Him, who requires their acting
otherwise.

So in this Course of Nature, He for excellent Ends, enables the Soul within us
to move the Body. But if the Soul will move the Body to a vile Action; the
Sovereign GOD is not obliged to change the Course of Nature, or work a Miracle,
or operate in a different manner; but still he enables the Soul to move the
Body; and the Sin and Fault entirely belongs to the vile Perverter.

So in the Course of Nature, for excellent Ends, the Sovereign GOD has given
various Virtues to various Meats and Liquors, and various Relishes to move our
temperate using them, for our Benefit and Comfort. But when the intemperate
Appetite immoderately swallows them; He is not obliged to change the Course of
Nature, or work a Miracle to hinder their natural Operation, though the excessive
Liquor should inebriate, or the provoking Meat inflame a vicious Appetite. The
Sovereign GOD is absolutely Spotless: and the Sin and Blame entirely lies on
the vile Abuser of the Divine Power and Influence.

However, this we see in Fact, that upon the Sin of our first Parents, the
Humane Nature became wretchedly depraved and corrupted. Before the Flood we
read, that GOD looked upon the Earth, and behold it was corrupt; For all Flesh
had corrupted his Way upon the Earth, Genesis vi.12. In the Times of David we also
read, that the LORD looked down from Heaven upon the Children of Men, to see if
there were any that did understand and seek GOD; But they were all gone aside,
they were altogether become filthy, there was none that did Good, no not one,
Psalm. 14.1, 2 In the Days of the Apostles, -- 1 John 5.19, And we know -- that
the whole World lies in Wickedness. So universal was this Corruption then; so
universal has it been ever since; and so universal is it now, that it is nothing
but our Ignorance of the State of Humane Kind that suffers us to imagine
otherwise.

Our Minds are now by nature Blind, that we cannot see the transcendent
Excellence and Loveliness of GOD; we cannot apprehend our highest Delight and
only Happiness consists in the Knowledge of Him, in being like Him in his
moral Excellence, in conversing with Him, in conforming to his Will, and in
promoting his Glory. Our Affections are so depraved; that we cannot love Him
with the highest Love, nor desire Him with the highest Desire, nor delight in
Him with the highest Satisfaction. And our Wills are so perverted, that we
cannot choose nor seek Him as our only allsufficient Portion, nor entirely
submit to his Sovereign Pleasure.

But instead of this, we delight in and value, we love and desire, we choose and
seek the World before Him. And because He forbids or hinders us herein; we rise
in Enmity and Opposition to Him, we hate his Holy Laws and Government, we will
not have Him to rule over us, we renounce our Subjection to Him, and set up our
selves against Him.

In such a Case as this are the Children of Men by Nature. And so the Apostle
describes them in Romans iii.9, -- 23. Chap. vii.17. and Chap. viii.7. But when
the DIVINE SPIRIT comes to Sanctify us; He enlightens our Minds, and gives us
the highest Apprehensions of the Glorious GOD; He purifies our Affections and
sets them chiefly on Him; He renews our Wills, and brings them to a cordial
Submission to Him. He deadens our Lusts; He delivers us from these sinful
Byasses; And in the room of them He puts a contrary and prevailing Bias
toward that infinitely GREATEST and BEST of Beings, as our highest Good, and
only Happiness. He enlivens us with every gracious Principle that makes us like
Him in his moral Image, and prevailingly inclines and moves us to obey his Will
and seek his Glory. He subjects every Passion to the enlightened Judgment: And
now they receive their Motion, Direction or Restraint from those holy
Principles and Inclinations He has produced and constantly preserves in us.

He brings us to see the Vileness of every Sin and hate it; to mourn for all
our Contrariety to GOD and Dishonours done Him; to reject every sinful Pleasure
and Inclination; to implore his Pardon and Favor through CHRIST the Mediator;
to embrace the Savior in all his Offices and Promises; Receiving Him,
submitting to Him and depending on Him for all the Benefits of his meritorious
Obedience and prevailing Intercession. He brings us heartily to love and choose
his Word and Truths, his Laws and Government, his House and Ordinances; and to
devote our selves entirely to Him. In short, He brings us to take the greatest
Pleasure in Conversing with Him, and in our own and others Conformity to his
Will and Image. He brings us to delight in Goodness wherever we see it, to love
our Neighbors with a kind affection, to desire their welfare, and even aspire
to be Blessings to all about us.

These are the internal Characters and Principles of the Saints of GOD: They
are thus inwardly Sanctified by his HOLY SPIRIT: He has renewed his Sacred
Image in them; and given them a vital Power to move and act in an Holy manner
like Him.

2. The Saints of GOD are therefore Those who also live in a sanctified or holy
manner.

Their Hearts being thus made Holy with holy Frames and Byasses; these holy and
active Principles put forth themselves in holy Lives.

They Persevere and Grow in every Grace: and from these vital Powers yield the
Fruits of Holiness. Their inward Graces rise up in holy Tho'ts, form their
Minds into holy Affections and Intentions, express themselves in holy Words,
and exert themselves in holy Actions.

They watch over themselves: They watch against the Snares about them: They
consider their Duty both to GOD and Man: They have a respect to all the Divine
Commands, and labor to perform them.

They deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts. They are wise and tho'tful, grave
and cheerful, pure and modest, temperate and sober; and they possess their
Vessels in Chastity and Honor.

They espouse the Cause of Piety, though despised by others. They are not ashamed
to profess their Faith in GOD, nor in his revealed Word, nor in that Blessed
SAVIOR which others slight: But they openly own Him, and declare their
Resolution to obey and follow Him. They make his Doctrines their Rule of Faith,
his Precepts their Rule of Life and Worship, his (...) their Pattern, and his
Glory their End. They sanctify his Name and Sabbath: They encourage and respect
his Ministers: They love his Ordinances, and they carefully attend them both in
Public and Private.

But a distinguishing Part of their external Character is their GOODNESS to
others. Their Concern to fulfill the Duties of their several Places and
Relations: Their becoming Carriage both to Superiors, Equals and Inferiors:
Their Justice and Honesty, their Mildness and Gentleness, their Kindness and
Beneficence to all about them. Their Pity to the Afflicted, their Help to the
Needy, their Charity to those who are of other Opinions, their manifest
Abhorrence of every vicious thing, their distinguishing Approbation of every
thing that is Good; their Displeasure at the Wicked, and their peculiar Favor
to the Wise and Virtuous.

In short, Goodness or Beneficence is so essential and great a Part of the
Character of the Saints of GOD, that not they deserve the sacred Name who shut
themselves in Cloisters or mostly spend their Lives in retired Devotions; But
they who desire and labor to Do most Good are the greatest Saints. They are
most like to the Holy GOD who does Good to all and who does Good continually,
who is never weary and who is never wanting, who is never backward, and who
will do Good for ever.

Thus have we considered briefly our First General Head, and in some measure
shown the Character of the Saints of GOD here spoken of. And by these things we
may clearly see

II. On what Accounts They are called HIS Saints --

I may but mention them, and so pass on -- And they may be such as these, viz.

Because they receive their Sanctification from Him, both in the Beginning,
Continuance, Progress, and Perfection of it.

Because, by their being Holy both in Heart and Life, They are like Him in his
moral Excellence.

Because they are therein conformable to his Holy Will and Law, and answer the
excellent Designs of the many Powers and Opportunities He has bestowed on them.

Because They are the Objects of his special Favor, Delight and Love.

And lastly, Because He has taken them into an happy Relation to Him as his
peculiar People, by a perfectly well ordered and everlasting Covenant.

On such Accounts as these they are styled His, with a special Eminence and
Appropriation. And yet these alas! must Dye as well as others! But

III. Why are not these Saints of his excused from this deplorable Calamity.

Now this in General is for the same Reasons that they are ordered to meet with
other Temporal Evils.

It is doubtless in Part to signify, that they are all involved with their
entire Fellow-Race in the first Apostasy.

It is to show the natural, pernicious and deadly Influence of Sin in their
depraved Natures.

It is to exhibit to the World in them, the more flagrant Instances of the
Divine Justice, Holiness and Truth, the Desert of Sin and its great
offensiveness to GOD.

It is to avoid those many Inconveniences, which their Exemption from the
common Lot of others, either by a perpetual Life, or their distinguishing
Translation, would subject the World unto.

It is to keep them humble, excite their Diligence, Fidelity and Watchfulness,
to try and exercise and improve their Faith, Submission, Patience, and other
Graces, for the Excitation of all who see them, and for their own greater
Benefit.

It is to show the superior Excellence of his true Religion in them, and to
magnify his Grace in giving them a joyful Triumph over Nature in the nearest
Prospect of this King of Terrors.

And in fine, it is to give Occasion for the more illustrious Appearance of the
Power and Empire of the Redeemer in their amazing Resurrection.

For these and it may be numberless other Reasons, which are unreveal'd and we
can little think of; the Saints of GOD, though sanctified and forgiven, though they
are his peculiar People and most dear to Him; yet must suffer Death as well as
others, and are exposed to encounter it in all its hideous Forms and killing
Agonies.

But we must now consider the Special Privilege here ascribed to them; or in the

IV. and last place show, In what Respect their Death is Precious in the Sight
of their LORD.

Now this plainly implies that their Persons and Lives are Precious to Him.
Thus He represents them as his Jewels, Mal. iii.17. as his peculiar Treasure,
Exodus xix.5. Psalm. CXXXV.4; and as his pleasant Portion, Jer. 12.10. As a
chosen Generation, 1 Pet. ii.9. as his peculiar People, Deuteronomy. xiv.2. Isai.
li.16. and 1 Pet. ii.9; as his Children, Mat. v.9; as his Beloved, Psalm.
cviii.6; and the dearly Beloved of his Soul, Jer. xii.7. That He takes
Pleasure in them, Psalm. cxlix.4. that whosoever touches them, touches the
Apple of his Eye, Zech. ii.8. and as the Apple of his Eye He keeps them, Deuteronomy.
xxxii.10.

By these endearing Epithets, He signifies that He most highly values Them;
that He watches over them with a special tender Care; and that He will not
easily or lightly suffer them to be hurt or perish.

Yea, that He accounts their Lives as singularly Useful to Him. The Life of one
of these is more preferable with Him than the Lives of many others. The Lives
of others are full of Vanity and Folly; and therefore of little worth in the
sight of GOD: But the Life of one of these abounds in Good Fruit and Wisdom.
The Lives of others are full of Sin and Injury: But the Life of one of these
abounds in Righteousness and Beneficence. The Lives of others highly dishonor
and offend the Sovereign GOD: But the Lives of these greatly please Him, and
yield Him Glory.

On these and other Accounts, their Persons and Lives are Precious to Him. So
Precious, as to be highly valued and carefully Preserved, as long as his own
Glory and their best Interest require it.

And as their Persons and Lives are Precious in the Sight of GOD, their Death
must needs be Precious with Him too. He makes not light, i.e. He makes no small
Account of the Death of his Saints; but He accounts them dear and of the
greatest moment to Him. He does not carelessly let them Die: He only suffers it
for wiser Ends and for their greater Benefit, than if they were to continue
longer.

In particular,

1. They are so Precious to Him, as He allows them not to Die before the
fittest Time, both for HIMSELF and Them.

His eternal and consummate Wisdom, before He gave them Being, both marked the
Time of their Entrance and Continuance in this lower World. He designed them a
Work to Do; He designed all their Services, both for Himself, for Others and
Themselves, before He made them. And when He brings them forth to Being, He
forms them for their Work, and He orders all the Circumstances of their
Existence Here in a perfect Concurrence with it. He introduces them into their
various Powers, Places and Opportunities of Service: He constantly upholds
their Lives. In innumerable Hazards both unknown and known, He defends from
Death; and He will not suffer them to Die, till their Work is ended, and the
fittest Time arrives, which even They themselves, if they knew all things,
would choose for their Departure.

2. In their very Dying They are Precious to Him.

In the midst of all their Throws and Agonies, the Horrors of the Shadow of
Death; and in the midst of their Infirmities, Impatience and Imperfections, the
Weakness of their Faith and the Greatness of their Doubts, Perplexities and
Fears, He yet highly values them. He sees and values even the faintest Lines of
his Image in them. He sees and values the smallest Measures of their Faith and
Hope in Him, of their Love and Desire to Him, of their Meekness and Humility,
of their Patience and Submission, of their Fears to offend Him, of their
Endeavors to obey his Will and honor Him. He considers their unhappy Darkness
and Infirmity: He greatly Pities them in their dying Agonies: and then
especially they are Precious to Him.

At such a time, They are very dear to their Earthly Relatives and Friends, who
can only guess at their internal Pains and Troubles. But they are much more
dear to their HEAVENLY FATHER and Compassionate SAVIOR, who clearly see and
know their innermost Distresses both of Soul and Body.

3. He most gratefully accepts the Death they humbly submit unto, as a precious
Sacrifice offered to Him.

Willingly to yield to Death, when the Lord of Life requires it, is to offer up
the precious Life as a Sacrifice to Him: and with what a grateful Acceptance
must He behold the Offering? For Life is the most precious thing we can
conceive: as without it we can enjoy no Delight, we can be sensible of nothing,
our very Being is of no Advantage: And when we willingly resign the Life to the
Divine Requirer, we offer Him the dearest thing we have, yea we offer Him all;
we offer Him every Enjoyment we have in Possession, and we trust Him wholly for
a future Existence. How great must the Offer be for Us, and how dear to HIM who
sees our entire Devotion to his Sovereign Pleasure. And when He sees the Life
resigned and the Body Dead; He beholds and values the Sacrifice which has been
offered to Him, as transcendently Dear and Precious.

4. Their Death is so Precious to Him, that when they Die, He suffers them not
to Perish with Others.

Their Bodies indeed are suffered to loose their Sense and see Corruption: But
their inconceivably more noble Part their Souls are not allowed to Perish as
the Spirits of the unsanctified are. The unsanctified Spirits are not only
separated wholly from the Life of GOD, or from all cheerful Influence from Him;
but they are also sent into a State of Darkness and Distress, with tremendous
Devils, as it were imprisoned and wrapped in Chains for the Judgment of the Great
Day. Even their Hope is Perished: and without the least Ray of Light or
Comfort, they have nothing left them but a certain fearful Looking for of
Judgment and fiery Indignation to devour them. Heb. x.27.

But the Souls of the Sanctified are neither suffered to perish from the Life
of GOD, nor to pass into a State of Pain nor Horror, nor yet of Fear or Doubt
or Insensibility. But they are perfected in the Life of Grace; they are filled
with Divine Light and Joy; and they enter into Paradise, a Place and State of
most sensible Rest, and of inexpressible Delight and Blessedness.

5. Their Death is so Precious in the Sight of their LORD, that even in the
State of Death, They are wholly Precious to Him.

While the Bodies of the Unsanctified lie putrefying in vile Corruption,
loathsome to GOD and Angels as well as Men; their unsanctified Souls remain in
all the Filthiness of Sin and Devils, fit only for their unclean Company, and
hateful in the Eyes of GOD. But the Souls of the Sanctified not only retain
their Holiness, but even in the Moment of their Separation their Remains of Sin
are entirely done away, they are made perfectly Pure and Holy; and so the Holy
GOD beholds them with full Delight, He highly values them as fitted for his
immediate Presence. And though their Bodies are allowed to putrify and turn to
Dust; yet these lamentable Ruins of their Nature, even their corrupting Bodies
and their mouldering Dust, are Precious to Him. He will not loose nor leave
them; but reserve and keep them as the dear Remains of his Beloved Friends; or
as the choice Materials of a glorious Temple, which He designs to raise and
dwell in for ever. Even in the State of Death He esteems them as his dispersed
Jewels, and designs a Day when He will make them up into a Crown of Glory. Mal.
iii.17.

6. Their Death is so Precious with Him, that He will perfectly Redeem them
from it, and from all its Influence and Power.

The Bodies of the Unsanctified shall indeed rise again, but in all the sinful
Vileness wherewith they died. Their unsanctified Souls shall also be restored
to them, but with all that increase of Sin they have been growing ^o in their
State of Separation and in their Converse with unclean Spirits. Such a
Resurrection cannot be called a Redemption; no more than the bringing forth the
known Criminals from Prison to their expected Condemnation: No! though they rise,
they rise in Chains; though they are brought forth to Light, they would fain fly
it; their Light is ten thousand times worse than Darkness, and they are brought
forth bound for the most open Shame and Punishment.

But not so the Sanctified -- their dissolved Bodies and their scattered Dust
shall be recollected and formed again, but free from Sin and fit to join their
pure and perfect Spirits. And then free from Guilt and Fear, they would quicken and
rise with Joy unspeakable, full of Liberty and full of Glory.

7. and lastly, Their Death is so Precious to Him, as He will gloriously Reward
it as the Final Trial and Victory of their Faith, their Love, their Patience,
and the Consummation of their Work in this lower World.

When the Sanctified come to Dye, then comes on the last and greatest Trial of
their Faith in GOD and of their Love and Obedience to Him. Their Warfare is now
accomplishing, their Course is Finishing, their Probation ending: and now their
Love is to mount above the World, their Patience is to overcome their sharpest
Sufferings, and their Faith to rise above their final Enemy. In the Power of
these Divine Graces they maintain the hardy Conflict, and they come off
Conquerors and more than Conquerors over all Opposition.

Now the Eyes of their gracious GOD is on them: He beholds the Contest and the
noble Efforts of their Faith and Love with Pleasure: He sees their Patience in
its last and perfect Work: He rejoices in the glorious Victory: He loves and
prizes them as his faithful and victorious People, and He will give them a
transcendent Recompense. He receives them into his Heavenly Kingdom, He crowns
them with Eternal Life, He transports them with his joyous Smiles in the Face
of CHRIST, and He entertains them with endless Blessedness.

In these Respects the Death of the Saints are Precious in the Sight of their
LORD. We might have enlarged on these and mentioned others; but the Time calls
us to a brief

IMPROVEMENT.

And,

1. Then it greatly concerns us to be Sanctified too.

For till we come to be Sanctified by the SPIRIT of GOD, we are so far from
being Precious in his Holy Eyes, that we are exceeding odious and contemptible
to Him. Whatever splendid Titles, exalted Honors, plenteous Riches, or
superior Powers we are now invested with; He sees our Hearts, with all the
trifling Thoughts and vile Affections brooding there. -- He sees them with
Abhorrence and Contempt. Both while we Live and when we Die He loathes us. At
Death He strips of all this gay Attire; and when we come to awake and rise, He
will then openly despise our Image. He only uses us at present to answer some
of his wise Designs; but at the Hour of Death, as mean and worthless He rejects
for ever.

2. When we see the Sanctified, we should highly value and love them.

Since they are Precious in the Sight of GOD, to be sure they should be so in
our's. Whatever unworthy Names they bare from their reviling Neighbors; yet as
far as they show the Holy Image of GOD, we should view it as a lovely
Appearance, and our Hearts should rise in Affection to them. We should esteem
their Persons, prefer their Company, desire their Friendship, avoid their
Offense, and wish their Welfare. And surely of all other People on Earth we
should make choice of those we apprehend are Precious in the Eyes of GOD, for
our most dear Companions Here, with whom we are like to find a sacred
Fellowship, and with whom we may expect to dwell, and delight in for ever.

To choose for our most intimate Companions Here, the Unsanctified, who are
under the Power of their vile Lusts, and who will not join with us in a
Religious Life; who are contemptible and hateful to the Holy GOD, whom at the
Resurrection we shall relinquish as utterly unfit for our Society, and in the
Judgment condemn to an eternal Separation from us -- How absurd the Union? How
inconsistent with the Rules of Wisdom? and what a constant Source of shocking
Thoughts will this produce in the Pious Soul unhappily consorted with the
graceless Sinner as long as Life continues, and then to part for ever. But what
a constant Scene of Satisfaction, to be joined with those who are Beloved of
GOD and Helpers with us to the Heavenly Places? whom Death it self will
separate but for a little Season, and then to meet with improved Loveliness and
Purity, never to Part again, but eternally rejoice together in the grateful
Memory of all the mutual Helps we have given each other to this endless
Blessedness.

3. What a Sacred Pleasure is it then to behold the Saints both Dying and
Expired, and what a Fountain here of living Consolations in the Prospect of
them.

When we consider our selves indeed as being bereaved, or when we view them in
their dying Agonies, with an Eye of Sense alone; we have before us very moving
Objects of Grief and Tears. But while by Faith we view them even then as
Precious in the Sight of GOD; while we view their Souls as passing out of a
World of Sin and Trouble into a World of Purity and Blessedness; and while we
view even their deceased Bodies as also Precious in the Eyes of their Redeemer,
and as designed for a Glorious Resurrection; then our Sorrow sinks away, and a
holy Pleasure rises, which inclines us rather to Congratulate their Happiness,
and wish to follow them.

To see an expiring Saint, and then to think, O there is a Precious Soul most
dear to GOD, a going to be delivered out of Prison; to be loosened from this
unweildy, painful and sinful Body; to be perfected in Holiness; to be awakened
in all its amazing Powers, to be filled with Life, and to stretch away with
Guardian Angels to the Seats above -- And to see the Body lying Pale and Dead,
and then to think, O there is a Body still most dear to Heaven; which will one
Day be formed again, but in perfect Purity and Beauty; which with wondrous Joy
will feel its Glorified Spirit Entering and Possessing it, animating every Part,
and filling it with Divine Powers and with Immortality -- I say to view these
things with an Eye of Faith, will carry the Mind into such a Scene of Pleasure,
as will banish all our Worldly Grief; and when returning, will both moderate
and sanctify our Sorrows.

4. and lastly, Then both while the Sanctified are Living and when they are
Dead, we should call to mind and imitate their various Excellencies.

While they Live we should eye their Graces and Good Words; not to lessen them,
or raise up in us the vile and hateful Spirit of Envy, but to attract our Love
and Imitation.

And when they are Dead we should remember these Precious Ones with a sacred
Pleasure, speak of their Excellencies, and excite our selves to copy after
them; that we may live and shine as they have done before us, and if possible
excel them.

Such an imitable and lovely Pattern has Madam OLIVER set before us. -- A
lovely Pattern of a blameless and agreeable Life from her Youthful Days: -- a
Life adorned in an eminent measure with many Christian Virtues, which attracted
the Esteem and Love of all about Her.

I shall mention but a few of the many; because on such Occasions I would
always rather choose to keep within than go beyond the known Character.

The GOD of Nature seemed remarkably to fit Her for that excellent Person to
whom she was associated, whose Loss we yet deplore, and for that honorable
Station in which He placed Her.

Innocence and decent Cheerfulness were among her lower Virtues. A rare Wisdom
dwelt in her tho'tful Mind; which constantly appeared in her Looks, Deportment,
Words, and Actions.

Quick in Apprehending, acute in Judging, lively and easy in Expression;
knowing both what and when to speak; free and impartial in expressing her Mind;
without Deceit or Flattery, which were greatly abhorrent to her upright Soul:
Ready to give her wise and faithful Counsels and Admonitions, and to do good
Offices to all about Her.

She always carried Her self agreeably to the Dignity of her honorable and
wealthy Circumstance; yet not with Haughtiness of Air, but with becoming
Modesty and Condescension, and without Offense. She was of a tender Heart; full
of Mercy and Good Works.

Her witty, easy and free Conversation made her Company very agreeable: But in
all She ever showed a due Regard to the Rules of her Holy Religion, and
carefully preserved Her self within them.

She kept her Household in excellent Order. She was both an happy Help and Crown
to her Husband. She with Him trained up their Children in the Nurture and
Admonition of the LORD. She set a lovely Example of all Good Works and Virtues
before their Eyes. Her Family was such a Nurser, b^ of Genteel and Virtuous
Accomplishments the Ministers in the Country were glad to have their Daughters
placed in it for the perfecting of their Education.

She loved the Habitation of the House of GOD, and his own Institutions there,
with the Dispensers of them; and She constantly attended them with becoming
Reverence.

The following Passages of the Virtuous Woman were most exactly described in
her Life and Conduct -- While her Husband was known in the Gates, while He sat
among the Elders of the Land; his Heart safely trusted in Her, so that He had
no need of Spoil. She did Him Good and not Evil all the Days of his Life. She
looked well to the Ways of her Household, and eat not the Bread of Idleness. She
opened her Mouth with Wisdom, and in her Tongue was the ^aw of Kindness. She
stretched out her Hand to the Poor, yea she reached forth her Hand to the
Needy. Her Husband while He lived Praised Her: and Her Children rise up and
call her Blessed. Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vain: But a Woman that
fears the LORD, she shall be Praised. Give her Memory of the Fruit of her
Hands, and let her own Works and Virtues Praise her in the Gates, as they do
this Day.

In short, She Persever'd in her blameless and exemplary Course to Death. And
when she came to Dye -- in the midst of all her earthly Delights and Prospects
Resigned Her self to the Divine Pleasure: In the midst of her distressing
Agonies she showed an admirable Patience. -- Expressed a lively Faith and Hope
in the Almerciful and Almighty SAVIOR. -- So fervently desired to be dissolved
and to be with Him, that She told her Brother the Governor when expressing His
Hope of her Reviving and Returning to us (the Night before she Died) -- No!
Brother, said she, Not for a thousand Worlds! In the Flames of her most raging
Fever, she said, She was going to Heaven in a fiery Chariot. And thither no
doubt She was soon transported.

Both her Life and Death were doubtless Precious in the Sight of GOD, as they
were eminently so with all who knew Her. And few have lived with higher Respect
and Value, or deceased with deeper Regret and Sorrow.

Let her Memory be always Dear, her amiable Life remembered, and her Example
followed by her Relatives and Others; and especially by those of the same Sex,
to whom She was a distinguished Ornament and Honor.

May her Prayers with those of her departed Consort, now rejoicing with each
other in the Heavenly World, come down in multiplied and continual Blessings on
their surviving and future Offspring. May the same Spirit dwell in them as
dwelt in their happy Parents: that they may rise up in their Room and do as
worthily as They; and at length may all meet in the Regions of eternal Light
and rejoice together.

And let us all Pray and Labor, that the Residue of the HOLY SPIRIT may be
poured out on us and our Posterity: that RELIGION in the Power and Practice may
be revived and in the Purity maintained, as in our Fathers Days; and so
continue flourishing till the Second Coming of the SON OF GOD, to take the
Universal Kingdom of this lower World, and inherit all Nations.

FINIS.
An ACCOUNT of the Deceased, From the Boston Gazette June 2. 1735.
WEDNESDAY Morning, May 21. Deceased Here, to the great Sorrow of the Town,
after Twelve Days Illness of a violent Fever, that most desirable Gentlewoman
Mrs. ELIZABETH OLIVER, Relict of the Honorable DANIEL OLIVER, Esquire She was the
second Daughter of the Honorable ANDREW BELCHER, Esquire by his first Wife, Born
at Cambridge, on Jan. 12. 1677, S. was married to Mr. Oliver in April 1696,
became his Widow in July 1732, and was the eldest surviving Sister of our
present GOVERNOR.

To her excellent good Sense and Wit and superior Education, she added all the
Ornaments and Virtues of the Christian Life. She was admired for her rare
Discretion, excellent Economy, ingenious and free Conversation, with such a
Mixture of Modesty, Sincerity and Friendship, as raised the Pleasure, and
engaged the Love of all about Her. She abounded in Pity and Charity to those
who wanted, was a faithful and beneficent Friend, discharged all the Offices of
a Wife and Mother in such a Manner as to be an eminent Pattern to others. In
her exalted Station she greatly honored Religion, by despising the growing
Vanities of the present Age, by a constant and grave Attendance on all the
Duties of Divine Worship, by countenancing the Ministers of it, and by a
Regular Life. She bare her distressing Illness with wonderful Patience and
Resignation, expressed her lively Hope in her SAVIOR, and received the
Approach of Death with great Serenity. Few have lived more esteemed, or died
more lamented among us: And She was Honorably Interred the Saturday after.


