Mr. Prentice's Election SERMON* May 28 th. 1735.

Pure and undefiled Religion, the highest Obligation, and truest Glory of CIVIL
RULERS.

A SERMON Delivered at Boston, In the Audience OF The Great and General Court
or ASSEMBLY of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New Englan^, May 28 th.
1735.

Being the Anniversary for the Election of His Majesty's COUNCIL for the
Province.

By John Prentice, A. ^. Pastor of the Church in Lancaster.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEEL^ND, Printer to the Honorable House of
Representatives for D. HENCHMAN in Corn hill. MDCCXXXV.

In the House of Representatives, May 29 th. 1735.
ORdered, That John Chandler, Esquire; and Capt. Ephraim Wilder, give the Thanks of
the House to the Reverend Mr. John Prentice of Lan^^ster, for his Sermon
preached yesterday before t^^ General Court, and desire a Copy for the Pr^^^.

J. Quincy, Speaker.

An Election SERMON.
II. CHRON. xvii. 3, 4, 5, and part of the 6th. ver. And the Lord was with
Jehoshaphat, because be walked in the first ways of his father David, and
sought not unto Baalim.
But sought to the Lord God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and
not after the doings of Israel:
Therefore the Lord stablished the kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought
to Jehoshaphat presents, and he had riches and honor in abundance.
And his heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord.

THE great God that formed all things, and that preserves them all, is Lord of
all. He has prepared his throne in the heavens, and his kingdom rules over
all. He does according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the
inhabitants of the earth. He is the most high, that rules in the kingdom of
men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. The inspired Psalmist informs us,
That promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the
south. But God is the judge: He puts down one, and sets up another, Psalm.
75. 6, 7. Asa king of Judah being put down by death, Jehoshaphat his son is set
up, and succeeds him in the throne; this we may see in the close of the
foregoing chapter, and in the first verse of the chapter before us. As it was
with the priests of old, concerning whom we are told in Heb. 7. 23. And they
truly were many priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason
of death; So it is respecting civil rulers of what denomination soever: they
have their predecessors and their successors. Jehoshaphat had three that went
before him, and fifteen that followed after him in the kingdom of Judah. In the
history of him, there are several things worthy our notice and observation. The
first thing we have an account of upon his accession to the throne in his
father's stead is, His strengthening himself against Israel, ver. 1. against
the king and people of Israel: Thus wise and prudent was he. He did not live
securely and in a defenseless posture, and so as to become an easy prey to
those that should at any time come out against him. But he took care to be in a
posture of defense, and to maintain his own dominions. He placed forces in all
the fenced cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the
cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken, as in ver. 2. Now follows
the words of my text, in which we have Jehoshaphat's piety acknowleged and
declared, or his religious reign spoken of to his praise. Also the Lord's
rewarding the same several ways. But more particularly in these words we may
observe,

1. Jehoshaphat's PIETY. He was a man of true piety, of pure and undefiled
religion. This character don't belong to all that sit upon Thrones, and that
sway the Scepter; neither have we the like account given of all the other Kings
of Judah. All that rule over men are not men of religion; but He was. We are
told ver. 3. He walked in the first ways of his father David. David was a man
after God's own heart, 1 Samuel 13. 14. It is spoken of him to his singular
honor after his death, that his heart was perfect with the Lord his God. And
that he did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside
from any thing that he commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the
matter of Uriah the Hittite, Kings 15. 3, 5. David's ways (in the general) we
find highly commended in the scriptures, and set up as a standard. See 2 King.
14. 3. 16. 2. 18. 3. Not David but Asa, was the father of Jehoshaphat. So that
instead of he walked in the first ways of his father David, it seems most
proper to read thus; He walked in the ways of David, and his father's first
ways. Asa's first ways were more exemplary, than those toward the latter end
of his time; as may be seen in the history of him in the three foregoing
chapters. Jehoshaphat followed David and his father Asa, wherein they followed
God. He did not imitate his father in what was amiss in him, toward the close
of his life. It Is good to be cautious (says one) Henry in loc.
in following the best men, lest we step aside after them. Though it be
commendable to walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the
righteous; to imitate them in their goodness; yet it is not so to imitate them
in their failings and imperfections.

Furthermore, We are told in ver. 3. And sought not unto Baalim. And in ver. 4.
But sought to the Lord God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and
not after the doings of Israel. He complied with that command in Matt. 4. 10.
Thou shall worship the thy God, and him only shall thou serve. He was not
chargeable with idol worship; with worshipping heathenish or false Gods. It is
said of him, That he sought not unto Baalim. We read frequently of Baal and
Baalim in the scripture. Baal signifies Lord; and Baalim is plural, and
signifies Lords. The false Gods of the adjoining nations, though they were
diverse, yet Baal was a name common to most of them. Now these he abhorred, he
paid no religious homage and adoration to them. He did not acknowledge these,
or own any dependence on them. He did not make his addresses to these, but
prayed to and worshipped the portion of Jacob, who is not like them. He sought
to the Lord God of his father; he worshipped and served the living and true
God. He walked in his commandments, and not after the doings of Israel. We are
told in Judges 2. 11. And the children of Israel did evil in the fight of the
Lord, and served Baalim, and they forsook the Lord God of their fathers, which
brought them out of the land of Egypt and followed other gods, of the gods of
the people that were round about them, and bowed themselves unto them, and
provoked the Lord to anger. They worshipped the golden calves which Jeroboam
made and set up, 1 Kings 12. 28, 29, 30. But now Jehoshaphat did not disregard
the commandments of God as Israel did, nor do after their doings: No; he
worshipped the true God according to his own institution. He reverenced the
divine law, and endeavored to make others conform to it: He reformed the
worship of God; he took away the high places, and groves out of Judah, where
they worshipped their idols; as in the latter part of the 6th. ver.

Once more it is said in the 6th ver. That his heart was lift up in the ways of
the Lord. His religion was real; He was sincere and hearty in his obedience.
His heart was enlarged in the service of God. Psalm. 119. 32. He was encouraged
by the favor of God, the respect and affection of his people, in the service
of God. He was vigorous and active therein; fervent in spirit serving the Lord.
His heart was lifted up above discouragements and difficulties in the way of
his duty. He was courageous and resolute in the ways of the Lord. Thus did king
Jehoshaphat's piety shine. In the words before us we may observe.

2. God's rewarding him for his piety. God will not only gloriously reward his
faithful servants in the world to come, ( Rev. 2. 10) but he is pleased to
encourage them in his service, and graciously reward them here. The Psalmist
faith concerning the commandments or righteous judgments of God, in Psalm. 19.
11. In keeping of them there is great reward.

It is said concerning Jehoshaphat in the text, That the Lord was with him
because be walked etc. ver. 3. and then in ver. 5. Therefore the Lord
stablished the kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat
presents, and he had riches and honor in abundance. Jehoshaphat was happy in
the favor of God, and his gracious presence with him: God did not rend the
kingdom from him, but stablished it in his hand. He interested him in the
affections of his people: they gave him presents in token of their respect and
subjection to him. He had riches and honor in abundance. Now though these things
prove a snare to some, yet they did not to him. They were not improved by him,
as fuel to the fire of his lusts, but as oil to the wheels of his obedience,
as we are assured in the last words of the text: And his heart was lifted up in
the ways of the Lord.

The subject is evidently copious, and the words would admit of much more to be
spoken from them, than the time will now allow of. I shall therefore mention
only some things which are to be gathered from these words.

And the first Observation or Doctrine from them shall be this, viz.

DOCT. I. That it is to be spoken to the honor of some civil rulers, that they
are truly religious; that they worship and serve the true and living God only,
and walk in the ways of their pious predecessors, and imitate them in those
things wherein they have been exemplary.

Here are three Heads, or Propositions, which I shall say something to
distinctly.

PROP. I. There are some among men, that, according to divine institution and
appointment, are civil rulers.

PROP. II. Some of these, are truly religious; they worship and serve the true
and living God only, and walk in the ways of their pious predecessors, and
imitate them in those things wherein they have been exemplary.

PROP. III and lastly. This is to the praise and honor of these civil rulers
of whom it is to be spoken.

Something briefly to each of these in their order.

PROP. I. There are some among men, that according to divine institution and
appointment are civil rulers.

Jehoshaphat was such a civil ruler: He was king of Judah. David also, spoken
of in the text. And Asa the father of Jehoshaphat whom the text has some
reference to. These, and many others we have an account of in the sacred
scriptures, were civil rulers among their people.

God the supreme ruler, has for wise and good ends appointed civil government
among men. Rulers and ruled are distinctions of his making: This we may see in
Romans ^3. begin. Civil government is burdensome: this is too great a burden to
lie upon the shoulders of one man. It is needful therefore that more than one,
be concerned and employed in it. Agreeable to this are the words of Moses unto
Israel, in Deuteronomy. 1. 9. I am not able to bear you my self alone. And in the 12
and 13 verses, How can I my self alone bear your cumbrance and your burden
etc.: Take ye wise men etc, and I will make them rulers over you. There are
rulers of diverse denominations. We read of the King as supreme, and of
Governors as sent by him, 1 Pet. 2 13, 14. Of Counselors, of Judges, and the
like. According to the differing forms of government among men, so there are
persons of differing denominations in the state, each of which have differing
business assigned them, which it concerns them faithfully to attend. This is so
plain, that I shall say no more here, for the confirmation of this Proposition,
but shall proceed to consider the second.

PROP. II. Some of these are truly religious; they worship and serve the true
and living God only, and walk in the ways of their pious predecessors, and
imitate them in those things wherein they have been exemplary.

Though all the kings of Judah were not truly religious, yet Jehoshaphat was so^;
as appears from the text and some other accounts given us of him in the chapter
in which my text is, and in the 18, 19, and 20 chapters of this book. He walked
in the ways of David, and in the first ways of his father Asa: He sought ^^t to
Baalim, but sought to the Lord God of his father, and walked in his
commandments, and not after the doings of Israel; his heart was li^t up in the
ways of the Lord. He was a good king; he abhorred idols, and did not worship
false gods as others, both ruler and ruled did. No; he worshipped the true God,
and attended his institutions: He walked in his commandments: He yielded
obedience, sincere, universal, and persevering obedience to God most high.
Indeed he had his failings and infirmities, as all good men have, yet his heart
was engaged and enlarged in the service of God, and he reverenced the divine
law in its latitude; he ruled in the fear of God, and endeavored a compliance
with his duty in his exalted station. He imitated his pious predecessors
wherein they were exemplary to him. And as he was religious himself, so he took
measures to make his people so. He took care to root out idolatry from among
them. He took away the high places and groves out of Judah, ver. 6. He sent his
princes and with them levites and priests to teach in the cities of Judah; to
teach the people in the truth and their duty. And these taught the people, as
you may see in the 7, 8, and 9 verses of the chapter before us. Again we are
told, that he brought the people back unto the Lord God of their fathers, that
he set Judges in the land, and gave them a solemn charge to judge between man
and man righteously, and in the fear of the Lord; to administer justice
impartially and faithfully, as we may see in chap. 19. Thus religious was he in
his reign over Judah.

And as it was thus with him, so it is with some others that rule over men*
they are found as they should be, just, and ruling in the fear of God, 2 Samuel
23. 3. David was a good ruler: His ways are spoken of in the general as a
pattern; as has been already hinted. He was a worshipper of the true God; he
was a man of prayer; he sought God's favor with his whole heart; he walked in
his commandments; he did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and
turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him, all the days of his
life, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite: forecited 1 Kings 15. 5.
But though some civil rulers are good, yet others are wicked, Prove. 28. 15. Some
are rulers of Sodom, Isa. 1. 10. Some are charged with idolatry; they don't
acknowledge the true God, neither are they obedient to him. It is some only in
civil authority that may be said conscientiously to conform to the precepts of
God, and to the examples that they have had for their imitation; and those that
have done thus are worthy of applause and commendation; which makes my way to
the last Proposition.

PROP. III. This is to the praise and honor of those civil rulers of whom it
is to be spoken.

Religion cordially embraced, and discovered in the life, reflects honor upon
those who enter upon a religious course, and continue evidently therein. To
this purpose we may read in Prove. 4. 89. Exalt her and she shall promote thee,
she shall bring thee to honor, when thou do embrace her; she shall give to
thine head an ornament of grace, a crown of glory shall she deliver thee. Such
as honor God, he will honor, whilst they that despise him shall be lightly
esteemed. Virtue and piety are dignifying wherever they are conspicuous. Men
are wont to praise others when they do well. We are assured in Prove. 14. 34.
That righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people. Such
as have the fear of God in their hearts, governing and influencing their lives,
are esteemed and honored by them that know their worth. The righteous is more
excellent than his neighbor: and the religious man esteems him so, and does
him honor. The good man is spoken of in Psalm. 15. 4. as one, In whose eyes a
vile person is contemned, but be honors them that fear the Lord. Yea religion
and virtue awe the ungodly, and oblige them to pay respect thereto, and to
reverence such as appear just and holy. Mar. 6. 20. For Herod feared John,
knowing him to be a just man and an holy.

This adds to the greatness of those that are in civil authority, and that set
in the highest seat of it. This increases the glory of the throne, and the
honor of him that sits upon it. This that is spoken of Jehoshaphat king of
Judah in the text, is spoken to his praise: The account here is dignifying and
honorable. And sure it is, when this comes into the character of any in civil
rule among men, it is enobling, and serves to increase the worth of such, and
to render them the more honorable in the sight of the people. But I shall
proceed no further in the confirmation of the Doctrine, but shall now make some
improvement of it, before I proceed to a second Observation.

USE I. What we have heard tells us, That when the reverse of this is to be
truly said of any in civil authority, it is very reproachful and dishonorable.

If religion when found in the powers that be, adds much to their greatness and
honor, it follows that where this is evidently wanting in those in civil
authority, it is reproachful, and tends very much to the dishonor of such.
Irreligion, a contempt of God and his laws, appearing in such, invites contempt
from all thoughtful observers. How reproachful are those words in Isai. 1. 10.
-- Ye rulers of Sodom -- What a shame is it when great men think the service of
the true and great God below them, and so refuse to engage in it? And when they
bow down to idols, and humble themselves? as some such are said to do, Isai. 2.
9. How reproachful is it to any, and especially to rulers, who are obliged in
their exalted station to be exemplary to those of an inferior rank, to have it
said of them, Having a form of godliness, but denying the power of it? How
dishonorable is it to that civil Ruler to whom it may be truly said, as the
prophet Elisha did to Ahab, Thou have sold thy self to work evil in the sight
of the Lord? 1 Kings 21. 20.

USE. II. See we hence, One motive to those in civil authority, to be truly
religious; and worship and serve the only true and living God, and walk in the
ways of their pious predecessors, and imitate them in those things wherein they
were exemplary.

This will render them honorable, and occasion their being spoken in the
praise of. I don't say that this is the only motive, or the main inducement to
this; neither should rulers or others do what they do in religion, like the
Scribes and Pharisees to be seen of men, and look no higher. But yet both
rulers and others should improve the consideration of it, to excite them to be
truly religious, inasmuch as this is one argument which the holy Ghost in the
scriptures makes mention of, to stir men up to a compliance with their duty. It
is needful that such be truly religious, in order to their own safety and
happiness: It is needful in order to their being public blessings, in order to
their doing of the duties of their several stations, and in order to their
being serviceable by their example. The examples that are set by those in civil
authority, are wont to be influential on those over whom they are. See for this
Jer. 44. 17. Evil examples set by those in civil authority, are like to be
followed by many. On the other hand, when rulers are remarkably religious, this
has a noble tendency to make their people so, to restrain them from vice, and
form them to virtue. These and other considerations there are to move those in
civil authority to be religious. And this which is mentioned in the doctrine,
is not unworthy the consideration of such. Honor is indeed due to such, and it
should be given unto them. Fear God, honor the king, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Now the
more religious they are, the more honorable they are, and the more likely to
have respect paid them, and honor done them by others.

And now, having been (beyond my expectation) desired to stand in this desk at
this time, and to speak to this numerous audience on this occasion; it will not
(I conclude) be looked upon as improper for me to apply my self to several
orders of men among us, some of which are here present before the Lord.

And the subject I have been upon, leads me to address my self in the first
place to our civil rulers of one denomination and another. And will all these
be persuaded, vigorously to endeavor to be of the number of those civil
rulers, of whom it may be truly spoken to their honor as in the doctrine? to
abhor idolatry and false worship, and to honor the true God, is the way to be
honored by him; to despise him is the way to be lightly esteemed: Thus we are
told in 1 Samuel 2. 30. For them that honor me I will honor, and they that
despise me shall be lightly esteemed. To be truly religious, to walk in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless, and to imitate pious
predecessors wherein they were exemplary; among many other advantages of it,
this is one, namely, It is the way to be honorably and respectfully mentioned
and spoken of. Now since this character is so honorable, let all our civil
rulers be ambitious to have it justly given of them.

And inasmuch as the honorable person mentioned in my text, was chief in the
government of Judah, and since by the favor of God and the King, Your
Excellency is chief in the government of this Province, it will not be
offensive, but rather acceptable, I presume, to have this royal pattern
recommended to you, for your imitation.

The laws of God, the rules of religion are all holy just and good; they are
admirably suited to advance the glory of God the great lawgiver, and the
interest of men, both high and low, rich and poor, bond and free, both singly
and collectively considered: conformity to them are therefore highly reasonable.

There is nothing that does more dignify even the chief ruler of a people, than
unaffected piety, and undisguised religion; than a due acknowlegement of the
true God, and a giving to him the glory that is due unto his name; than for
such to discover a just abhorrence of profaneness and unscriptural worship, a
due respect to all God's commandments, and a conscientious and preserving
obedience to them. What more commendable than for such to walk in the ways of
David, and to imitate pious predecessors in those things wherein they have been
exemplary? And we trust that it will be your Excellency's ambition to brighten
your character in this way, yet more and more.

There are also, some other things besides those spoken of in the words of my
text, in the reign of this pious king, that have been already hinted, that are
worthy your consideration and imitation. As now: His concern and care to have
his people well taught and instructed; as in the 7, 8, and 9 verses of the
chapter: and to have them also protected and defended; as may be seen in the
latter end of the chapter.

Again, he was exemplary in his concern for the reformation of his people, and
his bringing them back unto the Lord God of their fathers, from whom they had
gone astray.

Again, he took care that controversies that arose among them might be rightly
decided, and that justice might be done among them, and that with ease to his
subjects. He set judges in the land throughout all the cities of Judah, city by
city; and these he solemnly charged etc. These things are to be seen in the
19th chapter. And may your care, Excellent Sir, appear on all occasions, and
your authority and influence be discovered from time to time about these
things, and all others belonging to your exalted station, the tendency of
which, may be to the honor of God and the king, the promoting of religion, the
reformation, peace and prosperity of this people, your own peace and comfort
both living and dying, and a blessed memory after death.

And now in the next place I might say, that the Doctrine before us, is
improvable by those concerned in the Election of this day, for their direction
in the choice of Councillors. If it be so much to the honor of civil rulers to
be truly religious, it is plain that no little respect is to be had to men's
religious character in the choice of them into places of government. If men are
not truly religious, little great or good is to be expected from them; if men
don't fear God, they are not like duly to regard men. Indeed a good inclination
and disposition is not the only needful qualification of a Councellor, but in
order to a man's being an honorable Councellor, as was Joseph of Arimathea, he
must be a man of knowledge and understanding, of wisdom, prudence, courage and
resolution, of truth, steadiness, loyalty and the like. Due care should be
taken, not to introduce unqualified or irreligious persons into so great a
trust, but such whom you have reason to hope will act up to their dignity, and
steadily prosecute all proper measures conducive to the honor of God and the
King, to bring us back to the God of our fathers, to further religion and
virtue among us, the welfare and prosperity of this people. This is reasonably
expected from you; and your unanimity herein will be honorable, and discover
you to be fathers to your Country, and under a becoming concern for the public
good.

I may now proceed to apply my self to my reverend fathers and brethren in the
ministry, to stir up their pure minds by way of remembrance: You know, that it
concerns us, above all men, to be truly religious, that when we have preached
unto others, we our selves may not be cast-aways; our interest, our honor,
oblige us to be so. What man so contemptible as an irreligious minister* one
evidently so? Such a one is odious to God, and the world. Such wound religion
greatly, they encourage and embolden sinners in their evil ways; they shame and
grieve the saints, highly offend God, and bring men to abhor the offering of
the Lord. These were the sad fruits of the sin of the sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.
17. The guilt of such, and the danger they are in, are very great: Such build
up and strengthen the kingdom of darkness instead of battering of it down, as
they are by their office obliged to do. Our business is especially with the
souls of men, and with theirs peculiarly that are committed to our care, and we
should willingly spend and be spent for them. Our work is to promote the
spiritual and eternal interest of men; therefore to use our earnest and
unwearied endeavors to make them truly religious. Are we not the lights of the
world, and the salt of the earth? Should we not instruct men in the truth as it
is in Jesus? We are to preach the word; what we deliver to our people should be
that which we have first received of the Lord; yea we must not shun declaring
the whole counsel of God. We should be afraid of being found blind guides;
therefore should give our selves to reading, meditation and prayer, that our
minds may be stored with right apprehensions of things, that so these may be
communicated to our hearers for their advantage. False and dangerous doctrines
are what are carefully to be avoided by us. Moreover it concerns us to know how
to behave our selves in the house of God, to improve our talents, our seasons
and opportunities to further the good of the precious souls that are committed
to our care. We should magnify our office, and give none occasion to despise
us; we should give no offense in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed. It
concerns us to be examples to the believer, in word, in conversation, in
charity, in faith, in purity. In the whole of our work we must have an eye to
the glory of God, the good of souls; and lay out our selves for the conversion
of sinners, and the edification of saints.

And should we not remember, that we are set for the defense of the Gospel, and
that we are obliged to be valiant for the truth? And is there not occasion to
bear in mind that charge, and should we not carefully comply with it, Lay hands
suddenly on no man? We should not rashly introduce into the ministry, the
ignorant, the erroneous, the immoral, and the imprudent.

Moreover, Should we not be men of prayer? much, earnest, and persevering
therein: Not only for our selves, but others also; and particularly for our
civivil Rulers, however denominated or distinguished. For Kings and for all
that are in authority, that we may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all
godliness and honesty. Are we not obliged to put our people in mind, to be
subject to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates, yea to be ready to
every good work? Our obligation to this we may see in Tit. 3. 1. Should we not
excite them to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the
things that are God's?

In fine, it concerns us to take heed to the ministry that we have received in
the Lord that we fulfill it, The time of some of us, is almost at an end, of
all of us, is shortning continually, and after death is the judgment. It
concerns us therefore to be diligent, industrious and faithful in our Lord's
business, in expectation of his coming, and as ever we would have it said unto
us by him, Well done good and faithful servants, enter ye into the joy of your
Lord.

I shall now apply my self briefly and more generally, to the People of this
Land; and so finish this Doctrine.

And what I have to offer shall be in a way of Counsel or Exhortation. O
endeavor to become a reformed and truly religious People. To be truly
religious is not only the duty of civil Rulers, and the honor of those of them
that are so; but it is incumbent on those that are under them, and will be an
honor to such as comply with it. The exhortation is not needless. It is
undeniable that we need to be reformed. There is evidently much that is
irregular among us, and the dispensations of God in his Providence toward us
bespeak this. Let us then amend our ways and doings that have not been right;
and endeavor to become a truly religious People. Our fathers came into this
Land on a religious account. See we then to it, that we are not regardless of
that (even pure and undefiled religion) which they were so concerned about, and
were at such charge, and underwent so many difficulties and hardships, that
they might enjoy. Verily our being a truly religious People will be pleasing to
God, and for his honor and glory: It will be also honorable to us. But if we
are still a sinful People* this will be reproachful to us. According to that in
Prove. 14. 34. forementioned. Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a
reproach to any people. Religion is our life, Deuteronomy 32. 47. and the revival of
it will be our glory. This will engage the gracious presence of God with us,
and will be rewarded with the smiles of God upon us. He will be with us if we
are with him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. This will render us formidable to those round
about us. We read in the 10 th. ver. of our context, And the fear of the Lord
fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah, so that
they made no war with Jehoshaphat. But if we will not be reformed by what God
has done to reclaim us, and will yet walk contrary to him, may we not expect
that he will yet walk contrary to us, and punish us yet seven times for our
sins? According to that in Lev. 26. 23, 24. Yea if men carry irreligiously,
will they not expose themselves to punishments from men? Civil rulers will be
obliged to take notice of them, and to bear testimony against their evil
conduct. To this purpose we may read in Romans 13. 4. But if thou do that which
is evil be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain, for he is the minister
of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him th^^ does evil.

Let this People then endeavor to see and be convinced of the necessity and
advantage of this; and the disadvantage of a noncompliance with this
Exhortation; and endeavor a due improvement of divine ordinances and
providence, to further the same. And let us humbly, earnestly, and
perseveringly implore the plentiful effusions of the Spirit of grace, which are
needful in order hereunto. Let every one take care of himself respecting these
things, and consider how he is obliged in his place and relations to further
them in others, and see to it that he does not neglect his duty.

May we return unfeignedly to God from whom we have departed! Know and serve
the God of our fathers with a perfect heart and a willing mind! And may we
follow the good examples we have for our imitation upon record in the holy
scriptures, and those of our predecessors in this Land! Yea let our ambition to
be truly religious be excited by those shining paterns of piety and religion,
which are yet (through grace) to be observed among us.

And I may add, Let none remain under deep security in their sins, and
unconcerned about being truly religious, whilst there are so many in several
Towns discovering their great concern about the state of their souls, and are
asking that all-concerning Question, What must I do to be saved?

But, this is all I shall say under the first Doctrine. The time will allow of
but little more than mentioning those that are yet to be spoken to.

DOCT. II. When those in civil authority are truly religious, God is will not to
be with them, and to establish them in their authority.

When civil rulers are truly religious, when they duly acknowledge God, and pay
those regards to him that are due to him from them; when they walk in his
commandments, and imitate those that have done so before them; when they put
honor upon his governing authority, by a hearty universal and persevering
obedience to his perceptive will: God is will not graciously to reward their
fidelity; signally to own and bless them. Was it not thus with Jehoshaphat? And
the Lord was with Jehoshaphat because etc. therefore the Lord stablished the
kingdom in his hand. The Lord was with him. This is a comprehensive expression;
and denotes the gracious and favorable presence of God with him, and so is
inclusive of all that is good and desirable here. The Lord be with you! is a
very extensive wish; abundance of good is comprehended in it. We read
frequently of God's being with men both singly and collectively considered. Now
this is an excellent prayer when made for others, and it is a very desirable
assertion where we find it concerning any; as we do here in the text. If God be
with men in the sense of the text, he is also for them? And if God be for them,
who can be against them. If God be graciously and favorably present with men,
they are in the way to be protected, supported, guided, directed, assisted,
quickened, encouraged and comforted: they are in the way to be blessed, and made
blessings. Pious civil rulers, are will not to have God with them. Hear ye me Asa,
the Lord is with you whilst you are with him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. forementioned.
Such we find frequently spoken of as thus favored of God. Wo^ul are the
consequences of God's departing from or forsaking of men; and of those in civil
authority: But very desirable is the condition of those with whom God is. And
that he is will not to be with such as I have been speaking of, we may read
further in what is said concerning that good King Hezekiah, in 2 King. 18. 7.
And the Lord was with him, and be prospered whithersoever he went forth. And as
God is wont to be with such, or to be gracious to them many ways, so he is wont
particularly to establish them in their authority. Those that are stablished
strengthn'd and settled in religion and virtue, and that walk in God's
commandments, he is wont to confirm and continue in their exalted stations.
Thus it was with Jehoshaphat. Therefore the Lord stablished the kingdom in his
band. They stand firm (faith Mr. Henry) who have the presence of God with them.
Such are not wont presently to be put down when set up by God. Indeed those are
unfit and unworthy to rule over men, who are not willing that God should rule
over them; and those are sometimes rejected by God. Such as are irreligious and
disobedient, God in his Providence rends the kingdom from, and don't suffer
them long to rule. See the words of Samuel to Saul, 1 Samuel* 15. 23, and 28. --
Because thou have rejected the word of the Lord, the Lord has also rejected
thee from being king. And Samuel said unto him, the Lord has rent the kingdom
of Israel from thee this day, and has given it to a neighbor of thine that is
better than thou. Indeed, it is God's dominion only that is Everlasting. Civil
rulers, the highest and best of them, must not always continue by reason of
death. And such as serve their generation according to the will of God, as
David that religious king did, must like him fall asleep. They must die, and be
removed from their places of dignity and public trust. Act. 13. 36. For David
after he had served his own generation by the will of God, fell on sleep, and
was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption. These, though called Gods, yet are
but men, they are mortal, as well as other men. Psalm. 82. 6, 7. I have said, ye
are gods, and all of you are children of the most high. But ye shall die like
men, and fall like one of the princes. But notwithstanding this, such as stand
in awe of God, and of his law, and conscienciously comply with it, and
endeavor to answer the just expectations of God and men; such as do their duty
considered as rulers of this and that order and dignity; such are wont to stand
firm and unmoved; they are not wont presently to be put down from their seats.
Such as are obedient to God, and faithful to the cause of God, and the interest
of his people; such as don't misuse their power, betray their trust, nor
sacrifice the public to a private interest, but put on, and wear righteousness
as their Garments; as are a refuge for the oppressed, and a terror to the evil
doer; these are wont to be established in their authority.

I pass now to some brief Improvement of this Doctrine.

USE. I. What we have heard looks favorably upon that people whose rulers are
truly religious.

Those persons that are truly religious, don't desire to be so alone, but are
desirous that others should be so also. The honor of God, and the good of
others, is what they are concerned for, and they are disposed to comply with
the divine will which is conducive hereto. Civil rulers that are truly
religious, are disposed to set good examples before their people, and to attend
the divine will, in their respective stations, which is so adapted to promote
the interests of men: They are inclined to smile upon the virtuous, and to
praise and encourage those that do well, and to be a terror to evil doers. And
if God is will not to be with such, and to establish them in their authority, this
gives to those that are under them an hopeful prospect that such will be great
and lasting blessings to them.

USE. II. This Doctrine teaches us the great encouragement those in civil
authority, have to be truly religious; to respect all the commandments of God,
and to attend conscienciously what is incumbent on them in their differing
places in the Government that they are set in.

But this shall suffice for the second Doctrine. I proceed now to a third.

DOCT. III. That some in the civil Government, through the favor of God, and
manifest respect and obedience of the people, have riches and honor in
abundance.

This I think is fairly to be gathered from the fifth verse. And all Judah
brought to Jehoshaphat presents, and he had riches and honor in abundance.
Jehoshaphat was happy in the favor of God, in his signally owning and blessing
of him; as has been already observed from those words, And the Lord was with
Jehoshaphat: And those, Therefore the Lord stablished the kingdom in his hand.
The favor of God toward him is here also to be observed, in the interest that
he gave him in the affections of his people, and in the obedience that they
yielded to him as God's minister to them for good: both they and others did him
abundant honor, and through the overruling Providence of God, he had riches as
well as honor in abundance. We are told that all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat
presents In acknowledgment of his sending preachers among them Henry in loc.
. As subjects in those times and places used to do to their Kings, as a token
of their respect and subjection to them Poole in loc.
It is said of Saul, That they despised him, and brought him no presents. But
of Solomon it is said, 1 King. 10. 25. And they brought every man his present,
vessels of silver and vessels of gold etc. And concerning Hezekiah we are told,
in 2 Chronicles. 32. 23. And many brought gifts unto the Lord to Jerusalem, and
presents to Hezekiah king of Judah, so that he was magnified in the sight of
all nations from thenceforth. Some rulers are highly esteemed by their people,
and their respect is manifested, both in word and action, in all the customary
ways of discovering of it. Respect and honor are due to those in civil
authority, and are to be given them for the sake of their office; and it is
likely to be greatly increased by the due execution of it, and in this, they
are to be obeyed, and, are wont to have great honor done them by their people,
by their subjection to them herein. Yea, some there are, whom God is pleased to
reward not only with abundant honor, but with riches also in abundance.
Tribute is due to such, and a good Government is wont to be honorably
supported. It is highly reasonable that good rulers in the state, such as make
a business of discharging what God and men justly expect from them in their
respective places, that attend continually upon this very thing, should be well
rewarded by the public for their good services. Romans 13. 6. For for this cause
pay you tribute, for they are God's ministers, attending continually upon this
very thing. A small matter is not sufficient to support the dignity of their
posts. And God sometimes remarkably rewards the piety and fidelity of some in
civil authority with great riches. An instance of this we have in the text. All
that I shall add here is this, that it is worthy of our serious observation,
what is spoken of wisdom, or religion in the purity and power of it, Prove. 3.
16. Length of days is in her right hand: and in her left hand riches and honor.

All the Improvement that I shall make of this Observation shall be in this one
Inference.

Learn we from hence, How greatly some civil rulers are obliged to lay out
themselves in their respective places, for the glory of God, and the good of
his people. If it be as has been said, this Inference is just and natural. But
this makes my way to the last Doctrine.

DOCT. IV. and last. That some in civil authority, who have riches and honor
in abundance, have their hearts lift up in the ways of the Lord.

This honorable account is to be given of some such, but not of all. Riches
and honor in abundance, proves to many an hindrance in the ways of the Lord,
an occasion of pride, security and sensuality, but it had a quite contrary
effect upon Jehoshaphat. This abundance was oil to the wheels of his obedience;
and the more he had of the wealth of this world, the more was his heart lifted
up in the ways of the Lord. He brought his heart to his work, and lift up his
heart in it. He never thought he could do enough for God. He was lively and
affectionate in his religion, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. He was bold
and resolute in the ways of God, and went on with courage. His heart was lifted
up above all discouragements and difficulties that were in the way of his duty
Henry in loc.


Indeed we make nothing of our religion and the service of God, if we don't
make heart-work of it, if we don't heartily engage in it. And some there are in
civil authority, who are devoted to God's fear, and that may say with the royal
Psalmist, as in Psalm. 16. 2. O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, Thou art
my Lord. Psalm. 116. 16. O Lord truly I am thy servant. They consider the
multitude and greatness of divine favors and benefits to them, and are
desirous to know what they shall do in a way of return to God for them all:
Their enquiry is that in ver. 12. of the just now mentioned Psalm, What shall I
render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? They see themselves obliged
to do what they can for God, who has done so much for them; they are
encouraged, and their hearts are enlarged in the service of God. They are
inclined to God's testimonies, and they are the more resolved by divine grace
and help to be rich toward God, and to bring what glory they can to the name
of God, who has put such honor upon them, and given them riches and honor in
abundance. They endeavor from hence to be the better Christians, and the
better Rulers. But this shall suffice here.

And now, from what has been said,

1. We may see what the Lord of all, the God of all grace, and the giver of
every good gift, does for some of the children of men. He sets some above
others. Some he advances to posts of honor and service. He is with and
establishes them in their authority; he gives them riches and honor in
abundance, and an heart to honor and serve him, with the more readiness,
resolution and cheerfulness. He fortifies some against the temptations of a
prosperous state and exalted condition in the world, and makes them shining
patterns and examples to others. How admirable is this grace of God, and how
worthy a thankful acknowlegement is this from the receivers of such grace, and
the observers of the same?

2. This Doctrine teaches civil rulers what their ambition should be; even to
be truly engaged in the service of God, and to have their hearts lift up in the
ways of the Lord; how they should improve the distinguishing favors of God to
them, the riches and honor that in his providence he grants them, even to the
enlarging their hearts in running the way of his commandments. Those in civil
authority should be ambitious of writing after this fair copy. God justly
expects no small revenue of glory from such whom he has so obliged. He is
surely a critical observer of such. Psalm. 82. 1. God stands in the
congregation of the mighty; he judges among the gods. And such must e're long
be called away out of the world to give up their account to him: And happy they
who when they have a prospect of death and judgment as night unto them, are
able to look backward with comfort and satisfaction, and forward with joy: Who
are able with king Hezekiah to say, as in 2 Kin. 20. 3. I beseech thee, O Lord,
remember now how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight.

Thus have I said something from, and (I hope) agreeable to, the words of my
text, after my poor, imperfect manner.

So many of my reverend fathers and brethren have gone before me in this
service, that there is but little room left to offer any thing proper to the
present occasion without repetition at least of the same thing. I have
therefore omitted many things that I might have mentioned; and shall add no
more but an earnest address to this whole People, both rulers and ruled.

Let us all be deeply sensible, and thoroughly convinced of the necessity and
utility of our being truly religious, and on the other hand, of the evil,
danger, manifest unprofitableness, and manifold disadvantages of our being
irreligious, or only formalists in religion; and let us be concerned to have
our hearts sound in God's statutes. Let our aim and endeavor be, to be really,
personally, and relatively good. Let us not seek unto Baalim, but let us know
and acknowledge, worship and obey, the living and true God, the God of our
fathers, with a perfect heart and a willing mind; and walk in all his
commandments and ordinances blameless. Let us imitate CHRIST our great pattern,
walk in the ways of pious Predecessors, and imitate the graces and virtues of
the Saints and People of God upon record in the sacred pages, and of our
forefathers in this Land. If we do thus, may we not hope, to have God with us,
as he was with our fathers, and that he will not leave us nor forsake us, but
establish us an holy people to himself? If we return to the Almighty, shall we
not be built up, and have the Lord our God nigh unto us in all that we call
upon him for? I conclude with that in Psalm. 85. 9. 12. Surely his salvation is
nigh to them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our land. Yea the Lord
shall give that which is good, and our land shall yield her increase.

FINIS.

