Courteous Reader,
I was the rather inclined to make the following Discourse public, because of
the loud Clamours which (as I was informed) were raised against it, in order to
let unprejudiced Persons, and even the Objectors see what Cause there was for
so much Flame and Noise.

Farewell.
THE Danger of forgetting GOD, described. AND The Duty of considering our Ways
explained. IN A SERMON On Psalm L. 22. Preached at New York, March 1735.

By GILBERT TENNENT A.M. and Minister of the Gospel at New-Brunswick in
New Jersey.

NEW YORK. Printed by John Peter Zenger. 1735.

THE Danger of forgetting GOD, etc.
Psalm L. 22. Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in Pieces,
and there be none to deliver.


REASON, that peculiar Characteristick of the humane Nature by which we are
distinguished from, and advanced above, the brutal Herds, was no Doubt designed
by its great Parent to direct and assist us to act with Council and Discretion
in our Elections and pursuits, that we might choose a GOOD, worthy of, and
satisfactory to our Nature, and pursue Measures proper to attain it, not
suffering our selves to be imposed upon by the specious Appearances of present
Objects; but that we, as intelligent Creatures, would pierce their Natures, and
ponder their Events and Issues; accordingly forming our Determination and
Choice respecting them.

It is the Exercise of this noble Power of Reason in Meditation and Reflection
which the Text before us recommends to our Practice, in which we have these two
general Heads, viz.

I. An important Duty enjoined. And,

II. An awful Punishment threatened for the Neglect of it.

In the first general Head are included these four following Particulars, viz.

1. The Duty it self. 2. The Subject of it. 3. The Object. And, 4. The Time of
Performance, which is Now.
Before I proceed father, let me attempt a brief Explication and Illustration
of these Particulars: And,

1. As to the Duty enjoined, which is Consideration; this includes these three
Things following. 1. Knowledge and Understanding: When a Person in receiving a
Message from God, understands, both who speaks, and what is spoken: Consider
this, is as much as to say, Understand this; so Psalm, CXIV. 8. Understand ye
brutish among the People, and ye Fools, when will ye be wise? So that the
Meaning of the World Consider, is that they would seck to know that Being with
whom they had to do that he is an infinitely holy, righteous and jealous God,
who will not be mocked with fair Shows and Pretenses, but will render to every
one according to his Actions, at least in the final Judgment; and also that
they would labor to know the Nature and Importance of the Divine Messages. 2.
This Duty of Consideration imports, serious and solemn Deliberation, when the
mind of God is not only understood and known, but seriously pondered and laid
to Heart,; when a Person communes with his own Heart about it: What may be the
Weight and Importance of the Matter and Message, what the Advantages of
Obedience against it; this was the Psalmist's practice, Ps. CXIX. 95. The
Wicked have waited for me to destroy me, but I will consider thy Testimonies.
It is like that of Joseph, how shall I do this Sin and Wickedness, against God.
Or of Job. What then shall I do when God rises up, and when he visits, what
shall I answer him? Job. XXXI. 14. It was the neglect of this Duty of
Deliberation which was the Cause of God's Controversy with, and complaint over
the People of Israel, Is. XLIV. 19. Jer. VIII. 6. I hearkened and heard that
none considered in their Hearts to say, (why will ye not reason with your own
Souls, and say, poor Sinners,) how shall we escape, if we neglect so great a
Salvation? And on the contrary, what an unconceivable Happiness shall we be
quickly instated in, if we be willing and obedient? And, 3. This Duty of
Consideration, imports Submission, and Obedience: The Mind of God is then
rightly understood and considered, when it is obeyed, Ezekiel. XVIII. 28. Because
he considers and turns away from all his Transgressions that he has
committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die.


2. The Subject of this Duty: Forgetters of God, it will appear by the Law of
Contraries who they are that forget God, by considering what it is, to remember
him. And, 1. To remember God is to entertain him in our Thoughts. So David
remembered God upon his Bed, and meditated on him in the night Watches. Ps.
LXIII. 6. Thus God is forgotten when he is cast out of the Thoughts, as it is
said of the wicked, that God is not in all their Thoughts. Ps. X. 4. 2. To
remember God is to depend upon him, and confide in him, for Council and Support
in every Difficulty, Ps. XXV. 15. Mine Eyes are ever toward the Lord, he shall
pluck my Feet out of the Net. Thus these who trust in other Things, besides God
and make not him their Strength, forget him. 3. To serve and follow him with an
honest and sincere Heart; this is what David gave in Charge to his Son Solomon
and thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a
perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind. I Chro. XXVIII. 9. it is in this Respect
that the Psalmist said, that his Heart followed hard after God, and that he was
continually with him. Ps. LXIII. 8. Ps. LXXIII. 23. Thus these may be called
forgetters of God, who Worship him not sincerely in the Way of his Institution.
4. To make him the last End of all our Actions, so as to intend and direct
every Thing toward his Glory. 1. Cor. X. 31. Thus these forget God, who go no
further in their Aims than themselves.


3. The Object of Consideration. This, consider, that God knows and remembers
your Iniquities however you conceal and forget them; he is Panopthalmos, all
Eye; his Understanding pierces the thickest Vail of obscurity, the midnight
Darkness is to him as the Noonday; consider, Sinners, that as God knows your
secret Impieties, so he will damn you for them, he will tear you in Pieces,
except you repent, the Terrors of an enraged God, are the most proper Objects
for secure Sinners to confider upon; because, being selfish, they are more apt
to be influenced by Fear than Love.

4. The Time when this Duty is to be performed, is Now; now, this Day, this
Moment, to Morrow may be too late, and you torn in Pieces.

II. I proceed to consider the second General Head, viz. the awful Penalty
threatened against the Neglecters of the aforesaid Duty; in which are two Things
that want Explication, viz.

1. What it is to be torn to Pieces. And, 2. In what Respects none shall be
able to deliver.
1. Let us enquire what is the Meaning of this Phrase, torn in Pieces.

1. More Generally, it Notes an utter and irreparable Destruction: It Is an
awful Metaphor, taken from a Lion, or Bear's entirely devouring it is impotent
Prey.

2. More particularly it imports these three Things.

1. That God will utterly take his Mercy from them if they take no Warning. Is.
XXVII. 11. 2. That God will deal with them in strict Justice, according to the
Rigor of his Law, without lessening the least Measure of their merited
punishment: This is unspeakably dreadful; for, if God marks Iniquity, who can
stand? Ps. CXXX. 3. 3. According to the Power of his Wrath, avenging Jealousy,
and Consuming Indignation, of which a Complication of all the Terribles in
Nature is but a faint Shadow; for, who knows the Power of his Anger? Ps. XC.
11. Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul that does
Evil. Romans II. 8, 9.
Again let us enquire in what Sense it is, there shall be none to deliver. The
Meaning no Doubt is, That when the decreed Vengeance of God comes forth, it
will bring along with it sudden and remediless Destruction; and so there can be
none to deliver in these three Respects.

1. In Regard of Gods infinite Power; so none can deliver out of his Hands. Is.
XLIII. 31. 2. In Respect of Man's Weakness, who is crushed before the Moth;
they can neither by Power or Policy escape his Cognizance or Vengeance: He is
wise in Heart and mighty in Strength who has hardened himself against him and
prospered. Job IX. 4. 3. In Regard of God's Justice, he will not admit of any
Entreaty in the Day of his Anger. Jer. XIV. 11.
The Sum of what has been spoken, is briefly this; That while God is upon a
Treaty of Peace with Sinners, there is yet a Door of Mercy opened; and
therefore that it highly concerns those whose have hitherto forgotten God, in
Regard of Knowledge, Dependence and Service, that they would now, without
further Delay, consider and lay to Heart their present Danger and Misery while
they have the Offers of Mercy, lest they be forever deprived thereof, and
exposed to the Strokes of his avenging Severity.

From the Words thus explained, we may observe the following Truths.

1. That the sharpest Messages of God to his rebelious People are usually mixed
with gracious Warnings and Entreaties. The Reasons why God deals thus with
Mankind, are, 1. To show, that he has no Pleasure in their Destruction. Ezekiel.
XXXIII. 11. As also, to express the Greatness of his Mercy and Long-suffering.
2. To work upon the Sinners ingenuity, and keep them from utterly dispairing of
his Mercy Hos. XI. 4. 8. I drew them with Cords of a Man with Bands of Love.
There is a sweet Contemperation between Love and Tenderness in the Invitation
and Terror and Authority in the threatening, each assists the other in bringing
the Sinner to Christ,; the one guards against Presumption, and the other
against Despair, those fatal Obstructions in the Way to Jesus. 3. To render
obstinate Sinners inexcusable who will take no Warning. If I had not come, and
spoken to them, they had not had Sin: But now they have no Cloak for their Sin,
Joh. XV. 22. This is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and
Men loved Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds were evil. John. III.
19.


Then learn.

1. To admire God's Wisdom and Goodness in his Dealings with poor Sinners in a
Way best suited to their rational Natures, and most effectual either to alarm
their Fear, or allure their Love; these two governing Passions of the humane
Nature.

2. To be overcome by it. O let the Goodness and Patience of God lead you to
Repentance. Romans II. 4. If there be any remains of Ingenuity in you, can you
withstand an entreating God and Savior!

Some make the first Word of our Text, to be an entreating Particle: As if God
had said, O consider this! My Brethren, will not the passionate Entreaties of a
gracious God, freely tendering Pardon and Pity, after your numberless
Rebellions and cruel Obstinacies, pierce your adamantine Hearts,! and excite
you to accept at last, before it be too late, his merciful Offers and kind
Warnings! Hear how the holy God mourns over and expostulates with Sinners in
other Passages of sacred Writ. Exodus XXXIII. 11. Jer. IV. 14. Deuteronomy. V. 29. O!
That there were such a Heart in them that they would fear me, and keep my
Commandments, that it might be well with them, and with their Children forever:
When shall they be made clean? When shall it once be? Must he not have a Heart
harder than polished Brass that can withstand these Entreaties! May not the
Heavens and Earth be astonished at the Stupidity and Obstinacy of the ungodly
World.

Doct. 2. That Forgetters of God are in a dangerous State, every Moment in
Hazard of being torn in Pieces; their Condition is dangerous in two Respects.

1. In Respect of Sin. And, 2. In Respect of Punishment. And,
1. In Respect of Sin; their forgetting God lays them open to all Manner of
Temptations to be ensnared and taken, with little or no Reluctance, by Satan
and their own Hearts Lusts, as an easy Prey. Here we are told, Jud. III. 7.
That the Children of Israel forgot the Lord, and served Baalim and the Groves.
Also, Ps. X. 5. it is said of the Wicked, that God is not in all their
Thoughts, and therefore that their Ways are grievous. And does not Reason and
Experience confirm this Truth, that the Remembrance of a holy all-knowing God,
is the most effectual Restraint from Sin? Was it not this that kept Job in Awe,
Job XXXI. 4. Does he not see all my Ways, and connot all my Steps? And David
also, Ps. CXXXIX. that God knew his Rising up and Lying down, and that he could
not go from his Presence.

2. In Respect of Punishment: For, 1. It exposes to temporal Judgments; Jer.
XVIII. 15, -- 17. Because my People have forgotten me, I will scatter them as
with an East Wind before the Enemy; I will show them the Back, and not the
Face, in the Day of their Calamity. 2. To spiritual Judgments. Jer. XVII. 5, 6.
Cursed be the Man whose Heart departs from the Lord, for he shall be like the
Heath in the Desert; a dry sorry Shrub, fit for nothing but the Fire. 3. To
Eternal Judgments; Ps. IX. 17. The Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all
the Nations that forget God.


This Doctrine may strike Terror into the Consciences of all those that forget
God: But who are those? And what Arguments of Terror does this Subject afford
to such?

1. Secure Sinners: Had these Men a suitable Apprehension and Remembrance of
God, their wretched Security would be surely broken and disturbed.

2. Delaying Sinners; who put the evil Day far from them. Amos VI. who
studiously avoid the Thoughts of God's Justice, and thereby stab their Souls,
and strangle their gasping Consciences! O ye Murderers! Ye are the Forgetters
of God, whose doleful Doom (so continuing) is to be torn to Pieces.

3. Profane Sinners. Ps. X. Your Profaneness, it is the fearful Fruit of your
forgetting God. Apply to your Consciences this Text, Now consider this, ye that
forget God, lest I tear you in Pieces, and there be none to Deliver. 1 Cor. VI.
4, 10. Know ye not that the Unrighteouess shall not inherit the Kingdom of God?
Be not deceived: Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous,
nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God. O Drunkards! consider your Danger.

4. Covetous Idolaters and Sensualists; how can it be otherwise, but that these
should forget the God of Heaven! Who worship Mammon and their Bellies! You
pretend to trust God about your Souls, but you dare not about your Estates: O
you Soul deceivers! To you this threatening belongs; now consider this, ye that
forget God, lest I tear you in Pieces, and there he none to deliver you. See
Ephesians. 5.5.

5. All Hypocrites and time Servers. Job. VIII. 13. Ezekiel. 8.12. The Danger and
Misery of those who forget God, consists in this, that they fall into his
Hands, and are torn to Pieces.

Now how fearful it is to fall into the Hands of the living God, appears from
these Six following Consideration, viz.

1. The Depth of his Wisdom. 2. The extent of his Power and Dominion. 3. His
Spotless Holiness. 4. His inflexible Justice. 5. His infinite Eminence, And, 6.
His terrible Jealousy, And,
1. Is it not dreadful to fall into the Hands of God because, of his deep and
unsearchable Wisdom? To which every Thing is naked and open, which brings to
Light the hidden Things of Darkness. 1. Cor. 4.5. Remember the great God knows
the Number and Heinousness of our most disguised Impieties and how to
Proportion his Judgments to them Ps. L. 21, 22.

2. Is not it terrible because of the Extent of his Power? He is wise in Heart,
and mighty in strength: Who has hardened himself against him, and has
prospered? Job. IX. 4. God has an absolute Empire over all Nature, he can
easily arm the most contemptible of his Creatures with Vengeance to humble the
Proudest of his Enemies! Witness, the Squadrons of Frogs, of Lice that were
sent to humble that haughty Monarch Pharaoh. -- And,

3. Does not his untainted Holiness incline him to hate Sin infinitely, Hab. I.
13. and therefore kindle the Flames of his Wrath against such who commit it?
When the Prophet had a Sight of God and his Glory, and heard the Seraphims
proclaim his Holiness, saying, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the
whole Earth is full of his Glory; he presently replied, Woe is me, for I am
undone, because I am a Man of unclean Lips; -- for mine Eyes have seen the
King, the Lord of Hosts, Is. VI. 3, 5.

4. Is it not fearful to fall into the Hands of God, because of his strict and
inflexible Justice? Which inclines him to render to every Man according to his
Works, to mark their Iniquities, and increase their Punishments, according to
the Number and Aggravations of their Sins: Who then is able to stand before
this holy LORD GOD? Ps. CXXX. Ps. III. 1 Samuel VI. 20.

5. Is not it terrible to fall into the Hands of God, on Account of his
infinite Eminence? Shall not his Excellency make you afraid, and his Dread fall
upon you? Job. XIII: II. Shall not Destruction from God be a Terror to you? And
can you be able to endure by Reason of his Highness? Job XXXI. 23. A mean Man's
Anger is but lightly esteemed, but the Frowns of the great are much feared. If
the Wrath of a Temporal King be as Messengers of Death, what then must be the
Wrath of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, that high and lofty one, that
inhabiteth Eternity: Jer. X. 6, 7. For as much as there is none like unto thee,
O LORD, who art great, and thy Name is great in Might; Who would not fear thee,
O King of Nations? What will you Forgetters of God do? When he will tear you in
his Wrath, take you by the Neck, and shake you in Pieces? Set you up as a Mark,
for the Arrow of his Indignation to pierce, cleave your Reins assunder, and
pour out your Gall upon the Ground, break you with Breach upon Breach, and run
upon you like a Giant? Job. XVI. 9, 12, 13, 14.

6. Because of his burning Jealousy. Cant. VIII. 6. Jealousy is cruel as the
Grave, the Coals thereof are Coals of Fire, which have a most vehement Flame.
Nah. I. 2. You Fogetters of God, remember that God will be to you as a Lion, as
a Leopard by the Way will he observe you; he will meet you as a Bear that is
bereaved of her Whelps, and will rent the Caul of your Heart. Hos. XIII. 7, 8.

On the contrary, be entreated to remember God, and entertain him in your
Thoughts and Affections. Now there are these Things of God which ye ought to
remember, if you would approve your selves to him, viz.

1. His Omniscience: That his all-seeing Eye is continually beholding you, even
in your retired Recesses; this would be a great Preservative against Sin. Ps.
CXXXIX.

2. His Word: This you should hide in your Hearts, lest you Sin against him,
according to the Practice, Ps. CXIX. II.

3. His Works, whether of Creation, Redemption, or Providence. And, 1. Of
Creation; on every of which are visibly engraven bright Images of their
Author's Perfections; especially of his infinite Wisdom and almighty Power, in
their Formation and Order. -- Romans I. -- How manifold are thy Works, O God, in
Wisdom have thou made them all. 2. Of Redemption; in which all the Perfections
of the Deity conspiring shine with inexpressible. Beauty and ravishing Harmony,
to the Astonishment of the whole Heavens, and all the intelligent enlightened
Creation. But above the Rest gracious Love appears with unrivalled Luster and
peculiar Triumph ( sicut Luna inter Astra minora) as the Moonamong the lesser
Stars. 3. Of Providence; the precious Passages of which, respecting either your
Souls or Bodies, ought to be carefully remembered. Ps. XXXIV. 4, 6. I sought
the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my Fears.


4. His People; the Peace and Welfare of God's Church and People, ought to lie
near your Hearts. If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right Hand forget her
Cunning. Ps. CXXXVII. 5. The Afflictions of Joseph should press us heavily.
Amos VI. 6.

5. The Ordinances of God; Is. LXII I. For Zion's sake I will not hold my peace
until the Righteousness thereof go forth as Brightness, and the Salvation
thereof as a Lamp that burns. Upon this Account David thought the Tabernacles
of God amiable, and longed for his Courts, Ps. LXXXIV.

That you may be induced to take this Course, consider 1. The woeful Ingratitude
there is in forgetting God, who has so often and so graciously remembered you;
this was the awful Aggravation of Israel's Sin, that they forgot their Savior.
Ps. CVI. 21. 2. Consider how long ye have already forgotten him, and let that
Suffice, lest the Lord Complain over you, as he did of Old, Jer. II. 32. That
his People had forgotten him Days out of Number. 3. Consider the dreadful
Consequence of this Practice, that it will cause God to abhor you. Deuteronomy. XXXII.
18, 19. And tear you in Pieces, as our Text asserts. 4. The great Advantages of
Remembering God, by this the Psalmists Souls was filled as with Marrow and
Fatness, Ps. LXIII. 5, 6.


Now if you would be kept from forgetting God, you must observe these Two
Directions, viz.

1. Forsake your Bosom Lusts, for they are the Causes of your forgetting God,
Hos. II. 13. She went after her Lovers, and forgot me, says the Lord. 2. Seek
the Sanctified use of Prosperity, otherwise you are like to forget God, Hos.
XIII. 6. According to their Pasture, so were they filled, they were filled, and
their Heart was exalted, therefore have they forgotten me, says the Lord.
Doct. 3. That solemn and speedy Consideration is necessary to prevent the
Sinner's Ruin: Consideration is in two Respects necessary, both in Regard of
Command and Mean. And,

1. Gods commanding Authority to which we (who are dependant Creatures) should
stoop without the least Reluctance obliges us to it, in the Text under our
present Meditation.

2. It Is necessary in respect of Mean. For, 1. Consideration, has a natural
and excellent Tendency to prevent the Commission of Sin, which is the
meritorious cause of Man's Destruction, and that two Ways. 1. By stripping
tempting Objects of their false Guises and ensnaring Charms. Consideration
represents the Honors, Profits, and Pleasures, of the World, That sordid
Trinity, which infatuated Mortals with such fond and eager Passion court and
adore in a just Light, viz. To be in a great Measure but imaginary, uncertain,
unsatisfactory, perishing and ensnaring, and therefore not worthy of the high
Esteem, and passionate Pursuit of an immortal Spirit; being beneath its noble
Nature, and too narrow to satiate its enlarged Desires. And, 2. By representing
the dangerous Consequences of a sinful Course to the Mind, which must needs
check our Inclinations that Way; it allays the brutish Pleasures of these
stolen Sweets to think of the sour Sauce which follows them. The Lord ascribes
his Peoples Rebellion to their Inconsideration. Is. I. 2.3. Hear O Heavens, and
give ear O Earth, for the Lord has spoken; I have nourished and brought up
Children, and they have rebelled against me, the Ox knows his Owner, and the
Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel does not know, my People does not consider. It
is not so much Peoples Ignorance, as their Inconsiderateness, which is the sad
Source of their woeful Disorders: If Sinners did but seriously think, (says
Stakhouse,) that at the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God he will
pour out Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of Man
that does evil, Romans II. 5. They durst no more run into these Perpetrations
deliberately and in cold Blood, than pretend to stop a Thunder Bolt as it comes
roaring from the Clouds.


2. Consideration has a Tendency to convince of Sin, not only of the evil of a
sinful Act, but of the Danger of a sinful State, which is a necessary
Preparative to Conversion, and Salvation. Luke XV. 15.17. When the Prodigal
came to himself, i. e. came to consider and reflect upon his Way, and the
Danger of it, he soon cried out. I perish, and then resolved to go to his
offended Father. 3. Consideration has a Tendency to excite to Holiness, the
only sure Path to eternal Happiness, by representing to the Mind the Reality,
Beauty, and Perfection of these unseen and eternal Things, which the good God
has promised to all these that love and serve him, CXIX 29. I thought on my
Ways (said the Psalmist) and turned my Feet to thy Testimonies.


Use I. If it be so, that serious and speedy Consideration is so necessary a
Mean to prevent the Sinners utter Destruction, then surely, these have little
Respect to their own Souls, who will not be at the pains to consider what their
Case is, and what is like to be the End of their present Course! And yet Alas!
This is the Condition of the most: They seldom enquire what their present State
is or consider what will be the End of their Way, they are secure, Thoughtless
and Indolent about their everlasting concerns, Jer. VIII. 6. And truly this
persisted in is a deadly Token of a damnable and desperate Case, as our Text
asserts.

Use II. Be entreated in the Fear of God to consider your Case and Way, and
that speedily, ask your Souls these three Questions.

1. What you have been doing? And so reflect upon your past Practices. 2. What
you are now doing? Are you repenting and obeying the Gospel or not? Or only
carrying a dead hypocritical Form? 3. What you should do to be saved? Salvation
is your great Interest, which you should be most intent about and earnest upon:
Whithout such Enquiries there can be no Repentance, and without Repentance no
Salvation. Jer. VIII. 6. Acts II. 37. Luke XXXIII. 3.
Now in order to excite you to this Duty of Consideration, and that speedily,
think upon these Particulars.

1. God calls you to it; and will you not obey your Creator? Hag. I. 5. Now
therefore, thus says the Lord, consider your Ways.

2. This is the most effectual Mean to procure your Conversion, and prevent
your ruin, Ezekiel. XVIII. 28. Because he considers and turns away from all
his Transgressions that he has committed, he shall surely live; lest I tear
you in Pieces, and there be none to deliver: These Words insinuate, that if
they did consider and repent, they would not be torn in Pieces. The People of
Niniveh were in a very dangerous Condition, near the Brink of utter
Destruction: -- Yet when they considered the Prophet Jonah's Warning, humbled
themselves and reformed, the Lord repented of the Evil he threatened to inflict
upon them. Jonah III.

3. It is pleasing to God when Sinners take Warning from him, and consider
their Sin and Danger; so soon as the Prodigal came to himself, and thought of
returning to his Father, while he was yet a great Way off, his Father ran to
meet him. -- Hence the Lord graciously expostulates with those Sinners, in Is.
I. 18. Come now and let us Reason together, says the Lord: Though your Sins be
as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red as Crimson, they
shall be as Wool.

4. It Suits the Design of our Being; the intended Use of our Reason: What was
our Reason given us for? but to exercise it in Consideration upon the most
important Subjects! Can we dream, that it was conferred on us mainly to direct
us how to play to Advantage Domitian's Game, to catch Flies, to amass the
winged Trifles of the present World?

Again, consider now, O Sinner!

1. Because thy Happiness is of the last Importance, and the Seasons of
Securing it are very short and contracted; alas! they insensibly waste away,
and being once expired, can never be recalled. Genesis VI. 3. Luke XIX. 41.42.

2. Because uncertain; therefore while you have the Light, walk in it; work
while the Day lasts, Joh. IX. 4. For the Night comes in which no Man can work.

3. You must give a strict Account to God for every Season of Mercy you enjoy,
for every divine Warning. Rev. II. 21. The Lord complains of Jezabel, I gave
her a Space to repent of her Fornications, and she repented not.

4. You cannot too soon, but you may when it is too late, you may shed Tears in
vain, with Esau and Judas, when God is departed from you; you may seek God with
unhappy Saul, and get no Answer from him. 1 Samuel XXVIII. 15. O how sorely was
this Man distressed, when God had utterly forsaken him, and would answer him no
more either by Prophets or Dreams? And in the mean Time his implacable and
potent Enemies poured in upon him like a Flood, and no Refuge opened for his
Rescue and Escape! In like manner unspeakably acute and dreadful will be the
Anguish and Distress of finally impenitent and inconsiderate Sinners, in the
Day of the Lord's cruel Wrath and fierce Anger (which shall burn as an Oven and
consume the proud and wicked as dry Stubble) for then all their false Friends
and Refuges will fail them, and their Enemies environ them to destroy them, and
the Judgments of God arrest them suddenly and terribly, like Thunder and
Lightning, and that in Troops like Showers of fiery Hail, from which they
shall not obtain a hiding Place, though they cry to the Hills and Mountains for it.
Is. XIII. 9. Mal. IV. 1. Rev. VI. 16.

5. The most perish by neglecting the present Seasons; few deny absolutely, but
many delay, Felix like; go thy Way for this Time, Acts XXIV. 25.

6. You have delayed too long already, let the Time past suffice you, wherein
you wrought the Will of the Gentiles, when ye walked in Lasciviousness, Lusts,
Excess of Wine, Revellings, Banqetings, -- 1 Pet. IV. 3

7. The sooner you turn to God, the more Good you are like to do, and the
clearer Evidences obtain of a good State. It is a noble Sign of the Truth of
Grace, when we turn from Sin in its Strength: Young Converts have a large Field
of Usefulness opened before them, which it is their Honor and Interest as well
as Duty to improve. Dan. XII. 3.

If you will not consider now, when it is like to be so much to your Advantage,
you shall hereafter, to your inexpressible Torment, when your benumbed
Consciences shall be roused out of its Iron Slumbers, and scourge your guilty
Souls with the Fruitless Remembrance of your past Iniquities and Follies, when
it is too late to get them cancelled, or the offended God appeased.

If you ask me, what we shall consider upon? I answer, pray consider, -- 1.
What is the great Design of your Being? -- Is it not to glorify and enjoy God?
2. How little your past and present Course answers that Design. 3. O! cousider
what infinite Dangers you are exposed to, while in this Christless unreconciled
Condition. -- Also think upon, 4. The Shortness and uncertainty of Life; is it
not a Vapor that appears only for a little Time, and then vanishes away. James
IV. 14. 5. The Preciousness of your Souls: Is it not of a spiritual Nature? --
And everlasting Duration? -- Is the whole World sufficient Recompense for it?
Matthew. XVI. 29. 6. The Vastness of Eternity; especially the horrible Scene of
the divine Vengeance. Who can dwell with devouring Fire? -- With everlasting
Burnings? Is. XXXIII. 14. 7. The Aggravated Damnation of all those who sin
against Light and Love: This is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the
World, and Men loved Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds were Evil,
Joh. III. 19. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? Heb. II.
3. He thot being often reproved, hardens his Neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without Remedy. Prove. XXIX. 1. God shall wound the Head of
his Enemies; and the hair Scalp of such a one as goes on still in his
Trespasses. Ps. LXVIII. 21.


I conclude with the Words of the Prophet Hosea, Chap. VII. 1, 2, 13. When I
would have healed Israel, then the Iniquity of Ephraim was discovered: -- And
they consider not in their Hearts that I remember all their Wickedness. -- Woe
unto them, for they have fled from me; Destruction unto them, because they have
transgressed against me: Though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken Lies
against me.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 13. Line 18. for connot read count.

Page 14. Line 29. for Unrighteouess read Unrighteous.


