Mr. Clark's SERMON At the Thursday-Lecture in BOSTON, February 13. 1734.

A Sinners Prayer for Converting Grace; Or, THE Necessity and Efficacy OF THE
Grace of GOD IN THE CONVERSION OF A SINNER Asserted and Practically Improved,
Chiefly for the Direction and Encouragement of the Unconverted to pray for
Converting Grace.

In a SERMON Preached at the Lecture in BOSTON, February 13th. 1734. Published,
with Enlargements and Additions, at the request of several of the Hearers.

By Peter Clark, A. M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Salem-Village.

2 Cor. v. 17, 18. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things
are past away, behold all things are become new, and all things are of God.

Psalm. xxvii. 14 Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord.

BOSTON, N E. Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN for D HENCHMAN in Cornhill.
MDCCXXXV.

THE Necessity and Efficacy OF THE Grace of GOD IN THE Conversion of a Sinner.
JER. XXXI. 18. latter clause. -- Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou
art the Lord my God.


THE prophecies contained in this chapter, as well as in the foregoing, and two
following, relate chiefly to the happy deliverance of Israel from the land of
their captivity, and their restoration to the enjoyment of the institutions of
God's worship, and of all the rights and privileges of his peculiar people in
their own land. And because the design of God in delivering his own people into
captivity, was to reform and purge them from their sins, especially from their
idolatries, which had been very provoking to him, and against which he
testified his displeasure in that awful dispensation; therefore in the
predictions and promises of their return out of captivity, we find frequent
intimations of a signal work of repentance, that should be wrought in them, to
prepare and qualify them for so great a mercy, that before their return to
their own land, and in order to it, they should first penitently return to the
Lord their God, from their sins and idols, with humiliation and supplication;
that God being reconciled to his people upon their repentance, might with
honor to himself, appear for them as remarkably in works of mercy, as ever he
had appeared against them in works of judgment. For a specimen, or proof
hereof, let it suffice to cite one passage, and that parallel to our context
Jer. 50. 4, 5. In those days, and in that time, says the Lord the children of
Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah, together, going and weeping:
they shall go, and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to Zion,
with their faces thitherward, saying, come and let us join ourselves to the
Lord, etc. And it is observable, that the children of Israel are there joined
with the children of Judah in their return to God, and seeking the way to Zion;
for it is a mistake to think, that only the tribe of Judah and Benjamin
returned out of captivity; for there were many of the ten tribes that
associated with the two tribes in their return from Babylon. Particularly, we
read 1 Chronicles. ix. 3 of the children of Ephraim, and Manasseh, that dwelt in
Jerusalem after the captivity See Dr. PRIDEAUX Connect. Part 1. Book 3.
. Therefore in our text, where the same work of repentance is foretold, and
exemplified, and on the same occasion, and in order to the same happy issue of
the troubles of God's people, here promised, Ephraim is brought in bemoaning
himself, etc If it be asked, why Ephraim, rather than Judah? I can give no
account, unless it be for one or other of these reasons, First, Because, that
as the kingdom of Israel is often denominated in the prophets from Ephraim the
ruling tribe; so Ephraim first openly, and professedly revolted to idolatry in
the separation of the ten tribes from the house of David, under Jeroboam, and
idolatry being the special sin that provoked God to cast his people out of the
land he had given them, it being a breach of the marriage covenant between God
and them, and Ephraim being in a special manner guilty of this sin, he
therefore especially, is brought in exercising repentance for it: and this may
be the meaning of that penitent reflection in the following verse. I was
ashamed, yea even confounded because I did bear the reproach of my youth. Which
may be understood of this sin of idolatry, which was the sin of the ten tribes
from their youth, from their very beginning, when they were first formed into a
kingdom, and which was indeed their reproach and ruin. Secondly, Because in the
verses immediately preceding, a promise is made for the comfort of Rachel
particularly, mourning bitterly for the loss of her children, that they should
return from the land of the enemy, verse 15, 16, 17. therefore in the verses
immediately following, the repentance of Ephraim who descended from Rachel, is
particularly mentioned, and God's acceptance of him to mercy declared, as that
which prepared the way to the fulfillment of the promise of his deliverance and
restoration. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, that is, the
descendants of Ephraim: nothing being more usual in the prophets, than to put
the name of the progenitor for his posterity, as Jacob, for the children and
posterity of Jacob. And to go no farther than the context, Rachel weeping for
her children, is put for the matrons in Israel about the time of the captivity,
who descended from Rachel. The people of God are here spoken of as a single
person under the name of Ephraim, to show that their repentance should be
general, and that they should be unanimous in it, and as Mr. HENRY observes it
is thus expressed, that it might be the better accommodated to particular
penitents, for whose direction and encouragement this passage is intended.

The words express the language of a repenting sinner recommending himself to
(...) mercy of God. He bewails his impatience, and incorrigibleness under the
great and sore calamities God had inflicted on him for his sins, and in order
to his amendment. Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke. Which speaks either his need of chastisement; I was
untractable, and not to be managed or governed by gentler methods, therefore I
needed, and justly deserved this severe correction; or rather it speaks the
effect of his chastisement; thus I was chastised indeed, but behaved myself
very untowardly under it, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, I was not
amended by it, but grew impatient and refractory under the yoke of afflictions;
this he reflects on now (when God had begun to mollify his heart) with
humiliation for his past contumacy: and hence he is convinced that the greatest
afflictions will not suffice to bring a sinner to repentance without the
effectual operations of divine grace, and confesses it to God, as an argument,
in pleading for that grace; which is the import of the petition that follows in
the words of the text, turn thou me, etc. wherein we may observe,

1. A prayer for converting grace. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; it
speaks his sense of his own impotency to turn himself, his need of the grace of
God to turn him, his dependence on that grace, and earnest desire of it. Turn
thou me, and then I shall be turned q. d. if thou Lord wilt exert the power of
thy grace, the effect shall certainly follow, then I shall be assuredly and
effectually turned. Some render the word actively, then I will return, so it
expresses his promise, or resolution in a dependence on divine grace and
strength, quickening, exciting and assisting him, to return to God by
repentance and reformation: like that of the spouse, Cant. i. 4. Draw me, we
will run after th^e. Or that of David, Psalm. cxix. 32. I will run the way of
thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. It comes to the same
effect, whether we understand it passively or actively, for conversion and
repentance is at last the sinner's own act, being first quick'ned, moved, and
inclined by the grace of God. And he that truly desires, and prays for
converting grace, must be understood to purpose and resolve to repent, and turn
to God in a dependence on that grace, to improve the grace given, and
cooperate with it, in actual conversion from sin to God.

2. An argument or plea to enforce this Petition, for thou art the Lord my God.
Ephraim had been a very froward and undutiful child, had broken God's covenant
by going after his idols, and God had laid him under the tokens of his
displeasure, exercising him with very sore chastisements, for his covenant
violations; but he had not, as yet, utterly cast him off, nor dissolved the
covenant relation, he was still beloved for the fath^r's sake, with whom the
covenant was first made; and he improves this relation, as a plea in prayer for
the mercy of the covenant, for grace, for converting grace. It may also denote
his present choice, and acceptance of the God of Israel for his God; he had
been going a wh^ring after his idols, having forsaken the God of his fathers,
but now having long smarted for his idolatry, grows sick of his idols, loathes
'em, forsakes 'em, according to that prediction, Hos. xiv. 8. Ephraim shall
say, what have I to do any more with Idols? and being by his distress reduced
to a found mind, resolves with the prodigal son to go to his father; as though he
had said, I acknowledge myself to have been a stubborn refractory child, and am
no more worthy to be called thy son; yea, deserve to be utterly cast off, and
disinherited, nevertheless thou art my God, and father by covenant. (...) own
the relation, and desire to come up to the obligation it lays me under to
return to thee, and beg thy grace to enable me hereunto. I take thee the God of
Israel, and thee alone for my God, renouncing all false gods, and devote myself
to thee, and thy service. This temper and disposition God had promised to bring
his people to, thereby to prepare them for mercy. Jer. iii. 19. I said, now
shall I put thee among the children, and give thee a pleasant land, etc. and I
said, thou shall call me my father, and shall not turn away from me. And if we
take the word in the former clause, in the active sense, I will return, these
words, for thou art the Lord my God, may be understood as an argument, which
penitent Ephraim uses with himself, to quicken his return to God; and so he may
be conceived to speak to this effect, O my God, I have foolishly and wickedly
departed from thee, yet thou have still the supreme right in me, and dominion
over me, and I am still under solemn covenant obligations to thee, as my
rightful Lord, to obey and serve thee; and my hope and dependence is on thee,
as my sovereign benefactor, as my God in covenant, the portion of mine
inheritance, therefore will I return to thee. It seems to be a compliance with
that direction God gave his backsliding people, how to answer his call, and to
address him in their penitent return to him. Jer. iii. 22. Behold, we come unto
thee, for thou art the Lord our God.

The instructions which the words afford us, may be reduced to these three
heads, or points of doctrine.

Doct. I. That the converting grace of God is necessary to the effectual
conversion of a sinner. Doct. II That it is the great duty and concern of
unconverted sinners to pray for converting grace. Doct. III. That the
unconverted children of the covenant, have great encouragement to pray for
converting grace, from their covenant interest, and propriety in God as their
God. Turn thou me, for thou art the Lord my God.
It is the first of these that I purpose chiefly to speak to, the other two may
be considered by way of inference, and motive, in the application of the
doctrine.

Doct. I. That the converting grace of God is necessary to the effectual
conversion of a sinner.

I shall endeavor here briefly to show, First, What conversion is, or, when a
sinner may be said to be turned. Secondly, The necessity, and victorious
efficacy of the grace of God in the conversion of a sinner.

First, I shall show, what conversion is, or when a sinner may be said to be
turned.

It is a very harsh, and forced exposition which Grotius gives of these words,
to this purpose, return thou me to my own country, and then I will repent:
importing a present obstinate, incorrigible disposition, contrary to the whole
tenor of this passage, which exhibits a most humble, contrite, penitent frame,
on the sinner's part: and the most tender expressions of pity and compassion on
God's part, of any that are to be met with in the whole scripture.
Unquestionably therefore, the turning here intended, is no other than the
conversion of the soul from sin to God. And here, I need not tell you, that
this supposes a departure from God, a turning away from him, else there could
be no room for such a duty as returning to him.

Conversion to God supposes a state of degeneracy from him, which is the state
of all mankind, fallen in Adam from their primitive integrity, and all have
more or less departed from God by actual transgressions, and backslidings.
Psalm. xiv. 2, 3 The Lord locked down from heaven upon the children of men: to
see if there were any that did understand, and seek God. They are all gone
aside, they are altogether become filthy: there is none that d^eth good, no not
one. All sin is a turning away from God, and forsaking him, as our supreme
Lord, last end, and chief good, and a turning to self and the creature, to the
flesh, and the world. Jer. ii. 19 Know therefore, and see, that it is an evil
thing, and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God. Therefore in
returning to God, he is to be considered as our supreme ruler, and benefactor,
whom we have undutifully and perversely neglected and forsaken. Consider him in
his natural relation to us as our creator, and as he exercises a dominion over
us by his providence, so we can neither turn from him, nor to him, for in him
we all live, and move, and have our being, Acts xvii. 27, 28. Psalm. cxxxix. 7,
8, etc.
good and bad. But consider him in his moral character and relation, as an holy
and righteous ruler, and a kind and gracious benefactor; so we may be said to
forsake him by sin, and return to him by repentance, and obedience. We forsake
him as our supreme ruler, when we depart from the rule of his commandments,
either in heart or life, either by sins of omission or commission, and in
opposition to his laws and precepts, are governed by our own corrupt
inclinations and lusts. And we depart from him, as our supreme benefactor, when
we pursue an imaginary felicity in the interests and enjoyments of the world,
apart from God, in the room of God, and in the neglect of God the creator, who
is blessed for ever. Jonah ii. 8 They that observe lying vanities, forsake
their own mercy. Jer. xvii. 5. Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and
makes flesh his arm, and whese heart departs from the Lord. And therefore in
returning to him, we must own him as our supreme Lord and ruler, and turn from
all our transgressions, and sinful deviations from his laws, unto our duty and
allegiance to him; saying, as we are directed, Isai. xxvi. 13 O Lord our God,
other lords besides thee have had dominion over us: but by thee only will we
make mention of thy name. We acknowledge none but thee for our rightful Lord,
and lawgiver. We must renounce the dominion of sin and satan, and take the will
of God for our rule, and resolve to be ruled by it in everything. And we must
return to him, as our supreme benefactor, by renouncing the idols and vanities
of the world, whereby our hearts have been alienated from him, and by taking
him for our chief good, portioning ourselves in his favor, depending on him to
pardon and bless us, and to communicate an all-sufficient happiness to us. In a
word, we must return to him as our Lord to rule, and as our God to make us
happy.

And as to the requisites and ingredients in a sound conversion, let me only
note, 1. In the conversion of a sinner, there is a work of conviction and
humiliation wrought in his soul; whereby he is convinced of the evil, and
damnable nature of sin; his carnal rest is disturbed and broken, he finds
himself deserted of his earthly refuges, despairs of relief from every creature
to his wounded conscience, and is heavy laden with a sense of guilt and
corruption, which is the wormwood and gall that embitters all his comforts, and
the sting of all his afflictions, and fills his soul with vexation and terror,
which excites in him a loathing of his sins, and an earnest desire to leave
them, and to have no more commerce with them This work of humiliation is
necessary to mortify the love of sin, and to break off the sinner's heart from
it, to make the remedy of God's grace and mercy in Christ, welcome to him on
any terms, and to influence his inclinations and endeavors unto a ready
compliance with all the methods of grace, and the terms and conditions of
salvation. This is exemplified in the prodigal son, who never though it of
returning to his father's house, till reduced to the last extremity. Luk xv.
17, 18. When he came to himself, he said, how many hired servants of my father
have bread enough, and to spare, and I perish with hunger: I will arise, and go
to my father. And in those three thousand converted, Acts ii. who when they
heard the word preached by Peter, with a close application to their
consciences, were pricked in their heart, and said, men and brethren, what
shall we do? And in Saul Act ix 6 he trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what
will thou have me to do? And the same temper, and contrition of spirit is
represented in the instance before us, of a true penitent, ver. 19. After that
I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded,
because I did bear the reproach of my youth. 2. In the conversion of a sinner,
there is a change wrought in the temper, bias, and inclination of the soul;
turning it from sin to holiness, from the creature to God: it does not suffice
to conversion, that a sinner forsakes some sins, that he lived in before. Men
may escape the pollutions of the world, and be outwardly reformed, and yet
retain their swinish nature, which afterward they may, and too often do
discover by returning with the sow that is washed, to her wallowing in the
mire, 2 Pet. ii. 20, 22. But there must be an inward change in the disposition
of the mind, an healing and renovation of the powers and passions of the soul,
by the word and spirit of God, of the understanding, conscience, will, and
affections: the sinner is transformed, by the renewing of his mind, into a new
creature. Romans xii. 2. Be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by
the renewing of your mind. He is rectified in his apprehensions, and
estimations of things, he sees more of the deformity of sin, of the beauty of
holiness, of the vanity of the world, of the need and worth of a Savior, of
the excellency and importance of things spiritual and heavenly, than ever he
saw before; the will and affections are in part cured of their corrupt bias,
and prevailingly inclined to the things of God, to seek, serve, and enjoy him.
Sin has its rise from a corrupt heart. Mat. xv. 19. Out of the heart proceed
evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, etc. therefore the work of conversion must
begin in the heart, the fountain of all external operations, in purging,
healing, and rectifying those inward springs of motion; and this inward change
of the heart is necessary to an universal change of life and conversation: and
this is the peculiar effect of God's grace promised, Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26, 27 A new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, etc. And I
will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments and do them. 3. In conversion, a sinner forsakes all
his former sins both in heart and life. This is insisted on as the prime
requisite in actual conversion. Isal lv. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and
the unrighteous man his tho'ts: and let him return unto the Lord, etc.


(1) He forsakes all sin in general; that is, though sin still adheres to him,
and sins of infirmity will unavoidably attend him every day in this interim of
mortality, yet he allows no sin to reign in him, he cherishes no sin in his
heart; but in his judgment, will, and ^ffections, he is set against every sin,
Psalm. cxix. 104. Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate
every false way. And the reason is, he that truly turns from any sin, as sin,
as it is against God and his law, must turn from every sin.

(2) He forsakes his beloved sin in special: that sin, whatever it be, whether
pride, uncleanness, injustice in traffic, drunkenness, lying, or any other
sin, which he is most addicted to, through age, constitution, custom, condition
or circumstances of life, and which he is most tender of, and most easily and
frequently overcome by, and which he is most loath to part with; which, yet,
his heart chiefly smites him for under convictions; that sin, I say, a true
convert will be most careful to forsake, and mortify, and watch, and strive,
and pray against it, and get the victory over it. The call is, to turn
especially from our own evil way. Jer. xviii. 11. Return ye every one from his
evil way. And the truth of grace will discover itself in the most serious
endeavors to keep ourselves from our own iniquity. Psalm xviii 23. I was also
upright before him: and I kept my self from mine iniquity.

(3) He will forsake the sins both of heart and life. He will particularly
forsake heart sins, and abhor evil and vain tho'ts, and imaginations, all
unbelieving, irreverent, blasphemous, and murmuring thoughts against God, and
his providence; uncharitable, unrighteous and revengeful thoughts against his
neighbor, and all proud, covetous, unclean thoughts; he will crush sin in the
Embryo, and not suffer lust to conceive in his heart, nor evil thoughts to
lodge within him. Jer. iv. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness,
that thou may be saved; how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?
Here lies the main difference between a sincere convert, and an hypocrite; the
care of the latter is chiefly employed in keeping clean the outside, that he
might recommend himself to the good opinion of men, and if he can but do this,
all is well, though he is full of all uncleanness, hypocrisy, and iniquity
within. Whereas it is the first and chief care of a true convert to approve his
heart to God's acceptance, to keep the mind and affection clean, pure, chaste,
and meet for communion with him. He will take care to have a pure heart, as
well as clean hands Psalm. xxiv. 4. Jam. iv. 8
Again, he will exercise a strict care to forsake all sin in his life; and to
live no longer the rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to
the will of God, 1 Pet. iv. 2. For though every one is not certainly a true
convert, that forsakes some sins he had formerly lived in, and leads a life
visibly blameless; yet a true convert will certainly forsake all his former
sinful customs, and practices; for where there is a change of the heart, there
will be a change of the way; and the streams will partake of the nature of the
fountain: and in this the children of God are manifestly distinguished from the
children of the devil, namely, in their abstinence from, and opposition to all
sin. 1 John iii 9, 10 Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin: for his
seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. In this
the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil.

(4) In conversion the sinner returns to God whom he had forsaken, and devotes
himself to him by ^aith in Jesus Christ. Conversion consists in the prevailing
inclination, and tendency of the soul to God, as our last end, and chief good;
as was before observed and indeed the completing act of our return to God,
must be a serious and solemn dedication of ourselves to him in covenant.
Behold, we come to thee, for thou art the Lord our God J^r, iii 22.
. And when sinners are once persuaded to take up unfeigned resolutions to
return from their wand'rings, and deliberately, soberly, and resolvedly,
consent to the covenant of God (according to the tenor of their Baptism)
dedicating themselves, entirely and absolutely, to God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, as their owner to be disposed of by him, as their ruler to obey
him, as their benefactor and chief good, thankfully to depend on him, and love
him, and live to him, as their ultimate end, the work is then done, and they
are truly, and effectually turned to God. And if it seem too presuming for a
poor sinful creature to undertake such a solemn covenant transaction with the
great God of heaven; it is true, GOD, absolutely considered, is inaccessible to
sinful men; there is no coming to him but by a Mediator: we should therefore be
humbly sensible of the distance and variance between him and us, and see our
need of the mediation of his Son Jesus Christ, in whom he is reconcilable, and
conversable with man, and offers a covenant of reconciliation to us, founded on
the atonement made by his blood, in whom we have access with confidence in the
love and compassions of the Father Ephesians. iii. 12.
. By him therefore we must return to God, by faith embracing him in all his
offices, giving up ourselves to God by him, to be taught, saved, and ruled by
him, and to live in the observance of all his gospel ordinances, and
commandments. I am the way, says Christ, the truth, and the life: no man
comes unto the Father, but by me, Joh. xiv. 6. and Heb. vii. 25. He is able to
save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him But let this suffice for
opening the nature of conversion.

Secondly, I come now to show the necessity and victorious efficacy of the
grace of God in the conversion of a sinner. Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned. This shows, (1) The necessity of converting grace; as it implies a full
conviction, and persuasion, "that unless God do turn him by his grace, he shall
never be turned, but wander endlesly." Again, (2) It shows the invincible
efficacy of divine grace. God works with a conquering power in conversion; if
he gives converting grace, the sinner, the most obstinate sinner shall be
turned. "If he undertake the conversion of a soul, it will be converted Mr
HENRY.
. Let me here speak a word to each of these;

1. There is a necessity of a work of divine power and grace in the conversion
of a sinner. Which appears,

(1) From the nature of man in his fallen, degenerate state. All mankind are
naturally in a state of defection from God, destitute of original
righteousness. It Is evident not only from scripture, but universal experience,
that man is born into the world under corrupt byasses, and vicious
inclinations, which, as he grows up, are increased, and strengthened by customs,
whereby he is become averse from God, and an enemy to all spiritual commerce
with him, and pr^ne to all manner of evil; we cannot in reason conclude that man
came so corrupt out of the hands of God at first, but that he has lost his
original rectitude, and thereupon the faculties and passions of his soul are
exceedingly disordered, according to the scripture account of this matter,
which agrees with the common experience of mankind; the scripture informs us,
Eccl vii. 29. That God made man upright, but they have sought out many
inventions* Man being carried off by his curiosity from the center of his
felicity, and the bond of perfection between God and him being dissolved by
transgression, he is continually wandering from mountain to hill, in quest of
his lost happiness; and is put upon many shifts and inventions to supply the
want of one God, and obstinately adheres to the creature, and carnal
satisfactions, and is as obstinately disaffected to the blessed God. Upon the
dissolution of the union between God and him, his spiritual life is gone, and
till it be restored by divine grace, he is incapable of spiritual communion
with his maker, of all spiritual sensations and employments; and labors of a
moral impotency to duties of holiness, is weak, yea dead to all spiritual good:
dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. ii. 1. Chap. iv. 18. Having the understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the blindness of their heart; he is wholly estranged from
things spiritual and heavenly, and has a strong bent to the things of the
flesh, and the world, and a rooted aversion to holiness, which nothing can
effectually cure, but the divine operations of the Spirit of God. Our Savior
proves the necessity of the regenerating grace of the Spirit, in order to our
being restored to the spiritual life, and to an inheritance in the kingdom of
God, from the universal corruption, and carnality of man's nature. Joh. iii. 6,
7. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the
spirit is spirit. Marvel not, therefore adds he, that I said unto thee, ye must
be born again. That a man who is carnal by nature, might become spiritual,
there is a necessity of the regenerating work of the Spirit. Without the
restoring grace of the Redeemer, man fallen is not only impotent, but full of
enmity against holiness, and the duties of the spiritual life, as the
scriptures abundantly declare. Joh. xv. 5. Without me, says Christ, ye can do
nothing; no more than a branch severed from the vine, can bear fruit of it
self. Romans viii. 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. Col. i. 21. -- alienated, and
enemies in your mind by wicked works: or, as the original might be rendered,
enemies by your mind in wicked works. The mind and affections being strongly
bent to courses of transgression, is the cause of all enmity against God. And
how can such a degenerate creature, renew himself by repentance, or convert
himself to God, without the special influences of divine grace?

(2) It appears from the nature of that work of grace, by which this change is
effected^ It is called the workmanship of God, and ascribed to his creating
power, which exceeds all power in the creature. Ephesians ii 10. For we are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Chap. iv. 24. That ye put
on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness.
It Is also termed regeneration or a begetting us again. Jam. i. 18. Of his own
will begat he us with the word of truth. 1 Pet. i. 3. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant mercy has
begotten us again, unto a lively hope, etc. Regeneration and conversion, in a
general sense, are used as terms equivalent, but in a strict sense, there is
this difference, regeneration confers a supernatural power, or spiritual
inclination of the soul dead in sin; in conversion, this power is drawn forth
into act, in the exercise of repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ; and in both these the grace of God works, both in conferring
vital powers, and in drawing them out into act; and the quickening of a soul,
that lies in a state of spiritual death, by the regeneration of the Spirit is
necessary unto actual conversion. And this is ascribed entirely to God,
exclusive of all other causes. Joh. i. 13. Which were born not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. And if such a change
as amounts to a new birth, is necessary to the conversion of a sinner, surely
man cannot be the author of it in himself, no more than he may be said to beget
himself at first; but the power and grace of God is necessary to the production
of it

It may therefore be asserted with good reason from scripture, that if God does
not bestow his special converting grace on a sinner, he never will be
converted. It Is possible indeed, natural men may go a great way toward
conversion, and yet fall short of it: they may be half converted, almost
persuaded to become Christians Act. xxvi. 28.
, not far from the kingdom of God Mark xii. 34. chap. x. 21,
: they may be under a preparatory work, under strong convictions of sin, and
misery, they may confess their sins, as Pharaoh and Judas did: they may purpose
and resolve to repent, and amend their lives; they may leave some sins, and
make a show of returning to God; but without the effectual grace of God, they
will never be thoroughly converted, will never turn to God with the whole heart,
but feignedly. As God complains of his people, Jer. iii. 10. and Hos. vii. 16.
They return, but not to the most high; they are like a deceitful bow; which
however it may seem to point to the mark, yet carries not the arrow half way to
it, or casts it another way. It is divine grace alone that can effectually
bring a degenerate sinner home to himself.

2. There is a victorious efficacy in the grace of God, which being exerted,
shall infallibly convert a sinner, even the most obstinate, and hardened
sinner. Turn thou me, and the effect shall answer the virtue of the cause, and
I shall be turned. So Jer. xvii. 14. Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed,
save me, and I shall be saved. It Is God alone who can heal, and he can
powerfully, and effectually heal the distempered soul of a sinner: for as for
God, his work is perfect; if he undertake any saving work, he can and will
bring it to effect. Though the sinner may resist for a while, yet he shall not
finally do so, but shall be made to yield at last in the day of God's power
with him. God's grace works so strongly (and yet with a sweet harmony with the
reasonable nature of man, without putting the least force on his natural
liberty) that it shall not be left in the power of the sinner's will, finally
to srustrate or defeat the design of it; this cannot be denied, without denying
the sovereign dominion of God over the creatures he has made; especially free
agents, and the will of man in particular, to govern and bend it to his own
purposes. Yet some there are, who suppose, that when God has done all that he
has promised, and furnished a sinner with suffic^^n^ aids of Grace, whereby he
may be converted if he will, it is at last lest on the free will of man,
whether he will be converted or no, and that he may sinally resist the
operations of divine grace. If so, then instead of saying, turn me, and I shall
be turned, at may be said, though thou turnest me, yet I may never be effectually
turned. But the contrary to this is manifest from scripture.

(1) Because the regeneration and conversion of a sinner is expressly ascribed
to the will of God, and as expressly denied to the will of man. In the fore
cited Joh. i. 13. believers in Christ are said to be born not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. The new birth is not
the product of the will of man, but of the will of God. Jam. i. 18. Of his own
will begat he us, etc. Again Romans ix. 15, 16. He says to Moses, I will have
mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion. His inference hence is, so then, it is not of him that wills, nor
of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy, and that according to his
own sovereign will. The phrase, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, as
it speaks the absolute freedom of the divine will, so it imports the
irresistible efficacy of it. If God will have mercy on any soul, nothing in the
world shall hinder it; for there is a powerful efficacy in the will of God, he
works all things according to the counsel of ^is^^^ will, Ephesians. i 11. he works
them effectually (as the word signifies) with a potent, irresistible energy. If
any are converted and saved, it is not of man that wills originally, but of
God that wills, and works according to his will.

(2) It is ascribed to the mighty power of God, even that power to which all
things are possible. When our Savior had laid open the difficulties of
salvation, or of entering into the kingdom of God, Mark x. 26, 27. the
disciples were exceedingly surprised, and being astonished out of measure,
says the evangelist, said among themselves, who then can be saved? Jesus
looking upon them, says, with men it is impossible, but not with God: for with
God all things are possible: he speaks it indeed, with reference to the
conversion and salvation of rich men, but the same is true of all sinners
wedded to their lusts. The young man that came to Christ with that question,
good master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? (on which
occasion those words were spoken by our Savior) showed as good a disposition
to the kingdom of God, as any mere natural man may ordinarily be supposed to
do, yet it required the almighty power of divine grace to bring him into it,
and to subdue his heart and will, to the grace and government of Christ; and
when this power is put forth the most obstinate shall be made to yield to it.
It Is not the preaching of an apostle, but the power of God accompanying it,
that works faith 1 Cor. ii. 5.
, and captivates the souls of men to an obedient subjection to Christ 2 Cor. x.
4, 5.
. And this power of God, to which all things are possible, is infinitely
greater than that which is in the devil, or the corrupt nature of man to make
resistance.

(3) God has promised by his grace, to take away that principle of enmity, and
resistance in the ^arnal will; and herein lies the work of his grace
principally, in subduing the obstinacy of men's hearts, in curing the will, and
affections of their carnality. Deuteronomy. xxx. 6. The Lord thy God will circumeise
thine heart, and the heart of thy seed to love all thine heart, etc. Ezekiel xxxvi
26 And I will take away the stony heart cut of your flesh, and I will give you
an heart of flesh. Now what is it that may be supposed to resist, or frustrate
the operations of grace, but the heart of stone, or the perverse obstinacy of
the will? but this, God has promised, shall be taken away by the prevailing
efficacy of his grace.

(4) Because in the work of grace, the will is renewed, and powerfully inclined
toward God; as the scriptures clearly testify. Psalm. cx 3. Thy people shall be
willing, or become thy willing subjects, in the day of thy power. Phil. ii. 13.
For it is God which works in you, both to will, and to do, of his good
pleasure. Joh. vi. 44. No man can come unto me, except the Father which has
sent me, draw him, says Christ; which shows the necessity of divine grace; and
our Savior's inference (verse 45. Every man therefore, that has heard, and
has learned of the Father, comes unto me) shows its victorio^s efficacy. If
the Father draws, by the Word and Spirit, the sinner infallibly comes to Christ.

(5) Because of the absurd consequences of the contrary opinion; that leaves
the work of conversion at last to the self-determining power of man's free
will, for then the great and glorious designs God had in view, in the work of
man's redemption by his Son Jesus Christ, would appear to have been built on a
precarious bottom, then the decrees of God might be frustrated, and his
intentions defeated, contrary to that declaration, Isai. xlvi, 10. My couns^l
shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure; then God's promise to Christ of a
numerous seed to serve him, is grounded on an uncertainty, and Christ died for
an uncertainty, the fruits of his death and undertaking depending on the
slippery and inconstant free will of man; then the elect have no more special
grace than the reprobate, the saved than the damned; then a regenerate man may
share in the glory of his salvation, if it be the good use of free will, and
not the good work of free grace, that makes him to differ from those that
perish. These, and diverse other absurdities, that flow from the opinion of the
power of man's free will, to use or finally to resist the grace of God, are too
open and manifest to dwell upon, and serve for the confirmation of the truth
opposed by it. Let us come now to the

IMPROVEMENT.
First, Let us learn hence to settle right thoughts about the nature of
conversion, and to try our state, whether or no we are truly converted. There
is certainly something more in conversion, than many people are aware of; it is
more than a turning from error and false worship, to the true religion; some
suppose, that conversion is only for heathens, and infidels, and those that are
without the church: why then are the people of God here brought in, praying,
Turn thou me, etc? why was John the baptist sent, to turn many of the children
of Israel unto the Lord their God? Luke i. 16. why was Christ sent to bless the
children of the jewish church, in turning them from their iniquities? Act. iii.
25, 16. It is more than the reformation of a scandalous life. 2 Pet. ii. 20. If
after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of
the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and
overcome; the latter end is worse with them, than the beginning. It is
supposed, that men may be outwardly reformed, and purged from the gross
pollutions of the world, by the force of conviction, and of gospel light and
knowledge, and yet for want of a gracious change of the inward man, may finally
revert to them; that is, they may be visibly reformed, and not savingly
converted: yet how hard a matter is it to bring sinners, even to this, to
reform their drunkenness, their uncleanness, their lying, injustice, and the
like immoralities; alas, sinners, you may leave these sins, and yet fall short
of conversion, and salvation; but while you persist in them, you are certainly
in the broad way to hell: more is required of you, than the leaving these
pollutions of the world, yet whilst you will not be prevailed with to do thus
much, which it is, confessedly, in your power to do, by the common aids and
assistances of grace, how far are you from the kingdom of God? and how justly
may God be provoked to deny you his effectual converting grace, without which
you must perish everlastingly? Again, it is more than some compunction and
sorrow for sin. How often do awakenings, convictions, and good resolutions
prove abortive, not being deep and serious enough, to produce a through change
in men's hearts and lives. Yet again, it is more than putting in practice some
neglected duties of religion; many mistake here, if they who have neglected
prayer a great part of their lives, begin now to pray in their families, or in
secret, if they publicly recognize the covenant of their baptism, if they join
themselves to the communion of God's people in special ordinances, and come to
the Lord's table, surely now (they are apt to think) they are converted
persons, now they are just men that need no repentance: alas, foolish virgins!
have you never read or heard, that Christ in the great day, will say, depart
from me, to many that will be able to plead, we have eaten, and drunk in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets, Luk xiii. 26, 27. and what the
doom of the man was in the parable, who came to the marriage feast, not having
on a wedding garment, Mat. xxii. 11, 12.

Be not mistaken, saving conversion is more than all this; and it is nothing
else, nothing less than the life and image of God in the soul of man,
evidencing itself in newness of life, and universal holiness; a renouncing the
corrupt inclination of the flesh, the service of sin, and the idols of the
world, that formerly possessed the throne in our hearts, and an unfeigned, and
un^e^^rved dedication of ourselves to the Lord Jehovah, to love and serve him,
to live to him, and be happy in him, as our supreme Lord and benefactor, our
last end, and chief good. O let professors be persuaded to search and try their
hearts and ways. Try your state by those requisites, and ingredients of a sound
conversion, that have been mentioned; that if you have been under mistakes
about your condition, you may be undeceived while there is a remedy at hand,
and whilst there is room for such a prayer as this, turn thou me, etc. An error
here is fundamental, and most dangerous, and fatal; when persons take it for
granted, that they are true converts already, when they are not so indeed;
publicans and harlots, open and notorious sinners, lie more open to conviction,
and so are more likely to enter into the kingdom of God than they; they are
secure under all the terrors of the Lord, and all the threat'nings of the law
and gospel, which are designed to awaken and alarm all unconverted sinners,
while they please themselves with a conceit that they are not of that number:
and though they are conscious to themselves of many sins of omission and
commission that they live in, yet they reckon them as the infirmities of God's
children, and so are very easy and contented, for who lives without sin? O let
not a deceived heart turn y^u aside, lest you perish with a lie in your right
hand Isal. xliv. 20.
Take heed, brethren, lest your hearts be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin Heb. iii. 13.


Secondly, What has been said, serves for conviction to those that indulge a
secret opinion of their own sufficiency, and power to repent and turn to God
when they please. Such a conceit may be found with many, who yet have orthodox
notions concerning man's impotency, and the necessity of effectual grace. For
the truth of this, I will appeal to the consciences of many, who under strong
convictions of the sinfulness and danger of their condition, and of the
necessity of conversion, to satisfy conscience resolve that some time hereafter
they will repent, yet for the present wilfully neglect the doing what they
think they can do in order to conversion, and what they purpose some time or
other to do. Now what does this argue, but that you think it is in your own
power to repent when you please, without any more special grace from God?
otherwise it is a desperate hazard you run, by putting off convictions, and
deferring repentance, while the Spirit of God is striving with you, lest he
depart, and return no more. And I am persuaded, if sinners would seriously
consider this, and believe it, they could not be easy in their wretched
neglects and delays. Again, have you not, when lusts have been importunate, and
temptations strong, yielded to commit a sin against conscience, and, it may be,
against solemn vows, with such a though it as this, if I venture this once, it is
but to repent, and all will be well. And does not this suppose, that you think
that repentance is at any time in your power, whether God gives you the grace
of his Spirit or no? otherwise it is a fearful venture indeed, to provoke God
to his face, by whose grace alone, you must be enabled to repent, if ever you
do so in sincerity. Therefore,

Thirdly, Be deterred from sinning upon presumption of repenting; for this very
reason, because of the necessity of the grace of God, to thy repentance and
conversion, which he is not bound to give. He may do it, and he may not, if he
please. If thou take the liberty of thy will to sin, God may take the liberty
of his will to deny thee grace, and leave thee to thine own hardness, and
impenitent heart, to treasure up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

Fourthly, It may serve to humble all, especially unconverted ones, in a sense
of the hardness and obstinacy of their hearts by nature, that nothing can move
or melt to a temper pliable to God's will, but the effectual grace of the
Spirit of God. Judgments cannot do it of themselves, they may rouse and
terrify, but without the gracious influences of the Spirit, will rather have an
hardening efficacy. An unconverted sinner under divine chastisements, behaves as
a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. A messenger from the dead cannot do it.
Luke xvi. 31. If they hear not Moses, and the prophets, neither will they be
persuaded (i. e. to repent, ver. 30) though one rose from the dead. The most
awakening sermons, the most lively preaching cannot do it. All the former
prophets could not soften and subdue the hearts of the men of their generation.
Zech. vii. 12. Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they
should hear the law, and the words which the Lord of hosts has sent in his
Spirit, by the former prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of
hosts Isaiah's preaching did but make their heart fat, and their ears heavy,
and closed their eyes, that they did not see with their eyes, nor hear with
their ears, nor understand with their hearts, that they might be converted, and
healed, Isai. vi. 10. that is, this was the effect of his preaching, through the
hardness of the people's hearts. And thy heart is made of the same metal. If
Isaiah, Jeremiah or Ezekiel were alive, there is hardness enough in thy heart
to withstand all their calls, expostulations, and warnings. Nay, if Christ
himself were on earth again, who is greater than all the prophets, if he should
weep over thee, as he wept over Jerusalem Luke xix. 41.
, he could not humble, soften, nor convert thine obstinate heart, without
exerting his omnipotent grace. Learn then, to know the plague of thine own
heart 1 King. viii. 38.
, and seriously bewail it before God.

Fifthly, Let it be improved for caution against abusing this doctrine of the
necessity of God's grace in the work of conversion.

It is abused, when men pretend it as an excuse for their continuance in sin,
or neglect of known duties; they hope to amend and do better, when God gives
them grace; and thus, in a very impious manner, they lay the blame of their
sins, upon God's denying them grace. But know, O sinner, that thou art bound by
the command, which requires nothing of thee, but what is suited to the powers
of thy reasonable nature; and thine impotency to do what is required, lies not
in the want of natural faculties, but in an obstinate and perverse disposition
of will, which is so far from excusing thee from the duties of holiness, that
the neglect of them must needs expose thee to the upbraidings of thine own
conscience. And the promise offers thee grace sufficient in a sense of thine
own impotency, and thou art forever inexcusable, if thou do not seek it
earnestly, and use the appointed means to attain it; but if you content your
selves in the slothful neglect of what you may and can do in the use of means,
you despise the grace of God, and forfeit the influences and assistances of it,
and will perish as inexcusably, as if it had been ever so fully in your own
power to convert yourselves.

Again, It is abused, when persons admit of discouragements from duties,
because they are uncertain, whether God will give them grace, and for that
reason are discouraged especially from binding themselves with religious vows
to an holy life, and taking upon them the obligations of their baptismal
covenant, or joining themselves in church fellowship, because it is doubtful
whether God will give them grace, which is necessary to enable them to live up
to their religious engagements.

But the apostle has taught us to reason quite the contrary way. Phil. ii. 12,
13. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God which
works in you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure. He does not say,
because it is God who works in you of his good pleasure, therefore sit still,
and wait for the motions and operations of grace; no, but be encouraged hence
to work, to stir up yourselves, and put forth endeavors in working out your
salvation, never questioning the concurrence and powerful aids of divine grace;
which are never wanting to serious endeavors; and then be encouraged to hope
for the success of your endeavors, for if God works in you, and with you, your
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. Wherefore give up yourselves to God,
use the means of grace, you are then in the way of God's blessing, make trial
of his ways in good earnest, depend on his promised grace, and you shall find
it sufficient 2 Cor. xii. 9.
to carry you through, as thousands have done before you, who have had no more
assurance of God's grace than you, but they trusted God, and were helped, and
found his grace sufficient for them.

But some may say, if God has mercy on whom he will have mercy, then let me do
what I will, or can, I may yet fall short of grace.

But this is a preposterous way of reasoning. It Is true I must acknowledge,
that God is at liberty to withhold his grace (for if it were due, it were not
grace) and may justly do it after all my endeavors, for my ill deservings, yet
considering the general offer of grace to all, without exception, it is much
more reasonable, and more for the glory of God, and for the honor of his
grace, to argue thus, Let me do what I can in the use of means, and I have no
reason to despair of grace, and help from God, but rather much encouragement to
expect it; and a sense of sin and unworthiness should be no discouragement, for
he gives grace to none because they are worthy, nor denies it to none merely
because of their unworthiness, for so he should deny it to all; say then, Lord,
I am a poor wretched creature, unworthy of a favorable look from thee, there
is nothing in me to move thee to pity or help me, but my own wants and
miseries; yet since thy grace is free to all, even the most unworthy, and thou
have mercy in a sovereign way on whom thou will, if therefore, Lord, thou will,
thou can glorify thy mercy on such a vile unworthy object as I am, therefore
will I wait on thee, and if I perish, I will perish at the footstool of thy
grace. A soul bro't into this humble yielding frame, is a fit object of the
divine compassions and grace. Jam. iv. 6, 7. He gives grace unto the humble.
Submit yourselves therefore to God. Hence,

Sixthly, Let me proceed to an use of exhortation, from the consideration of
the necessity and victorious efficacy of the grace of God in conversion, Let
all concerned, be excited and quick'ned to pray to God, and pray earnestly for
his converting grace, to be poured out on themselves and their children: for if
conversion be the gift and work of God's grace, what more reasonable and
necessary, than that his grace should be acknowleg'd and magnified, by our
humble dep^^dance on it, and earnest desires after it, exp^e^^d (...) fervent
prayer and supplication? And thus God expects we should show our value of this
blessing, and our disposition and readiness to ascribe to him the praise and
glory of it entirely. And there are several sorts of persons concerned in this
exhortation, to whom therefore I would address it with all seriousness.

And First, I would press it upon all unconverted o^^s, or those who have
reason to think themselves such, to pray to God for his converting grace.
Secondly, On true converts themselves, after grace received, still to pray for
the grace of God to convert, and recover them from their backslidings. or
decays of grace they may have fallen into. Thirdly, On Parents in covenant with
God, to pray for their unconverted children. And Fourthly, On the unconverted
children of the covenant in particular, to pray for the grace of God to convert
and turn them to himself; taking encouragement from their visible covenant
relation to God, as their God.

First, Let me urge and inculcate, the great duty and concern of unconverted
sinners to pray for converting grace; pursuant to the second point of
observation from the example in the text: which contains (as was observed) a
petition for converting grace, such as becomes every unconverted sinner to
offer up to God. And though Ephraim, who is here brought in praying for his
conversion, was not altogether in a state of natural corruption, and
unregeneracy; his language in this and the following verse, is expressive of a
very humble and penitent disposition, a good work was already begun in him by
the grace of God: yet still the same grace was necessary to bring it to some
perfection, without which (that is, if God should then have left him, without
the further assistances of his grace) he is sensible that he should still
miscarry, that he should still wander from his duty and happiness, and never be
thoroughly converted and healed; and therefore prays, turn thou me, and I shall
be turned. The same sense every unconverted sinner ought to have of his
condition, and to humble himself, and confess his sins, and bewail his
impotency and insufficiency to turn himself, and to beg of God the powerful
influences and aids of his Spirit, in order to his effectual conversion.

If it be said, that such sinners are as incapable of doing this, as of
converting themselves, they are incapable of making such humble, penitent,
believing supplications as God will accept, for this supposes them already
endowed with the grace of repentance. But

I Answer, Sinners must needs be supposed to have desires of their own
happiness, which are inseparable from a reasonable creature, and it is the will
of God that such desires should be cultivated and improved; there are many
important duties of religion urged upon men, from a supposition of these
natural desires of their own welfare; and if sinners would suffer themselves to
be set right, by the rules of the word, in the method of pursuing these
desires, they would not fail of everlasting happiness, and under this notion,
they may desire the grace of God, without which, they know they cannot be
saved; and it must needs be granted also, that they are capable of taking to
themselves words to express such desires to God; and if sinners might be
prevailed with to do this, with that fervency and importunity that the nature
of the thing requires, though prompted thereunto merely from a concern for their
own welfare, they have sufficient encouragement set before them, to hope that
such their desires and prayers shall not be altogether without success.
Wherefore in order to the inforcement of this exhortation, I shall endeavor to
show these two things, 1. That it is the unquestionable duty of all
unregenerate and unconverted ones to pray to God. 2. That it is their great
concern to pray for converting grace.


1. That it is the unquestionable duty of all unregenerate and unconverted ones
to pray to God. Though they are supposed destitute of supernatural habits, and
the indwelling presence of the Spirit of grace and supplication, that should
frame their hearts unto this duty, in order to the acceptable performance of
it, they are still under indispensable obligations to pray to God: and the more
sinful and wretched their condition is, and the more sensible they are of their
own vileness, and unworthiness, the more need they have certainly, to bemoan
themselves to God, and pour out their hearts before him in prayer, for the
succors of his mercy and grace.

That this is matter of plain duty, appears, in that prayer is a duty of
worship founded on the law of nature, the obligations whereof reach every man,
being of equal extent with the humane nature; this is a part of natural homage
due from all reasonable creatures to the God that made them, by the law of
their creation, and dependence on him. Psalm. c. 2, 3. Serve the Lord with
gladness --. Know ye that the Lord he is God, it is he that has made us, and
not we ourselves. Psalm. xcv. 6, 7, O come let us worship, and how down: let us
kneel before the Lord our maker. For he is our God, and we are the people of
his pasture, and the sheep of his hand. It is highly reasonable that depending
creatures, endowed with reason and understanding, should in this way, own the
sovereign author of their beings, on whom they have a constant and necessary
dependence for life, breath, and all things. The neglect whereof therefore is a
counteracting the end of our creation, and a violation of the prime dictate of
the law of nature. For prayer is a duty which natural conscience requires of
men, there is a natural reverence of God in the consciences of men that prompts
them to this duty. The unenlightned heathen, though mistaken in the objects of
their worship, have yet ever though it it their duty to pray to the gods they
owned. Thus those pagan mariners in Jon. i. 5. in a distressing tempest at sea,
being taught, as it should seem, by the mere voice of nature, cried every man
to his god. And those that neglect this part of God's worship, are justly
construed to cast off the natural reverence of God. Job xv. 4 Thou castest off
fear, and restrainest prayer before God. Moreover.

This duty is enforced by the plain positive commands of the word, often
repeated, from the obligation whereof no sort of men can pretend exemption.
Such as Psalm. lxii. 8. Trust in him at all times, ye people, pour out your
heart before him. Isai. lv. 6. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found; call ye
upon him, while he is near. Luke xviii. 1. He spoke a parable to them to this
end, that men ought always to pray and not to faint. 1 Timothy ii. 8. I will that
men pray every where, etc. These and the like commands which often occur in
scripture, enjoin the duty upon men indifferently, without determining whether
they be regenerate, or unregenerate, and are of equal extent with the law of
nature obliging every man to pray. Again,

There are many gracious promises God has made to prayer, which are designed
for the encouragement of such sinners, and do therefore greatly enforce their
obligations thereunto; such as Prove. viii. 17. They that seek me early shall
find me. Mat. vii. 7, 8 Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall
find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks,
receives, etc. i. e. every one, whosoever he be, that makes a business of
serious importunate prayer, shall undoubtedly find acceptance and success in
his petitions. Isai. xlv. 19. I said not to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in
vain. And many others of the like importance, which should encourage and
persuade all men, even the vilest sinners to the practice of this duty; so that
their interest invites them, and their necessities should drive them to their
prayers. For consider again, that the natural state of fallen man is a state of
extreme indigence: he is wretched, miseraeble, poor, blind and naked, Rev. iii.
17. which calls aloud upon him to apply himself to the mercy of God by earnest
prayer for relief. Who of all the living do more need divine mercy and succor
than unregenerate sinners? so that their being sinners, and unregenerate, is so
far from excusing them from prayer, as a duty they are unfit for, that it shows
them the greater need they have to pray, to confess their iniquities, and beg
pardon of their offended Lord, and his grace and mercy to heal the maladies,
and relieve the necessities of their poor perishing souls. And let me add,

That God's affording to sinners a day of grace, and a season of trial in this
world, for their eternal state, confirms their obligations to this duty, and
should quicken them to the speedy and serious practice of it. Through the riches
of God's goodness and for bearance, they are still in the land of hope, in a
state of trial, and expectation; their final condition is not yet determined,
God has not yet passed a sentence of rejection upon them, he does not yet say
unto them, though you cry unto me, I will not hear, such a sentence he will pass
upon men, when he comes to deal with them in wrath, and to execute judgment
without mercy Prove. i. 28. Mic. iv. 3.
. And this is the condition of those poor sinners that are gone to their
everlasting state, though they cry never so earnestly for mercy, it will be all
in vain, when their state of trial is over, and their opportunities of grace at
an end, the bowels of God's compassions will be for ever shut up against them.
Many will at last cry with the greatest vehemence and importunity, Lord, Lord,
open to us, when it will be too late to prevail by their most importunate
entreaties, the door of mercy being shut Mat. xxv. 10, 11, 12.
. But it is not so with sinners in this time of trial and hope that God has
mercifully afforded them in this world; the door of mercy is now open to the
greatest sinners, especially to those that enjoy the gospel, and means of
grace; they have the greatest encouragement that can be desired to seek God; he
is near to them in the offers of his grace, and the strivings of his Spirit, it
is now a time when he may be found by humble, and diligent seekers. God reveals
himself to them on a mercy seat, and the way to the throne of grace is open to
them by the mediation of his Son Jesus Christ, who is ready to befriend them by
his agency, and intercession with the Father. They have now an accepted time,
and day of salvation 2 Cor. vi. 2
; and their penitent supplications may find acceptance with the God of mercy,
as God heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, etc. From all which considerations it
appears, that sinners in a state of unregeneracy are under the plainest
obligations to pray to God.

Object But it is said, without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb xi 6
And that the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. xv.
8. therefore some may be ready to think that it is better to forbear a duty,
than to contract new guilt by the performance of it.

Answ It is granted, that faith toward God, and the Mediator, is certainly
necessary to our pleasing God in duties of worship, especially in prayer: and
that the unregenerate not having a justifying faith cannot please God, Romans
viii. 8. And further, it is true that such sinners as go on wilfully in a
course of transgression, and rebellion against God, cannot be though it to pray
acceptably, yea their prayers are an abomination to him; for be that turns
away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abomination, Prove
xxviii. 9. But what does all this infer, but that whilst men content themselves
in an unregenerate state, and live securely in sin, and think by their formal
services and duties of worship, to atone for their moral transgressions, they
are the objects of God's displeasure, and the more so for their hypocrisy, and
dissimulation in their prayers and devotions. And this, surely, is a very
dangerous state not to be rested in securely. But for a more direct answer to
the objection in a word or two,

(1) If unregenerate sinners are bound to pray by the law of nature, and the
express commands of God's word, as has been proved, it is unreasonable to
suppose, that their want of fit qualifications should make void their
obligations thereunto; for then it would follow, that the profanest sinners
would be chargeable with no guilt, for their ungodly neglects of the plainest
duties of God's worship, as being under no obligation to them for want of
suitable qualifications; which is an open absurdity; yea, this very defect is
their sin and fault, for what is it that may be supposed to render sinners
unqualified, or unmeet for the duty of prayer? not merely their being sinners;
for the greatest sinners praying to God in an humble, penitent, broken hearted
manner, shall, without doubt, find acceptance with him: but their being wilful
resolved sinners, securely persisting in sin, which is rather an aggravation of
their guilt than any excuse for their omission of God's worship.

Therefore,

(2) It is equally their duty to repent, believe, and pray; as the apostle
Peter directs Simon Magus, Act. viii. 22. Repent of this thy wickedness, and
pray God, etc. When sinners, therefore, are called upon to pray, it is not
meant that they should pray without repentance toward God, and faith toward
the mediator, but these graces are to be exercised in prayer, we must exercise
repentance in humiliation, and confession of sin, and faith in our
supplications for mercy in the name of Christ, which suggests another argument
whereby this duty is enfore'd. For if it be the duty of sinners to repent and
believe in Christ, as most certainly it is, then it is unquestionably their
duty to pray, for these graces are to be acted in prayer, and every man that
sets himself to repent, or makes any offer toward it, will think it his duty
to pray to God; it is one of the first and main duties in which his own
conscience will direct him to exercise repentance. And there is no incongruity
in calling upon sinners to exercise repentance and faith in their prayers to
God for the grace of repentance, and conversion, because the operations of
divine grace are no otherwise to be expected, than in concurrence with our best
endeavors in the use of the means of grace.

(3) Though sinners be not at present in a state of justification and acceptance
with God, though they have not as yet received the Spirit of adoption, enabling
them to cry, Abba, Father; yet it must be confessed, that it is much better and
safer for them to pray as well as they can, than wholly to neglect it. There is
certainly a difference to be made between wicked men, or those that are in an
unregenerate state, in respect of their prayers; and it may truly be said, that
the prayers of some sinners are more agreeable to the will of God, than those of
others. some pray only to cover their hypocrisy and wickedness, and get esteem
among people; as the pharisees, who gave alms, and prayed, that they might be
seen and have praise of men, Mat. vi. 2, 5. and for a pretense made long
prayers, Mat. xxiii. 14. Some pray in a formal manner, without any serious
desires toward God, merely from a dictate of conscience. Some pra^ for
provision for their lusts; they ask amiss, that they might consume it upon
their lusts, Jam. iv. 3. Some think by their prayers to make some compensation
for past miscarriages, that they may run on a new score; it is no wonder at all
that such prayers are an abomination to the holy God. But then it must be
acknowleged, that there are some sinners, who are put upon praying, and that in
secret, by a sense of their sinful and wretched state, and their need of a
Savior, and out of a serious concern for the welfare of their souls. And
supposing that such sinners are not yet converted, yet there are hopeful
symptoms upon them, and they are making progress toward conversion; and
certainly it is much more pleasing to God, for sinners to pray as well as they
are able, in a contrite sense of their sins and wants, and their case is more
hopeful, than if they lived in the careless omission of such an important duty
of worship and means of grace. Consider therefore,

(4) Prayer is one of those ordinances of God whereby he conveys saving grace,
and therefore to be attended by unregenerate persons, no less than the hearing
of the word, as being an appointed means of conversion; in the want of
supernatural abilities, they must improve their natural faculties, and continue
lying at the pool of Bethesda, waiting on God in outward ordinances, for the
quickening healing influences of his holy Spirit. You are directed to take with
you words, and turn to the Lord, and say unto him, take away all iniquity, etc.
Hos. xiv. 2. And in this way God may meet you, as he has met thousands, with
his gracious visits, and spiritual blessings. But this leads me to the second
particular,

2. That it is the great concern of unconverted sinners to pray for converting
grace. And having showed it to be their unquestionable duty to pray, that it is
their great concern to pray for converting grace, requires no great labor or
proof. For,

(1) Conversion and repentance is the gift of God, and not in the sinners own
power without divine grace, as has been proved, and every such gist must be
asked in prayer. Regenerating grace is a good and perfect gift that comes down
from the Father of lights. Jam. i. 17, 18 Every good gift, and every perfect
gift, is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights. Of his own will
begat he us, etc Therefore it is highly fitting, and reasonable, that if any
man lack this gift, he should ask it of God, as verse 5 If any of you lack
wisdom, or grace, let him ask of God, that gives unto all men liberally, and
upbraid^th not, and it shall be given It Is fitting that the indigent sinner
should express his desire and value of this gift; and that the donor of it
should be acknowleg'd, and the honor of his grace secured by humble and
earnest prayer.

(2) God has promised the grace of regeneration and conversion. The first
saving grace is matter of promise; it is exhibited to sinners in such promises
as these, Deuteronomy. xxx. 6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, etc. Jer.
xxxi. 33, 34. I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts -- They shall all know me from the least of them, unto the greatest,
etc. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26. A new heart will I give you, etc. Now the promises are
the rule and warrant of our prayers. To pray for what God has promised to give
is to ask according to his will, and this is the confidence that we have in
him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, be hears us, Joh v. 14.
And the promises afford great encouragement to a sinner's prayers, for hereby
it appears not only that God can work conversion if he will, but also that he
will do it for some, yea for many, and most probably for those whose hearts are
stirred up to seek unto him for it. And such is the wretchedness of an
unconverted state, that a probability of obtaining so great a blessing should
excite all to pray for it.

(3) Prayer is the means sanctified, and appointed by God for the obtaining
this gift. Among the many choice mercies promised to the church and people of
God, in Ezekiel. xxxvi. the promise of giving a new heart, and spiritual
blessings, is of principal consideration, ver. 26, 27. yet the means which God
has ordained for the accomplishment of this his promised grace, is serious and
earnest prayer; as it follows, ver. 37. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for
this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them. So Luke xi. 13 --
How much more shall your heavenly father give the holy Spirit to them that ask
him? God can indeed work grace without our prayers, and he is sometimes found
of them that sought him not Isai. lxv.i.
, in a way of sovereign preventing mercy: but though God has not tied himself to
means, so as never to work without them, yet he has so tied us to them, as that
we should never expect any saving influences from above in the neglect of them,
especially to prayer, which is a self abasing, and soul-humbling duty,
requisite and conductive to the honor of divine grace, and necessary to
prepare us for the blessed effects of it.

(4) The calls of God to repentance and conversion are designed to direct and
quicken sinners to seek his converting grace. God calls sinners to do that
which without his effectual grace they cannot do, as Ezekiel. xviii. 32 Make you a
new heart, and a new spirit: and yet it is his grace alone that must do this,
which therefore he has promised, chap. xxxvi. 26. But notwithstanding this,
God's calls to sinners to turn, and make them a new heart, are not useless and
in vain, though they labor under a moral impotency to obey these commands; but
they are designed to set them about their duty, with all seriousness, which is
the most effectual means of beating down all carnal conceits of their own
sufficiency, which they are prone to indulge, that being sensibly convinced of
their own impotency, they might humbly implore the grace of God to work that in
them which he requires of them. A man confined to a sick bed, may perhaps
sometimes imagine that he can get up, and walk, as at other times; but the
least attempt soon makes him sensible of his impotence. So sinners may imagine
that they can break off their sins by repentance, and turn to God when they
please, and can scarce believe a necessity of the almighty power and grace of
God to work a change in their hearts in order thereunto, but when they make the
attempt in good earnest, and set themselves seriously about the work of
repentance, in renouncing carnal habits, and humbling their souls unto
obedience to the will of God, they soon begin to feel their own weakness, and
need of the succors of divine grace, to carry them through a course of
repentance, in humiliation for, and mortification of sin, and in recovering
them to and establishing them in a new and holy course of life; a sense whereof
naturally and necessarily leads them to their prayers, and engages them to seek
God by humble and earnest supplications for the promised aids and influences of
his grace and Spirit. So that as the promises are designed to encourage their
compliance with the commands, so the calls and commands of the word are
designed to drive them to the promises, to seek by prayer the grace promised,
which is necessary to their effectual recovery from sin to holiness.

(5) If sinners are obliged to pray for any thing, they have the greatest
reason in the world to pray for converting grace. This is of greater necessity
and importance to their happiness, than all temporal blessings, than health,
wealth, liberty, peace, or even than their daily bread: these things serve only
to the comfort and convenience of this present mortal life, and afford no
relief to the soul against its greatest necessities, and miseries, but the
renewing and healing grace of God is necessary to the life and well being of
the immortal soul. Yea, in some sense they have more need to pray for
converting grace, than for the remission of their sins; for though this ought
to be asked of God in prayer, yet without conversion there is no possibility of
obtaining it, repentance and remission of sins being inseparably connected in
the gospel covenant But if we obtain converting grace, we are assured of the
forgiveness of sins, and of all the privileges of mercy, by the certain promise
of God. Isai lv. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, -- and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon. And if God gives repentance, he will infallibly bestow
remission of sins: for he has exalted his Son Jesus Christ, with his right
hand, to be a prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sins, Act. v. 31. Thus you see how much it is the concern of the
unconverted to pray for converting grace.

Now then, let all unconverted ones, and all those that have just grounds to
fear that they are yet in their sins, and strangers to the new birth, suffer
the word of exhortation to prevail with them.

Be excited in a sense of duty and interest, to put forth endeavors, and cry
mightily to the God of all grace for his effectual renewing, quick^ning,
heart-changing grace, which is necessary to your turning from sin, and living
to God; beg of him to give you repentance (as well as forgiveness of sins) by
the operation of his Spirit, and through the merit of his Son's blood. To that
end,

1. Think often and seriously, of the miseries of your condition whilst
unconverted; the wrath and curse of God abides on you Joh. iii. 36.
: and without conversion there is no pardon, no peace with God, no salvation,
no possibility of escaping the perdition of hell. Christ has told you once, and
again, Luke xiii. 3, 5. That except ye repent, ye shall perish: and without the
effectual grace of God, you never will repent, or be converted. The carnal
mind, and will, is enmity against God, opposite to all holiness, Romans viii. 7.
and will for ever continue so, unless divine grace work a change in the bias
and inclination of your souls. As it is said, through faith ye are saved Ephesians.
ii. 8.
, so through conversion ye are saved, and that not of yourselves, it is the gift
of God. Let such thoughts as these dwell on your minds day and night, when you
rise up and when you lie down, to quicken your importunities at the throne of
grace, for divine mercy and grace in Christ to succor the pressing necessities
of your souls. And consider further,

2. If the present accepted time be neglected, you will cry in vain when it
will be too late. They that turn their back upon God all their days, yet in the
time of their trouble, they will say, arise, and save us, Jer. ii. 27. In a
time of distress or sickness, or under the near approach of death, sinners will
cry to God for mercy, if their consciences be not fearfully stupefied; a sense
of their necessities will urge and constrain them to it; which shows, that it
is mere security and obstinacy, that they do not now pray as well as when
distress comes, that they do not now lay to heart their spiritual necessities,
and stir up themselves to seek God, while he may be found a prayer hearing God:
and for the neglect hereof, God threatens that they shall cry and not be heard.
Prove. i. 24, -- 28. Because I have called (viz. verse 23. Turn thou at my
reproof) and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand in the offers and
promises of grace (such as, behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you, ver.
23.) and no man regarded etc. then it follows, I also will laugh at your
calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, -- then shall they call upon me,
but I will not answer; they shall seek me early but they shall not find me.
Again consider,

3. If you perish without the grace of God, it will evidently appear that your
destruction is of your selves. Though you cannot save yourselves, nor in order
thereunto recover yourselves out of your miserable degeneracy by a true
repentance without the efficacious working of divine grace; yet since God
offers you this grace, and is ready to confer it, and waits but for your humble
and earnest seeking for it. Mat. vii. 7, 8. Ask, and it shall be given you etc.
for every one that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him
that knocks, it shall be opened. Which words of our Savior imply, that none
that ever set themselves in good earnest to seek the grace of God, and
continued importunate, at the door of mercy, have been rejected, but have
obtained their suit; for every one that asks, receives: since, I say, this
grace is to be had for asking by importunate prayer, if you will not be
persuaded to do thus much, you must needs inexcusably perish; it will appear
that God has done for you all that becomes him, as a wise and gracious ruler to
do for his worthless, revolted creatures, to prevent their being lost for ever;
and the blame of your perdition will lie wholly at your own door; because you
despised the grace of God, whilst it might have been obtained, not esteeming it
worth asking; how justly may Christ then upbraid you with your folly, in your
contempt and refusal of his grace, as the cause of your eternal. ruin, You
would not come unto me, that you might have life, Joh. v. 40.

How sad is it, sinner, (if thou believe these things) that the consideration
of the misery and danger of a sinful state, will not press out one sigh or
groan from thy heart, or excite thee to offer up one cry, to breath out one
fervent desire to the Father of mercies (who alone is ready and able to pity
and help thee) from one week, or month, or year, to another? and how much more
lamentable is thy case, the less it is lamented by thee?

But if by these considerations, I might prevail with any to engage in the
serious practice of the duty exhorted to; let me proceed to counsel and direct
you in a few words,

1. Consider well what it is you must aim at in your prayers and endeavors
after conversion. I have endeavored by some brief hints, to obviate your
mistakes about conversion. If you imagine, that no more is intended in it than
a forsaking some sinful customs, or refraining from gross scandals, or leading
a life visibly blameless in the eyes of men, or of common professors, or
putting on a form of godliness, and keeping up a course of external religious
duties (all which a mere hypocrite may do (to outward appearance) as well as a
true saint) you will scarce see any need of the physician of souls, or any need
of the healing grace of God, or of earnest supplications for that grace to
repair the distempered frame of your souls. But you must know, that conversion
consists in the recovery of your souls to the life of God, from which you are
naturally estranged; your understanding and judgments must be renewed unto a
through conviction of the evil of sin, and of the vanity of the world, and the
insufficiency of all its enjoyments, of all the pleasures, profits, and honors
of it to relieve you against your greatest miseries, or to make you truly
happy; and of your absolute need of Christ, and of his superlative worth, and
excellency, and sufficiency to answer all your spiritual necessities and
disires; the bent of your wills must be turned to choose and love God in Christ
as your chief good, in opposition to the world, and the idols of it; the
prevailing aim of your lives both in duties of worship, and in common
conversation, must be to please God, by approving your hearts to him, in a
strict course of obedience and spiritual devotion to him; your affections must
be displaced, taken off from things on earth, and set on the things above. In a
word, the image of Christ must be formed in the heart, and the whole soul must
be endowed with such a spiritual, divine temper, as may qualify it for
complacential converses with God, and render it meet to see and enjoy him in
heaven. Nothing short of this must be your aim, when you set yourselves to pray
for the grace of God to renew and convert you, for the effecting whereof you
will see a necessity of the greatest importunity in your addresses to the
throne of grace, for the heavenly influences of the divine Spirit. Therefore,

2. You must pray with deep humiliation in a sense of the miseries of your
carnal natures It Is a requisite of acceptable prayer, that a man should know
the plague of his own heart, 1 King. viii. 38 This plague of the heart, is the
corruption and depravity of the degenerate soul of man, which admits of various
denominations, according to the different respects in which it stands in
opposition to the blessed God; (for the aversion of the heart from God, and its
opposition to him, is the great disease of all humane souls, since the fall)
With respect to God as creator, the plague of the heart is ignorance,
blindness, atheism, unbelief, whereby men are taken off from a dependence on
God as the first cause. It is an evil heart of unbelief that discovers itself
in departing from the living G^d Heb. iii. 12.
. With respect to God as a sovereign Lord and ruler, the plague of heart is
obstinacy, hardness of heart, the enmity of the carnal mind, the rebellion of
the appetites and passions against the law of the mind, the unsubmissiveness of
the will, murmuring, impatience, and discontent, whereby man withdraws his
allegiance from God. With respect to God, as the chief good, the plague of
heart is hatred of God, weariness of God, creature love, inordinate affections
to earthly things, the pleasures, profits, and enjoyments of the world, whereby
men are carried away from their true happiness in God, as the supreme
benefactor. With respect to God as the final cause, this plague of heart is
self-love, self-esteem, self-seeking, pride, ambition, vainglory, and the
like, whereby man arrogates to himself the glory and praise that is due to God
alone, as the last end. Now every unrenewed soul is deeply infected with this
plague in the understanding, spiritual darkness, cursed prejudices against
truth and holiness, in the will stubbornness and disobedience, in the
affections, carnal lust, and raging passions, envy, wrath, malice; of which
plague, nothing but the regenerating grace of God can effectually work a cure;
and in praying for this grace, you must labor to be sensible of, and deeply
lament these distempers of your souls. Till a man comes to know, and have some
experience of the plague of his own heart all his prayers will be flat and
cold, and undertaken but for form sake: but when he once begins to feel his
disease, and to have a true sense of this heart plague, then the spiritual
physician will be valued and desired to good purpose, then he may be supposed
to pray as one in earnest, with life and fervency, as knowing that no cure is
to be expected but from a divine hand; then he will cry out, Lord, give me thy
holy Spirit, to renew and heal my diseased soul, to take away this plague, or
else I shall pine away under it, and perish for ever from thy presence; Lord,
heal me and I shall be healed, etc. Thus you must humble yourselves before God,
not only for some particular sins of life which may lie heavy on your
consciences, and you can have no rest till you have confessed them to God, and
sought forgiveness; this indeed ought to be done, but you must go on with your
confession and humiliation to the fountain whence these impure streams issue
forth, which is a corrupt nature; and confess to God, not only against thee
have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, Psalm. li. 4. but also, behold I
was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, ver 5. Humble
yourselves likewise in a sense of your utter insufficiency to renew or recover
yourselves from the maladies and miseries of a carnal state; and of your utter
unworthiness of any relief or help from God; humbly refer yourselves to his
compassions, and acknowledge that all your expectations are from his free grace.

3. Pray in faith. Jam. i. 6. Let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. Say not,
faith is God's gift in the work of conversion, for though it be the work of God,
yet it must also be the act of the sinner, and is necessary as the foundation
of all your religious addresses to God; for he that comes unto God must
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently se^k him,
Heb. xi. 6. And you are bound to believe and to exercise faith in prayer, and
therefore in a sense of du^y, you must exert your best endeavors; and in this
way you may expect relief from the supernatural influences of divine grace;
pray therefore, as you are able, with faith in the promises of grace, such as
those beforementioned. By faith plead the power of God, whereby he is able to
make good his promises, Lord if thou will thou can change my heart of stone
into an heart of flesh; to me it is impossible, but not to thee, for with thee
all things are possible. Plead the truth and faithfulness of God in his
promises, whereby he is engaged to make them good, Lord, I could have no hope
or encouragement, to ask at thy hands, the great and precious gift of thy grace
and Spirit, but that thou have spoken such a word as this, I will give a new
heart, etc. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh Joh. ii. 28.
; therefore have I found in my heart 2 Samuel vii. 27.
to make this the matter of my request to thee; will thou frustrate the hope
and expectation that thy word has raised in a sinner's heart? O let not thy
word of promise fail.

Particularly, you must exercise faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and have
an eye in all your addresses to God, to the powerful mediation of our Savior,
through whose hands all saving gifts and spiritual blessings are dispensed out
unto men; and since God has commissioned and empowered him to give repentance,
and remission of sins, and it is his voice that quickens those that are dead in
sin, for as the father has life in himself, so has he given to the son, to
have life in himself Joh. v. 25, 26.
, and was pleased, that in him all fullness should dwell, for the renovation and
reconciliation of fallen sinners Col i. 19, 20.
therefore you must seek to him for the blessings of his grace, to turn you
from your iniquities, and to work a cure on your souls. Take encouragement from
the instances of the power, and compassions of our Lord Jesus (extant in the
gospels) in healing bodily infirmities, to bring your diseased souls to him by
faith and prayer, expecting the saving influences of his Spirit, those healing
beams of the Sun of righteousness. How ready and able was he, when on earth, to
heal the various maladies and distempers of men's bodies? did he ever deny the
request of any one that sought him for such a mercy? Believe then, that (seeing
spiritual cures are now more especially the work and business of the great
physician) he is as able and ready, and compassionately inclined, to bless your
souls with the healing influences of his grace, upon your serious application
to him, in a sense of your spiritual wants and maladies, and with confidence in
his wisdom, ability and compassion; address him in the language of the leper,
Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean Mat. viii. 2.
, and be encouraged to hope, that he will say unto thee, as to him, I will be
thou clean, and then thou shall be purged from thy spiritual leprosy. Only
believe, for as Jesus said to the father of him that was possessed, if thou
can believe, all things are possible to him that believes Mark ix. 23.
: (the almighty power of the great Savior to which every saving work is
possible, being engaged by faith). Trust your spiritual physician, follow all
his prescriptions, and doubt not of success.

4. You must pray with earnestness and constancy. Be very importunate at the
throne of grace; the necessities of your souls, require the greatest
earnestness and vigor in your supplications, beg as for your lives, that God
would give you the saving grace of his holy Spirit. It may be you will say, I
have often prayed to this purpose, but still I find my corruptions and lusts as
strong as ever, and my heart as little subdued to the will of God as before.
But it may be thus only in your own sense, and apprehension, and you may
perhaps be more sensible of the power of sin and corruption than before, which
is often the case of sinners under a work of illumination. But if this be
really the case, the true reason may be because you do not stir up yourselves
to earnestness in prayer, but perform the duty in a formal heartless manner,
rather from a dictate of conscience, that you ought not to leave it undone,
than from the inward sense of your minds and desire of your souls in a sense of
indigence and want. If therefore you would succeed in your supplications, stir
up warm and earnest desires toward God, wrestle through discouragements, say
with Jacob, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me Genesis xxxii. 26.
, with the blessing of a renewed healed soul. Our Savior has, in several
parables, recommended and encouraged importunity in prayer; particularly Luke
xi. 5, -- 9. And he said unto them, which of you shall have a friend, and shall
go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves; for a
friend of mine in his journey is come unto me, and I have nothing to set before
him: and he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not, the door is now
shut, and my children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee. I say
unto you, though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend; yet
because of his importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needs The
scope and design of which parable, is declared in the words immediately
subjoined; and I say unto you, ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. And the particular blessing
he directs us there to ask, is the gift of the holy Spirit, ver. 13. the author
of all saving grace. The parable is not so to be understood, as if the blessed
God needed our importunity, or was moved by it (as men are) to do that which he
is unwilling to do otherwise; but it is designed to show the success of
importunity in our prayers, and its prevailing efficacy for the obtaining mercy
from God, not by making him more willing to give, but by making our own hearts
more fit and prepared to receive the blessing asked.

Again, you must be frequent and constant in prayer. It is not sufficient once,
or twice, in a pang of devotion, to make a fervent prayer for grace, but you
must continue in prayer Col. iv. 2. Luke xviii. 1. Ephesians. vi. 18.
with persevering importunity, cry day and night unto God, and not give over,
until he shall have mercy on your souls.

Lastly, Let your prayers for converting grace be followed with answerable
endeavors in the work of conversion. This direction indeed would be
superfluous, if sinners might be persuaded to be importunately desirous of
their own conversion; for is it possible to desire any thing very earnestly,
and to sit still without suitable endeavors? if it be not so in temporal
concerns, it is a delusion if we imagine it will be of any more force in the
matters of our souls. In praying to God for his grace to turn you from sin to
holiness, you admonish yourselves of what must be your aim and endeavor in the
course of your lives. If you revert to your former loose vain behavior, you do
in effect deny, and retract your own prayers: and can you then think, that God
will have any regard to them? Though you cannot turn yourselves, without the
special grace of God, yet he expects, that you should frame your doing to turn
to him Hos. v. 4.
: and if you will not do what you may and can do by the improvement of your
natural faculties, and the common aids of the Spirit, it will be just with God
to deny you his special grace; and if you be not converted and healed, the
blame will for ever lie on yourselves. Set yourselves therefore in a dependence
on divine grace, to watch and strive against sin, and to reform ill habits, and
break off from bad company, diligently attend the means of grace, commune often
with your own hearts, and consider your ways; come to a point at last, and be
fully resolved and determined for God, and holiness, and heaven: and desist not
till the work be completed, that is, till you have prevailed with yourselves
seriously and prayerfully, understandingly and deliberately, to come into a
covenant dedication of yourselves to GOD the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be
his entirely, to trust in, love, and serve him, and to be pardoned, and
sanctified, ruled, and saved by him eternally. And let this be done, 1.
Privately, in secret transactions between God and your own souls. 2. Publicly,
in the presence of his people. And 3. Practically, in a life of holiness and
devotedness to God. Now arise, and be doing, and the Lord be with thee 1 Chronicles.
xxii. 16.
.

This may suffice for the first branch of exhortation, which, being mainly
designed, I have the more largely insisted on. I proceed now in a few words, to
press the exhortation,

Secondly, On true converts themselves, who after grace received, are still
concerned, to pray for the grace of God to convert and recover them from their
backslidings, or decays of grace, they may have fallen into. For if conversion
be the acting of the life of grace, in repentance toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, as I have showed; and if the grace of God works,
not only in conferring gracious habits in regeneration, but in drawing forth
those habits into exercise in actual conversion, and repentance; (as appears
from Phil. ii. 13.) then it is not at all unbecoming the regenerate themselves
to make this prayer in the text, turn thou me, and I shall be turned. Because,
as sin remains in them, and too often breaks out into act, so they have need of
turning more and more unto God every day of their lives, and it is by his grace
that they are enabled so to do, which therefore must be sought by daily prayer;
especially in these two cases, 1. Under declinings of the spiritual life. When
they find in themselves a dullness, heaviness, and straitness of spirit, and
indispositions unto and in holy duties, and the life and vigor of grace under
decays, when they have lost much of their spiritual savor, and there is an
abatement of that love and delight which they once had in the things of God,
and in their converses with him in the word, prayer, and the sacrament, and
carnal affections sadly prevail; then it is time to cry out with the psalmist,
in his complaint and prayer, Psalm. cx.x. 25. My soul ^leaveth unto the dust;
quicken thou me according to thy word; and ver 32. I will run the way of thy
commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart: and with the spouse, Cant i. 4.
Draw me, we will run after thee It Is God's promise, not only to put his Spirit
within us, but to cause us to walk in his statutes, etc. Ez^k. xxxvi. 27. We
must pray therefore for the powerful co-operations of the Spirit of grace,
without which we cannot move, much less ^un after him. When we are fallen from
our first love, we must repent, and do our first works Rev. ii. 4, 5.
, and own our dependence on divine grace for our recovery: the life of our
souls lies in a close dependence on God through Christ, by faith, for as we
depend upon him as the God of nature, not only for our natural lives, but for
every motion and action of life; so we must depend on him as the God of grace,
for all the acts of the spiritual life, and for the preservation, progress, and
increase of it, for in him we live, move, and have our being Acts xvii. 28.
in the spiritual, as well as natural sense. And we must express this our
dependence, by continual humble prayer, under decays, more especially, we must
look up to God in Christ, and earnestly supplicate for the revival of his work
in our hearts, by fresh influences from above: to which purpose, that prayer of
the church (which speaks the language of the text) may be (not improperly)
used, in Lam v. 21. Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned:
renew our days as of old. 2. When they fall into any sin; against which they
have no absolute security by grace received, nor by the promises of the
covenant of grace; for there is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and
sins not, Eccl. vii. 20. And as the falls of the saints on scripture record
do testify, in such cases they must be converted anew. Mat. xviii. 3. Verily I
say unto you, except ye be converted, said Christ to his own disciples (when
they discovered a frame of spirit unsuitable to the gospel state, in aspiring
after the pre-eminence) and become as little children, ye shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Conversion therefore is twofold; a conversion from a
state of sin, which is the first conversion of a finner, when he is turned from
darkness to light, and from the power of sin and satan unto God: and a
conversion from the acts of sin, which is incumbent on all regenerate
believers, as often as they fall into sin, or suffer any carnal lust to prevail
in their hearts. Peter's recovery from his fall, is called his conversion, Luk
xxii. 32. therefore they must begin the work of repentance anew, and implore
the efficacious influences of divine grace, to assist them in it. As David,
after his fall, begs of God new creating grace. Psalm. li 10 Create in me a
clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me; as if the work of grace
had but then its beginning, and the new creature were then first to be formed
in his soul; for the same effectual grace is necessary to reduce the
backsliding children of God, that was put forth in their first conversion; for
however certain the perseverance of believers is unto the kingdom of glory, yet
it is a truth, that if the grace of God does not recover them from their falls,
they shall yet perish; but this grace is secured to them by the promises of the
new covenant J^r. iii. 19 Chap xxxii. 40.1 Cor i. 8, 9. Chap. x. 13.1 The^ v.
24. Ph^^. i. 6.
, and by prayer as the means of their accomplishment; therefore you must live
in a daily sense of your dependence on the power of divine grace, to work all
your works in and for you, and in a believing dependence on it, must work out
your salvation with fear and trembling: and in the cases I have mentioned
especially, you must stir up yourselves to supplicate the powerful influences,
and aids of the Spirit of grace, in order to your being converted, and renewed
again by repentance, with as much earnestness, and importunity, as ever you did
in your first return to God from the wanderings of your unregenerate state: and
you have a prayer to this purpose, indicted by the Spirit of God, Psalm. cxix
176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy servant: for I do not
forget thy commandments But I purpose not to enlarge here. I should now proceed
to press this duty,


Thirdly, On parents in covenant with God to pray for their unconverted
children. And,

Fourthly, On the unconverted children of the covenant in particular, to pray
for the grace of God to convert and turn them to himself, taking encouragement
from their visible covenant relation to him as their God.

But these two branches of the exhortation will come in with better advantage,
under the consideration of the argument pleaded in the text.

I shall now therefore, suggest some motives proper to enforce the exhortation,
and encourage sinners to pray to God for his renewing, healing, and converting
grace. And they are of two sorts, First, Such as are common to all unconverted
sinners. Secondly, Such as are peculiar to the unconverted children of the
covenant; which will lead me to take some notice of the argument in our text to
enforce the petition, -- for thou art the Lord my God.

First, I shall propound some motives and encouragements, that are common to
all unconverted sinners, who are awakened to any serious concern about their
condition, and would be glad to know what hope there is in the God of Israel
concerning them.

If, therefore, the serious consideration of the miseries of your unconverted
state, and your own insufficiency to turn yourselves, and of the necessity of
divine grace to turn you, has wrought in you an inclination and willingness to
seek that grace, you have great encouragement set before you, to hope for the
success of your supplications, and that you shall not seek in vain.

1. You have great encouragement from the merciful and gracious nature of God,
whereby he is disposed to do good, and bestow his favors freely, without
regard to any merit or defect in the creature Psalm. cxl^. 9. The Lord is good
to all; and his tender mercies are over all his works Luke vi. 35 -- He is kind
unto the unthankful, and the evil Consider what God has done for you as a
bountiful creator and benefactor, in a way of preventing mercy; he has end^w'd
you with a reasonable immortal soul, capable of communion with himself, both
here and in eternal glory: and will he not have regard to the desires and
aspirations of such a soul, toward himself, in order to the attaining the end
of its creation? yea he complains of the wretched stupidity of the children of
men, in not improving those excellent faculties he has given them, in enquiring
after their maker. Job xxxv. 10, 11. But none says, where is God my maker, --
who teaches us more than the beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser than the
fowls of heaven Consider also, while you have been persisting in sin, and
disobedience against him, how merciful and kind he has been to you; it is he
that feeds and clothes you, that heals your diseases, and preserves you from
innumerable destructive accidents, that holds your souls in life, and suffers
not your feet to be moved; and makes so many of the inferior creatures
serviceable to your comfort: yea, more than all this, he has sent his Son to
die for you, and his gospel to invite you to mercy, and his Spirit to thrive
with you, to bring you home to himself; and all this he has done without your
asking, or desiring. And can you suppose, that so gracious a God will deny you
his saving converting grace, when you cry unto him? He hears the inferior
creatures who in their way cry to him for food and sustenance. Psalm. cxlvii 9
He gives the beast his food, and the young ravens which cry; and will he not
much more hear his reasonable creatures, especially when they cry to him not
for corn and win^, not for provision for their lusts, but for grace to serve
and glorify him, to enable them to answer the end for which they were made?
It Is an argument of great force in prayer, to plead the general pity and bounty
of God, for special grace to relieve the souls necessities: as Psalm. cxix. 64
The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes. q. d. Lord,
thou art good to all the creatures according to their necessities, and
capacities, and will thou withhold what the necessity of my soul craves at thy
hands? will thou not afford me instruction and guidance from thy word, which is
more needful to me, and which I choose and prize above all earthly blessings?
Thou feedest the young ravens that cry, with food proper for them; and will thou not feed me with spiritual food, the bread of life, which my soul needs,
and craves, and cannot subsist without Mr. HENRY in loc.
. Such a plea cannot but avail much with God, he cannot but be pleased with
such desires of his creatures, who confiding in his gracious nature, and
readiness to give liberally to all, fix their choice on such mercies, as he is
more ready to give, and has more pleasure in giving, than any temporal
commodities, health, wealth, and prosperity; these he often distributes in
anger; as when the Israelites asked meat for their lusts, he gave them their
request, but sent leanness into their soul, Psalm. cvi. 15. But the gift of his
Spirit and grace, is a gift that proceeds from pure love; and therein he
fulfils all the good pleasure of his goodness 2 These. 1.11.
. The gifts of grace come freely, and readily from him; he satisfies his good
pleasure, and takes delight in the communication of them. And for our
encouragement to ask the holy Spirit, our Savior, that he might root out of
our minds, those unworthy conceits we are apt to entertain of the blessed God,
as if he were hardly drawn, or with great difficulty prevailed with, to bestow
his gifts of special grace, has assured us that he is much more wise, and kind,
ready and willing, to give his holy Spirit to humble importunate seekers, than
earthly parents are to give good gifts unto their children. Luk xi 11, 13. If a
son shall ask bread of any of you, who is a father, will he give him a stone?
No surely, he must have an heart of stone indeed, who will deny his child
bread, when he needs it, and asks it, -- if ye then, being evil (as the best
parents are in comparison with God, who only is good; yea the worst of men, who
have the least moral good in them, have yet ordinarily so much natural
goodness, as to be kind to their children) know how to give good gists unto
your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to
them that ask him? Our Savior here, has taught us to argue from the bowels of
the fathers of our flesh, to the comp^ssions of the Father of spirits, much
after the manner of the psalmist's reasoning, Psalm. xciv. 9, 10 He that planted
the ear, shall not he hear? he that formed the eye, shall not he see? -- he
that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? i. e. He has all the virtues and
perfections of creatures, in himself, in a super-eminent manner; so here, he
that has put so much compassion into the heart of a father, shall not he have
the compassions of a father, infinitely, and transcendently in himself? He has
infinite wisdom to choose what is best for us, and infinite goodness to bestow
it on all that ask him, and that is his holy Spirit, which is comprehensive of
all good things; (compare Mat. vii. 11) thus ready and willing is God as a
Father, to give the grace of his holy Spirit, which is necessary to conversion
and sanctification, to poor, humble, importunate supplicants.

But you will say, if I were a child of God, I could take more encouragement
from his fatherly love and compassions, but I am a sinner, and an enemy.

But does not this argue, that you have so much the more need of his Spirit to
renew, and heal, and sanctify you for his service? You are a sinner, but you
desire to be a repenting, returning sinner; an enemy, but you desire to become
a willing subject; and are you not sensible of your want of his Spirit? and
has God excluded any sensible sinner from this encouragement to ask, which is
grounded on his paternal goodness and pity? Consider he is your Father by
creation, if not by regeneration and adoption. And this is the argument I am
now upon, God's kindness to his creatures. Our Savior, in the parable of the
prodigal's return to his father, has instructed you to eye God as a father in
your penitent re^urn to him; though he be an offended father, yet is he ready to
show himself in and through Christ a reconciled father, upon your repentance:
therefore you may and ought humbly and penitently, to address him in the
language of the prodigal, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before
thee, etc. Luke 15.18, 19. And you may hope to find that pity and compassion
with him, that is very affectingly represented, by the kind reception the
returning prodigal met with from his father.

2 You have encouragement to ask this grace, from the wisdom, power and
goodness of God in your creation. This I touched under the former head, as an
argument of his general bounty to his creatures; I would urge it here, as an
encouragement and plea, that may be used with God in prayer, for his grace to
recover us out of our degeneracy, that we may know, and love, and serve him
with all our powers and capacities; because we are his creatures, made f^r his
service and glory Psalm. cxix. 73. Thy ^ands have made me, and sa^h^oned (...):
give me understanding that I may learn thy commandments: this is a plea that
may be used by sinners as well as saints: our being God's creatures, the work
of his hands, should be an encouragement to us, and may be pleaded in prayer to
God for wisdom, and grace to enable us to serve him as now creatures.

(1) You have encouragement hereto, from the consideration of the creating
wisdom of God; which is seen in appointing every creature its use and end, and
in fitting them with proper qualities, and dispositions to serve their several
ends Now the end of man is to serve and glorify God by active homage and
obedience, as becomes a reasonable creature; and though our fall has disordered
our faculties and laid us under an incapacity, yet it has not dissolved our
obligation to serve the end of our creation; and since there is provision made
of new creating grace in Jesus Christ, the redeemer of fallen man, we may the
more confidently ask this grace, which is necessary to our answering the end we
were made for, that we may not appear to be made in vain, that God would form
us anew for himself, that we might show forth his praise; that we may be his
workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before
ordained (which I conceive is meant of our original obligation by our first
creation) that we should walk in them, Ephesians. ii. 10. This is to ask what has an
immediate tendency to the honor and glory of God.

(2) From the consideration of the creating power of God. He that formed us at
first, though now we are deformed by sin, can easily form us anew by the same
power; though we are fallen from him, and by our fall have marred the work of his
hands, and cannot of ourselves recover the original rectitude of our natures,
yet God that once made man upright, can new make him. Though we see nothing but
ruin and disorder in our souls, blindness in the understanding, obstinacy in
the will, rebellion in the affections and appetites, against the dictates of
conscience, yet despair not of a reparation, the creating power of God, to
which all things are possible, is a great support to faith in prayer. Create in
me a clean heart, O God, Psalm li. 10. The God whom we pray to is able to
create, to bring order out of confusion, beauty out of deformity, light out of
darkness, and to rear up to himself living temples out of the ruins of man's
apostasy: what we cannot do for ourselves, and what no creature can do for us,
that God can do; for nothing is too hard for creating power.

(3) From the consideration of the creating goodness of God. For his good
pleasure all things are, and were created, Rev. iv. 11. He could have no other
motive to create, but his sovereign good will and pleasure; unworthiness
therefore should by no means discourage you from asking new creating grace.
It Is true we deserve not the least grace from God, otherwise it were not grace:
but as God created us without regard to any merit of ours, of his mere good
pleasure; so though we deserve nothing, yet we may be encouraged to ask the grace
of renovation, from the same free unmerited goodness of God, that at first gave
us our beings. But,

3. You have encouragement from the fullness and perfection of Christ's
satisfaction. 1 John ii. 2. He is the propitiation for our sins; and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. Christ's propitiatory
sacrifice has so far appeased God toward mankind in general, as to lay the
foundation of a general invitation and offer of grace to all sinners, to
encourage them to come to God by him, by repentance, faith and prayer 2 Cor. v.
19. Heb vii. 25.
. This is a great matter, yea the very foundation of a sinner's hope toward
God: for otherwise we could have no confidence to look up to an holy God in
prayer for any mercy, guilt would fly in our faces, and our own consciences
would tell us, that we have nothing to expect from a righteous God, whom we
have so highly offended, but wrath and judgment. Therefore the unenlighten'd
souls of men are represented to be at a woeful loss how they should come before
the great God in an acceptable manner. Mic vi 6, 7. Wherewith shall I come
before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? shall I come before him
with burnt offerings? -- will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams? etc.
But now the terror of divine justice is veiled in Christ, in whom God appears
sitting on a throne of grace, inviting sinners to come to him in the name and
mediation of his Son, and to lay open their wants, and make known their
requests to him for mercy, and grace to help them in their time of need, Heb.
iv. 14, 16. Particularly, Christ has (by being made a sacrifice, and a curse
for us) so far atoned the incensed justice of God, and secured the honor of
his other attributes, that he is pleased to open the rich treasures of his
grace to men, and is ready to impart the gift of his Spirit unto men, even to
the rebellious, to subdue, convert, and sanctify them to himself Gal. iii. 13,
14 Psalm. lxviii. 18.
So that all things are now ready on God's part, and Christ's part, since he
has made full satisfaction by his death, and nothing is wanting but a
willingness on thy part, to come to him by serious believing prayer for his
offered grace. And this consideration should both direct you how to pray for
converting grace, or the gift of his Spirit to renew and sanctify you, you must
ask it in the name of Christ, through whose mediation by sacrifice, and
intercession it is dispensed unto sinners J^h. xiv, 14, 16.
: and it should also encourage you to pray for it, in an humble, penitent,
believing manner, because if you do thus pray, your guilt and unworthiness
shall be no bar to the acceptance of your prayers with God, who is ready for
the sake of Christ's satisfaction and intercession, to give his holy Spirit to
them that ask him.

4 You have encouragement from the general promises of the gospel; such as Joh.
vi. 37. Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Chap vii. 37, 38,
39. If any man thi^st, let him come unt^ me and drink. He that believes on me,
as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall fl^w rivers of living water;
but this sp^k^ he of the Spirit, etc. and many others. You must come to him for
the first grace; for he has full power to give the Spirit, and to give
repentance Act. i^. 33. Chap v. 31.
. Come therefore to Christ in the way of humble, believing supplication, and he
has given his word that he will not reject you, yea that he will give abundant
satisfaction to your desires.

5. You have encouragement from a probability or possibility of prevailing.
Isai. lv. 6. Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found. If God may be found by a
sinner's seeking, if he may obtain mercy, and find grace, to supply his soul's
necessities, this should be a prevailing motive with you to seek him earnestly.
In times of danger and distress, a mere peradventure has been thought a
sufficient inducement to the duty of prayer; and when prayer has been made upon
no greater encouragement, it has prevailed See Exodus xxxi. 3^. Jon iii 8, 9.
and certainly an unconverted state is a most dangerous state, the necessities
of the soul are exceeding deplorable, if you lie still in your sopine
negligence and sloth, there is no remedy, but you must pine away, and perish
for ever in your in quiti^s; but (...) ^here be but a peradventure of
succeeding in your, praye^ for the grace of God; should not this excite you to
do your best, and pray with all the earnestness you are able? It may be that
God will have mercy upon you that you perish not; it may be, that you may
obtain his effectual renewing grace, and then you will be happy for ever: let
such a thought as this put life into your endeavors, and pravers. But indeed
there is more than a have possibility of your succeeding, if you he import up
^e and constant in your supplications; if you cry day and night unto God for
has grace, you shall without all (...) prev^^^^ what else is the me^^ing of
that promise of our Savior? L^k xi. 9, 10. 'so^ecited.

6. You have encouragement from the examples and experiences of other sinners.
Prayer has always been the practice of sinners in their first conversion to
God; and many ('it is not to be doubted) have received the first saving
impressions from the Spirit of God in the duty of prayer: and some of the
vilest and unwo^thiest sinners, have sought, and found mercy and grace to help
them in their exigencies. I might mention several on scripture record; such as
Manasseh (2 Chronicles. xxxiii 12, 13.) Saul (Act. ix II) the publican (Luk xviii.
13, 14) but I shall only propose to your consideration, the instance before us,
Ephraim is brought in making a most penitential prayer, and the compassions of
God are set forth in a very lively manner toward him: to which there is scarce
a parallel in the whole scriptures (as I have observed) unless it be in the
parable of the prodigal returning to his father, and the affectionate embraces
he received from him upon his return, Luke xv. 20, 21. etc. So here God
discovers the heart of a compassionate father toward his returning prodigal
child, ver. 20 Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I
spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are
troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

I shall only add, that if by all these considerations, sinners might be
prevailed with to pour out their h^arts in prayer to God, as they have been
directed, it would be no small evidence of a good work already begun in them,
which must be carried on toward perfection in a course of serious and fervent
supplications: for this is one of the first discoveries of the Spirit of grace
poured out on any soul; the Spirit of grace will be a Spirit of supplication.
Zech. xii. 10.
.

And why should all these motives and encouragements lose their efficacy upon
you? Remember, sinners, that it is a limited time, and but of a short duration,
that the golden scepter is extended, that God offers his grace and mercy to
you, which may be obtained by your importunate entreaties at tho throne of
grace: and is this season to be trifled away in security and indolence? If you
neglect this day of your opportunity, through remissness and sloth, it may be
over before you are aware; and then how wretched and desperate will your
condition be to eternity? If death seize you before conversion, no tongue can
tell, or heart conceive, the miseries that shall come upon you, you will die in
your sins, and lie under the curse and wrath of God for ever, eternally
banished from this world, and from the presence of God in heaven, unto the
regions of darkness, where none but devils and damned spirits have their abode.
But it is impossible to describe the horrors of those wretched souls, that are
hurried out of this world before they are savingly converted to God. O then be
persuaded to know and consider in this your day, the things which belong unto
your peace, before they are hid from your eyes Luke xix. 42.
.

Secondly, I come now to offer a word of encouragement more peculiar to the
unconverted children of the covenant: suggested to us in the third point of
observation from the argument in the text, viz.

That the unconverted children of the covenant have great encouragement to pray
for converting grace, from their covenant interest, and propriety in God as
their God.

Backsliding Israel, under the name of Ephraim, is here represented, as owning
their covenant obligations to God, and claiming a covenant interest in him, as
their God, improving it as an argument in prayer to him for his effectual grace
to recover them from their backslidings, that he might receive, and own them as
his peculiar people, and show himself their God. Turn thou me, -- for thou art
the Lord my God This prayer, and plea, may be accommodated for the
encouragement of all the children of the covenant, who are in an unconverted
state, in setting about the work of repentance, humbly, earnestly, and
believingly to seek the grace of the covenant, which is necessary to their
effectual conversion. I shall endeavor in a few words, to show the propriety
and force of this plea.

1. By the children of the covenant, I mean all that are born in the church of
parents in visible covenant with God, and are brought under the initiating seal
of the covenant, viz. circumcision under the old testament, and baptism under
the new: wherein as God engages to be their God, so they come under a solemn
covenant dedication to him, to be his children and servants. Thus all the seed
of Israel were the children of the covenant under the old testament, by virtue
of God's premise and command to Abraham and his seed. Gen xvii^. 7, 9 I will
establ^sh my covenant between me, and thee, and thy seed after thee -- to be a
God to thee and to thy seed after thee. -- Thou shall keep my covenant
therefore, then, and thy seed after thee in their generations. H^^ce the
apostle Peter preaching the gospel to the J^^^s, the natural posterity of
Abraham, styles them the children of the covenant, as they were the visible
heirs of the covenant and promise God made to Abraham. Acts iii. 25. Ye are the
children of the prophets, and of the covenant, which God made with our fathers,
etc. And it is no less evident, that the children of christian parents under
the evangelical dispensation, are in like manner, children of the covenant; for
the christian church succeeds the church of Israel, in the possession of all
the main privileges of their covenant: particularly, that the blessing of
Abraham, consisting in God's promise to be his God, and the God of his seed,
comes upon the families of the Gentiles, through faith in Christ, is plainly
declared, Gal iii. 14. And the apostle Peter holds forth the covenant in this
extent to the Jews, to bring them over to the christian faith and baptism. Act.
ii. 39. For the promise is unto you and to your children: this privilege must
be intended in these words, to belong to them upon their being baptized in the
name of Christ, and so becoming members of the christian church, as much as
ever it belonged to them, as they were members of the church of Israel;
otherwise it could be no motive to prevail with them to submit to the baptism
of Jesus, or encouragement to expect the gift of the holy Ghost upon their
being baptized, as it is evidently designed to be If the promise should cease
to belong to their children upon their receiving christian baptism, as some
imagine, then the apostle must be supposed to propound matter of privilege to
persuade them to do that, the very doing whereof would deprive them of that
privilege; the absurdity whereof is obvious.
. Therefore, now, by the children of the covenant, are to be understood all
those that are born of christian parents, and by baptism dedicated to God, who
stands in a more special relation to them as their God, than he does to others.
And as they are under more sacred obligations to God than others, so they may
plead this relation as an encouragement to their faith in prayer for the grace
of the covenant, and for all temporal and spiritual blessings: thou art the
Lord my God, by virtue of that standing promise of the covenant, I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed.

2. Many of the children of the covenant, the visible heirs of the promise, are
yet in an unconverted state; strangers to the saving grace of the covenant.
This is presupposed and implied in praying for converting grace. which is
represented as the duty of the children of the covenant. They may be the
children of the covenant and yet unconverted. The children of parents in
visible covenant, yea, and of such as are truly godly, are born in sin, and
children of wrath, even as others. The apostle in Ephesians. ii. 1, 2, 3. runs a
comparison between the Jews and Gentiles, as to their natural state. ver. 1, 2
he speaks to the Ephesian Gentiles, And YOU has he quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins, wherein in time past YE walked according to the course of
this world, etc but in ver. 3. he speaks in the first person, Among whom also
WE all had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh -- and
were by nature the children of wrath, even as others. Not only ye Gentiles, who
were aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants
of promise ( ver. 12.) but also we Jews the seed of Israel, to whom pertain'd
the covenant and promise, were, as to our natural state, equally corrupt,
sinful, subjects of God's wrath. And many of the children of God's people do
sadly degenerate in their lives, and go astray from the God of their fathers,
and their God, in courses of transgression and disobedience, pursuing the idols
of the world, and fulfilling the desires of the fleshly mind; so that they have
as much need as others to be converted, and need the grace of God to recover
them from their backslidings, and reduce them to their covenanted duty.
Therefore were all the prophets of old, and John the baptist, Christ, and the
apostles, sent first to the covenant people of God to call them to repentance:
particularly, the apostle Peter tells the children of the covenant. that God
having raised up his S^n Jesus, sent him to bless them in turning them from
their iniquities, Act. i^i 25, 26 Many of the children of the covenant
therefore need to be turned from their iniquities, and ^^^ed the redeemer's
grace for their conversion. Wherefore a covenant interest in God as our God,
does not necessarily argue a state of grace and conversion. There are barren as
well as fruitful branches in the true vine Joh. xv. 2.
, hypocrites as well as real christians that profess relation to Christ in the
visible church.

Consider therefore, we may be said to be in covenant with God, and to have
relation to and interest in him as our God, either by external profession and
dedication; or by the grace of the covenant inwardly dispensed and received,
that is, by the regenerating, and sanctifying grace of the Spirit, and hy an
inward devotedness of soul to God. Now the unconverted children of God's
people, are in covenant with him in the former sense only, namely, in respect
of the covenant externally administered, and their external dedication to him.
And though there is a very great difference, between this external
administration, and the inward spiritual dispensation of the covenant, yet it
is a great privilege to be brought under the external administration, to have a
name in the house of God, and to stand in visible covenant relation to him,
which the children of God's people should prize, and be thankful for. Hence,

3. The unconverted children of God's people, who are in visible covenant with
him, should improve their covenant relation to and interest in him as their
God, as an encouragement to pray, and as a plea in praying for converting
gra^ce.

Here I shall show, (1) What is implied in this plea, And (2) The value and
efficacy of it in prayer.


(1) Let me show, what is implied in this plea, improved in prayer by the
children of the covenant, -- thou art the Lord my God.

[1] It implies their acknowledgment of the relation that God stands in to them
as their God in covenant; their adherence to and acquiescence in it. When
Ephraim is brought to say, thou art the Lord my God, it is as much as if he had
said, Though I have gone away from thee, and set up other gods, and served them,
yet now convinced of my sin and folly in so doing, I will have no more to do
with idols, but will henceforth own thee, the God of Israel, for my God alone;
thou art my God not only by external covenant, but by my own choice, and
consent. And in this manner God justly expects and requires, that the children
of his people should explicitly own him for their God (renouncing all their
idols) in order to his acceptance of them to the mercies of his covenant, and
hearing their prayers. Zech. xiii 9 -- They shall call on my name, and I will
hear them: I will say, it is my people, and they shall say, the Lord is my God.
Thus they must own the relation, and consent to it, if they would improve it as
an available plea in prayer. While in their unconverted state, they have set up
other gods in the room of the true God, in placing their chief love and
delight, trust and dependence on creatures, which is due to God alone. They are
guilty of spiritual idolatry: carnal pleasures, worldly possessions, and
honors, were their gods. Phil. iii. 19 -- Whose God is their belly. Col. iii.
5. -- Covetousness which is idolatry. And a covetous, or worldlyminded person
is an idolater Ephesians v. 5. But in returning to God, they must renounce all the
idols of the world, and say with an hearty choice and consent, the Lord is my
God.

[2] It implies their acknowledgment of the obligation they are under to God,
as their God in covenant, to love, reverence, and serve him with all their
capacities. Thou art my Lord, and my God; other lords besides th^e have had the
dominion over me, sin, satan, and fleshly lusts, but by thy grace I resolve to
shake off their usurped dominion, and relinquish their service; and return to
thee my rightful owner and sovereign, hence forward to yield dutiful subjection
and obedience to thee, and to make thy service the business of my life; thou
art the Lord my God, to govern me by thy will, as well as to bless me with thy
grace.

[3] It implies their dependence on God for those covenant blessings that are
founded on this relation. For God to be a God to any, implies some
extraordinary favors: and indeed this promise, I will be thy God, is
comprehensive of all the promises in the word of God All temporal and spiritual
blessings, and eternal blessedness, is bound up in this one great promise All
that can be expected from God our creator, redeemer, and sanctifier, is
intended, as promised to those to whom he promises to be a God in covenant: and
they may on this ground, look for the power and bounty of the creator, to
preserve them from all evil, and to supply them with all good; and for the
benefit of the merit and righteousness of the redeemer, to relieve their souls
against the guilt of sin, and the penal consequences of it; and for the grace
and comfort of the sanctifier, the holy Spirit, to recover them to the life of
God, and to be in them the earnest of life everlasting. And what can be desired
more? Wherefore this plea, thou art the Lord my God, implies some confidence in
God, or some hope of the mercies that this relation lays the foundation of.

(2) Let us consider therefore the value of this plea, and the efficacy of it
in prayer, and what encouragement hence arises to the unconverted children of
the covenant, to pray for converting grace.

1. God's relation to them as their God in covenant affords great
encouragement, as it shows that he stands ready to confer the saving grace of
the covenant upon them, if they don't put a bar in the way by a wilful contempt
or refusal, or if they do but seek him earnestly for it. Christ ordained and
directed his apostles to preach repentance and remission of sins first to the
Jews, because they were the children of the covenant, Luke xxiv. 47. --
beginning at Jerusalem. Act. iii. 25, 26. Ye are the children of the covenant,
says the apostle Peter, unto you first God having raised up his Son Jesus,
sent him to bless you, etc. Nor were they finally deserted till they
obstinately rejected the gospel offer, and invitation See Act. xiii. 46.
. God stands ready to bless the children of the covenant, with his converting
grace; and what an encouragement is this to a serious and diligent seeking of
it!

2. They may conclude from their covenant interest in God, that there is
greater hope and likelihood, that he will bestow his grace on them than others.
It Is true indeed, that the Lord is ric^ to all that call upon him, whether Jew
or Greek, Romans x. 12. but the children of the covenant are nearer to the grace
of God than others: they have a greater sufficiency of means and advantages,
they have the prayers, instructions, and examples of their pious parents, and
the prayers of the church for them, and word of God read and heard; to all
which means the dispensation of the Spirit is annexed by the promise of God.
Isai. lix. 21. As for me, this is my covenant with them, says the Lord, my
Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, etc. The apostle
speaks of them, as the natural branches, of whom there is greater likelihood,
that they should be graffed into their own olive tree (under which emblem the
church of God is represented) Romans 11.24. -- How much more shall these which be
the natural branches, be graffed into their own olive tree. God may suffer the
branches of the covenant to grow wild, and may graff in a strange slipp, says
one, but it is most kindly to the natural branches, the grace of God runs most
freely and kindly in the channel of the covenant. -- Certainly it is a great
advantage to be born of parents within the covenant, they have an excellent
inheritance, till they disinherit themselves by their own unthankfulness, and
rebellion. Dr. MANTON.


3. There are indefinite promises of the covenant, that belong to them, which
are ordinarily obtained in the way of prayer; promises of regenerating,
converting grace, (as I have observed) Now to whom, or on whose behalf are
those promises made, but to the seed of God's covenant people? the children of
the church who need to be regenerated and converted? Such as God's promise of
circumcising our hearts, and the heart of our seed, his pouring his Spirit upon
our seed, and his blessing on our offspring Isai xliv. 3.
the promise of writing his law on our hearts Heb. viii. 10.
and others which I have mentioned. They run indefinitely, but are all made to
the church on the behalf of their unconverted children, and are sealed to them,
as by circumcision of old (whence the phrase of circumcising their hearts) so
by baptism now, (whence the same work of grace is termed the washing of
regeneration, Tit. iii. 5. agreably to God's promise, Ezekiel. xxxvi. 25. Then
will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your
filthiness -- will I cleanse you) And I have showed, that God has appointed
prayer as the means of the accomplishment of these promises. Therefore in
pleading their covenant interest in God, they do in effect plead these
promises, which God has made and sealed to them; and this is to pray according
to his will: and therefore they may be encouraged to hope that they shall not
seek in vain. And consider.

4. It is a plea very pleasing to God, and prevailing with him. Partly,

(1) As it implies a sense of their obligation to God, and an inclination and
desire to come up to their covenanted duty, and to answer God's relation to
them, by a serious and hearty dedication of themselves to him. Turn me to thy
self, O Lord, for thou art my God: the import of which prayer, from the mouth
of a child of the covenant, must be this, viz Lord, I own thee to be my God,
and to have a supreme right and dominion in and over me, not only as creator
and ruler of the world, but as a God, and Father by covenant, whereby I am
solemnly bound to love, and serve, and glorify thee; I have sinfully and
shamefully broken thy covenant, and have forsaken my own mercies, and turned
aside to lying vanities; but the desire of my soul is to return to thee, in
compliance with thy merciful invitation, return ye backsliding children Jer.
iii. 23.
; O grant me the grace which thou have promised, to restore me, by repentance,
unto my duty and happiness, in serving and enjoying thee as my God and portion
for ever. Such a plea from a broken hearted sinner, is very agreeable to the
will of God, and must needs be of great force and prevalency with him. Partly,

(2) As it argues a good temper of mind, and a disposition pleasing to God to
improve a covenant interest in him, as a plea for special grace. It may indeed,
be pleaded by believers, for all kinds of mercies, even temporal mercies. Jacob
improves it as a ground of trust in God, for bread to eat, and raiment to put
on, and providential protection Genesis xxviii 20, 21.
. But to make choice of and prefer renewing grace above all other instances of
covenant mercies, is no small symptom of a gracious disposition, which he that
will not break a bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, will not despise,
because it is the work of his own grace: and when God has put such a though it and
desire into a sinner's heart, it may reasonably be hoped, that it shall not be
without success. We know how Solomon succeeded in that prayer, 2 Chronicles. i. God
puts it to his choice to ask what he would, ver. 7. -- Ask what I shall give
thee, Solomon's request is, ver. 10. Give me now wisdom, and knowledge, that I
may go out and come in before this people; and how pleasing this request was to
God, appears from the answer given to it, ver. 11, 12. God said to Solomon,
Because this was in thine heart, and thou have not asked riches, wealth, or
honor, nor the life of thine enemies, neither yet have asked long life, but
have asked wisdom and knowledge for thy self, that thou may judge my people,
etc. Wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee, and I will give thee riches and
wealth, and honor, such as none of the kings have had that have been before
thee, neither shall there any after thee have the like. Thus, those that seek
first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, shall not only obtain what
they seek, but shall have all other things (so far as God sees best) added unto
them Mat. vi. 33.
. Partly,

3. Because the glory of God is more nearly interested in this petition and
plea; more than in praying for the pardon of sin: for pardon of sin more
immediately respects the sinner's security and comfort, which he may desire
from self-love; but grace to serve God, is more immediately conducive to his
glory Now as Christ has taught us to make this our first and principal
petition, thy name be hallowed, or glorified, so the more nearly the glory of
God's name is concerned in any petition that we offer up to him, the more
pleasing it is to him, and the more hope of speeding. And it is especially for
the glory of God in the eyes of the world, that those to whom he stands in
visible relation, should be an holy people, as his name is more dishonored by
the unholiness of their lives, than by the sins of others; for he will be
sanctified in all them that come nigh him, Lev. x 3. And as God makes this an
argument with himself in promising sanctifying grace to his people. Ezekiel.
xxxvi. 22, 23. Thus says the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, O house
of Israel, but for my holy Names sake, which ye have profaned among the
heathen. -- And I will sanctify my great Name, which was profaned among the
heathen, which ye have profaned in the midst of them, etc. So it may be
pleaded to good purpose, by the children of God's people, in prayer for
converting sanctifying grace; Not for my sake Lord, though thou should have no
regard to such an unworthy worm as I am, but (since thou have taken me into so
near a relation to thyself) for thy holy Names sake, for the glory of thy great
Name (which will be more polluted and dishonored by my sins, than by the sins
of others who are aliens and strangers) I beg the promised gift of thy grace,
to make me holy, and to enable me to walk answerably to my covenant relation to
thee, and that thou may be sanctified in me, in the eyes of men. And what is
this but to pray that God's name may be glorified?

It Is confessed that the spirit of this plea (as it has been opened in these
particulars) can proceed only from a gracious heart, which has been impressed
by the Spirit of God, with a disposition and tendency toward its divine
original: but it shall suffice to have showed the native import of it rightly
managed, and how prevalent with God, and what abundant encouragement it affords
the children of the covenant in praying for the grace of repentance, and
conversion. Now then, let it be briefly applied,

(1) In a word of exhortation to parents in covenant with God, to pray for
their unconverted children. In your supplications at the throne of grace for
your own souls, you must bear upon your heart the case of your children's
souls, and be earnest in prayer, as for other mercies which they need, so more
especially and principally for the saving grace of the covenant, that their
souls may be cured of their corrupt bias, that they may be principled with the
fear of God betimes, that they may be made wise, and virtuous, and holy; that
good things may be found in them toward the God of Israel; that being begotten
again by the Spirit, they may be instated in the blessings of God's family, and
that whether they live a longer or shorter time, in health or sickness, in
prosperity or adversity in this world, they may be made heirs of life and
immortality, and live in God's favor, and in his presence for ever hereafter.
It is unquestionably the duty of all parents thus to pray for their children
especially of those that are in covenant with God, in imitation of the example
of the father of the faithful, Genesis xvii 18. O that Ishrael might live before
thee! and of David, 1 Chronicles. xxix. 19. Give unto Solomon my son a perfect heart
to keep thy commandments --.

Thus you must express and exercise says in God's promise, I will be the God
of thy seed; and plead the same argument that is here put into their mouths,
Lord, thou art the God of my children by external covenant, and have encouraged
me therefore to dedicate them to thee, and they are thine not only by creation,
but by baptismal dedication: O take possession of them for thy self, betimes,
by thine indwelling Spirit, turn them to thyself from sin and satan from the
vanities of the world, and a vain conversation; they are the children of the
covenant, O send the Spirit of thy Son to bless them in turning them from their
iniquities. By says plead the promises God has made to the seed of his people,
the promise of circumcising their hearts, of pouring his Spirit and blessing
upon them, and of their being taught of the Lord. Isai. live. 13. Remember thy
word of promise, and establish it unto my children, on which thou have caused
me to hope.

Thus you must express your value of this blessing. For God to be the God of
your children, is a far greater privilege, than to have all the riches, wealth,
and honors of the world heaped upon them: and he will then be their God
according to the full intention, and utmost extent of his covenant love: when
he gives them his Spirit to regenerate, and sanctify them to himself. O then,
put in for a share in this privilege, on the behalf of your children, by your
earnest prayers for them, that whatever they want, they may not want the
special blessings of the covenant, for therein is all their salvation, and all
that is necessary and conducive to their happiness in both worlds. Thus you
must express your tender affection to your children. When they labor under
grievous bodily diseases, you are full of compassion toward them, and will
seek to the physician for healing; and can you without concern, see them
infected with spiritual distempers, the hereditary disease of a carnal nature
derived by their natural birth from our first parents, which without a cure
wrought by regenerating grace. will prove mortal to their souls? How many
distressed parents came to our Savior, when on earth, for the cure of their
sick and diseased children, and prevailed; take encouragement hence, and show
your compassion to the souls of your children, by bringing them in the arms of
your faith and prayer to the great physician; and beg the healing influences of
his grace on their souls Every godly parent, next to the salvation of his own
soul, will be most solicitous and desirous of the conversion and salvation of
his childrens souls, which must be expressed both by frequent instructions,
counsels, and admonitions, and also by constant and fervent prayer with and for
them: perhaps they neglect praying for themselves, how sad would it be, if you
also should neglect praying for them!

And let not those parents that are exercised with ungracious wicked children
(which has been the lot of many a godly parent) be therefore discouraged from
praying for them; for how perverse and disobedient soever they be, if God
undertake to turn them they shall be turned. He that can of stones raise up
children to Abraham, can easily by his grace soften and subdue the hardest
heart, reduce the most obstinate and refractory, and work a cure on the most
desperately diseased soul. Be encouraged then, to hope and pray for their
conversion. St. Austin was a very vicious youth, for whom his godly mother
Monica was often in tears and prayers: a certain pious Bishop observing her
weeping for her son, said unto her, it cannot be that a son of those tears
should perish AUGUSTINE Confess. Lib. 3 Cap. 12.
. And he had a remarkable conversion, and proved an eminent instrument of God's
glory. Therefore hold on praying, though there should be no more encouragement
than that, Who can tell whether God will be gracious unto you, that your child
may live 2 Samuel xii. 22.
.

(2) Let it be applied, in a word, to the unconverted children of the covenant,
to exhort and incite them to seek converting grace. You have this encouragement
over and above what has been propounded to the unconverted in general, that the
Lord is your God in external covenant. The encouragement arising hence to seek
the grace of the covenant, has been at large declared: God's promise of being
your God, virtually compriz^s all the promises of grace contained in the
scriptures of both testaments; which must be drawn forth to an accomplishment
by prayer; and you may with more confidence than others, plead such indefinite
promises, as that, I will give a new heart: I will put my laws into their mind,
and write them in their hearts, and the like. God is ready to give Himself, his
Son, his Spirit and grace to such as you, which you should improve as a motive
to seek him earnestly and diligently; and as a ground of faith and confidence
in prayer. Bless God, therefore, for so distinguishing a favor, that you have
a name and a place in his house, and are admitted into so near a relation to
him; on which account, you may with good reason say, the lines are fallen to me
in pleasant places, yea I have a goodly heritage. Yet be cautioned against
trusting in the privileges of your birth, and baptism; for though you are born of
the most religious parents, and baptized in the church, yet you are also born
in sin and corruption as much as others, and are by nature children of wrath
even as others: the natures you derived from your first birth, being as carnal,
and as deeply polluted as those of others; and the sins of your lives being
against greater mercies and engagements, than the sins of others, will expose
you to a sorer condemnation. See then, a necessity of your be^^g born again of
the Spirit, otherwise it had been better for you never to have been born at
all, never to have had a being. See also a necessity of the grace of God to
work this change in you, and of earnest supplication for that grace, whereunto
you are encouraged by the covenant offers, and promises of grace, sealed to you
in your baptism, the obligations and privileges whereof you should seriously
and well consider.

And if these considerations have been effectual to work any convictions on
your minds, delay not the prosecution of them, but take the first opportunity
in some convenient retirement, to pour out your hearts before God in the
language of repenting Ephraim, and fall down on your knees, and say, in words
to this effect; O Lord God of my fathers and my God! thou have of thine
infinite mercy, brought me into bonds of thy covenant (in my early days)
wherein thou have engaged and sealed to be my God, and Father, Redeemer and
Sanctifier, as I am laid under a sealed obligation to be thine; I confess and
bewail my treacherous departures from thee, and the degeneracy of my nature and
life, for which I deserve to be cast off by thee for ever; nevertheless thou
have made known to me by thy word, that thou have mercy in store for thy
backsliding children, both for pardon and renovation, through the merits of my
Redeemer's blood; I acknowledge thee, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be my God
in Christ, and desire to comply with thy gracious calls to return to thee from
all my backslidings, and in a sense of my own insufficiency, I beg thy promised
grace to enable me; turn thou me and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord
my God.

The rule of God's dispensation toward the children of his covenant people,
is, not to leave them till they first forsake him. 2 Chronicles. xv. 2. The Lord is
with you, while ye be with him; if ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if
ye forsake him, he will forsake you. And they may be said to forsake him,
either by courses of open transgressions, or by neglects of religious duties,
especially the neglect of seeking God by prayer; for there is no medium between
seeking and forsaking him. If they forsake him, he will cast them off for ever;
but they that seek him early shall find him: and if the seed of Israel would
thus seek him, seek him early, seek him earnestly, verily they shall not be
found to seek in vain.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 6. line 11. read how. P. 9 l. 25. read rule us. P. 17. l. 21. for
of, r. on. P. 19. l. 36. and p, 20. l. 3. r. irresistible. P. 39. l. 5. for or,
r. of. P. 44. l. 6. r. turn you P. 57. l. 29 r. desert.


