AN ANSWER TO THE Hampshire NARRATIVE.

An EXAMINATION of AND some ANSWER to A Pamphlet, entitled, A Narrative and
Defense of the Proceedings of the Ministers of Hampshire, who disapproved of
Mr. Breck's Settlement at Springfield.

WITH A VINDICATION OF those Ministers and Churches, that approved of, and
acted in the Settlement of said Mr. Breck.

Prove. xviii. 17. He that is first in his own Cause, seems just; but his
Neighbor comes and searches him.

BOSTON: Printed by J. Draper, for H. Foster, at his Shop in Cornhil. 1736.

An Examination of AND some Answer to THE Hampshire Narrative and Defense.
THE Case of the first Church and Parish in Springfield, with Respect to the
Settlement of the Rev. Mr. Robert Breck in the pastoral Office among them, has
indeed made a great Noise through the Country; and the Conduct of those who
have been immediately concerned, approved or blamed, according to the
Information Persons have received, or as they have stood affected to one or
other of the acting Parties. But the extraordinary Noise has been occasioned by
the extraordinary Methods taken to hinder the said Settlement, in direct
Opposition to those Liberties of the Churches, which are confirmed to them by
Law, and they have been in the constant Use and Exercise of. If the Reverend
Gentlemen in the County of Hampshire, who disapproved of Mr. Breck s Settlement
at Springfield, could but have thought they kept themselves pure, by forbearing
to act in it themselves, and sending their formal Protest against it, and then
left those called by the Church to judge in the Affair, (of which Number were
the Eldest Ministers in their own County) to have acted according to their
Light and Consciences, without employing the secular Arm upon the Occasion,
much of the Noise had, to be sure, been prevented. Or if after the strange
Interposition of some in civil Authority, to which we have very good Grounds to
think the disapproving Gentlemen of the sacred Order were accessory, they could
have been contented to have let the Matter remaind the Subject of Conversation
only, without running it into the public Prints, the Noise had been still much
less, and the Censures bestowed on either Party fewer and milder. But not
thinking enough was done to blacken Mr. Breck, and bring an odious Imputation
on the Council, by the two Letters published in the Boston Journal, Here it may
be remarked, That these Letters were published the Day before the Complaint of
the Church in Springfield was to be heard in the Honorable House of
Representatives, and were industriously put into the Hands of the Members, no
doubt to prepossess them, that nothing might be done in Favor of the Church or
Mr. Breck. A Specimen of their fair way of managing!
by these Gentlemen themselves, or some Body that undertook their Vindication,
before any Thing had been published on the other Side of the Question, they
have now thrust into the World a remarkable Piece, containing about seven
Sheets; entitled, A Narrative and Defense of the Proceedings of the Ministers
of Hampshire, who disapproved of Mr. Breck's Settlement at Springfield. And
because Vis unita fortior, it is said in the Title Page to be Written by
themselves. The Text of sacred Scripture with which this Page is graced, is
certainly very pertinent and well chosen, viz. that Passage of the wise
Solomon, "He that unswereth a Matter before be hears it, it is Folly and
Shame unto him". It may therefore well be supposed those into whose Hands their
Narrative has been put, have suspended their Judgment, till they hear the other
Side, and will not think themselves Masters of the Merits of the Cause, by
hearing it only ex Part. Especially since the same royal Author tells us
presently after, He that is first in his own Cause, seems just; but his
Neighbor comes and searches him. i. e. He that speaks first will be sure to
tell a straight Story, and relate that only which makes for him, and put the
best Color he can upon it, so that his Cause shall appear good, whether it be
really so or no. But the Plaintiff having done his Evidence, it is fit the
Defendant should be heard, and have Leave to show the Falsehood and Fallacy of
what has been alleged, which perhaps may make the Matter appear quite
otherwise than it did.

In the Introduction to their Performance, lest the World should think they had
meddled with what did not belong to them, they let us know that the Ministers of
the County of Hampshire were obliged both by their Situation and Office to act
in this Affair. As to their Situation, it is indeed in the same County; but the
Churches in this same County are at a large Distance from one another. And some
of these very Gentlemen live twenty, thirty, or near forty Miles from
Springfield: So that some Ministers in another County, and indeed in another
Province, were as conveniently situated to have acted in the Affair as
themselves. Boston is in the County of Suffolk; yet the Ministers there have
not though it themselves obliged by their Situation to act in the Affairs of every
Church in the County. These Gentlemen seem to lay a great Stress in the present
Controversy upon their Limits as a County; though we are perfectly at a Loss by
what Law or Rule they make the Churches to follow the Civil Districts. The
Towns in the Province we know are by the Legislative Power laid out into
Countys; but we did not know the Churches were. If they are, should there not
be a Shire-Church too in every County, for the holding ecclesiastical Courts
in? These would be a new Kind of Churches indeed, such as we have not yet heard
of. We have heard of National Churches, and of Provincial and Classical, but we
do not know a Name for these, unless that of Comitatic may be allowed. -- But
it may be their Obligation is stronger from their Office. As to this, we
suppose them by their Office to be Pastors of particular Churches, which were
committed to their Care at their Ordination; and that they are obliged to act
in the Affairs of other Churches only as their Assistance, by Advice, or
otherwise, may be desired and sought, by those Churches in Communion with them
that think they need it. Or if they consider themselves as Ministers in the
Catholic Church, and therefore obliged to take Care of all the Churches; so are
other Pastors: and we cannot see but the Obligation which arises from hence lies
upon others equally with themselves. -- But if their Situation and Office an't
quite enough to give them Authority to act in the Affairs of Springfield
Church, will not their being an Association do it? It seems the Ministers in
this County are associated; and will any countenance the first Church in
Springfield in a Rebellion against the Association? And because we find such
frequent mention in their Narrative of their Association, its Meeting, Breaking
up, Committee, Votes and Doings, we would here, (thinking it may be as proper a
Place as any) speak our Thoughts about those Assemblies of Ministers which are
now called Associations. And in a Word, We don't look upon them to be any Part
of the Constitution (...) Churches; for we cannot find so much as the (...) our
Platform of Discipline, or the Result (...) ^ynods, nor in the Laws of the
Province. (...) therefore account them to be voluntary Meetings of Ministers by
mutual Agreement amongst themselves; and whether any Person or Society will
refer themselves to them for Advice or not, and how far they will be directed
thereby, is perfectly free and voluntary. We make no Question but Ministers
have as good a Right to meet together at one another Houses, as other People;
and if when they are so met, any ask their Advice upon any particular Case,
they have without Doubt a Right to give it. And such Interviews at stated
Times, duly managed, may be many Ways serviceable, as they may help to promote
brotherly Love, and their mutual Assistance in the Work of the Gospel. But if
such associated Pastors, whose Original as an Association is only from
themselves, come at length to look upon themselves as a sort of Body Corporate,
and assume the Exercise of Government; if they claim a Right to take the sole
or the first Cognizance of Ecclesiastical Cases within those Bounds which they
have drawn for themselves, or to direct and limit Churches in the Election of
Officers, and the Calling of Councils; if they declare it irregular and
unwarrantable in a particular Church to choose and ordain a Pastor, without
first consulting them, and having their Consent thereto; such an Association of
Pastors, wherever it is found, is an Usurpation upon the Liberties of
Congregational Churches, and those Churches are servile indeed that tamely
submit to them therein. And when they come ex Officio to administer Oaths, it
seems also to entrench upon the Authority of the Civil Magistrate. The Form of
an Oath or Declaration taken by a particular Minister, by Order of an
Association, may be seen in the Narrative, p. 49. The first we suppose of the
Kind, which has been given to the Public, and therefore worthy of special
Notice.


Well; but these Gentlemen being thus obliged to act in the Affair of the first
Church in S --, have heard that their Conduct has been greatly blamed; and
therefore they think nothing can be more just, than that a true and faithful
Account should be given of those things: Their Reputation, the Cause of Truth,
and the Interest of Religion calling for it. If any Account were given, it
ought, to be sure, to be a true and faithful one; and we heartily wish we could
say theirs was such: But whether it is or not, and whether their Reputation,
the Cause of Truth, and the Interest of Religion, are like to be served by it,
must now be left to their and our Readers to determine.

After the Introduction, the Performance it self is divided into two general
Parts, a Narrative or historical Account, and a Defense or Reasonings upon the
Case; though they are not very careful to keep these Parts entire; for in the
Historical Account they frequently intermix some Scraps of Argument, and in
their Reasonings upon the Case, they again give an Account of Facts. And indeed
they don't appear to keep to any Order or Method throughout their whole Book; but
Things are very oddly mixed and scattered, and bro't in here and there, one
would think just as their Heat and Passion at that Time prompted and hurried
them. So that to track their Footsteps by following them Page after Page,
would be little better than a Goose-Chase, and carry the Reader hither and
thither, and back to the same Place very often; and indeed make the Answer as
large a Bundle of Confusion, as their Narrative and Defense. But we hope the
consideration of nothing which they offer, of any Weight or Force, throughout
their long and labored Piece, will be omitted, if we pursue the following
Method. viz. To

I. Make some General Remarks upon the Historical Part of their Performance, or
the Account they give of Facts.

II. Examine those Arguments they make Use of in their Defense, which concern
the Merits of the Cause in Dispute.

III. Give an Answer to the Charges which they make upon the Council in
general, and some Members of it in particular, to bring an odious Imputation
upon them.

IV. Gratify the Opposing Gentlemen of Hampshire themselves, in their earnest
and repeated Request, That we would let them know wherein they are to be
charged with Usurpation, Injuriousness, etc. And,

V. Let the World know the Grounds upon which we proceeded to the Ordination of
Mr. Breck to the Pastoral Office in the First Church in Springfield, and upon
what Principles we think it is to be justified.

I. In the First Place we would make a few just Remarks upon what may be called
the Historical Part of their Book, or the Account they give of Facts. And they
are these which follow,

(I.) Things are multiplied and repeated in a Manner that is very unnecessary,
and to a Degree that is perfectly troublesome and nauseous. The Charges against
Mr. B -- come over and over in different Parts of their Narrative. Testimonies
to the same Things, are not only multiplied, but the Testimonies of the very
same Persons, to the same Things, at the same Times, are repeated. After they
have published the Evidences sent to them as an Association, they must needs
bring in those that were given to the Council; though they relate to the same
Matters, and did not at all belong to their Proceedings, which they call their
Book a Defense of. Six or seven Times are scarcely enough to bring in Mr. B --
's saying, one Man lied, and he would not take another's Word for a Groat.
Several Times the Reader is reminded, that one Gentleman of the Council was
related to him by Marriage. And we have some of the same Stories in that Part
which they call the Defense, that we had before in the Narrative. But why must
the same Things be repeated so often, and bro't in at every other Leaf almost,
till the Book is swelled to so large a Size, and mounted to four Shillings and
fix Pence Price? It is evident the Gentlemen affected Show and Bulk, and had a
good Will, and strong Inclination, to magnify Things, and lay on all the Load
that ever they could. They surely though it some Things could not come over too
often; for in this Way they would be likely to make the deeper Impression on
some of their Readers; and thus they are not vain Repetitions, but serve mighty
well to answer the very christian Design of their Performance.

2. Their Account contains several Things very low and trifling. Amongst others
of this Nature we might take Notice of what they tell us, (P. 32) of Mr. B --
's singing on a certain Sabbath the three first Stanzas in the 35th Psalm. --
Well; and what if he did? We suppose the Psalm is of divine Inspiration, and
given for the Use of the Church, as well as others. But if they would suggest
that Mr. B -- designed to have those Passages of Imprecation applied in the
singing of them to his Opponents, and so to themselves, they herein seem to
make themselves Judges of evil Thoughts: And that which spoils all too is, That
the Psalm was not of his choosing, if it was of his naming: For another
Gentleman preached (...) him that Day, who desired Mr. B -- to ease him by
praying before Sermon in the Afternoon; and Mr. B -- asking him what Psalm he
should appoint to be sung after Prayer, he mentioned this, because it was
agreeable to the Subject he was upon. So that had the Thing been of Importance
enough to have told the World of it, yet it was not so much Mr. B -- 's Act as
these Gentlemen imagined. -- We do not think it worth while to inform the
World, (though we could do it) what Psalm was appointed to be sung at a certain
Lecture, upon the Receipt of that Letter they mention in this Page, which they
made so much Use of then and since, and thought would have effectually answered
their Design. Some of the Ministers that were then present, and observed the
Spirit that was discovered at the communicating that Letter, could not but
think the Psalm of Triumph that was sung, was chosen to suit the joyful
Occasion.

Another such pretty Tale we are entertained with in P. 63. There they tell us,
That Mr. B -- preaching from those Words, Many are the Afflictions of the
righteous, compared himself to David, Mordecai, and other good Men, and those
who opposed him to Haman, etc. But those who have perused the Notes of this
Sermon, know very well no such Comparison was made by Mr. B --, and that the
Parallel was run only by some of the Hearers, who did not come to hear with
that meek and teachable Frame of Spirit which the Gospel requires. Nor did he
make such a Declaration as they speak of, and call God to Witness that be was
innocent of the Things laid to his Charge. His Words are grossy misrepresented;
for he said no more than this, That God and his own Conscience know his
Character had been too unchristianly treated: And herein many others think with
him -- The telling such little Stories is a plain Proof these Gentlemen were
for letting nothing slip, though of never so trivial a Nature.

We shall mention but one Thing more under this Head, and this because they
seem to think it worthy of special Notice by the Manner in which they tell it.
In the 65th Page, the Reader is entertained with what they call a remarkable
Scene that opened upon the 5th of October; which was this, That a young
Gentleman, now of the Ecclesiastical Order, read Mr. B -- 's Confession of
Faith on Horseback Which Story serves to introduce this memorable Piece of Wit
in the next Page, namely, That a Young Gentlemen who was present at that
Transaction, made this Remark upon it, viz. The Old Horse stood astonished at
what was doing; and if be had had the Tongue of Balaam's Ass, he would have
reproved the Madness of the Prophet. As to the Matter of Fact referred to, The
reading the Confession of Faith on Horseback, we shall have occasion to
consider that, and set it in its true Light in another Place. What we intend
here is only to admire the Piece of Wit it was the Occasion of; which if we
should forbear to do, they that tell it might perhaps be angry with us for our
Dullness. But at the same Time we cannot but lament it, that they have not
gratified our Curiosity with the Name of this witty young Gentleman, and let
the World know who this sprightly Genius is, lately risen up in the County of
Hampshire, who could with so quick a Turn of Thought convert the poor Old Horse
into Balaam's Ass. Yet we would not have them think they have all the Wits in
their own County neither. If the Reader will forgive our trifling, we will see
whether we cannot match them with a Wit. There was a young Gentleman amongst us,
who after he had read the Hampshire Narrative, told the Story of a certain
Roman Catholic, who thinking it high Time to get Absolution from the Priest,
writ down all his Sins in a great Volumn, and carried them to his Confessor:
The Father, frightened at the Bulk of the Book, satisfied himself with asking a
few Questions, and told him, he absolved him from all his Sins. But says the
poor Offender, What Penance do you impose? The Confessor, after a Pause, --
answers, You must read your own Book several Times a Day for a whole Month.

We might point out several other such low and little Matters as help to swell
their Book; but it an't worth while: for we know they don't tend to the main
Point; and we ask the Readers Pardon for those we have stopped at. Only we cannot
help expressing our selves something surpriz d, to see a Combination of so many
able Heads and Pens, to convey such trivial Matters as these into the World!
Who would have believed it, if they had not told us they were WRITTEN BY
THEMSELVES. But what is still worse, Their Account contains

(3.) Several Things that discover an evil and bitter, an uncharitable and
unchristian Temper and Spirit. Such a Spirit sufficiently discovers it self in
many Passages of their Book, and in diverse of the Stories they tell of the
Council, and of particular Persons belonging to it, which if they had more of
Truth in them, yet don't enter into the Merits of the Cause, and the whole
Design of them must be only to fix, as far as they could do it, a Mark of
Dishonor and Disgrace, where they would have it worn. Passing here those which
concern others, we will mention only what relates to Mr. B -- himself.
Sometimes indeed they pretend a Tenderness for his Character: And we are told
of one Gentleman in particular, That cautioned the People of S -- to be careful
in this Respect, and endeavored to make them sensible how injurious it was to
receive and spread Reports th it tended to blast his Reputation. And of
another, Who when he let two or three of Mr. B -- 's principal Friends know of
the Objections that lay against him; desired them for the present not to speak
of them. Yet it seems they so far forgot their own Cautions, that as soon as
Mr. B -- left Springfield the first Time, they let the Papers from Connecticut
go about the Parish, when he was not there to make any Answer for himself. And
now, that his Reputation, and therein his Serviceableness, may be the more
effectually destroyed, they in their Narrative fall upon his Morals as well as
Principles; and frequently insinuate as if his Conversation was as bad as they
had represented his Opinions to be. He is spoken of in P. 43, as chargeable
with several Immoralities. Yet the only one they fasten upon, (not out of
Tenderness sure!) is one committed when he was a Boy of about 13 Years of Age,
while he was at the College; that he then stole Books. And for Fear the Truth
of the Story should be questioned, they take Care to direct all that desire to
have it confirmed, to inquire of such and such Persons: Though, it may be, not
one of their Readers has been at the Pains to make the Inquiry, and so they
might have saved themselves the Trouble of this Advertisement. But what can be
more cruel and barbarous, more contrary to Humanity as well as Christianity,
than to publish such a Thing at this Time of Day, which the World knew nothing
of before; which was covered in the Time of it by the Persons injured by it, by
the Governors of the College who never animadverted upon him for it, and by a
good and laudable Conduct afterward. To fetch such a Thing up out of Oblivion,
and publish it in a Way that will perpetuate the Remembrance of it to Persons
and Times that are yet to come; -- What a Spirit does this discover?

But probably it will be said, The Reason of publishing this Story is, to show
that he is still defective in Point of Veracity; for he denied it to Mr. Clap:
And this is One of the Immoralities referred to. -- Mr. B -- 's Answer to this,
as he gave it to the Gentlemen of Hampshire, we have in the 25th and 26th Pages
of their Narrative. He there says, That the Report, as Mr. Clap gave it, being
partly false, he thought he might consistent with Truth deny it. For though he
did take the Books, yet he was not expelled the College for it, as the Report
was: Nor was he so much as called to an Account for it by the Governors of the
College. This was true in Fact; and was confirmed to us by one of the Gentlemen
of the Council, who was at that Time one of the Tutors of the College. Yet it
might have been better, if Mr. B -- had, without Reserve or Disguise, let Mr.
Clap have known how the Thing was: but no Wonder if he was put into a Surprise
and Confusion, upon such a sudden and unexpected Question; and had not the
Command of his Tho'ts at that Time. Mr. B -- himself afterward thought this
would have been more prudent: And therefore in his Letter to Mr. C -- has these
Words, (P. 20.) " You having had some Occasion to think I was wanting to the
Truth, in the Answer I gave you to your Enquiry concerning the former
Immorality you hcard I was guilty of, I do blame my self for it, and wish I had
spoken more plainly: But what I meant then, as I have often declared, was only
this, That the Report you gave me was not wholly true. And so far as I have in
any of these Things, or in my Discourse with you upon the Account of them, been
faulty, I ask christian Forgiveness, etc." Yet neither this, nor the Answer he
gave to him afterward, when he put the Question to him, Whether there was no
Foundation upon which People could build such a Story? viz. That he went to
College very young, and that his Conduct was not as it ought to be: But that he
hoped God had given him a Sight and Sense of his Sins, and that be was truly
humbled upon the Account of them: We say, neither the Blame he takes to himself
in his Letter, nor such an Answer as this, though spoken with Tears, could
prevail upon them to forbear the Publication of such a Story. If this is to be
tender, some Men's tender Mercies are Cruelty.

Though, as we have just said, it might have been more prudent in Mr. B --, to
have answered Mr. C -- in a plain and unreserv'd Manner; yet, it is certain, Mr.
C -- had no Right to such an Answer; for it was a Question he had no Right to
put: And in such a Case a Man may lawfully give an evasive Answer that is
consistent with Truth. The Question was evidently unseasonable and impertinent,
to say the least. To what Purpose could Mr. C -- so sollicitously inquire into
this Matter now? Allow it to be true, and it could not disqualifie him for the
Ministry. Mr. C -- knew, or might have known, he had long since been received
into the Communion of the Church in Cambridge: A public Testimony that his
after Conversation was blameless. -- But, perhaps it may be said, Mr. C -- made
the Inquiry with a charitable Hope the Story was not true, and a kind Design to
contradict it when he heard it mentioned. Whether it was just so or not, there
is some Reason to doubt, when he could write to a Minister in Boston, (not one
of the Council) to desire him to make Inquiry into Mr. B -- 's Conduct and
Behavior when he was at the College, and send him an Account of what he could
furnish himself with: But the Gentleman in his Answer desired to be excused
from so unchristian a Part, and told him, He though it the Question was not how Mr.
B -- carried himself when he was a Boy at College, but what his Conversation
had been since be became a Professor of Religion, and a Candidate for the
Ministry. Now that this has been laudable in the Opinion of the Governors of
the College, what follows is another Testimony. A pious and charitable
Gentlewoman deceased a few Years since, left 60 Pounds per Annum, to be given
to two Candidates for the Ministry, who were sober, diligent, and gave good
Hopes of their future Serviceableness, to encourage them to continue at College
and prosecute their Studies there; to be disposed of by the Overseers of the
College: And the Overseers referring it to the Rev. President, with the rest of
the Corporation, to nominate two Candidates to them, thus qualified to receive
the Donation, Mr. B -- was one of the Candidates, so nominated and presented to
the Overseers by the Corporation: And this was just at the Time of his going to
Springfield.

But though Mr. B -- did deny this same Story in the Manner he did, it may, all
Circumstances confider'd, be better for these Gentlemen not to insist too
strongly on his being defective in Point of Veracity on this Account. For if to
deny a Thing that is not wholly, or literally, true, be always inconsistent
with Truth, perhaps some other People's Veracity may be taxed, whose Reputation
they may think more strongly established than Mr. Breck's. The good Brother who
carried up the Letter beforementioned from Boston to Hatfield, and by whose
Means the Contents of it were spread about Springfield, before it reached where
it was directed; when the Gentleman who sent that Letter, wrote to him about
his doing so, he received from him the following Answer, viz. "I would inform
you that the Account you have of your Letter being put into the Hands of a mean
Person, who carried it from House to House, is a Mistake. For I did not give a
Copy of it to any Body, or let any Body ever so much as read it, or take it out
of my Hands. But we have many wrong Representations made, in order to make us
odious abroad. I pray God not to lay to their Charge their injuring me." Here,
though we give full Credit to him, and believe he says nothing but the Truth
about it; yet we don't believe he tells the whole Truth. While he says he did
not give a Copy of it, nor let any Body so much as read it, or take it out of
his hands, he takes a prudent Care not to say that he did not read it to any
such Person, and so put it into his Head and Mouth, though not into his Hands;
which was a much more disadvantageous Way of carrying it from House to House,
than if the Letter it self had been so carried; for we may be sure it lost
nothing by its thus running, if it did not grow: And yet, we believe, this
Gentleman and his Friends, would think it hard, if, for this, his Veracity
should be called in Question. We will add but one Remark more upon their
Account of Facts; and this is

(4.) That it abounds with Misrepresentations and Untruths. This may seem a
hard Reflection considering whose Names it appears in; but is not more hard
than just. As to some of these Things, their Have and Warmth, very probably,
carried them beyond their Evidence. This seems to be the Case particularly,
when to evidence that the Ministers that came from Boston were prejudiced in
Favor of Mr. B --, they say (p. ^3.) they had before joined in giving him a
Certificate of his Orthodoxy; when in Fact but one of them signed it. From
whence we may conclude they ventured to say this, before ever they had seen the
Testimonial. Indeed this is made an Erratum at the latter End of the Book, and
stands corrected; but, if we mistake not, it was done by a Gentleman at Boston,
that looked over that Half-Sheet before it was worked off: And it is Pity but
some knowing and faithful Friend, had done them the Kindness to correct some
other more important Errata for them; especially those in which it is difficult
to excuse them from a wilful Misrepresentation of Matters; as will appear when
we come to set them in their true Light in their proper Places. Having made
these General Remarks on their Account of Facts, we proceed

II. To examine the Arguments they make use of in their Defense, which do enter
into the Merits of the Cause in Dispute between us.

These disapproving Gentlemen have freely declared it to be their Minds, that
those Elders and Messengers of Churches that met at Springfield, and took upon
them to sit there as Judges in Mr. Breck's Case, were not regularly called
thereto, and that they meddled with an Affair that did not belong to them, and
that their Proceedings were very irregular and disorderly. P. 77. This is
freely declared, it is true; but it becomes them to be something modest as well
as free in their Declaration, since the Representative Body of the Country have
declared their Minds the other Way: For the Honorable House of
Representatives, after a long Hearing of the Case, came into a Vote, That the
Ecclesiastical Council convened at Springfield at the Call of the first Church
there, to assist in the regular carrying on the Ordination of Mr. Robert Breck,
was a regular Council. But these Gentlemen think they have very weighty Reasons
to support them in the contrary Opinion and Declaration; and they are the
following Ones, which we will even take in the Order in which they offer them.

(1.) Because the prevailing Part of the Council was not of neighboring
Churches, but fetched from very remote Parts of the Country; in Neglect of the
Churches of the Neighborhood, and in Opposition to the Body of neighboring
Ministers. But the prevailing Part of the Council, as it was called by the
first Church in Springfield, did not consist of Churches that were so remote
from them. Of the Eight Churches which the Church in Springfield applied to
upon this Occasion, Four of them were in that County: If one of them would not
come, and by this Means the major Part of the Churches that convened were not
of the County, it is owing only to the Failure of that Church; and is not to be
imputed to Springfield Church, nor to the Council. If the Rev. Mr. Williams of
Hatfield, could but have been prevailed upon to have come with his Church, as
he was earnestly desired and entreated, they would not have had it to say, That
the prevailing Part of the Council came from remote Parts.

But if the major Part of the Council were not of what they call neighboring
Churches; was it not a regular, nor so much as a valid Council because of this?
Are Churches in the calling of Councils limited to the Vicinity, so that it is
an Irregularity and Offense in them, if they don't take the next neighboring
Churches, and no other? This is what these Gentlemen assert; and they deliver
it not only as their own Opinion, but say it was evidently the Mind of the
Composers of the Platform: For they when they direct to, or mention any
Application to be made by a particular Church to other Churches, from Time to
Time specify neighbor Churches. In the 15th Chapter of the Platform,
concerning the Communion of Churches, there is mention made several Times of
Councils of neighbor Churches; and no mention of any other; yea, the Platform
is wholly a Stranger to any Councils, but what are made up of neighbor
Churches: Why don't the Platform say barely Councils of Churches? Why does it
add such limiting Expressions from Time to Time, unless it be a Direction to
Churches where to go for Councils?

It is likely these Gentlemen have, upon this Occasion, been roused up to look
into the Platform; yet it is plain they have not read it with a due Care and
Attention: if they had they would never have asserted, That as often as it
directs a particular Church to apply to other Churches, it specifies neighbor
Churches; nor have asked, Why don't the Platform barely say Councils of
Churches? Why does it add such limiting Expressions from Time to Time? The good
Gentlemen have been in too great a Haft; if they would stop a little, and
sedately consult the Platform a second Time, they would find it often and often
mentions barely Councils of Churches, without adding such a Limitation as they
speak of: If they would look again into that 15th Chapter, concerning the
Communion of Churches, which they quote, they will find it begins with
declaring, That ALL the Churches ought to preserve Communion one with another,
because they are ALL united unto Christ, not only as a Mystical, but as a
Political Head, whence is derived a Communion suitable thereunto. It then goes
on to mention the several Ways in which Communion of Churches is to be
exercised, One of which is by way of Consultation one with another, when they
have Occasion for the Judgment and Counsel of OTHER CHURCHES, touching any
Person or Cause, etc. And it adds a little after, If a particular Church in
Case of Division or Scandal, refuse to consult with OTHER CHURCHES, it is
matter of just Offense, etc. In these Places it barely mentions other Churches,
without any the least Restriction. We might turn to many more such Passages,
but one shall suffice, which comes nearest to the present Case: In the 9th
Chapter, concerning Ordination, and Imposition of Hands, having asserted the
ordaining as well as electing Power with which every particular Church is
vested, by saying, Sect. 4. In such Churches where there are no Elders,
Imposition of Hands may be performed by some of the Brethren, orderly chosen by
the Church thereunto; It adds in Sect. 5, Nevertheless, in Churches where there
are no Elders, and the Church so desire, we see not why Imposition of Hands may
not be performed by the Elders of OTHER CHURCHES. It is said here other
Churches at large, and not neighbor Churches; such as the Church whose Officer
is to be ordained shall choose and desire to perform that Service; and without
such a Desire, we presume the Elders of the very next Church cannot claim any
Right to act in the Affair.

It is true, mention is sometimes made of neighbor Churches; but, by comparing
one Place with another, we cannot suppose that the Compilers of the Platform
always meant by neighbor Churches, those that were situated next to one
another; but Churches in Communion with one another, by professing the same
Faith and Order of the Gospel, so situated as that they could and would afford
Assistance to one another, as the same should be needed and desired. To be sure
they never meant to confine a particular Church in calling a Council, to such a
Circle as a County or an Association; for this would be to destroy the
Congregational Scheme, and to make the Government of our Churches not
Congregational, but Classical; whereas the Platform declares, Chap. 2. Sect. 5.
That the Government of the Church since the Coming of Christ, is not National,
Provincial nor Classical, but Congregational only: If therefore the Platform is
consistent with it self, it must leave the Communion of Churches in the several
Acts and Ways of it, more at large than these Gentlemen would have it to be.
Agreably the Synod, in 1662, In Answer to this Question propounded to them by
the General Court, viz. Whether according to the Word of God there ought to be
a Consociation of Churches, and what should be the Manner of it? Having said,
That one Act of Communion of Churches, is to seek and accept Help from, and
give Help to each other, in Matters of more than ordinary Importance, such as
Ordination of Elders, and in doubtful and difficult Questions and
Controversies, doctrinal or practical, that may arise, goes on to say, 'Tho' in
this there should be special Reference to those Churches, which are planted in
a convevenient Vicinity; yet there should be LIBERTY WITHOUT OFFENSE TO MAKE
USE OF OTHERS, as the Nature of the Case, and the Advantage of Opportunity, may
lead thereto. And a particular Church is the sole Judge, when their Case leads
them to make Use of others. The Mind of our Fathers upon this Point is
certainly best known by their Practice: Now it has been the Custom of the
Churches in the Country from the Beginning, to exercise this Liberty in calling
of Councils, to apply to other Churches according to their own Discretion,
without being confined to Churches of such a Circle or Division. This has been
the Practice particularly in Ordinations; on which Occasions, as well as other,
Churches at a remote Distance, and even in other Provinces, do, to this Day,
exercise Comunion with one another; and never was any Offense taken at it till
now.

And this has been pleaded for, as the Right of Congregational Churches, by
such as have wrote in Defense of their Way of Government; and some who much
better knew the Mind of the Composers of the Platform than these Gentlemen. The
learned and venerable Doctor Increase Mather, in his Disquisition concerning
Ecclesiastical Councils, p. 31, 32. enters his vehement Dissent from a Proposal
that carries in it such a Limitation as this; and says, "Churches whose Case
calls for a Council, ought not to have their Liberties infringed." -- So that
upon the whole we cannot but think these Gentlemen have mistaken the Sense of
the Platform, and the Mind of the Composers of it, as well as of the
Legislators of the Province: For as our Platform of Discipline has been
approved and recommended by the General Court, we cannot but suppose when they
mention neighboring Churches in any of the Laws, it is to be understood of
those who are such in the Sense of the Platform. The Legislative Authority has
taken Care to establish the Liberty of the Churches to them in the fullest and
largest Manner, and not in the least wise to curtail them. In the present Act
for the Support and Settlement of Ministers, it is declared in these Words,
"The respective Churches in the several Towns within this Province, shall at
all Times hereafter, use, exercise and enjoy all their Privileges and Freedoms
respecting divine Worship, Church Order, and Discipline; and shall be
encouraged in the regular and peaceable Profession and Practice thereof.

But if neither the Platform, nor the Province Law, has constituted them the
Judges in this Case, they think they have a higher Claim that what is founded
on either of these. PROVIDENCE, they say, has assigned it to us, by placing the
religious State of our Neighborhood under our View, and by making us by our
Situation most capable of understanding it, and of advising and acting upon it.
But we think other Things must concur with their Situation, before they can
found their claim in Providence. The Affair must be put into their Hands, by
those nextly concerned, (i. e. by the Church of Springfield it self) or by some
superior lawful Authority, before they can say Providence has assigned it to
them; notwithstanding their Situation may be very convenient.

They go on to say, Besides, it is most reasonable, that wherein other Churches
are concerned, it should be neighboring Churches; because next to the Church
it self, the Interest of neighbor Churches is concerned. If this is ordinarily
proper and fitting, yet it is not absolutely necessary, nor always reasonable.
It is very possible neighboring Churches may have differing Apprehensions in
Points of Order and Government from a particular Church in the Neighborhood;
and in such a Case should not a particular Church be at their Liberty, to apply
to such Churches as most agree with them in Principles? It is also very
possible the nearest Churches, or the Pastors of them, may be prejudiced, or
pre-ingaged, in a Controversy that calls for the Judgment of other Churches.
And it is more than possible the Body of Pastors in an Association, or
Neighborhood, may be related to one another; and it may be observed of them,
that they commonly hang together, and are all affected or disaffected, to a
Person or Business, as some particular Ones among them are.

But where it is on some Accounts most fitting that neighboring Churches
should be employed, must all be applied to that call themselves neighbor
Churches? And if any of them are not applied to, is there Occasion given them
to cry out of their being injured, or denied their Rights? The Church in
Springfield did upon this Occasion apply to neighboring Churches, and three of
them came and concurred in the Ordination; and the second Minister in Age in
their own County presided in it, and gave the Charge, as another of them did
the Right Hand of Fellowship. Yet these Gentlemen will say, It was done in
Neglect of the Churches of the Neighborhood, because their particular Churches
were not applied to.

But they complain of something more than a bare Neglect, that it was done in
Opposition to the Body of neighboring Ministers. It is true their Association
was divided upon Mr. Breck's Case. It consisted, (as one of these Gentlemen
informed us,) of thirteen; and seven of them were against the Church's
Proceeding to his Settlement. So that at best Things lay among them at sixs and
sevens. But had there been a greater Union amongst themselves, unless this Body
of Ministers had the Right of Jurisdiction over the first Church in
Springfield, their mere Opposition ought not to prevail to stop the Proceedings
of the Church, or of the Council: And this their Right of Jurisdiction is still
to be made out, notwithstanding all they here say to support their Claim of it.

Was the Claim of these Gentlemen to be allowed, and their Scheme of Government
once suffered to take Place in the Country, the Churches would have little but
the Name of their Liberties left unto them. What they assert, and contend for,
is plainly this, That the Judgment of Ecclesiastical Cases, which are bro't out
of a particular Church to other Churches, belongs to neighboring Ministers and
Churches, and to THEM ONLY: Other Ministers and Churches that live out of the
Vicinity must not be so much as joined with them in any Case; this is to
intermeddle in their Affairs. They by their Situation are best able to judge,
and so Providence has assigned it to them; to them therefore it must be bro't,
and by them it must be issued; and there don't seem so much as an Appeal to be
allowed. This is evidently the Scheme by their whole Talk under this Head. And
a fine Scheme it is to fetter and enslave the Churches; and have Things carried
according to the Will, Humor, Prejudice, or arbitrary Disposition of a
particular Set of Ministers. Where did they get this Scheme of Government? And
by what Name shall it be called? It differs as much from the Presbyterian as it
does from the Congregational. The Government in the Church of Scotland compared
with this, is a Government of Liberty: For they are very far from thus
confining Things within the Circle of a Neighborhood. If a Difficulty arises
among them about settling a vacant Congregation, though that Presbytery first
judges upon the Case; yet if either Party does not like their Judgment, they
may appeal to the Synod, made up of six or ten Presbyterys from several
Countys; and if they like not their Determination, they may from them appeal to
the General Assembly of that Church. But as our Constitution has not such
Appeals belonging to it, it is the more unreasonable and dangerous to confine
Church Affairs to such a narrow Circle.

[2.] Another Reason they give why those Elders and Messengers of Churches that
sat in Judgment on this Case, were not orderly called thereto, is, That it was
in a disorderly Manner taken out of the Hands of the Association of the
Ministers of this County, after it had been referred to them by the first
Church in Springfield themselves, and by Mr. Breck. But whoever will be at the
Pains to look into their Narrative, and observe the Account they give of the
Case in the Rise and Process of it, will soon see they took it into their Hands
before they were desired, and without its being at all referred to them either
by the Church, or Mr. Breck. We will here give a Breviate of their Account, in
order to set this Matter in its true Light.

Some Time in May, 1734, the first Parish in Springfield made their Application
to Mr. Breck, to preach to them in Order to Settlement. P. 2.

August 15th, That People proceeded to give him a Call, etc. And about the same
Time Mr. Williams of Springfield received a Letter from his Brother, the Rev.
Mr. Williams of Mansfield (in Connecticut) telling him that by what he had
understood concerning Mr. Breck's Principles and Morals, he was not a suitable
Person to be employed in the Work of the Ministry: And if there should be
Occasion for a more particular Account, if they would write to him, and Messi.
Kirtland and Clap, they would give it. P. 2, 3.

At Westfield Lecture, Sept. 4th, Mr. Williams of Springfield communicated this
Letter, to the Rev. Messi. Williams of Hatfield, Devotion, Hopkins, Raynolds,
Bull and Ashley; who thought it advisable Messi. Devotion and Hopkins, should
each of them take a Copy of the Letter, and show it to Mr. Breck. P. 3.

Not long after Mr. Kirtland and Clap were desired to send the Objections they
had against him. P. 3

The Papers that contained these Objections, were received at their Association
Meeting at Suffield, October 10th, and were read in the Association. P. 4.

After this Mr. Breck gives his Answer to the People of Springfield, which
contained Proposals of his own, higher than those the People had made him,
which the Precinct did not comply with, and so he left them. P. 13.

This brings us from May to November, about six Months; and all this while
there is not the least Intimation of a Desire from the Church and Parish, that
they would concern themselves in the Affair: So that to be sure they took it
into their Hands, before it was at all referred to them.

But

Not long after he went away, there appeared a Disposition in many of the
People to renew their Call to him; which occasioned the following Votes,

Springfield, November 8. 1734. At a Meeting of the first Precinct of said
Town, 1. Voted, That this Precinct take such suitable Methods as they shall
think proper, to inform themselves of Mr. Breck's Removal from us; it being
commonly, reported that some Persons of Note, have endeavored to obstruct his
Settlement here, by Writings lodged in the Hands of some of the neighboring
Ministers: And to inform themselves whether or no those Allegations are
sufficient to obstruct his Settlement. And whether or no it may be convenient
for this Precinct to make any further Application to Mr. Breck, in order to a
Settlement here in the Work of the Ministry. 2. Voted for a Committee to
prosecute said Affair, by applying themselves for Advice to the Ministers of
the County, and make Report to the next Meeting. P. 13.

This Committee, upon their Application to the neighboring Ministers,
according to the foregoing Votes, had the following Advice given them, viz.

Upon Consideration of the Case of Mr. Robert Breck, represented to us in some
Letters from Windham and Norwich, we think it advisable that the People of
Springfield do no farther make their Application to him. Signed by six of the
Ministers. P. 13, 14.

Though the foregoing Advice was produced in their Meeting, yet the Precinct went
into a Vote to invite Mr. Breck to preach the Word of God to them in order to
Settlement. P. 14.

Mr. Breck upon Application made to him returns to Springfield, and some Time
after the Parish sends to the Association which met there April 1735, That they
would please to let them know, Whether there was any just Impediment to his
being settled with them in the Work of the Ministry, and in Case there was,
What Methods were proper for the removing of it.

The Association gave this Advice, That the Matters objected against Mr. Breck
by Mr. Clap and others, should be fully heard and determined by a Committee of
the Association, either here or in the County of Windham, (i.e. by Windham
Association.) And voted, That the Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield, Mr. Chauncey,
Mr. Devotion, Mr. Williams of Springfield, Mr. Raynolds, and Mr. Bull, be a
Committee to hear and determine the Matter if desired. P. 28, 29.

This is all that was done by the People; and yet the Gentlemen will have it
that the People did of their own Accord put the Matter into their Hands; and so
they go on to argue very notably, That if they put the Case into their Hands of
their own Accord, then they could not regularly take it out of their Hands; and
if they could not regularly take it out of their Hands, they could not
regularly put it into other Hands; when nothing can be plainer from their own
Account, than this, That after they had of their own Accord taken the Case into
their Hands, and had it there a long Time, the People of Springfield only sent
to them to be informed what the Impediment in the Way of Mr. B -- 's Settlement
was, and what Methods they would advise to for the Removal of them.

The Method which the Association advised to for the Removal of the
Difficulties, viz. to have the Matter heard and determined by Windham
Association, or by that Committee of their own which they had chosen, the
People of Springfield thought they had sufficient Reasons not to comply with:
And their not complying with this Advice, is represented as a Thing very
disorderly and irregular. Nay they carry the Matter further, and say, That as
it was irregular not to comply with the Advice of the Association to have the
Matter heard by their Committee, so, if the Matter had been heard by them, and
they had given their Judgment upon it, it would not have been regular in them
to have acted against it. The Argument here is so pleasant that we will give it
the Reader in their own Words, by transcribing the whole Paragraph that
contains it, in P. 82. If we suppose it to be in their Power to refer it to
whom they would, yet certainly it was a disorderly Thing for them to take it
out of the Hands of the Association, after they themselves had of their own
Accord put it into them, before ever they had had any Opportunity to give their
Judgment in the Case, because it was before they had Opportunity to hear Mr.
Breck and the Witnesses face to face; and that for no other Reason but because
they insisted on such a Hearing before they gave their Judgments. If the
Association had given their Judgment, and their Judgment had not suited them,
it would not have been regular in them, after they had referred it to their
Judgment, to have acted without any kind of Regard to it, merely because they
did not judge that Way that they would have had them; because this would be
nothing but Confusion; they would herein have been inconsistent with
themselves; there is a gross Absurdity in their referring the Matter to our
Judgment and Advice, unless it was to be directed; the very Notion of asking
Advice is to ask others Judgment to be directed, but it is impossible and
self-contradictory that any one should ask judgment to be directed, that is
already fully determined, that let the Judgment be which Way it will, he will
go no other Way than this; but it was yet more disorderly to take the Case out
of the Hands of the Association, after they themselves had put into their
Hands, before ever they had Opportunity to make any Judgment. And if it was
irregularly taken out of their Hands, it could never be regularly in any other
Hands. What can be finer! It must be put into their Hands, they told us before,
it properly belonged to them, and none else; for by Reason of their Situation,
and other Circumstances, they were best able to judge in it: Being put into
their Hands, it must not be taken out till they have given their final
Judgment; and when they have given it, it must not be disregarded or receded
from: No! This would be irregular, and bring Confusion; and it is absurd to ask
Advice, unless it be to be directed; for the very Notion of asking Advice, is
to ask others Judgment to be directed. But, Dear Sirs! to be directed, how? Any
otherwise than to be assisted in making a Judgment for themselves? We think
there is a gross Absurdity in calling of it Advice, and yet making it to be
binding and obligatory; and that the very Notion of asking Advice, supposes a
Capacity and Right in them that ask it to judge at last for themselves. If it
must be followed, however unsuitable in the Judgment of those to whom it is
given, pray don't call it Advice, but by its proper Name, Law, or Command. But
if to ask Advice of an Association, does thus take away the Right of private
Judgment, they that value their own Liberty, or (to use your own Words, when
you assert your own Right to judge for your selves, p. 68.) think themselves
Partakers with the Rest of their Species of the Nature of rational Creatures,
will be very cautious how they ask any Advice of them.

But let us now see whether the Church in Springfield, and Mr. Breck, had not
sufficient Reason for not complying with the Advice of the Association, to have
the Matter heard and determined by the Committee aforesaid. There were six
Reverend Gentlemen put upon this Committee; Mr. Breck objected against one of
them, namely. Mr. Williams of Long-Meadow, as a Person prejudiced; and prayed
the Favor of his being taken off, and then he should be free to leave the
Matter to the Judgment of the other five: And, that his Request might be the
more readily complied with, added, that the Committee at present consisted of
an even Number, which was not looked upon convenient in such Cases; and as the
Committee was large, one might well enough be spared. But Mr. Williams, it
seems, was not willing to exclude himself, and so the Association were not
willing to exclude him; and it was said, It was not fit Mr. Breck should
dictate to the Association: though to remedy the Inconvenience of an even Number,
another Gentleman was added, but one though it to be very far from being favorably
disposed to Mr. Breck; and so the Committee consisted of seven, which was the
major Part of the whole Association; -- and they had as good have resolved
themselves into a Committee of the whole House. This was certainly an
unreasonable Piece of Stiffness in the Association; and it does not excuse the
Matter for them to say, Mr. Breck objected against Mr. Williams as a prejudiced
Person, but without offering any Reason. That was Reason eno'; it was
sufficient to say he looked upon him prejudiced. Upon this Mr. Williams ought
immediately to have excused himself, and all other Judicatures would have taken
him off. This gave Mr. Breck little Reason to expect much Favor from these
Gentlemen in their after Managements: Therefore he made another Request to the
Moderator of the Association, the Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield, that he might
have Liberty to join two or three Gentlemen from abroad with them: and though He
might consent to it, as they say he did, p. 29. yet others did not; and their
mentioning of it in such a way as looks as if it was conceeded to, because he
consented to it, when others did not consent, is a Kind of Fallacy, and tends
to impose upon the World: For when the same Proposal was afterward made by
others, in Mr. Breck's Name, and at his Desire, we know several of these
Gentlemen manifested their Dislike of it, and would not give their Consent. And
now is it to be wondered at if Mr. Breck was not willing to leave his Case in
which his Character, Usefulness, and almost every Thing dear to him in this
World was concerned, in the Hands of those, who (though very good and worthy Men)
had now evidently received Impressions to his Disadvantage? Or is it to be
wondered at that the Church, instead of leaving it to this Committee of the
Association, or to the Windham Association, should choose the Method more
agreeable to our Constitution, to have the Affair heard and judged of by a
Council of Churches? Upon the whole, we think these Gentlemen instead of
complaining that the Affair was irregularly taken out of their Hands, should
blame themselves that by their unreasonable Stiffness put it out of their
Hands. -- Their third Reason in Order stands thus,

[3.] As to those three Elders that belong to this County, that sat in Council
as Judges of this Case, they each of them had once before openly in
Association, given their Judgments, and upon a formal Consideration, and where
the Matter was particularly discussed and debated; -- therefore it is against
common Sense that they should sit in Judgment on the same Case again. The
Gentlemen seem to have short Memories: For but the Page before this, they
complain very sadly that the Matter was taken out of the Hands of the
Association, before (...) they had had Opportunity to give their Judgment in
the Case, because it was before they had Opportunity to hear Mr. Breck and the
Witnesses Face to Face; and the same Complaint is often renewed in different
Patts of their Book; yet here they tells us the Matter was particularly
discussed and debated in the Association, and that upon a formal Consideration
of the Case, these Gentlemen had openly given their Judgment. All the Remark we
will make upon this, shall be in their own Words, p. 71. "A remarkable Instance
of the strange Insensibility, and ridiculous Inconsistence that those are
sometimes subject to, that are under the Power of strong Prejudice!" But lest
any should think by this formal Consideration of the Case in the Association,
they were all disqualified to be upon the Council, they take Care to tells us
they had suspended their Judgment, and so it would have been no Objection
against themselves, if they had been applied to.

The Ministers of their own County being thus disqualified, they go on to tell
of some Thing that as much disqualified those that came from Boston; They had
joined in giving him a Certificate of his Orthodoxy. That they were mistaken in
this, because but one of them did so, we have had Occasion to say already. But
if all of them had, How the signing a Testimonial, that a Man answered
orthodoxly to such Questions as were put to him in an Examination, disqualifies
those Persons from giving their Judgment about Expressions delivered at another
Time, upon a formal Hearing where the Witnesses and Party are Face to Face, we
must confess our selves at a Loss to understand, and believe others will be so
too. Their next Objection is

[4.] They were of all them chosen by those that were a Party in the Case. As
to those Elders that belonged to this County, they were chosen by that Part of
the Church that had made themselves a Party with Mr. Breck. This is the first
Time that ever we heard a Church, acting as a Body, with so great Unanimity as
the first Church in Springfield did in this Affair, called a Party. It appears
by their Narrative, P. 34. that but four of the Brethren dissented from the
Proceedings of the Church when they met to choose the Ordination Council. If
they had called these four, with whom they have taken Part, a Party, there
would have been much more Propriety in it, than to call the Body of the Church
by that Name. To speak of a Society, acting according to the Rules of Society,
with so great Unanimity, as a Party, seems very odd, and to discover too much
of a Party-Spirit.

But to whom did it belong to choose what Churches should be applied to, but the
Church it self? If we consult the Platform upon this, we shall find it puts the
calling of a Council when there is need of one upon any Occasion, into the
Hands of the Church, and not of a Party dissatisfied with the Proceedings of a
Church. And the Law of the Province does the fame: For if there happens a
Difference at any Time between the Church and the Inhabitants about the Call
and Settlement of a Minister, so as that the Inhabitants do not concur with the
Choice of the Church, the Law says the Church may call a Council of Churches to
hear the Reasons of their Dissatisfaction, and if the Council judge them not to
be sufficient, the Minister the Church has chosen shall be accounted the
Minister of the Parish. Indeed the Case of Springfield happily differs in this,
That the Inhabitants concur with the Church in the Choice of Mr. Breck, by a
very great Majority; and therefore we only mention the Law of the Province in
this Case, to show that the Right and Power to call a Council, when there are a
Number dissenting from the Choice of a Minister, is lodged with (...) and not
with a dissatisfied Party, though (...) very large. But, say these Gentlemen,
(...) of a congregational Church, in such a Case to choose all the Judges, then
the Rights of congregational Churches are built on the Ruins of the common
Rights of Mankind; and if so they stand upon but a very poor Foundation. But we
think this is to argue very weakly and falsely; for it is agreeable to the common
Rights of Mankind as united in Societies, that the Majority should rule. And as
these dissatisfied Brethren had an equal Vote with every other Member of the
Society, both in the Choice of a Minister, and in the Choice of the Ordination
Council, there is no Foundation for the Complaint of their being denied the
common Rights of Mankind. They had indeed a Right to have their Objections and
Complaints fairly beard by the Council which the Church had called; and
therefore the Church seasonably passed a Vote, and sent it to them, wherein was
signified that they might have Opportunity to offer their Objections against
Mr. Breck's Settlement, the Day before that which was appointed for Ordination,
to the Council they expected would then convene: And to do this they had all
the Opportunity and Liberty that could be, given them by the Council. And it
was further offered to them in an Interview which the Brethren of the Church
had with their dissatisfied Brethren, about a Fortnight or three Weeks before
the Council met the second Time, that they might have the Liberty to join a
Number of other Churches to them; but they would not accept the Offer, without
a Council entirely new was called, and the Churches which the Church had
applied to were set aside. But if this be the Right of one or two dissenting
Brethren in a Church, we think it is built on the Ruins of the common Rights of
Societies.

[5.] Their fifth Reason is, Because the major Part of the Council was chosen
by Mr. Breck himself, and it is contrary to the Light and Sense of all Mankind,
that a Man should choose his own Judges, because this is in Effect to give him
Liberty to choose his own Judgment. It is true that the Church gave Mr. Breck
Liberty to nominate some of the Churches they should apply to; but not the
major Part; and this is no more than is given to all Candidates. Dr. Cotton
Mather in his Ratio Discipline, etc. where he gives an Account of the Method of
Ordinations in these Churches, mentions it, P. 22. as the universal Custom for
the Church to agree with the Candidate what Churches to apply to upon the
Occasion. But though the Church, with Mr. Breck, did choose the Churches that
should be addressed to meet in Council upon this Occasion, yet to choose the
Churches cannot be said to choose the Judges, so as in Effect to choose the
Judgment; since the Churches choose their own Delegates, and in Councils the
Delegates that are not Pastors, are always equal to, and commonly more in
Number than the Pastors, and are as much the Judges, and vote with them when
the Council give their Judgment upon the Case on which they are convened. --
But these Gentlemen seem to have reserved their greatest Strength till the last
Effort; for in no Part of the Argument do they exercise their Talent more
notably, than when they come to say,

6. The major Part of the Council were not regularly called, even according to
their own Principles; and that because the Churches they belonged to were never
applied to by Springfield Church; -- therefore whatsover is acted by them as
thus inter-meddling, without being so called, must be null and void: so that
the Act of the Churches of Boston and Sudbury in choosing Delegates to assist
in ordaining an Officer in Springfield Church, was null and void, because they
had never been applied to by Springfield Church. If this was so, they might
well say we intermeddled with an Affair that did not belong to us, and
pronounce all our Acts to be null and void; for we acknowledge our very Being
as a Council, and consequently the Validity of all our Proceedings, depends
upon the Call of the first Church in Springfield If Associations may take
Matters into their Hands before they are put there, we don't think Councils
should. Therefore to let the World see we did not run before we were called, we
shall here give a Copy of one of the Letters missive;

To the Reverened Benjamin Colman, D. D. and Mr. William Cooper, Pastors of the
fourth Church of Christ in Boston, to be communicated to the Church.
Springfield, August 5. 1735. Reverend and dearly Beloved,
IT having pleased Almighty God to lay his afflicting Hand upon this Place, by
taking away from us our Pastor, the Rev. Mr. Brewer, by Death, so that for some
Time this Church and Flock have been as Sheep having no Shepherd. We therefore
the first Church in Springfield, together with the Concurrence of the
Inhabitants of the first Precinct in said Town, have invited the Rev. Mr.
Robert Breck, after a considerable Acquaintance with him and his Ministerial
Abilities, to take upon him the Charge of this Flock To a Compliance with which
Request and Invitation it has pleased God to incline his Heart. And now being
desirous to have him Ordained over us, we have therefore appointed Wednesday
the Eighth of October next to be the Day for setting him solemnly apart to the
Work of the Ministry, by Prayer and the laying on the Hands of the Presbytery.
Wherefore we pray the Company of one or both of your Reverend Elders, and such
a Delegate as you shall think sit to appoint on that Day, that so that great
Work may be regularly carried on amongst us. So committing you to God and the
good Word of his Grace,

We are, Your Brethren in the Bonds and Fellowship of the Gospel, Nathanael
Mun, Henry Burt, Joseph Williston, Luke Hitchcock, Luke Hitchcock, 2d. In the
Name of the rest.


Letters of the same Import were sent to all the other Churches. But they say
the Committee that signed the Letters to the Churches, not only signed that in
the Church's Name that never had been any Act or Vote of the Church, but the
Church never gave that Committee power to act for them in choosing Churches to
assist: And the Church did not only not give this Committee Power to choose
Churches to assist, but they never so much as appointed them to send for those
that Mr. Breck should choose; but made Mr. Breck their Committee, though not yet a
Member of the Church, and appointed a certain Person to go and wait on those
Elders that he should choose. What they mean by saying the Church made Mr. Breck
their Committee, though not one of the Church, is not easy to conceive; for he is
not named as one of the Committee that signed the Letters, nor was he appointed
to carry them. The Votes of the Church respecting the Affair of the Ordination
they give us a Copy of in their Narrative, P. 33. and they run thus,

At a Meeting of the first Church in Springfield, regularly met August 4. 1735.
Luke Hitchcock 2d chosen Clerk.

1. Voted to choose Elders for to ordain the worthy Mr. Robert Breck, viz. The
Rev. Mr. William Williams of Hatfield, Mr. Isaac Chauncey of Hadley, Mr.
Ebenezer Devotion of Suffield, Mr. William Rand of Sunderland.

2. Voted to choose a Committee to manage the Affairs with Respect to the
Ordination, viz. Deacon Nathaniel Mun, Deacon Henry Burt, Mr. Joseph Williston,
Mr. Luke Hitchcock, senior, Mr. Luke Hitchcock, 2d.

3. Mr. John Burt chosen to go to Boston, as a Messenger to the Elders that Mr.
Breck shall choose to ordain him.

The Church had not at this Time a Pastor at their Head, but were left to
manage for themselves as well as they could, and so their Votes are not drawn
up in so methodical and expressive a Manner, as they might have been;
nevertheless the true Intent and Meaning of them is very plain to any one that
has a Mind to understand them, and no Design to pervert them. The Church
regularly met to vote upon Affairs respecting the Ordination; they chose four
of the Elders, that with their Churches, they desired might assist; thinking
the Churches were sufficiently distinguished by naming their Elders; than which
nothing is more common: And as for sending to Elders without their Churches, it
never entered into their Hearts. The naming the other four was left with Mr.
Breck. And they chose a Committee to manage the Affairs respecting the
Ordination; and one necessary Affair for which they were chosen, was to sign
Letters to the several Churches of which these Elders were the Pastors. And
because some of these Elders lived at Boston, they chose another of their
Number to be their Messenger to carry the Letters to them This is the plain
State of the Case, and this was the true Intent and Meaning of the Church, as
they afterward declared in a Body. For when the Council met at Springfield, it
was soon suggested to them, that truly they were never applied to by
Springfield Church: Therefore at a Meeting of the Church by Adjournment the
next Day, we thought it proper to inquire of them, Whether the Letters we had
received came from that Church, and the Committee that signed them in their
Name were appointed and authorized by them so to do? And they universally
answered in the Affirmative. This the Gentlemen have represented in P. 89, as
our being accepted as a Council after our coming up to Springfield by a Vote of
the Church, to supply the Defect of their not sending to us. And in the 88th
Page, having said, That the Act of the Churches of Boston and Sudbury in
choosing of Delegates to assist in or daining an Officer in Springfield Church,
was null and void, because they had never been applied to by Springfield
Church, they go on to argue, and if that Act was null and void when done, the
Vote of Springfield Church that was passed afterward, could not make it valid;
when in Truth no Vote of this Nature was passed, or asked for, or so much as
thought of: There was only a plain Question asked the Church, to which they
returned an Answer. It is therefore a very false Representation which they make
of this Matter, and they have herein imposed upon the World, and abused both
the Church and the Council; but it is not the first nor the last Time of their
doing so.

They go on in their Argument against the Regularity of the Council, and seem
to think it increases in Strength as it does in Length: To cut us all up by the
Roots at once, they say, Indeed not only that Part of the Council that came
from Boston and Sudbury were not regularly called according to congregational
Principles, but neither that Part that belonged to this County, for the Church
never voted to desire the Assistance of any Church at all, or any of their
Lay-Delegates, and voted for none but certain Presbyters by Name; the Church
did nothing that by congregational Principles they had any Business to do,
which was to desire the Assistance of other Churches, and did not only that
which they had no Business to do, (viz.) choose particular Persons out of other
Churches to assist, which by congregational Principles belonged not to them,
but to those other Churches they belonged to. So that by congregational
Principles all they did was null, and THERE WAS NOT ONE SOUL OF THAT COUNCIL
HAD ANT BUSINESS THERE according to the Platform, but their being there was in
Opposition to it. The whole Weight of this swelling Argument rests upon this,
that only Elders are mentioned in the Church's Votes; though there is not any
Question to be made, but they intended the Churches of which they were the
Elders, and in their Letters those Churches were addressed to send their Elders
and other Delegates. The Gentlemen are very welcome to any Advantage they can
make from so mean a Cavil, which none but the lowest Sort of Disputants would
make Use of -- But supposing Springfield Church had only desired the Assistance
of certain Elders by Name, and those Elders had, with the Consent of their
Churches, come to them, and carried on the Ordination, being satisfied as to
the Man's Qualifications for the Ministry, to say that this is contrary to
congregational Principles, and according to those Principles is null and void,
discovers they have no thorough Acquaintance with those Principles they pretend
to judge upon. The Platform in the Chapter of Ordination, Sect. 5, says, The
Imposition of Hands may be performed by the Elders of other Churches, if the
Church whose Officer is to be ordained so desire. And the Synod of 1662,
speaking of the Communion of Churches, says it is exercised by making Use
occasionally of Elders, or able Brethren of other Churches, or by the more
solemn Meetings of both Elders and Messengers in lesser or greater Councils, as
the Matter shall require. But it may be the Gentleman who thus lays about him
to invalidate the Springfield Ordination, had best not strike too furiously,
lest the Blows should reverberate upon himself; For, if we have been rightly
informed, only certain Elders by Name were invited to carry on his own
Ordination, and these never so much as chosen by the Church he was ordained to;
though we don't suspect he has any Design to invalidate his own Ordination, and
we have such a Respect both for the Person and Ministry of this Brother, that
we would not go about to invalidate it neither, though it were only upon
congregational Principles.

There is another Argument these Gentlemen make much Use of, though it does not
stand distinctly by it self, but seems rather to run through their whole
Performance, and to be interwoven with almost every single Argument, viz. That
the Method taken by Springfield Church, and their Council, makes void all
Endeavors any Ministers can use to hinder the settling of heterodox Ministers,
and to prevent the Growth of Error in the Country. -- That we have opened a
Door for the letting in of Error, etc. and this at a Time when they apprehend
the State of the Land requires that the Care that is taken in such Cases be not
slighty, but thorough and effectual. We have, perhaps, as good Opportunity to
know the State of the Land, (i. e. of the Churches in the Land,) as themselves;
and we are as apprehensive as they are, that it requires that the Care that is
taken in the Settlement of Ministers respecting their Orthodoxy, should be not
slighty, but as thorough and effectual as may be. But from the Knowledge that
we have of the State of the Land, we are fully persuaded the Care of Councils
respecting this Matter, is likely to be as thorough and effectual as that of
Associations. In this Way Purity of Doctrine has been preserved in these
Churches, for more than a hundred Years: And if future Councils will take as
much Care in this Respect, as the Springfield Council has done, we hope there
will yet be Truth in our Day; though whether our Care has been slighty or
thorough, the Reader will not be able to judge, till we come to show the
Grounds upon which we proceeded, which will be done in its proper Place. But
our proposed Method leads us in the next Place,

III. To reply to those Things with which they charge the Council in general,
or some particular Members of it, to bring an Odium upon them.

In general they charge us with Prejudice and Violence, and say this was many
Ways evident by our Conduct.

In one Place it is suggested as if we had given Mr. Breck our Promise to come
and ordain him; and for this they bring in the Rev. Mr. Allis as a Voucher.
They say, P. 33, 34. The Rev. Mr. Allis, coming directly from Mr. Breck, told
some of us, that Mr. Breck intended it should not be known, what Churches out
of the County should be sent to, till the Letters to call them were actually
gone. And Mr. Allis added, There was no Doubt but Mr. B -- would be ordained,
for he had got some Gentlemen's Promise, that they would come and ordain him.
This Mr. Allis is a Gentleman of their own Association, and has given us
Authority to contradict them in what they here say he told them. In a Letter to
one of us, dated April 5, 1736, he says, These are to inform you that what is
produced in the Narrative, as an Argument to prove that you Boston Ministers
were prejudiced in the Affair of Mr. B -- 's Ord nation, and were not fit to
fit as Judges in the Case, because as they say, I told them that Mr. B --
intended it should not be known what Churches out of the County should be sent
to, till the Letters to call them were actually gone; and that there was no
doubt but he would be ordained, for he had got some Gentlemen's Promise that
they would come and ordain him, is not so; for upon the strictest Recollection
in the World, I cannot remember any such Expression, and have told the Gentlemen
since they must needs be mistaken, and then repeated to them what I did say,
which was vastly different from what they represent. To be sure the Suggestion,
let it come from whom it will, is groundless and false. We now solemnly declare
Mr. B -- had never any such Promise from us; but on the contrary, we, (some of
us at least) took Occasion once and again to say to Mr. B -- himself, and those
that bro't the Letters to us, that if we should go up, they must not think we
came resolved to carry on an Ordination, but to hear and judge of what might be
objected, and if there was not full Satisfaction given as to Principles, we
should never lay our Hands on him. That we spoke to this Purpose to them, they
themselves openly declared, upon an Appeal which we made to them, before the
dissatisfied Brethren.

In the 90th Page some of us are charged with laying out our selves to be the
Persons that must be the Judges in the Case, long before the Church bad any
Meeting to choose any Body; which, they say, is particularly evident with
respect to the Moderator, by a Letter be sent up hither directed to the Rev.
Mr. Williams of Hatfield, to get us willing that he should come upon that
Business, pretending to be unwilling to come without our Consent; but when he
failed of obtaining that, be appeared fully resolved to come nevertheless.
This, like most of their other Matters, comes over twice; for they had told it
before in their Narrative, P. 37. But they have hereby doubly abused Mr.
Cooper, and basely misrepresented his Letter; the Design of which was not to
ask the Consent of any of them, to his coming up upon a Council, if the Church
of Springfield should apply to the Church of which he was a Pastor, and his
Church should vote to send; No; Mr. Cooper never thought their Consent at all
needful to that; But it was at Mr. Breck's Desire, and in his Name, to make the
Motion which he himself had made before, but did not think complied with, though
they once and again speak as if it was, viz. that when the Objections against
him from Connecticut were further heard in the Association, he might be allowed
to have two or three Ministers from abroad present, to hear those Matters, and
to use their good Offices as far as might be proper for them, to get the
Difficulties removed, for the greater Satisfaction, both of the People of
Springfield, and of Mr. Breck. Their Consent to this Proposal was needful; and
this is all that the Letter refers to. And if this Motion had been consented to
at this Time, on the Part of those Gentlemen, it may be the greatest
Difficulties had been removed, and the Things that followed prevented. Mr.
Breck also desired Mr. Cooper to write upon another Account, viz. to represent
to those Gentlemen the Affair of his Examination at Boston, according to the
Light in which it stood with him; which Mr. Cooper did the more readily,
because but a little before he had had considerable Discourse with Mr. Williams
of Long-Meadow upon that Affair, and spoke something of writing to Mr. Williams
of Hatfield about it.

The Letter now follows for the Reader to judge of.

To the Reverend Mr. William Williams of Hatfield.
Reverend and Honored Sir,
I Take occasion from some Discourse I had with Mr. Williams of Longmeadow,
when he was last in Town, to pay my Duty to you, and to give you a short and
true Representation of an Affair, wherein, with some other Ministers, I have
been concerned: I mean the Examination of Mr. Breck here at Boston, respecting
his Principles in Religion.

When Mr. Breck came to us with a Request that we would take him under such an
Examination, it was immediately objected to him, That as he had been preaching
at Springfield, and had a Call to Settlement in that Place, it was much more
proper for him to be examined by the Rev. Association there, than by the
Ministers here: That those Gentlemen might think we had taken an Affair upon
us, that did not immediately concern us, and so it might possibly disgust them,
and prejudice him. To which he answered, "That though he had a Call to
Springfield his Settlement there was at present Matter of Uncertainty; and he
had once already refused their Invitation. That if he did finally settle there,
he did not suppose this would set aside his Examination by those Ministers, and
that he should be free and ready to be examined by them also, if they desired
it. But there having been Reports concerning him in other Places, as a Person
of Heterodox Principles, particularly at Boston and Marlborough, (which some of
us knew to be true, though we had no Reason to think them well grounded) he though it
it concerned him to endeavor to secure his Character in these Parts; and that
this would be better done by an Examination here, than at any other Place." So
after some delay we proceeded, and gave him a Testimonial which we though it
proper. It is true, Mr. Breck did not acquaint us with the Difficulties
respecting him in your Association: Nor do I see how these Matters in dispute
are touched by what we have done. For our Testimonial only respects his
Orthodoxy, as it appeared to us upon an Examination at his own Request; nor is
it suited to serve him at Springfield any more than any other Place in the
Province. If indeed Mr. Breck should make use of it to superceed any
Examination into his Principles, you might think proper to make previous to an
Ordination, he would so far deal unfairly and falsely with us.

It is much to be desired, that the happy Harmony which has hitherto subsisted
among the Ministers and Churches in your County, by which the Interests of
Religion have no doubt been greatly served, should be continued, and no Breach
made upon it, especially at a Time wherein such a remarkable Work of God is
carrying on among you, for which we here give Thanks to Heaven, and pray that
nothing may be permitted to interrupt or blemish it; and therefore that Mr.
Breck's Settlement at Springfield should be to the Satisfaction of neighbor
Pastors. But I find Mr. Breck himself ready to think such Impressions have been
made upon some of those Gentlemen to his Disadvantage, that they, as Things are
now circumstanc'd, cannot be deemed equal Judges in his Case. He also thinks if
any thing should be determined not in his Favor, the People would not be
likely to rest satisfied with it, if they alone were the Judges. It is
therefore his present Intention (as I understand from himself) to ask them so
far to Favor him, as to give him Liberty to invite two or three other Misters,
to give their Presence and Assistance, when his Affairs are further proceeded
in: And in Case this Motion is accepted, he requests me to be one of them.

Now, Sir, though it would be very pleasant to me to visit my Reverend Fathers
and Brethren in your Part of the Province, and it is what I have long had a
Desire to do, and should choose this remarkable Time above any, yet I cannot
think of coming upon this Occasion, without consulting those who are more
nearly related to the Affair. I therefore humbly Request you to give your self
the Trouble to write me your Thoughts upon it.

As to Mr. Breck himself, though I heartily wish his Usefulness, and entertain
good Hopes concerning him, yet I have no particular Interest in him, and know
of nothing to give me an undue Bias toward him: And I hope no one will appear
upon this Occasion to oblige Mr. Breck, or gratify the People, to the Damage
of Religion, Peace, and good Order, or to the just Grief and Offense of
neighbor Pastors.

I rejoice to hear your advanced Age is so comfortable to your self, and
profitable to the Church of Christ; and pray God still to prolong your useful
Life. I beg your candid Interpretation of my writing on this Affair, and ask
your Blessing and Prayers for

SIR, Your dutiful Son and Servant, W. C.
Boston, July 1735.

We cannot but think the bare reading this Letter, must convince the
unprejudiced, that these Gentlemen in representing this Matter, have, on
Purpose, set it in a wrong Light, and therein treated Mr. Cooper in a very
disingenuous and injurious Manner.

To this Letter the Rev. Mr. Williams returned an Answer, wherein, as they say,
P. 37. he plainly manifested his Disapprobation. But how to reconcile this with
their saying in P. 29. that the Proposal of joining some Ministers from abroad
was conceeded to by him, is something of a Difficulty, unless we suppose the
good and venerable Gentleman mistook the Proposal in the Letter, as by his
Answer he really seems to do: Though, perhaps, the Mistake might be more owing to
his Amanuensis; for the Body of the Letter is wrote by another Hand, and only
signed with his own; and superscrib'd by Mr Williams of Long-Meadow, if we have
not mistaken the Hand, which we think we have not. The Answer runs in the
following Terms;

For the Rev. Mr. William Cooper at his House in Boston.
Reverend Sir,
I Have received yours relating to the Affair of Mr. Breck; wherein you
signisie a Desire to visit our Parts of the Country. I should greatly rejoice
to see you here, and I doubt not you would be welcome to my Brethren in the
Ministry here. But I am not conscious of any unfairness or unfriendliness
toward him, as to the Matters that have been objected against him, nor any
personal Prejudice against him in any of us, that should render us unmeet
Judges in his Case, as he suggests. It is probable that he and the People of
Springfield will Use their Liberty in conducting their Affairs as they have
done. But not being informed by Mr. Breck or them what Persons of our
Association they intend to improve or set aside, or what Ministers they will
apply to, to ordain him, I think it not proper for me to give Advice or
Encouragement to the coming of other Ministers to manage that Affair, which
would seem to cast a Reflection of insufficiency or unfaithfulness on the
Ministers of the County, which I know no grounds for; nor does it seem to have
a Prospect of promoting his Comfort, or of Peace and Love among the Ministers
of the County, etc. -- I heartily salute you.

From your Friend and Brother, William Williams.
Hatfield, Aug. 4. 1735.

The Gentlemen carry on their Charge of Prejudice respecting those of the
Council particularly that came from Boston, and say, P. 90, 91. It evidently
appeared in their acting when they came, contrary to what they gave Reason to
expect; who assured the Rev. Doctor Colman, as he informed us in a Letter
directed to the Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield, that when they came they would
before they proceeded visit us, and not act without us, much less against us;
but yet when they came never consulted with us, but acted entirely without us,
yea, contrary to our Protestation --. Indeed they proposed that the Association
should be called together at Springfield when they came up, to give them their
Reasons, etc. But this in our Judgment would have made an odd Appearance, for
our Association to be called together from all Parts of the County, to appear
before them, to give an Account of our selves to them, submitting our Conduct,
as well as Mr. Breck's Case. to their Judgment. This Paragraph contains a
complicated Charge, in which there is a Complication of vile
Misrepresentations: We call them so, because they can be no other than willful
ones.

The first Part of the Charge is, That when we came to Springfield we never
consulted them, but acted entirely without them. This Charge, according to
Custom, is made two or three Times over. We had it before, P. 79, where they
say, We have the more Reason to complain that in an Affair wherein our Interest
is so much concerned, and their's so little, they would resolutely proceed,
without giving any Heed to our earnest Remonstrances, and stand aloof from us
when they came into the County, and never so much as friendly inquire of us, or
give us any fair Opportunity to speak for our selves. When the Truth of the
Case is, they stood aloof from us, and would not give us that Opportunity to
confer and consult with them, which we earnestly desired and requested them to
favor us with, in a Joint-Letter which we wrote to Mr. Williams of Hatfield.
This Rev. Gentleman, after the Letters from Springfield Church had been read in
our Churches, and they had voted to send, and appointed their Messengers,
writes a Letter to Doctor Colman, the Contents of which he desired might be
communicated to the other Pastors of the Churches sent to; in which he has such
a Passage as this; "I cannot but take it something hardly that upon Mr. Breck's
bare Word, they should think so meanly of us, as to count it necessary to send
their Ministers and Delegates to interpose in that Affair". And afterward
asks, "Are not our Churches got too deep into Contentions already?" This
occasioned our Writing to him the following (as we thought, respectful) Letter.

To the Rev. Mr. William Williams of Hatfield.
Reverend and Honored Sir,
YOUR Letter to the Rev. Doctor Colman has been communicated to us, the other
Pastors of the Churches in this Town, applied to by the Church in Springfield
to come up to assist in the Ordination of Mr. Breck, whom they have chosen to
be their Pastor. Their Letters missive had been before communicated to our
several Churches, who had with much Unanimity voted to answer the Desire of
that Church, by sending their Elders and Messengers upon the Occasion. But it
is Matter of Concern and Grief to us that this Step should give any Grief or
Offense to your self, or any other of our Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry
with you. We cannot think the Affair justly stated, when we are represented as
coming up upon Mr. Breck's bare Word to interpose in an Affair that don't
belong to us, without taking the least Notice of the Call we have from the
Church most nearly concerned in the Affair. Nor can we think our coming up, as
so called and sent, casts a Reflection upon the Ministers of your County, as if
they were insufficient or unfaithful; but must declare against any such
Interpretation of the Action as most injurious to us, being conscious to our
selves that we highly Honor and Esteem them, for their Piety, Wisdom,
Faithfulness, and other Endowments, as well as for the Honor God does them in
so owning them in his Work, as he has done formerly and of late. The Act of
Communion which the Church at Springfield asks us to exercise, is, as we
apprehend, agreeable to the general Principles and Practice of these Churches.
We are far from thinking our selves necessary to this Affair, any otherwise
than as we are applied to by that Church. And we hope you don't think so meanly
of us, as that we shall be their Tools to carry on an irregular and unworthy
Action. However inferior we may be to our Brethren with you, in other
Respects, we hope we are equal with them in a Concern for the Purity, Peace and
Order of the Churches. And could we after a most serious weighing the Matter,
judge that the Ends of Peace and Edification were most likely to be answered by
our staying at Home, we can assure yon, Sir, we should not visit you at this
Time, at least not as coming up upon this Affair. But we verily fear if the
Churches sent to should refuse to come up to Springfield, because the neighbor
Ministers have desired they would not, it would tend to widen the Difference,
inflame the Spirits of Men, and drive the Church there to such Measures, as
might give you still more Grief.

We are sensible, Sir, as you are, that our Churches are already too deep in
Contentions; and therefore desire there may not a new one arise, about the
Rights of Associations, and the Liberty of particular Churches in calling and
ordaining their Pastors.

In one Thing we are obliged to set Mr. Breck and the Church at Springfield
right in your Thoughts. You intimate a Suspicion that the Ordination might be
purposely set at a Time when the Ministers were to be absent at an Association
Meeting at Deerfield. But we can assure you the contrary. There was a Blank
left in the Letters that the Time might be set which would best suit those that
were at the greatest Distance. They that bro't the Letters were very desirous
it might be the Beginning of September, but as that did not suit the
Circumstances of some of us, so we though it it was bringing on the Affair much too
quick, and therefore, not without some Difficulty, got them to set the Eighth
of October for the Day. And now, Sir, the chief Design of this Letter, is to
make this Request, if it may be granted; That your Association Meeting which
was to be at Deerfield, may be at Springfield on Thursday the second of
October, at which Time we shall endeavor, by the Will of God, to be up; that
so we may be favored with an Interview with the Rev. Brethren, and may receive
the fullest Information of the State of the Case we are called to be concerned
in, that we may not be left to act amiss for want of sufficient Light; And that
there may be the Presence of the Rev. Mr. Clap and Mr. Kirtland, if it can be
obtained, If this Motion may be complied with, and all Prejudice and
Resentment, (if there be any Thing of them) laid aside, and a friendly
Interview had, who can tell but it may have a good Issue? But if this cannot be
obtained, we nevertheless hope, and earnestly request, that Your self, and the
other Gentlemen of your County that are sent to, would come with their
Churches, and sit in the Ordination Council, and hear and judge in the Affair.
We cannot see, Sir, why any should refuse this, because if they are not
satisfied, they may refuse to act if an Ordination should be proceeded in, and
at the same time will have an Opportunity to declare the Reasons of their
Dissatisfaction. In these Requests we think we have the Concurrence of the Rev.
Doctor Colman, and suppose he will so far join with us as to make them to you
himself in a separate Letter. We are sorry for the Occasion of giving you this
Trouble; and if, in any thing, we have used too great a Freedom with the hoary
Head, which we would rise up before, we pray you to excuse and forgive,

Honored Sir, Your Sons and Servants in the Gospel, William Cooper, William
Welsteed, Joshua Gee, Samuel Mather.


This Letter, before it was sent up, was shown to some Ministers, who have
never been suspected to be in the least prejudiced in Favor of Mr. Breck or of
us, who expressed themselves well pleased with our writing in so respectful
Manner, and especially with our desiring such an Interview with those
Ministers; it was therefore the more surprising to us to receive such an Answer
from the good Gentleman himself as we did, wherein he speaks of himself as
ill-treated, and refuses to call the Association together, unless it might be
left to the Association, with our selves, to judge what might be objected
against the Proceedings of Springfield Church. But this was not in our Power to
do. We could not put the Proceedings of Springfield Church into the Hands of
the Association to judge of and determine. None could do this but the Church of
Springfield themselves, and they had before refused to do it. Besides our
Churches had now sent us forth with other Delegates, in the Way of a Council of
Churches; and how could we set aside our Messengers, and join our selves with
the Association, in judging the Case? All therefore that we proposed, or could
propose, was a brotherly Interview and Conference, between the Ministers of
that Association, and the Ministers of the Council, to try if some of the
Difficulties could not be removed before the Council met, and way could not be
made to have some other of the neighboring Churches yet sent to. If we had
found Mr. Breck or the Church unreasonably refusing what was proper for them to
do on their Part, we had some Reason to hope that by our Interest in them we
might have prevailed upon them to a suitable Compliance. With such Views and
Hopes, and with Hearts full of Respect to our Fathers and Brethren in the
Ministry there, (God is our Witness!) we went up to Springfield, a Week sooner
than we should else have done; but found the Association would not condescend
to give us the Meeting we so much desired, though they had not their Meeting at
Deerfield neither. But instead of meeting us, a Number of them met for several
Days successively with the Dissatisfied, and with the Justices that were
fetched down from Northampton, and there is no Room to doubt were in the Scheme
to stop the Councils proceeding in the Affair, by that extraordinary
Interposition which every Body has heard of. And now, let any one judge, with
what Reason and Justice they complain of us, that we stood aloof from them, and
would not consult with them. Could they imagine we should go from one Part of
the County to another, to meet with them singly, when they live so remote from
one another. Some of us, particularly Mr. Cooper and Mr. Welsteed, did go to
visit Mr. Williams at Long-Meadow, where they found Mr. Raynolds with him, and
had considerable Discourse upon the Affair. And we should with Pleasure have
paid our Duty at Hatfield, if we had had more Reason to think the Visit would
have been well received: but as the venerable Gentleman there, seemed to think
himself ill treated in a Letter, drawn up in as respectful Terms as we could do
it, we despaired of his thinking himself well treated by us in a Visit: So that
Reverence, and not Want of Respect, kept us from thence. But whether it was
expected we should have proceeded, and humbly visited as far as Deerfield, we
cannot say.

We can also leave it to every Reader, of but common Understanding, and the
lowest Degree of Impartiality, to say, Whether in the latter Part of this
Charge, they don't treat us again in a most unjust and injurious Manner, when,
for our thus requesting them so far to favor us, as to have their Association
Meeting at Springfield instead of Deerfield, that so we might have an
Opportunity for an Interview and Conference with them, they represent us as
writing in an assuming Way, to have their Association called together, to
appear before us, to give an Account of themselves to us, and to submit their
own Conduct, as well as Mr. Breck's Case, to our Judgment Is there any Thing in
our Letter that gives them Occasion to say this? Can this be any other than a
wilful Misrepresentation of us, and our Proposal? And how should such Men be
credited in their Representation of other Matters?

They say farther concerning the Council, That their Prejudice evidently
appeared in the driving and violence of their Proceedings, particularly when we
earnestly desired them if they would come, at least to defer coming for some
Time, and not to proceed so suddenly and hastily; that there might be further
Opportunity for Consideration, or for things to get into a better Posture, but
we were not regarded, they went violently on against all that could be said to
them. How fast and violently we drove shall now be told. The Church at
Springfield sent forth their Letters to the Churches, the Beginning of August.
A Blank was left in the Letters to set the Time for the Council to meet, that
might best suit those that lived at the greatest Distance. The People, as we
understood by those that bro't the Letters, were desirous it might be early in
September. But the Ministers at Boston prevailed to have October fixed for the
Time; so that there were two Months between sending out the Letters, and the
Meeting of the Council: And one principal Reason why they desired the Time
should be put off, was, that the Affair might not be bro't on too quick, and
that there might be Opportunity for Consideration, and Things to get into a
better Posture. Not only this, but we went to Springfield a Week before the
Time for the Session of the Council; and let the Gentlemen there know that we
should do so, that so we might have Opportunity to confer and consult with
them. The Council (i. e seven of the eight Churches sent to) convened on the
seventh of October, in the Morning, and being formed into a Council, let the
Church, and the dissatisfied Brethren, know we were ready to hear what they had
to offer to us. The dissatisfied Brethren let us know they were not yet
prepared to bring in their Objections, and desired further Time. The Council
therefore adjourned to 3 o'Clock in the Afternoon; at which Time they came and
presented a Paper of Charges and Allegations against Mr. Breck, but declared
they would not bring their Proofs, because they would not submit their Affairs
to us as a Council. The next Day in the Morning the Council sent to them the
following Vote, That this Council expect the dissatisfied Brethren, not only to
produce their Objections against the Ord nation of Mr. Breck, but also the
Proofs and Evidences to support them: And if the dissatisfied Brethren refuse
to do so, we shall think it our Duty to inquire into the Principles of Mr.
Breck, and it we find him Orthodox, shall proceed to comply with the Desire of
the Church in this Place. The Return was, that they should not submit their
Affairs to us However, as the Council were appriz'd that the Rev. Messi.
Kirtland and Clap, two Connecticut Ministers, who were then at Springfield were
the principal Persons from whom the Objections against Mr. Breck came, they
passed a Vote, and sent it to those Gentlemen, manifesting it to be the earnest
Desire of the Council, that if they knew any thing respecting the Doctrine, or
Morals. or both, of Mr. Breck, which may disqualifie him for the Gospel
Ministry, they would please to declare it freely to us. These Gentlemen, after
some Debate, both by Word and Writing, consented to give us an Account of what
they knew. [We were now bro't to the Day, that had been named by the Church for
the Ordination; but the Council told them there could then be no such Thing as
an Ordination; Time must be allowed to hear and judge in the Case; and whether
we should ordain at all we could not yet tell; and therefore forbad their
making the usual Preparations for Entertainment.] When the Rev. Gentlemen
aforesaid were admitted into the Council, and the Council prepared to hear, Mr.
Clap produced and read sundry large Papers referring to the Principles of Mr.
Breck, which Papers are published in the Narrative. When Mr. Clap first began,
Mr. Breck desired to know whether he might make Answer to Things as Mr. Clap
went along, or stay till he had done. The Council told him they would hear Mr.
Clap out, and then he should have Opportunity to make Answer. While Mr. Clap
was reading his Papers, there came a Messenger on Horseback to speak with him,
who, having finished his private Message to Mr. Clap, rode away with convenient
Speed, it is not unlikely to inform those that sent him, how to Time the next
Messenger and Message. For just as Mr. Clap was finishing, and Mr. Breck was to
have made Answer, there came an Officer with a Warrant from three Northampton
Justices who were fetched down to Springfield a Day or two before, to apprehend
Robert Breck, Gentleman, and bring him before them, to answer to such Things as
should be objected him. And Mr. Breck, being apprehended, was carried into the
public Townhouse, and Proclamation being made for any in the Assembly to
testify what they knew about the Principles etc. of Mr. Breck, the Rev. Messi
Clap, Kirtland, and others, appeared as Evidences to testfie to those Things
which they were before exhibiting to the Ecclesiastical Council. Though the
Council looked upon this unprecedented Proceeding of the Justices, to be a
direct Breach upon those Liberties of the Churches which the Law has confirmed
to them, and they had been in the unmolested Possession and Use of to that very
Day, yet they made no Opposition to them, but on the contrary endeavored to
calm the Spirits of the People, that were now put into Ferment eno'; and by
their Influence kept them from any rash Action; and contented themselves with
sending to them the following Vote by two of the Members of the Council, soil.
Voted by the Ecclesiastical Council in this Place, That they consider it as
their Duty, not only to the first Church in Springfield, but also to the
Churches whom we represent, and all the Churches of Christ through this Province,
to acquaint your Honors, that when you sent your Officer to apprehend Mr.
Robert Breck, and bring him before you, we were regularly and legally convened
in Council, at the Desire of the first Church in Springfield, for the regular
carrying on the Ordination of said Mr. Breck, according to the Order of the
Gospel in the Churches of New England, and were actually hearing the Charges
against the said Mr. Breck, which your Honors have seen meet to take
Cognizance of, and wrest out of our Hands.

The Justices kept Mr. Breck from the Council till it was Night, and ordered
the Officer to take Care of him till they should send for him again the next
Day; but upon some of the Councils giving their Word he should be forth coming
when called for, he was admitted to go to his Lodging that Night. The Council
were together early in the Morning, and endeavored to go on with the Hearing;
but it was not long before Mr. Breck was again sent for by the Justices. But
Mr. Clap declared to the Council, he had the Day before delivered to them
almost all that he had to offer in the Case; and Mr. Kirtland said what he had
to offer was much to the same Purpose, and tended to confirm what Mr. Clap had
offered; and that it was given to the Justices in Writing the Day before, from
whom might be had a Copy of it. The Justices kept Mr. Breck till it was late in
the Afternoon, when they signed a Warrant to carry him to Connecticut, there to
answer for those Things; and thither he was forthwith carried; a Number of the
Church being chosen to attend him in Token of Respect, and the People giving
evident Marks of their Affection to him as he went through the Town. -- The
Council while he was gone, did all they could that the Temper and Behavior of
the People might be suitable to their Circumstances; and, it must be said of
them, they generally carried it becoming their christian Character. As an
Instance of it, A Number of the Church came, the next Morning, to the Ministers
of the Council, with a Desire that some Time might be spent with them in
extraordinary Supplications to Heaven, upon so extraordinary an Occasion; to
which we readily and willingly consented. It was proposed at first to have it
with the Church in private; but finding the Inhabitants concurring with the
Church in the Motion and Request, it was agreed to have it in Public:
Accordingly the Afternoon was spent in Prayer in the Public Meeting House, with
a large and weeping Assembly; and the Word accompanied Prayer, in a seasonable
Discourse made by one of the Ministers, from those Words, Ephesians. 2. 21. In whom
all the Building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord.

The Day after this Mr. Breck returned to Springfield; and though the Council,
after mature Deliberation upon the Case, were unanimously of Opinion, that as
he had given, and was still ready to give, full Satisfaction about his
Principles, the Objections that had been made against him from Connecticut of
so long standing, were no longer a Bar in the Way of his Ordination; and though
many of the People were desirous, if we had Light in our own Minds for it, that
we should then proceed to ordain; yet we though it it best, on many Accounts, to
proceed no further in the Affair at that Time: We therefore only come to a
Result, in which we gave our Opinion and Advice to the Church; and having
agreed to stay and keep the following Sabbath with them, our Result was then
publicly read. The next Day we made an Adjournment; and, after several
Sessions by Adjournment, and after the Affair was determined in Favor of the
Church and of the Council, so far as it went in the General Court upon the
People's Complaint, the Council, after the Space of more than three Months, met
again at Springfield, and finding the People did abide firm in their Choice of
Mr. Breck, and continue steadfast in their Desires to have him ordained their
Pastor, we did, upon what we esteemed sufficient Satisfaction, proceed to
answer their Desires. -- And now, Where does the driving and violence, they
speak of, appear? We think we proceeded in the Affair by very slow and
leisurely Steps; and showed much Moderation in our Councils and Managements;
and that there was no other driving but this, that we did not stay at Home when
they bid us, and stop as they would have had us.

Another Thing they complain of us for, is, that we had not a public Hearing of
the Case. Thus they ask, P. 47. Can it be though it a proper Act of an
Ecclesiastical Council, to bear Matters of public Scandal, in which many are
greatly concerned, in a private and hidden Manner? As was the Case here. If
Ecclesiastical Councils, (or indeed any Judicature) acting as such, should thus
conduct themselves, we cannot but think that they would give the World too much
Reason to think, that they had other Things in View, than Righteousness, Truth
and Pence. When the Council, Witnesses, and Accused, were secure within the
Walls of a private Chamber, the Door fast shut, and latch'd upon them, the
Business proceeded, etc. That Ecclesiastical Councils always meet first in a
private House, and there form themselves into a Council, choose a Moderator,
Clerk, etc. and prepare Matters for a public Hearing, before they go into
Public, is known to all that have ever attended such Assemblies. And the only
Reason why we did not go into a public Hearing of this Case, was because the
dissatisfied declared they would not submit their Matters to us a Council; and
though they bro't to the Council a long Paper of Charges, or Allegations, against
Mr. Breck, yet they once and again refused to bring their Proofs to support
them; as appears by the 46th Page of the Narrative. And when the Rev. Messi.
Kirtland and Clap, were afterward desired to give the Council an Account of
what they knew relating to Mr. Breck's Principles, they declared they did not
come to be Accusers; they had been sent for by the dissatisfied to be
Witnesses, but now they were come they found those that had sent for them would
not improve them in that Capacity, because they were determined not to submit
their Affairs to us as a Council; and they, for their own Parts should not put
themselves into the Place of Accusers, and so be under Obligation themselves to
get Proofs and Evidences. The Council then said to them to this Purpose, 'We
will not consider you in the Case, either as Witnesses or Accusers, but as
Friends to Truth, and Persons concerned for the Purity of the Churches, and
speaking only to give the Council what Light you can at their Request to you;
and we hope, and, as far as we can, engage, that neither Mr. Breck nor his
Friends, shall take Advantage of what you shall say, to give you any Trouble.'
Then these Gentlemen desired the Hearing might be in public. -- But the Council
told them, 'There could be no Foundation for a public Hearing, unless some
Persons would appear as Accusers. They themselves refused to do that; and the
dissatisfied Brethren, when they bro't in their Paper of Allegations, declared
they would not bring their Proofs; and to arraign a Man in a public Judicature,
when no one appeared as his Accuser, and when those that pretended to exhibit
Charges against him, declared, at the same Time, that they would not support
their Charges by evidence, was contrary to the Rules of common Justice: But if
the dissatisfied Brethren, would let us know they were ready to support their
Charges, or they themselves would be his Accusers, we were free and ready to go
into a public Hearing.' And herein we cannot but think our Conduct will be
justified by all wise and just Men. And as to the Door's being shut, while
these Reverend Gentlemen wore giving us their Account, the Weather was too cold
to allow it to stand open; but it was never shut to keep out any that they
desired might be present. They did desire Messi. Stephen Williams, Hopkins,
Raynolds, and Bull, and some others might be present, and they were readily
admitted. -- It looked very odd, that when the dissatisfied refused to submit
the Case to us, and these Gentlemen declined the Place of Accusers, a public
Hearing should still be so pressed for on all Sides, as it was. There is some
Reason to think, there was another Design in it, besides the the endeavoring
to blacken Mr. Breck all that they could. We know, (for it was proved before
the Honorable House of Representatives) that a Warrant was prepared to
apprehend that Part of the Council which did not belong to the County; and the
going into public would have given a fairer Opportunity to have (...) the
Warrant, and some more Color to prosecute us for a Riot. But we can assure
them not the Jealousy of this, but the Unreasonableness and Injustice of the
Thing, made us decline going into public.

Another Thing they say, (P. 91.) that showed the Prejudice of the Council was,
their appearing Mr. Breck's Advocates, even before they came to a Result, as
one of the Delegates did openly in Court. One would think they might be ashamed
to hint any thing of what was transacted in the Courthouse! -- But an
Ecclesiastical Council, and a civil Court, are very different Things: And why
one Man's speaking for another in a civil Process, must disqualifie him from
acting in an Ecclesiastical Affair, when that same Person is concerned, other
People will not so readily apprehend as these Gentlemen do: Besides that
Delegate appeared there in Behalf of the Council, as well as Mr. Breck.

They proceed and say, (P. 91.) Another Thing that shows the Prejudice of the
Council, was their causing to be read, (as we presume it was of their ordering,
because done so publicly under their Window) on Horseback, in the Street, in
the midst of a Multitude of People, Declarations of certain Persons, to no
other End, but to represent Mr. Kirtland and Mr. Clap to be Liars, etc. The
History of this also was given before, (P. 65.) something more particularly,
after this Manner, Upon the Ninth of October, there was a very great Concourse
of People gathered at the House where the Council was sitting; whether called
together, or accidentally met, we don't pretend to determine: But cannot but
take Notice of a very remarkable Scene that then opened, which was this; The
People being assembled in great Numbers before the Door, a young Gentleman, now
of the Ecclesiastical Order, distinguished himself, by mounting a Horse, and
reading off Mr. Breck's Confession of Faith, (the first possibly, that ever was
read on Horseback) And that which is more surprising still is, that though the
Day before, the Evidences in Opposition to Mr. Breck's gross Errors, must needs
be beard in a most private Manner; yet now the Evidences to invalidate them,
must be read on Horseback, etc. We have before taken Notice of the prodigious
Piece of Wit, about the Horse and the Ass, which this serves to introduce; that
which we have now to speak to is the Matter of Fact related. And though the
Gentlemen's Manner of Reasoning here is admirably strong, scil. It was done
under their Window, therefore by their Order; yet we can assure them, if they
will give Credit to us, that let it be done where it would, it was not only
without the Council's Order, but without their Knowledge. The Time they speak
of in which it was done, was the Day after Mr. Breck was carried from the
Council before the Justices, and while he was with them the second Time, and
they were signing the Warrant to send him to Connecticut. The Business of the
Council being now obstructed, they were adjourned, and the Members of it
scattered, some in one Place and some in another. Two or three of them were
sitting and discoursing by the Fireside, in the Chamber where the Council had
sat, and there came up one or two of the Church, and said to them, 'They had
heard some Evidences had been bro't to the Council, tending to invalidate some
of the Evidences against Mr. Breck, and that Mr. Breck had himself given in a
Confession of his Faith; and defir'd they might see them.' They were answered,
'That if they would be patient for a Day or two, the Council would by that Time
come to a Result, and the Church would be sent for in a Body, and the Council
would then give them all the Light they had themselves.' They said, 'They
supposed it would do no Hurt just to take them down and read them, and they
should soon be returned.' So the Person who had those Papers in his Pocket, let
them take 'em, without any Though It of their being read in so public a Manner.
But, it seems, as they began to read them; one and another gathered about, and
because they that had them could not read them very readily, a young Gentleman,
a Candidate for the Ministry, who happened to be by, was desired to read them;
and because more gathered about than could well hear, he was perswade'd by some
of them to get upon a Horse that hung by the Door. The Gentlemen of the Council
who were sitting together up Stairs, perceived nothing of all this, till it was
just over; probably, they would not have advised to the Thing in the Manner of
it, had they known it before. However, it may be remarked, This was nothing
near so public as the Transactions in the Town House the Day before, where all
the Charges against Mr. Breck were read to a much greater Multitude, and as if
they were not drawn un full enough, were harrangu'd upon, according to the best
of some Men's Talent, on Purpose to blacken him the more. But if the Concern of
this young Gentleman for his Friend, at such a Time as this, did carry him a
Step beyond the Rules of Prudence, for these Gentlemen to publish it in such a
Way as they have done, with a plain Design to bring, as far as this can do it,
an Odium upon him, helps to show with what Tenderness they use those that do
any Thing that is not pleasing to them. And that which makes it still look
worse in them, is, that Mr. Kirtland and Clap, whom they speak of as injured by
it, did not manifest themselves offended with him for it; but a Week or two
after assisted in his Ordination. But it will not hurt the young Gentleman,
with those that know his discreet, sober, and ingenious Conversation, which
some of us had Opportunity with Pleasure to observe.

The worst Charge, it seems, is reserved for the last; They finish with saying,
(P. 92.) Another Thing that shows the Prejudice and Violence of the Gentlemen
of that Party (if those can be called Gentlemen that can be guilty of so sordid
an Act) is their intercepting and breaking open, and publishing in the Gazette,
a private Letter of a Person of Distinction to his Friend; the taking such
Methods to promote their Design, will have a Tendency to render both the
Design, and them that promote it, infamous in the Eyes of all wise and sober
Persons: Herein they have done that in the Face of the World, as glorying in
it, which common KNAVES and RUFFIANS when they do, do privately, and keep
secret, as being ashamed of it. The Gentleman that writes this seems to have
his Temper pretty much raised, and to desire to raise the Passions of his
Readers too. And we acknowledge such an Act deserves to be had in Detestation
and Abhorrence. But as they relate the Story, it wants, as many of their
Stories unhappily do, the needful Circumstance of Truth. We are, some of us at
least, charged with intercepting this Letter. But we do, every Man of us, (if
they will allow us once more to borrow some of their own Words) solemnly declare,
to all that will give us the Credit of Men of common Honesty and Truth, that if
the Letter they refer to was intercepted, we were, no manner of Way in the
World, knowing of, or concerned therein. A Copy of a certain Letter was bro't
to Boston, but not one of us knows, from whom, or by whom, it came. Nay, we had
not the least Though It of its being intercepted, or broken open, till the
Narrative told us of it. But our Though It was, that the Person to whom it was
sent, thinking it must have great Influence as it came from a Person of such
Distinction, had shown it at Springfield, till some Body had taken a Copy of
it. For these Gentlemen therefore to charge it so roundly upon some of us, upon
no better a Foundation, and with such Terms of Reproach, as they use, is very
injurious Treatment, and we might justly return their hard Words upon them; but
we will only say, They may do well to consider, if it be not a Breach of the
ninth Commandment, which they are obliged to teach others to observe and keep.
-- And as it was never intercepted by us, so it never was published by us, nor
by any Body else that we know of. It is true there was an Advertisement
published in the Gazette, by Way of Amusement, with some Passages of this
Letter interspersed, the whole Design of which seemed to be to let the
Gentleman that wrote the Letter, and him to whom it was written, know that it
had fallen into other Hands. It may be, but few of our Readers ever saw the
Advertisement, and some of them, perhaps, may have a Curiosity to read it, we
will therefore transcribe it.

To the Publisher of the Boston Gazette.
SIR,
I Ask the Favor of a little Room in your Paper, to advertise, That upon
suitable Encouragement from the Friends of Literature, there may be speedily
published, An Extract of a curious Letter from N. H -- n to L -- g M -- d -- w;
with learned Remarks upon it, and some interspersed Reflections on the Benefit
of an Academical Education, particularly with Regard to the epistolary, Style.
To which may be added, and humbly dedicated to the Author of that Letter,
several elegant Dissertations, written in the Laconic way, upon the following
Subjects,

I. The improper Use of the Epither, hotheaded, in certain Cases; and whether
it may not sometimes be properly used, when we speak of Gentlemen.

II. The Means by which Men may infallibly come to think they see in a clear
and strong Light the Folly and Wickedness of a Transaction, and publicly to
condemn it, without the Trouble of hearing both Sides upon it.

III. A remarkable Case wherein Gentlemen of the Civil and Sacred Order may,
it is though it, very innocently have the Conduct of certain Persons in the greatest
Indignation.

IV. An Illustration of the plain Distinction between Talking and Exerting our
selves thoroughly on fit Occasions; and when County Ministers may be said to
observe this Distinction.

V. A clear and full Answer to that Inquiry, When is a Man guilty of meddling
with Matters out of his own Province?

VI. An historical Account of Abhorrers, ancient and modern; with Directions
how to guard our Managements from falling under general Abhorrence.

The whole adapted to serve as an Introduction to a Treatise full of Recondite
Erudition, upon the Subject of private Judgment, the Liberties of Particular
Charches, and the ancient Rights of an Association; By another Hand.

Sir, If you will give the Public an Opportunity to encourage such a Useful and
Entertaining Work, by allowing this a Place in your Next, you will gratify many
of your constant Readers, and among them greatly oblige,

Sir, your very humble Servant, PHILALETHES.


Now, that the Reader may judge whether the Letter was published in this
Advertisement, there shall follow a Copy of it; and as they say it came from a
Person of Distinction, so we judge it to be a Letter of Distinction; though we
will not so much as guess at the Person it came from.

I Write these Lines by Mr. H -- to hint to you, that if these hotheaded
Gentlemen go through with the Ordination of Mr. Breck, I cannot think but that
it would be of special Service, if all the Evidences etc. that may serve to fet
the Matter in a clear Light be collected together: that Vote the Council sent
to the Colonel, and Mr. Cl^p's and Kirtland's Evidences, which prove a
Contradiction upon them, be also taken; and that you or Mr. Raynolds, or Mr.
Edwards, or all together, draw up and set the whole Matter in a strong Light;
and that all may see the Folly and Wickedness of such a Transaction: and to
complete the whole have Ordained (i. e. if they have done it) a Man under the
Scandal of having broken such statute Law of the Government, and actually under
Bond to answer in the Civil Court. The Gentlemen here both of Civil and Sacred
Order, our Governor, and most of our Magistrates, I have already given the
Account to, as well as Ministers on the Road, Whittelsey, etc. etc. there,
Eliot, Cook and Noyes, all which have it in the greatest Indignation. And I
think it Time the Country [or County] Ministers, not only Talk but Exert
themselves thoroughly, etc. I could enlarge with the greatest Freedom, but the
Bearer allows me not. I wish Mr. Breck's opposites may be wisely directed. It Is
pity but as soon as may be the Ministers, (Mr. Edwards may be got home) would
get together and consult, and do the best in order to their Deliverance. I am
persuaded their Action will be had in general Abhorrence. I add not, etc.

October 14. 1735.
N. H -- n to L -- g-M -- d -- w.

The Reader may now see upon what Foundation their Complaints of us, and
Charges upon us, do stand. But barely to vindicate our selves will not do. The
Gentlemen will not be contented unless

IV. We let them, and the World, know wherein their Conduct is to be blamed, or
they are to be charged with any Injuriousness, Usurpation, etc. They begin
their Defense with a Complaint, that we have never signified to them, what
Parts of their Conduct have been Matter of Difficulty with us, or wherein we
have thought it blameworthy. And in the 73 Page they say, We have heard there
is a great Cry of insufferable Tyranny in the Hampshire Association: We desire
that those that have made and promoted it, either in this County, or elsewhere,
making all the Improvement they can of their own Observation, and all the
Information they can get from any People in the County, or those Ministers that
belong to us, that have dissented from us in the late Affair, to show in any
one Instance wherein the Association of the Ministers of Hampshire have, in
this Case, or any other, done any Thing that has in the least savored of a
Spirit of Usurpation or Tyranny, or whereby the Privilege of any Congregational
Church have in the least Degree been invaded. And is it to the Honor of them
that make this Clamor, that they are the Authors of so great a Noise and
Uproar, against a Body of Ministers in the Country, whereof they can give no
Account, of show any Ground? To gratify these Gentlemen, we will freely let
them know, wherein we think their Conduct, in some Parts of it, is to be
blamed, and has more than savored of Usurpation and Tyranny. But because they
have heard that they have been blamed, in Things that we never heard them
blamed for, we will, (to do them Justice) let them know wherein we do not lay
any Blame to them.

We do not blame them in the least, because they have in some Instances forborne
to act as (they say) Mr. Breck, and the first Church in Springfield, would have
bad them, because they would not act against their Judgments; No; so far from
this that we think they are to be commended and honored for it, and not
blamed. And we entirely agree with them, that their not acting against their
Judgments, was so far from invading the Rights of any Congregational Church,
that whoever opposes them in it, invades their Right, not as Members or
Ministers of either Congregational or Presbyterian Churches, but as Partakers
with the rest of their Species of the Nature of rational Creatures. But then
they should be willing to allow others, who are as rational and free Creatures
as themselves, a Right to act according to their Judgments. We cannot but think,
Mr. Chauncey, Mr. Devotion, and Mr. Rand, had as good a Right to act according
to their Judgments, in the Affair of Springfield, as Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Williams,
and Mr. Edwards, had to forbear acting against their Judgments; and that to
oppose them therein is to invade their Rights as Partakers with the rest of
their Species of the Nature of rational Creatures.

Neither do we at all blame them, that they have, either in private
Conversation, or more openly, freely declared their Opinions, about the
Springfield Affair; if they have but spoken the Words of Truth and Soberness.
We are no more aware than themselves are, that either Congregational Churches
or Councils, had ever a Right to oblige neighboring Ministers to hold their
Tongues, and not to dare to speak their Minds about the Regularity of their
Proceedings. But neither are we aware that Presbyterian Ministers have a Right
to tie the Legs and Hands of Congregational Ministers, that they shall not come
and ordain a Minister in a Congregational Church, that has sent to them to
exercise such an Act of Communion with them.

And, that we may lay as little Blame as possible upon these Brethren, we say
farther, We never blamed them, nor so much as ever heard them blamed, because
the Rev. Mr. Williams, the Rector of the College in New Haven, was at
Springfield at the Time wherein the Ordination was intended. Though we think the
Excuse they make about his being there is something lame. They say, he came up
a little before on a Visit to his Rev. Father at Hatfield, and was then on his
Return home, and came both to Hatfield, and to Springfield, without any of
their Procurement; and they suppose bad as much Business there as the greater
Part of Gentlemen have that attend Ordinations, and conclude he did not think
he transgressed any Rule, or invaded any Bodies Right in going there. If
neither his being there, nor his Conduct there, needs an Excuse, why do these
Gentlemen go about to make one for him? But if one is at all needed, it is Pity
but they should make a better. He might, and no doubt did, make a Visit to his
Rev. Father at Hatfield, but we know a great Part of his Time was spent at
Northampton and Springfield, especially the latter Place, where he was more
than once, and for diverse Days together, though it is twenty Miles from his
Father's House at Hatfield. We can hardly think he came as other Gentlemen do
to an Ordination, when the Week before, he could considently give out at
Springfield, there would be no Ordination, or there should be none; and some
others of Connecticut, that were with him there, could give out the same. It is
much more likely he came to hinder the Ordination what he could, when he was
with the Justices, and the dissatisfied for so many Days together. And whether
he did not urge the serving the Warrant upon that Part of the Council that did
not belong to the County, let the Gentleman who refused to Consent to its being
served, be inquired of. When Mr. Breck was taken from the Council, into the
public Townhouse, and treated after the Manner he was, did not Mr. Rector
Williams sit there, with a singular Air of Pleasure in his Countenance, to the
Observation of many that saw him? And did he not faithfully attend at
Springfield, till the Business was so far over, that the Warrant was signed to
send him to Connecticut? Then he rode a Way a little before, no doubt to
prepare him a suitable Reception in that Colony; and to do as that Person of
Distinction did, who wrote the Letter from N -- H -- to L -- g-M -- d -- w. Yet
we fully agree with these Gentlemen, that it would look hard, if they must be
accountable for his being there, or for what he did there.

That we think they were to blame about the Choice of the Committee of
Association, to hear Mr. Breck, and the Witnesses, we have said already. As
likewise in their refusing to give us a friendly Meeting, and standing aloof
from us, when we came into the County. But especially do we think them
Blameworthy in that they have as an Association, or as County Ministers, set
up a Jurisdiction over the first Church in Springfield, and claimed for
themselves the sole Cognizance of the Affairs of that Church, and endeavored
to limit, control, and overruled them, in their free electing and ordaining
Power. Herein, we say plainly, we think they have invaded the Rights of a
Congregational Church, and are chargeable with no small Degree of
Injuriousness, Usurpation, and Tyrany. It will doubtless be expected that we
show the Ground of this Charge, and wherein it appears that the Hampshire
Ministers have so done.

Now,

That these Gentlemen did, by virtue of their Situation and Office, take the
Affair of Springfield into their Hands, without its being referred to them by
that Church, has been already made evident from their own Narrative; and that
to judge of the Proceedings of that Church in the Call and Settlement of their
Minister, did of Right belong to them, and them only, is what they argue and
contend for, when they come to that Part which they call their Defense. See the
78th, 79th, 80th, and 81st Pages; out of which we have had Occasion to
transcribe several Passages already, and therefore shall omit them here to
avoid Repetitions.

That they endeavored to keep the Case in the Hands of the Association, and
bring the Church at Springfield under a Necessity to submit to their Judgment
and Decision, is evident from the great Pains they took to hinder the Churches
sent to from coming up upon the Occasion. Many Letters were wrote to this End,
in which were such Passages as these; "It is an odd Thing, that the Case of a
Candidate, bro't before an ASSOCIATION, should be wresied out of their Hands,
(Nam sub judice lis erat) under a Notion of the Privilege that the Churches
have to choose their own Officers, or of the Liberty to choose whom they will
to ordain." -- "If the Charges against Mr. Breck were heard by our whole
ASSOCIATION, and be was cleared by them, Things would be like to be easy.' --
"For Gentlemen to come from distant Parts to concern themselves in this Affair,
OR AND THE LIKE CASE, is irregular, and not to justified, Because the Ministers
of this County are equal to the Business, and because they are more knowing in
and better acquainted with the Case, and therefore more fit to be the Judges."
--

This is still more evident from their Conduct after the Churches sent to did
convene at Springfield: particularly by that formal Protestation See the
Narrative, P. 38, 39, 40.
sent in against the Councils proceeding at all to act in the Affair, signed by
six of them, (to which another has since given his Concurrence) some of whom
live about forty Miles from Springfield; in which Protestation they plainly
claim the Church at Springfield as belonging to their Diocese, by telling us
our coming up there, was properly, allotrio episcopine, to play the Bishop in
another Man's Charge.

But that the Powers of the Association might be in the most effectual Manner
supported, and the Church of Springfield at last compelled to submit themselves
to their Jurisdiction, the Help of some Justices was called in; and after those
Gentlemen, in an Interview with the Council, had let us know that they did not
think it proper that other Ministers and Churches should be concerned in the
Ecclesiastical Affairs of that County, there was a Warrant drawn and signed, to
apprehend that Part of the Council, that did not belong to the County of
Hampshire. And, if we are rightly informed, nothing hindered the prepared
Warrant's being actually served, but the Prudence of one of the three Justices,
who after it was signed, grew diffident in his own Mind a out the Step they
were going to take, and so would not consent to have it served. By this Means
it was that the Measures were turned, from the Council, upon Mr. Breck and
another Warrant was suddenly drawn and signed to apprehend him; which was
accordingly executed. -- And if we say, that the Ministers of the Hampshire
Association, a considerable Number of them at least, were accessory to this
Interposition of the Justices, it is no groundless Surmise. If they were not
the Persons that complained to the Justices, or went to fetch them down to
Springfield, yet, we know that Mr. Williams of Long-Meadow, Mr. Hopkins, Mr.
Raynolds, Mr. Bull, and Mr. Ashley, with a Person of Distinction from
Connecticut, came to Springfield when the Justices did, and were in
Conversation, if not in Consuit, with them, and the dissatisfied Party, from
Day to Day, till the Business was over. -- Indeed the four Ministers that were
present at the Desire of Mr. Kirtland and Clap, when those Gentlemen gave their
Account of Matters to the Council, did seem surpised to see Mr. Breck
apprehended. And one of them particularly, said to a Minister of the Council,
that he knew nothing of it, but was surpised and grieved at it. And we
charitably believe him; for till then they imagined the Council was to be
apprehended; for the sudden Change of their concerted Measures from the Council
to Mr. Breck, was made while they were present in the Council at the Hearing;
and, we make no doubt, but it was a grievous Disappointment to them, that the
Members of the Council were not seized and committed, instead of Mr. Breck. --
That it may not be said this is a bare Conjecture of ours, we will transcribe a
Passage or two from a Letter, which one of those Ministers afterward wrote to
a Minister of the Council, -- "I thought I had satisfied you when at
Springfield, that I was not accessory to the Measures that the civil Magistrate
took; for you told me you believed me, when I told you I was not. But I hear in
Town, and from Boston, that I am mistaken if I think I have satisfied you, that
I was no way accessory, etc. I am sorry that my Veracity is bro't into such
Suspicion with you; but yet I venture again to tell you, and that in Writing,
that I am not sensible that I was accessory: For the Application to the civil
Authority, by the grieved Party, was not only without my Advice, but even
without my Knowledge. For Capt. P -- jun. went up with the Complaint to N -- H
-- on Monday Morning, and I knew nothing of it till the Afternoon. -- Nay, that
Day Mr. Breck was seized, I was so ignorant of the Method the civil Authority
intended to take, that it was a Surprise to me that Mr. B -- was seized; for I
had concluded by what I had occasionally heard among them, that the Complaint
was against the Council." It is very plain from this, that when the Gentleman
speaks of his not being accessory to the Measures the civil Magistrate took, he
means the apprehending Mr. Breck. He acknowledges that he (and no doubt the
rest of his Brethren) knew of the Scheme as it was laid against the Council. We
would then ask them, Whether they advised against it when they did know it, or
manifested a Disapprobation of it? If they had so, and done it, not feignedly,
but in such a Manner as showed them to be hearty in it, we believe their very
civil Friends would have been loath to have grieved them; and if they did not,
we think they cannot say, they were no ways accessory. But on the contrary we
have Reason to think they discovered an Approbation of and Satisfaction in it.
One of them said to a young Gentleman of Springfield, on the Evening before
that on which the Warrant was to be served on the Council, -- To Morrow is
Wednesday -- and -- Mark my Words! -- The Town of Springfield will be in the
greatest Convulsion it was ever in since it was a Town. -- And the same
Gentleman, (if we are not misinformed) when the coming up of the Council the
second Time was mentioned in Conversation, could say, If they do, the Jail is
the fittest Place for them --. And we know another of them was not so much
grieved at the taking of Mr. B --, but he could go soon after, where a Number
that had been engaged in the Affair were together, and say to them, with an Air
that did not discover much Grief, -- Well, Gentlemen, We have had a fine
Ordination to Day! -- And since the Affair was over, the Action of the Justices
has been not only vindicated, but applauded by them. One Reverend Gentleman in
particular has these Words in a Letter, "I thank God we have Men in that Order,
who know the Truth, and do honor it by their Practice, and are ready to appear
in the Defense of it, when they see a just Occasion. -- Now, when these
Gentlemen have managed after this Manner; -- not only taking the Case of
Springfield Church into their Hands before it was put there, but claiming a
Right to be the sole Judges of the Proceedings of that Church; using their
utmost Endeavors that the Churches they applied to might not come to them; and
when they did come, protesting in so formal a Manner against their Proceeding
in the Affair they were called upon, because it belonged to themselves, and
would be playing the bishop in their Diocese; and then getting some in civil
Authority to interpose as they did, to stop the Proceedings of the Church, and
the Council they had called --; After all this, to hear them gravely ask, Where
is the Foundation of all the Noise that has been about the Usurpation and
Injuriousness of what we acted? And desiring us, that making use of our own
Observation, and all the Information we can get, we would show wherein they
have done any Thing, that has in the least savored of a Spirit of Usurpation
and Tyranny, or whereby the Privileges of a congregational Church, have in the
least Degree been invaded,

-- Risum teneatis, Amici?

But we come in the next Place,

V. To declare the Grounds upon which we proceeded to the Ordination of Mr.
Breck to the pastoral Office in the First Church in Springfield.

And here we think it proper first to declare what we did not make the Ground
of our Proceeding; though it is suggested as if we did. -- Thus we did not make
it the Ground of our Proceed ng that the Witnesses were not to be regarded. We
think we gave all the Credit to the Testimonies of the Rev. Mr. Kirtland and
Mr. Clap in particular, that was due to Ministers of the Gospel, of an
established Character and Reputation; and we should have done it, if they had
bro't no Certificates from the Association. It is true, there were some
Evidences that tended to prove a Contradiction upon Mr. Clap; the Witnesses,
(who were Messi. Lazell and Cook) being ready to testify, That when the People
of Scotland invited Mr. Breck to settle with them, they went to Mr. Clap to
advise with him upon the Affair, who then told them without Hesitation, that he
knew nothing but Mr. Breck's Principles were as good as any Man's in the World.
But their Evidences were not formally received by the Council, nor were they at
all used by us to invalidate the Testimony of that Gentleman. Nay, though the
Evidences that were given in to the Council, were supposed to be drawn up about
a Year and half after the Conversation, and those Discourses, in which the
Words and Expressions testified to, were delivered; and though there was Reason
to think the Testimonies of some of the other Witnesses were drawn by Mr. Clap
himself; (for though the Gentlemen mention it in their Narrative, P. 15, as an
ill Report, that Mr. Clap wrote Huntington's Evidence, yet they don't
contradict it, and say he did not do it. And Mr. Lazell declares that when Mr.
Clap came to him, as he did to others, to get his Testimony, he would have had
it run in such Terms as he could not in Conscience subscribe to: And when he
told him how his Evidence must run, if he gave one at all, then his Evidence
was no longer desired) yet the Council did not put by their Evidences on this
Account.

Neither did we make Mr. Breck's own Vindication of himself, the Ground of our
Proceedings. As to his denying the Things alleged against him, as if there was
no Foundation for them, but the Witnesses all lied in their Testimonies, he
never pretended to do it. He did indeed in a Letter to a Friend, say of one
Gentleman, that he lied; but it referred to a particular Thing which that
Gentleman declared Mr. Breck said to him at such a particular Time, which the
Gentleman has not yet proved, and we presume never can; because the Gentleman
owns the Conversation was in private, and no Witnesses were present. With
respect to some Part of what was alleged, he might say, he did not remember
his expressing himself so, and could not think be did: But yet his Word was in
nothing received by the Council, against the Declaration of the Witnesses. As
to some of the Points objected, He declared they never were his settled Belief,
though he acknowledged he was at that Time in Doubt about them, and might in
Discourse of them speak with too much seeming Assurance; which agrees with what
the Rev. Mr. Kirtland says in his Evidence, that when he had sometimes asked
him, Whether be really believed those Principles for which he disputed? He
commonly replied, Some of them he did believe, and that sometimes he argued
from the Opinion of others. And as to other Matters, though, when he related the
Occasion and Circumstances of his Discourse with the Persons that witnessed
against him, and explained his own Sense, by adding some other Passages
delivered at the same Time, that tended to clear up his Meaning, it set Things
in a different Light from what the Evidences placed them in, yet, the Council
did not make this the Ground of their Proceeding, as if he had offered what
fully came up to every particular, and stood sufficiently clear of the Things
alleged against him, and his Representation of Things was right, and their's
wrong.

Much less did the Council make it the Ground of their Proceeding, that the
Matters objected against him were of a small or trifling Nature: No; we thought
them of very great Importance, and suppose we do, in our Judgments lay as much
Weight upon them, as the Gentlemen themselves disapproved of our Proceedings.
-- But we proceeded upon what we esteemed a full Satisfaction as to Mr. Breck's
present Orthodoxy, or Soundness in the Faith; as appears by the Council's
Result, of which a Copy here follows;

At a Council of seven Churches, (viz. the Church of Hadley, under the Care of
the Rev. Mr. Chauncey; the Church of Suffield, under the Care of the Rev. Mr.
Devotion; the Church of Sunderland, under the Care of the Rev. Mr. Rand; the
Church in Boston, whereof the Rev. Mr. Cooper is one of the Pastors; the Church
in Boston, under the Pastoral Care of the Rev. Mr. Welsteed; the Church in
Sudbury, under the Pastoral Care of the Rev. Mr. Cook; and the Church in
Boston, whereof the Rev. Mr. Mather is one of the Pastors,) convened at
Springfield at the Desire of the first Church of Christ there, for the regular
carrying on the Ordination of Mr. Robert Breck: After fervent and repeated
Supplications to the God of all Grace, for his gracious Direction and Conduct,
and mature Deliberation upon that important Case, the following Result was
Unanimously agreed on:

1. We find that Mr. Robert Breck is regularly called by a very great Majority
of the first Church and Precinct in Springfield, to the Work of the Ministry
among them.

2. We cannot find sufficient Reason to advise the first Church in Springfield
to recede from their Choice of him, on the Account of those disadvantageous
Reports which are gone abroad concerning his Principles, while he was very
young and unsettled; because he has given all the Satisfaction that can be
desired concerning his Orthodoxy, or Soundness in the Faith, both by a strict
Examination; and a Confession of his Faith given in to this Council, and
designed to be delivered at his Ordination, had it been proceeded in: Nor are
we sensible of any thing respecting his Morals, which disqualifies him for the
Gospel Ministry; inasmuch as those Persons who have thought themselves aspersed
by him, have had an Opportunity to bring in their Complaints to this Council,
and yet have not done it: And to one of them particularly he has given what we
think a sufficient Satisfaction according to the Rules of the Gospel. -- So
that upon the best View we can take of this Case, after many Days careful
Enquiry into it, and Consultation upon it, we can freely and heartily advise
the first Church in Springfield to continue their Regards unto him.

3. Nevertheless, Having met with an unusual Interposition and Hindrance in
carrying on the Work upon which we were called, we do not think it advisable
to proceed farther herein at this Time, but that this Council be adjourned to
October 21st, then to meet at Boston, at 10 o'Clock in the Forenoon.

In the mean Time, -- We exhort and advise the first Church in Springfield to
follow the Things which make for Peace, and wherewith one may Edify another,
and that they would humble themselves under the holy Hand of God, that so in
due Time they may be exalted.

Signed in the Name, and at the Desire of the Council, William Cooper,
Moderator.
October 11. 1735.

The Satisfaction given as to Principles is here said to be both by an
Examination, and a Confession of his Faith. The Examination referred to was at
Boston, more than half a Year before his Ordination; and he did not offer
himself to be examined by Ministers there, because he declined being examined
by the Hampshire Ministers; for they have told us in their Narrative, that he
offered himself to Examination before them, and they refused him. And we can
assure the Reader his Examination was not a slighty one; if the Ability and
Fidelity of the Eight Ministers that were concerned in it may be relied on; who
afterward gave him a Testimonial of this Tenor.

Whereas Robert Breck, M. A. of Harvard College in Cambridge, has applied
himself to us the Subscribers, a Number of the associated Pastors in Boston,
earnestly requesting us to inquire into his Principles in Religion, These may
certify, that on the 8th Day of May, 1735, we discoursed with him to our good
Satisfaction concerning his Orthodoxy in the great Doctrines of Christianity,
as believed and professed in the Churches of Christ in New England, agreeable to
the Westminster Confession of Faith. And so recommend him to the Grace of God,
and are his Brethren in Christ,

Benjamin Colman, Joseph Sewall, John Webb, William Cooper, Thomas Foxcroft,
Samuel Checkley, Joshua Gee, Mather Byles.


Though such a Testimonal as this, in most Cases, would have been esteemed a
sufficient Satisfaction, yet the Council did not think it was in this. Mr.
Breck was therefore directed to prepare and give in a Confession of his Faith,
which if it was esteemed orthodox, should be publicly delivered at his
Ordination, if they proceeded to it. Such a one he gave in, which, when it was
read and considered by the Council, was unanimously approved by them as an
orthodox Confession of Faith; and, at the Demand of the Moderator in the Name
of the Council, it was publicly delivered by him, previous to his Ordination;
and is as follows,

IN AS MUCH as it is desired of me, by Those who I think have a Right to be
satisfied, that I should give an Account, what those Principles and Doctrines
are, which I believe my self, and shall endeavor to teach others; I do with
all Freedom of Mind, and I hope with Seriousness of Spirit, (considering my
self as before the Heart-searching God) declare to the Church that has chosen
me to be their Pastor, to the Churches convened on this solemn Occasion, and to
all the World, as follows,

I Believe that there is a God, whose eternal Power and Godhead are to be
clearly seen from the Things which he has made: But I believe the Light of
Nature is no way sufficient to lead us into the true Knowledge of what God is,
and what he requires of us, in order to our Glorifying him here, and coming to
the Enjoyment of him hereafter.

I therefore acknowledge the Necessity of divine Revelation, and believe this
is to be found in the Books of the Old and New Testament, and in no other:
These I most heartily receive as of divine Original and Authority, and believe
that God has to this Day, in his Providence, kept them pure and incorrupt.

According to these I believe that there is but One God, who is over all,
blessed forever; yet, that in the Unity of the Godhead there are three Persons,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who are the same in Substance, and
equal in Power and Glory: And as this is a Doctrine of pure Revelation, so I
look upon it to be of the highest Importance in Religion, and that on which the
greatest Truths of the Gospel do depend.

I believe that this one God has, from all Eternity, decree and foreordained
in the Council of his own Will, whatsoever comes to pass in Time: yet so as not
to take away the Will of his Creatures, or make himself to be the Author of Sin.

I believe that as the great God created all Things at first by the Word of his
Power, so he does now by his powerful Providence, uphold, preserve, and govern
his Creatures, all their Actions and Affairs, from the highest to the lowest of
them.

I believe that God made Man at first in his own Image, consisting in
Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness; giving him a Law for the Rule of
his Obedience; and entering into a Covenant, wherein Life was promised to him
and all his Posterity, upon Condition of his perfect and personal obeying the
same; endowing him also with a Stock of Grace sufficient to enable him
thereunto: But that Man being made mutable, did, through the Subtilty and
Temptation of Satan, wilfully transgress the Law of his Creation, and break
Covenant with God by eating the forbidden Fruit.

I also believe that Adam being the Covenant, as well as Natural Head of all
Mankind, he by this first Sin of his, derived both Guilt and Corruption to all
his Posterity: So that every Man as he comes into the World, is both odious to
God's Holiness, and obnoxious to his Justice.

But God having from all Eternity, a Design to glorify the Riches of his Grace,
in the Recovery and Salvation of an elect Number of the fallen Children of
Adam, has made a new Covenant, wherein the Lord Jesus Christ stands as their
Head and Surety.

In order to this I believe, That in the fullness of Time, the Lord Jesus
Christ, being the eternal Son of God, became Man. I believe the mysterious
Union of the divine and humane Natures in the Person of Christ: I believe that
in order to satisfy divine Justice for the Sins of the Elect, and reconcile
them to God, he offered up himself a Sacrifice upon the Cross. And, as he was
delivered for their Offenses, so I believe he was raised for their
Justification, and after wards ascended into Heaven, where he is now at the
Right Hand of God, making Intercession for his People.

I believe that it is the peculiar Work and Office of the Holy Spirit, to make
the effectual Application of the Benefits of Christ's Redemption to the Souls
of Men; and that he does this by working Faith in them, and thereby uniting
them to Christ in their effectual Calling.

I believe that fallen Man has left all Power to what is spiritually Good, and
is not able to convert or turn himself to God; and therefore that Effectual
Calling is the special and almighty Work of the Spirit of God, in and upon the
Hearts of Sinners, whereby of unwilling they are made willing, in the Day of
his Power, to go to Christ for Life.

I believe that all that are effectually Called, are justified, through the
Righteousness of the active and passive Obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ
imputed unto them, and received by Faith of God's own Operation.

In these I believe the Work of Sanctification will be carried on, and they
will be enabled to persevere in Grace and Holiness to the End of their Lives.

At Death I believe that the Souls of the Righteous are made perfect in
Holiness, and do pass into Glory and Happiness; but the Spirits of the Wicked
into Torments and Misery.

I believe the Lord Jesus Christ will come a second Time to Raise the Dead and
Judge the World; then shall the Wicked in their raised Bodies, go into
everlasting Punishment; but the Righteous into Life Eternal.

THIS is the Sum of that Christian Doctrine, which I have learned from the Holy
Scriptures, and shall think my self obliged to teach others in the best Manner
I am able; while at the same Time I put them that prosess to believe, in Mind
that they be careful to maintain good Works.

And I hope it will be my Prayer to the Father of Lights, that my Knowledge of
these Things may be enlarged, and my Faith of them confirmed, and that I may be
enabled always to keep the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience.


In this Confession of Faith, the principal Errors Mr. Breck was charged with
are renounced, and the opposite Truths owned and acknowledged by him in the
fullest and strongest Terms, and the most solemn Manner, with an explicit
Engagement to teach those Truths to others, in the Course of his Ministry. It
is therefore very strange these disapproving Gentlemen should say in their
Defense, P. 92, That the Council declare in their Result, there was nothing in
the Way of his Ordination, without his ever openly making any Recantation, or
any Reflection on himself for the Errors be had vented: And that if be did make
any Recantation before the Council, it was not made public as the Case
required, but kept private. Why; they would not stay to see what the Council
did do, but broke in upon us by the Help of the civil Magistrate, before we had
Opportunity to make any Thing public, or indeed to determine upon any Thing.
But how could they say this when they had seen the Result, which says, the
Confession of Faith was to have been publicly delivered at his Ordination, had
it been then proceeded to? And as to Reflections upon himself; Had he not made
them in his Letter to Mr. Clap, which they have published, P. 19, wherein he
acknowledges his being too inconsiderate and incautious in his Discourses about
the Points objected against him; and desires him, that if he knew any Persons
that had conceived ill of Religion or Revelation on his Account, he would let
them know he rejected all such Opinions, etc. These Gentlemen indeed make light
of this Letter, and would have it pass for nothing at all. -- Better they do so
than we, considering who drew it up for Mr. Breck, and though it it satisfactory
then, namely, The Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield. We think still the Letter
would have given more Satisfaction to those that were disposed to receive it,
and that it might have been used toward repairing any Damage that had been
done to Religion; for Mr. Clap had it in his Power, and was expressly desired,
to make it as public as he though it was needful. -- But what is more public than
the Transactions of an Ordination, at which Persons from all Places round about
do usually attend? And in the Confession of Faith which Mr. Breck then made, we
think he did a public Honor to those holy Doctrines, which, they say, he had
denied and treated with Contempt. They may call the Confession of Faith a
Recantation if they please; for it plainly contains a Renunciation of those
Errors he had been charged with: And the Reason why it was insisted upon, and
demanded of him, by the Council, when it is not of other Candidates, was, that
he had given too much Occasion to suspect his holding such Errors. -- If any
now think all this is not Satisfaction enough, it seems to be a hard Matter to
give them Satisfaction. If Mr. Breck is now really an orthodox Man, how can he
satisfy any that he is so, but by an Examination, and a solemn Declaration of
his Faith? Unless it will be said, There should be a Time of Probation; and
this there was in his Case; for he had been preaching at Springfield, after he
left Connecticut, more than a Year and half, and approved himself orthodox by
the Tenor of his Conversation and Preaching there. If one that had been settled
for some Years in the Ministry, had been charged with such Errors, and the
Charges proved, and the Person, after a less Time of Probation than Mr. Breck
had been preaching at Springfield, had renounced the Errors he was charged
with, and owned the contrary Truths, and solemnly engaged to teach them for the
Time to come, it would, doubtless, have been, in the Opinion of prudent and
charitable Men, a sufficient Foundation for his being restored to the Exercise
of his Ministry. How much rather then should this be esteemed a Satisfaction,
in the Case of a young Student, (just bolted out of College, at little more
than 20 Years of Age,) before it can be supposed he had duly informed his
Understanding, and settled his Principles? Allow all the Objections against Mr.
Breck in their full Strength, without any Abatement on any Account, and say
that he was of such Principles, two or three Years ago; still he was not worse
than a Heretic, make the worst of him. Now the Rule of the Gospel in such a
Case is, Tit. 3.10. A Man that is a Heretic, after the first and second
Admonition, reject. The End of the Admonition is doubtless to rectific the
State of the Man's Mind, and reduce him from his Errors; if this is answered,
and the Man makes a Profession of the Truth, that may be accounted sincere in a
Judgment of Charity, he must not be rejected: The Rejection is to be only in
Case he continues obstinate and irreclaimable. By what Rule then should this
young Gentleman be rejected from the Ministry, who was free to say, that
whatever Doubts had been in his Mind in Time past about some certain Points in
Religion, they had been long since removed, by Study, Conversation and Prayer;
who actually submitted to an Examination about those Points; who openly and
solemnly, as in the Sight of God, owned the contrary Truths; and farther
declared, That if any still wanted Satisfaction, by Conference, or any other
Way, he stood ready to give it to the ut most of his Power? As we know of no
Rule by which his Rejection could be justified, so we think there are many
would have been transgressed by it.

As to Objections against Mr. Breck, that respected his Morals, besides what
relates to the Books, (which we believe, every one of our Readers will think
ought no more to be mentioned) we know of none, but what they call his
aspersing some of the Witnesses; by saying, One of them lied, and he would not
take another's Word for a Groat. We have been often told in the Narrative who
these Gentlemen were, namely, the Rev. Mr. Clap and Mr. Kirtland Mr. Clap had
declared, that when Mr. Breck came to visit him, after he was at Springfield,
to discourse with him about the Objections he had sent thither against him, he
still persisted in it, that the Heathen might be saved without Faith. When Mr.
Breck heard the Report of this, he in his Haste did say, Mr. Clap lied. When
his saying so of Mr. Clap was mentioned to him in the Association as Matter of
Offense, he immediately said. "He was sorry he expressed himself in so hasty
and indecent a Manner, but he must insist upon it that in what Mr. Clap said of
him he was wronged". Indeed it looks very strange that Mr. Breck should so
express himself to Mr. Clap at this Time, when the whole Design of his Visit
was to see if he could satisfy Mr. Clap, that so he might manifest himself
satisfied to the Gentlemen of Hampshire; yet he might do it: But then the
Burden of Proof lies upon Mr. Clap; and as the Conversation was private,
between Mr. Clap and Mr. Breck alone, Mr. Clap is not able to prove it, if Mr.
Breck did really say so. In this Case, no other Acknowledgment can in Justice
be insisted on from Mr. Breck, but only that he did not express himself in a
suitable Manner; that considering Mr. Clap's Station and Character, instead of
saying he lied, he should have said, he was mistaken, or mis-understood him --
And, to this Purpose Mr. Breck did not only speak to the Association, but write
to Mr. Clap himself. The Words of his Letter are, " So far as I have been
faulty, or have failed in showing that Respect which was due to you, or of that
Meekness which becomes a Christian, I ask Christian Forgiveness; and desire
your Prayers, etc."

As to the Reason of Mr. Breck's expressing himself as he did, respecting the
Rev. Mr. Kirtland, we are not particularly acquainted with it; but the Council
were much concerned that both these Gentlemen might have a proper Satisfaction
given them, if they had been hurt in their Reputation. And therefore when they
were with the Council, after they had said all they chose to say about Mr.
Breck relating to Principles, the Moderator in the Name of the Council,
inquired of them, "Whether they had any Charges to make against Mr. Breck, upon
the Account of any personal Injury he had done them? That if they had there
might be a reasonable Satisfaction given them by Mr. Breck, which he at the
same Time declared he was ready to give." But both these Gentlemen declined
making any Charge upon him, or manifesting themselves offended with him upon
any such Account. And this is the Ground of what the Council say in their
Result, That they are not sensible of any Thing respecting his Morals, to
disqualifie him for the Gospel Ministry; inasmuch as those Persons who have
though it themselves aspersed by him, bad an Opportunity to bring in their
Complaints, but did not do it; and to one of them particularly he had given
what might be looked upon to be christian Satisfaction.

And now that we may draw to a CONCLUSION.

We must, in our Turn, desire all that will allow themselves to make Use of
their Reason, and to think coolly on the Matter, to judge to whom it is that
all the vast Confusion is owing, that has happened with Relation to this Case. We
know indeed all Men are apt to be partial to themselves in judging of their own
Actions, yet we cannot help thinking our Proceedings in this Affair are to be
justified upon the Principles of Liberty and the Constitution. For we invaded
no Men's Right. The Church at Springfield, which called us to act in their
Affairs, was a free Church; and had never put themselves under the Jurisdiction
of those Gentlemen that opposed us. They were inquired of, "Whether they had by
any Vote, obliged themselves to referr their Concerns only to the Ministers and
Churches of that Association?" And they declared, No! It was also further
declared, That though such a Vote had once been projected in the Association and
offered to the Churches, and some of the Churches had been bro't into it, yet
that this Church of Springfield, and some others in the County, had refused it.
-- We think also our Proceeding to the Settlement of Mr. Breck in this Church,
is to be justified upon the Principle of Justice, as well as Tenderness, to one
who had been devoted to the Work of the Ministry, and spent a considerable Part
of his Patrimony in his Education for it; who had now given such Satisfaction
of his Soundness in the Faith, and of whose Abilities for the Work of the
Ministry, and Sutableness to be their Pastor, the Church that called him were
generally so well satisfied. -- And that we have not espoused the Cause of
Liberty, or that of a particular Person or Society, to the Damage of the Cause
of Truth, which should be most dear to us, we think appears from the Care we
took to have the great Doctrines of the Gospel both secured and honored: We
may say, Such Care as was never before taken at any Ordination in the Country.
And though these Gentlemen are pleased to represent us as Favorers of heterodox
Principles, and having opened a Door for the letting in of Error upon the
Churches, if Churches that are hereafter called to Ordinations, whether they
are at a Distance, or near at Hand, will take as much Care, and receive the
like Satisfaction and Engagements from those whom they introduce into the
Ministry, we believe there will be less Danger of the letting in of Error, than
there has been for some Time past. For our Parts, we cannot, after all, but hope
our Conduct in this Affair will be a real Service to the Cause of Truth, as
well as Liberty, in our Churches. -- And we cannot but wish our Brethren of
Hampshire, would, at this Time, put on a little more of that Charity, which
rejoices in the Truth, and in Persons being bro't to own and acknowledge it. Or
if they still allow themselves to suspect Mr. Breck's Sincerity, let them stay
till he does something against the Truth, before they go to give him and his
Church any more Trouble. Since there has been such Confusion already, let them
but do their Endeavor there should be no more, and Things would, probably,
very soon return to a State of Peace If it be the Cause of Truth and not their
own apprehended Association Rights they have at Heart, (as they pretend) since
Mr. Breck has been solemnly ordained to the Ministry upon those professed
Principles which they account orthodox, why will they not own him as an
orthodox Minister, till he discovers himself to be otherwise, and admit him to
join with them in promoting the common Interests of Christ's Kingdom, and so
prevent, or heal, the Breach in their Association, which they seem so much
concerned about? This, we know, is what has been earnestly recommended to them
by some whom they profess a great Honor for, and is what would rejoice their
best Friends that are at a Distance from them. But if they continue to show no
Regard to Mr. Breck as a Minister, and will not so much as pray for a Blessing
upon his Ministry, upon special Occasions that lead to it; and if they
countenance the Measures that are now taking, to get the Parish presented to
the civil Court, for not being supplied with an orthodox Minister as the Law
requires, we fear those who have been ready to think there was nothing but the
Wisdom and Meekness of Moses in them, will be ready to say, Ye know not what
Manner of Spirits ye are of: And though they may call it Conscience, others will
be apt to put another Name upon it.

The Gentlemen conclude their Defense, with a solemn Appeal to Heaven, in the
following Words; Whoever condemns us, we rest in the Testimony of a good
Conscience, appealing to our Lord and Master, who has sent us into his Vineyard
and who is the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, that is omniscient, and
never blinded with Prejudice, that he would judge us with respect to our
Uprightness in this Affair. -- Some serious, considerate Christians, have been
a little surpised at so strong an Appeal in such a Case. For our Part, We are
sensible that Controversy always raises a Dust, that tends to blind even wise
and good Men; and when such are fallen into a Contention, each Party are too
apt to act from other Principles besides those of Religion and Conscience, and
yet not always be sensible wherein, or how far, they have done so. They are but
little acquainted with the Infirmities and Corruptions of Men in their present
best State, that will not allow it is humane so to err. We would remember the
Words of the great Apostle, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby
justified: and therefore instead of such a confident Appeal, we would take the
Liberty to close this Vindication, as the Sermon at the Ordination concluded,
with a humble Prayer, That wherein any of us, on either Part, have failed or
done amils, God would show it to us, humble us for it, and spare us according
to his great Mercy! And that wherein we have acted sincerely, from right
Principles, and for right Ends, we may find Acceptance, for the sake of the
perfect Obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ, who always did the Things that
pleased the Father! -- That the God of Love, would unite his Ministers and
Churches, in Love to Christ and one another, till we shall all come to that
blessed World, where no Offense shall arise, where there shall be no Jar, no
Contention, but perfect Love and Peace and Charity, shall reign for ever and
ever! Where that Prayer of our Savior for his Church and People, will have its
full and everlasting Accomplishment, THAT THEY ALL MAY BE ONE, AS THOU FATHER
ART IN ME, AND I IN THEE; THAT THEY ALL MAY BE ONE IN US! AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 19. l. 3, for Heat read Have. P. 66. l. 27, for signed read served. P.
91. l. 19, read Gentlemen.


