Dr. Colman's DISSERTATION On the three first Chapters of GENESIS.

A Brief Dissertation ON THE Three first Chapters OF GENESIS. Giving some of
the Evident Signatures Of the INSPIRATION of GOD in those First Pages of the
Holy Oracles. Being the Substance of Some SERMONS Lately Preached By Dr. Colman.

Joh. ix. 29. We know that GOD spoke unto Moses.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for J.EDWARDS and H.FOSTER, at
their Shops in Cornhill. 1735.

THE learned Reader is desired not to expect any thing Critical or
Philosophical in the following Essay; but a studied Plainess and Simplicity of
Method, Style and Reasoning; adapted to Readers of a lower Form, to inform
affect and confirm such, and yet at the same time to gratify Those of a higher
Class.

This being the Author's Aim and Endeavor, he accordingly commends it to the
Blessing of GOD for General Use and Service.

The Evident Signatures of Divine Inspiration, in the first Pages of the HOLY
ORACLES. In a brief Dissertation on the Three first Chapters of GENESIS.
MANY excellent Pens, in our Nation, have of late Years appeared in Defense of
Divine Revelation; which has been boldly attacked, openly insulted, and
sometimes profanely ridiculed, by the Deists and Infidels of the present Day;
with a Pretense to superior Understanding and Judgment, and Freedom of
Thinking; as if all beside Themselves were hoodwinked and shackled by
Prejudices of Education, or corrupted and restrained by Worldly Interests; and
They alone were the Men of free Though It, Sincerity and Courage, and Wisdom were
to die with them.

Great has been the Provocation to answer some of the more licentious and
scurrilous Advocates for Infidelity according to their Folly, lest they be wise
in their own Conceit: But great has been the Guard and Caution on the part of
the noble and serious Defenders of the Divine Authority of the Bible, to write
with Decency and Justice, Reverence and Gravity, Reason and Argument, on a
Subject of so great Importance to the Honor of God and the Salvation of Souls.
They have nevertheless contended earnestly for the Faith, while they have given
the Reason of it with Meekness of Wisdom; and Eno' has been said to convince
Gainsayers, to stop the Mouths of unruly and vain Talkers, and to confirm the
Souls of the Disciples.

I am my Self in a particular manner obliged to mention, with great
Acknowledgment, the Pleasure and Benefit I found in reading Dr. Thomas Burnet's
Demonstration of true Religion in a Chain of Scripture Consequences; and a
later Author of Revelation examined with Candor; to which the following
Dissertation owes its Rise. It pretends not to any like Elaborateness, but is
written for People of a lower Rank, who cannot rise to the Price of the
forenamed Books. We write for the Places where we live, and for the People to
whom we belong; and at the Request of Those to whom the following Pages were
acceptable and profitable from the Pulpit under another Form, I now publish
them in this of a Dissertation on the first Chapters of the BIBLE.

If these first Pages in the Book of God do not appear worthy of his
Inspiration, we may even give up the Rest of the Bible. If God has not spoken
to us by Moses, neither has He by the following Prophets; no, nor by JESUS and
his Apostles. But if it be Evident that Moses wrote by Inspiration of God, it
is a sure and strong Foundation for, and Argument of the Credibility of the
whole Sacred Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; which we find bearing a
strict Reference unto, Agreement with, and to be the Fulfillment of what Moses
has written.

The whole of Revealed Religion, the whole Doctrine of Christianity, stands on
this Foot. The Prophets and Apostles all bear Witness to the Writings of Moses.
The Old Testament ends with this, "Remember the Law of Moses my Servant! and
the New begins and ends with the like Testimony to Him as Inspired of God, and
sent by Him. It begins with leading us back to Moses, Joh. v. 39, 45, etc.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life, and These are
they that testify of Me: Do not think that I will accuse you unto the Father;
there is one that accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye trust: For had ye
believed Moses ye would have believed Me, for he wrote of Me; But if ye believe
not his Writings, how shall ye believe my Words? -- And if we look to the Close
of our Bible, we find it ending with "the Song of Moses and the Lamb.

I will not go into the Honors of Moses, as they are delivered to us in the
Sacred Pages, lest it should seem a begging the Question before us; but let us
only open our Bibles and read the short Narrative given of the Creation of the
Earth and of Man upon it, his Sin and Judgment, and see whether it be not most
worthy of the Majesty, Holiness and Grace of the MOST HIGH; the most fit and
proper Beginning of a Revelation of God to Man.

The first Book of Moses is Historical. And it is the grand Honor of History
that the Revelations of God begin thus. And if we weigh the Thing well we must
needs judge that the Inspired Oracles must so begin. Lapsed and ignorant
Mankind by Moses Time needed a History of their own Beginning, their first
State and the Origin of Evil. And this must be a Doctrinal History, concerning
GOD and Themselves; how God made Them and all Things very good; what He made
'em for, and what He required of them; how they came into their present State
of Sin and Misery, and what Way there is for their Recovery out of it. This is
the Argument and Substance of the Book of Genesis, and more especially of the
first three Chapters of it.

GOD there informs us first concerning HIMSELF, his Own ETERNAL BEING AND
GODHEAD, and then concerning his Works, the Origin of the World, and the
Manner and End of our own Formation. In what other, or better Manner, can we
think that a Revelation from God should begin? The first Verse of the Bible
shows it to be the Book of God: "In the Beginning God created the Heavens and
the Earth. What, but this, should be the first Line of Scripture? The DIVINE
MAJESTY here speaks of Himself as the First Cause of all Things; That of Him
and to Him are all Things, and for His Pleasure they are and were created. The
one only true Foundation of all Science and of all Religion. It was not
possible for Man to know any thing aright concerning Himself, or the Visible
Works of God, till he knew this. This is the Image and Superscription of God
upon the Bible in the first Line of it. God being to write His Book, for the
Use of the Sons of Men, through all Generations, put his Name before it in these
Words, In the Beginning GOD created the Heavens and the Earth.

GOD is here represented as Self-Exisient, and in his own Times, as the blessed
and only Potentate, giving unto all Things their Existence and Being, visible
and invisible; by an Act of his Will, and a Word of his Power. How well does
this first Line of Moses agree to the Psalm which bears his Name? Psalm. xc. 2,
4. Before the Mountains were bro't forth, or ever Thou had formed the Earth
and the World, from Everlasting to Everlasting Thou art God: For a thousand
Years in thy Sight are but as Yesterday when it is past, and as a Watch in the
Night. The Eternal God speaks by Moses of His own Eternity, how He was before
all Things; and the Infinite God speaks of his own Infinity, his infinite Power
which by a Word bro't the visible Heavens and Earth into their Being and Order;
first commanded the Matter into Being, sufficient for the forming the Universe,
and then spoke it into that Beauty and comely Proportion which our Eyes behold.
-- What, but This, ought the first Line of sacred Scripture to contain? He that
does not see or read God in it is blind; and he that does not hear God speaking
in it of Himself, has no Understanding of what he hears. The God of infinite
Wisdom, Power and Goodness speaks of these his immense Perfections, in these
few Words, as plainly and copiously as if Volumes were writ of them.

In the Beginning, soil, of the Universe; when the Worlds came into Being, the
upper and the lower; it was merely by the Sovereign Will and Word of the LORD
GOD; at what Time and in what Order. These Worlds had their Beginning, but GOD
had none. God gave Them their Existence, when, where and how it pleased Him;
and made all most good and perfect, for His Own Praise and Glory. There was no
other Will, Wisdom, Goodness or Power to do this, but His who is THE ETERNAL;
Who was, and is, and is to come; the same Yesterday, to Day and for Ever.

This is but a just Paraphrase on the first Line of Scripture, which is Immense
in Sense. The Fullness of the Eternal GODHEAD is in it, and all Things that God
has made are in it too. -- One might dwell and expatiate on this first Word of
Moses for Ever, and never be able to think or say any thing on it adequate to
the Fullness of Sense and Spirit in it. -- In what other Words could the Book of
God begin? O the Height and Depth, the Length and Breadth of this one Line! It
is Light, without any Darkness at all! GOD dwells and shines in it! It is Light
unapprochable and full of Glory! Here is the Beginning and Finishing of the
Creation of God in a Single Line! And then the DIVINE SPIRIT descends to that
Part and Point of the Creation that belongs to Man, our Earth, and proceeds to
speak of it.

Ver. 2. And the Earth was without Form and void, and Darkness was upon the
Face of the Deep. This we must suppose, unless we should rather think it
becoming the Glory of God to give every Globe in the Universe its perfect Form
at once. He could indeed as easily have done this, but I think the Glory of
Divine Wisdom and Goodness more displayed in the gradual Process related by
Moses. God had first created the Heavens and Hosts of glorious Angels, a World
of bright Intelligences to behold the lower Worlds, take their Place, Form and
Motion. And as these were finishing from Day to Day, one Part after another,
and every Part more and more perfective of the Whole, those blessed Spectators
sang together and shouted forth the Praises of that infinite Perfection, which
they saw with Wonder in every step: As we read Job xxxviii. 7.

The most perfect Idea that the Mind of Man can now frame concerning the
Formation of our Earth, and so of the other Planets within our Circle, is this,
"That they were first a Chaos, or confused Particles of watery, oily, earthly,
aerie, and fiery Matter, blended together, without any distinct Order, Form or
Beauty, a darksome Mass and Deep, which we should have been ready to think
could never be bro't into any Order, Comeliness and Use. We read that THE
SPIRIT OF GOD moved on this Face of Disorder and vast Confusion: And who else
should reveal to us what a void and formless thing the first Materials, or
Collection of Matter, for such a World as this, must needs be?

And now, what would a considering Angel think should be the first Thing
produced, or called forth into some Appearance, out of this Darkness and
Disorder? What should it be but LIGHT? And Moses tells us this was it, Ver. 3.
And GOD said, Let there be Light, and there was Light.

Did Moses conceive this? wise as he was and penetrating, even as an Angel of
God, and learned in all the Philosophy of Egypt? No, it was beyond the Ken of
any humane Mind or Wisdom. How is it spoken like a GOD! and how God-like is the
Account of the Production of one Thing and another? "GOD said, Let there be
this and that! and let it be thus and thus! The Perfection of Wisdom saw at
once how it should be, and the Perfection of Will said, Let it be so. He spoke
and it was done, He commanded and it immediately existed, and was established.
Here is perfect Ease in the Production of every Thing; and in the Projection of
it, if that Word be lawful. Moses could not have spoken thus of God and of His
Work, if God had not spoken of Himself to him. And yet we cannot now possibly
conceive of any other Manner of Working worthy of the great GOD! and therefore
we know that God spoke by Moses.

Of all visible, material Things, which should be first in Order of Time, and
which is first in Order of Nature, Use, Influence and Dignity, but LIGHT? By
this all Things are seen, pervaded and enlivened. For Heat accompanies Light,
and it is (under the Will and Power of GOD) vital to all Things that live, grow
and move, or act upon Earth.

That first Light was pleasant to the surrounding Hosts of Angels, how far
soever it was below That of their Celestial Regions. From their high World of
Light and Glory they came to see a new World of Material Beauties and Splendors
rising from a Chaos. They heard the Voice from the Heavenly Glory say, Let
Light be here below! and they saw it to be very good.

GOD is Light. So He represents Himself unto us, because Light is the
firstborn of the Visible Creation. How does it excel Darkness! how did it
spring forth out of Darkness, and shine in the Eyes of admiring Angels! Hail,
Holy Light! they cried: Our Milton learned it of Them in his Darkness. And so
our late Angel of a Man, Mr. Henry in his Exposition: Light says he, which of
all Things seen does most resemble it is great Parent in Beauty and Blessings,
in Purity Brightness and Beneficence, in Spirituality Immensity and
Immutability.

GOD is the Father of Light, from Whom every good and perfect Gift comes down;
and with Him there is no Variableness, nor Shadow of Change. So in the New
Creation Light is the first Thing formed. GOD gives the Light of the Knowledge
of his more Spiritual Glory, in the Face of JESUS CHRIST.

The Order of the Creation is admirable and perfect as it is related by Moses;
yet it could not have entered into the Heart of Man to have conceived of it, if
God had not revealed it to Him. As soon as the Light shone out of Darkness, God
stretched out a Firmament, He made an Atmosphere about the Earth, an Expansion
of Air, the higher and lower Region of it, of various Use and vast Benefit, and
of the last Necessity for the Growth of every Vegetable, and for the Life and
Motion of every Animal. The Mass of Water and Earth was hereby left a distinct
Body by it self. In this Firmament of Heaven the Vapors ascend from the Ends
of the Earth, the Winds blow, the Clouds roll, and God rides on them, and plays
his dreadful Artillery, the Lightning and Thunder, which purifies the Air for
us, while it makes us tremble. It ^^ndly deceives our Sight, and makes Things
seem near to us at inconceivable Distances, and our Eyes receive Objects through
an immeasurable Space, the Sun and Stars, with Ease and Pleasure. Hereby the
Light and Heat and Rains descend on us, in fit Proportions to make the Earth
fruitful; the Grass grows for the Cattle, Herbs and Corn and Fruits for the
Service of Man; the glorious Works of God are seen and contemplated by us, and
vital Heat is conveyed to our Hearts, and preserved in our Blood. -- Such is
the Firmament which God has spread over us, the Pavement of his Feet, but the
Breath of our Nostrils. Moses has told of it, as the wondrous Work of God,
accompanying the Light, which how should it glare, or be at all visible, but
through a Vehicle of Air? In this, under God, whose Visitation preserves our
Spirits, we live and move and have our Being.

And now God gathered the Mass of lower Waters into one Place, into one vast
Body, or Collection of it, and the dry Land appeared. The Sea is His for he
made it; and his Hands formed the dry Ground: In his Hands are the deep Places
of the Earth, and the Strength of the Hills is his also. GOD formed it a
Terraqueous Globe, Land and Water; both alike necessary and beauteous in their
Kind and Place. He bad the Earth to bring forth the Grass and Herb and Trees,
even before there was a Sun in the Firmament of Heaven, say some; but others
choose only to say, before its Heat and Light broke through the exhaled Vapors,
drank up the dark Waters and scattered the thick Clouds of the Sky. The Moon
and Stars then appeared in their Courses, and Day and Night commenced, Months
and Years. The same Circle and System of Planets and fixed Stars, which are
beheld by us at this Day, but can never be eno' admired by the Sons of Men,
shone out at once on this Terraqueous Globe of ours.

But as yet no Eye was formed to behold and view them; no not so much as the
Eye of a Fish in the Waters of an Animal on the Land, or of an Insect in the
Air. Now therefore it pleased God to command the Waters to bring forth the
moving Creatures in them, great and small; and the Fowl to fly in the open
Firmament. He filled the Sea with Fish, and things creeping innumerable; and
the Air with feathered Fowl, of every Wing and Size. Angels beheld with vast
Delight the Life, the Beauties and Motion of them all. -- Who could have led
Moses down into and through these Depths of the Sea, and up into all these
Heights of the Air, to trace out the Original of the Inhabitants of both; but
only GOD the Former of them all, and the Fountain of Life unto all? For there
is not the most inferior Life in Air or Water, but what loudly tells us of the
living JEHOVAH, the GOD of Moses, Who only has Life in Himself, and gives
unto all Life and Breath and all things.

God made 'em to propagate their Life; to increase, multiply in, and replenish
the Sea, the Air and Earth. He added his Blessing on Them for this End, which
is effectual to this Day, and without which every living Thing had been barren
and fruitless for Ever. -- O the Riches, and Profusion of Bounty, in the Living
Creatures that communicate the Life-which they receive, through all Ages of the
World, as long as Man and Sun and Moon shall endure.

This Power and Goodness inexhaustible flowed on, and rose higher and higher,
till the dry Land was also stored with Beasts, and Cattle and every creeping
Thing after their Kind; and then MAN was last of all formed, with a Solemnity
and Pleasure peculiar to the Superior Creature on Earth; designed to be the
Lord of all the Creatures in Air, on Earth and in the Seas, and to bear the
Image and Likeness of the CREATOR of all. Genesis i. 26, 27. -- ii. 7. And God
said, Let us make Man in our Image, after our Likeness: and let Them have
Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and over the
Cattle, and over all the Earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps
upon the Earth. So God created Man in His own Image, in the Image of God
created He him; Male and Female created He them: And God blessed them, and said
unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the Earth, and subdue it;
and have Dominion etc: -- The Lord God formed Man of the Dust of the Ground and
breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life, and Man became a Living Soul.

What should be the Image of the LIVING GOD, in Heaven or on Earth, but living
Spirits? intelligent and immortal Creatures, made after the Power of an endless
Life. Who but These should be made for Dominion in one World or the other? God
is the Father of Spirits and the Fountain of Life. The Life of Angels and of
Souls is of Him and to Him. The living Beings in every World must worship Him
that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns before His Throne; for
they are all crowned with Glory and Honor, in His Image on them.

GOD is the BEING of Beings: I AM THAT I AM is his Name. JEHOVAH is but the
same Name. Eternity, Immensity and Immutability go into the full Meaning of it.
And all these also go into every moral Perfection of the Divine Nature. God is
therefore a SPIRIT infinite, eternal, unchangeable in his Being, Wisdom, Power,
Holiness, Justice, Goodness and Truth.

Man in his Immortality may be said to bear some Image of the Everlasting Life
of God. But the Moral Perfections of God must necessarily be communicated to
Reasonable Creatures, in a Degree and Measure suitable to their Place in the
Creation of God, in order to their Acting wisely, holily, justly; with Goodness
and Truth. The Apostle tells us that this was the Image and Likeness of God,
wherein Man was created, and to which He is in part restored in his
Sanctification. Ephesians. iv. 24. Renewed in the Spirit of your Mind, and after God
created in Righteousness and true Holiness. Col. iii. 10. Renewed in Knowledge,
after the Image of Him that created him.

MAN is a living Soul, not only in respect of Immortality, but as he is an
Intelligent, Self-conscious Creature, made a Law to Himself, and for
Self-Government; an Agent by Counsel, accountable to God, to his own
Conscience, and to the Societies to which he belongs. He feels and shows the
Work of the Law written in his Heart, his Conscience bearing him Witness, and
his Thoughts excusing or accusing, and binding him over to the Eternal Judgment
of God, Romans ii. 15, 16.

Sense, Reason and Experience do all testify to us that the other Animals on
Earth are not such Living Souls, as these which we feel within our Selves. As
they have no Conscience of Right and Wrong, so no Knowledge or Fear of a holy
Maker and Judge. They are not capable of contemplating God in his Works, nor of
giving Glory to him in Acts of Worship and Obedience. But the Soul of Man is as
evidently made for those Exercises of Religion, to glorify God with his Body
and Spirit; having the Presages of a future and everlasting State in present
Hopes and Fears.

Now Moses is the first who told the Sons and Daughters of Men in Writing of
their being created these living Souls, for these superior and holy Ends. And
this is the first Thing he tells them concerning Themselves, which highly
becomes a Revelation from God, to let us know our Selves to be the Offspring of
God; that He has taught us more than the Beasts of the Earth, and made us Wiser
than the Fowls of Heaven, and expects more from us. This stands excellently
well in the Account given us of our Creation. God knows the Soul which he has
made, and tells it what it is, and leads it to Himself, by showing it his own
Image in it self.

No Writer before Moses has told Mankind how they came into Being, in what a
Glory they were created, in what Rectitude and Perfection. And surely a
Revelation from God to Man should begin with such an Account of his Original
and first State; " Who made him, how he was made, what he was made for; that
God made him very good, and for Himself; for Glory to Himself from Man, and for
Blessedness in Himself unto him.

Thus Moses writes of GOD who was before the World, and of His making it in
such a Manner as becomes the Wisdom, Goodness, Holiness and Eternal Power of
God. Moses could never have undertaken and performed This, but under the
Inspiration of God. Known to HIM, and to Him alone, are all his Works from the
Beginning to the End. Had Moses, or any One else, presumed to have told the
Manner and Order of the Creation of their own Head, they had justly incurred
the fearful Words of the ALMIGHTY out of the Whirlwind, Job xxxviii. 2, -- 6.
Who is this that darkneth Counsel by Words without Knowledge? Gird up now thy
Loins like a Man; for I will demand of thee and answer thou Me. Where wast thou
when I laid the Foundation of the Earth? declare if thou have Understanding.
Who laid the Measures thereof; if thou know? or who has stretched the Line
up in it? Whereupon are the Foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the
Cornerstone thereof? Or who shut up the Sea with Doors, etc.

Moses was the boldest Man that ever wrote, the most daring and insolent, if
not inspired from on High. Yet what can be more Reverend and Awful before God,
than all his Words concerning Him and his Works! -- What a Presumption had it
been to have pretended to tell, Who the first Parents of Mankind were, how they
came into Being, what God said to them, where he put 'em, and how they behaved;
if it were not from certain Tradition from the Mouth of Adam, or by immediate
Inspiration from Heaven? This Man Moses, the wisest and meekest upon Earth, had
shown himself the vainest and proudest, to write as he did at the End of two
Thousand Years, without a certain Record left him to copy after, or the certain
Impulse and Dictate of the SPIRIT OF GOD. But if God spoke to him, and by him
of his own Work, then the meeker he was the more suitable for God to speak by;
for He resists the proud and gives Grace unto the lowly.

It looks indeed as if God spoke to Moses in that he tells us that Man was
created last of all the Works of God upon Earth. The Earth and the Creatures on
it were made for Man, by Moses his Account; no doubt therefore but they were
made before him. Man being the Top, the Crown, and Lord of the lower Creation,
it was finished and perfected in his Formation. It agrees to the Wisdom,
Goodness and Bounty of the Great CREATOR, that it was so. Through the whole
Creation the less perfect was created first. The Advance is gradual, by Moses's
Account; from Earth to Grass, from Grass and Trees to Cattle and creeping
Things, and then to Man in the Image of God.

Man had no more any Hand in his own Coming into Being, than any of the
Inferior Creatures. It was an Honor and Favor to Him to be made last. God
built and furnished him a Palace for his Reception, being designed to be the
Prince and Vicercy here below. He did not come into an empty naked World, but
found it richly stored with every Beauty and Bounty for Soul and Body. He had
the Glories of the whole finished Creation for his Mind to contemplate, and all
the Stores of Nature to regale his Appetite. Here was every Thing for Delight
as well as Need; all that his Soul could wish for: Eno' to entertain his Wonder
and raise his Gratitude, and fill him with Adorations. This was as became the
Work of God.

Again that Man should be created with more Solemnity, Pause and Pleasure, than
the other Creatures, as Moses relates, is a Circumstance as credible as it is
agreeable. God had said, Let the Waters bring forth the moving Creature, and let
the Earth bring forth the living Creature; but when the Formation of Man comes
on the Style alters; and Reason good, on the Account of GOD, in whose Image Man
was to be made. The words of God therefore were, Let Us make Man in Our Image,
after Our Likeness, and let Them have Dominion. It was meet for the High GOD to
put this Honor on His Own Image, in the Creature formed for Dominion, and his
own Worship. Honor and Majesty is put upon Him in his Superior Nature, and
therefore also in his Coming into Being. Psalm. viii. 5, 6, 7. Thou have made
him a little lower than the Angels, and crowned him with Glory and Honor; Thou
made him to have Dominion over the Works of thy Hands, and have put all
things under his Feet. God pleased to distinguish this his crowning Work before
he made Him, and in making him, and afterward. He spoke of Him, as he made him,
as having a special Delight in the Sons of Men; "Let Us make Man, Our own Image
upon Earth, a living Spirit, a rational and immortal Soul. This is said for
Man's sake, as if he called a Council about forming him; that Man might
reverence Himself, and love and praise his Maker. q. d. Let Us form this
Creature for Our Self, in Knowledge and Sanctity, and for Immortality; to
worship and obey Us, and be blessed in the High Enjoyment of our Favor for
Evermore.

Man is sacred and dedicated to that Glorious TRINITY or GODHEAD, Who thus
spoke of him in the Day of his Creation. His reverend and dutiful Answer must
be Jerem. xxxviii. 16. Prove. xxxii. 8.
, GOD that made us this Soul! The SPIRIT of God has made me, and the
Inspiration of the ALMIGHTY gives me Understanding: For the Spirit of Man is
the Candle of the LORD. Moses his account of Man's Formation highly becomes a
Creature so Endowed from on High. The whole Account is worthy of GOD and of his
Work. Less should not be said of it, and more ought not.

To go on: That Man should be created Male and Female, and but one Man and
Woman, highly agrees to the Wisdom and Purity of God. That it was so, none but
God could tell; unless the Tradition might be had from Adam and his immediate
Sons. That it should be so is in all respects desirable; Even that all Mankind,
throughout all Ages, might be of one Blood, one Family, the Children of one
Father and Mother, and love accordingly: And that according to the Original
Pattern, only one Man and one Woman should join themselves in Marriage through
all Generations; to preserve a chaste, a godly, a robust and healthy, and so a
happy Seed. This is the Reasoning of the HOLY GHOST upon this Subject, toward
the End of the Old Testament: Mal. ii. 15. Did He not make One? yet had He the
Residue of the Spirit: And wherefore One? that He might seek a godly Seed.
Wherefore take Heed to your Spirit, that none deal treacherously with the Wife
of his Youth. The plain Meaning of the Prophet is this, God made but one Adam
and Eve at first, as Moses tells us. He could have made ten or twenty Females
for the speedy Propagation of Mankind, and to replenish the Earth, fast with
Inhabitants. And if ever there could be Reason to think that God would allow
more than one Woman to a Man, it had been to Adam, when the whole Earth was
without another Inhabitant, and it could be peopled but very slowly from one
Pair. Yet even in this Case God made but one Eve, and instituted the Purity of
the Marriage Bed therein; that no one in any Case, or on any Pretense, should
ever take more Wives than one at a Time, or break the Marriage Covenant by
lusting after any other Woman. -- And now, how worthy this Account of Adam and
Eve, alone in the World, is of God their Maker, let the Experience of all the
World speak, from the manifest and manifold Confusions to Persons and Families,
to Body Soul and Estate, from having more Wives than one, or from the impure
Mixtures of Fornication and Adultery. How necessary and honorable is Chastity
and holy Matrimony to Mankind, whether we consider our selves as reasonable, or
as religious social Creatures? The bodily Health is consulted by the Law of
Marriage, and the Health of the Soul more: It was meet therefore for the Father
and Preserver of Men to make This one of his first Laws and Institutions, as
Moses tells us He did.

As One says, Since Adam was confined to one Wife, it is a sufficient
Intimation that his Sons should be so; and that the Bond of Marriage is not to
be dissolved at Pleasure. So our Lord JESUS has taught us to reason; Mat. xix.
3, -- 8. The Pharisees came unto Him, tempting him and saying, "Is it lawful
for a Man to put away his Wife for every Cause? And he answered and said unto
them, "Have ye not read, that He which made them at the Beginning, made them
Male and Female? and said, For this Cause shall a Man leave Father and Mother,
and shall cleave unto his Wife; and they twain shall be one Flesh. Wherefore
they are no more twain, but one Flesh. What therefore God has joined together,
let not Man put asunder. They soy unto Him, Why did Moses then command to give
a Writing of Divorcement, and put her away? He says unto them, Moses because
of the Hardness of your Hearts suffered you to put away your Wives; but from
the Beginning it was not so. No Permission or Indulgence to any in Times past,
no not to Abraham or Jacob themselves, or to any of their Posterity, may be
pleaded for an Exemption from this Original Intention and Constitution in Man's
Creation; but this must determine Us, -- Adam had but one Wife, "Eve had but
one Husband.

In the next place, Moses tells us that as soon as God had formed this lovely
happy Pair, and brought them together, He blessed them. A Particular truly
becoming the Father of their Spirits; the Former of their Bodies, and the Lover
of his Own Image in them. He had made 'em holy, wise, perfect; for Happiness in
one another, and for Blessedness in Himself and in a better Life; and no wonder
that He blessed 'em, rejoicing in his own Work. He blessed the Fish and the
Fowl as they came into Being, and so the other Living Creatures that were made
to propagate and multiply; for his Work was all Honorable and Glorious; but
the Blessing of Man far excecded that on the inferior Creatures; as He was made
greater and better than they. -- Let the Sons and Daughters of Men know, that
God most High is as ready to bless 'em all as to make 'em; and to bless 'em
particularly in their Marriage and Family Relation: And that as he has filled
this World with Variety of Blessings for them, so he gives them with a
Blessing, and has greater Blessings than these in Store for them, if they will
know and love and fear their MAKER; even all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly
Places in CHRIST JESUS.

Moses certainly wrote as an Historian from GOD, in telling us with what
Pleasure God looked on Man, and on the inferior Creatures also, in the Day he
made 'em; and how he bestowed his Blessing on them. It belongs to a Father to
bless his Offspring, from the Love he bears to 'em. And could it be possible
that God should make Adam and Eve in his own Likeness, and put them together,
without a solemn Benediction?

By this Blessing God joined them together in Holy Marriage, -- And O what a
Wedding was it! God gave the Bride, and blessed the Match of his own making. --
This Institution of Marriage, upon the Formation of Man male and female, is a
pure and evident Token that God spoke by Moses. It agrees to the whole after
Current of Scripture, through both Testaments; to the Seventh Commandment in
particular, and that every One possess himself in Sanctification and (...).

To go on. By Moses Account of the first State of Man, it appears that Adam and
Eve were created with Understanding and Speech, and with the Powers of Reason
in Perfection: Also with a Knowledge of the Brute Creatures necessary for their
Dominion over them: And moreover, that in Things necessary for them to know,
but above the Reach of Humane Understanding, they were favored with
Supernatural Revelations, or Inspiration from on High. And certainly this is as
became Him whose Work is perfect, who beheld it and lo it was all very good. It
was necessary for Adam and Eve to be endowed with Knowledge and Speech, and not
to have These to acquire; for then had the lower Creation been without a Head
or Ruler, and the Work of God had herein been greatly defective. -- Moses tells
us therefore that as soon as our first Parents were created, God spoke to them,
and They to one another. God made Man a Soul and Mouth, and inspired him with a
Knowledge of Himself and of his MAKER. The Man and his Wife upon the first
Sight of each other had a perfect Apprehension of their Relation and mutual
Obligations; and knew Themselves to be designed Parents of a numerous
Posterity, to people the Earth. -- They knew also, by Moses Account, all the
Beasts of the Earth; had an Understanding given them of the Nature of the brute
Creatures; who were therefore bro't to Adam to receive their Names from him;
which was his first act of Dominion over 'em, and a wondrous Proof of their
Subjection to him, and a much more wonderful Evidence of that natural Wisdom
and Sagacity with which he was endued: That at the first Sight of any of the
Creatures he could look into them, see their different Natures, and name them
agreably.

It was a mysterious Dominion that Adam enjoyed, incircled by the various
inferior Creatures, the Lion and the Bear together with the Sheep and Doves, to
know what he would call 'em. Genesis ii. 19, 20. Out of the Ground the Lord God
formed every Beast of the Field, and every Fowl of the Air, and bro't them to
Adam to see what he would call them; and whatsoever Adam called every living
Creature, that was the Name thereof. Methinks the Angels ministered with
Pleasure on this Occasion, and heard the Man give every Creature its proper
Name. Or rather as One says, God by a special Instinct directed 'em to come to
Man as their Master and Owner. God gave him Livery and Seisin of them all, as
the fair and great Estate he had endowed him with, and put him in Possession of
it all. The Creatures, as it were, did Homage to Him as their Sovereign. And
they would have remained obedient to him, if he had been so unto his God. But
when he lost the Image of his God, the Creatures lost also their Awe and Fear
of him. All this now is worthy of God, and honorary to Man in his first State.

See again what a mighty Knowledge Adam was inspired with on his first Sight of
Eve. Read how he received Her from the Hand of God, into his own Arms. Words
worthy to be written with a Pen of Gold, and graven with a Diamond on the Heart
of all his Offspring. Genesis ii. 22, -- 25. And the Rib which the LORD GOD had
taken from Man made He a Woman, and bro't her to the Man. And Adam said, "This
is now Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh! She shall be called Woman,
because she was taken out of Man. Therefore shall a Man leave his Father and
his Mother, and shall cleave unto his Wife; and They shall be one Flesh. And
they were both naked, the Man and his Wife, and were not ashamed.

He knew her to be a Rib of Himself, his own Flesh and Blood, taken from his
very Heart, as soon as he saw her. So Christ loves his Church, for out of his
own Side it was formed. Who, but GOD only, could inspire Adam, in a Moment, at
first Sight of Eve, to cry out, -- Bone of my Bone! a Piece of my self! taken
out of me, to be again Joined with me, and be One with me for Ever! Therefore
shall a Man leave his Father and Mother and cleave to his Wife! What a Prophecy
was this! fulfilled through the Earth, however degenerate it is become, unto this
Day! How should Adam in an Instant know any thing of being a Father and Mother
and of having Children! and what the Temper and Manner of these Children should
be, in this grand Article of Life, through all Generations! What a Flight and
Compass of Thoughts was this! beyond the Ken of Angels, who looked on and saw
this Interview, and heard the Salutation, and understood not one half of it. --
This was the first Time, that by the Mouth of Man was made known to the Angels,
the manifold Wasdom of God.

"That Adam (says a late most Ingenious Author See Radation Examined
) should have a perfect Idea of Father and Mother before there was any such
thing, and of the Affection and Endearment arising from that Ralation; and at
the same time see clearly a Second Affection arise from the Marriage of a
Stranger, and getting the better of the Ties between Parent and Child; is a
Problem that must puzzel all the Infidels in the World to explain. No
Penetration of the Humane Mind, nothing but express Revelation from God to
Adam, can account for this Prediction. -- What Idea's were here in Adam's Mind
before there were any Objects for them! the Idea of Parent and Child, of the
paternal and filial Affection, and of a Love succeeding these and surmounting
them, that should be Universal through all the Generations of Men upon the Earth!
These are Perceptions, most agreeable for Adam to have on the Sight of Eve, and
yet utterly impossible for him to have in any natural Way."

Nor is it conceivable that Moses should imagine, and feign these Tho'ts for
the Head and Mouth of Adam: But if Moses wrote them from God, then all is plain
and easy. The Revealer was the same both to Adam and Moses, and what was
Prophecy in One, was History in the Other.

And thus we see how worthy an Account we have from Moses of the first State of
Man, with respect unto that Perfection of Knowledge and Wisdom in which he was
created. Nothing could be more to the Glory of the CREATOR, nor be more
honorable to the Creature, than this Account. Certainly the Wisdom of Moses
could never have gone into all the Particulars before cited, but it is GOD has
spoken to Him and by him. GOD who inspired Adam to speak and act, revealed it
to Moses; or it had never entered into his Heart.

I pass on to another Point, which Moses could never have though it of, and that is
the Institution of a SABBATH to Man, from the Day in which he was created;
together with the Reason for God's Sanctifying the seventh Part of Time. Genesis
ii. 1, 2, 3. Thus the Heavens and the Earth were finished, and all the Host of
them; and on the seventh Day God ended his Work which he had made; and he
rested on the seventh Day from all his Work which he had made: And God blessed
the Seventh Day and sanctified it; because that in it He had rested from all
his Work, which God had created and made.

It is highly agreeable to Reason, and seems to me a plain Dictate of the
Religion of Nature, that some Portion of Time be statedly Holy to God, and for
the Reverend Worship of Mankind, as Social Creatures If God must be worshipped,
there must be a Time for it. The Author of all our Time deserves a Share in it.
The Affairs of this World cannot claim it all; the Expectation of a better
challenges a part. A Mind full of earthly Cares is unfit for Attendance on God.
We may not take his Name lightly and in vain. The Time for Worship should be
stated, that it may be remembered and prepared for. One Day in Seven cannot be
though it too much for God and our Souls. His Diguity and their Value forbid us to
think so -- See the Religion of JESUS delineated.
. What that Part of Time is, seems to me beyond the Power of Man's Reason to
determine, whether a third, a fifth, a seventh, or a tenth. God must therefore
reveal his Mind to Man in this Point. And He must do it early, as Moses tells
us he did, even as soon as the Creation was finished. God let our Parents know
immediately, that the Seventh Part of Time should be for ever holy to Himself,
and for Exercises of Worship unto Mankind, Solitary and Social, to all
Generations.

How well did this become the Proprietor and Lord of Man, Lord of his Life and
Time, and of all his Powers, of Soul and Body! How did it become his own Glory,
and his Creatures Duty and Happiness! that Man should render to Him a perpetual
public Acknowledgment as his Creator, and herein enjoy a stated blessed
Communion with Him! growing in his Likeness and Love all his Days upon the
Earth. God's Regards to Himself and us are manifest in a Sabbath. And it is
meet to be his first Ordination to his Creature Man, his first Injunction,
Commandment and Law to him; that Man's first Day should be a holy Sabbath unto
God. -- What else should it be? Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory and
Honor and Power! for thou have created all things, and for thy Pleasure they
were and are created, Rev. iv. ult.

Surely revealed Religion must begin with the Institution of a Sabbath, and it
can subsist by nothing less than the Observation of it. The Consideration of
this is a shining Ray on the Face of Moses. The first Thing God provided for,
was to be worshipped by his Creature for ever, in the most open and solemn
Manner: the Salvation of his Creature depended on it, and His own Glory from
him. And none but Moses ever gave the Reason why the Seventh Part of Time is
sacred to the Worship of God, namely, because God had finished his Work in the
Space of six Days.

Here is a sufficient Reason why this is the Part of Time declared to be
morally Holy, and therefore to be put into the Moral Law, when given from
Heaven; as Exodus xx. 11. It is a Reason becoming the MAKER of Man, his Lawgiver
and Judge! meet to be given to Adam in Paradise, and meet to be given from
Sinai to the Church.

The Sabbath was made for Man; as Christ has told us: Therefore as soon as Man
was made the Sabbath was given to him. It is a good Day for Man, for Soul and
Body both; for our Families especially, our Sons and Daughters, our Men and
Maid Servants. These therefore are named in the Commandment, and even the
laboring Cattle at our Doors. Rest is good, under the Curse of Toil and Sweat
which Sin has bro't upon us. But holy Work is better, the Exercise and even
Labor of the Mind Heart and Affections, in Contemplation Prayer and Praise, in
holy Communications, in reading preaching and hearing the Word of God. This is
the true Rest of a Soul devoted to God, and under the Attractions of Heaven, at
the returning Seasons of God's own sanctifying. See Psalms xcii. 1, -- 5.cxi.
1, -- 4.

Justly have the Books of Moses been always read in the worshipping Assemblies,
both of Jews and Christians, every Sabbath Day; He being the first Man that has
written of a weekly Sabbath for Man, from the Beginning of the World unto the
End of it. The number Seven seems accordingly honored in the Course of Nature,
more than any other, by the Moon in its constant Changes.

Seven has been the Ancient and honored Number among the Nations of the Earth.
They have measured their Time by Weeks from the Beginning. The Original of this
was the Sabbath of God, as Moses has given the Reason of it in his Writings. No
wonder then that this Number is honored through the Book of God. Noah waited
Seven days, and sent out the Dove again. Balaam seems to have a superstitious
Regard to this Number; "Build me seven Altars, and prepare me seven Oxen. At
seven Years End was the Sabbatical Year, and the Jubilee to the Children of
Israel at the End of seven times seven.

Seventy Weeks (of Years) were determined upon the Holy City, in the Prophecies
of Daniel, for the Coming of the Messiah, the Anointing of the most Holy. And
if we look into the Revelations of John, the last Book of Scripture, the Sevens
multiply upon us; the seven golden Candlesticks, seven Stars, seven Horns,
seven Eyes, seven Angels, seven Spirits of God, seven Thunders, seven Vials,
the seven last Plagues. There seems something very particular in the HOLY
GHOST's fixing so much upon this Number: And what should be the Key to it? but
the Beginning of the Writings of Moses, the first Pages in the Book of God? his
finishing his glorious Work in Six Days, and consecrating the Seventh to be a
Holy Sabbath to Himself. -- The Number Seven is made Honorable to us, both in
the Works of God and also in his Word. His Word agrees with his Works herein,
and it is a Testimony for Moses that God spoke by him.

It should endear and make Venerable the Name of Moses to us, that we are thus
let into the Reason of a Sabbath to the Church and People of God through all
Times. It was meet that the wise and good God should fix it thus, and reveal it
thus, from the Beginning. Mankind have never been without a Sabbath, nor ever
will be. -- We thus triumph in the Sabbath day, and in Moses by whom God made
it known to us. We sing the Song of Moses and celebrate our Sabbaths. We
remember that the first Thing he speaks of to us from God is the Sabbath. We
remember how awfully he charges us to observe and keep it. Exodus xxxi. 12, 13,
14. The Name of Moses was venerable to Nehemiah on this Account. Nehem. ix. 13,
14.

Let us keep the Holy Day with Joy, in Memory of the World's Nativity, in
Remembrance of God our MAKER. Let us wish to keep our Sabbaths always, as our
first Parents did their first Day unto God. God sanctify us on the Sabbath Day,
as He has sanctified that to us. Let us every Lord's day remember the Law of
Moses, God's Servant. Let Moses the Servant, lead us to CHRIST, the SON, in his
own House. JESUS honored the Sabbath, and did it greater Glory than Moses.
Moses wrote of it, and JESUS wrought his Miracles of Grace on it. JESUS
preached on it, so as never Man spoke. The Jewish Sabbath was buried in the
Grave of JESUS; the Christian Sabbath rose with Him on the first Day of the
Week. Then he rested from his more glorious Work of our Redemption, made his
Visits and sent down the HOLY SPIRIT thereon. We yet sanctify the Seventh Part
of Time, to the Honor of GOD our Maker, Redeemer and Sanctifier, To the ONE
GOD, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be Glory in the Churches of his Saints, while
Sun and Moon, Day and Night endure! Glory be to the FATHER, to the SON, and to
the HOLY GHOST; as it was in the Beginning, is and ever shall be; World without
End. Amen.

I have insisted the more upon this great Point, (the very first by Moses
Account after the Creation of Man, and of the last Importance to his Felicity
and the CREATOR's Glory) because I find it wholly omitted by a most Ingenious
Writer, while he selects three other Things from Moses Writings, which he well
observes did require a Revelation in the State of Purity; namely, Food,
Marriage and Language. But certainly the Sabbath stands as plain in Moses
Account, and equally called for a Revelation from God; even that Part of Time
which should be for ever sacred from Man, to the solemn public Worship of God.
For as Man was made for Worship, and also for worldly Works, so there must be a
Sabbath, or holy Rest, made for Man: That is to say, a Portion of Man's Time
sacred to God. Of this Man's Reason and Conscience would easily tell him in his
perfect State, but could not (I conceive) discover what that just Proportion
was, Moses lets us know that this called for a Revelation from God to Adam, and
accordingly the LORD GOD separated and blessed the seventh Day. That it must be
a Seventh, and the Reason why a Seventh, could be known only by Revelation. And
this I take to be a grand Instance and Argument of the Credibility of Moses
History; that whereas some Time must be Holy to God from Man, the Proportion is
given by Him, and by none before him, with the most secret and illustrious
Reason of it.

This Proportion of Man's Time is found by Experience so convenient and
sufficient, that none can be fixed on by the Wit of Man alike suitable and
fitting. And This is so great a Thing in the History of Moses, in the Religion
of Man, and in the Worship of God, and is so plain a Thing in the sacred Story,
that I could by no Means omit it, nay could not but enlarge on it as a chief
Strength and Beauty in the Argument before me. I wish that all Christians were
duly sensible how great a Thing the Sabbath is in true Religion, according to
the Scriptures of God, from the Beginning to the End of the World.

The only Exception to what I have advanced from this early Mention of the
Institution of a Sabbath in the Writings of Moses, that I have met with, is
this: That we don't find the least Hint of the Observation of a Sabbath in all
the Patriarchal State from the Days of Adam to that of Moses; and therefore it
is probable that Moses mentioned it in his Account of the Work of Creation only
by Way of Anticipation, after he had received the Decalogue at Sinai; where
finding it given as a Reason for the fourth Commandment, That in six Days the
Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Seas and all that in them is, and rested the
seventh Day, wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath Day and hallowed it; he
from thence took Occasion in the Beginning of his History to mention God's
resting from all his Work, and blessing the Seventh Day.

If this manner of Arguing had come from the Mouth of an Infidel, I should have
overlooked the Weakness of it from his Prejudice against Revelation from God;
but from the Pen of a Believer and a Christian Doctor, I can impute it to
nothing but his low Esteem of the Sabbath, from an unhappy Education in that
too common Prejudice prevailing in some Christian Schools, to the unknown
Injury of true Religion and vital Piety. The Verity of Moses is indeed
impeached, as well as one eminent Signature of his Inspiration from Heaven
thrown up, by this lame Concession, from the Silence of Scripture concerning
the Observation of a Sabbath before the Flood. Whereas the whole Current of
Scripture from the Days of Moses, through the Writings of the Prophets,
Evangelists and Apostles, is strong for a Weekly Sabbath, as a most necessary
and important Means of Religion in the Church of God. -- Is it not then by far
most probable, that the most Ancient Patriarchs did according to this early
Appointment, recorded by Moses, observe it as a Day of Rest from Labor, and
for the Worship of God their Creator? And that one Day in Seven, as divinely
appointed, has run through all Dispensations, both before and after Moses, and
must remain to the End of the World See a late Treatise, Faith and Practice, in
54. Sermons, on the Principal Heads of Christian Religion. Sermon 31,
?

The Thing next related by Moses is that a Paradise was prepared for our first
Parents, in their State of Innocence and Rectitude. The Earth was it self
indeed a Paradise, but some One of the finest and richest Spots in it was
singled out for Man's first Residence and Dwelling. Genesis ii. 8, 15. And the
Lord God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden, and there He put the Man whom he
had formed; to dress it and keep it; where He had made to grow every Tree that
is pleasant to the Sight and good for Food.

As the Sabbath had been given for the Soul, the better Part of Man, so was
this Garden prepared for him as an imbodied Spirit; to gratify his Sight,
Smell, Taste and Hearing; by every Sense, and Bounty of God, to draw forth his
Heart to Him, his magnificent and munificent CREATOR.

Here Adam and Eve walked together, contemplated and discoursed, eat and
worshipped. The Birds sang in the Branches, the Trees were laden with painted
Fruit, the Plants were covered with Flowers of the sweetest Odor, and Streams
of pure Water ran by the green shady Walks. A Scene meet to typify and
represent the Heavenly Felicity, which is therefore called by the Name of
Paradise, and figured out to us by the Garden of God with the Tree of Life in
it. Rev. xxii. Man's first State continued in, had been as like to Heaven for
Happiness, as could be on Earth.

We read of the Trees of Eden in the Garden of God: Ezekiel. xxxi. 9. Eden
signifies Pleasure. That must needs be a Place of Delights, which is meet to be
called the Garden of God. -- What a Garden was this? of God's own forming and
laying out? of his own settling and planting? of his own preparing for the
Creature of his peculiar Delight, made in his Image and Likeness? There was
doubtless a Collection of every Thing pleasant and fair for Delight, and all
ranged in the most beauteous Order. -- Souls know no higher Comparison whereby
to express their Delights in GOD their Maker, Savior and Sanctifier; nor His
in Them; in and with whom He still walks as He did with Adam and Eve in Eden:
Cant. iv12, -- 16.

The Situation of the Earthly Paradise seems to me a vain Enquiry. After Sin
had blasted it, it might become one of the most barren and waste Places, even
before the Flood; as the Garden of Israel became after their Iniquity and
Punishment was full. The Flood tore the Surface of the Earth in pieces, and the
Spot where Paradise was may be now a Lake of Water, or a craggy Rock. Moses, I
think, only pointed to the Place where about it was, by the new and present
Rivers that are since the Disruption of the Earth. We must no more think of any
Paradise here below, there is no such thing to be found. If there had ever been
another, it had been in the Gardens of Solomon, but Vanity and Folly and Death
soon convinced the Monarch that no Labor or Expense of Man can recover any
Earthly Paradise.

And indeed the first Paradise had been nothing, without Purity, Rectitude and
Immortality in it. As soon as Sin entered, and Death by Sin, Man found no more
any Paradise in Eden, but fled, hid and was driven out of it. And so it is as to
all our Imaginary Paradises regained here, in a State of Sin and Death. After
all the Fatigue in the Experiment, or Attempt for them, we must write on 'em
the Words of Solomon, which in Effect call 'em a Fools Paradise, Eccl. ii. 4,
-- 11.

The Air without, and Wisdom within, was such in the Paradisaic State, that our
Parents needed no Covering. The Man and his Wife were naked, and were not
ashamed. This is admirably well said of a State of Innocence and moral
Perfection. The Purity and Wisdom of God dwelt in them, and they could have
nothing to blush at. This was the better, the Superior Part of Paradise; far
more than all its delicious Fruits to the Eye or Palate, or than the perfumed
serene Air to their Nostrils. Their Paradise was within Themselves, and so is
every wise and good Man's in the Grace of God within him. The obedient Animals
about them were nothing to their own Obedience to God; His Spirit in 'em and
Image on them. This made their Heart glad, their Face to shine, the Air calm,
and the Fruits delicious. "By the Fall we have lost, as One well observes, the
true Notion of Honor and Shame". There is nothing shameful but Sin, but every
thing is good and great that belongs to Virtue and Sanctity. It is more than
Chains to the Neck, Bracelets to the Arms, or a Crown for the Head. There is no
Paradise regained, but in that Regeneration which CHRIST preached to Nicodemus,
and which his Gospel produces in his Elect and Sanctified. We must be created
anew after God, in Righteousness and true Holiness, and be made New Creatures.
This is the Shadow of the Paradise past, and the Earnest of that to come.

Let our Meditation of the One end in nothing short of the Other. The Bible
begins there and ends here. Rev. xxii. Surely it is as the Revelation of God
should begin and end. God meant Man two Paradises, the one in the Way to the
other. By Adam's losing the first, the other also is lost to most of his
miserable Children. If the first Paradise had been kept, dressed and improved,
we had not failed of the second. But O the Shame and Misery to Mankind, when we
reflect -- how soon the Enjoyments of a Paradise were all forfeited and lost!
all vilely thrown away as a Thing of naught!

How ungrateful to God, and unnatural to Themselves, was this Sin of our first
Parents! We are driven from the Joys of Paradise, into the sorrowful
Consideration of the Crime and Guilt of Man's Apostasy. From a Garden of
highest Peace and Pleasure, we pass into an Hospital of Diseases, Sores, Pains,
Anguishes both of Soul and Body! into the Agonies of Death, the Putrefaction of
the Grave, and the Torments of Hell for Evermore.

O dismal Change of State and Place! from the Paradise of GOD, to the Pit of
Devils. Legions of Angels had fell from the Heights of Heavenly Glory before
this; had left their first State, and were cast down into Hell. They are in
Chains of Darkness reserved unto Judgment, a Pet. ii. 4. Jude v. 6. Lucifer,
(the Prince of these fallen Angels, the Devil and Satan, that Son of Pride and
Malice) could not bear to see a Spirit in Flesh in the Image and Favor of God,
in a Paradise on Earth, while he was sunk down to Hell, accursed. He therefore
in Spite to God and to his happy Creature Man, in his accursed Hatred of the
Image of God in One so much his Inferior in the Order of Creatures, meditated
(and alas accomplished) Man's Loss of his Original Holiness, his Ejection from
his earthly Paradise, his Forfeiture of the Heavenly, and Condemnation after
him to a Hell of everlasting Burnings. And now let us see by what Means he
effected this his devilish Design.

Only the Writings of Moses let us into the Original of Evil. That GOD is good,
and that He must needs make all things good, and Man so in a singular manner,
is agreed on all Hands. But whence then should Evil come? This is a Difficulty
that has puzzled all Men, who have not seen or used the Key of Scripture. That
only opens to us the Gates of the Shadow of Death, and shows us the Goodness
and Holiness of God, without the least Imputation from all the Misery and Ruin,
that Man by the Instigation of the Devil has bro't upon himself.

The greatest Wonder is, how Sin could enter into any of the Angels of God, in
their Superior State of Knowledge and Wisdom, Goodness and Holiness. And the
Guesses of learned and pious Men are very vain, I fear, in this Point, if they
venture further than the SPIRIT OF GOD has led 'em, in the few Hints given of
this tremendous Matter in the written Word. There we read of the Condemnation
of the Devil, that it was for Pride: 1 Timothy iii. 6. The most probable Account
that can be of the Sin of Angels: that there was some Discontent, Emulation or
Envying among them, or some Aspiring to be as the MOST HIGH; to which Sin he
prompted our Parents also, and prevailed.

This was the Original of Sin and Misery; probably long before our Earth was
created and Man upon it. And when Angels saw the Delights of God in the Sons of
Men and shouted for Joy, the Devils were filled with Madness and Vexation at
it, and set themselves to destroy this pleasing Workmanship of God.

We are greatly obliged to Moses, in the Hand of GOD, for this Discovery to us
of the Cause the Way and Means of our Ruin. We are delivered from the vain and
absurd Imagination which others have gone into of an Evil God, as well as a
Good One. A most impious Principle, and pleasing eno' to the Devil; to make a
God of him, and give him a Throne like the Most High. A very grateful Return to
Him for all the Mischief he has done us!

The Persians went into this ridiculous Notion, which was the Reason of the
Prophet's Words to Cyrus, the Anointed while yet unborn, in the Name of the
LORD: Isai. xlv. 5, 6, 7. I am the LORD, and there is none else, there is none
beside Me; I girded thee, though thou have not known Me: That they may know from
the Rising of the Sun and from the West, that there is none beside Me: I am the
LORD and there is none else: I form the Light and create Darkness, I make Peace
and create Evil; I the LORD do all these things. You may be ready to think,
this would mislead the People of Cyrus into an ill Though It of the Good God, as if
he were the Author of Evil. But the plain Meaning is, that there cannot
possibly be two Gods, the one good and the other evil; Opposites and Rivals to
each Other; and that such an Imagination ought never to have entered into their
foolish blinded Hearts. For GOD is necessarily One only, and most Good; and at
first made all Things good, and forbad Evil to the uttermost. But intelligent
Creatures sinned against their own Light, abused their Freedom, and bro't the
Evil upon Themselves. And now this Evil is under the wise and righteous
Government of the Good God, is the Punishment of a wicked World, and over ruled
by God to the most wise, good and holy Ends. Therefore there is but One
Providence and Dominion over all, which is altogether good and perfect, and in
the Hand of the GOD of Israel, the one living and true God.

Into all this Train of Truth and Religion to the One Eternal supreme GOD,
Moses leads us by his Account of the Origin of Evil; telling us how God made
Man very good and happy, and how soon he made himself sinful and miserable.

But the Wonder then must be about the Way and Means of Man's bringing himself
under Sin and Misery. And this is the Particular which Moses (under the
Inspiration of God) has revealed to us. A Matter of the last Importance to the
Honor of God, and for our Recovery to Him. And when we have considered Moses
his Account, we cannot conceive of any other, or like Way, for the Original of
all the Evils, of Body and Soul, that we find our Selves under, from our Birth
into the World, to our going out of it.

Moses therefore lets us know, in the first place; That God having made Man's
Body to subsist and live by Food, growing out of the Earth; He immediately gave
Direction to Man about his proper Food. Genesis i. 29. And God said, Behold, I
have given you every Herb bearing Seed, which is upon the Face of all the
Earth; and every Tree yielding Fruit; to you it shall be for Meat. Moses goes
on in the next Chapter and tells us, That the LORD GOD having planted the
Garden in Eden for his Creature Man, He filled it with every Tree pleasant to
the Eye and good for Food; and in the Midst of the Garden he placed the Tree of
Life, and also a Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil: And that the LORD GOD
commanded the Man, saying, Of every Tree of the Garden thou may freely eat,
out of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil thou shall not eat of it; for
in the Day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die.

Now what could be more good than all this? consulting the Honor of God and
Man's Happiness, in God's Government and Man's Obedience! and other Way for
Either there could be none. What could the wise and holy ONE do more, or what
less, to prevent the very Being and Knowledge of Evil? He forbid it on Pain of
Death, he told our Parents the certain Consequent of their Disobedience to Him,
in this or any other Particular; that it would be ALL EVIL to them, Death and
Damnation to Body and Soul.

It was in the Power and Will of Man now to have obeyed and continued happy;
but to be sure you would have though it that he could never dare to offend in this
particular Point, by Eating of the forbidden Tree, which carried the Knowledge
of Evil in its Name. But God saw Man's Danger was here, in his Appetite, which
it was fit to restrain and direct as to every thing that would be hurtful to
the Life of the Body, and therein also to the Powers of the Soul; and
whatsoever was not so, Man might be sure his bountiful Maker would not prohibit
to him.

It seems very reasonable to think, That Man in the Perfection of his
Understanding needed the Direction of God, as Moses tells us he had it, in
respect of his proper F^^d. He was not created with a natural Instinct like the
brute Creatures, which is to them a more infallible Direction than Reason could
be in the matter of Food. The Creatures were made to be governed only by Sense,
and a Sense they have very perfect what to eat and drink, and what not; even as
if they knew and could say to themselves, This is good for me, and that would
do me hurt; I choose this therefore as I shun that. -- Reason in Man was not
primarily intended for these inferior Things, and therefore was never meant to
serve as Instinct does in the brute Kind the Purposes of Universal Sense and
Antipathy, which is necessary to their Preservation. Reason being given us for
higher Uses, Man seems to need a Revelation from God about his inferior Good,
his Food. It is by Observation and Experience that Mankind get the Knowledge of
Things noxious to Them, among the Herbs or Fruits of the Earth. And there
being, let us suppose, one Tree in the Midst of the Garden of a poisonous
Nature to the Humane Body, God forbad it to Man, and made it the Trial of his
Obedience; assuring him it would be deadly to him if he eat of it.

I own, that it is not necessary for us to suppose this Poison in the forbidden
Tree. It is eno' that God forbad it, were it never so good in it self. It was
certainly intended to prove our first Parents whether they would continue good,
or lapse into known Evil. They knew it would be good in them to abstain and
obey, and would certainly be very evil in them, and bring Evil on 'em to
disobey and eat. They could not think that God would have denied 'em this Tree,
if it were not Evil for them in it self, for any other End but the Trial of
their Obedience, whether they would continue good. -- Yet on the other Hand,
there might be (for ought we know) a natural Evil to the Body of Man in this
forbidden Tree. As we are told by Bishop Patrick that many of the Fathers
supposed there was a Virtue in the Tree of Life to preserve and maintain the
Animal Spirits, and the bodily Organs, in that equal Temper and State in which
they were created. -- But as to This we may think differently, and yet not
differ upon it. It comes to the same Thing, if with other Divines we judge the
Tree of Life to have been only a Sign and Seal of the Continuance of Life and
Happiness to Adam, even unto Immortality and everlasting Blessedness, through the
Grace and Favor of his Maker, upon Condition of his Perseverance in his State
of Innocence and Obedience. In like manner the Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil was at least this, "A Sign and warning to Adam of the Loss of Life and
Happiness, and of the sad Experiment of Evil in Soul and Body; and as such it
was forbidden him. -- So that here were Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing,
set before our first Parents, as in two Sacramental Signs and Seals annexed to
the Covenant of Works.

In short, Moses lets us know that Man's Depravation both in Soul and Body was
from his Sinning against God, and that the Sin of Man was his indulging an
irregular Appetite, in an Instance positively forbidden him, with a most plain
Threatening of the mortal Effects of it See Revelation Examined, Dissert. I.
He tells us also the Temptation Man was under to commit the Sin, namely, to
attain a higher Degree of Knowledge than he was made in. God had made him very
knowing and happy in all Respects, and he ought to have been not only contented
with, but very thankful for his Endowments and Enjoyments both intellectual and
sensitive. God had made him to use his Knowledge, and to govern his Appetites,
in a reverential Obedience to Him his LORD. To disobey was necessarily to
defile himself both as to Soul and Body, and that presumptnously in Defiance to
the Warning given him of the fatal Effect on both, Death bodily and spiritual.
Here was a Complication of Infidelity, Ingratitude, Discontent, Profaneness,
Sensuality, Pride and Arrogance, with unnatural Cruelty against his own Life,
and that of his Offspring.

This Account of the Original of Sin and Misery wonderfully agrees with the
Progress and Propagation of it from Age to Age. As one excellently observes and
argues, We see it still in our Selves to be the Establishment of God, in the
Nature and Constitution of Things, that all irregular Indulgence of bodily
Appetite, of one Kind or other, is atttended with Evil: And so also every
inordinate Affection and Passion of Soul, and in particular all vain Pursuits
of superior Wisdom, Affectation and Pride of Knowledge, naturally tend to
impair the Powers of the Mind and make it vain. And as this is matter of Fact,
so what can be more worthy of the Wisdom, Goodness and Perfection of God's
Government, than that the Abuse of Reason should impair the Powers of it, and
Indulgence of Appetite make it more irregular. And if every Disorder of Mind
and Flesh in Man is still attended with Evil, how agreeable to Reason must this
Account of the Original of Evil be, which Moses gives us; soil, That God
acquainted Adam and Eve, as soon as he had made 'em, with this certain and
invariable Constitution of Humane Nature; and therefore vehemently prohibited
every inordinate Desire and Appetite, because of the Evil that would onsue upon
it, to Themselves first and also to their Posterity after them; which in the
Course of Nature is unavoidable, The Infections of Parents affecting their
Children while yet in their Loins.

And this again was a very great Aggravation of the first Transgression, that
it must be in the Course of Nature the Inlet and Entail of Sin and Misery upon
the Offspring. If the first Parents corrupted themselves, their Issue must come
depraved into the World both in Soul and Body: For who can bring a clean Thing
out of an unclean? That which is born of the Flesh is Flesh. People that are
vicious and lustful corrupt their own Seed, more or less by their Indulgences,
and often entail Diseases, Dolours and evil Inclinations upon their Offspring;
which is one Way of God's visiting the Iniquity of Parents on their Children to
the third and fourth Generation. -- And that the first Corruption of Mankind
should be by their first Parents eating of a Fruit forbidden to them, because
Evil for them to eat of, by a good God, cannot seem at all strange to us who
know that there are several sorts of Fruits growing at this Day about us, the
eating whereof would poison our Bodies and be deadly to us, some presently,
some more leisurely. And those that do in the most slow manner affect the
bodily Life, do at the same Periods of Time and in the same Degrees affect the
Soul and hurt the Powers of the Mind. The Experiment and Knowledge of Evil
comes on Mankind after this Manner unto this Day. No wonder then if it first
came in at this Door. Nay it may be we should find, if we could but attain a
perfect Knowledge of the Effects of every forbidden Indulgence of bodily
Appetite, and the Passions of our Souls, that there is not the least of either
Kind we can be guilty of, but it does in some Degree impair the Health and Life
of the Body, as well as the Virtue and Purity of the Soul. Our Soul and Body in
their present Union suffer together, by every Intemperance and Lusting of Flesh
or Spirit, bring on their own Dissolution, and treasure up Evil against the
World to come; where God has told us we must suffer in both, if Sin is died in;
if it is not repented of, subdued and forsaken here in the Body: Which is the
only way to recover something of a Paradisaic State for Souls here, and of Life
everlasting for Soul and Body hereafter.

Let the Wit of Man show if it can a more eredible, a like natural Account of
the Original and Propagation of Sin and Misery. And if the Freethinkers, the
Deists and Unbelievers of the present Age cannot give us a more likely Account;
more worthy of a wise and good God, and more agreeable to the Nature of Man; let
them receive Conviction and confess that GOD was in Moses of a Truth, or at
least let them cease their Cavilling and Snarling at the Holy Scriptures, and
from blaspheming the Writings of Moses.

For my own part, If I know what free thinking is in this our degenerate State,
wherein we find the Powers of Mind and Body infeebled and depraved to a great
Degree; If I know what it is to reason clearly and impartially, it is on the
Side of Moses, and by Faith given to what he has written as a Revelation from
God unto us. But it is no great wonder to see the Men of License and vicious
Life at Defiance to the Writings of Moses, which would convince them of Sin and
lead 'em to the Original of it, and thereby condemn to Death all their loved
criminal Indulgences both of Flesh and Spirit. For if they own Moses his
Account to be true, Death must be for ever staring 'em in the Face in all the
Excesses of their bodily Appetites, in all their inordinate Passions, and more
especially in their darling imperious Assuming of Knowledge to themselves, as
if none had tasted of that Tree beside 'em, but they were the Gods knowing Good
and Evil.

And it is too true that this is their Guilt and Aspiration, in Similitude of
Adam's Transgression, while they ridicule the Imputation of it and the
Derivation of it. So has the Serpent beguiled 'em through his Subtlety, and like
their first Parents they transgress daily, but do not see themselves naked.
While they laugh at the Account of Adam's Sin, and banter Moses for it, they
are but feeding on the Tree of Death without Fear.

I say again, The Origin of Evil had remained unknown to us to this Day, if
God had not revealed it to us in his Word. The World by Wisdom could not know
it. Neither the Grecian or Roman Schools could imagine which way Mankind had
become so vicious, foolish and miserable. The most probable Solution of the
Matter was the Opinion of a pre-existent State wherein Souls had sinned, and
were sent into these Bodies as into Prisons in Way of Punishment. Others went
into the before named ridiculous Notion of two opposite and contrary Principles
or Causes, the One of all the Good in the World, the other of all the Evil in
it. What Confusion was there in this Imagination of an Evil God? how were their
foolish Hearts darkened? What a Mercy is it to be delivered out of this Maze and
Labyrinth of Evil! Truth is easy, but Error is endless. How plain is the
Matter now Moses has told it to us? in the Quest whereof we should have
wandered in vain without his Clue.

Evil is from the Creature and not from God. Far be it from the ALMIGHTY who
cannot be tempted with Evil, neither tempts he any Man. Angels and Men were
drawn away of their own Lust and enticed. God inclined both the One and Other
strongly to Good, commanded it, and forbad the Knowledge of Evil. Angels were
high in the Creation of God, but aspiring to be higher they fell by Pride.
Fallen they swelled with Rage and Envy and Hatred of God, and of every happy
Being, the Objects of his Love and Favor. Man being of this blessed Number,
the Prince of Devils had him in his spiteful Eye, and presently devised Means
how to spoil God of his Glory from Man, and Man of his Blessedness in the
Favor of God. He knew there was but one Way in which to compass this dire
Event, and that was to entice Man into Sin, the abominable Thing which God
hates. To compass this he considered the Nature of Man both as to Soul and
Body, the Appetite of the one to Food, and the Thirst of the other after
Knowledge: And there being in the Garden one Tree of goodly Fruit to look on
forbidden to the Man, he proposed if he could by any Means to bring him to lust
after it and eat of it, and he fixed on that by which he and his Angels had
fallen; scil, Discontent in his State, and by aspiring after more Knowledge; a
Temptation to which he would draw from the very Name of the forbidden Tree, the
Tree of Knowledge; a Tree (he would feign) to be desired for an Increase of
Knowledge and Wisdom.

In this Way, as Moses tells us, Man was seduced, through the Subtlety of Satan,
the Prince of Devils, to disobey God, and bring Ruin on Himself and on his
Posterity, both as to Soul and Body. And what can be more probable than such a
Way and Inlet to all the Evil we find our Selves subject to here in this Life,
and to Death the End of it? What but Disobedience to God our Maker, and
Rebellion against his Will made known to us for our Good? even for our
Preservation in Holiness and Happiness. What can be more honorary and glorious
to God than this Account of the Original of Evil? and what more like our
Selves, our own Consciences being Witnesses? For to be sure we find our Selves
fallen into Sin, and most prone to it by Nature from our Birth; and what more
likely Account can there be of our coming into such a State, than by the
Instigation of some Devil or other, in such an Instance as Moses has related?
Nor can we wonder at the Consequence of so much Evil, bodily and spiritual;
upon the Supposition of such Sin and Transgression.

Let us therefore seriously peruse and weigh the whole Process of the
Temptation and Seduction of our first Parents, as it is given by Moses, and see
if it be not the most likely, and only probable Account of the Origin of Evil
that has been offered.

That Evil could not come from the Good GOD, as His Act, Will or Pleasure, is
most certain: The Nature of God must abhor from it, and so does Moses his
Account. -- That Evil is of two Sorts is evident, moral and penal; the Evil of
Sin and Punishment for Sin: Moses reveals it, and we are conscious to it within
our Selves; we have Sense of Sorrow and Pain, and we have the Conscience of
Sin. -- That bodily and Soul Sorrows or Sufferings, and that Dissolution of
Soul and Body which they work, should be the Fruit of our Sinning against God,
is the most easy, natural and only reasonable and worthy Account of the Matter,
that the Wit of Man can give. -- That Evils beset us from the Womb, and pursue
us through all our Life here in the Flesh, wear out our Bodies and Spirits, and
bring down our green or gray Heads to the Grave, is a thing not to be denied.
-- That these are under the Providence and Government of a most wise, good and
holy GOD, is as certain as the very Being of One. -- That they must come upon
us for Correction and Judgment, and in a Way of Punishment, is sensible to
Flesh and Blood, and evident to Reason: We groan, weep, cry out and beg for
Mercy, Compassion and Respite, under our bodily Maladies and Pressures. -- What
GOD should punish us for, but for Sin against Him, some criminal Disorder of
our Appetites and Affections, in Contradiction to the Law of our Nature, his
Will made known to us for our Good and his Glory from us, is not to be
imagined. -- That this Sin is of our Selves, or by the Instigation of some evil
Being who had himself fallen from God, is as evident to our Understandings as
that God is good, and can be the Author only of what is good, pure and perfect.
-- That this good God should do all that is fit and proper to prevent his happy
Creature from falling into Evil, is every way agreeable to our Reason, as Moses
has told us that he did. -- That He should hainously resent his Creatures
presumptuous Sinning, is most agreeable to all our Ideas of his Wisdom,
Holiness, Dominion and Government. -- That He is very just and righteous in the
Infliction of Evil upon the Sinner, is as undeniable as his necessary Relation
to us of a Lawgiver and a Judge. -- The only Doubt or Question then is, Whether
Moses his Account of Adam's Sin, by a criminal Indulgence of his Appetite, in a
particular forbidden Instance, at the Solicitation of a fallen Angel, that was
before become an Enemy to GOD and Goodness; be not a very rational Account of
the Introduction of Evil, into this Part of the Creation of God which we
inhabit? -- If the Infidels, who are ready to ridicule Moses his Account, can
give a better, let them do it: But this they do not attempt. -- Yet they say
that the Account of Moses is incredible, because of the Agency of the Serpent,
his Part in seducing Eve, and God's Curse upon him for it. -- But let us
deliberately read over, and examine, what Moses has written of this Matter, in
the third Chapter of Genesis; and if we cannot vindicate it as worthy of the
blessed GOD, and the most likely Way of Man's first Sin and the Evil consequent
thereon, then let 'em mock on. -- Or I would rather say, Although we cannot
answer for every Difficulty in the Account given of Man's Fall, yet we may see
Eno' in it of GOD, his Wisdom, Goodness, Holiness and Justice, to still the
Enemy and the Avenger, and to fill us with Admiration of and Thankfulness for
the Writings of Moses.

The Matter then lies thus, 1. There was a Tree of Evil in the Garden where
Adam and Eve were placed by God. 2. The Nature of this Tree was such, or the
Constitution of God respecting it was such, that if Man eat of it 'twould bring
Evil on him. 3. God immediately informed our first Parents hereof, and
positively forbad 'em to eat of it, because of the Evil it would bring upon
them if they dared to touch it. 4. He therefore called it in their Hearing by
the Name of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; which was to say, whereby
they would experience within themselves what Evil is, and how it differs from
the Good which they were in the full Enjoyment of. 5. He let them know
therefore, that this Tree was placed there for the Trial of their Obedience;
whether in the midst of all the other Fruits of Paradise, of all which they
might freely and safely eat, they would regard his Will and Pleasure in this
one Prohibition, which was also for their Preservation. 6. He therefore also
set a Tree of Life in the Midst of the Garden, as a Sacramental Sign or natural
Means of Immortality, for him to eat of; while the Tree forbidden to him would
only bring certain Death on him. -- Upon all we must remember the Perfection of
Understanding wherein our first Parents were created; that they perfectly
understood the Mind and Will of God in all this Prohibition, with the Reason
and Equity of their Restraint in this Particular, which plainly appears from
Eve's Answer to the Serpent, Genesis iii. 2, 3, And the Woman said to the Serpent,
We may cat of the Fruit of the Trees of the Garden; but of that Tree which is
in the Midst of the Garden God has said, "Ye shall not eat of it, neither
shall ye touch it lest ye die.


And now 1. Let us suppose with Moses a World of accursed fallen Spirits, with
Satan at their Head, who in their Pride and Rebellion against God had left
their first Seat, and were full of Enmity to God, full of all subtlety and
Mischief, Enemies of all Righteousness, as contrary to God and all Goodness as
Darkness is to Light. 2. We may reasonably grant that these wicked diabolical
Spirits, in their Spite against God, and Enmity to his Image in Man, and Envy
of his Delight in him, would desire to seduce Mankind into Sin and Misery after
themselves. 3. There is nothing in Reason and Justice to forbid God's
permitting the Tempter to try the Obedience of his happy Creature, endued with
Knowledge, Holiness and Strength for yielding him a constant and resolute
Obedience. 4. It is not unlikely, that God having placed a Tree in the Garden
which he had forbidden Man to touch, the Tempter would fix on that particular
Test, and try if he could not prevail over our Parents in this matter of bodily
Appetite. 5. Fixing on this Way of Temptation, he lays his Train on what Motive
to induce Man to transgress.
And 1. Remembering well how he fell himself by Pride, aspiring after a higher
State in the Creation than that God had given him, he naturally though it this as
likely a Way whereby to prevail over Man, a like Intelligent Spirit with
himself, but in a Body of Flesh. 2. If therefore he can prevail on Adam or Eve
to lust after greater Knowledge and Wisdom, he knew that they would fall after
him, into his own Condemnation. 3. To compass this he resolves to improve the
Name of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, and to recommend the Tree to Man as a
Tree to be desired to make them wiser than God had made 'em; yea to make 'em as
Gods, as Angels, like GOD Himself, for Understanding and Wisdom. 4. To this End
he craftily proposed to enter into some brute Creature, or to assume the Form
of one, and watching an Opportunity he would in the Sight of Eve or Adam, or
both, eat of the Fruit of the forbidden Tree, and then speak to them with a
Man's Voice, and with the Reason and Understanding of a Man; to let 'em see
with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, the Power and Virtue of that Fruit,
to change a brute Creature into Rational; and from thence to persuade 'em that
if they would eat of the same Fruit their Souls would by a Parity of Reason be
raifed into Angels.


This seems evidently to be the Scheme which the Devil laid, according to Moses
Account; and a more subtle one could not be laid: It was a Depth of Satan. In
Pursuance of it, 1. He considered which among the brute Creatures had the most
natural Subtlety and Beauty, and might therefore be the most taking in Man's
Eye: And pitched upon the Serpent; which did not go upon its Belly, or crawl in
the Dust and feed on it as after the Curse; but was as much more beauteous and
charming a Creature to the Eye of Man, as it is now base, abject and hateful.
2. He watched his Opportunity to find Eve alone, near to the forbidden Tree, to
speak to her as out of the Mouth of the Serpent. 3. We may will suppose she was
exceedingly surprised to hear a brute and dumb Creature speak with humane Voice
and Understanding, and that she might be ready to express her Surprise thereat.
And 4. We may as reasonably suppose that the Devil in the Serpent's Form, like
himself, a false and lying Spirit, told her that he came by his Knowledge and
Understanding, and by the Power of Speech, by happening to eat of the excellent
Fruit of that Tree: That whereas till now he had been indeed a brute Creature
and destitute of Knowledge, immediately his Eyes were open, and a Man's Heart
was given him, and this Light and Understanding came into him, which she now
saw and heard. 5. We may well imagine that the pretended Serpent told her this
with a great Appearance of Joy and Transport, as one must needs have that was
at once transformed from the Spirit of a Beast to that of a humane
Intelligence. 6. We may as well think that hereupon Eve spoke her Admiration of
this Event, and let the Serpent know how that God had forbidden them to taste
of this Tree; which she could not but the more muse upon and wonder at, upon
what she now saw and heard. 7. To which the Serpent also answers with a Show of
Wonder, and asks (as Moses tells us) "Yea, has God said, ye shall not eat of
every Tree in the Garden? q. d. Can it be so? and what can this mean? can the
good God lay any such Restraint upon you? and forbid you this Tree in
particular? 8. Eve naturally, and truly replied, Yes, We may eat of the Fruit
of the Trees of the Garden, but of this Tree God has said, "Ye shall not eat
of it; neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.


It is plain there had been some previous Conference between the Serpent and
Eve, before the Serpent's Words, "Yea, has God said, ye shall not eat? It
seems to be a Return to somewhat said before. The Temptation had been else too
abrupt, and the Devil had betrayed himself to be endued with more than humane
Knowledge; even to know what God had said to Adam and Eve while he was yet a
Brute and without Understanding. -- Or if you would choose to think, that the
Serpent would have Eve imagine, that he had indeed attained to the Intelligence
of Angels by eating of the forbidden Fruit, it will but carry the Deception yet
higher, and make the Temptation so much the stronger. -- But it is more likely
that he appeared to take this Information from her own Lips, and leads her into
Wonder and Inquisitiveness after the Reason of such a Prohibition to them;
while she saw (as was pretended) the happy wondrous Effect that the Fruit had
on him, the Serpent, that was before an ignorant and dumb Beast. -- And when
the Devil had by this Wile shook her Mind, raised in her a Suspense and
doubtful Admiration, and too much a Regard to her Senses, in a Contradiction to
the Word of God; then the Tempter boldly shot his fiery Dart, and as a Creature
of superior Light said to the Woman, "Ye shall not surely die: For God does
know that in the Day you eat your Eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as
God's, knowing Good and Evil.

This bold Satanical Reasoning had its cursed Effect upon the Mind and Heart of
Eve! She took in the Poison of Pride, and the Lust after more Knowledge
conceived within her, and she fell after the Example of Satan. She looked upon
the Fruit with Desire, believing all that the Serpent had said of it. It looked
good for food; nay the Serpent had found it so: It was pleasant to her Eye, but
more to her aspiring Mind: She considered it as desirable to make her wise,
wise as the Angels of God who know good and evil: She greedily took therefore
of the Fruit and eat, and gave also to her Husband with her, and he did eat.
That is to say, She went away to Adam, with some of the Fruit in her Hand, and
told him of all that she had seen and heard of the Serpent's eating and
speaking, with Understanding equal if not superior to their own; and that he
had told her to what Angelical and Godlike Heights of Knowledge the Fruit will
raise them upon their eating of it: To all which Adam hearkened, and from a
like Lust after forbidden Knowledge, he suddenly, rashly and fatally took from
his Wifes Hand and eat.

It seems to me, that our First Parents not taking Time to deliberate on the
Matter, did not see into the real Devilism of the Serpent's Words; that it was
a giving God the Lie, and to tax him with want of Goodness and Bounty to his
Creatures, or with grudging to 'em and denying them the Knowledge that was
proper for 'em. Or if we may think that the sagacious Minds of Adam and Eve
could not fail of these Reflections upon the Devil's Words, then was their
Crime and Guilt so much the more like unto the very Devils who deceived them.

And now I may appeal unto the Heart of every impartial Reader, if Moses has
not given us the most likely Account we can imagine, of the Seduction and Fall
of our first Parents? How the Serpent beguiled Eve through his Subtlety! how by
one Man Sin has entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and has passed upon
all! how by one Man's Disobedience all are made Sinners.

I go on now to the Consequents upon the Fall of Adam, as they are related by
Moses: And for my own part I cannot but think the Account given by him to be so
rational and natural, that I cannot imagine how it could be otherwise. That is
to say,

First, That as soon as our First Parents had sinned they saw themselves naked:
i. e. found themselves under some shameful Disorder both of Mind and Body: A
Cloud came upon their Minds, Guilt stung 'em, Fear seized 'em, and they saw
each other's Face changed for the worse: The Joys of Innocence left their Eyes,
the Poison of the Fruit worked in their Veins, sick Qualms and cold Sweats came
upon them, and their Minds were full of Confusion and Consternation at their
Disappointment: They felt the forbidden Knowledge of Evil, and were ready to
run and hide themselves any where.

Secondly, It is most reasonable to think that God would now appear, arraign
and condemn them to die, according to his Threatening in Case they disobeyed
Him. Whereupon it is natural to think the Sinners would fly from his Presence,
as Moses says they did, as soon as they heard his Voice. -- It is also
altogether worthy of GOD to call them forth with the Voice of an offended
Father and Judge, Adam, where art thou? -- The Answer of Adam must needs be
just as Moses relates it; scil, a plain Confession of his Crime; for there was
no hiding it. "And he said, I heard thy Voice in the Garden and was afraid,
because I was naked, and I hid my self. Shame naturally hides it self, and Fear
flies. -- This was Confession eno' of the Fact to God, and therefore the Reply
is just which Moses gives us from the Mouth of God, "Who told thee that thou
wast naked? have thou eaten of the Tree whereof I commanded thee, that thou
should not eat? q. d. Nothing but the Loss of thy Innocence, and Guilt of
Sin, could strike thee with this Fear, and cover thee with this Shame: Where is
the Love and Joy with which you were will not to welcome my Presence? -- And now
what could Adam say for himself, but those words which Moses relates, laying
the Blame on his Wife, who was first in the Transgression? And what should Eve
answer, but as Moses has it, "The Serpent beguiled me. -- And upon this their
Confession what should follow, but God's passing Sentence and Judgment? -- And
where should the Judgment begin, but on the Serpent? i. e. Satan the Contriver
and Author of all this Sin and Mischief. -- And first the Curse falls upon the
Instrument which the Devil used, the Serpent; and our Parents saw the Creature
changed from that beauteous Form wherein it was before, into a crawling hissing
Snake, viler than every Beast about them, to slide upon his Belly in the Dust,
and feed upon it. No doubt, this Change upon the Serpent struck Adam and Eve
with new Remorse and Terror; as a Criminal that is to die for Beastiality sees
with Horror the poor Beast slain before his Eyes, as the dire Prologue to his
own Execution. -- Then under the Shadow of the Enmity that should for ever be
between the Sons and Daughters of Eve and every Kind of Serpents, which we all
know to be universal and invincible; ( These being ever ready at the Heels of
Men to bite 'em, and They being ever as ready to bruise the Heads of Serpents
and destroy them) I say, under the Image of this, the Devil is told of and
threatened with a glorious SEED of this poor miserable Woman that should break
his Head, while he should be only able to bruise his Heel. -- This was a deadly
Word to the Old Serpent, the Devil and Satan; and no doubt the Fiend was struck
with Torments by it, which no Humane Soul can think of. And fit it was the
Judgment should begin with him who was the guilty Cause and Beginning of all
this Tragedy. -- At the same Time, It was a most merciful Revelation of a
SAVIOR, and of a Suffering REDEEMER, to be born of Eve, born of a Woman
without the Concurrence of a Son of Adam; who should conquer Satan and destroy
his Work and abolish Death, by recovering Souls from Sin and Hell. All which
has been fulfilled, we know, in the Person, Temptations, Ministry, Miracles,
Obedience, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, Ascension and Reign of our LORD
JESUS CHRIST, the Second Adam; Who will come again in Glory to judge Angels,
and cast Death and Hell into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone. -- The Devil heard
this his Judgment, and trembled, though he understood it not at the Time. Our
Parents also heard it, and were enlightened to conceive of some most glorious
Deliverer, a Son of Eve, in God's Time; and it was Life from the Dead to them;
while it was Death and Damnation in the worst Form that could be to the proud
Serpent, to be overcome, destroyed, judged and damned by a mortal Son of that
weak Woman, whom he had just deceived into Sin and Ruin. -- Say now, if this
was not worthy of the Infinite Wisdom and Foreknowledge of God, his Sovereignty
and Dominion, his Justice Mercy and Grace! This is the LORD'S Doing and
wonderful in our Eyes.

Then GOD, the Judge, proceeded and told the Woman, that he would multiply her
Sorrows in bearing Children, for alluring her Husband into Sin; and that
henceforth She and her Daughters should be in such a suffering sort of
Subjection to the Men's disordered Passions, as they would never at all have
known, if She had not been an Instrument in his Sin and Fall. -- The Man also
was told that the Ground was cursed for his sake, that in Sorrow he should eat
of it all the Days of his Life, till he returned into it: Which Words were a
plain and express Reprieve granted to Adam and Eve from deserved instant Death;
but as plain and positive a Declaration of Death working in them, from that Day
forward, and bringing them down slowly to the Grave. -- All Mankind have been
from that Day a Comment on this righteous and terrible Judgment of God; having
the full Experiment of it in Themselves. All sadly know the Truth of it. It has
been, is and will be to the End of the World, as Moses has written. Adam's Sin
is the Original, Cause and Means, of all the dolorous Diseases of Body and
Griefs of Mind, which bring on that Death, to which every Son and Daughter of
Adam are inevitably doomed by the righteous Sentence of God.

And now say, Have we not Reason to think that Moses has writ from the Mouth of
God, in all this Account of Adam's Fall and Punishment, and of Satan's Agency
therein and Judgment therefore? It agrees to all the present known State of
Mankind, our dying Condition, the Sorrows of our Life, our Proness and
Temptations to Sin, our Lusts and Corruptions, and our fearful Apprehensions of
the Eternal Judgment of God, a Hell of Devils.

These Things might be easily enlarged on, but the bare simple Mention of them
carries, I think, a Light and Conviction to every sober considering Mind. A
more reasonable Account of the Origin of Sin on Earth, and of the Sorrows and
Death the Demerit thereof, and of a final Deliverance therefrom by the Man
CHRIST JESUS, cannot enter into the Heart of Man to conceive of. A better
Foundation for Christianity could not have been contrived by Moses, had he
lived and wrote after the Manifestation of CHRIST in the Flesh, and after his
Resurrection from the Dead.

But alas! the Sons of Eve are born with the Seed and Poison of Infidelity in
their Veins! that Poison which the Serpent infused into her before she eat of
the forbidden Fruit. And the Agency of the Devil is the same in all his
Temptations to Infidelity at this Day. -- In vain has God told us how Satan
seduced our first Mother; for we are still willingly beguiled by him;
disbelieve and eat and die. The Devil is in Men in all their Unbelief, as much
as he was in the Serpent that deceived Eve: the HOLY GHOST tells us so, and
deplores the Misery of an unbelieving World: Psalm. lviii. 3, 4, 5. The wicked
are estranged from the Womb; they go astray as soon as they are born speaking
Lies: Their Poison is like the Poison of a Serpent, they are like the deaf
Adder that stops her Ear; which will not hearken to the Voice of Charmers,
charming never so wisely. Our LORD JESUS repeats the dreadful Words, and I will
close my Argument with his just Reprehension and Rebuke of the Infidels in his
Day: John viii. 43, 44, 45. For I proceeded and came forth from God, neither
came I of my self, but He sent me: Why do ye not understand my Speech? even
because ye cannot hear my Word. Ye are of your Father the DEVIL, and the Lusts
of your Father ye will do; He was a MURDERER from the Beginning, and abode not
in the TRUTH because there is no Truth in him: When he speaks a LYI he
speaks of his own; for he is a Liar and the Father of it: And because I tell
you the TRUTH, ye believe me not.

Let us be deeply affected with, and greatly bewail our Selves under, all the
Sin and Evil that the Transgression of our First Parents has bro't upon us:
Original Sin without us, (as One speaks) and also within us Farth and Practice.
Vol I. p. 222.
Are not the Ruins of Human Nature, in our Selves and Others, vast and hideous!
Let us feel every one the Plague of his own Heart, look to the Rock whence we
were hewn, and justify God in his Judgment. Let us admire the Grace and Mercy
of God in the Way of our Recovery by the SECOND ADAM, who is our Public Head
in the Covenant of Grace, the LORD from Heaven, a quickening Spirit! Who in our
Nature has abolished Death, has finished Transgression, and made an End of Sin,
and has bro't in an Everlasting Righteousness for the Justification of Sinners.
Read the Glory of the Second Adam, as it is set by the Apostle over against the
criminal Transgression of the First, and his righteous Punishment: Romans V.17,
-- 21.

From the Whole it appears, that GOD is most Good and We evil. As Moses
finishes his Account of the Works of GOD with the best and most snitable Word
that could be spoken; And God saw every Thing that he had made, and behold it
was very good! So give me Leave to close this Contemplation of GOD OUR MALER
with an Adoring Acknowledgment of His Goodness, and the most abasing Confession
of our own Vileness and Sinsulness. Now let our Eyes see HIM, and let us abber
our Selves, repenting in Dust and Ashes. This only have we found by our Enquiry
after the Work of God, (and Solomon with all his Wisdom, giving his Heart to
see and search, found only this at last) Eccl. vii. 29. That GOD made Man
upright, but They have sought out many Inventions. As our first Parents, so all
their Posterity after them, by the Instigation of Satan, have sought and are
seeking out new Ways of making Themselves more wise and happy Mr. Clark in Loc.
. But O how much in vain, and to their own Hurt! to the vast Increase of Folly
and Guilt, Vanity and Misery! for like Men (like Adam) they full transgress:
The Word of God is disregarded, and the Lies of Satan are listened to. -- Let us
not cover our Transgression as Adam: It is written as with a Pen of Iron and
with the Point of a Diamond. The open Infidelity of the Age proclaims it; the
Lives, the Tongues and Pens of the modern Infidels. -- Let us desire to
sanctify the LORD GOD in our Hearts and Lives, whether we speak or write; and
he ready always to give an Answer to every Man, that asks us a Reason of the
Hope that is in us, with Meckness and Fear. I hope I have here done it in the
Fear of GOD, and if I have failed of doing it with the Meckness of Moses, I ask
HIS Forgiveness the Zeal of Whose Word should eat us up.

FINIS.

