A Dissertation On the Image of GOD, wherein Man was created.

A DISSERTATION ON THE Image of GOD WHEREIN Man was created.

GENESIS. I. 27. So God created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God
created He him, Male and Female created He them.

By Benjamin Colman, D.D.

Anima est Naturae spiritualis, caelestis, divinae, indivisibilis,
incorruptibilis, immortalis, Angelis imo Deo proximae.

Van Mastricht. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN in
Queen Street. MDCCXXXVI.

Quoniam deleta est Imago Dei in nobis per lapsum Adae, ex reparatione
judicandum est qualis fuerit: Dicit Paulus nos per Evangelium transfigurari in
Imaginem Dei: Et secundum ipsum Regeneratio spiritualis nihil aliud est quam
ejusdem Imaginis instauratio: quod autem eam constituit in Justitia et
Sanctitate veraci, est Synecdoche; nam quamvis illud praecipuum est, non tamen
est totum: Hac voce designatur totius Naturae Integritas, -- in Mente lux
rectae Intelligentiae etc --.

Calv. in loc. THE INTRODVCTION.
IN a late Dissertation on the three first Chapters of Genesis, I passed over
the Subject now before me, with a Design (by the Will of God) to give it a more
distinct and full Consideration by it self. This I now present unto the
Public, hoping it may be of some Use and not unacceptable, to Them especially
whose spiritual Profit has been the Duty and Aim of my Studies and Ministry.
And the less I am like to visit and converse with them in my advancing Years,
the rather would I now and then put into their Hands some of the Meditations
they have heard with Patience and Pleasure, and in which when I am dead I may
yet speak to 'em. And if this Apology displease any, and provoke Reflections
public or private, they will not much move me.

Man in his first Estate, and so Angels in theirs, were very much made for
Contemplation and Admiration. And these are very much the Exercise, Pleasure
and Improvement of renewed and enlightened Minds under the Gospel.

Admiration seems the first Affection of an Intelligent Creature, both in the
Order of Nature and of Time; and of special Use and Influence in the rational,
moral and Divine Life. We may suppose Adam was struck with vast and a most
pleasing Admiration upon his first coming into Being. What a World of Wonders
presented it self before his Eyes! how many strange and beautiful Objects
surrounded him! which should he first gaze at, which most admire! and most of
all (it may be) did he survey and wonder at Himself! Who and what am I? whence
came I into this Form and Circumstances, and with these Powers of Mind and
Body? what glorious Wisdom Power and Goodness has made me thus, and all these
Things about me?

Such we may suppose were the Emotions of Adam's Mind, upon his first View of
his Paradise, the living Creatures about him, and of the Heavens over him. In
the midst of which holy Astonishment he fell into a Trance, and awaked with a
new Object before him, more the Wonder and Desire of his Eyes than all that he
had seen before! It was Eve, formed in the same Image and Likeness of God that
he saw and felt within himself. How did he gaze on this crowning Gift of Heaven
to him! This is now Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh; said he, She shall
be called Woman. -- Immediately God bro't the long Train of living Creatures,
in beauteous Order, before their Earthly Lord and Owner, to give them Names
according to their various Kind and Nature. What a Scene of Admiration was this
to Adam and also to the Angels of God! to see an imbodied Spirit, like
Themselves in the Image of God for Knowledge, endowed with an Insight into the
various Workmanship of God below, into the exquisite Perfection of every Form,
the End and Use of every living Thing! Thus his first Act of Devotion to his
Maker was Admiration, which justifies the Wisdom of the Schools, who have made
it the first of the Passions. It certainly is so, and ever was. But in our
present fallen State, in how low and feeble a manner is the first Exercise
hereof in our Infancy! in what unknown sort of Confusion are the first Notices
of Things now received by us! The state of Infancy had no doubt been vastly
better in a state of Innocence, and the Perception of Things incomparably
faster, more distinct, and exquisitely pleasant; as the Crystal Glass drinks
in the Light and is irradiated.

God has made all his wonderful Works to be admired; to be sought out with
Pleasure by all rational Beings. He has made Angels and Men to admire them and
give him Glory. This is their Worship and Praise to God, and their own
Improvement in Knowledge and Goodness -- It had been the immediate Sin and Fall
of our first Parents, without their eating of the forbidden Fruit, yea before
that was forbidden to them, if the first Affection and Exercise of their Mind
had not been a religious reverend Admiration of God, in Themselves, the Heavens
and Earth, and in all the living Creatures about them. And holy Admiration
still is, ever has been and ever will be, the Employment and Felicity of Angels
and Saints in the heavenly Places.

There are the Objects of Admiration which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard,
neither can they enter into the Heart of Man to conceive of; And the Angels of
Heaven have greater Capacities and Powers to look into the Wisdom Power and
Goodness of God in all his Works: How then do we think that They admired and
adored, looked on the Divine Glory and on one another, and shouted together in
the Day of their own Creation! And again we read, that in the Day they saw our
Earth come into its Place Form and Motion, with Man and all the Creatures under
his feet thereon, those Morning Stars sang all together the Praises of God. How
did they admire the Descent of the IMMENSE SPIRIT on the Face of the Deep, to
bring a World of Order and Beauty out of that dark Void, and Abyss of confused
Matter! With what awful Reverence and vast Expectation did they attend and
listen, when God commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness! though they were
most acquainted with Light before, dwelling in the Fullness of it, in Light
unapprochable by us, where the Light of the Sun is not needed, and compared
with which it is but a Shade! Yet they saw our Light was good, inexpressibly
good for us, and they admired the dividing it from the Darkness. They saw the
Firmament, that vast Expanse of Air and Region of Light and Darkness, a Shadow
to Humane Eyes of the inconceivable Immensity of God, filling all in all through
this his seen Universe. They beheld from on High the forming of our Sea and dry
Land, and the Earth bringing forth Herbs and Grass and Trees, with all their
wondrous Seeds and Fruits, while as yet there was no Ray of the Sun upon them;
not knowing, but expecting greatly, for what kind of Creature and Creatures
this vast Profusion of Bounty was prepared. They were the only Audience when
God bad the Waters bring forth the moving Creature that has Life, and the Fowl
that fill the Air and fly in the open Firmament; and while they heard God bless
his inferior living Creatures, and bid 'em to increase, to multiply and
propagate their Kind, (a Thing altogether new to Angels and mavelous in their
Eyes, for living Creatures to communicate Likeness and Life, under the Power
and Blessing of God) how were they filled with new Wonder and Delight at this
new Thing which the Lord God created: whereof their Superior World had given
them no Idea. They then turned their Eyes on the dry Land, and with a growing
Surprise saw the Cattle and creeping Things and Beasts come forth out of the
Earth after their Kind; all of them finding their proper Food provided for
them, and all of them made in Pairs to propagate their kind! a Scene of Beauty
and Wonder, and superior Workmanship, suited to the Element of Air, as the
Fishes before were to the Waters! and could the bright Intelligences above look
down on all these Things, from Day to Day, as God created them, and not be
ravished in the Contemplation of them?

But most of all, when God proceeded and said, Let Us make MAN, in our Image,
after our Likeness, Male and Female; to have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea,
the Fowl of the Air, and over the Cattle and all the Earth; how did the Hosts
of Heaven look (think we) with all their Eyes, to see what God-like Creature,
like Themselves, the Lord of all this Earth and of all the Creatures on it, was
coming into Being? When presently they saw the Lord God form Man's Body of the
Dust of the Ground, and then breathe into his Nostrils the Breath of Life, and
he became a living Soul, a Spirit like Themselves, but united to Flesh and
Blood! O new and wondrous Form! so near a Kin unto themselves and yet how
different! made male and female also, to multiply and fill the Earth, and eat
all the Good of it! How did the Angels of God look on and love the happy
perfect Pair, and more admire 'em, than they were able to admire the Wisdom and
Power of God in themselves.

I no more doubt, my Readers, of the Truth of something like these things that
I here write, than I do of almost any thing not seen and not revealed to me in
the Word of God. That is to say, I do not at all question but that in the
Creation of this World of ours, the Angelic Hosts looked on admiring and giving
Glory to God, as the Almighty proceeded from one Part of his Work unto another;
and that the Words of God to Job out of the Whirlwind are to be taken
literally; "When the Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God
shouted for Joy.

But Man in his fallen State, and in his Redemption has been more an Object of
the Admiration of the Angels of God, than he was in his Creation. God's Work of
Grace toward Sinners is represented to us as more admirable in the Eyes of
Angels, than all his Works of Nature and Providence, in a separate
Consideration herefrom. Not that Man's Sin was a thing so new to them, for they
had seen their Fellow-Angels fall from Heaven; but the Recovery and Salvation
of Sinners was a thing altogether unknown before. We find 'em therefore
pictured by the Pencil of God, and spoken of in his Word, as intently and for
ever looking into this Mystery of Grace Exodus xx^. 17. 1 Pet. i. 12. Ephesians iii.
10. Isai. vi. 2. Luke ii. 14. Revel. v. ii.
. So the Cherubims were made, by the Order of God to Moses, with their Faces
bowed over the Mercy-Seat, as never able to satisfy their pleasing Wonder on
the sacred Mystery. And St. Peter tells us, that these Things the Angels desire
to look into. For as another Apostle teaches us, By the Church on Earth is the
manifold Wisdom of God made known to the Principalities and Powers above. And
we have their new Songs through the Book of God, in Admiration of his Power,
Wisdom, Holiness and Mercy in the Redemption and Salvation of fallen Man.

Only let us never think that the Admiration of perfected Spirits ever grows
into any like Surprises and Amazements, as are sometimes felt by us. The Light
which shines in and on them in so pure clear and distinct, the Manner wherein
they think and perceive is so perfect, the Government of their Though It and
Affection is so true and exact, that it forbids us to imagine any such Weakness
and Infirmity in their Admiration, as we find in our own. Innocent and holy
Minds have a Strength, Steddiness and Fortitude of Though It, which we have lost by
our Fall. God of his Fullness communicates so to them, as is ever filling,
refreshing and satisfying 'em. In his Light they see Light. The Glory of his
Face is ever shining on them in all that they behold. They are able to make an
equal and just Observation of all things. They see and search deep, with great
Ease, into all Things, greater and less; and mavelous things occur to them in
every one. They live in the World of Wonders, and see into the Wonders of all
Worlds, see nothing little or common in any of them. All is great and good in
their Eyes that God has done. We have Songs prepared for us which They take up
and Sing: The Works of the Lord are great, sought out by all them that have
pleasure in them! If I would speak of them they are more than can be numbered.
Such Language as this becomes the Mouth of innocent Creatures, as well as ours.
So He may be praised from the Heavens, "praised in the Heights! praise ye Him
all his Angels! And were the Sun and Stars shining Intelligences like them, we
should call on them to praise him in their Courses, and Stations: Or had the
Deeps and Dragons from the Earth Minds to admire Him, and Tongues to extol Him,
we might call on them to join with us in the Work. But since Beasts and all
Cattle, creeping Things and flying Fowl, have no such Powers for Praise; let
Kings of the Earth and all People, Princes and all Judges, young Men and
Maidens, old Men and Children, praise the Name of the Lord; for his Name alone
is excellent; his Glory is above the Earth and Heaven.

The great End and Design of this Affection of Admiration (says our admirable
Dr. Watts) is to fix our Attention on the admired Object, to impress it more
effectually on our Memory, and to give a sensible Delight to our Mind. How
good, how pleasant and necessary then is it, to use this Means of fixing our
Hearts on God by his Works, which day and night declare his Glory, and speak to
us of his Eternal Power and Godhead.

In short, Without the Admiration of God in his Works of Nature, Providence and
Grace, there neither is nor can be any thing of Religion, either among Angels
or Men. And there is so little Religion among Men on Earth, because there is no
more Admiration of the blessed God in the Things that are seen, or that are
revealed to us by him. The more God is admired by us the better He will be
worshipped and served by us. It is because He is so perfectly admired by the
Spirits in Glory, that he is so perfectly served and obeyed by them. The
Admiration of God works by Love to Him, Delight in him, Desire to please and
glorify him, Fear and Reverence of his excellent Majesty, and the Hope of
seeing and serving him for ever. It draws all the Affections of the Soul after
it, carries them along with it, and is the Spring and Life of all Devotion. It
enlarges the Mind and dilates the Heart, and leads it away a willing Captive.
It opens the Lips to show forth God's Praise, it lists up the Eyes and Hands to
him, with Transports of Joy: And at times too it stops the Voice, and strikes
us mute, and Praise sits silent on the Tongue. -- Such an Instrument of
Devotion, and Handmaid to it, is true Admiration. It is sacred and devoted to
God, and Man in his Innocence kept it so. It is not only consistent with
perfect Tranquillity and Happiness, but indeed promotes and advances it. There
can be no true State or Relish of real Happiness in created Spirits, without
the free and full Exercise of this Affection. If there were nothing to be
admired in God and Christ, in Heaven and Glory, how should they be the Beatific
Objects to us?

I shall add but two Words more. The first is that the greatest Admiration
seems to be with the least Surprise. Nothing is more calm and tranquil, I
conceive, than the Admirations of Angels and perfected Spirits, in their Vision
and Adoration of God. Our Surprises at things new and rare and unexpected is
from the Weakness of Flesh and Blood, and from the Darkness of our Minds. The
more feeble the more Surprise, but the stronger the Intellect is the more
serene and placid, even and fixed is the Admiration. -- I know not which was
Eve's Fault and the Beginning of her Sin, whether too much Surprise at the
Serpent's speaking to her, or too little Emotion at it. One or other might be
the Beginning of her Fall. It was a wonderful Thing that a Snake or Worm should
find a Tongue and Voice to speak to her. His cursed Motion to her, to eat of
the forbidden Fruit, should have raised in her a holy Indignation. Her
Innocence and Holiness should have so expressed it self, when she heard God
contradicted, and mean and ill Things suggested of Him. But the Marvel at the
Thing, and her Admiration at the Serpent, seems to have taken up her Mind and
drawn her away into a Parley and Talk with him. She was too curious to hear him
out (speaking after our manner) in all he had to say, and so was beguiled through
his Subtlety. As the Snake to this day charms Birds and Squirrels with its Eye,
so Eve seems to have been taken with the Admirable in the Serpent's Management.
She should have dropped the Wonder from a Detestation of his Words, and have
answered only as her Blessed Seed did when he was tempted, " Get thee hence,
Devil! Were it an Angel from Heaven that should speak thus, let him be
accursed. Her Wonder should have wro't thus, " Lord God! what cursed kind of
Beast is this, that speaks indeed, but to slander Thee, and give Thee the Lie!
-- But Eve seems to have been too calm and unmoved upon so strange an Event,
and so vile a Motion.

The other thing I would therefore add is, That an innocent and holy Mind may
be piously struck with Admiration at Things most evil and disagreable to it.
The Angels that keep their first State were doubtless struck with sacred
Astonishment at the Rebellion of their Fellows; and after they had sung for Joy
at the Creation of Man, they were filled with a holy kind of Wonder Grief and
Anger at his sudden Fall. God Himself spoke to Adam of it after this Manner, "
Who told you, you were naked! have you eaten of the Tree whereof I commanded
you that you should not eat of it? Woman, what is this that thou have done? And
to affect the stupid Sons of Adam, and Daughters of Eve, for their Iniquities
after the similitude of Adam's Transgression, God has spoken in his Word of our
Sins as such, that the very Heavens (the heavenly Spirits who dwell in them)
might even be surprised and amazed at them Isai. i. 2. Jerem. ii. 12.
Hear O Heavens, I have nourished and bro't up Children, and they have rebelled
against me! Be astonished O ye Heavens at this, and be horribly afraid! be ye
very desolate says the Lord. If any thing has ever caused any thing like
Surprise and Astonishment in the serene and holy Minds of Angels, it has been
and is the Sin and Wickedness of Men and Devils. But even in this Case, the
Difference is unknown, and it may be inconceivable, between the Wonder of a
holy Mind above, and that of a Saint on Earth. -- It may be represented to us
from St. John's Wonderment at seeing the great Whore, and the Angels Answer to
him: Revel. xvii. 1, -- 7. -- And when I saw her I wondered with great
Admiration! and the Angel said unto me, Wherefore did thou marvel? I will
tell thee the Mystery of the Woman and of the Beast, her seven Heads and ten
Horns. See how surpised the holy Man was at this horrid Form, the Mother of
Harlots and Abominations of the Earth, a Woman drunken with the Blood of Saints
and of the Martyrs of Jesus, sitting upon a scarlet colored Beast, full of
Names of Blasphemy! but see again how calm the blessed Angel was! he even
reproves mildly the great Admiration of the Apostle, as being too much. Yet the
Bloodiness and Filthiness of the Church of Rome is abominated in Heaven much
more than it is in the true Church on Earth: But it is seen there with less
surprise. Indeed the Harlot is a Wonder and an Abomination both there and here.

I ask my Readers Pardon that I have so long detained him with a kind of new
Dissertation on the Admiration which may agree unto a State of Innocence and
Perfection: But the plain Scope of it is to direct and fix our admiring
Thoughts on the Blessed GOD and his Works, and on His Image in our Selves in a
more especial Manner; as they would have been if we had kept our first State,
and as they will be in Heaven for Evermore if we regain it and get thither;
which is the only Aim of the present Meditations.

DISSERTATION. Of the Image of GOD wherein Man was created.
GENESIS. I. 27. So GOD created Man in his own Image, in the Image of GOD
created He him, Male and Female created He them.


THree things are here said concerning Man, that he is a Creature, that he was
made Male and Female, and that the first Man and Woman were created in the
Image of GOD. The last thing is doubled in the Text, partly to express the
double Pleasure of God in his Work, and also to put a double Honor on it: But
more especially to impress on the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of Men a
high Sense of the Dignity done 'em, and of the great Love of GOD to them in
their Creation.

It is a Matter of great Importance to the Children of Men, and to be for ever
kept by them in a religious Remembrance, that God made our First Parents, both
Adam and Eve, in His own Image, in the Image of God.

He made them alike Humane Souls, which know no Difference of Sex when out of
the Body, but are as the Angels; of Whom nothing higher or more glorious can be
said in their Original blessed State, than that God made Them, as He did us, in
his own Image. Man was made a little lower than the Angels, but like them
crowned with this Glory and Honor Psalm viii. 5.
.

Man is Male and Female. Neither is the Man without the Woman, nor the Woman
without the Man in the Lord 1 Cor. xi. 7, 11, 12.
: That is to say, neither in the Day of his Creation, nor in those of his
Propagation through all past and future Generations: As it follows, For as the
Woman is of the Man, even so is the Man also by the Woman; but all things of
God. When therefore it is added, that the Man is the Image and Glory of God,
but the Woman is the Glory of the Man, the Apostle explains himself only to
give the Man his Pre-eminence in point of Authority and Dominion: This one
Thing in the Image of God excepted, the Woman equally shines in the Glory of
all the rest.

So are Mankind constituted and propagated. Adam was first created, and then
Eve; he out of the Dust of the Ground, and she taken out of his Body. So she
became Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh. But their equal and greater
Glory was, that God made them alike living Souls, immortal Spirits, in a
Perfection of Knowledge, Holiness and Goodness, and consequently of Happiness
and Blessedness, suited to their Earthly State, with Dominion over the
Creatures. Moses gives us this Account of the Image of God wherein Man was
created, if you compare, Genesis i. 26, 28. with Chap. ii. v. 7.15, 16, 17, 20,
23. And keeping my Eye upon this pure Word of God, it appears plain and evident
that the Image of God on Man, in the Day when God created Him, consisted in the
following Things.

I. GOD made Man a Spirit, a living Soul, and this was his Likeness to his
MAKER, the Image of God upon him.

If you ask, what God is? Christ has revealed Him, John iv. 24. God is a
Spirit. And if you ask, what Man is, Moses tells us, He is a living Soul. In
his Soul he bears the Image of God, and not in his Body. His Body is of the
Dust and returns to it, when his Spirit returns to God, the Infinite Spirit,
the Father of Spirits, the Lord, Ruler and Judge of Spirits, the only Portion
and Felicity of Souls.

God claims the Soul for his own, even all Souls, the Soul of the Father and of
the Son Ezekiel. xviii. 4.
. This unseen Part of Man bears the Image of the Invisible and Incorruptible
God. Were the Body a thousand times more elegant and wonderful a Form than it
is, or even as it will be after the Resurrection, yet it were utterly
impossible and unlawful to conceive of it as any Likeness of God. As when God
would be seen in the Mount by the Elders of Israel, they saw no manner of
Similitude Deuteronomy. iv. 12.
. The Face and Eye and Hands of Men are full of Spirit and Life, from the
living Spirit within that animates and acts 'em. These are attributed to God in
Scripture in way of Accommodation to Souls here in the Body. But the first
thing in the Image of God on Angels and Men is Spirituality. What should be the
Likeness of the Living God, but a living Soul or Spirit?

Indeed we little know what our Souls are: Yet we are sure that we are such,
because we think, reason, remember, reflect, foresee, hope, fear, etc. What the
Spirituality of God is, is far more inconceivable to us. He is Infinite,
filling Heaven and Earth. Whither can we go from His Presence and Spirit Psalm
cxxxix. Prove. xvi. 2.
? The Rays of Light, the Wings of the Morning are not equal to the Thoughts of
Men, for Brightness and Swiftness. In one Moment of Though It my poor Mind reaches
the third Heaven, a million times beyond the Sun in its Zenith. This Soul is a
poor, low feeble Image of the Immensity, Spirituality and Omniscience of God.
HE searches the Heart of Man, weighs his Spirit, and knows his Though It affar off.
This is too wonderful for us, it is high and we cannot attain to it.

Let our Souls pause and imagine what an Incomprehensible Spirit GOD is! What
is his Name, and his Sons Name, if thou can tell Prove. xxx. 4
. HE is that He is, has Life in Himself, and in Him we live and move and have
our Being Exodus iii. 14. John v. 26. Acts. xvii. 25.28.
. The Worlds of Spirits, and so the Corporeal Universe, are his Workmanship,
continually sustained and governed by Him. His active Essence therefore
intimately pervades and penetrates the immeasurable Frame! GOD is Life, Light,
Mind, Self-existence; Glory, Blessedness, Perfection; incomparable,
inconceivable. To Whom can we liken Him, or what Likeness can we compare unto
Him? Singularity and Onliness is his Glory. There is One God, and no other than
He. Religion of Jesus delineated.


We should not have dared to say of God that He is a Spirit, or to have called
Spirits his Image and Likeness, if He Himself had not so spoken to us of
Himself. Yet is there no other Image whereby our Minds can represent Him to
themselves, but from their own spiritual Nature, Powers, and Operations. This
therefore must be the first thing in the Image of God of Angels and Men,
Spirituality. In this Glass we see the first Shadow of God. Our Souls discern
it by Reflection on themselves. We then look without, look abroad, and see
through the Eyes of the Body Images of Wisdom, Power and Goodness, in every thing
Material and Visible. We see the Work of some perfectly wise, good, Almighty
Intelligence. -- It is in and from it self, that the poor finite Spirit of Man,
conscious to its own Understanding and Affections, and enlightened from the
Spirit and Word of God, conceives and infers what a transcendent Being and
Spirit God is; the Framer of the Universe, and the Former and Father of all
Spirits. It is because we in our Souls bear some Image of God, that we can at
all apprehend and know that God is a Spirit. The Beasts have Eyes to see the
Fields of Grass and Corn as much as we, but not having our Souls to discern the
Eternal Power and Godhead from the Things that are made, their Spirits are not
the Likeness of God as ours are.

And yet the spiritual Nature of Angels and Men is not to be compared with the
Spirituality of God, or the Simplicity of his Essence. The grossest Matter that
our Eyes behold is not so much below the Soul of Man, as that is below the
Spirituality of the Divine Nature. Never the less in the Faculties of the
Humane Soul we plainly see some Resemblance of the Infinite Eternal Spirit, the
Maker and Preserver of all Things, visible and invisible. And this is the first
and most obvious part of the Image of God upon us in our Creation, that we are
Souls or Spirits. God who made us this Soul Jerem. xxxviii. 16.
, herein has made us in his own Image, after his Likeness; for He is THE
SPIRIT, and the Father of Spirits.

God is a Spirit in a Sense far superior to that wherein Angels are to be so
called. He makes his Angels Spirits Psalm. civ. 4.
. I doubt not but God is more Invisible to them, and in Comparison of them,
than they are to us and in Comparison of us. Created Spirits are compounded
Beings if compared with their MAKER; they are made what they are, and He who
made them can if he please annihilate and dissolve them again. But there is an
ineffable, inconceivable Simplicity of Essence in the Divine Nature, which
infinitely distinguishes His Spirituality from that of all Creatures. -- Angels
and Souls are Spirits but they singly occupy a space, and pass from place to
place, with an incredible Swiftness, like Rays of Light; but the Invisible God
is an Immense Being filling Heaven and Earth, always present and the same in
all Places. This is as far above Souls or Angels, as they are above Bodies.

It is a most just and glorious Account that God gave of Himself to Moses, I AM
THAT I AM. He is what no One else is or can be; He is alone what He is; what
all his Creatures can but poorly represent, and less can understand; even as
the Shadow of a Man does but poorly represent him in his Life, Look, Thought
and Speech. -- God is singly the Spiritual BEING, and there is none like Him,
none beside Him. As there is none Good but One which is God, so is there but
One only Spirit in the Universe, who fills all in all Ephesians. i. 23.
.

Thus the Lord our God is ONE LORD, and the Knowledge of HIM is too wonderful
for us; it is high, and we cannot attain to it: yea how little do we know of
our own Spirits, which are made for the Knowledge of Him? It is but as through a
Glass darkly that we see any thing of GOD. The Ideas of Infinite, Eternal,
Unchangeable and Selfexistent are the Proof and Illustration of his
Spirituality. We can only explain and confirm the One from the other. As what
Man knows the Things of a Man, save the Spirit of Man that is in him? even so
the Things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God 1 Cor. ii. 11.
: Which Things we therefore speak, not in the Words which Man's Wisdom teaches,
but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual Things with spiritual.

There is therefore unto me no Account of the Spirituality of God like unto the
following Texts of Scripture. Exodus iii. I AM, that is my Name. xxxiii. 20.
Thou can not see my Face. 1 Timothy vi. 16. Whom no Man has seen, nor can see.
Heb. iv. 13. All things (even all Souls and Spirits) are naked and open before
Him. Psalm. cxxxix. Thou understandest my Tho'ts afar off. 1 Cor. xii. 11. That
One and Self same SPIRIT divides to every one severally as He will. So does
the One Immense Being in all Worlds, visible and invisible, to every Creature,
superior and inferior, as the one Creator, Preserver, Governor, Judge,
Sanctifier and Savior of all. -- This is Light without any Darkness at all,
Light unapprochable and full of Glory. 1 John. i. 5.
There can be no more glorious and convictive Light given us into the
Spirituality of God than St. Paul's noble Discourse to the Men of Athens, Acts.
xvii. While the Eye reads it, the Soul sees and feels what a SPIRIT God is: it
seeks and feels and finds Him within it self: "GOD that made the World and all
things in it, Lord of Heaven and Earth! who dwells not in Temples made with
Hands, nor is worshipped by us as though he needs any thing; for He gives unto
all Life and Breath and all things, and has made of one Blood all Nations of
Men, and has determined the Times and Bounds of every ones Habitation; for He
is not far from every one of us, for in Him we live and move and have our
Being; for we are his Offspring. See here an immortal, enlightened, sanctified
Spirit! that it is some Image, some Shade of the Eternal, Immense, most Holy
Spirit, which is GOD.

II. God made Man in his own Image in respect of Intellect and Understanding,
Knowledge and Wisdom.

God is the Only-wise Romans xvi. 27. Job xxxvi. 4., Psalm. cxlvii. 5.
perfect in Knowledge, and his Understanding is infinite. So his Word speaks of
Him, and his Works declare it of Him. He that forms the Eye, shall He not
see? and He that teaches Man Knowledge shall He not know? There is not a Soul
so brutish Psalm. xciv. 10.
as not to allow this.

Man, in his Soul and Body is the most eminent Display of the Knowledge and
Wisdom of God here on Earth. The Mind and Eye of Man survey the Heavens, Earth,
Seas and all the Creatures, and see how in Wisdom God has made them all Psalm.
civ. 24.
. Then we behold our Selves alone, among all the Creatures here on Earth,
capable of this Understanding, and are led to say unto our Selves and unto God,
Where is God my Maker! that teaches me more than the Beasts of the Earth, and
makes me wiser than the Fowl of Heaven.

Man in his first State was happy and glorious in a Perfection of Knowledge and
Wisdom, proper for an imbodied Spirit. He had not the Knowledge of Angels, for
he was made lower than they; but he was wise as an Angel in Flesh should be. He
was created with a due Knowledge of God his Maker, of Himself, and of the
Creatures about him. God spoke to our first Parents, and they to each other in
an admirable manner, as is related by Moses. Their Minds were full of Light,
the Law of God was in their Heart, and they were in the Possession of their own
Souls and of Intellectual Happiness. They wanted no more Knowledge of Good at
the Time, and to be sure needed no Knowledge of Evil.

This Understanding of Man was a Beam from the Light of the Knowledge and Glory
of God upon him. God made him like Himself an Intellect, an Intelligence; the
Inspiration of the Almighty gave him his Understanding. In his Light Man saw
Light. And now Souls are renewed in Knowledge after the Image of God Col. iii.
10.
. They are renewed into the Likeness, in part, wherein they were first created.
As they grow in holy Knowledge, they are changed more and more into the Divine
Image from Glory to Glory 2 Cor. iii. 18.
.

The Devil tempted our Parents to aspire after more Knowledge, and so they
fell. The Father of Light had given them as much of this perfect Gift as was
good and fitting for them. This should have highly contented them, and filled
'em with Delight and Thankfulness. And so it did, until the false Fiend
persuaded them to think, that GOD forbid 'em the Tree of Knowledge left it
should make 'em wiser and better than they were. Alas! they found nothing by it
but the Knowledge of Sin and Misery, of which it was their Happiness to be
ignorant; and they lost the Knowledge of all the Good which they before
enjoyed. We remain miserable, and perish in our Ignorance of God, unless we are
renewed after Him in Knowledge. True spiritual Wisdom is restored in the
Regeneration of Souls. God gives the Light of the Knowledge of his Glory in the
Face of JESUS CHRIST 2 Cor. iv. 6. Romans xv. 14. Mat. vi. 23. Ephesians. i. 17. Col.
i. 9.
. They who were sometimes Darkness, are made Light in the Lord. They are full
of Goodness, filled with all Knowledge.

That the Soul be without Knowledge, is not good. It is very evil to it to be
so. What is a dark and blind Soul good for! the Light that is in it is
Darkness. The Light of Life is from the Father of Glory, the Father of Christ,
the Eyes of our Understanding being-enlightned, to know the Hope of his
Calling. God gives the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the Knowledge of his
Son. This is the Image of the Father restored in his Elect. So they become
again the Children of God; filled with the Knowledge of his Will, in all Wisdom
and spiritual Understanding.

What a bright Account is this, given by the Holy Ghost, of the Image of God on
the Soul of Man, in respect of Knowledge! Not only has Man an Understanding
which reflects on its own Acquirements, and (as an excellent Divine Mr. Willard
on the Catechism.
of our own says) " reads its own Knowledge, and communicates it to others; but
the true and high Glory of this created Intellect is, "that it is capable of
knowing God unto Eternal Life; for this is Life Eternal to know Him the only
true God and Jesus Christ whom be has sent. And if Souls regenerated by the
Spirit of God receive from him a sanctified Mind, a spiritual Discerning of
Things relating to their own Duty and Happiness; how much more must we suppose
our first Parents in their state of Integrity and Perfection to be blessed with
a most holy Knowledge and spiritual Discerning?

But there is another of the Divine Attributes, which in the Scripture Account
of it and in the enlightened Mind of Man, excels in Glory, and is yet more
eminently the Divine Likeness on the Reasonable Creature, and that is Holiness,
Goodness and Righteousness. I go on therefore to say,

III. Man was eminently created by God in his own Image, after his Likeness, in
respect of Sanctity and Holiness, Integrity and Rectitude.

There is a moral as well as intellectual Perfection. The Blessedness of God
and his Glory lies in both. HE is infinitely and unchangeably possessed of
both. Nor is there any possible Perfection of Souls or Angels, but it must be
both in Mind and Understanding, and also in Will and Affections. This is to
follow the Dictate of that, and then the Light of God rules in the Heart; which
is what we are called to by the Voice of Reason and Scripture Col. iii. 15.
. Then all is regular, wise, just, perfect.

There is none Holy as the Lord. He is glorious in Holiness. Holy, Holy, Holy,
is his Name Exodus xv. 13. Isaiah vi. 3. Act iii. 14. Dan iv. 13.
. Christ is the Holy One of God, and all the Angels of Heaven are holy Ones.
They proclaim the equal Holiness of Father Son and Spirit, while they treble
the Praises of the Divine Holiness. What then should be the Image of God on the
Seraphims but their Holiness? while with covered Faces they make the
Superlative Holiness of God the Subject of their Adoration. They never cease
from this Rev. iv. 8.
, They rest not Day and Night saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty!
which art and wast and art to come. The Work of Saints on Earth is just the
same Psalm xcix. 9. xcvii. 12.
, Exalt the Lord our God and worship at his Footstool, for the Lord our God is
holy. And again, Give Thanks at the Remembrance of his Holiness.

This renders God fearful in Praises, that He is glorious in Holiness. "A
perfect Understanding must have a perfect Will, and where the Mind and Will is
perfect there must be perfect Holiness. Therefore is the Name of God most holy
and reverend. He must needs be Holy in all his Works. He must needs then make
Angels and Men holy. They could not come other out of his holy Hand. The
Impress and Stamp of his Holiness must be upon them. Being capable of this
Image of God, and it being necessary to their Perfection, they could not
possibly be destitute of it. If every Word of God is pure, so is every Work. He
cannot look upon Iniquity, he is of purer eyes than to behold it, he hates and
loathes it, and loves Righteousness. This bears his own Likeness, and is
therefore lovely in his Eyes, for he infinitely loves Himself. We read, The
Lord loves the righteous: why? but because He is Himself righteous, and those
that love and do Righteousness are like to Him. This one Thing is easily found
Eccles. vii. 29.
, nor is all the Wisdom of Solomon needed to find it out, that God made Man
upright. He could not make him otherwise. This Uprightness in the Creature is
the Image of God upon it. Men are Partakers of a Divine Nature, in the
Regeneration of Souls 2 Pet. i. 4. Psalm. xxv. 21.
. They are made upright and sincere in the Sight of God. Integrity and
Uprightness preserves them, and they escape the Corruption that is in the World
through Lust, and add to their Faith, Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience,
Godliness, brotherly Kindness and Charity. The Sons of Men (you see here) are
capable of such a Glory and Likeness to God as to become again Partakers of the
Divine Nature. This cannot possibly mean any thing more or less than some
Restoration of the Image of God in them. The Loss of that Image is supposed,
and it is said to be the Want of Original Righteousness and the Corruption of
his whole Nature. He has corrupted himself through Lust, and the World lies in
this Corruption, it is propagated from Age to Age, and common to all Places.
But then there is through Grace an Escaping out of this Corruption, which some
are made Partakers of, through Sanctification of the Spirit. That is to say, they
are made holy, virtuous, wise, temperate, patient, godly by the Power of Divine
Grace, making a glorious Change in them; whereby they do again partake of that
Divine Nature which was the Likeness of God upon Man in his first Creation.

This is the true and genuine Meaning of St. Peter's Words, repeated in the
next Chapter ver. 20.
They have escaped the Pollutions of the World, through the Knowledge of the Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. These the Holy Ghost calls Romans vi. 6.7.2 Cor. v. 17.
Gal. vi. 15. Ephesians. iv. 22.
new Men and new Creatures; being renewed in the Spirit of their Mind; the old
Man being put off, which is corrupt according to deceitful Works, and the New
Man put on, which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness. See
here the Image of God wherein Adam was created, and into which the Elect of God
are recovered by the Power and Efficacy of the Gospel, which calls us with a
holy Calling, from Uncleanness unto Holiness. This is the Image of God's dear
Son, and this is his Calling, 1 Pet. i. 15.16. Romans viii. 29.
Be ye Holy, for I am Holy. So we are made Children and adopted in Christ; for
the HOLY ONE will put no other among his Children, but those in whom he puts
this Likeness to Himself, his Son and Spirit.

Holiness is the eminent Glory of the DEITY. It is not Knowledge or Power that
gives Likeness to God, separate from Holiness, Justice, Goodness and Truth. It
is in these moral Perfections that the Lord passes before us, proclaims his
Name and shows his Glory, from the Beginning of the Bible to the End of it.
Devils retain a vast Knowledge, void of Wisdom because destitute of Holiness.
Angels shine in the Purity and Wisdom of God, because they are holy in all the
Use they make of their Understanding. And such is the Renovation of Man after
God in Knowledge and Holiness together, transformed by the renewing of his Mind
Col. i. 9, -- 15.
.

Pause here a Moment and reflect, -- It is in our Souls and Spirit that we
must look for any Likeness or Image of God, most High most Wise and Holy! and
it is essential to every created Spirit in its first Existence to be like God
the Father of Spirits, as his Offspring, in Understanding and Will, in a
Rectitude of both; Which is to say, in Integrity and Uprightness, in moral and
intellectual Perfection together; for they are inseparable, are lost together
and are recovered together: They come from Heaven, prepare for Heaven, and are
unchangeably and eternally in Heaven -- Let God be dear and honored to us, and
our Souls be dear and prized by us, from the Consideration of what God at first
made them; so wise and knowing, holy and righteous. God made them for Himself
and like Himself; in his Image and for his Glory; and for their Blessedness in
his Likeness and Love for Evermore. This we ought to have preserved and been
ever happy; now let us seek to recover it in the Way of Gospel Perfection, (by
Regeneration, Repentance, holy Obedience, and by Faith in a better
Righteousness than our own) setting the Life and Laws of Christ ever before us;
and we shall become wise, holy and blessed, in a Measure of Conformity to
Christ, who is the Image of the Invisible God, the Firstborn of every
Creature; which is the whole End, Aim and Fruit of the Ministry of the Gospel,
of Sabbaths and Ordinances, the Word, Sacraments and Prayer.

In short, the most full and perfect Resemblance of created Spirits unto the
One infinitely wise and good SPIRIT, theri Former and Father, can be no other,
either more or less than this, -- the Mind and Will of the Creature agreeing
perfectly after his Measure and Manner, to the Wisdom and Rectitude of the
CREATOR: So that the Soul at first received a Stamp and Impress of God, even as
the Wax does of a Seal, as well in its Will and Affections as in its
Intellectual Powers; even a gracious Habit, to propose cleave to and prosecute
the highest and best End, in the most proper and direct Means: So that as God
ever acts for his own Glory in his Creatures Happiness, so the Soul of Man in
its Conformity to Him acts for the Glory of God and its own Blessedness in his
Favor. This must be the first and great Commandment of the Lord God to the
Soul that he has made, and its last Happiness and Perfection, its Likeness to
God and Union with him; " Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all the
Understanding and with all thy Heart. The Soul cannot close more with God, nor
receive more of Him. -- As will further appear by our going on to consider,

IV. God created Man in his own Image, after his Likeness, in respect of
Dominion. These are the express Words of Moses, "God said, Let Us make Man in
Our Image, after Our Likeness, and let them have DOMINION.

God is LORD of all! this is his Glory and unalienable Right, to reign and
rule. He cannot deny Himself, and woe to his Creation should his Government and
Providence cease. His is the Power and Kingdom; He is GOD over all; the Most
High, Possessor of Heaven and Earth. Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth his
Footstool. Angels, Authorities and Powers are all under his Feet. He is the One
Lawgiver and Judge, the Lord of Hosts and King of Glory. Wisdom and Might are
His: his Dominion is an Everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom from Generation
to Generation.

Intellectual and moral Creatures carry an Image of God's Dominion in their
Nature. They are made for Rule and Government in their Places. Angels are
therefore called Dominions and Thrones, Principalities and Powers. And Man was
in like manner made for Government here on Earth. The Fear of him was put upon
the Creatures, and they herein are put under his Feet. God first said to him,
Have thou Dominion, and then bro't them to Adam to give them Names. So he gave
him Possession of them all. This is celebrated in the Eighth Psalm; the Glory
is given to God and all Pride is hidden from Man: " What is Man that Thou art
mindful of him! Thou have made him a little lower than the Angeis, and have
crowned him with Glory and Honor.

Man is made for Dominion in his Place as Angels are in their. Rational and
moral Powers are given to be sure to be used and applied, to great and good
Ends and Purposes, respecting God, Self, and Fellow Creatures, in one World or
other. The Application of these Powers must be in Subjection to God, the
Government of our Selves, and a righteous Conduct toward others, below or above
us, or on a Level with us.

But principally Man's Glory is, that he is made for Self-Government, for Rule
over himself, for a Possession of his own Soul, the Government of his own Mind
and Will, Desires and Appetites, Thot's, Words and Actions.

This was the Dominion he was principally designed for, and invested with. The
Law of his God put within him, and given to him in Words as soon as he found
himself in Being, sufficiently told him this. It spoke indeed plainly his
Subjection to-God, that he was made for Obedience and a reasonable Service; But
it spoke also his Pre-eminence above the Creatures put under him, in a
distinguishing Power for the Rule of his own Actions, with Understanding and
Choice, Liberty and Freedom, and from a Conscience of right and wrong.

Understanding and Wisdom, the Power of Though It and Consideration was given to
Man for this End. "The Lord God put the Man into the Garden to dress and keep
it, and He commanded the Man, saying etc. Thus Man was made under the Law to
God, a Law to himself, and was both able and inclined to do the Will of God,
and to govern himself thereby. And this Power for Self-Government, by the Light
and Law of God within him, and by the Will of God revealed to him, was the
Image of his God upon him.

For the Divine Dominion and Government is in the Perfection of Wisdom and
Righteousness. The Scepter of his Kingdom is a right Scepter. He does according
to his Will in the Armies of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth;
but his Will is perfect, his Ways are Truth and Judgment, He is holy in all his
Work, just and right is He.

Therefore the Subjection of Man to God is his governing Himself, in all his
Thot's Words and Actions, in a wise, righteous and superior manner; as becomes
a Creature in the Likeness of God, and made for Authority and Rule on Earth.

Our Lord therefore tells us that he came into our World to recover Man into
his Original Freedom and Liberty. " If the Son make you free, ye shall be free
indeed John viii. 36. Romans viii. 21. Luke xvii. 21.
. Man by his Fall lost that Dominion over, and Possession of himself, wherein
God had made him. The Son of God came to restore him into the glorious Liberty
of the Sons of God. The Image of the Heavenly Father is restored in those
Souls, whom his Grace recovers from the Bondage of Sin and Satan, into his own
Kingdom, which Kingdom of God is within us. It makes Men Kings and Priests to
God. They use Themselves, and all his Creatures, to the Creator's Glory. This
was that Original Dominion in which and for which Man was made. His Original
Wisdom and Righteousness was given Him for this End. So God qualified him for
the Rule to which he called him. He gives no Right but for his own Glory from
his Creatures, and for their Happiness in a regular ordering and conducting
themselves. -- And this leads me to another Point, wherein the Image of God
consisted in Man's Original Stace of Knowledge Holiness and Dominion, and that
is

V. His Original State of Happiness and Blessedness. -- God is the blessed
Being; infinitely, eternally and unchangeably happy; being possessed of all
possible Perfection and Glory for ever and ever: " God over all, blessed for
Evermore Psalm. cxix. 12. Romans ix. 5.
. He made Man happy, and for Happiness everlasting: He forbad him that which he
knew would make him miserable: For he knew that Misery must lie in the Loss of
the Divine Likeness.

A miserable Creature could not come out of the Hand of the blessed God: He
could not make a living Soul so unlike Himself, so contrary to Himself. -- The
Creature must make it self miserable, if ever if become so. Angels and Men have
made themselves so, against the Commandment of God, by their own Sin and
Transgression. They have wickedly chosen Evil under the Notion of Good, and
thereby brought Misery upon themselves. But God required 'em to choose only what
is good, and to refuse the Evil. God made 'em in the Knowledge of Good, and
ignorant of Evil.

Man was made innocent, wise and holy, and therefore necessarily happy. He was
made blessed for ever, in case he did not commit Sin, from which Misery
naturally flows, and with which it is necessarily connected. -- Man was made
happy both as to Soul and Body: He wanted nothing for either. He had Wisdom and
Purity within, Peace and Joy, Content and Pleasure. Without him he had a
Paradise, a Garden of God. Every thing grew there, pleasant to the Eye, to the
Smell and to the Taste. His Eye beheld a Creation of God's in Perfection. He
had a charming Tongue and Voice to praise Him. The musical Birds, happy in the
Branches, singing and feasting there, were but an Emblem of their Owners
Liberty and Freedom to what was good and joyous. Man was a thousand fold more a
Pleasure to himself in all his Tho'ts and Words! in his Contemplations of God
in his Works, in his Knowledge of his Will, in his Sense of the Divine Favors
and Bounties to him, in a Heart full of Gratitude to God, and with a Tongue
tuned to his Praise, to magnify Him with Thanksgivings.

Every intellectual and moral Pleasure attended Man in his Paradisaic State, as
well as every sensitive Delight. "He feasted (says One) on the Loving Kindness
of God, better than Life, and on all the Sweets of an untarnished Creation. --
God blessed him in the Day he made him, for he saw him in a blessed State, and
required him to keep himself in that State and be happy. God bound himself to
bless him, if he kept himself in his Love. As a Means of preserving himself
herein, God gave him his Sabbath and his Covenant: He blessed every Seventh Day
to him, for a Time of special Communications of his Grace and Love; and none of
us can imagine what a blessed Day every Seventh would have been to Man in his
State of Innocence and Holiness; what Visits and Visions from Heaven Man had
enjoyed thereon. It may be a Flavel, or an Henry the Elder, may sometimes have
tasted a little of like Rapture.

Real and sensible Communion with God is the proper Blessedness of Souls. A
measure of it remains to fallen recovered Man in his secret and public
Devotions. Because thy Loving kindness is better than Life my Lips shall praise
thee: Thus will I bless thee while I live, I will lift up my Hands in thy Name:
My Soul shall be satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness, and my Mouth shall
praise thee with joyful Lips: My Soul follows bard after thee, thy right Hand
upholdeth me Psalm. lxiii. 3, 4, 5. Heb iv. 3.
. Believers in Christ do enter into this Rest, but it comes vastly short of a
Sabbath in Eden, or the Heavenly Sabbatisin.

No doubt but the Image of God was visible upon Man in his Earthly Paradise,
and sensible to himself in his inward Frame. His Mind was full of Light, his
Heart of Joy; which beamed out in his Eyes and Face, and flowed over from his
Mouth and Tongue. The Abundance within irradiated the whole Body. If Moses Face
shone in the Mount with God, how did Adam's in the Garden of God! The Joy of
the Lord was a Covering of Glory on Him: It fell off in the Hour he sinned, and
he saw himself naked. Our Parents looked astonished at one another to see the
outward Change upon themselves, as well as from what they felt within. They ran
to the Fig Leaves to hide their Shame.

Thus Man lost the Image of God in the sensible Loss of his Happiness. Misery
is the Image of Satan. Such is Guilt to a Soul: Pollution attends it: Grief and
Shame are the inevitable Consequent. The Evils of the World, with Death in the
Rear of the woeful Train, shows us the Loss of the Divine Likeness wherein we
were created. For we were made for immortal Life and Happiness, and lo Misery
and Death have invaded us! Which leads me to add,

VI. And lastly, God created Man in His own Image in respect of Life and
Immortality. God made Adam a living Soul that can never die, a natural Image of
HIM who only has Immortality. And God covenanted with Adam that though his Body
was corruptible in it self, yet He would preserve it in Health, Ease and
Strength, and it should never see Death in case he never sinned. God gave him
therefore the Tree of Life to eat of, a Sign Pledge and Means of Immortality to
his Body, and of the Continuance of Happiness to him in Soul and Body all his
Days on Earth; and I doubt not it was also a Seal and Assurance to him of a
Translation to a better World, a better Paradise in due Time.

Man could not but begin to be because he was a Creature; no more could the
Angels of Heaven. God only is Eternal, from Everlasting to Everlasting, without
Beginning or End. Spirits that can never cease to be, yet once were not. By God
were the Invisible Thrones and Dominions above created, and so likewise the
Spirits in Flesh. Both were made for an everlasting Existence and Duration. The
Word of God's Power upholds them in Being, whether in a holy and happy State,
or in their sinful and miserable Condition. This Immortality simply considered
is a signal Likeness of the Everlasting Father upon his Offspring. Angels are
in this Image of God upon them for ever and ever: Their Being, Glory,
Blessedness, Joys are sure of an everlasting Duration. And Souls that are here
sanctified in Jesus Christ are sure of going to Him at Death, and of
Blessedness in his Likeness for Evermore. Psalm xvi. 9, 10, 11. lxxiii. 23, --
26. John xiv. 1, -- 4. 1 Cor. xv. 16, -- 23, 45, -- ult. 1 John iii. 2.1 Pet. i.
3. Rom ii. 7.
This Life and Immortality is bro't to Light by the Gospel, and we are begotten
to the lively Hope of it by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. The
Promise which GOD has promised is this Eternal Life, in Soul and Body united,
unto all them that by patient Continuance in well doing, seek after it.

And this shows us the Original State of Man; to what Life and Happiness he was
designed and prepared in his Creation, in Conformity to the Life and
Blessedness of his MAKER, even for an everlasting seeing serving and Enjoyment
of Him. This therefore was an eminent Part of the Divine Image and Likeness on
our First Parents, in the Day when they received their Being. They knew
themselves made for Immortality, and that their present happy Circumstances
could never cease, but might increase for ever and ever, and be changed for
better and better, higher and high: to Everlasting. Death therefore was set
before them to deter them from Sin; Death bodily and spiritual; not a Period to
their Existence but to their Happiness; which alone is to be called Life; for
to exist in Misery, in any great Degree of it, is Death rather than Life, and a
reasonable Creature would choose Strangling Job. vii. 15. Psalm. xlix. 19. Rev.
xx. 6, 14. Mark. ix. 44. Jude. v. 6. Luke iii. 17. Isai: xxxiii. 14.
, rather than such an Existence. -- We read therefore of the Soul in a State of
Misery, that it shall never see Life; and the second Death has power over it.
The Curse comes on that Soul in the very Letter of it, " In dying thou shall
die. The miserable Spirits in Hell are for ever dying, and yet never die; never
see an End of their Misery; their Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched.
Here is the Loss of the Image of God to the uttermost. For God lives in the
Perfection of Bliss, in ineffable inconceivable Blessedness, for ever and ever:
And so do Angels and glorified Spirits in His Likeness and Favor: They have an
Eternity of Happiness before them: But sinning Angels, and impenitent damned
Souls, are in everlasting Chains of Darkness, reserved to unquenchable Fire and
everlasting Burnings. The Image of Immortality upon them is an everlasting
Curse! the Reverse of that Living Happy Soul which God at first made us.

Indeed there is no Image of God's Self-Existence, his necessary Existence, his
Independent Essence, his proper Eternity and Unchangeableness, in the immortal
Nature of Angels or Men, or in the happy Immortality of holy Spirits. God is
the High and lofty ONE that inhabiteth Eternity; having Life in Himself. Only
the Eternal Word and Spirit who are One with the Father, are also the
Brightness and express Image of his Eternal Glory. Yet every immortal Spirit is
an Image of the Vital Being from Whom it came; in Whom alone is the Origin of
Life, and the Life is the Light of Men and Angels: i. e. the Living God is the
Spring and Fountain of it; as the Psalmist sings, " For with Thee is the
Fountain of Life Psalm xxxvi. 9. John. i. 4. Isai. lvii. 15.
. When Man recovers his first and proper Immortality, as the Righteous shall do
at the Resurrection, then the Image of God will be perfectly restored in him,
never to be lost again.

And thus we have said something (O how little a part) of the blessed Image of
God wherein Man was created: A little lower than the Angels, but like them
living Spirits, in a sufficient Degree of Knowledge and Wisdom, Purity and
Goodness, Greatness and Dominion, Happiness and Blessedness, and in Immortality
which was the Crown of all: For this Wisdom, Holiness and Blessedness would
have remained with him for ever and ever. Like GOD he had been the same, and
his Years without End; only there had been a perpetual Increase in Perfection
and Blessedness, if he had preserved his Innocence.

And now, O Sons and Daughters of Men, contemplate this your Original State,
and mourn the Loss of it! bewail and condemn your Selves, and give Glory unto
God who made you such, and for an ever-during Felicity.

DEATH, Death is the dreadful Sign and Testimony to us of the Loss of God's
Image and Likeness! Bodily Death is so, Spiritual Death more! A dying Body,
under miserable Diseases, and presently forsaken by the living Spirit, is a
visible, sensible, sorrowful Spectacle of the Loss of God's Image: But a dead
Soul, under the Misery of spiritual Lusts, and the Sentence of God to Eternal
Death, is a thousand-fold more hideous Spectacle of the Loss of God's Likeness.
Let Sense look upon a dead Corpse, and let it say if the Image of the Living
God is not departed, in this Punishment of Sin! but let Faith look into the
State of the Dead, and see Souls in the Place of Misery for ever and ever; and
then behold the utmost Loss of Life, of God and of Blessedness! Here, here is
the Image of God lost to the uttermost! look on this and cry out, on Adam's Sin
(as some have done) O Adam! "what have thou done! -- But rather lay thy Hand on
thy own Heart, O Sinner, and smite on thy own Breast, and cry out of thy own
Sins, and feel thy own Plague, who wilt not come to Christ that thou may
have Life! wilt not submit to the Terms of the Gospel, for the recovery of
this, and more than this, thy Original Knowledge, Holiness, Dominion and
Blessedness in an Everlasting Paradise.

God is ready to restore our Souls; the Means of Grace and Holiness testify of
it to us from Day to Day: What mean our Sabbaths, Sermons, Sacraments, the Word
and Prayer, but a holy and happy everlasting State for Soul and Body, if we
will but accept of so great Salvation! Read the Account of a better Paradise
for every One who will but seek it, by a timely Submission to the Son of God,
the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, who came to seek and save that which was
lost, and to restore that which be took not away: Your Bible closes with the
Account of this Caelestial Paradise, and of the Image of God on Man in the
Heavenly Places! and how could the Revelations of God to Man end more holily
and gloriously! Revel. xxii. 1, -- 6. And he showed me a pure river of water of
life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb.
In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the river, was there
the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit
every month: and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.
And there shall be no more curse: but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall
be in it; and his servants shall serve him. And they shall see his face; and
his name shall be in their foreheads. And there shall be no night there, and
they need no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord God gives them
light: and they shall reign for ever and ever. And he said unto me, These
sayings are faithful and true. And the Lord God of the holy prophets sent his
angel to show unto his servants the things which must shortly be done.

But I am not willing to finish on a Subject so pleasant and profitable as this
is, without going into some more particular Reflections.

I. O what a brave, good, great and happy Creature, was Man in his first Estate!

See, you Sons of Adam, and Daughters of Eve, what your first Parents were, and
you in their Loins! how crowned with Glory and Honor, as the Psalmist sings!
or as the Evangelist speaks, " Adam, the Son of God! He that in his Gospel had
wrote this, might well in his Acts quote that Passage of the Poet. "For we are
his Offspring! -- If then we are the Offspring of God, and were at first
created worthy of such a Style, being made in his Image and Likeness; then what
an Angel in Flesh was Man in his first State! wise, holy, happy and immortal!
an imbodied Spirit made for the Knowledge and Vision of God, and in a Dominion
over the Earth and all the Creatures on it. Man was a Brother of Angels; only
in a Body of Flesh, and a Candidate for their heavenly Glory. He was a grand
and august Creature in the Eyes of his Maker, good in his Sight, high in the
Esteem of good Angels and the Envy of evil ones. -- We talk of noble and royal
Blood now in our fallen, corrupt and dying Condition; under our Diseases and
Pains, Leprosies and Ulcers; but we were indeed in our first Estate Children of
the most High, Sons of Glory, for immortal Dominion. Here was the true Honor,
which came from above, and had returned to God and Heaven, and left us in high
Dignity and Royalty everlasting, with the Image of the King of Glory on us, a
never fading Crown. Our Bible does us the greatest Honor in this Account of
our Original State; but the Glory is altogether unto God in the Perfection and
Excellency of his own Works. So God created us, and unto Him be Glory. " Thine
O Lord, is the Greatness and the Majesty!

II. O what a great and good and holy and blessed Being is the LORD OUR GOD,
who made Man in his own Image and Likeness! Of his own Heart, and overflowing
Fullness, He did this! " O Lord, our Lord; how excellent is thy Name in all the
Earth! So the Psalm begins and ends, which is the Contemplation of Man in his
State of Dominion. The Glory of God herein is also above the Heavens, above the
Praises of Angels there. We poorly lisp, like Babes and Sucklings at his high
Praises, for our Souls are not what they once were! yet had we the Tongues of
Angels we could not render Him the Glory due unto his Name, which is exalted
above all Blessing and Praise. It should be a Pleasure to us, that there are
higher Orders of Creatures to praise and serve God better. We should awake up
our Glory, and do our best, and live on the Hope of doing better and better for
evermore. " Be thou exalted, O God, above the Heavens! let thy Glory be above
all the Earth Psalm. cviii. 4, 5, 6. cxlviii. 1, 2, 11, 12, 13.
.

[Under this Head I will insert the learned and pious Peter van Manstricht his
Reasons Theoreticopractica Theologia, p. 378.
of God's making Man in his own Image. 1. To contemplate and delight Himself in
Man, as in a Glass or Effigy: As we read Prove. viii. 31. that in the Day when
He appointed the Foundations of the Earth his Joy was in the habitable Parts of
it, and his Delights in the Sons of Men. 2. As it were to propagate Himself,
were any thing like that possible, in Creatures bearing his Likeness. As it is
in the Nature of all Good to communicate of it self, and propagate its own
Likeness. It is so in every inferior Life here known to us, in Conformity
doubtless to the First and most perfect. 3. That he might have on this Earth,
as in every other habitable Globe he doubtless has, Those that should know and
love and worship Him for what he is in Himself and is to them: which they would
never do without an Impress of Himself on them, sensible to themselves. 4. That
He might have on this Earth of ours Those with whom he may converse, as a
Father Friend and Benefactor, and make blessed by Communion with Himself, through
Time here and to Eternity: which Friendship and Conversation cannot be without
Likeness, any more than Man can converse with the brute Creatures which are so
unlike to him. Simile enim simili gaudet. Man therefore that is made to live to
God, and for ever with him, and to find his Blessedness therein, must needs be
in the likeness of God, wise, holy, just and good. 5. That Man may have within
Himself a Perception and Conviction of his Creator's most high and infinite
Perfections; his Simplicity, Invisibility, Immortality, Understanding, Will,
Wisdom, Justice, Holiness, Goodness and Dominion; and have these always in
Remembrance, and before his own Eyes, in the Image of them on himself. 6. That
we may know and be convinced that none of our Evils come from God, but are
altogether of our Selves, and that in Contradiction to the Will of God, and
therefore in Rebellion against Him, which the Glory of his Holiness and
Dominion must see punished. Prove. xvi. 4. The Lord has made all things for
Himself, yea even the wicked for the Day of Wrath.]


III. See the true Basis, and a strong Foundation for the whole moral Law, in
both the Tables of it; the Love of GOD, and of our Neighbors; and I may add
the true Love of our Selves also. For if God made Man in His own Image and
Likeness, how ought Man to love God, Himself, and his Neighbors?

1. He ought to love the LORD his GOD with all his Heart, and with all his
Soul, and with all his Mind, and with all his Might Deuteronomy. vi. 4, 5. x. 12, 15,
20. Matthew. xxii. 37. Psalm. cxxxix. 14, 17. lxxiii. 25.
. This must necessarily be the first and great, Commandment and indispensable,
Duty of all Creatures, in all Worlds, made in the Image of God. For they are
made to love what is good and lovely; and the Original of Good, the Perfection
of Beauty, to be sure first; the most perfect and supreme Good with the highest
Affection. Desire and Delight. Besides, that the Relation of an Offspring is a
Bond to Love, in the highest Degree, by the Acknowledgment of all Mankind. A
Child is bound to love his Parents with his first and best Affection, because
through Them he receives his Being, and is begotten in their Likeness. If God
then be a Father (and have we not One Father? has not one God created us?) this
must be the Honor due from us; and our great Honor it is to be permitted to
love the Greatest and Best of Beings, for this Reason, because He has made us
in his own Likeness? No wonder this is his Law to us, and this his Grace and
Favor to us, to require our Love? "My Son, give me thy Heart! Is He not thy
Father, that has made thee? that has fashioned thee in the Womb, with the same
wonderful and precious Thot's unto thee, as to thy First Parent when he spoke
first of forming him, " Come let us make Man, in our Image, after our Likeness.
O what is there that is lovely in us but that, and who should be the Object of
our Souls Love but this Blessed Being? "Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? and
there is nothing on Earth that I desire beside Thee.

Did ever any Prince make a Law that his Subjects should love Him Henry on
Deuteronomy. vi.
? yet such is the Condescension of the Divine Grace that this is God's first
Law to Man.

Let me turn the Question, and ask -- Was there ever any King that did not
expect and require the Love of his own Children? So high and near a Subject as
a Child must needs love, as well as fear; and it is the Glory of Kings to be
loved as well as feared.

But if we are made in God's Image, let our Love be regulated hereby. Our
Desire must be toward Him, out Delight in him, our Dependence on him, and to
him we must be entirely devoted. It must be a comstant Pleasure to us to think
of Him, hear from him, speak to him and serve him. We must love him with an
intelligent, entire and superlative Affection. We have had Fathers of our Flesh
and we gave them Reverence; shall we not love the Father of our Spirits and
live?

2. Our being made in the Image of God teaches us to love our Selves, to love
our own Souls, with a high Esteem and Value, with a rational tender and fervent
Affection. God made us to love our Selves for his sake, for his Image on us and
Glory from us. God is Himself Love 1 John. iv. 8.
: What more amiable Idea can we have of Him? what a delectable Object is He by
this Account of Him? How lovely is He to Himself and to all Intelligent Beings!
He is in the first place Love with Regard to Himself, in a most perfect blessed
everlasting Self-love. He necessarily, infinitely and unchangeably loves
Himself; whether we consider Him in the Ineffable mutual Love of Three Divine
Persons, One in Godhead and Glory; or in his infinite Complacence in his own
blessed and glorious Perfections. He has revealed Himself thus to us, " I the
Lord thy God am a jealous God! which speaks Self-Regard in the highest Degree.
He cannot deny himself, nor give away his Glory. He has made all Worlds, and
all, Rational Beings for his own Glory. He has made us like Himself, with an
invincible Principle of Self-love, but first for his own Praise from us,
without which we can never be perfect and happy.

It is evident that the Principle of true Self-love in us is Part of the Image
on God on us; for by this we govern our Selves, our Appetites, our Will and
Affections, by the Will of God, for his Glory and our own Good, present and
future. As soon as Adam was created he was forbidden to Sin against his own
Life; "In the Day thou eatest thou shall surely die." In our fallen State God
addresses to this same Principle, in its Remains within us, " Why will ye die?
In Regeneration Souls are recovered to the true Love of Themselves. As God is
glorious Self-love, so is Man in his primitive and saved State. The greatest
Self-good we can propose to our Selves, is to be like God, and to have him well
pleased with us. That is to say, to be good and do good, as God is and does.

We should love nothing in our Selves but what is agreeable to God, and an
Exhibition more or less of his Image on us. We should hate and loathe in our
Selves whatsoever is contrary to God, his Nature and Will made known to us. We
must deny our present carnal Self, which is Enmity to God, is not subject to
his Law, nor indeed can be Romans viii. 2, 6, 7, 13. John iii. 7. Gal v. 24. Col.
iii. 5.
, without a holy and blessed Change wro't in us by the Spirit of God. Hence we
are required to mortify our Members, and to crucify the Flesh with its
Affections and Lusts. These are not our Self, but the Corruption and Enemies of
our Soul.

O that we did but know our Selves, and love our own Souls! we should then seek
the Image of God within our Selves, and set a just Value on it. The Want of
this is the real Hatred of our Selves and of God: Proverbs. viii. 36. He that
sins against Me wrongeth his own Soul, all they that hate Me love Death.

3. We must love our Neighbor as our Selves, for he is made like us in the
Image of God. Therefore honor all Men, and therefore love the Brotherhood. 1
Peter. ii. 17.1 Tim. i. 5. Luke x. 29. Deuteronomy. x. 18. Genesis ix. 6. iv. 10 John.
xiii 34 1 (...) 8, 9. iv. 7, 8. v 1.
Have we not all one Father, has not One God created us? And have not Saints
One Redeemer and Sanctister, whose Image is renewed on them all! The End of the
Commandment is Charity (the Love of God and of our Neighbor) out of a pure
Heart, a good Conscience and Faith unfeigned.

Say not, Who is my Neighbor? Let Humanity be found in us, for the sake of
that Image of God wherein Man was created. We must love the Stranger, for the
Lord loves Him. Contempt of Men is Contempt of God, and Cruelty to Men is
odious to God. So is all Injustice and Unrighteousness. The last Injury to Man
is in his Life, and this is forbidden from the Beginning, and revenged by God,
for this Reason, " For in the Image of God made He Man! therefore whosoever
sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed. No wonder that the Blood
of Abel cried so from the Ground against wicked Cain, and that God has set such
a Mark and Brand upon his Name for ever. Benevolence and Beneficence ever was
and is the Law of Nature, of Moses and of Christ. Love is the fulfilling of the
Law. As we have Opportunity let us do good to all Men, especially to the
Household of Faith.

Christians are under a more special Law of Love than others, from the
Knowledge of God and his Love in Jesus Christ, that great Love wherewith he has
loved us; and from the Example and Law of Christ, " A new Commandment give I
unto you, that you love one another, as I have loved you that ye love one
another. And how is this new Commandment enforced and urged on us in the New
Testament? but from the Image of God restored by Grace in the Godly. Therefore
we must love the Brethren, and to Godliness add Brotherly Kindness. We should
be able to see God in one another, and we must love the Godly in Christ Jesus
for the sake of his Spirit in them, and their Likeness to Him. As Aaron and the
Elders of Israel looked on the shining Face of Moses, when he came down from
the Mount, with Wonder and great Reverence. The Apostle of Love, who had lain
in the Bosom of Jesus, vehemently urges the Law of Christian Love from the
Image of God renewed in the Saints. Every one that loves Him that begat,
loves him also that is begotten of Him: Beloved, let us love one another, for
Love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God, and knows God; he
that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love. If we love one another God
dwells in us, and his Love is perfected in us: We know that we have passed
from Death to Life because we love the Brethren: he that loves not his Brother
abides in Death. Such was the Love of this blessed Apostle to the Elect Lady
and to Gaius; for the Truths sake, which dwells in us and shall be in us for
ever. It goes to Heaven with us, and is the Image of God on Angels and Saints
there for ever and ever. Charity never fails, but remains and is perfected
when that which is perfect shall come; when Prophecies and Tongues, and Faith
and Hope shall cease and vanish away. 1 Cor. xiii. 8, 10, 13

How odious then should the want of Love be among Christian! who as God for
Christ's sake has loved them, so they ought for his sake to love one another.
This Love should not be in Word or in Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth, with a
pure Heart, fervently. 1 John. iii. 18 1 Pet. i. 22. Jam. iii. 9. Romans xii. 9,
14
The Tongue is an unruly Evil, full of deadly Poison, when not under the Law of
Kindness; therewith Men bless God even the Father; and therewith curse they Men
which are made after the Similitude of God. Can there be any thing more a
Contradiction, and an Abomination than this. Let Love be without Dissimulation,
bless and curse not. But if ye have bitter Envying and Strife in your Heart,
glory not in Words of feigned Love, and lie not against the Truth. This is
earthly, sensual, devilish. So distant is it from and opposite to the Likeness
of God and Heaven.

How excellent are the Precepts and Directions of our Holy Religion Ephesians. iv.
26, -- 37. Col. iii. 8, 9, 12, 13.
! Be angry and sin not; let not the Sun go down upon your Wrath: Neither give
place to the Devil. And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are
sealed to the Day of Redemption. Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and
Clamor, and evil Speaking, be put away from you with all Malice; and be ye
kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ sake has forgiven you. So does the Image of God on Man teach him to
love God, Himself and his Neighbors, more especially Those in whom the Image
of God is renewed in Righteousness and Holiness.

IV. I go on to infer the dreadful Loss to Man by Sinning against God, and the
positive Misery that he has bro't upon Himself. He has lost the Likeness of his
God! O how vast was this Loss! how dreadful this natural and inevitable
Punishment of Sin! He aspired to be as God for Knowledge and he lost that
bright Understanding which God had given him. Sin got him nothing but the
Knowledge of Evil, and it lost him the Knowledge of God. Man lost his Original
Righteousness. This Glory departed from him. He was a living Temple and Palace
of God, and the Spirit of God dwelt in him; but he polluted himself and became
a Stye of unclean Lusts, the Habitation of Devils. Sin extinguished the Light
of God on him, in Mind and Body; and Darkness covered him, the Shadow of Death
stained him. He lost the Possession of himself, Dominion over himself, and
became a Slave of Satan. The Creatures lost their Fear of him, which the
Majesty and Luster of his Face before commanded, and he lost that Knowledge of
the Creatures which God had given him for Empire over them. They grew surly and
fierce toward him, as he had lost his Reverence and Fear of God. He lost his
true Happiness in his Original Rectitude; his Peace within and Joy in God was
gone; the Terrors of Guilt seized and stung him, and he fled from God; was
afraid and hid himself. His Immortality indeed remained, but what Joy in that,
when Innocence and Purity was gone! Immortality in Sin and Guilt, under the
Loss of God's Image and Favor, unlike God and abominable in his Sight, -- it
was but the greater Misery to be immortal in such Circumstances. To cease to be
at all, were the thing now to be desired! even to lose Immortality too with the
Likeness of God! for in his Favor is Life, and his Likeness is better than
Life. We may take to our Selves in our Apostasy from God, those Words of the
Prophet, Isaiah. xiv. 12. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Son of the
Morning! thou that did say in thy Heart, I will be as the Most High! how art
thou bro't down to Hell, to the sides of the Pit! -- But then the Misery of Man
by the Fall is not only the Loss of God's Image, but a Contrariety and Enmity
to God. We are alienated Ephesians. iv. 18.1 Cor ii. 14. Romans viii. 7. Matthew. vi.
23. Joh. iii. 1^.
from the Life of God through the Ignorance that is in us, our carnal Heart is
Enmity to God, is not subject to his Law, nor indeed can be of it self. The
natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God, for they are
Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. The Light that is in the wicked is Darkness; and how great is that
Darkness! which is loved and chosen rather than Light! -- This is that
Corruption of our whole Nature, "which is commonly called Original Sin", from
which the Rebellions of our Lives against the Will of God do flow; even all our
Transgressions in Though It, Word and Deed -- This is the Scripture Genesis vi. 5.
Jerem. iv. 22. Prove. i. 22. Psalm. x. 4. xiv. 3. Romans vii. 18, -- 24.
Account of our Contrariety to God by Nature and wicked Works. We are wise to
do Evil, but to do Good we have no Knowledge. We even hate the Knowledge of the
Holy. God is not in all our Thoughts. The Imaginations of our Hearts are only
evil continually. We are all gone aside, we are altogether become filthy, there
is none that does Good no not one. I know that in me, dwells no good thing;
the Good that I would I do not, the Evil that I would not that do I! O wretched
man that I am. who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? -- This
Soul-Misery is the dire Consequent of the Loss of God's Image. It is the Image
of Satan on us, who deceived us into our Revolt from God. This is Sin's
Dominion and our natural Bondage. And our necessary Immortality is an infinite
Addition to this State of Sin and Misery, were there no Deliverance from it.

In one Word, For what is it that the Sons of Men exchange the Image of God in
their Estrangement from Him, and in their Rebellions against him! O it is for
the Image of a Brute Beast in their fleshly Lusts, and for the Likeness of
unclean Devils in their spiritual Lusts! a miserable Exchange be it the
Filthiness of the Flesh or Spirit. But there is no avoiding either, if we leave
God or will not return to Him; we must take our Lot, nay our own Choice, and
become both Brutes and Devils, and perish like 'em.

Wherefore,

V. Here is abundant Matter and Cause for that Evangelical Repentance,
Humiliation, holy Mourning, Shame, Fear, Confession, Deprecation, and Agony of
Soul after Pardon and Renovation, which the Gospel teaches and requires. The
Doctrine of our Salvation must be a Doctrine of Repentance and Return to God.
In this the Kingdom of Heaven returns to us. There is no other possible Way for
it. Repentance unto Life must be granted, revealed and published to us; and it
must be wro't in us, we must be bro't into it. By what other Means can a Soul
ever recover out of a state of Sin? Therefore Moses and the Prophets, the
Baptist and the Holy JESUS, came all preaching Repentance. We must mourn for
every single Act of Sin committed by us, how then ought we to bewail the Sin of
our Nature, which is the Spring of all the Impurities of our Life! It is only
Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ Psalm cxxx 4. Romans iii. 25, 26. Zech. xii. 10.
Psalm. li. 1, 5, 7.
that draws forth this Repentance toward God, showing us that there is
Forgiveness with Him that he may be feared; "Whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
Remission of Sin; that he might be just and the Justifier of him which
believes in Jesus. See here the Fountain opened for Pardon and Cleansing, in
the Exercise of Faith and Repentance! See it decribed by Zechariah and
exemplified in David; The Prophet gives the Promise of it, the Psalmist
practices it. " I will pour (says the Promise of God) upon the House of David,
and on the Inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of Grace and of Supplication,
and they shall look upon Me whom they have pierced and they shall mourn for
him, as one mourns for his only Son, and shall be in Bitterness for him as
one that is in Bitterness for his Firstborn. So the Psalmist practiced in the
Day of his great Repentance. " Have Mercy upon me, O God, according to thy
Loving kindness; according to the Multitude of thy tender Mercies blot out my
Transgression! Wash me thro'ly from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin;
for I acknowledge my Transgressions, and my Sin is ever before me! -- Behold I
was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me! Purge me as with
Hyssop and I shall be clean, wash me and I shall be whither than Snow! --
Create in me, O God, a clean Heart, and renew a right Spirit within me! --
Restore to me the Joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit.

VI. Learn we the Misery of Devils, which to be sure must be equal to, if not
much greater than fallen Man's, in the Loss of God's Image and Likeness, and in
the Infliction of his Wrath and Curse. And yet not greater than theirs who
despise the Gospel and perish under the Light thereof: For Devils never sinned
against an Offer of Mercy or Means of Grace, that we know of. The Son of God
took not their Nature, to put them in a Way for the Recovery of their primitive
Holiness and Glory. They saw him indeed in our Nature, but it was with Hatred
and Indignation, which added to their Guilt and Judgment. They tempted him in
Hope to have defeated the Design of our Redemption; but finding nothing in Him,
and prevailing nothing against him, they trembled before him and hated him the
more. Math. viii. 29. What have we to do with Thee, Jesus thou Son of God? art
thou come hither to torment us before the Time? They thus abhorred from the
Brightness of the Image of the Father in Him; " I know thee who thou art, thou
holy One of God! In this their Uncleanness, and Enmity to God and Christ and
Holiness, they remain odious and accursed for Ever; and the Son of God in our
Nature and in our Air will sentence 'em to the everlasting Burnings.

VII. See we then the Glory of the Man CHRIST JESUS, the second Adam. The first
Adam in all his Glory was not to be likned, or compared to Him. The first Adam
was in his best Estate of the Earth earthy, the second Man is the Lord from
Heaven; the first Adam was made a living Soul, the second Adam a quickening
Spirit 1 Cor. xv. 45, 47. Col. i. 5.2 Cor. iv. 6. John. i. 14. Col. i. 13.
Prove. xxx. 4. Col. ii 9.
. There is as much Difference between the Image of God in mere Men, and that in
the Man Christ Jesus, as there is between Earth and Heaven, between God and his
Creature, between a living Soul and Him that made it, between Him that has Life
in Himself and communicates Life natural and spiritual, and him that receives
it. Accordingly we read of CHRIST, that He is the Image of the Invisible God,
the Heir of all things, the Brightness of the Fathers Glory, the express Image
of his Person, having by Inheritance a more excellent Name than Angels, the
Object of their Worship; And yet they are Dominions and Thrones and
Principalities and Powers: To the SON it is therefore said, " Thy Throne, O
GOD, is for ever and ever! Agreably we read again, of the Light of the Glory of
God in the Face of Jesus Christ, and that his Glory was beheld as the Glory of
the Only-Begotten of the Father.

Such is the Image of the Eternal Father in his dear Son, by an ineffable
Communication of Essence, or by an unsearchable Self-existence, is not for us
to say! for what is his Sons Name? if thou can tell.

Was Adam created wise in the Likeness of God? Christ is the Wisdom of God; the
Serpent with all his Subtlety could not beguile him, neither in the Desert nor
in the City. Was Adam made holy in the Likeness of God? Christ was the Holy One
of God; seen and confessed to be so both by Angels and Devils. Was Adam made
Lord of the Creatures on Earth? Christ is set down on the Right Hand of the
Majesty in the Heavens; Angels Authorities and Powers being made subject to
Him. And was Adam made blessed and happy in the Likeness of God? of Christ we
read that God has made Him most blessed for evermore. -- In one word, the
incommunicable Glories of the Eternal and Unchangeable Godhead are in Christ,
in whom dwells the Fullness of the Godhead bodily. -- But let us descend to
the poor Members of Christ on Earth.

VIII. What must we then think and say of the Saints on Earth? of Souls
Regenerated by the Spirit of God, converted from Sin and sanctified to God;
adopted in Jesus Christ, pardoned and justified; again made Children and Heirs
of God! Why, the Image of God is in part restored in them, and will soon be
perfected in 'em. How else should God justify them, put 'em among his Children,
and declare them Heirs of Heaven? Well might the Apostle John speak with
Admiration of this new Creation of God, the Conformity of renewed Souls to the
Image of the Son of God, and their Adoption in Him 1 John. iii. 1, 2, 3. Romans
xii. 2.
; Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be
called the Sons of God! therefore the World knows us not, because it knew Him
not: Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we
shall be; but we know that when He shall appear we shall be like him; for we
shall see him as he is: And every One that has this Hope in him, purifieth
himself even as He is pure.

See the Blessedness of a State of Grace here and of Glory for ever! the Image
of God is begun in this Life, and will be perfected in the next. The Sanctified
in Jesus Christ are renewed in Knowledge, and made Light in the Lord; they are
after God created in Righteousness, are made free from Sin and are translated
into the glorious Liberty of the Children of God. They are begotten to the
lively Hope of the Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in Heaven for them. Thus does the Holy Ghost magnify the
Regenerate State, and set it before the Eyes of Men in a Divine Light, that all
may see the Necessity and Excellency of the true Salvation of Souls; which is
the Recovery of the Image and Likeness of God, wherein we were at first
created. So that all the Precepts and Directions of the Gospel do at last
expire in those Words to the Romans, "And be ye transformed by the renewing of
your Minds, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable and perfect
Will of God.

IX. Think and infer from all, what Heaven is, and what the Caelestial Glory
and Blessedness will be found by the happy Partakers thereof! then the Image of
God and Christ will be perfected in the Saints! They will shine forth in the
Kingdom of their Father, wise holy blessed dignified for ever and ever. And
this glorious Likeness to God will be for ever growing in 'em, to their
increasing Joys for ever and ever. -- This is Heaven, Paradise regained, the
Jerusalem from above, with the Glory of God upon it. This is Vision, to be more
and more like God, by seeing Him as he is. This is to know even as we are
known; to see the Face of God in his Name and Image on us. This is the Tree of
Life, with all manner of Fruit; and this the Water of Life from the Throne of
God and of the Lamb: And there can be no more Curse, no more any Loss or Want
for ever of the Likeness and Love of God; but the highest Blessedness in the
everlasting Enjoyment of both; and they shall reign for ever and ever. Revel.
xxii. 1, -- 5.

And here let us contemplate, for a Moment, the UNITY of the Scriptures of God;
how they begin and end, and through every Part agree and are one in This; "Man
created in the Image of God and most happy therein; but presently miserable by
sinning against God in the Loss of God's Likeness and Favor: Then the Seed of
the Woman is revealed, recovering Souls into the Favor of God, by renewing
them in Knowledge and Holiness, after the Image of Him that created them, and
so making them meet for the Heavenly Paradise. -- Whosoever looks through the
Book of God, may easily see this one Line drawn through the whole of it; than
which nothing can be more worthy of God, nor more necessary for us, and level
to us. -- And I know no more short and plain Argument of the Authority of the
Holy Scriptures than this View of their Unity gives unto us. Such a Unity of
Design, in all the Parts of Scripture, though written by different Persons, in
different Ages, and in such a Manner as the Scripture is delivered, Historical,
Doctrinal, Legislative, Prophetical, Devotional, and Hortatory; seems utterly
inconsistent with either Imposture or Enthusiam; one or other of which must be
the Charge that Infidels bring against our Belief of their Inspiration of God.

"Show if you can (says a late learned Writer An Essay on the several
Dispensations of God to Mankind.
) a single Enthusiast that is consistent with himself through many Volumes. If
then it shall appear, that there is one worthy and noble Design pursued through
the Books of the Old and New Testament, by one wise plain and simple Mean, though
they had forty or more different Authors and were not written in less than
sixteen hundred Years; it will amount to the clearest Demonstration that the
Bible must be from HIM who exists through all Ages, and sees all that is past,
present and to come, who has always the same View, etc." Thus He.

Upon all therefore, as the natural Result and Consequence of what has been
said,

X. And lastly, How dear and precious, infinitely so, should Christ and his
Gospel be to us? and what can we think or say of our Selves if we refuse Him in
the Proposals of it?

The Design and End of Christ's coming into the World is to restore the lost
Image of God in us, and to recover us into the Divine Likeness, Love and
Favor; to our primitive Holiness and Blessedness, Dominion and Glory, and to a
far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory. He took our Nature and died in
it to make us New Creatures, such as God at first made us; His Workmanship a
second time, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works. He came to deliver Souls
from the Power of Satan, and to bruise the Serpent's Head under the Feet of his
Elect, that they should trample on the Lion and the Dragon. He gave himself for
us to redeem us from all Iniquity, and to purify unto himself a peculiar People
zealous of good Works 2 Cor. v. 17. Gal. vi. 15. Ephesians. ii. 10. Romans xvi. 20.
Psalm. xci. 13. Tit. ii 14. Psalm xl 8. Romans vii. 22.
. This should make Christ glorious in our Eyes that he saves only in this Way
of Holiness through Sanctification of the Spirit, and Obedience to the Truth: So
that every renewed Soul can say after him, "Lord, thy Law is within me, I
delight to do thy Will, O God. O what a Change is this! into the Likeness of
Man's Original State! "I delight in the Law of God after the inward Man.

For this Cause should the written and preached Gospel be very dear to us; it
being the declared End, Use, Power and Efficacy thereof, to restore the lost
Image of God in us. It is the blessed Means of holy Knowledge and saving
Illumination; and of the Purification of Souls for Communion with God: Ye have
purified your Souls in obeying the Truth 1 Pet. i. 22. Psalm. cx. 2 3. Romans i
16. Hebrews il. 1, 2, 3. 2. Cor. iv. 3, 4.
. It is the Means of spiritual Dominion, Freedom from Sin and Liberty to what
is good and holy: Thy People shall be willing in the Day of thy Power, in the
Beauties of Holiness. It is the Means of infinite Blessedness unto Souls in the
Likeness and Love of God. He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it
is that loves me, and he shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
will manifest my Self to him.

We ought therefore to give the more earnest Heed to the Things which we have
heard, to the Doctrines Precepts and Motives of the Gospel, lest at any Time we
should let them slip out of our Minds and Hearts; for how shall we escape if we
neglect so great Salvation? the Recovery of the lost Image of God in our Souls,
and thereby the Pleasure and Delight of God in us, which supposes and secures a
state of Holiness and Happiness everlasting. What can God himself propose
better for us than such Salvation? the same Felicity which he at first made us
for and made us in. What can our own Souls desire or wish for beyond this, or
any thing beside it? to have the Likeness of God restored in them, or to be
restored in his Eye and Heart! and by this Means to be made meet for the Vision
of God, and for Blessedness in Him to all Eternity! And indeed there is no
other Way to the true and proper perfect Happiness of Man; for without Holiness
no Man can see God. Without Likeness there can be no Love; no Love in God to
us, no Love in us to God, and both are necessary to the Felicity of Souls,
whether in the Body or out of it.

O the Misery of Souls then, who by their Disobedience and Impenitency under
the Gospel do in Effect say to God, "Depart from us, we desire not the
Knowledge of Thee; the Recovery of Likeness to Thee or any Communion with Thee!
O the Misery of that Soul, which having lost the Image of God and his Love, is
content in the Want of it; seeks not the Recovery of it, nay refuses the Means
thereof! If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God
of this World has blinded the Minds of them that believe not, lest the Light
of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine into
them. The same Serpent, the Devil, and Satan, who deceived our first Parents
into the Loss of God's Image, still blinds and hardens Sinners, under the Light
of the preached Gospel, and they wilfully refuse the Recovery of it in their
own Souls. Sinners choose to perish under Ignorance of God, Lust, Servitude and
Death; when Light, Holiness, Liberty, Glory Honor and Immortality are set
before them and tendered to 'em. They perish therefore without Excuse, and
everlasting Remorse will be their Torment. The Sacrifice of Christ will be so
far from saving them, that his Blood cries against them, and will inflame their
Consciences for Evermore. As it is written, Hebrews x. 26, -- 31.

How earnest therefore and instant should we be in seeking the Recovery of the
lost Image and Likeness of God, with our whole Soul? the Beginning of it in
this Life, though here we can but know in part and prophecy in part, understand
as a Child and speak as a Child; yet the Infant bears the Image of the Parent;
the Perfection of it in the Life to come, where that which is perfect shall
come, and that which is in part shall be done away; and we shall see Face to
Face, and know even as we are known 1 Cor. xiii. 9, 10, 11, 12.
." Deliver my Soul from the Wicked, prays the Psalmist, from Men of the World
which have their Portion in this Life; As for me, I will behold thy Face in
Righteousness; I shall be satisfied when I awake in thy Likeness Psalm. xvii.
15.
. They are sure to shine in the Divine Likeness for ever and ever, who here
behold the Face of God in Righteousness, How Divine and God-like therefore, how
full of Grace and Benignity to us, are the Exhortations Rom, xii. 2. 2 Cor iii.
18. Ephesians. iv. 24. Col. iii. 10. 2. Pet. 1 3, 4
of the Gospel, with reciting which I will conclude, as carrying in them a
Light and Authority, a Majesty and Goodness which no Words of Man can pretend
to: And be ye transformed by the renewing of your Mind, that ye may prove what
is that good, and acceptable, and perfect Will of God: And be renewed in the
Spirit of your Mind, and put on the new Man which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness; and is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of
Him that created him: According as his Divine Power has given unto us all
Things that pertain unto Life and Godliness, through the Knowledge of Him that
has called us to Glory and Virtue; whereby are given unto us exceeding great
and precious Promises, that by these you might be Partakers of the Divine
Nature, having escaped the Corruption that is in the World through Lust: Give all
Diligence therefore to add unto your Faith Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance,
Patience, Godliness, Brotherly-kindness, Charity; for if these Things be in you
and abound, they make you that ye be neither barren nor unfruitful in the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. "Now the LORD is that Spirit, and where the
Spirit of the LORD is there is Liberty: We all with open Face, beholding as in
a Glass the Glory of the LORD, are changed into the SAME IMAGE, from Glory to
Glory, even as by THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD.

Addenda.
As a Marginal Note Page (...)
Essay on the several Dispensations of God to Mankind. p. 8.
THE Image of God in the Old and New Testament, generally, if not every where,
signifies the Representation of God's Dominion. See Genesis ix. 6.1 Cor. xi. 7.
Col i. 15 See also to this purpose Ecclesiastic. xvii, 3, 4. And from hence it
is likewise that Princes are figuratively called the Sons of Sons; especially
such as exercise their Dominion with Justice and Mercy; ( Psalm lxxxii. 6, 7.
John x. 33, -- 37.) though they are not possessed of Bliss Glory and Immortality.

FINIS.

