THE VANITY OF HVMAN INSTITVTIONS IN THE WORSHIP of GOD.

A SERMON Preached at Newark, June 2. 1736. To which are added, some little
Enlargements.

By JONATHAN DICKINSON, M.A. Minister of the Gospel at Elizabeth Town, in
New-Iersey.

Gal. iv.9. But now after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God,
how turn you again to the weak and beggarly Elements, whereunto ye desire again
to be in Bondage?

New York, Printed by John Peter Zenger, 1736.

To the Presbyterian Congregation at Newark in New-Iersey.
Dear Brethren,
IT was in Compliance with the earnest Solicitations of some of you, that I
first preached; and then consented to publish the ensuing Discourse. It is (I
must confess) very disagreable to me, to bring these controversial Points into
the Pulpit; being sensible that there are much weightier Matters that ought to
be the ordinary Subjects of our Preaching: Whence this is the first Sermon,
wherein I have particularly insisted upon these Things in the whole Course of
my Ministry. But the Reasons which were offered me; and the Circumstances of
your Congregation where so many were inclined without any known Cause, to
change their Profession and forsake your Communion; convinced me that a
Discourse of this kind was at that Time seasonable. And I have this to comfort
me amidst all the Clamours of angry Men, that what I delivered to you and have
herewith emitted, is agreeable to the Council of God; and founded upon the
unalienable Rights of Mankind: And therefore proper to be urged upon those, who
seemed so earnest to part with the Liberty wherewith Christ has made them
free; and causelessly to take upon them a Yoke of Bondage.

I am not sensible that I have given any Cause for those tragical Outcries,
that have been made upon this Occasion; having through the whole Discourse
handled the Argument with all the Caution and Tenderness that I could: being as
careful to prevent the sowring of Men's Tempers, and the alienating their
Affections one from another; as to establish the important Truths herein
asserted. However I do as heartily forgive the Abuses I have met with, as I
despise the Threatenings of those, who are willing to show us what they would be
at, if they had the Power in their Hands.

I have herein particularly insisted upon the Necessity of Charity and mutual
Forbearance, in the Affairs of Conscience and Salvation; and cannot but again
inculcate the same Doctrines with the most earnest Application. For though you
have all Faith, that you could remove Mountains; and have not Charity, you are
Nothing. 1 Cor. xiii.2. And I here forbear observing to you, that this is one
of our greatest Articles of Complaint against the Church of England, that they
refuse us their Communion, lay all under Excommunication by their Canons, that
scruple a Compliance with their imposed Rites and Ceremonies; and that their
warmest Advocates declare us all incapable of Salvation for want of a Prelacy,
whereof we cannot find the least Account in the Oracles of God. Thus since they
know that we are grieved with their Meat, they walk not charitably, in
destroying him with their Meat for whom Christ dyed. Romans xiv.15. From whence
we have good Reason to conclude, that they are safest who are most charitable,
and that the Error is on the damning Side. And I am willing to refer it to your
own Judgments and Consciences, who walk most agreably to that brotherly Love,
Charity and Kindness, so much insisted upon in the Gospel of Christ. We that
treat our episcopal Brethren with the Respect that is due to Christians and
fellow Members of the Body of Christ; and are willing to receive them into our
Fellowship and Communion, in all the Ordinances of Gods House. Or they who
reject us from their Society; and put the stumbling Block of their uninstituted
Rites and Ceremonies in the Way between us, that we are forced to abstain from
their Communion; or to wound our own Consciences. These Things we take to be
very great Grievances, and express Violations of the great Laws of Charity and
Love. But then, since we make this Complaint of the Church of England, let us
be especially careful, that we don't fall into any Degree of the like
uncharitableness. Let your Deportment toward those who differ from you, be
with the greatest Kindness, Friendship, and Love, that by this all Men may know
that you are Christ's Disciples, that you love one another. Ioh. xiii.35. For
thou art inexcusable O Man! Whosoever thou art, that judge; if wherein thou
judge another, thou condemnest thy self; and if thou that judge, do the
same Things. Romans ii.1.

Let it be always remembered, that though we complain of the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Church of England; and especially of their being imposed upon the
Consciences of those that religiously scruple them: Yet we heartily consent to
their Doctrinal Articles; and would rejoice to find that all the Ministers of
the Church of England did so too. But what represents a Conformity to that
Church the most unsafe to me, is, that the generality of their Clergy are
professedly Arminians; and they themselves should best know, how they reconcile
those Tenets with the excellent Articles which they subscribe. I should (I
confess) think there was a very dark Cloud come over our Churches, that the
Glory of the God of Israel was gone up to the Threshold of the House; and that
ICHABOD was become our Motto; if the Doctrines of original Sin, of our
Justification by the imputed Righteousness of Christ, of the Efficacy of the
Sovereign free Grace of God; and of the Preseverance of the Saints, were once
exploded and ridiculed among us, as they have been by some of the most eminent
Clergy of the Church of England.

I am sure Brethren these Doctrines are dear to you, they are Doctrines upon
which you found your Hopes of Salvation; and it must therefore appear most
reasonable to considerate Persons, to continue in Fellowship with those
Churches where they are believed as well as professed, lest they or their
Families, are ensnared with the Errors of the Times; and are brought to forsake
the Doctrines, with the Communion of our Churches.

Finally Brethren farewell: Be perfect, be of good Comfort, be of one Mind, live
in Peace; and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

I am your Servant for Christ Sake, J. D.

THE VANITY OF HVMAN INSTITVTIONS IN THE WORSHIP of GOD etc.
Mark vii.7. Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men.


AS it is the Scope and Purport of the first Commandment, that we Worship the
only true God; so it is the great Design of the Second, that we worship him in
a right and acceptable Manner. Our Obedience to the first is taught us by the
Light of Nature: But our Conformity to the Second must be altogether directed
by divine Institution: For God best knows, what Worship will be most acceptable
to him and most serviceable to us. He has therefore particularly instructed us
in both the Matter and Manner of his Worship, that neither may be left to the
different and contradictory Dispositions, Affections and Opinions of Men; nor
their fluctuating Inclinations or capricious Humors: But that all may conform
to the Pattern that was given in the Mount, to his own Institutions, which are
the only Standard of the Sanctuary, and the only Rule of our religious Conduct.
To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it
is because there is no Light in them. Isai. viii.20. Upon this Account it is,
that our Blessed Savior so sharply reproves the Scribes and Pharisees in our
Text and Context. That not contented with divine Institutions, they must add
some of their own, as though Gods Worship stood in Need of their refining and
polishing, in Order to render it more complete and perfect. Thus did they in
vain worship God, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.

If we take Notice of the special Occasion of this Crimination against the
Scribes and Pharisees, it was not for fundamental Errors in Principle; nor for
flagitious Lives. But only for a religious Injunction of what was in it self
most innocent and indifferent, the washing of Hands before Meat; as appears
from the 2 and 3 Verses of the Chapter. And when they saw some of his Disciples
eat Bread with defiled (that is to say with unwashen) Hands they found Fault.
For the Pharisees and all the Jews, except they wash their Hands often eat not,
holding the Tradition of the Elders. And to this it is our Lord makes the sharp
Reply, in the Words before us.

It must be confessed, that this was a cleanly and decent Custom: But it wanted
divine Appointment to warrant its Injunction as a religious Rite. And while it
wanted that, it lay open to that Reprimand, who has required this at your
Hands? And laid the Imposers open to the just Censures of him, whose
Prerogative they invaded.

In the Words we may Note.

1. A declaratory Sentence against their Worship. (In vain do they worship me.)
Notwithstanding all their show of Wisdom in this their Will Worship, it was in
Christ Account vain, idle, trifling and impertinent. Such as would not find
Acceptance with God, nor turn to their own Advantage.

2. Here is the Reason of this Sentence against their Worship. Their teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.

It Is observable, that these Commandments were from the Supreme Authority in
the Jewish Church. The condemned Institution, was the Tradition of the Elders.
Verse 5. and by the Decree of the Sanhedrim. An Authority from Gods own
immediate Institution; and therefore worthy to be honored and regarded by all
Men, while they kept to the Rules, and within the Limits of their delegated
Power. But when they came to put a religious Sanction upon any Rites,
Ceremonies or Institutions of their own, though in themselves never so innocent
or indifferent, they usurped the divine Authority; and therefore exceeded the
Limits of their own. They certainly had as great Authority as any Church upon
Earth, or as any ecclesiastical Rulers in the World, ever had: But yet they had
not Power sufficient; to enjoin the indifferent Rite of Washing Hands before
Meat, as a religious Duty.

But that we may have a clearer View of the Case before us, it may be proper to
consider, what is employed in teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men;
and how this renders our Worship vain.

I Am first then to consider, what is employed in teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men.

And it must be here premised, that agreeing among our selves upon any mere
Circumstantials and Appendages of Worship, is not teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men. It Is impossible to attend upon any public Worship,
without adjusting some external Circumstances with Relation to it, such as the
Time and Place of Worship; and such like Things as are altogether extrinsecal
to the Worship it self, and which have no Religion placed in them. This is no
Addition to, or Detraction from the divine Institution, no Imposition upon any
Man's Conscience, no lording it over Gods Heritage; and therefore perfectly
Innocent and indifferent. Here Wisdom is profitable to direct, how these Things
may be best adapted to the Circumstances and Occasions of each religious
Society. And here that general Rule takes place, Let all Things be done
decently and in Order. But then,

1. Proposing and requiring as a religious Duty, what God has not proposed as
such nor required of us, is teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.
This was eminently the Case of the Scribes and Pharisees in our Context. There
was no Sin in washing their Hands before Meat, there was no Sin in washing what
they brought from Market, or in washing their Cups and Pots, brazen, Vessels
and Tables. But their Sin was in placing Religion in them, and requiring them
as religious Observances. It was no Apology that these Things were indifferent;
and were therefore to be complied with for the sake of Peace and Order. For if
they were indifferent, why were they not left indifferent? By what Authority
did they make that necessary, which God had left free? Why could they not be
peaceable and orderly upon Gods Terms, as well as upon Terms of their own
devising? Who are chargeable with the Infractions of Peace and Order, they that
would peaceably worship God according to his own Appointments, or they that
disturb the Peace of the Church with their own Inventions

What Religion can their be in doing what will be no ways pleasing to God? Or
how can we suppose that acceptable to him, which he has not required? There can
be no Obligation in this Case, but the Commandments of Men; and what Obligation
can those Commands lay us under, that are given without Authority, as all human
Institutions in Matters of Conscience and Religion are? For there is but one
Lawgiver who is able to save and destroy; and who is he that judges another.
Iam. iv.12.

God himself has given us a complete and perfect Rule in this Case, sufficient
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, and for Instruction, in
Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all
good Works, 2 Timothy iii.15, 7. And if God the Supreme Lord of Conscience has
given us his Law for our Observance, who should venture to interpose? If this
Law be perfect, what Room can there be for any Addition to it?

If it be here replied, that religious Observances may be required, without any
Pretense of adding to the divine Law, whilst they have a Relation only to the
outward Polity, Peace, and Order of the Church, which are Things left by God to
the Care and Direction of Church Officers; and necessary to be provided for by
them. I answer, if no more be intended, then mere external Circumstances either
of Worship or Discipline, the Reply is just, as I observed before: But then,
these cannot bear the Denomination, of religious Observances. If they once have
Religion placed in them, they lose their indifferent Nature; and from
Circumstances become integral Parts of God's Worship; and thereby render such
Worship vain.

It might be here observed, that the Scribes and Pharisees in our Context, had
the same Advantage to make this Plea that any Society whatsoever can now have.
They might have argued, that this condemned Rite was a decent Observance,
needful for maintaining the Peace. Unity and Order of the Church, that it was
withal very significant of that Purity and Holiness, that is necessary to all
the true Worshippers of God; and that it was very near of kin to those diverse
Washings, enjoined by God himself in the Levitical Law: But all these Pretenses
or as many more as could be invented, would not excuse their Superstition; nor
acquit them from the Imputation of rendering their Worship vain, by teachings
for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. However, this is certain, that such
Institutions must be either divine or human. If any should pretend that they
are divine, they thereby acknowledge them an Invasion of God's Royalty, and an
Addition to his Law; for how came they by divine Authority. If they are human,
they come under the censure in our Text. And thereforefore since they are
Commandments of Men, they cannot lay our Consciences under any Obligation to
observe them. For there is but one Lord of Conscience. The Conclusion thereof
follows, that all Rites, all Ceremonies, all modes of Worship, not appointed of
God, if they have the stamp of Religion put upon 'em; and are enjoined as
necessary Observances, are in all Cases unwarrantable.

2. Enjoining Terms of Communion which God has not enjoined, is teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men. All true Christians are fellow Members of
the mystical Body of Christ; and should therefore be joint Partakers of all the
Privileges of his House and Kingdom. If they are such as we can charitably
suppose Christ will own at his Appearing and Kingdom, they are certainly such
as we should now own, and admit to Communion in all his Ordinances. If they
have a Right to the Kingdom of Glory, they certainly have a Claim to the
Benefits of the Kingdom of Grace. And we are accordingly directed, Romans xv.7.
to receive one another as Christ also receved us, to the Glory of God. By what
Authority then can any enjoin new Terms of Communion, that Christ has not
required; and whence this exorbitant Claim to put Fetters and Shackles upon
Men's Consciences, whereby they must be forced* to sin against their own
Consciences, or go without the Portion of Meat that God has provided for them?
Its enough, that we have one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. Its enough, that we
observe the Appointment that God has ordained, without taking a Yoke upon our
Necks, that neither we nor our Fathers have been able to bear.

There is no Place here for the Pretense, of requiring Terms of Communion that
are in themselves innocent and inoffensive. For is it possible to suppose any
Thing more so, than washing of Hands before Meat? And yet this as innocent as
it was, exposed the Scribes and Pharisees to this severe Reprimand in our Text.
And have not every Society in the World just the same Claim to this Pretense,
let their Terms of Communion be what they will? For none will acknowledge that
they require what is sinful or unreasonable; and every one have an equal Right
to judge what is, and what is not so. If one Society may require what Terms
they think innocent, every Society may require what Terms they think innocent,
the Claim of each being founded upon the same Authority; and justifiable by the
same Arguments. There can be no Pretenses made by any Church on Earth for
enjoining any human Institutions, that cannot be urged with the same Justice, by
the Roman Catholics, in Favor of all their ridiculous Pageantry, and of their
superstitious and idolatrous Observances.

In a Word every Degree, and every kind of Will Worship, when made a Term of
Communion, is to subject the Conscience to the Commandments of Men; and to
bring the scrupulous Conscience to the sad Necessity of neglecting public
Ordinances, or of sinning against their own Light. To say in this Case, that
their Scruples are unreasonable, is to say just Nothing; for they don't appear
so to them; and they have just the same Reason to avoid these Injunctions, as
to avoid the most flagitious Crimes, because they appear sinful; and therefore
are certainly so to them; and every one must believe for himself, and answer
for himself. If they mistake in their Apprehensions, if they esteem those
Things sinful that are in their own Nature innocent and Lawful, they are
nevertheless sinful to them; for he that doubts is damned if he eat; and it is
evil to that Man that eats with Offense. Happy therefore is he that
condemns not himself in that Thing which he allows. Romans xiv.20.22.23. If
their Consciences are weak, there should be the more Care not to put a
stumbling Block, or an Occasion to fall in our Brothers Way. Romans xiv.13. It is
then our Duty to receive him that is weak, but not to doubtful Disputations.
Romans xiv.1; And not to destroy him with our Meat for whom Christ dyed. Romans
xiv.15. From all which it appears that the impleaded Practice is an
unwarrantable assuming the divine Prerogative, and a bold Invasion of Christ's
legal Authority.

3. Imposing any Terms of Communion by any penal Sanctions, is eminently
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. Every Person in the World has
an equal Right to judge for themselves, in the Affairs of Conscience and
eternal Salvation. And all have the same natural Right to all the Benefits and
Comforts of Life. By what Pretense therefore, may they be deprived of any
natural Right; because they don't subject their Consciences to other Men's
Dicision? What dreadful Work has been made in the World, by using Methods of
Force in Matters of Opinion and Conscience; and what dreadful Work would still
be made if the same Methods are pursued! How must the World by this Means
become an Aceldoma; and we devour and be devoured one of another! If this be
allowed, every Man's Hand must be against his Fellow; and all that have the
Power in their Hands, are authorized to oppress and destroy the Weaker Side,
whatever their Principles be. If coercive Methods are used at all in this Case,
it must be because the Imposers think themselves in the Right. And by the same
(...), all that think themselves in the Right may justifiably force their
Principles upon others. The Argument is as good at Constantinople or at Rome,
in Favor of the Alcoran or the Mass Book, as in any religious Society
whatsoever.

All temporal Injuries, all Force or Violence, all Prejudice to the Estates,
Honors or Comforts of Men, on Account of their different Sentiments in
Religion, is imposing the Commandments of Men; and lording it over Gods
Heritage with a Witness, a direct Violation of the great Laws of Peace and
Love; and directly opening the Door of all the Cruelties and Barbarities even
of a Spanish Inquisition. For every Society have the same Right to inflict what
Penalties they think proper; and to judge what Penalties are proper to inflict,
upon those that differ from them.

But has the Gospel of the Prince of Peace, any where encouraged these
unmerciful Violations of the Laws of Humanity? Are we not therein directed to
love as Brethren? Are we not admonished not to judge our Brother, or to set at
naught our Brother. Romans xiv.13. And are we not therein informed, that
whosoever sin against the weak Brethren, (as all are esteemed that have not the
Power in their Hands) and wound their weak Consciences, sin against Christ. 1
Cor. viii.12. Since therefore, no Acts of Unkindness upon Account of our
religious Sentiments, can ever be justified by the Commands of God; it must be
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.

I am now to consider in the next Place, how this renders our Worship vain. And,

1. Because that it is of human Original, and not of divine Institution. As I
have observed before, God is the only Lord of Conscience. He has left no
Authority upon Earth, to make any Laws for his Subjects, in the immediate
Affairs of his Kingdom: But has directed in what Way he will be worshipped. Who
then has any Business to set their Thresholds by Gods Thresholds, and their
Posts by his Posts? It Is enough therefore, to render our Worship vain, if it
can be said of it as of Iereboams Feast, that it was devised out of our own
Hearts. Whatever Appearances of Sanctity and Devotion there may be in any
Rites, Ceremonies, or Modes of Worship of human Institution; yet since they are
of human Original, they are therefore but a show of Wisdom in Will Worship, as
the Apostle instructs. Col. ii.22, 23. Which all are to perish with the using,
after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men, which Things have indeed a show of
Wisdom in Will Worship and Humility.

No Pretenses of Decency and Order will serve in this Case; for God himself is
the best Judge of what is decent and orderly in his immediate Service; and
cannot be pleased with what is not agreeable to his own Will: And how can we
conclude any Thing agreeable to his Will, but what he has appointed.

If our own Inclinations, Imaginations, or Apprehensions are sufficient to
direct us, to what Worship or Mode of Worship is pleasing to God or agreeable to
his Will, without a divine Institution, then every Worship or Mode of Worship
in the World must upon that Supposition be acceptable to God, since every one
have a like Claim to follow the Dictates of their own Apprehensions in this
Case, and every one may with the same Justice conclude, that their
Apprehensions are Right. God has given the like Liberty to all Men and to all
Societies of Men to judge for themselves. If some may in this Case judge one
Way of Worship pleasing to God, others may on the same Grounds judge the direct
contrary to be so. And what Contradiction, what Confusion, what blending
together of Light and Darkness, what a Justification of all the Worship among
the Papists, Ranters, etc. would this be* For certainly every one have the
Right to follow what appears to them must decent and orderly. But God has left
us no Room for any of these Pretenses, or any of these Confusions. He has not
left this Affair to the Determination of any Men whatsoever; but has himself
provided and particularly directed, how he will be worshipped. And thence it is
that all the Commandments of Men in this Case are but vain Worship.

2. Because it is a Reflection upon the Wisdom and Faithfulness of the Lord
Jesus Christ, to introduce our own Inventions into his Worship. It is a
Character given of our Blessed Savior. Heb. iii.2. That he was faithful to him
that appointed him, as Moses was in all his House. And we find Moses was
faithful, to keep to the Pattern given him in the Mount, to the very Taches,
Pins, and Fillets of the Tabernacle. Accordingly our Blessed Lord has showed us
all the Form of the House, and the Fashion thereof, and the Goings-out thereof,
and the Comings-in thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and all the Laws
thereof, Ezekiel. xliii.11. And has denounced his Curse against any that shall add
to, or diminish from what is contained in his Word. Rev. xxii.18.19. What Room
then can there be for any new Institutions, for any Rites, Modes, or Ceremonies
of Worship, which he has not appointed? Are we wiser than Christ? He has
appointed what he thought sufficient; and why should not we think it sufficient
too? Are the Laws and Institutions of Christ a perfect Rule or not? If they be,
what Occasion is there of human Inventions? If they be not, where is his
Wisdom, where is his Faithfulness? Nay, if they be not, where shall we stop on
this Side Rome? If there be Place for some human Inventions in Gods Worship,
there is Place for all human Inventions in God's Worship, unless there can be
shown an exclusive Character for some, and none but they, to add what they
think proper and needful. If a Protestant Church may, a Popish Church also may,
invent new Methods of Decency and Order in the Worship of God. We must
therefore reject all, or none, keep only Christ's Institutions, or submit to all
human Additions that are imposed upon us. The Bible is our only Directory; and
they that set up any other, reflect egregiously upon the Author of it.

3. Because this Practice has a direct Tendency to root out vital Piety, and
the Power of Godliness. They that place Religion in Form and outward
Observances, are ordinarily ready to rest in those Forms and go no further.
This was the Case of the Scribes and Pharisees. They had first an Itch at
refining upon Gods Law by the Addition of their own Institutions; and then they
came to reject Gods Law for the Sake of their own Traditions. Full well ye
reject the Commandments of God, that ye may keep your own Traditions. Context
verse 9. And I venture to appeal to my Audience, whether it has not been their
constant Observation, that there has been the least of the Power of Godliness,
where there has been the greatest Attachment to human Inventions, to external
Pomp and Ceremony in the Worship of God. They that place Religion in what God
has not required, are ready to spend their zeal that Way; and grow careless
about that Religion which he has required. We often see such as these make
broad their Phylacteries, and enlarge the Hem of their Garments: But neglect
the weightier Matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith; and thus they
render their Worship vain. -- But it is Time to make some Reflections upon what
we have heard. And,

In the first Place, this gives immediate Occasion to gratify the Desires of
some of my Hearers, by considering the Reasons why we cannot ordinarily join
with the Worship of the Church of England; because we think they teach for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men. The Time before us will not allow a distinct
and particular Disquisition of this Case, all that I can now do, is very
briefly to offer some of the Objections that have been from the beginning of
the Reformation, and yet are made, against Conformity to that Church.

We cannot help but think that stinted and imposed, Liturgies, are teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men. It Is certain that the Scriptures have
imposed none, they have prescribed none. And I think its impossible to produce
any Direction or Warrant from the Word of God, to any Men upon Earth, to
prescribe or impose any Forms of Prayer for constant Worship. We cannot
therefore but suppose the Injunction of the Common Prayer Book unwarrantable.
For we know no Way to answer this Argument. This Book is imposed either by the
Command of God or of Man, if by the Command of God, there must be some Precept
for it in Scripture, or at least some Promise that God will accept it, which I
think none will pretend to; if by the Command of Man, our Objection against it
is just; and it comes directly under the Censure in our Text. We have no
Account either in the old or new Testament, of any Forms of Prayer for stated
public Worship; and we may therefore presume that there was none imposed by
the divine Direction, and Permission. We therefore know of no Authority to
appoint, much less to impose them now. And it greatly adds to our uneasiness
under these imposed Forms, that they limit both the Matter and Manner of our
Prayers, prevent those proper Addresses to God that special Exigencies call
for, and which no Form can provide for; and deprive us of those divine
Assistances that may be hoped for, in the Use of conceived Prayers thence they
seem inconsistent with that of the Apostle Romans viii.26. Likewise the Spirit
also helps our Infirmities: For we know not what we should pray for as we
ought: But the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us, with Groanings which
cannot be uttered.

It is not the Question, whether any Forms of Prayer are lawful, it is on all
Hands, acknowledged. Forms may be very useful to such ignorant Persons, as know
not how to pray without them. But we would not by them be deprived of improving
the Gift of Prayer which God has given us; nor be forced to use Crutches, when
we have the free Use of our Limbs.

We cannot help but think that taking a great Part of the Prayer Book
especially the whole Method and Form of it out of the Popish Liturgy, is
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. That this is Fact is beyond
Dispute; and may be made evident to any that will take the Pains to compare
them. Whence we think that we have just Cause to complain, that the Order and
Method, as well as a great Part of the Matter of these Prayers, are not only
from the Commandments of Men; but originally from the Commandments of
Antichrist himself. It therefore appears to us too great a Symbolizing with
Idolaters to statedly use them in our public Worship, contrary to that Rule 1
Cor. x.28. and that in Cor. vi.17*

It is true, the Prayer Book has left out the most superstitious and idolatrous
Parts of the Mass Book; and contains some Additions to, as well as Alterations
of, what is contained in the Roman Liturgy; yet we think it also true, that
there might be found a better Resort than to the Pope of Rome, both for the
Matter and Manner of our Prayers.

We cannot but object against the Tautologies in the Common Prayer, as teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. In one Service, the Worshippers must
repeat these Words Good Lord deliver us, eight Times over; and these Words We
beseech thee to hear us, twenty Times over. Which appears directly repugnant to
our Lords Direction in Mat. vi. 7. But when ye pray use not vain Repetitions as
the Heathen do.

We cannot but think the Reading of the Apocryphal Books as a Part of public
Worship, while there are a great many Parts of the canonical Scriptures never
read in public, to be likewise worthy of the same Censure. Does not this look
like casting Contempt upon the blessed Book of God, the only Oracles of
Salvation, when these human, and even trifling and fabulous Composures, are
substituted in the stead of it? Does not this look like paying a Religious
Reverence to the Doctrines of fallible Men, when their Commandments are exalted
to these high Places, publicly taught for Doctrines; and treated with the
Regard that is only due to the Word of God? And must the inspired Pages give
Way to these legendary Fables, and much of the Bible be never read in the
Church! This adds Weight to the Grievance.

We cannot but think the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, is also teaching the
Commandments the Doctrines of Men. The Cross is made on the Forehead in
Baptism, in Token that the Party be not hereafter ashamed to confess the Faith
of Christ crucified, and that he is to fight manfully under his Banner, etc.
Now if this be a Token, of these Invisible Graces, it agrees with the Churches
own Definition of a Sacrament. A visible Sign of invisible Grace. Since
therefore it is confessed on all Hands, that the Cross as abused by the Church
of Rome has been one of their greatest Idols should the Church of England who
abhor their Idolatry give the Honor of a Sacrament to a Popish Idol? And I
would enquire by whose Commandment is this Honor given to it? Is it by the
Commandment of God or of Men? The former is not I think pretended; and if by
the latter how can it escape the Censure of our Text? I would further enquire,
why this Honor is done to the Cross on which Christ was crucified, any more
than to the Thorns with which he was crowned, to the Traitor by which he was
betrayed, or the malicious Court by which he was condemned. I can think of no
Plea that can be made in Favor of this Usage, but what may be also made for
it is Companions in this Ordinance among the Papists, Cream, Salt and Spittle,
and be sure none, but what might have been made for the Practice condemned in
our Text.

We cannot but have the same Thoughts of Kneeling at the Lords Supper. All
confess that Kneeling is a Posture of Religious Adoration: But what do we adore
in the Act of receiving this Ordinance? It Is true, the Church of England
expressly disclaim any Adoration to the Elements: But why then should they use
the Posture of Adoration? It is known to the World, that this Method of
receiving the Sacrament was brought in by the Papists, with their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; and some of them have confessed that they would be torn to
Pieces by wild Horses, if they did not believe Christ there bodily present.
Costerus the Jesuit confesses, that if the Substance of the Bread remain, the
Idolatry of the Papists is more intolerable than the Egyptians was, in
worshipping an Ox or a Crocodile. Costerus, En^hir Cap. 8. Vid Am^s fresh Suit
Part. 1. p. 521.
It is certain our blessed Master who instituted this Ordinance, did not
himself use it kneeling; but in the common Table Gesture Mat. xxvi.28. And can
it be Reverence in us, to pretend to a more suitable and decent Method of
attending the Ordinance, than either he himself used or appointed? Since the
glorious Author of this Feast is pleased to stoop to a friendly Familiarity
with his Guests; and has instituted this Ordinance to that End, is it not the
highest Reverence to attend it in a Method agreeable to the End of its
Justitution, especially since we have his own Example to warrant our Conduct?

We cannot but have the same Sentiments of the Sureties in Baptism, and the
Vows they lay themselves under. These promise and vow in the Name of the Child,
that he shall renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of
this wicked World; and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, that he shall believe
all the Articles of the Christian Faith; and keep Gods Holy Will and
Commandments, and walk in the same all the Days of his Life. But it is not
within the Compass of human Power, to make and keep these Promises. Who can
promise for any Infant, that it shall so much as have the Exercise of Reason,
much less that it shall live in the highest Exercise of Grace. It is Gods
Prerogative to give a new Heart; and to give the Grace to lead a Life of Faith
and Holiness; It does not seem a sufficient Apology for this Conduct, that the
Obligation is to be understood in the more lax and general Sense of the Words;
and not according to their strict and literal Signification; since all Vows are
always to be taken and always to be understood, in the plain natural and
received Sense of the Words in which they are made, if we would have any
sincerity maintained in the World, either toward God or Man. Nor can I see how
it helps the Case to allege, that the Sureties depend upon the Divine
Assistance for the fulfillment of these Obligations; for God has never given,
never promised Assistance to any Man in changing the Hearts, sanctifying the
Natures; and governing the Affections and Passions of others. But were it in
the Sureties Power to fulfill these Vows* how come the Obligations to be
transferred from the Parents, to whom it belongs to bring up their Children in
the Nature and Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. vi.4. to Sureties that have not the
Education of the Children; nor Advantages to instill into them the Principles of
Holiness and Piety? Not to speak of the general unconcernedness of the most of
those that take these Vows upon them, about the religious Conduct of their
God-Children as they call them.

The like Objection also lies against the Service in the Burial of the Dead,
The Minister is obliged at the Funeral of every one that does not die
unbaptized, or excommunicate; or that has not laid violent Hands upon himself
to declare that it has pleased Almighty God of his Mercy to take the Soul of
this our Dear Brother to himself; and to commit his Body to the Dust, in sure
and certain Hopes of Resurrection to eternal Life; and to give hearty Thanks to
God, that it has pleased him to deliver this our Brother out of the Miseries
of this sinful World; Even though the Person has lived never so wicked and
flagitious a Life, dyed in the very Act of Sinning; and lest no rational Hope
of his Salvation. We cannot but look upon this as a mocking of God; and of a
sad Tendency to harden Men in Sin, from the Expectations of Salvation, how
carelessly soever they live.

We cannot but think in like Manner, that the Absolution of the Sick upon a
Profession of Repentance, is a teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.
To such the Minister must declare, that by the Authority of the Lord Jesus
Christ committed to him, he absolves them from all their Sins, in the Name of
the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. But we know of no such
Authority committed to any Man by the Lord Jesus Christ. We know nothing of his
having put the Authority of absolving Sinners and forgiving Sins out of his own
Hands, into the Hands of any Man or Men in the World. Nor does it satisfy to
pretend, that this is but a declarative Absolution, and not authoritative: For
whence have they a just claim even to that? I know not where to find any such
Powers given by the Lord Jesus Christ, whatever Pretenses are made to it. And
it is hard to imagine, what Good this can do; unless it can be supposed
advantageous to ignorant Sinners, to have their Consciences quieted in a State
of Guilt, that they may securely depend upon their Absolution, as a Pasport for
Heaven.

We have the same Difficulty with Respect to the Holy Days, appointed to be
observed by the Church of England. The Apostle particularly complains of the
Galatians, that they observed Days, and Months, and Times* and Years on which
Account he was afraid he had bestowed Labor upon them in vain. Gal. iv.10 11.
We may therefore justly demand by what Authority are the Holy Days in the
Church of England enjoined. If by God's, let us see the Institution, if by Man's
how are they more innocent than those complained of by the Apostle? If it be
answered, that these were Jewish Holy Days; and abrogated by Christ's coming in
the Flesh. I should again enquire what Reason can be given, if we must put off
the Yoke that God himself made, why we should put one upon our Necks of our own
Wreathing; and not stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free?

I might also insist upon the sad Consequences of these Observances* there
being commonly more Wickedness perpetrated upon those Days, than at any other
Times, as though Christ was honored by our Sensuality and Impiety.

We have the same Complaint to make of the Prelacy and it is Attendants, in the
Church of England. We know nothing, the Scriptures know nothing, of any
imparity in the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel; much less do we find any
Warrant from the Scriptures, for a Diocesan Bishop to claim all the Power of
Jurisdiction and Discipline, as well as of Ordination to himself; and thereby
deprive the Ministers of the Gospel, of exercising a great Part of the Charge
committed to them by the Lord Jesus Christ. And we know nothing but the
Commandments of Men, for the Archbishops, Lord-Bishops, Deans, Prebends,
Archdeacons Vicars, Curates, and the like, belonging to the Hierarchy of the
Church of England.

I might here also observe, that we have like Matter of Complaint, of the
Discipline of the Church of England. Who notwithstanding they have for above a
hundred and fifty Years past, yearly confessed the want of that godly
Discipline, that was in the primitive Church; yet they take no Care to restore
it to this Day: But have all their Discipline managed by lay Courts, by
Chancellors, Commissaries, Proctors, Apparitors, etc. Officers that the
Scriptures are altogether Strangers to. And what aggravates the Grievance is,
that instead of that spiritual Discipline appointed by Christ, theirs is
carried on by corporal Inflictions, Imprisonments and Fines, to the vast Charge
and temporal Injury of the Delinquents, which we can see no Warrant for but the
Commandments of Men.

These are some of the chief Objections against our stated Communion with the
Church of England; though many more have been made, and might be insisted on,
such as the Canonical Vestments, the broken Responses in Prayer, Women speaking
in the Churches, in vocal Responses and Repetition, contrary to the apostolical
Canon, the manifest Corruptions in the old Translation of the Psalms yet in
Use; with other like Things, that I have no Time to particularly insist upon.

But the chief Objection of all, is the Imposition of all this; and their
declaring by their Canons, all those excommunicated ipso Facto, that don't
approve all the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England; and that don't
approve of the Government of the Church of England by Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons and the rest that bear Office in the same; or that pretend
to groan under any Grievances imposed upon them, by the Church of England* or
that dare allow that there are any Congregations or Assemblies in the Realm
besides the Church of England, that may challenge to themselves the Names of
true and lawful Churches. Not to speak of the many dreadful Prosecutions
suffered by thousands of serious Christians, for their conscientious
Nonconformity to these Things, hoping that those Days of Tribulation are come
to an End.

What can be a greater Tyranny over Men's Consciences, than this is? What can be
more contrary to the Spirit of the Gospel; or more destructive of that Charity,
Love and Peace, that are the essential Characteristicks of a true Christian?
How can the Reformation be justified upon such Principles? For if the Church of
England have Power to impose these Things upon their fellow Protestants; the
Church of Rome by the same Reason, had Power to impose their Doctorines and
Worship upon them. As I have observed before. And for the same Reason that the
Romish Impositions were condemnable, are the English Impositions likewise to be
complained of. -- Though it be true, that there is greatest Difference in the
Nature of the Things imposed by the Church of Rome and the Church of England:
Yet I must take Leave to conclude, that there is none at all, in the Authority
to impose them.

2. From what has been said there is just Cause to consider, what Reason there
can be for those of our Profession, to forsake the Way of Worship in which they
were educated, for the sake of these Additions of human Invention. We have all
the Essentials and Substantials of Worship, that is found in the Church of
England, all that Christ has made our Duty to attend upon, all that is a
necessary Mean of our Salvation; and what do we want more? Are these
controverted Points Indifferent as we are told they be, what Cause then can
there be, why we should destroy the Peace of our Churches, forsake their
Communion, and set up opposite Societies for indifferent Things? Or are they
esteemed necessary to Salvation by any of us? Can any be so weak as to suppose
any Thing necessary to Salvation, that wants a divine Institution, and has
neither Precept nor Warrant from the Oracles of God? It is a sad Case if any
built their Hope of Salvation upon the Practice of these Things. The usual
Plea, that we must submit to them on Account of their legal Establishment, has
no Place among us, where there is no particular Profession or Principles
established by Law. I am therefore utterly ignorant, upon what Grounds our new
Proselites change their Opinion and Communi^^

Many of my Audience are the Posterity of those who left their delightful
Country and pleasant Habitations, crossed the Atlantic with their Families,
came into a howling Wilderness among innumerable Multitudes of barbarous
Salvages, encountered the most amazing Trials, Difficulties and Discouragements,
to fly from the Imposition of these Things; and to worship God in Peace and
Purity according to his own Institutions. And how remarkably were they owned of
God! How signal were the Appearances of his Providence in their Favor! Would
it not therefore be every Way our Interest, to imitate their Purity and Piety
in worshipping the God of our Fathers, that he may be with us as he was with
our Fathers, that he may remember the Kindness of our Youth, and the Love of
our Espousals, when we came after him into the Wilderness, into a Land not
Sown? Why then gad we about to change our Way?

3. We may also infer from the Text, that we ought to be careful not to censure
one another, and not to maintain Contentions, Animosities and Alienation of
Affections* on Account of these debated Points. If we cannot join with others,
because they teach for Doctrines, the Commandments of Men, let us not censure
others for not submitting to the Commandments of Men. If they without
Conviction submit to our Opinions, they subject their Consciences to human, and
not to divine Authority: And our requiring this of any is demanding a
Subjection to us, and not to Christ. We have indeed a Right to give the Reasons
of our Opinion; and to endeavor to convince others, of what we esteem to be
Truth: But we have no Right to claim their Assent without Conviction; nor to be
offended with them, for not thinking as we do; any more than they have to be
offended with us for not thinking as they do. For every one have the same Claim
as we have, to judge for themselves.

To apply this to the present Case, what Cause can there be for any Acts of
Unkindness, for any want of Friendship, Charity or Love, on Account of these
different Sentiments? If these Principles on both Sides the Question, are
consistent with a State of saving Grace, why not consistent with mutual Charity
and Forbearance? If there may be such of each Party that are fellow Members of
the Mystical Body of Christ, why should they not live in Love and Peace; and
not fall out by the Way, for they are Brethren? If there be some Things in
which we differ, there are much greater in which we agree; therefore wherein we
have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same
Thing. Let it be our chief Emulation, to excel one another in Holiness, Piety,
and Usefulness in the World.

Whatever is wrong, we are sure this is Right, to have brotherly Love continue.
And let it be always remembered, that there can be no true Christianity,
without Charity, Kindness and Love. Beware of Strife and Contention; for where
there are Contentions, there is Confusion and every evil Work.

Finally, this may be improved by Way of Exhortation to every one, to be
awfully careful, that their Worship don't prove in vain. There is a great deal
depends upon the regular Practice of Devotion; and it is of infinite Importance
that it be so performed, as to find Acceptance with God. There are other Things
besides submitting to human Institutions, that may render our Worship vain;
such are in an especial Manner, Unbelief, Hypocrisy, Formality, and trifling
Indifference in the Duties of Religion. Let us therefore be serious and solemn,
earnest and Diligent, in seeking the Favor of God in all the Ways of his
Appointment, depending upon the Merits and Mediation of the blessed Redeemer,
to render our Persons and Services acceptable to him; and to entitle us to an
Inheritance with the Saints in Light.

FINIS.

