REMARKS Upon a Pamphlet, Entitled, A LETTER to a Friend in the Country,
containing the Substance of a SERMON preached at Philadelphia, in the
Congregation of the Rev. Mr. Hemphill.

WHEREIN The Terms of both Christian and Ministerial Communion are so stated,
that all Impositions in religious Concerns are exploded, a proper Enclosure
proposed for the Security of each religious Society; and the Commission of the
Synod justified in their Conduct toward Mr. Hemphill.

Rom xiv. 22. Have thou Faith? Have it to thy self before God.

Gal. ii. 5. To whom we gave Place by Subjection, no, not for an Hour, that the
Truth of the Gospel might continue with you.

In necessariis Unitas, in non-necessariis Libertas, in utrisque Charitas.
PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by ANDREW BRADFORD at the Bible in Second
street. 1735.

REMARKS Upon a Pamphlet, Entitled, A LETTER to a Friend in the Country,
containing the Substance of a SERMON, preached at Philadelphia, in the
Congregation of the Rev. Mr. Hemphill.
IT is a sad and affecting Prospect, to consider the Distractions and
Confusions, Heresies and Schisms, that the Church of Christ has labored under
for above fourteen hundred Years past, by the Impositions of Creeds; and a
Desire of Dominion over Men's Consciences, from the specious Pretense of
contending earnestly for the Faith, and of preserving the Purity of our holy
Religion. Under this Umbrage, almost every Sect and Party have in their Turns,
when they have had the Power in their Hands, used coercive Methods, to bring
others to the same Profession with themselves; or as it has been commonly
phrased, to the Profession of the orthodox Faith; 'till by devouring and being
devoured one of another, the inhuman Violences and Barbarities that have
successively obtained, had almost effaced out of the Minds of Men, all
Remainders of that brotherly Love, Peace, Charity and Beneficence, that are the
peculiar Characteristicks of a Disciple of the Prince of Peace.

But blessed be God, we are now in an Age of Liberty; an Age, wherein the Cause
of Liberty has been most excellently defended, by many learned and ingenious
Persons, against all the Claims of Tyranny and Persecution; that it is hopeful
the World will begin to consider themselves as rational Creatures and free
Agents, and not so tamely put their Necks under the Yoke for the future.

But as one Extreme commonly begets another, there now appears greatest Danger,
that Liberty will be abused to Licentiousness, and that to escape Imposition,
we shall open a Door to Infidelity, and instead of Charity and mutual
Forbearance, we shall make Shipwreck of the Faith as well as Peace of our
Churches, by the mixed Communions of those most opposite to one another, in the
essential and fundamental Articles of their Faith.

And we cannot but suppose, that the Pamphlet now under Consideration, has a
direct Tendency to this sad Event, notwithstanding the many valuable Truths, so
fairly stated, and rationally established by it.

But lest we may lay open to Misapprehensions, and be suspected for Patrons of
either of the forementioned Extremes, it may not be improper, to give the
Reader a general View of our Sentiments of the Cause under Consideration,
before we proceed to particular Animadversions upon that Discourse.

In Order to this, we must premise, as an immutable Foundation of all just
Conclusions in the present Case, that no Methods of Force or Violence, no
temporal Injuries of any Kind, no Prejudices to the Estates, Honors, or
Comforts of any Man or Society of Men, are ever lawful, upon the Account of any
Difference in mere matters of Speculation, or any different Sentiments in
Articles of Faith, or Principles of Religion. These fall under the immediate
Cognizance of every Man's Conscience, which has no Master upon Earth, and is
accountable to none but the supreme Lord of Conscience. As no methods of Force
or temporal Injury, can have any Tendency to convince the erroneous, or to
alter their inward Persuasion whatever it be; so it can be no proper Method of
promoting the Kingdom of Christ, which is not of this World, and which wants
none of the Laws or Sanctions of the Kingdoms of this World, to advance or
establish it. The Fountain of Peace and Love, can never be supposed to be the
Author or Encourager, of Cruelty and Barbarity, or to establish his Interests
in the World, upon the Ruins of all Humanity, Kindness and Compassion. This
were not only to violate the Laws of Nature, and to subvert the great Design of
the Gospel, which is to bring us into an Estate of Peace with God and with one
another; but also to place us upon God's Throne, and to give us Dominion over
the Servants of another Master.

As a Consequence of this, it must also be observed, that every Person, and
every religious Society, have the same Title to suppose themselves in the
Right, and to steadfastly adhere to their own Sentiments whatever they be. For
though there certainly is from the Nature of Things, an infinite Difference
between Truth and Error, and infinite Danger of damnable Delusions; which
should prompt us to the most serious and solemn Search after the Mind and Will
of God in his Word: Yet it is impossible for any Man to have greater Evidence
of any Doctrinal Truth, than the full and firm Persuasion of his own Mind. And
every one that has attained this Persuasion, how different soever from other
Men, or how distant soever from the Truth, has all the Assurance that he can
have, or that any Body else can have, of being in the Right; and is therefore
utterly incapable, without new Conviction, of thinking otherwise than he does.
From whence follows the necessary Liberty of private Judgment, to all Men, and
to all religious Societies in the World; since the Faith of one Man can no ways
affect the Safety of Another; but every one must Believe and Answer for
himself. And since no Man can have any Assurance of being in the right, but
what must be also allowed to those of a contrary Persuasion, by all that
disclaim Infallibility.

This also leads us to observe, the Necessity of mutual Forbearance, Kindness
and Charity toward one another, notwithstanding our different Speculations in
doctrinal Points. For I have no more Cause to be displeased with another, for
his different Opinions, than he has to be displeased with me. It Is as much out
of his Power, as out of mine to help thinking as he does, unless he has been
criminally negligent, in seeking after Truth.

This introduces the thorny Question, how far Christian Communion in all sacred
Ordinances should be extended? To which we Answer, It should extend to all,
that we can charitably suppose to be real Christians. Whatever Errors any one
embraces, that are in our Opinion consistent with vital Christianity, should be
no Bar to his enjoying Communion with us in all Ordinances. That is, all that
are united in what they suppose the Essentials of Christianity, should unite in
partaking of all the Privileges of it, and not fall out by the Way for they are
Brethren. To refuse these the Privileges of Christians, that we can charitably
think belong to Christ, is to beat our fellow Servants, and to reject the only
Claim, that any Men in the World have, or can have, to these Enjoyments. For it
is only on Account of our being Disciples of Christ, and our Interest in him,
his Covenant and his Salvation, that we partake of the Seals of the Covenant;
which must therefore belong to every one, that has visibly the same Interest
with ourselves, all his Mistakes notwithstanding; unless he throws a Bar in
his own way by his scandalous Conduct. -- But then on the other Hand, we cannot
admit those to Communion in sealing Ordinances, whose Errors we suppose
inconsistent with the Grace and Favor of God. This were to seal the Covenant
to those that have no Interest in it, to have Communion with Christ's Enemies,
to erect a Fellowship between God and Belial, and to pave the Way to an utter
Extirpation of Christ's Interests among us. It is true, that we are not
infallible in our Judgment, Christ may own them at last, whom we now disown.
But yet we have nothing but our own Persuasion, to guide us in this Affair. If
the best Light we have, represents them incapable of a State of Grace, we must
act according to it.

And as to ministerial Communion, we should admit all to the Exercise of the
Ministry among us, that we suppose qualified for the Work, according to the
Instructions Christ has given us in the Gospel, and capable of doing Service in
the Church of Christ, in that important Character, how different soever in
Opinion from us. To refuse these, were to reject such as Christ has sent, and
to deprive his People of the Advantages he has provided for 'em; as well as to
tyrannize over our Brethren, by rejecting their Labors in Christ's Vineyard.
To admit others, were deliberately to send Poison into Christ's Household,
instead of the Portion of Meat which he has provided; and to prejudice, instead
of advancing the Interest of their precious Souls. And as every Society must
judge for themselves in this Matter; so ought they to take the best Means to be
acquainted with their Principles, who offer themselves to the Exercise of that
sacred Trust, and with what Apprehensions these entertain, what they believe to
be the essential Doctrines of the Gospel.

These Things being premised, we proceed to the Consideration of our Author's
Reasonings, and to obviate the plausible Objections, which he has thrown in our
Way.

There needs no special Remarks upon the Prefacer's Invectives, against the
Impositions of Priests, whether Popish, Presbyterian, or Episcopal, etc.
Ignorance and Error, Bigotry, Enthusiasm and Superstition. Let him sound the
Alarm among his Lay Brethren, and awaken their most active Concern for the
glorious Cause of Christian Liberty, and we will join with him, in earnestly
admonishing them to stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made them
free. Only let them not use their Liberty, for an Occasion to the Flesh; nor
for a Cloak of Maliciousness.

But our Business is with the Substance of a Sermon, preached in the
Congregation of the Rev. Mr. Hemphill; and no doubt preached and published,
with a Design to vindicate that Gentleman, and to justify his Claim, to preach
what erroneous Doctrines he pleases among the People of our Profession, and to
be notwithstanding indulged Ministerial Communion with our Synod, when
undermining the Foundations of our Faith and Hope.

The Question the Author undertakes to consider, is, whether a Man that
professes to believe the holy Scriptures, and the Christian Scheme of Religion
as contained in them, ought not to be admitted to Christian and Ministerial
Communion, if no Reason can be alleged against him in other Respects, why he
should not?

This he holds in the Affirmative, and seems to suppose it so self-evident, as
to need no Arguments to confirm it. All he pretends to, is to consider the
principal Arguments, offered by those who contend for other Terms of Communion,
than the Belief of the holy Scriptures. And we must accordingly follow him in
this Path.

The first Argument he proposes to answer, is, that a Thing agreed on, by
almost all Christian Churches of all Denominations; a Thing universally
practiced in the early Times of Christianity,etc. ought not to be abolished,
without the strongest Reasons. -- Now for the Point in Question, we have
Antiquity, Unanimity, and the Practice of the Church Time out of Mind.

Had we framed this Argument, we should have pleaded the Authority of much
earlier Times, than are here designed; and have recurred to the Directions
given by the Ancient of Days, as our surest Guide in this Matter. For we value
one apostolical Canon, more than a Thousand Decrees of Fathers, Popes or
Councils; and more than any Practice of all the Churches in the World, how
venerable soever it may appear from its hoary Head of Antiquity. For Antiquitas
sine Veritate est Error is Vetustas. Cypr. Let the Cause then be tried at the
proper Bar.

It is predicted concerning the antichristian or papal Hierarchy, that they
should be left to strong Delusions, to believe a Lie, that they all might be
damned, who believed not the Truth, 2 These. ii. 11, 12. -- It is notorious to
all the World, that the Papists profess a Belief of the holy Scriptures; and
yet the Text assures us that their Errors are damning. Since therefore, their
Heresy renders them incapable of the Kingdom of Glory, they are manifestly
unqualified for the special Privileges of the Kingdom of Grace. And we are
accordingly directed how to behave toward this mystical Babylon, in Rev. xviii.
4. Come out of her my People, that ye be not Partakers of her Sins; and that ye
receive not of her Plagues.. From which it is most clearly manifest, that there
are such, who profess a Belief of the holy Scriptures, from whom we are to
withdraw Christian Communion, on Account of their damning Errors and Delusions.
And the Reason of the Thing is the same, with respect to all such, whose Errors
appear to us equally dangerous. And our Conduct should be the same toward
them. This is what the Scriptures require of us, as will appear by the
following Considerations.

We are directed in Tit. iii. 10. A Man that is an Heretic, after the first
and second Admonition reject. Now the Question it, whether any Man may be
esteemed an Heretic, who professes a Belief of the holy Scriptures? If not,
Adamites, Anthropomorphites, Muggletonians, Ranters, Socinians, Arians, etc.
must escape this Imputation; and the most distant Persuasions in the World,
must unite in one Society, from that general Profession of the Truth of the
Scriptures, tho, from Principle, obliged to act in continued Opposition to one
another; and to be a continued Check upon each other, in their pursuing what
they suppose the great Duties of Christianity. But if there may be Heretics
who profess their Belief of the holy Scriptures (as there certainly may if
there be any such Thing as Heresy in the Woeld) then we may, and ought to
reject some such, as make that general Profession.

We are directed to to try the Spirits, whether they be of God, 1 John iv. 1.
And the Church of Ephesus is commended for trying them, which say they are
Apostles, and are not; and finding them Liars, Rev. ii. 2. Now it is a
sufficient Trial in this Case, to enquire into their Acknowledgment of the
Truth of the Scriptures, when their avowed Principles are, in our Opinion,
repugnant to the whole Tenor of those blessed Oracles? If so, the forementioned
Confusions will necessarily obtain; and we must have Fellowship with the
unfruitful Works of Darkness, and not reprove them. Nay if so, the quoted Texts
will be found impertinent. For can it be supposed, that these false Apostles,
that were tried and detected by the Church of Ephesus, were such as denied the
Truth of the Scriptures? This would at once have discovered them, their own
Mouths would have condemned them, that there would have been no Place for
Trial. No, it is manifest, that they (like almost all succeeding Heretics in
the Christian Church) pretended the Patronage of Scripture, for their damning
Errors, which made it necessary to search out their false Pretenses, and false
Opinions. But if on the other Hand, we may try those, who profess their Belief
of the Scriptures, and yet hold what we esteem fundamental Errors, then such a
Profession is not sufficient, to entitle every one, both to Christian and
Ministerial Communion.

We are taught to turn away from such, as have a Form of Godliness, and deny
the Power thereof, 2 Timothy iii. 5. These must be such as acknowledge the Truth
of the Scriptures, they would not otherwise have the Form of Godliness. There
can be no Form or Appearance of Godliness, in those professed Christians, who
deny the only Rule and Standard of Godliness, the Book of God. And how must we
turn away from such? Must it be by hugging them in our Bosoms, and receiving
them into Christian and Ministerial Communion? That is, must we turn away from
'em, by turning to 'em, and embracing them?

The Apostle reproves his Galatians, for being so soon removed from the Grace
of Christ unto another Gospel, which was not another; but there were some that
troubled them, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. Gal. i. 6, 7. -- From
whence it is manifest, that there were such who acknowledged the Truth of the
Scriptures (for they brought not another Gospel) who by subverting the Gospel
of Christ, rendered themselves unqualified for Christian and Ministerial
Communion. How else were the Galatians culpable, for following them and
adhering to them? We might add many other Arguments from Scripture, against
this latitudinarian Scheme: but it is time to hear what our Author has to say.

When the Eunuch, (says he) when Cornelius, when three thousand Souls at once
were converted, there is not the least Hint, that any of the Articles of Faith
now stiffly maintained by some Sects of Christians, as essential ones, and
esteemed by others not necessary, and altogether rejected by others as
erroneous, were imposed as Terms of Communion; or ever mentioned at all.

It must be granted, that in the first State of the Christian Church, a general
Profession of Faith in Christ, was all that was required, in Order to Christian
Communion: But it must also be granted, that as soon as any Errors sprang up in
those holy Societies, they were sharply animadverted upon by the Apostles; and
all the Churches warned to beware of them. Beware of Dogs, beware of evil
Workers, beware of the Concision, Phil. iii. 2. Beware lest any Man spoil you,
through Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Rudiments of the World, and not
after Christ, Col. ii. 8. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause
Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned; and
avoid them, Romans xvi. 17. Perverse Disputings of Men of corrupt Minds and
destitute of the Truth, -- from such withdraw thy self -- avoiding profane and
vain Babblings, and opposition of Science falsely so called, which some
professing, have erred concerning the Faith. 1 Timothy xi. 5, 20, 21. From which
and many more such like apostolic Admonitions, it appears that though there were
no particular Confessions of Faith and Tests of Orthodoxy then used, in
admitting any to Christian Communion; yet the Churches were exhorted to beware
of, to avoid, and to withdraw from, those that swerved from the Faith, and were
fundamentally erroneous, though with Respect to those, whose Mistakes were to
be supposed consistent with a State of Grace, they were to receive one another,
as Christ also received them, to the Glory of God, Romans xv. 7. This was the
primitive Practice in this Case, and we see no Necessity of any other Method
now.

But with Respect to ministerial Communion, there was more Care and Caution
enjoined, in the Admission of Candidates to the sacred Employment. Lay Hands
suddenly upon no Man, 1 Timothy v. 22. The things that thou have heard of me among
many Witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful Men, that shall be able to
teach others also, 2 Timothy ii. 2. And if any in the Exercise of the Ministry,
were likely to subvert the Faith of their Hearers, by their false Doctrines,
they were by apostolic Institution to be Silenced, that the destructive
Gangreen might be stopped, For there are many unruly and vain Talkers and
Deceivers, especially they of the Circumcision, WHOSE MOUTHS MUST BE STOPPED,
who subvert whole Houses. etc. Tit i. 10, 11. Where by the Way, it may be
observed, that some such were to be denied ministerial Communion, who professed
their Belief of the holy Scriptures, as they of the Circumcision certainly did.

Thus we have briefly considered this Case, as it is represented by the first
and purest Antiquity; and since all the succeeding Ages of the Church, were
erring and fallible Men like ourselves, we disclaim al Pretenses of building
upon their Authority. We disclaim all Arguments from Prescription, Ancient
Practices, or the Customs of the best and purest Churches in the World; or any
such like vain Apologies for Bigottry, Superstition, and Impositions. We are
content, that the Cause be tried and decided, by the only Standard of the
Sanctuary.

The second Argument the Gentleman pretends to Answer, is thus proposed,

Every Society, say Creed-Imposers, has a Right to make such Laws, as seem
necessary for its Support and Welfare. The very Nature of a Society requires,
and supposes this, else it would ly open to all Kinds of Enemies; there would
be no Provision, no Remedy against the Intrusion of Adversaries, that might
destroy its very Vitals. In a Word, no Means to keep them off, or turn them
out. And why of all imaginable Societies, a christian one alone, should be
deprived of such a Right, is not to be accounted for. etc.

In Answer to which Argument, the Author has very justly observed the vast
Disparity, between a civil, and a christian Society. The former have a Power to
make what Laws they think best, for their own Defense and Preservation: but the
latter are absolutely subjected to the one Lawgiver, that is able to save or
destroy. And no Man nor Society of Men upon Earth, have any Power to impose
their Laws. or their Interpretations of Christ's Laws, upon other Men's
Consciences. It is true, that every Subject is equal to any other Subject,
their Concerns have nothing to do with this World, every one is accountable for
his Belief to Christ alone. Every Christian Society is upon an equal Level of
Liberty, and has equal Claim to Power and Authority. It is ridiculous, for one
Church or Society to claim that Authority to make Laws, or to impose their
Interpretations of the Laws of Christ, which they deny to another Church or
Society. For if Christ has given this Authority to any Church, he has given it
to every Church, without Difference. He has given no Charter to any particular
Church, exclusive of others. To say that this Authority belongs to the true
Church, to the purest or best constituted Church, is to say just nothing at
all. For every religious Society is such to itself; and every one has an equal
Assurance of its Orthodoxy, and is equally fallible. And then on the other
Hand, it is, in like Manner, ridiculous, to imagine this legislative Power
lodged in every Church, or Society of Christians. This were not only to condemn
the Reformation, and to justify the Inquisition; but to make God the Author of
Confusion in all the Churches of the Saints. This were to put the Stamp of
Divine Authority, upon all the most contradictory Schemes and inconsistent
Decrees, of all the different Sects, that have ever been in the World; to blend
together Light and Darkness, Truth and Error; and to bind our Consciences to
the impossibility of believing all the most unreasonable, and most Opposite
Principles and Practices, for Divine Injunctions. Whence it follows, that no
Church or Society has this Authority. To pretend to it, is to violate that
Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free.

And it is upon these very Principles, that we oppose this Gentleman's Scheme,
and insist upon it, that we are not obliged to admit all to Christian and
Ministerial Communion, who profess their Belief of the Scriptures. For though it
be true, that I have no juster Pretense than any other Person, to determine
what is a fundamental Article of Religion; and on that Account to impose my
Opinion upon others: Yet I have an undoubted Right, to judge for my self, and
to reject those Opinions which I think fundamentally erroneous; and
consequently to enjoy the Liberty of my Conscience, by refusing Communion with
those, that I think unqualified for it. As on the one Hand, I may not assume
Infallibility to myself, by determining what are Articles fundamentally
necessary for others to believe; so on the other Hand, I cannot ascribe that
Infallibility to others, whereby they can determine against my Conscience, that
this is not fundamental which I esteem to be so. As I may not impose my
Credenda on other Men, neither may they impose theirs on me. If I think in my
Conscience, Arianism (for Instance) unqualifies a Man for my Communion, must I
be forced against my Conscience, to have either Christian or Ministerial
Communion with such a Person? What then becomes of the Freedom and Liberty that
this Author so strenuously argues for? And it may be here observed, that this
Case is the same with respect to a Religious Society, as a single Person. Every
Society who in their Consciences think any one unfit for their Christian or
Ministerial Communion, have the Liberty to declare him so, and to refuse
Communion with him, let his Profession be what it will. None are to be imposed
upon in this Matter, against their Consciences: For if Impositions are lawful
in this Case, they are by the same Reason, in all Cases whatsoever.

But our Author tells us, that if Jesus Christ has not distinctly and
positively pronounced, that such and such a speculative Point, understood so
and so and not otherwise, is necessary to Salvation, then the Societies
pronouncing and imposing the Belief of it, according to its own Interpretation,
as a Term of Christian or Ministerial Communion, seems plainly to be an
unjustifiable assuming a Power, that belongs to Christ alone; a tyrannical
treating, as a Rebel, one whom perhaps, Jesus Christ himself loves as one of
his most faithful Subjects; and a manifest Infringement upon the most sacred
Laws of Christian Charity.

But by this Gentleman's Leave, we must observe to him, that if the Society
think, that Jesus Christ has most distinctly and positively pronounced, that
such and such a speculative Point, understood so and so and not otherwise, is
necessary to Salvation, it is the same Thing in this Case, as if it were really
so; though perhaps they may be greatly mistaken. Though we are all fallible; yet
every Man's, and every Society's Opinion, is right to themselves; and every one
must understand the Mind of Christ, in his Word, for himself, and follow the
best Light he has. If therefore, upon the best Enquiry they can make, they
think such a speculative Point necessary to Salvation, and the Belief of it
necessary to Christian or Ministerial Communion, it is no Imposition, Tyranny or
Infringement upon Charity, to declare their Opinions; and to act according to
'em, by denying Communion to those, whom they suppose Christ disowns and will
reject at last. But on the contrary, 'twould be the greatest Tyranny and
Imposition that is possible, to be obliged to admit any to Communion that they
think unqualified for it; and to sin against their own Consciences.

This Author allows, that a Number of Men, have the same Liberty to think and
act in Religion, that one Man has. To which he subjoins, But then what will
authorize you, or the Church, to impose these Tenets and Forms upon him, as
Terms of Communion? To which we answer, if the Tenets and Forms be such as we
esteem essential, and necessary to Salvation, that same Liberty to think and
act in Religion, which was just now granted, authorizes us (though not to impose,
yet) to insist upon, these Terms of Communion. And whatever is further than
this, we acknowledge to be tyrannical Imposition.

The Gentleman adds, You cannot say he is not a Christian, for he solemnly
professes to believe the holy Scriptures. Let him alone as to his Belief, nay
hear him patiently if he is willing to preach to you; for he may be in the
right,and c. But it is possible that we can say he is no Christian,
notwithstanding he professes to believe the holy Scriptures. For it is certain
to Demonstration, that if there be any steady and invariable Character and
Qualification necessary to the being a Christian; and if there be any Idea
belongs to the Word Christian, there have been such, who have professed to
believe the Scriptures, that were no Christians. We challenge this Author, to
instance in any one Article of Religion, that some who have made that general
Profession, have not disowned. If the Acknowledgment of an infinite God, belong
to the Idea of a Christian, the Anthropomorphites, who thought they could prove
from Scripture, that the divine Being had a limited bodily Shape, were no
Christians. If the Belief of Christ's Divinity be necessary, the Socinians and
Arians are, notwithstanding their Acknowledgment of the Scriptures, divested of
that Character. If Faith in the Incarnation and Humanity of Christ are
necessary, we could instance in such, that have denied This; and yet owned the
Truth of the holy Scriptures. If it be necessary for a Christian that he
believe a future eternal State of Rewards and Punishments, how many are there
that forfeit that sacred Title, by their Disbelief of this, notwithstanding
their professed Belief of the Scriptures. If the acknowledgment of any
established Ministry or Ordinances in the Church is necessary, the Quietests,
that pretend to be above Ordinances, have no Right to the Christian Name. If
the Belief of Christ's Satisfaction belong to the Character of a Christian, we
could direct our Author to an Acquaintance with one, that has forfeited that
Character, by endeavoring to undermine it. If none of these are necessary, a
Man may be a Christian, though he disbelieves the Being of an infinite God,
both the divine and human Nature, as well as the Satisfaction of Christ, all
the Ordinances of Christianity, and all future eternal Rewards and Punishments;
And in a Word every Article of the Christian Faith, as might be particularly
exemplified. And all this by the strange transforming Charm of their professing
their Belief of the holy Scriptures.

But we are told, He certainly is or may be a true Christian; and as such, I
think, we may defy all the World to show from Scripture or Reason, that Jesus
Christ, the sole King and Governor of the Christian Church, allows any Man, or
any set of Men, or any Nation to refuse him Admittance, to all the Advantages
and Comforts of Christian, and consequently of Ministerial Communion.

We must again entreat the Liberty to judge for ourselves in this Matter; a
Liberty, which we cannot but suppose, belongs to every Man, and every Society of
Men as such. And if we conscientiously believe he is not, and cannot be a true
Christian, that he is not and cannot be qualified for Communion with us, our
Opinion amounts to Certainty with Respect to ourselves; and to act against it,
is to sin against our Consciences, and consequently against God; unto which no
Person or Society may be constrained.

To charge our Opinion with Weakness, Error or Mistake in this Case, is at once
to enervate all our Author's fine Arguments for human Liberty. For every
Society in the World, suppose those of an Opposite Opinion to be erroneous; and
if this Liberty of judging for ourselves be denied to the erroneous, it must be
denied to every Body. And thus we should argue all Christian Liberty into the
Grave.

It may be expected, we should say something further about Ministerial
Communion in this Place, since this Author so particularly urges it. Hear him
patiently (says he) if he be willing to preach to you. But must we hear him,
whether we will or no! We have but little Liberty left, if we have no Choice in
this Matter, but must be obliged to hear every one that is willing to preach to
us. Let him preach to those that are willing to hear him; but leave us to our
own Judgment and Conscience.

He disallows any Men, or any set of Men, or any Nation to refuse him (whoever
professes his Belief of the holy Scriptures) Admittance to all the Advantages
and Comforts of Christian, and consequently of Ministerial Communion. Here we
must again put in our Petition for LIBERTY, to each Christian Society to judge
for themselves, who are, and who are not qualified for the Exercise of the
Ministry among them; who are likely to serve the Interests of Christ's Kingdom,
and promote the Welfare of precious Souls, and who are like to subvert both of
these. If we must not judge the Qualifications of our Ministers, we may expect
a Babel, but not a Church of Christ. If we must approve and support such in the
Exercise of the Ministry among us, whom we in our Consciences believe are
acting counter to the great Ends of the Ministry, we have lost all LIBERTY of
being faithful to God, and our own Consciences.

Another Argument considered by this Author, was this.

Private Judgment in Matters of Religion, will certainly be allowed of by Creed
Opposers. Now if every Man may judge for himself, then he may join with such
other Men as think as he does. They may form a Society, and separate themselves
from all others, who in their Way of thinking, maintain pernicious Errors. They
may reject any Teacher, that maintains erroneous Notions, in Points which they
look upon as essential, etc.

It must be confessed, that the Gentleman has here fairly stated our Argument;
but he has been so unhappy, as presently to forget the State of the Question,
and to contest with an Adversary, as opposite to our Sentiments, as his own.
For thus he begins his Answer,

How from the Right of private Judgment, it is inferred, that you may refuse a
Man Christian or Ministerial Communion, upon Account of his differing from you
in Things disputable, I am utterly at a Loss to see. And we profess our selves
at the same Loss, if he means by Things disputable, all, or any of those
Things, that are not in the Society's Opinion, essential Articles of
Christianity. These (as we have so often declared before) cannot, consistently
with Christian Liberty, be insisted upon, as Terms of Communion. In these, let
every one abound in his own sense; and let these be disputed as every one
pleases. We cannot too often declare, that the Door of Christian Communion,
should stand as wide open as the Gates of Heaven; and each Christian Society,
have a Right to judge for themselves how wide that is. But then, they are not
Things disputable with any Society, which they think essentially necessary to
Salvation. Let others dispute them as much as they will, they are with them an
invariable Foundation, upon which their Hope for Eternity is built.

This being considered, we allow that we cannot in Justice deny to another,
that Privilege of private Judgment, which we claim ourselves; nor censure
another, upon a speculative Point, not in our Opinion necessary to Salvation;
upon which we would not be willing to be censured ourselves. We allow, that we
should not refuse that Man Communion with us, as a Christian, who (we can
suppose) may be deemed by the Almighty himself, a good Christian: We allow,
that there is no Use at all of Impositions, but to make a Man dissemble, and
speak a Language foreign to his Heart. We allow, that if a Man of Piety and
Virtue, Learning and good Sense, differ much (if not in Essentials) from the
Church or Society to whom he offers his Ministry, if these Differences do not
affect his Christianity, there can be no Reason assigned for rejecting him. We
only claim the Privilege, which our Author so freely grants, to make Choice of
our Minister, as our Judgment and Conscience directs us. Thus far we are agreed.

But there is a plausible Objection thrown in our Way, which may be supposed to
affect our Opinion and Practice; which is therefore necessary to obviate.

As to the Wrong done (says the Gentleman) to a Man, who is denied Communion
with a Society of Christians, it is obvious, that the Thing is not so harmless
as our Creed-Imposers allege. He goes on to urge, that by being esteemed an
Heretic, he may suffer in his Reputation: that by being branded with Heresy by
the Rulers of the Church, he may want all the Advantages of public Trust,
Honor, Profit or temporal Favors, and so suffer in his worldly Circumstances:
Poverty and Contempt may pursue him, and destroy his Health and Constitution;
and so he may suffer in his very Person.

This Argument is allowed to be just, against refusing Communion to any, that
we can, in Charity, suppose to be true Christians; and that are not in our
Opinion, fundamentally erroneous. We will therefore leave this Practice to his
severest Censures. Let him call it Tyranny, Persecution, or what he pleases.
But then, if the Man who cries out so loudly of Wrong in this Case, disbelieves
such Articles, as are by the Society which disowns him, esteemed necessary to
Salvation, we may answer all these Outcries against Persecution, in the
Gentleman's own Words. page 22. The Answer is obvious, that Man does not at all
pretend to Communion, for he declares himself no Christian. -- We don't exclude
him, he excludes himself. It is certain that some who have disbelieved the
Scriptures, have, for temporal Motives, offered themselves to Communion in
Christian Societies. And if this Way of Reasoning be good with Respect to
these, it is also good with Respect to those, whose Errors are in the Opinion
of the Society, equally dangerous. Whether the Society's Opinion be in this
Case right, or wrong, it is the same Thing. It is right to them, and they have
Liberty to judge for themselves. Must a Society admit an Enemy to the Lord
Jesus Christ (for such he is to them) to partake of the special Privileges of
his Kingdom, for fear it may be accidentally disserviceable, to such a Person's
temporal Interests, to refuse him? They inflict none of these Penalties, by
refusing Communion in sealing Ordinances; they are the necessary Consequences
of his own Opinion. If it be said, that he cannot help thinking as he does, it
is answered, neither can the Society help thinking as they do, nor acting as
they do, in refusing Communion with him, while they follow the Dictates of
their own Consciences. Let him therefore seek Communion, with those that can in
Conscience join with him. There is otherwise no escaping this Dilemma. He must
bear with the worst Consequences of his Opinion, or the Society must sin
against God, to save him from Temporal Disadvantages.

The Author pursues the same Chain of reasoning, with respect to Ministerial
Communion. A Man (says he) may have spent his Substance and Youth, to fit
himself for the Ministry; if he be rejected, when there is nothing against him
but his refusing to subscribe Creeds, which perhaps he don't well understand;
or in the Belief whereof he cannot rest entirely satisfied; or if he refuses it
for some other Reason, it is or may be a very great Disappointment. Then
follows the general Odium, that constantly pursues the poor Soul, once called a
Heretic. The Case is yet worse, with a Man that has been a Minister for some
Time -- for he is immediately deprived of Office; and may, for ought I know, he
and his Family, go and starve on a Dunghill.

Here again we are content, that he should dress up the impleaded Practice, in
as frightful Appearances as he is capable of (For he can hardly give too bad an
Idea of it to the World) if he means by subscribing of Creeds, the making any
Thing, but what the Society think essentially necessary, a Term of Ministerial
Communion. For if a Man be, in the Society's Opinion, qualified for the Work of
the Ministry, and like to serve the Interests of Christ's Kingdom, they can
with a good Conscience, admit him to the Exercise of the Ministry with them;
notwithstanding lesser Differences of Opinion, in extra-essential Points; and
therefore, all the Hardships consequent upon their refusing him this Privilege,
might be prevented, if they would walk charitably; and not destroy him with
their Meat, for whom Christ died. But then on the other Hand, if he embrace
such Errors, as in the Judgment of the Society, unqualify him for a faithful
and successful Discharge of that important Trust, they cannot admit him to the
Cure of Souls, without unfaithfulness to God, and their own Consciences.
Whatever Difficulties, whatever Hardships or Distresses, may follow from their
disowning or separating from him, are out of their Power to prevent. They must
leave him to the necessary Consequences of his Sentiments; or themselves to the
Stings of their own Consciences. It were therefore as reasonable to impute to
them, all the Sickness and Pain, or other Calamities incident to human Life, as
those Sufferings which they could not prevent. Why then should such a Person
offer his Service to a Society, that cannot, consistent to their known
Principles, receive him? Why should he endeavor to thrust himself upon those,
whose Principles are essentially different from his?

As for the other Argument, from the various and jarring Opinions, and the
Confusions that would rush into the Church of Christ, where Creeds are not
imposed, we see nothing in it; but agree with this Author, that Unity in
Affection and in reciprocal Benevolence, are more necessary for the Well-being
of the Church, than Unity in extra-essential Speculations.

Thus we are prepared to consider his Postscript, the Arguments whereof are
most justly and strongly urged, against all Impositions of every Kind. But we
cannot see how they at all affect us, who are as little pleased, with any
Pretenses to an imposing Power, as that ingenious Author can be. Let it be
remembered, that we allow no Power in any Church or religious Society, to
determine what Articles of Religion are, or what are not essential to
Salvation, for any but themselves, and those that are willing to join with them
upon their own Principles. We allow of no Confession of Faith, as a Test of
Orthodoxy for others, but only as a Declaration of our own Sentiments; nor may
this be imposed upon the Members of our own Society, nor their Assent required
to any Thing as a Condition of their Communion with us; but what we esteem
essentially necessary. If others differ from us, they have Liberty to think for
themselves, if they will but allow us the same Liberty. How then are we
concerned with that Gentleman's Reasonings?

Now if all Men are right in following their private Judgments (says he) even
where the religious Rights of others are affected, will not this justify any
Encroachments upon our religious Rights, that any Man or Body of Men shall
judge necessary and just. -- To apply this to the popish Principles, pray what
has the popish Church been doing all this while, but pursuing this very
Principle? Has she not judged for herself, in all the Creeds she has ever
published? Has she not judged for herself, that she is infallible? Has she not
as the natural Consequence of this, judged, that all Men ought to submit to
her? Has she not judged for herself that she ought to use Force, and that
Heretics ought not to live at all? etc.

The Fallacy of this Way of reasoning, consists in the Ambiguity of the
Question; and in his not distinctly considering, how the Exercising of our
private Judgment, affects the religious Rights of others. Let it be first laid
down as a Preliminary, that every Man has Liberty, and every Society has
Liberty to judge for themselves, and for none but themselves, and all these
fine Appearances will vanish. Upon whom then can the Church of Rome exercise
this Force, that her private Judgment leads her to? Must it be upon those that
agree with her in Opinion, or those that do not? They that join in the same
Sentiments with her, want no Constraint to be of the Opinion they have already
embraced and adhere to. They that are of different Sentiments from her, are out
of the Question, and cannot, by these Principles, be the Objects of her Force;
for she is to judge for none but herself.

Men may pretend that it affects their religious Rights, to be denied Communion
in any Society, to which they are pleased to offer themselves. But don't it
affect the religious Rights of the Society much more, to be forced to admit
them, when convinced that they are altogether unqualified Subjects, either for
the Kingdom of Grace or Glory? It may indeed, in some Cases, affect the
Reputation of the former; but it always affects the Consciences of the latter,
which is an infinitely greater Concern.

Let it be further observed, that the present Debate is about Matters of Faith
and not of Practice. It is therefore, very unjust to argue, from the Liberty of
believing for ourselves, what is necessary to Salvation, to a Liberty of
knocking one another on the Head. Our Faith cannot directly do our Neighbor any
Hurt, though our Racks and Gibbets may. We may have full Liberty of our Faith,
without any Liberty to do Mischief. No Man can do Hurt by his Speculations. He
may therefore be allowed safely to think for himself. But his evil Practices
may injure his Neighbor, and should therefore be restrained.

That ingenious Author concludes his Discourse, by observing, that the other
Way of thinking furnishes a very clear Answer to Papists, and all others, that
are guilty of Imposition, if it be but a just one, viz. that their whole Scheme
is wrong, for they are wrong in forming Judgments, so as to affect the
religious Rights of others, other than the express Decisions of Scripture. This
cuts the Nerves of all antichristian Authority, and leaves us a fixed Point to
rest at.

But it may not be improper to enquire here, who are to determine what are, and
what are not, the express Decisions of Scripture. A late Champion for the
Church of Rome, has found the Scripture in express Terms, requiring the Use of
that Force, this Author is impleading, in those Words compel them to come in.
And there is scarce any Society in Christendom, but what suppose they have the
express Decisions of Scripture, to justify their Sentiments. The Arians have
express Scripture [ The Father is greater than I] The Trinitarians have also
express Scripture [ I and my Father are one] The like may be said, with respect
to almost all other different and contrary Persuasions. If any of these be
told, that they don't understand the Design and Meaning of the Texts they
quote, the same Answer will be retorted, with equal Assurance. And so all the
same Consequences this Author supposes to follow from the Right of private
Judgment, where the religious Rights of others are affected, are just as
necessary from his own Scheme, as from ours: And our Hypothesis leaves just
such a fixed Point to rest at, as his does; unless he pretends to Infallibility
in determining, what are the express Decisions of Scripture. And so we
conclude, in the Words of the accute and ingenious Mr. Lock, in his Letter
concerning Toleration. page 15.

This is the fundamental and immutable Right of a spontaneous Society, that it
has Power to remove any of its Members, who transgress the Rules of its
Institution. But it cannot by the Accession of any new Members, acquire any
Jurisdiction over those, that are not joined with it. And therefore Peace,
Equity, and Friendship, are always mutually to be observed, by particular
Churches, in the same Manner, as by private Persons, without any Pretense of
Superiority or Jurisdiction over one another.

APPENDIX.
TO convince the Reader, that we govern our selves according to the Principles
here asserted and pleaded for, we annex a Copy of the Synod's Agreement, in the
Point debated.

Although the Synod do not claim, or pretend to any Authority of imposing our
Faith upon other Men's Consciences; but do profess our just Dissatisfaction
with, and Abhorrence of such Impositions; and utterly disclaim all legislative
Power and Authority in the Church; being willing to receive one another, as
Christ received us to the Glory of God; and to admit to Fellowship in sacred
Ordinances, all such as we have Grounds to believe Christ will at last admit
into the Kingdom of Heaven: Yet we are undoubtedly obliged to take Care, that
the Faith once delivered to the Saints, be kept pure and incorrupt among us;
and so handed down to Posterity. And do therefore agree, that all the Ministers
of this Synod, or that shall hereafter be admitted into this Synod, shall
declare their Agreement in, and Approbation of the Confession of Faith, with
the larger and shorter Catechisms, of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster;
as being in all the essential and necessary Articles, good Forms of sound
Words, and Systems of Christian Doctrine; and do also adopt the said Confession
and Catechisms, as the Confession of our Faith. And we do also agree, that all
the Presbyteries within our Bounds, shall always take Care, not to admit any
Candidate of the Ministry unto the Exercise of the sacred Function, but who
declares his Agreement in Opinion, with all the essential and necessary
Articles of said Confession, either by subscribing the said Confession of Faith
and Catechisms; or by a verbal Declaration of his Assent thereto, as such
Minister or Candidate shall think best. And in Case any Minister of this Synod,
or any Candidate of the Ministry, shall have any Scruple, with respect to any
Article or Articles of the said Confession, he shall at the Time of his making
said Declaration, declare his Scruples to the Presbytery or Synod who shall
notwithstanding admit him to the Exercise of the Ministry within our Bounds;
and to Ministerial Communion, if the Synod or Presbytery shall judge his
Scruple or Mistake, to be only about Articles not essential and necessary, in
Doctrine, Worship, or Government. But if the Synod or Presbytery shall judge
such Ministers or Candidates erroneous in essential or necessary Articles of
Faith, the Synod or Presbytery shall declare them incapable of Communion with
them. And the Synod do solemnly agree that none of us will traduce, or use any
opprobrious Terms, of those that differ from us, in those extra-essential and
not-necessary Points; but treat them with the same Friendship, Kindness and
brotherly Love, as if they had not differed from us in such Sentiments.

THE END.

