Waiting on GOD IN OUR Straits and Difficulties.

The great DUTY OF Waiting on GOD IN OUR Straits and Difficulties, Explained
and Enforced: IN A SERMON Preached at BOSTON on the Lord's Day April 17. 1737.

By Benjamin Colman, D. D.

Published at the Request of many that heard it.

Hosea xii. 6. Therefore turn thou to thy GOD, keep Mercy and Judgment, and
wait on thy GOD continually. BOSTON: Printed by J. Draper, for J. Edwards and
H. Foster in Cornhill. 1737.

Waiting on GOD IN OUR Straits and Difficulties.
Jeremiah xiv. 22. -- Art not Thou He, O Lord our God? therefore we will wait
upon Thee: for Thou have made all these things.


THESE Words are the Close of the Chapter, and the first Verse of it informs us
of the particular Occasion on which the whole was uttered: " The Word of the
Lord that came to Jeremiah concerning the Dearth.

The Dearth here spoken of was caused by a great Drought, but God can bring
Dearth upon us as well by Cold and Clouds, as by burning Drought.

The Prophet, in the Name of the Church, and from Love to it, humbly mourns,
bewails, complains, confesses, supplicates, deprecates, and expostulates; in
Words the most moving and affecting you ever read: See from the 19 Verse, "Have
thou utterly rejected Judah? has thy Soul loathed Zion? why have thou smitten
us and there is no healing for us? we looked for Peace and there is no Good,
and for the Time of healing and behold Trouble! We acknowledge, O Lord, our
Wickedness, and the Iniquity of our Fathers; for we have sinned against thee.
Do not abhor us for thy Name sake; do not disgrace the Throne of thy Glory;
remember, break not thy Covenant with us: Are there any among the Vanities of
the Gentiles that can cause Rain? or can the Heavens give Showers? "Art not
Thou He, O Lord our god? therefore will we wait upon Thee, for Thou have made
all these Things."

In these last Words the Prophet first despises, disdains, pours Contempt on,
and rejects with Abhorrence the Gods of the Nations: "Are there any among the
Vanities of the Gentiles that can give Rain? He gives to Idols their true Name
Vanities; for we know that an Idol is nothing in the World. He affirms it
universally, of all and every one of them, that they are but so many Vanities.
He demands of them, if they can, only to give Rain: One of the greatest things,
it is true, in Nature; yet one of the most common things too, and most
necessary for Man. If they cannot do this, what is there they can do for us? and
if they could do this, what else might they not do?

Secondly, He assigns to second Causes their Place and Limits; "Can the Heavens
give Showers? either the upper or lower Heavens! As for the upper Heavens and
all their Hosts, they are thus far concerned in our Rains, that the Sun exhales
the Vapors by its fiery Rays, and the Moon influences our Waters both in the
Air and Sea, and the Fluids in our Bodies, in a sensible but secret manner. And
as for the lower Heavens, the Region of our Clouds, they gather not by any
Knowledge or Design of their own, neither when they give their Showers do they
mean any Benefit to us: For as Job said very piously and justly, " if I beheld
the Sun when it shone! so must we say, if I behold the Rain when it falls, with
any religious Respect to the Creature itself, it were to deny the GOD that is
above.

Thirdly, GOD the first Cause is devoutly acknowledged in the Government of all
second Causes, and in the Benefits done us by them; and all the Glory is
rendered to Him alone, to Whom it is due: " Art not Thou He, O Lord our God?
therefore we will wait on Thee; for Thou have made all these Things.

1. A Principle is laid down, in Form of Interrogation, but in Sense a vehement
Affirmation: Thou art He, and Thou only! Thou the Lord Jehovah, the God of
Israel, thou only can cause Rain, and command the Heavens to give us Showers!
Thou do it when and where thou please, and thy Will and Providence governs
herein! Who art greater than the Heavens and above them, have made and rulest
them.

2. A devout Resolution is formed upon this Principle, a Resolution of
Dependence on God and of Application to Him at all Times: " Therefore will we
wait upon Thee, for thou have made all these things: a good Reason for the
Resolution; while the gods that made not the Earth and Heavens, let them perish
from the Earth and from under these Heavens.

" We will wait upon thee: should not a People wait on their God? They declare
their Expectation to be only from Him, their Dependence to be solely on Him,
and their Confidence to be strong in Him. They apply, and seek and pray, and
resolve to continue herein, to Day, always and for evermore.

" For thou have made all these things: the Earth, Waters, Air, Clouds,
Seasons; and governest all for the Life and Good of Man. Thou have given Being
to all things, and thou give Laws to them, and they serve the wise and
gracious Intentions of thy Providence! Thou with-holdest the Rain, or thou
sendest it in Judgment or for Mercy! "Therefore we will wait upon Thee; rely on
thee, seek to thee, tarry thy Time, be found in thy Way, and resign our Selves
to thy Will.

The Doctrinal Observation from the Words might be this; "That the Supremacy,
the universal Providence and Agency of the Lord our God, does strongly oblige
us, and should engage and bind us, to be waiting upon Him at all Times and in
every Case; more especially in our Times of Trouble, Straits and Difficulties.

Or in the Words of Another, "The Sovereignty of God should engage, and his
Asufficiency encourage our Attendance on Him, and our Expectations from Him at
all Times."

I shall only enquire into the Nature of this great Duty of Religion, our
waiting on God; and then briefly suggest a few Reasons for it and Motives to it.

I. The Duty of waiting on God implies and includes in it the following Things,

1. Our fixed Belief, our constant Remembrance, and actual Consideration of
God, his Perfection and governing Providence, and the Extent of it to every
Thing in the World: that the Lord our God is one Lord, the living God and
everlasting King, in Heaven above and on Earth below; and that we and all
things are under his most wise, good, powerful and perfect Rule and Ordering;
without which not a Cloud gathers over us, nor a Ray of the Sun shines on us,
nor a Spire of Grass grows under our Feet. We must bear about with us always,
wherever we are and whatsover we do, want and seek after, an abiding Sense of
our Dependence on God; who upholds all things by the Word of his Power, and the
Eyes of all wait on Him; who holds our Soul in Life, feeds us every Day, and is
our Life and the Length of our Days. Deuteronomy. xxx. 20.

This Belief in God is essentially requisite to, and necessarily supposed in,
our waiting on Him: For he that comes to God must believe that He is, and have
right and just Apprehresions of his blessed Nature and supreme universal
Government; what He is in Himself and to us.

2. Consequently, we cannot wait upon God, but with a Frame of Worship and high
Adoration. The idea of a great and good God commands this from us, all his
Works challenge it, and every Benefit we look for from Him. They are all vast
in themselves, and speak his Eternal Power and Godhead, and declare an Infinite
Dominion, Wisdom, Goodness and Justice For Instance, Do we wait on God for the
Light and Heat, or for the Shade and Moisture; it must be in such a Frame and
Posture of Soul as that, Psalm cxxxv. 6, 7. For I know that the Lord is great,
and that our God is above all Gods! Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did he in
Heaven, and in Earth, in the Seas and in all deep Places: He causes the
Vapors to ascend from the Ends of the Earth, he makes Lightnings for the
Rain, he brings the Wind out of his Treasuries: And in the xxxiii Psalm; By
the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of them by the
Breath of his Mouth; He gathers the Waters of the Sea together as an heap, he
lays up the Depths in Storehouses; Let all the Earth fear the Lord, let all
the Inhabitants of the World stand in Awe of Him! -- Behold, the Eye of the
Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his Mercy; to deliver
their Soul from Death, and to keep them alive in Famine; Our Soul waits on
the Lord, He is our Help and our Shield; for our Heart shall rejoice in Him,
because we have trusted in his Holy Name: Let thy Mercy, O Lord, be upon us
according as we hope in Thee.

3. We are in a more special and proper Sense waiting on God in the regular
Discharge of the Duty of Prayer; serious constant and fervent Prayer to God for
all we want. What Prayer or Supplication soever we make to God, mental or oral,
private or public, we are therein waiting upon God, lifting our Hearts and Eyes
and Hands to Him; and He that searches the Heart knows the Mind of our
Spirits. If we ask, and seek and knock, as our Lord directs us, Matthew. vii.
this to wait; but the prayerless Person profanely neglects God, waits not on
him in his Closet from Day to Day, nor watches at his Gates, the Gates of Zion,
his House of Prayer to all People. -- Our Text is it self a fervent holy Prayer
to God, as the Governor of the Seasons, as the Father of the Rain. God expects
to be thus acknowledged by us, to receive this Homage from us. Zech. x. 1. Ask
of the Lord Rain, -- and be will give Showers and Grass. And if we want the
Shining of the Sun after the Rain, it is the same thing; we must seek and cry
to God for it. And in these Cases the People of God are ready to pray, and
enquire early after God; to howl to him for Corn and Wine and Oil, tho they do
but flatter him with their Lips, and lie to him with their Tongues. Even the
Priests of Baal in the Day of Drought waited on their deaf Idol, with loud
Cries from Morning to Evening, to answer them either by Fire or Water; "O Baal
hear us! Elijah made one loud and fervent Petition to the living God, and the
Heavens gave Showers. -- Generally, through the Book of God, the required Waiting
on Him means Prayer and Supplications for Things agreeable to his Will, and in a
Manner

4. We must wait upon God with upright Hearts, true and strong Desire of Soul
to his Name, with Affection and Earnestness. The acceptable and effectual
Prayer of the Righteous is the fervent one. St. James v. Cold and formal
Praying is not meet to be called waiting on God. " Our Soul waits for the
Lord; says the Psalmist, more than they that watch for the Morning: and he
repeats the Profession to express the Truth and Vehemence of his Desire. The
Dawn of the Morning-Light is not more earnestly longed after by One in Pain on
his bed through a long restless Night; than is the Favor and Mercy of God by a
Soul that waits on Him therefore. " I wait for the Lord, my Soul does wait, and
I hope in his Word; Lord hear my Voice, and let thine Ear be attentive to my
Supplications. Such are the Breathings of the earnest waiting Soul; " Lord all
my Desire is before thee, and my Groaning is not hid from thee; with my Soul
have I desired thee in the Night, and with my Spirit within me will I seek thee
early. All the Powers and Affections of our Souls must be excited and engaged
in our waiting on God.

5. Humble and ardent Hope, Expectation, Trust and Confidence are implied in
our waiting upon God. To wait on Him is to depend, rely, and expect from his
Power and Goodness, according to the promises of his Word. We are directed to
ask in Faith, and are told that believing we receive. Abraham was strong in
Faith, giving Glory to God; being fully persuaded that what he had promised he
was able to persorm; and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness; as it is to
Us also, if we believe on Him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, Romans
iv. 20. God still remembers his holy Promises, and Abraham his Servant: i. e.
the like Faith of his spiritual Seed in their Supplications to Him, and waiting
on Him; and they, in their measure are made Kings and Priests to God, as
Abraham and Jacob were in their Day; as Princes before the Throne have Power
with their King and prevail.

In such a Spirit of Faith and Trust the Prophet prays in our Context, "O the
Hope of Israel, the Savior of it in the Time of Trouble! Remember, break not
thy Covenant! Do not abhor us for thy Name's sake, disgrace not the Throne of
thy Glory! Art not Thou He, O Lord our God! Therefore we wait on thee.

This is waiting and praying through the Psalms of David Psalms xxvii. 14,
xxxiii. 20, etc. lxii. 5. cxxx. 5.
, My Soul, wait thou only upon God, for all my Expectation is from Him: He only
is my Rock and my Salvation; He is my Defense and Glory, the Rock of my
Strength and my Refuge is in God! Trust in Him at all Times ye People, pour out
you Hearts before Him: Unto Thee O Lord, belongs Mercy. Again, I had fainted
unless I had believed to see the Goodness of God in the Land of the living;
wait on the Lord, be of good Courage and He shall strengthen thy Heart; wait I
say on the Lord. Again, Our Soul waits on the Lord, He is our Strength and
our Shield; for our Heart shall rejoice in Him, because we have trusted in his
holy Name.

Thus there is no real praying, or waiting on God, without Faith, Hope and
Trust in some good Exercise; I wait for the Lord, my Soul does wait, and I hope
in his Word.

6. We must wait upon God with great Fear and holy Trembling, because of his
Holiness, Justice and terrible Majesty. We must ever think of God, and bow
before Him, as the great and dreadful God, who keeps Covenant and Mercy;
remembering our many and mighty Sins against Him, by which we have so often
forfeited our daily Mercies, and highly merited his Wrath, that all the Vials
of it should be poured out upon us, by Land and also on the Sea. So that should
God order the Sun to withdraw it is Heat, and cover our Heavens with Clouds that
our Prayers may not pass through, it were less than our Sins deserve. Our Lives
and Livelihood are every Day in his Hand, and should we not be afraid of the
Power? A righteous, sovereign and judicial Power, Jer. v. 20. -- 24. Declare
this in the House of Jacob, and publish it in Judah, saying, Hear now this, O
foolish People and without Understanding, which have Eyes and see not, which
have Ears and hear not! Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not tremble at
my Presence, which have placed the Sand for the Bound of the Sea, etc.? Neither
say they in their Heart, Let us now fear the Lord our God that gives Rain,
both the former and the latter in his Season; He reserveth unto us the
appointed Weeks of the Harvest: Your Iniquities have turned away these things,
and your Sins have witholden good things from you.

O say unto GOD, how dreadful art thou in thy Works! He commands the Sun and it
shines not, and he seals up the Stars: He bows his Heaven and comes down, and
Darkness is under his Feet: He makes it his secret Place, even dark Waters and
thick Clouds of the Sky: Again, He commands the Clouds and they rain no Rain;
Nor can there be either Dew or Rain from Year to Year but according to his
Word: He sends too the great and long Rains of his Strength and sets his
Church, at least, a trembling: Let all the Earth fear the Lord, let all the
Inhabitants of the World stand in Awe of Him Job ix. 7. Isai. v. 6. 1 Kings
xvii. 1. Ezra x. 9. Psalm. xviii. 9, 21.
.

7. We must always wait on God with an entire Resignation of our selves, and of
all that concerns us to his Wisdom and Sovereignty. His Will must be ours,
which is the absolute Perfection of Spirits. The Angels of Light are thus
waiting about the Throne on high, infinitely removed from Self-Denial. That
belongs only to our State of of Sin, in the Punishments whereof our Obedience
is Submission. Where the Psalmist professes, "Truly my Soul waits upon God;
the Hebrew is -- "My Soul is silent to God, or before Him. Not that it did not
speak and pray, but because it said nothing against what God did, but was
quietly expecting what he would do, and resolved to acquiese therein. This is
the Way of Duty and Comfort, when we cheerfully refer all our Affairs to the
good Pleasure of God, and accommodate our selves to his Dispensations -- The
waiting Soul in a Time of Trouble, or doubting Expectation, prays the more
fervently; but it says, Father in Heaven thy Will be done; not as I will, but
as thou will. "I will be still and know that it is God! Let the Lord do what
seems good to him. So in the Way of God's Judgments we must wait on Him: He
brings down them that dwell on high; the lofty City he lays it low, even to
the Ground; he brings it to the Dust, Isa. xxvi. 5, 8.

8. We can wait on God only in the Way of Obedience, having Respect unto all
his Commandments, and in a devout Observation of all his Ordinances. This is
the royal and perfect Rule to us, and the sure Way of God's Blessing; " Wait on
the Lord and keep his Way; Let Integrity and Uprightness preserve me, for I
wait on thee. "All the Paths of the Lord are Mercy and Truth, unto such as keep
his Covenant and his Testimonies. "Depart from Evil and do Good, and dwell for
evermore. Sins of Omission as well as those of Commission, are a Departure from
God: So are secret as well as open Sins; both against the first or second Table
of the Law; any one Instance of allowed Sin; for he that offends in one point
is guilty of all. Neither may we add unto the Word which the Lord our God has
commanded us, nor diminish from it. We must take heed to our selves, and keep
our Souls diligently, that we forget not any of the Statutes and Judgments so
righteous, as all the Laws of our God; that they depart not from our Heart all
the Days of our Life, but that we teach them to our Sons and their Children.
Then God will be nigh to us in all that we call upon Him for. For therefore
will the Lord wait that he may be gracious to us, and therefore will he be
exalted in having Mercy on us; for the Lord is a God of Judgment; and blessed
are all they that wait for Him. Isai. xxx. 18.

9. Using indirect Means to extricate our selves out of Evils real or
imaginary, felt or feared, or using unlawful and wicked Means, is utterly
inconsistent with our waiting upon God.

Certainly God may bring us into Difficulties for our Trial, as he pleases. So
he did by the Patriarchs who were dear to him, and for the most part they
behaved admirably, yet sometimes failed strangely. So did David in his latter
Trials, after he had acted a more than royal Part in his first fiery
Temptation, through the many Days of Readiness bloody and barbarous Persecution of
him. And long after this, when Shimei raved at him and cursed him, he behaved
most piously, with a glorious Meekness and perfect Humility before God and Men.
The Comfort hereof he carried to his Grave, and the Fame of it endures in the
Church for ever. He gives God the Glory, and triumphs in the Remembrance of his
Conquest over Himself and his Enemy, in the Eighteenth Psalm: He Sings there,
How the Lord rewarded him according to his Righteousness, according to the
Cleaness of his Hands did he recompense him; for he had kept the Ways of the
Lord, and had not wickedly departed from his God; for all his Judgments were
before him, and he did not put away his Statutes from him: Therefore the Lord
recompensed him according to his Righteousness, according to the Cleaness of
his Hands in his Eyesight: For with the merciful (says he) Thou will show thy
self merciful, with an upright Man thou will show thy self upright; with the
pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward thou will show thy self
froward: For thou will save the afflicted People, but wilt bring down high
Looks; for thou will light my Candle, the Lord my God will enlighten my
Darkness: As for God, his Way is perfect, the Word of the Lord is tried He is a
Buckler to all that trust in Him.

A People also are very prone, and more especially the Inferior sort of
People, to take indirect, rash and very sinful steps, provoking to God and
injurious to their Rulers, rebellious against Providence and humane Government,
when for their Sins and Humiliation God brings them into Straits which it is
not in the Power of Man it may be to deliver them out of, or at least not
presently. -- This was often the Case and Transgression of the Children of
Israel in the Wilderness, under the Conduct of Moses the Man of God: As often
almost as God bro't the Congregation into the Want of Bread or Water, or
punished them for their past Murmurs and Mutinies, they fell into new and
seditious Clamours, charging their Rulers with the most inimical Intentions
toward them, even of destroying them and their Children. You know the Ruin they
brought on themselves hereby, we read their Sin in it is Punishment: Psalm. xcv.
Had they humbly, meekly and prayerful waited on God; believing, fearing,
resigning and repenting; they had been timely extricated out of their pinching
Straits, and led directly to their Rest in Canaan: but they ran out of God's
Way, and he left them to their own, and swear in his Wrath that they should
never enter into his Rest.

10. We must be waiting upon God in the Exercise of deep Repentance for our
Sins against Him, and of lively Faith in the Name, Merits and Righteousness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, for Pardon and Acceptance; and for the Bestowment of the
least, even the most common outward Favors of Providence.

We can wait upon God only as Penitents, and by Faith in Christ. These two must
always come together in every Prayer we make to God. The Prophet prays in the
Words before my Text, with great and holy Mourning for Sin, and with a strong
Faith in the Covenant-Mercy of God! " We acknowledge, O Lord, our Wickedness,
for we have sinned against thee; do not abhor us for thy Name sake, do not
disgrace the Throne of thy Glory, break not thy Covenant, but remember it for
us. The Throne of the Mediator is the Throne of God's Glory; He looks on that
and remembers his Covenant-Mercy for penitent Sinners. All the Favors and
Bounties of God in the Course of his Providence come to us for the sake of
Christ. The Kingdom of Providence is in his Hand, even the whole Administration
of it, for the Good of his Church and the World. It is for His sake that the
World stands. In his Sacrifice it is that God smells the sweet savor, as in
the Day of Noah whose Offering of every clean Kind was but the Type of Christ's
one Offering; and the Curse is no more executed on the Earth till the
Conflagration to which it is reserved.

We pray to God only in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, by Faith in his
Mediation and Intercession, and in the Promises, which are all in Him Yea and
Amen: We look for his Mercy, whether it be on temporal Accounts or spiritual.
We have no Access unto the Father but by Him. On his Name therefore it is we
wait, who has purchased for us all we need for Soul and Body, and by his Hand
it is bestowed on us. It is good before his Saints to receive all of Him and
through Him; to whom be Glory for ever.

11. We must wait on God with Patience and Constancy, Continuance and
Perseverance. We must continue in Faith, Prayer, Hope, Trust, Resignation,
Repentance and universal Obedience. This is waiting. Psalm. xxv. 5. On Thee do I
wait all the Day. All the Days of our Life, this is our Work, every Day the
Work of the Day. Psalm. xxxvii. 7. Rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him.
It is good for a Man to hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of God. We must
wait God's Time as well as keep his Way: The Vision has its appointed Time, if
it tarry wait for it; it will surely come and not tarry. We must not be
short-spirited. The Rule and Precept to us is, Patient in Tribulation,
continuing instant in Prayer, and rejoicing in Hope. There is no practical
Religion and Godliness without a patient Continuance in Well-doing. Patience
must have its perfect Work, whether it be in bearing and submitting, or in
praying and obeying. Waiting respects both the active and passive Exercise of
Grace. " The Foolishness of Man perverteth his Way, and his Heart fretteth
against the Lord. As the profane and impatient King said, " This Evil is of the
Lord, why should I wait on the Lord any longer? and into what desperate
Outrages was he running against the best Friend and Father among the Israel of
God? 2 Kings vi. 31.

12. And lastly, We must wait upon God with Resolution and holy Fortitude, in
the Strength of God. Without Him we can do nothing, nor may presume to resolve
on any thing; but the least Believer may say, " I can do all things through
Christ helping me.

The Prophet forms a mighty, just and reasonable Resolution in my Text;
"Therefore we will wait upon Thee. We must resolve to wait upon God, and
resolutely set our selves to do it. There needs a good and strong Resolution to
perform this Duty. Who ever did any thing great and good, without a Firmness
and Constancy of Soul in undertaking it? It is a good Thing that the Heart be
established with Grace; to be able to say with the Psalmist, "My Heart is
fixed, O God, my Heart is fixed. This is the Heart and Property of a Saint in
every point of Duty. His Heart is fixed in this especially, to be waiting on
his God continually. Grace has thus wro't in the Saints of every Age, Psalm.
lii. ^. I will wait on thy Name, for it is good before thy Saints. Here Is
Inclination and Resolution, and a good Reason for it, Isai. viii. 17. I will
wait upon the Lord who hides himself from the House of Israel, and will look
for Him. Micah vii. 7. Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the
God of my Salvation; my God will hear me. How positively do they resolve, one
and another of them, as Men determined and fixed through Grace; " I will, I will?

To resolve is a rational Act of the humane Soul, whereby it freely and firmly
determines and binds it self to do, that which it judges to be it is Duty,
Wisdom and Interest. But considered as an Act of Religion, it supposes a Mind
divinely illuminated from the Word of God, under the Influence and Power of the
Holy Spirit, with a full Purpose of Heart determined for a holy Life. Josh.
xxiv. 27. Nay, but the Lord our God we will serve, and his Voice we will obey.

This is a very serious and awful thing, and must be done with Understanding
and Knowledge, with Deliberateness and Consideration, fervently and zealously,
for without Counsel Purposes are disappointed. To use the Apostle's Words, it
must be done devoutly and with Solemnity: 2 Cor. i. 17. When I therefore was
thus minded, did I use Lightness? or the Things that I purpose, do I purpose
according to the Flesh? that with me there should be Yea, Yea, or Nay, Nay! As
God is true our Word was not Yea and Nay. Religion is founded on certain and
unchangeable Principles and Resolutions, and there must be no saying and
unsaying, promising and changing in it. But then neither may we make any
religious Resolutions in our own Strength, but with an entire Dependence on the
Grace of God, which works in us both to will and to do. We must be very
humble if we would be strong, and have a godly Jealousy of our selves, that our
Hope may be in God. Psalm. cxix. 8. I will keep thy Statutes, O forsake me not.
We must also resolve upon the Means, together with the End; and up and be doing
that the Lord may be with us.

And thus I have spoken of the Nature of the Duty, what it is for us to wait
upon God.

II. I come briefly to mention a few Reasons, Motives and Arguments, for our
resolving on and engaging in this Duty.

1. God is great and it is meet we should wait on Him. Kings and Princes expect
much waiting on them. It is the least Homage to the King Eternal, Immortal, the
blessed and only Potentate. Should we not daily attend his Levee? not in
Ceremony and Compliment, or for any Need of our Services, but to express a
sincere Loyalty and humble Allegiance, and to acknowledge an absolute
Subjection and Dependence. Zeph. iii. 8. Therefore wait ye upon me, says the
Lord, until the Day that I rise up. Luke xii. 36. And be ye your selves like
unto Men that wait for their Lord.

2. The Favor, Gifts and Bounties of a God are well worth our waiting for.
Instance if you please in the Light and Rain from Heaven, do they not deserve
more than all the Pains that we can be at in our Dependence on God, or
Supplications to Him? Do they not pay us well for our repeated urging Prayers?
Does not the Husbandman wait for them with long Patience, after much Toil and
Labor, that he may receive the Fruits of the Earth? James v. 7. And when he
has reaped a good Harvest, thinks himself well recompensed for his Summer's
Work! But how great and good are the Blessings of Grace, which our God
especially requires us to be waiting on him for! Luke xii. 23: It is your
Fathers good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

3. All things wait upon God, and he is glorified in them. In this Way it is
that we give him Honor, and do him Glory. So we acknowledge his Power,
Goodness and Sovereignty, and testify our Dependence on Him, Subjection to Him,
and Receipts from Him. Psalm. cxxiii. 2. Behold, as the Eyes of Servants look
unto the Hand of their Masters, and as the Eyes of a Maiden unto the Hand of
her Mistress; so our Eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have Mercy
upon us. We wait as Beggars for an Alms, as Children for a Father's Regard and
Blessing, and as Subjects on their Prince for his Favor and Reward, and at the
same Time to know his Pleasure and do his Will. Psalm. lix. 9. Because of his
Strength will I wait on thee, the God of my Mercy shall prevent me.

4. It is highly profitable and beneficial to us to be waiting upon God. " A
Servant that waits on his Master shall be honored. We do not serve God for
naught. It is good for a Man to hope and quietly wait; Good in it self, good in
us, good for us; good before his Saints, good in their Account, good in their
Experience as well as Conscience, Psalm. xxv. 3. O my God I trust in thee, let
me not be ashamed. Isai. xxxiii. 2. O Lord be gracious to us, for we have
waited on thee. As Kings distribute Riches and Honors among them that wait in
their Presence, so does the King of Heaven the Blessings of his Providence and
Grace here, and all spiritual Blessings in heavenly Places, among them that
religiously wait on and serve Him.

Let what has been said reprove those among us, who are irreligious and
prayerless, and so far from waiting on God in this Day of Trouble and Rebuke,
on private and personal Accounts as well as public; that they are indeed
murmuring against Him in their Hearts and with their Mouths, and mutinying
against him with their Hands, in open Defiance of that Government which God has
set over them. These things bring great Guilt upon a People, and should be
matter of Mourning and great Humiliation to us; they are greatly to be repented
of and openly testified against. Psalm. xii. 4. Who have said, with our Tongues
will we prevail, our Lips are our own, who is Lord over us? We cry out of
Wrongs, and of Oppression, we cry to Men and against one another, and we cry
against Those (it may be) who never wronged us, but are public Benefactors;
but we cry not to God that binds us, to whom we should cry out against our
selves and our own Sins: we do not wait upon Him with our Secret and Public
mournful Prayers for our Families and our People.

To this let us be humbly directed and exhorted in the Fear of God; to carry
all our Difficulties to God, sensible of his punishing Hand in them, and humble
our selves under it. Job xxi 4. Is my Complaint to Man? If it were so, why
should not my Spirit be troubled? x. 1, 2 I will leave my Complaint upon my
self, I will say unto God do not condemn me. God will hear the Desire of the
Humble, he prepares their Heart and bows his Ear. Cursed is the Man, that
trusts in Man, and makes Flesh his Arm, and whose Heart departs from the
Lord; But blessed is the Man that trusts in the Lord, and whose Hope the Lord
is: the One shall not see when Good comes, nor the other when Heat comes.

But let us especially be waiting on God for the spiritual Blessing, the
Blessings of his Grace, for the Effusion of his Holy Spirit, for broken and
contrite Hearts, and for the Pardon of our Sins. Seek first the Kingdom of God
and his Righteousness, and all other Things shall be added to us, by our
Heavenly Father, who knows our Need of them. Our anxious Fore-tho't,
distracting Cares and immoderate Fears, are our Misery and Crime. We need the
Spirit of Humiliation and Repentance, of Prayer and Reformation, more than the
very Light, or Rains of Heaven. We need to care for our Souls, more than for
our Bodies; that these may feed and flourish under the Word of Life: This
Blessing is more than the Dew of Heaven, the Fatness of the Earth, or Plenty of
Corn and Wine. O if the Lord would make his Face to shine upon his Sanctuaries,
in the Efficacy of his Word and the Conversion of Souls! This is the
Consolation we should be waiting for in the Temple! these the richer Dews of
Hermon descending on the Mountains of Zion, where the Lord commands the
Blessing, even Life for evermore.

Let us wait on God in all his Ordinances that his Doctrine may drop as the
Rain, and the Light of the Knowledge of his Glory shine into our Hearts by and
with his Word. Let us lift up our Eyes and Hearts to Him that is above the
Heavens, and pray -- " Drop down ye Heavens from above, and let the Skies pour
down Righteousness! It follows, Let the Earth open and let them bring forth
Salvation, and let Righteousness spring up together: I the Lord have created
it! Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker; let the Potsherd strive with the
Potsherds of the Earth; shall the Clay say to Him that fashions it, what make
thou? Men are but broken Potsherds (says One on the Place) and are often made
so by their mutual Contentions, dashed in pieces one against another.

What faith the Apostle? Galat. v. 5. We through the Spirit wait for the Hope of
Righteousness by Faith. There is nothing worthy of a Christians waiting for
like this; nothing in Comparison of it. It is highly pleasing to God to see us
waiting on him for this, and his Promise is full on this point, Luke xi. 13.
Shall not your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him? This
Blessing of Blessings is the Hope of Believers, and it is the Hope of
Righteousness; the Promise of the Father which Christ left with his Apostles in
his Farewell Discourse with them: who when He should come would convince the
World of Sin, of Righteousness and of Judgment: A Hope founded on the
Righteousness of Christ, sanctifying to us and keeping us in the Ways of
Righteousness. Faith in Christ allows us not to hope on any other Ground, nor
in any other Way, but warrants us in this. And it is through the Spirit, under
his Direction and Influence, that we are begotten unto the lively Hope, and are
kept waiting for it. And they that thus wait upon God, that wait on Him for
this, shall never be ashamed of their Hope.

FINIS.

