A DEFENSE OF A SERMON Preached at Newark, June 2. 1736. Entitled, the Vanity
of human Institutions in the Worship of God, against the Exceptions of Mr. John
Beach, in a Letter to him.

JONATHAN DICKINSON, M. A. Minister of the Gospel, at Elizabeth-Town in
New Jersey.

1 John ii. 19. They went out from us; but they were not of us: For if they had
been of (...) they would no Doubt have continued with us.

(...) Jam. 1.6. He that wavereth is like a Wave (...) the Sea driven with the
Wind and tossed.

New York, Printed by J. Peter Zenger.

A DEFENSE OF A SERMON Preached at Newark, June 2. 1736, etc.
SIR,
I AM so far from finding Fault with your Attempt to vindicate the Church of
England from the Exceptions both of Mr. J. G. and my self, that I cannot but
think every Man equally entitled, both to follow the Dictates of his own
Reason, and Conscience in matters of Religion; and to give the Reason of his
Hope to others for their Conviction or Satisfaction. And I must acknowledge,
that you and the rest of your Brethren that have deserted our Communion for
that of the Church of England, had a special Call to satisfy the World about
you, as to the Reasons of your surprising Conduct. And I know no other but this
public Method of doing it, that would so effectually obviate those harsh
Insinuations and censorious Reflections, unto which you are liable; and
convince every Body, that your Change was not owing to the Want of necessary
self-Denial, and christian Contentment with the Hardships and Indigencies, that
(through the Ingratitude of the People) are the too common Lot of the Ministry in
this Country. But you will pardon me, if I find it more difficult to apologize
for the Method, in which you have chosen to publish your Vindication.

It might have been expected, that though you had seen Reason to change some of
your Religious Principles; you would nevertheless have retained something of
that common Civility, for which you have formerly been famous; and at least
have treated your Adversaries with that Decency, that is always due to human
Nature; if your new Principles could not have allowed us the Character of
Friends, Gentlemen, or Christians. (Indeed Sir, I cannot account for those
opprobrious Epithets you are pleased so freely to bestow, such as brutish
Noise, palpable and notorious Untruths, Profane enough for an Infidel, Fool
etc. I cannot but think your Arguments would have been every whit as
conclusive, without these Decorations as with them.

I am in like Manner incapable to apologize; for your overlooking so great a
Part of the Sermon you had undertaken to answer. You have wholly overlooked the
Preface to that Sermon. -- You have made no Reply to the Imputation of
Arminianism, which methinks might have stuck pretty close to such Clergymen of
the Church of England, as have subscribed the xxxix Articles. -- You have made
no Reply to the Reasons offered against Requiring as a religious Duty, what God
has not proposed as such, nor required of us; against enjoining as Terms of
Communion, what God has not enjoined; and against imposing any Terms of
Communion by penal Sanctions. -- Nor have you taken any particular Notice of
the three following Heads, wherein is shown, how teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men, renders our Worship vain. -- You have indeed roundly
asserted, that there cannot be any public Worship, but there must be some
stinted Prayer imposed. p. 17. And that there neither is nor can be any Church
upon Earth, but what has Terms of Communion and Ceremonies imposed, which God
has not expressly commanded. p. 51. But did you think that these strong
Assertions, were sufficient Answer to all the Arguments in the Sermon against
Impositions? Are we to take your Word in this Case, and not know why? This is I
confess a very concise and summary Method of answering that Discourse, to
wholly neglect the greatest Part of it; and even that Part which was proposed
as the Grounds and Foundation of those Exceptions, that you have been pleased
to make some Remarks upon. -- If you thought these Things unworthy your Notice,
'twuold have been proper for you to have treated the whole with the same
Contempt; since it was so necessary to take off Sampson's Hair, (as you are
pleased to style my Arguments against Impositions) in Order to prevent his
making further Spoil of the Philistines.

But perhaps you might suppose, that the answering those Arguments would not at
present be quite so popular, among the new Proselytes at Newark, to whom it
might be something shocking to think, that they had parted with their old
Profession and Freedom together. -- They might have been frighted at the Sight
of the Yoke; and it is therefore too early to endoctrinate, them in the
Necessity of a blind Obedience to their spiritual Guides, and an absolute
Subjection to their Impositions.

Having premised these Things, I proceed to consider your Vindication, which as
you inform us, is no new Reply; but a Collection from several Writers, that we
may see how each Complaint has been answered, long before I preached or
published them; and therefore, how little Need there was to renew the tragical
Outcry. By which Declaration I find, I have the united Strength of all your
Party to grapple with. -- For you have doubtless collected the best Answers,
that you could find, among all the Authors that have written on your Side of
the Controversy. -- And if I can justify my Exceptions, against all these
Champions called in to your Assistance; it will appear, that we have good
Reasons, why we cannot ordinarily join with the Worship of the Church of
England; which was the Thing I undertook to prove in that Sermon. And that
there is Cause to continue the same Complaint, that has ever been made from the
beginning of the Reformation, against the Impositions of the Church of England,
in the Points under Debate.

I am first to attend upon your Explication of the Text I preached upon; and
your Answer to that Enquiry, What is it to teach for Doctrines the Commandments
of Men? This (you tell us) is no more nor less, than to teach that, that is a
divine Law or Ordinance, which is really but a human Appointment. When Men
father those Practices on God which have only an human Original; and (...) that
God has made that a Duty or a (...) which he has never commanded nor forbidden
p. 5. But by what Argument is this Gloss justified? -- You tell us out of Dr.
Pride and of the Jews pretending to a twofold Law, the Written and the Oral
Law; the latter equally divine, and of the same Authority with the former; that
this Oral Law, or Bundle of Traditions, was committed to Writing in a Book
called the Talmud, etc. In the Talmuds I confess these Traditions were
pretended to be of Divine Authority: But don't you know, that the Jerusalem
Talmud was written above five Hundred Years after Christ; and the Babylonian
Talmud much later? -- How then does the ridiculous Dotages of the Talmudists,
prove this to be the Doctrine of the Pharisees, opposed by our Blessed Savior
in this Text? It is certain they had Multitudes of most trifling ridiculous
Traditions and Observances, at the Time that the Talmuds were written, which
were utterly unknown, while our Savior sojourned upon Earth. 'Twould therefore
have been more to the Purpose, for you or your Author to have proved, That this
Doctrine of the Oral Law, and of Washing of Hands before Meat as a part of it,
was received to be of Divine Authority in those (...) of which that Context
treats; than (...) have founded your confident and positive interpretation of
the Text, upon (...) so many Hundred Years after.

But suppose this was the Case, I cannot see how it at all affects the present
Argument. -- are not they as well changeable with teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men, who enjoin these Commandments by the severest Penalties;
and are more careful of their Observation, than of the Observation of God's own
Institutions; as they who expressly declare, that these Commands are of divine
Institution? -- What does it signify for the Church of England to teach that,
These Ceremonies are not Ordinances necessary to Salvation, when they are
imposed with such severe and dreadful Sanctions? -- You tell us, the Scribes
and Pharisees valued their pretended Oral Law, more than the written Law of
God; and made the written Law give way to it. p. 9. -- And I must tell you,
That the written Law of God requires us, to receive one another, as Christ also
received us, to the Glory of God, Romans xv. 7. To receive him that is weak in
the Faith, but not to doubtful Disputations, Romans xiv. 1. Not to judge one
another any more; but to judge this rather, not to put a Stumbling Block, or
Occasion to fall, in our Brothers Way. Romans xiv. 13. And not to destroy him
with our Meat, for whom Christ died; nor to eat Flesh; nor drink Wine; nor any
Thing whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak. verse. 15.24.
-- The written Law of God requires, that we should have Compassion one of
another, love as Brethren, be pitiful, be courteous. 1 Pet. iii. 8. -- And
would it not be a valuing the Commandments of Men, above the written Laws of
God, to declare all excommunicated ipso facto, that don't acknowledge these
Commandments of Men, to be such as they may with a good Conscience approve,
use, or subscribe to; or that do but pretend to groan under certain Grievances,
imposed upon them by the Commandments of Men? vid. Can. vi. and x.
And yet you are no Stranger to that excellent Constitution, where all such as
these are by Canon delivered up to Satan. -- And did the Scribes and Pharisees
ever go further than this, in teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men?

You also inform us, That the Scribes and Pharisees esteemed this Instance of
washing of Hands before Meat, as much a divine Command, as that thou shall not
kill; or thou shall not commit Adultery. -- And would it not be a virtual and
practical declaring the same Thing, to treat such as capital Offenders, who
conscienciously refuse Subjection to these Commandments of Men? And yet that
many Hundreds have been laid in Irons, in stinking Dungeons, been banished,
dismembered, and put to Death in this Cause, is well known to all that are
acquainted with the History of our Nation.

And now, Sir, I dare even make the Appeal to your self, whether it ben't as
much teaching these for Doctrines, to impose them with such dreadful Severity,
as to barely declare them divine, when they are not.

You tell us, they are not taught to be necessary to Salvation. p. 7. And that
the Church has declared to the World, That they place no Religion in these
Things. p. 9. And must all be looked upon as Heathen Men and Publicans, by
Virtue of the Church's Excommunication, who cannot conform to these Things, that
by your own Confession have no Religion in them? -- Must they be perpetually
pelted, with the frightful Clamours of damning Schism, who scruple the
Observance of those Commandments of Men, which the Imposers themselves declare
to the World that they place no Religion in?

But that we may put an End to this Debate, let us view the Case, as it is
represented by the Evangelist himself, and see whether all teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men, are not condemned in the Text. -- And
whether all Impositions of our own Institutions upon other Men's Consciences,
(whether we give them the Character of divine Ordinances or not) are not
culpable, by this Verdict of our blessed Savior. If we recur to the sacred
Story, we find it thus related. -- Then came to him the Pharisees, and certain
of the Scribes which came from Jerusalem; and when they saw some of his
Disciples eat Bread, with defiled (that is to say, with unwashed Hands they
found Fault. -- Then the Pharisees and Scribes asked him, why walk not thy
Disciples according to the Tradition of the Elders, but eat Bread with unwashen
Hands? He answered and said unto them, well has I said prophesyed of you
Hypocrites, as it is written. -- This People honors me with their Lips; but
their Heart is far from me. -- Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men. -- By which Narrative it plainly appears,
that the Thing and the only Thing found Fault with by the Scribes and
Pharisees, was that the Disciples eat Bread with unwashed Hands. -- That the
Reason and the only Reason of their finding Fault was, that they walked not
according to the Tradition of the Elders. There was not the least Pretense that
his Observance was founded upon any divine Authority. -- It was the Injunction
of this (in it self) innocent and indifferent Rite, by the lawful Authority in
the Jewish Church, that brought upon 'em these severe Censures. You Hypocrites,
in vain do you worship me, etc. And I must take Liberty to say, that I cannot
imagine any Plea or Pretense, that can possibly be made for the Imposition of
the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, that may not with like
Propriety be offered, in Favor of the Scribes and Pharisees in this Context.
-- Are the Injunctions of the Church of England imposed by lawful Authority? So
was washing of Hands before Meat. -- Are they significant of inward Purity and
Holiness? So was this. -- Are they pretended to be decent and orderly? And was
not this Pretense much more plausible in the Case before us? Are your
Ceremonies as you tell us, p. 11. convenient; and conducive to the Peace and
and good Order of the Church, in the Opinion of the civil and ecclesiastical
Governors?' And was not this so too? Do you pretend that the Churches
Injunctions are not forbidden by God, and therefore lawfully imposed? You know
this has been always a Subject of Debate. -- But none can pretend that God has
any where forbidden us, to wash our Hands before Meat. -- Or do you plead, that
your Ceremonies are indifferent Things; and therefore what cannot be justly
objected against. But can they be more indifferent, than the washing of our
Hands before we eat? In short, try your Skill in making what Apology you please
for the Imposition of your Rites and Ceremonies; and the same Arguments will
conclude with equal Force, in Favor of the Scribes and Pharisees in this
Context.

And now I Am come to consider your artful turning the Point upon us; and to try
if we can no Way avoid the dangerous Thrust. -- No, no, they teach for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men, (you inform us) who say it is a Sin to join
in an imposed Form of Prayer, when God never said so, etc. p. 8. But what is
this to the Purpose? We do indeed say it is a Sin for any to join in those
imposed Forms and Ceremonies, against the Remonstrances of their own
Consciences; and a Sin for any to impose them. -- But you must give us better
Conviction than your bare Word, that God has never said so. -- I am sure God
has said, that he that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of
Faith; for whatsoever is not of Faith is SIN, Romans xiv. 23. -- And God has also
said, that if ye SIN against the Brethren and wound their weak Conscience, ye
SIN against Christ. 1 Cor. viii. 12. -- But you tell us. They are the guilty
Persons, who make these Things sinful, which God has left indifferent; as he
has all the Ceremonies of the Church of England. Has God left these Things
indifferent? Why then I beseech you, don't the Church of England leave them
indifferent too? Can they order this Matter better than God has done? And I
must further enquire, to whom are these Things indifferent? If to the Imposers,
they could easily part with indifferent Things, for the Peace and Union of the
Church, without any Prejudice to their Consciences. -- But how often must you
be told, that they are not indifferent to us; and therefore cannot be complied
with without Sin. -- If you say, that our Scruples are unreasonable. -- I
answer, that you have no Business to monopolize all Reason to your selves. --
We have as good a Claim to follow the Dictates of our own Reason, as you have.
-- We must believe for our selves, act for our selves, and give an Account for
our selves. -- And are therefore not to depend upon your Reason for our Guide.

Thus I Have endeavored to rescue my Text out of your Hands, and have (I think)
left the Foundation of that Discourse safe, notwithstanding all your Attempts
to subvert and undermine it.

You next endeavor to turn my own Concessions against me; and appeal to any
Man that is not stark blind with Prejudice, whether I have not by these true
Assertions, wholly freed your Church from that dreadful Charge, of teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men. But why could you not give your Reader my
Concessions in my own Words, without leaving out some Passages, and altering
and adding others, according to your own Fancy? Did not your publishing those
Passages in the Italick Character, give your Reader Reason to suppose them an
exact Transcript; and did not the Justice of the Cause require, that they
should be so? Indeed Sir this looks a little suspicious.

I did (I confess,) allow, that agreeing among our selves, upon any mere
Circumstantials and Apendages of Worship, is not teaching for Doctorines the
Commandments of Men. -- That it is impossible to attend upon any public
Worship, without adjusting some external Circumstances with Relation to it,
such as the Time and Place of Worship, and such like Things as are altogether
extrinsecal to the Worship it self; and which have no Religion placed in them.
-- But what is this to the Affair under Consideration? You indeed demand, What
has the Church of England done, but only agreed together about some mere
Circumstantials and Apendages of Worship? And tell us, They have declared to
the World; that they place no Religion in these Things, etc. But could you be
serious, when you wrote this? Are the Churches Impositions of these Things with
such severe penal Sanctions, no more then an Agreement among themselves? Is
there no Difference, between adjusting such external and altogether extrinsecal
Circumstances with Relation to the Worship of God, as the Time and Place of
Worship; and the imposing your mystical significant Ceremonies, your Modes and
Forms of Worship? Don't you your self allow, that the Sign of the Cross (for
Instance) is a visible Sign of invisible Grace. -- That it is a Badge of our
Christianity; that it is a covenanting Sign, a Sign of professed Consent to the
Covenant Duties, an obliging Sign, an investing Sign; that it is to operate
Grace morally on the intelligent: And that it is a Discharge of our Duty, by
glorying in the Sufferings of Christ? From p. 20. to 26. And can any Body
pretend, that this is no more than mere Circumstantials and Appendages of
Worship, such as Time, Place and the like? Or can any Body pretend, that the
Modes of Worship are altogether extrinsecal to the Worship it self; that they
are mere Circumstantials, that have no Religion in them? Why then are we forbid
in the second Commandment, to bow down to any Thing in Heaven or Earth? Why did
the three Children rather choose the Fiery Furnace, than to fall down to
Nebuchadnezzar's golden Image. Dan. iii. 16? And why were the Martyrs in the
Roman Persecution so weak, as to suffer the most terrible Death their Enemies
could inflict, rather than take a Censer in their Hands, with burning Incense,
in an Idols Temple? Could not these have performed the outward Act, without any
inward Consent, by the Help of this fashionable Distinction; These are but mere
Circumstances, we place no Religion in them? -- You Will remember Sir, that I am
not now comparing your Modes of Worship to the idolatrous Modes of the Heathen;
but endeavoring to show, that the Modes of Worship are something more than
mere Circumstances. -- And if it be so in heathen Worship, it is so likewise in
Christian Worship. -- Since it is so from the Nature of the Thing, it is so in
all Cases whatsoever, as might be abundanlty proved from Scripture, if there
needed any further Evidences, in so clear a Case. -- And I have the same Cause
to expostulate with you, with Respect to your Forms of Worship. -- Will you
yourself say, that there is no Religion placed in them? If you do say so, you
acknowledge all the Forms of the Church of England to be void of Religion; and
I Am sure then not very desirable. -- If you do not say so, how are they mere
Circumstantials and Appendages of Worship? How can your Church declare to the
World, that they place no Religion in these Things? In a Word, you must
persuade the World to quit their Understanding; and to act wholly by an
implicit Faith, before your Reasoning will pass among Men of Discerning, for
any Thing but most egregious and ludicrous Trifling.

I am in the next Place to take Notice of your Attempt to vindicate the Church
of England, from the Imputation of Will Worship. -- And whether that Church be
chargeable with Will Worship or not. I cannot but think the Difference here made
by you, and the learned Advocates called in to your Assistance, is very lame
and deficient. -- You begin with an Exposition of Col. ii. 23. And tell us,
from thence, that Will Worship must consist in these two Things, 1. In giving
that Worship to a Creature, which is due only to God. 2. In enjoining a Thing
as necessary and commanded of God as a Piece of his Service, when God never
commanded it; and in prohibiting Things as unlawful by God's Command, when God
never forbid them. -- But whence I beseech you, is this Limitation of
Will Worship? Can no Worship be instituted from Men's own Wills, as the
Foundation and Rule of it, without terminating in the Creature, or pretending
an immediate Command from God for it? Nay, are not all Institutions of Worship
merely human, founded upon the Will of Man, and that only; Whatever Reasons Men
may pretend for their willing and requiring such Kinds of Worship; yet their
Wills are the only Foundation and Rule of it. -- This is (I think)
incontestable, that such Worship must be founded upon a Declaration of the Will
of God, or the Will of Man. -- The former you your self expressly exclude in the
present Case; and tell us, that they are not imposed under the Notion of
Necessary Duties, or religious Actions, or as commanded by God. p. 11. They
must be therefore imposed as commanded by Man; and founded upon the Will of
Man. -- That is, they must be Will Worship. -- But you may yet object, that
this is not what was designed by the Apostle in the cited Text. -- Let us then
consider the Case a little.

Either this Imputation of Will Worship, must be connected to all the foregoing
Context; (as you seem to suppose) or else only to the two Verses immediately
preceding. -- If the former, then the imposing of Meat Drink and HOLD DAYS. v.
16. Voluntary Humility, and worshipping Angels. v. 18. the Rudiments of the
World, and human Ordinances. v. 20. forbidding to touch, taste, or handle. v.
21. all the Commandments and Ordinances of Men. v. 22. are equally condemned as
a Show of Wisdom in Will Worship, in the Text under Consideration. -- But if we
are to consider this Charge of Will Worship, as referring only to the two
Verses immediately foregoing the Text; yet even then, all the Doctrines and
Commandments of Men in the Worship of God, are without Distinction to perish
together, under this Indictment. -- They are all in the Apostles Account, but a
Show of Wisdom in Will Worship. -- There is no Place at all for your
Distinction, of pretending these Things to be necessary and commanded of God,
when God never commanded them. -- All that the Apostle founds this Charge upon,
is their being merely the Commandments and Doctrines of Men. -- No Pleas or
Pretenses of Gods having commanded or not commanded them comes into the
Question in this Context.

And now for the Application. -- Whether this Charge lies against some hot
Dissenters, (as you are pleased to call us) or against those that made them
such; is a Question pretty easily answered. -- Let us be deemed guilty, if we
forbid Meats and Drinks; and appoint for Days of fasting and Abstinence, the
forty Days of Lent, the Ember Days at the four Seasons, being the Wednesday,
Friday and Saturday after the first Sunday in Lent, the Feast of Pentecost,
September 14. and December 13. The Rogation Days, being the Monday, Tuesday and
Wednesday, before holy Thursday or the Ascension of our Lord; and all the
Fridays in the Year, except Christmas Day. -- Let them bear this Imputation;
that say touch not, taste not, handle not, for above a hundred Days in the
Year. -- We will also be content to bear this Charge, when you prove us guilty
of appointing HOLY DAYS to be observed; (which is another Article in the
Catalogue of Will Worship) and when we require between twenty and thirty Days
in the Year, to be observed in Commemoration of certain Saints departed; and of
notifying in our Calendar, the Days of above fifty more, some of them very
little worthy to be remembered; and some of them utterly unknown, besides
Christmas, Circumcision, Epiphany, good Friday, Easter, Whitsunweek; with a
long etcetera. -- If we (I say) thus appoint above half the Days in the Year,
for Feasts, and Holy Days, let us bear the Imputation of Will Worship. -- For
if so, I don't see how we could evade the Charge of rejecting the Commandment
of God, (six Days shall thou labor) that we may keep our own Traditions. Mark
vii. 9. I will add to this -- We shall also confess our selves chargeable, when
we enjoin the Rudiments of the World, and subject our People unto human
Ordinances, and the Commandments and Doctrines of Men; (Which are the other
Articles in the Apostles Catalogue of Will Worship) and impose all these, under
the Pains of Excommunication: When we impose the Athanasian Creed; and damn all
that don't believe the whole of it, though not one in five hundred understand it.
-- When we impose contested and scrupled Forms of Prayer, canonical Vestments,
the Cross in Baptism, Kneeling at the Lord's Supper, and the like. And yet at
the same Time acknowledge; as you do. p. 11. That we don't impose them under
the Notion of necessary Duties or religious Actions, or as commanded by God:
But in short, to assert our Dominion over other Men's Consciences. -- When we
ordain, that the Church shall be governed by Arch Bishops, Bishops,
Chancellours, Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, etc. that
the Scriptures know nothing of. -- Then must we plead guilty at this Bar. For
we have but one Law giver, who is able to save and destroy. -- And who is he
that judges another? Jam. iv. 12. But in the mean Time, Turpe est Doctori cum
Culpa redarguit ipsum.

As to your Discourse of Superstition, which you acknowledge to be another Name
for the same Thing, p. 12. There is no Occasion to say any Thing about it,
having already obviated all your Pretenses upon that Head; and shall therefore
only observe, that it can certainly be no Superstition, to avoid Will Worship.
-- And to whom that Imputation properly belongs, let the World Judge.

Upon the whole, I must remark to you, how impertinent are all your Pretenses,
of fixing the Charge of Will Worship and Superstition upon us; for avoiding
what God has not forbidden. For he has forbidden every Thing in his Worship,
but what he has required. -- Christ has given no Commission to his Ministers to
teach any Thing, but what he has commanded them. Mat. xxviii. 2. To the Law and
to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is because they
have no Light in them. Isai. viii. 20. Whatsoever Thing I command you, observe
and do it; thou shall not add thereto; nor diminish from it. Deuteronomy. xii. 32. For
I testify unto every one that hears the Words of the Prophecy of this Book,
if any Man shall add unto those Things, God shall add unto him the Plagues,
that are written in this Book, Rev. xxii. 18. To which may be added, besides
many other plain Scripture Proofs, the Texts already debated. -- By the one
they are reprimanded as Hypocrites, who worship God in vain, on Account of
their teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men; and by the other, they
are stigmatized as Will-Worshippers, who teach the Commandments and Doctrines
of Men.

Pardon me Sir, if I here take Liberty to enquire of you, upon what Warrant the
Church of England have rejected the Popish Ceremonies and Institutions? The
Scripture no where expressly forbids saying Mass, using holy Water, crossing our
selves upon all Occasions, setting up Crosses in our Churches or Streets; or
wearing them in our Bosoms: Nor does it expressly forbid wearing a String of
Beads about our Necks, and counting them when we say our Prayers, or the like.
Now according to your own Rule. p. 12. since you think to please God by
avoiding what he has not forbidden, are you not guilty of Will Worship and
Superstition, in rejecting of these Things? If you say that the general
Prohibition of these Things in Scripture is sufficient. We give the same Answer
with respect to your unscriptural Institutions. And assign any Reason if you
can, for the Church of England's Authority, in appointing any unscriptural
Institutions, which she thinks decent and orderly in the Worship of God; which
cannot be urged with the same Force, in Favor of the Church of Rome's Authority
in appointing such unscriptural Institutions, as she thinks decent and orderly
in the Worship of God, I must take leave to tell you again, that though there is
greatest Difference in the Nature of the Things imposed; yet there is none at
all in the Authority to impose them; nor any at all in the Authority to judge,
what are, and what are not decent and orderly in Gods Worship.

Thus I Am prepared to hear what you have to say, to the particular Charges as
you call them.

The first is, that I think stinted and imposed Liturgies, are teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men, for this Reason among others; because the
Scriptures have not imposed nor prescribed any. And is not this a good Reason?
Such imposed Liturgies must be either the Commandments of God or the
Commandments of Men. -- If the former, God has prescribed and enjoined them;
and if he has not, they are the Commandments of Men, which is what I undertook
to prove; and I think this falls nothing short of Demonstration. -- If it had
been the Will of God that we should worship him by stinted Liturgies, he would
have told us so in his Word. -- It is impossible by any Evidence to determine
that to be his Will in this Case, which he has not revealed to be so in his
Word, which is the only Manifestation of his Will, with Respect to the Modes of
Worship. -- And it is not so light a Concern, whether we worship God with a
Form or without, whether we have a stated and stinted Liturgy or none at all,
or by that sort of Form or Liturgy, whether by a Mass Book, or
Common Prayer Book, or some other, we are to perform our public Worship, that
there should be no Provision made about it in the Word of God, if it had been
the divine Pleasure, that there should be a stated stinted Liturgy constantly
used in the Church, for public Worship. Whence I think we may safely conclude,
that the imposing any stated Liturgy, is teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men.

But was you in earnest, when you pretended to turn this Argument upon us? Can
you, who have lived so long among us, be capable to imagine, that we impose our
extemporary Prayers, upon our Congregations? Did you ever know any Penalties
inflicted by us, upon such as differ from us about conceived Prayers? How could
you with any Justice say, that I excommunicate all that cannot in Conscience
join with me. p. 17. I challenge the World to produce as much as a Shadow of an
Instance of this Kind. -- No, it is with such as agree with us about the Use of
conceived Prayers, with whom that Part of public Worship is performed. -- We
have no canons to excommunicate such as differ from us in that Matter. We
refuse no sacred Ordinances to any upon that Account. -- And let it be so in
the Church of England, and (though we could not then think their Way of Worship
the best; yet) we would maintain no Controversy with them about it; but consent
to have every one Practice, according as he is fully persuaded in his own Mind.
And what Imposition, I entreat you, is it, to agree with them that agree with
us; and use conceived Prayers with those that desire it?

But you insinuate, that we have no Command of God in the Scriptures for our
conceived Prayers, any more than you have for imposing your Liturgy upon us. --
To which I answer. -- We have express Command in Scripture to attend upon this
Duty of Prayer, to pray with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit. -- We
have particular Directions as to the Method of performing the Duty: But no
Precept, no Example, no Direction at all for the compiling, imposing, or using
any Liturgy, either for public or private Devotion. -- From whence I think the
Consequence is necessary, that we are commanded to pray without a Liturgy,
since we are commanded to pray, and have frequent Examples in Scriptures of
praying without a Liturgy; But no divine Warrant for the Use of a Liturgy upon
any Occasion, much less a stinted Liturgy for constant public Worship. And I
must further observe to you, that your Reasoning will as well conclude against
our preaching my Sermons of our own composing; and for our constant Use of the
Homilies in our public Ministry. -- For God has no where expressly commanded us
to preach our own Composures -- Will you therefore conclude, that we must
preach no Sermons but what the Church has composed for us? I believe you will
acknowledge that the general Commands to preach, to be instant in Season and
out of Season, to declare the whole Counsel of God, etc. are a sufficient
Declaration of God's Will, against a stated and stinted Use of the Book of
Homilies. -- And why it is not equally so in the other Case, it concerns you to
show. -- Would you argue, that composing of Sermons, is one of the chief of
those Gifts that Ministers are required to stir up and exercise. And why not
composing or conceiving their Prayers too? How comes the Gift of Prayer
confined to the Composers of the Liturgy; and denied to all other Ministers,
though as much concerned as they, about both the Matter and Form of their
Prayers? Would you urge, that our Sermons should be suited to the several
Occasions and Exigences of our Congregations. -- And why not our Prayers too?
Why should we be confined by the Book, to Joy and Gladness, when God calls for
Weeping and Mourning and Baldness and girding with Sackcloath? See Isai. xxii.
12 13. And on the other Hand. -- Why must we be confined by the Book, to
Fasting and Humiliation, when some signal Instance of special Mercy calls for
present Thanksgiving? See Neh. viii. 9.10. And yet these are Cases, that often
do and must occur.

Besides, it is utterly impossible, that this Book, or any other, should provide
for all the various Exigencies and different Dispensations of Providence, that
frequently happen. -- And must these Occasions be never regarded in our
Devotions? Thus you see what becomes of your fine Reasonings upon this Subject.

But after all, if it were indeed as you boldly assert, that there is a
Necessity of Peoples submitting to imposed Prayers, p. 15. And that conceived
Prayers are a Form imposed upon the People: Yet this makes nothing at all for
your Prayer Book, I should nevertheless be unsatisfied with stated and stinted
Liturgies, for these Reasons.

1. Because there was no such Liturgy composed nor imposed in the Christian
Church in the earliest and purest Times of it. -- Christ and his Apostles have
given us no such Pattern for our Imitation; and I would willingly walk so, as
to have them for an Example, Phil. iii. 17. Certainly if this Method of public
Worship had been the best, it must have been used by them who were infallible
in their Choice of the best Methods of worshipping God.

2. Because there is no Commission given by the great Head and King of the
Church, to any Man or Men upon Earth, to compose or impose any Liturgy for the
Churches Use. -- Wherever it is, it must be without Authority; and therefore
without any Promise of God's Acceptance. -- And I am loath to do any Thing in
the Worship of God, that will expose me to that Reprimand. -- Who has required
this at your Hand, Isai. i. 12.

3. Because where this Commission is wanting, Christians are bound to withstand
and oppose all these Impositions; and all Infractions of their Christian
Liberty: And even in lawful and indifferent Things, not to be brought under the
Power of any, 1 Cor. vi. 12. But to stand fast in the Liberty, where with
Christ has made us free. Gal. v. 1. And in doubtful Cases they should certainly
take Care, that they condemn not themselves, in those Things which they allow.
Romans xiv. 22.

4. Because a stated and stinted Liturgy, limits both the Matter and Manner of
our Prayers; and as it prevents those proper Addresses to God which special
Exigencies call for, and which no Form can provide for; so it deprives us of
those divine Assistances, that may be hoped for in the Use of conceived
Prayers. -- Whence it seems inconsistent with that of the Apostles, Romans viii.
26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our Infirmities: For we know not what we
should pray for as we ought: But the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us,
with Groanings that cannot be uttered. -- Of this you were told before, but
have found nothing to reply to it.

And now let us consider, whether I am chargeable with such a gross Mistake as
you suppose. In saying, that there is no Account in the Old or New Testament,
of Forms of Prayer for stated public Worship. -- You call upon us to look into
Deuteronomy. xxi. 7. xxvi. 5, 6, 7, 13, 14, 15. Number. vi. 23. Joel, ii. 17. But you did
not think it proper to transcribe the quoted Texts. That would have laid them
open to the Readers view, whereas you might hope, that the most of 'em would
take your Word, for the Pertinency of these Quotations; and never take the
Pains to read and consider them. -- But I have followed your Orders, I have
looked into Deuteronomy. xxi. 7. And find there Directions, how Men were ordered to
clear themselves from the Guilt of innocent Blood, in the Case of an unknown
Murder. But then, this was no public Worship at all, much less was it stated
public Worship. -- I have looked into Deuteronomy. xxvi. 5, 6, 7, 13, 14, 15. -- And
find there Directions given, for the Method of bringing the first Fruits to the
Priest; and for the Declaration they were to make, when they had made an End of
Tything all the Tithes of their Increase: But in this Case also, the same
Objection lies against you. -- Were these Directions for public stated
Worship, when the Occasions occurred but once in a Year; and but once in three
Years? Did the public stated Worship of the Jews return no oftener? Is there no
Difference between stated, and such Occasional Worship (if it be proper to call
it Worship at all)? I confess I was so Ignorant, as to think occasional and
stated Worship to be opposites; and did therefore put in the Word stated, in
Opposition to these occasional Observances. -- I have also looked into Numb. vi.
23. Which is only a Direction as to the Manner of the Priests pronouncing the
Blessing to the People; and not for the Peoples Worshipping God at all. -- And
as little to the Purpose is your last Quotation from Joel ii. 17. Which is no
more than a Direction to the Priests, to use a particular Petition in their
Prayers to God, on one particular Fast Day then appointed by the Prophet,
without any Direction that it should ever be used, upon any other Occasion. --
And what is this to stated public Worship?

Could you your self suppose, that those Texts of Scripture any Thing affected
the Debate between you and I? Do they make any Thing at all, for the composing
and imposing a stinted Liturgy for their constant public Worship? Which was
the Thing (as you know) that I was then pleading against. -- Is it just
arguing, that because in the Case of an unknown Murder, Men were to use a Form
to clear themselves from the Guilt of that Murder; Or that when the Jews
brought in their first Fruits, and Tithes, they were to use a particular Form
of Words, upon their delivering them to the Priest; or because the Priests were
to bless the People in a particular Form of Words; or that because there was a
special Petition to be used, upon one particular Fast Day of Gods appointing;
that therefore we are to be tied up to a stated stinted Liturgy of human
Invention and Appointment, in all our Prayers in the public Worship of God?
Methinks a little more thought upon this Subject would have been proper, before
you had published that scripture Evidence to the World.

But you have one more Scripture Proof which is, that the Psalms of David,
Moses, etc. are Forms of Prayer as well as Praise; and called Prayers. p. 6.
But were not these penned to be sung in the Congregations? Were not praying and
singing different Parts of public Worship, in the solemn Assemblies of the
Jews? And do not we as well as you, use these very Forms in our public
Worship? What then is this to the present Case? Is this Reasoning; or is it
trifling, to urge, that because it is agreed between us, that there were Forms
of Divine Appointment for public Singing, that therefore there were also Forms
instituted for the stated public Prayers in the Jewish Church. -- What does it
signify, that these Psalms were some of them by Way of Petition to God, since
they were designed for a different and distinct Part of Worship, from their
stated public Prayers.

Upon the whole, I have this further Remark to make, that you your self don't
pretend to any Warrant from the New Testament, for the Use of Forms of Prayer
in our stated public Worship. -- Whence you implicitly allow, that there is no
scripture Warrant for their Use under the Gospel Dispensation.

I am now to consider, what you can offer against this Saying of mine, in the
Sermon you oppose, that we cannot help but think, that taking a great Part of
the Prayer Book out of the popish Liturgy, is teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men. To which you answer, first "I wish you had the Mass Book
that you might see with your own Eyes, how wide he is from the Truth." But what
an odd Evasion is this? Did I pretend, that the Common Prayer was taken out of
the Mass Book strictly speaking? Or is that Book (if considered only as the
Order and Canon of the Mass) all the popish Liturgy? No Sir, when you undertake
to compare Notes, be pleased to look into the Roman Breviary for the first Part
of the public Prayers; into the Ritual for the Order of Administering
Sacraments, Matrimony, visiting the Sick, and Burials; into the Missal for the
Order of Consecration; in the Communion, for the Epistles and Gospels and
Collects; and into the Pontifical, for the Order of Consecration of Bishops and
Priests: All which belong to their Liturgy.

You next pretend to call in some Witnesses in your Favor, Mr. Ball and the
Ministers of Old-England, in their Letter to the Ministers in New England. --
But what do they say? Do they deny; or could they deny, that the Method and
Form of the Prayer Book, was taken out of the popish Liturgy? No, but that the
popish Liturgy was refined; and that what the Church of England retained in
their Prayer Book, was in most Things according to the purest Liturgies, that
were in Use, long before the Mass was heard of in the World. -- Which if true,
does not contradict any Thing spoken, by me, since it is not denied; but that
these Things were Part of the popish Liturgy, when the Prayer Book was
compiled. -- But what are we to understand by these ancient and purest
Liturgies, they speak of? You tell us, The Truth is the Church of England when
she reformed came as near as she possibly could, to the Church in the purest
and apostolical Ages, long before Popery was heard of in the World.. p. 18.
This (I must confess) is something surprising. -- Can you direct where to find
those Liturgies of the Apostolical Ages, that the Prayer Book was copied from?
Or can you find any Liturgy at all, of constant stated Use in the Church,
before Pope Gregory's Time, in the Year of Christ 600. If you can find any such
Liturgy, from which the Church of England copied any Part of the Prayer Book,
before that Time, let us hear of it in your next. -- But if you cannot, what
mean these Boasts of the Apostolical Ages? What if the Church of England might
find something of Pope Gregory's Liturgy in the Popish Service, when she
extracted the Prayer Book: I must nevertheless observe to you, that the Church
in Gregory's Time, instead of being Apostolical, was very Apostatical; and
Popery was heard of in the World, long before that Time.

But since you are pleased to call in human Testimony in your Vindication, it
may not be improper for me also, to offer you some human Testimony, more
pertinent, and of better Authority. And I Will first bring forth two Royal
Witnesses, who are as express in my Favor as Words can be. -- King Edward the
vi. in his Speech to the Devonshire Rebels (that were armed in Opposition to
the Reformation) tells them, As for the Service Book in the English Tongue, it
perhaps seems to you a new Service; yet indeed it is no other but the old THE
SAME WORDS in English that were in Latin, saving a few Things taken out, that
were so fond, that it had been a Shame to have heard them in English. If the
Service of the Church was good in Latin, it remains good in English; for
NOTHING IS ALTERED, but to speak with Knowledge, what was spoken with
Ignorance; and to let you understand what I said for you. Foxes Acts and Mon.
Vol. 2. p. 667.
King James the first, in a speech to the general Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, thus expresses himself, As for your Neighbor Kirk in England, their
Service is but an evil said Mass in English, they want nothing of the Mass, but
the lifting up, etc. Calderwood Hist. p. 256.
To these I add Mr. Thomas Gage, who was bred a Popish Priest; and therefore
very capable to judge in this Case. Who thus expresses himself. When in Paul's
Church, I heard the Organs, and the Music, and the Prayers, and the Collects;
and saw the Ceremonies at the Altar, I remembered Rome again; and perceived but
little Difference between the two Churches. I searched further into the Common
Prayer; and carried with me a Bible into the Country, on purpose to compare the
Prayers, with a Mass Book, which there I had at Command; and found no
Difference but English and Latin, which made me wonder, and to acknowledge that
much remained still of Rome in the Church of England; and that I feared my
Calling was not right. English Amer. p. 205.
And if a Witness from among the Papists will add any Force, you may take that
of Weston, whom I believe you will think satirical enough. Some Protestants
(says he) that they may not appear absolutely impious and irreligious, use our
Missal and Breviary, selecting what they please thereof, for their Liturgy; and
to make the Form of their Worship to appear more goodly, they have their
Canonical Persons forsooth, after the Modes and Customs of the Church of Rome.
Their Caps, and Hoods, and Holy Days, and such like Stuff, which they say they
found in the Synagogue of Antichrist. By which very Thing it is apparent, that
the Religion of these Protestants stands guilty of Stealth and Robbery, by
which it first came into the World. Or if they will not be taken for Thieves,
let them go for our Apes. These with their whole Service are derided, not only
by ours, but also by their own. The English seem to have driven the Pope out of
England in such Haste, that they forced him to leave his Clothes behind him,
which they, like Fools in a Play, put on with a kind of pompous Ceremony of
Triumph, and so lead the Quire. A goodly Reformation it is, that they dare not
earn through! Thus he. To which I may add, That two successive Popes offered
Queen Elizabeth, on certain Conditions, to confirm or allow the Prayer Book, as
we are told by the aged Nonconformists, out of Cambden's Eliz. p. 46. and Fox's
Acts and Monum. Vol. 2. p. 667.

Thus I have entertained you with some counter Evidences, and have more at your
Service, if these wont satisfy.

But what need of Evidences in a Matter of Fact, always open to the Test? Mr.
De-Laun you know, has exactly drawn the Parallel, between the one and other
Liturgy, to whom I refer you for further Satisfaction.

But you say, suppose the Papists use several of those Prayers that we use,
what then? Did I not tell you before, what then, that we think we have just
Cause to complain, that the Order and Method, as well as a good Part of the
Master of those Prayers, are not only from the Commandments of Men; but from
the Commandments of Antichrist himself. It therefore appears to us, too great a
symbolizing with Idolaters, to statedly use them in our public Worship,
contrary to that Rule, 1. Cor. x. 28. and that 1 Cor. vi. 17. To which you have
not seen Cause to make any Reply.

What next offers, is your Attempt to vindicate the Prayer Book from the
Imputation of vain Repetitions. And in Order to a just view of the Case, it may
be proper to enquire into the meaning of our Lords Prohibition of vain
Repetitions, in Mat. vi. 7 -- And then consider, how applicable that Text is to
the Case before us. The Words of that Text are. -- But when ye pray, use not
vain Repetitions as the Heathen do: For they think that they shall be heard,
for their much speaking. -- From whence it is apparent, that the frequent
Repetition of the same Thing, that God may the rather hear and accept us on
that Account, is what is here prohibited and condemned by our blessed Savior,
under the Character of vain Repetitions. And is not this the Case in the Prayer
Book? That there are numerous Repetitions of the same Thing, is certain. And
that these Repetitions are altogether needless, is as certain. One single Use
of Good Lord deliver us; or of We beseech thee to hear us good Lord, would have
been as well connected with the Whole of that Prayer in the Litany, as the
Repetition of the one eight Times, and the other Twenty. And what is this much
speaking of the same Thing for? Is it not that God may hear you? Or is it mere
trifling to no Purpose at all? The one or other of these must be the Design of
it. If the former, how can you be excused from vain Repetitions, in the very
Sense that they are prohibited in this Text? If the latter, it is horrible
Profaneness, which therefore cannot be the End of it. I don't apprehend what
Answer you can give to this.

It don't at all affect the Case, for you to say as p. 19. When we repeat Good
Lord deliver us, it always relates to new Matter; since there is no new Matter
at all, spoken by those that vocally pronounce these Petitions; nor any Cause
at all (that I know of) that calls for their Repetition. And there are besides
this, many other Repetitions in your Prayers, where there can be no Pretense
for any new Matter intervening. For instance, in the very same Prayer before
referred to, that Petition Have Mercy upon us miserable Sinners, is used eight
Times successively, without any other Petition between; and that Petition, Lord
have Mercy upon us, Christ have Mercy upon us, six Times successively, without
any new Matter. And you know where to find more of the like Kind. The Common
Prayer Book complains of the Papists using Multitudes of Responds, Verses and
vain Repetitions We make the same Complaint of the Prayer Book. And the
likeliest Way to satisfy our Complaint, is to show how Multitudes of
Repetitions in the Popish Prayers are vain; and Multitudes of Repetitions in
the Prayer Book are not vain. But I can think of no possible Method of doing
this, unless you pretend, That the Papists have wrong Ends in their using these
Repetitions: But then, may not they that join in your Litany have wrong Ends
too? And don't the Repetitions in both, tend to the same End? You tell us
indeed, that these Repetitions are very necessary to raise our Devotion, and
keep up our Attention. p. 19. And will not the Papists make the same Plea, upon
the same Grounds? But unto what, I beseech you, are they likely to raise our
Devotion, and keep up our Attention, when we are doing Nothing but repeat the
same Thing over and over again, unless it be to an Expectation of our being
heard for our much speaking? This appears to me their direct Tendency; and I
don't know how you can instance in any Repetitions used among the Heathen, that
carry a greater Show of this Kind in their Countenance, than these do. Let us
for Instance, pitch upon that Prayer of the Priests of Baal, 1 King xviii. 25.
And how do these show their Expectation, of their being heard for their much
speaking, by repeating O Baal hear us! any more than they, that above Twenty
Times going, repeat, We beseech thee to hear us good Lord, or that do nothing
but repeat, Have Mercy upon us miserable Sinners? It Is granted their Petitions
were made to a false God, yours to the true God: But that is so far from
helping the Case, that it is the very Argument of our Savior, why we should
not imitate them, in the Verse following the Text under Consideration.

But in Justification of these Repetitions, you plead, that in Psalm cxxxvi,
there are but Twenty seven Verses; and those Words, For his Mercy endures
forever, are repeated twenty seven times. And what can you argue from hence,
but that because we may use Repetitions in Singing, where Christ has not
forbidden it, we may use Repetitions in Prayer, where Christ has forbidden it.
Besides I have often heard of the Burden of a Song; and this has been at all
Times usual, both in sacred and profane Songs. But I never heard of the Burden
of a Prayer.

You add, Christ himself repeated the same Words thrice, in his Prayer in the
Garden, Mat. xxvi. 44. And twice on the Cross in one Breath, Mat. xxvii. 46.
But I must needs tell you, That you ought to have considered this Case better,
before you had ventured to publish so great a Mistake to the World, upon any
Man's Authority. For (first) if it were granted, that our Lord did use the same
Words three times; it was in three distinct different Prayers; and what is this
to the Case of using needless Repetitions in the same Prayer? Did ever any Body
object against praying for the same Thing, in several distinct Prayers? If you
pretend, that these Words were repeated in the same Prayer you directly
contradict the sacred Story referred to, where we are expressly informed, that
he came from his Retirement to his Disciples, the first Time, the second and
third Time; and waked them up, conversed with them; and then returned again to
his secret Devotion. And (secondly) there is no such Thing in the Original of
that Text you quote, as Christ's repeating the same Words. The Original Words
are TON AUTON LOCON, which signifies the same Speech, or the same Matter; but
not the same Words; and so it is accordingly rendered in both the Latin
Versions. And it is certain that he did not use the same Words. For the Words
of his first Prayer were, O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass
from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. ver. 39. But his second
Prayer was thus expressed, O my Father, if this Cup may not pass away from me
except I drink it, thy Will be done. ver. 42. So that it is plain, our Lord used
no Liturgy, in that he prayed for the same Thing in different Words, much less
did he use any Repetitions at all. So far from it, that in his praying for the
same Thing, in several distinct Prayers, he used different Expressions.

And as for your last mentioned Text. Was there any Petition twice used, or any
Thing like it, in the same Breath? What then could you mean by pretending to
it? That he invoked the Name of God twice is true, but nothing to the Purpose.
I cannot but think it looks pretty hard upon your Cause, that you have no better
Arguments to support it.

And now I proceed to the Consideration of what you have to say in Vindication
of your Churches appointing the Apocrypha to be read, as a Part of public
Worship, while there are a great many Parts of the canonical Scripture, never
read in public. Your first Answer is by Way of Recrimination upon your
Adversaries, for complaining of this, when they themselves have laid by the
whole Bible; and never read one Chapter by way of Lesson. But who are these
Adversaries you speak of? It was with me, that you had to do in this Debate;
and you very well know, that it is my constant Practice to read a Chapter of
the Bible, upon every Occasion of public Worship. There are, it is true, some
of our Ministry in this Country, that do live in the Omission of that Part of
public Worship; and I dare not undertake to justify them. Our public
Formula's do (I think) all declare for it. And I confess my self ignorant, upon
what justifiable Pretense it can be omitted.

Your other Answer is, that they (your Adversaries) know, that you never read
the Apocrypha as the Word of God, never read it on the Lord's Day, never
neglect the Holy Scripture for it. To which I answer. How should we know, that
you never read this as the Word of God, when you declare so loudly in the
Preface to the Common Prayer, that nothing is ordained to be read, but the pure
Word of God, the Holy Scriptures; or that which is agreeable to the same. And
must we suppose, that the legendary Story of Judith and her wonderful
lascivious Feats, in a mere Utopian Bethulia, on a certain Time, that could
never be brought into any Calendar, under the Reign of a Nebuchadnezzar, that
never had any being, is the pure Word of God, or agreeable to the same. And yet
your Calendar directs Judith the first and second, to be read October 5th. Or
must we suppose the same of the famous romantic Story of the lying Angel (that
said his Name was Azarias, Tobit's near Kinsman, of the Tribe of Naphtali, etc.
who in Company with Tobit's Son, rescued him out of the Mouth of a Fish big
enough, and fierce enough, it seems, to have devoured him; and yet these two (a
couple of notable Trencher Men, I confess!) eat up the mighty Fish at a Meal,
except his Heart, Gall, and liver, which were reserved for very sacred Uses;
the one of 'em, to cure Tobit's Eyes, that were muted out by a Swallow; the
other, two to smoke away the Devil into the furthermost Parts of Egypt, that he
might be bound there, and return no more, to carry on his Amor with the young
Man's Wife. And yet you know, this very edifying Story is by your Calendar
appointed to be read, in your public Worship. It is there ordained, that Tobit
1, 2, 3, 4, and 6, be read on the 27, 28, and 30 of September; and that Tobit
7, 9, 11, and 13, on the 1, 2, 3, and 4, of October. You tell us us indeed,
that these are never read on the Lord's Day. But tell us not, why they are
appointed to be read on any Day in God's immediate Service. And I would humbly
enquire, whether the Lord's Day never happens on the three last Days of
September, or the four first Days of October; or on any other Days of the
Months, on which Lessons are by the Calendar appointed to be read out of the
Apocrypha. But to avoid Prolixity, I venture to sum up this Debate, by an
Appeal to the World, whether the ridiculous and false Stories, as well as the
many false Doctrines, that are appointed to be read out of the Apocrypha, are
worthy of that Honor, which is due only to the Word of God, to be made Part of
our public Worship, in our Religious Assemblies. And whether it ben't the
highest Indignity to the Oracles of God, to omit the reading of a great Part of
them at all, in order to make Way for such fabulous Composures.

And now let us consider, whether the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, be not
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men; and a just Exception against
your Liturgy. I had observed, that the Cross is made on the Forehead in
Baptism, in Token, that the Party be not hereafter ashamed to confess the Faith
of Christ crucified, and that he is to fight manfully under his Banner, etc.
Now if this be a Token of these invisible Graces, it agrees with the Churches
own Definition of a Sacrament. A visible Sign of invisible Grace. To which you
answer, Surely he thinks the People of Newark are Idiots or natural Fools, to
believe that to be true, which every Child which has learned the Catechism,
knows to be false, etc. But why so much Heat! Will you cool a little, and
submit to be catechized; and answer me a few Questions, according to your own
Catechism and Prayer Book.

D. How many Parts are there in a Sacrament?


B. Two. The outward Sign; and the inward spiritual Grace.


D. To what End is the Sign of the Cross used in Baptism?


B. In Token that hereafter we shall not be ashamed to confess the Faith of
Christ crucified; and manfully to fight under his Banner, against Sin, the
World, and the Devil; and to continue Christ's faithful Soldiers and Servants
unto our Lives End.


D. Is here no outward visible Sign?


B. Yes, the Sign of the Cross, which the Prayer Book calls a Token, that
hereafter we shall not be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, etc.


D. Is here no inward spiritual Grace, accompanying this outward Sign?


B. Yes, the confessing the Faith of Christ crucified; and manfully fighting
under his Banner, against Sin, the World the Flesh and the Devil, and
continuing his faithful Soldiers and Servant unto our Lives End, are certainly
inward spiritual Graces, if there be any such Thing as spiritual Grace.


D. Has not then this Use of the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, all the Parts
assigned by the Church Catechism unto a Sacrament?


B. It seems so. But then I don't understand, why in the Definition of a
Sacrament these Words are added, ordained by Christ himself, as a Means whereby
we receive the same; and a Pledge to assure us thereof.


D. No wonder you don't understand it; for you confess your self to be but a
Novice, p. 4. and you cannot expect to learn every Thing at once. It may not be
unserviceable therefore, for you to have it explained to you. That these Words
do not belong to the Definition of a Sacrament as such, plainly appears by the
following Answer in the Catechism, where we are told, that there are but the
other two Parts, in a Sacrament: But it belongs to a divine Sacrament, to have
it ordained by Christ himself. Institution is indeed of the very Essence of a
Sacrament; and Christ's Institution is what makes it of divine Original. -- But
then a human Ordinance such as the Sign of the Cross, may be, nay must be,
according to your Catechism, a Sacrament nevertheless; if it have (though by
human Institution) both the Parts of a Sacrament. For what can be wanting to
make it a Sacrament, if it have all the Parts? To make this a little more
familiar to you. It Is to be observed, that the Catechism countenances this
Distinction of a divine and human Sacrament, in the immediately foregoing
Answer, where we are taught, that there are but two Sacraments only, GENERALLY
NECESSARY to Salvation, that is to say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.
Whereby it is plainly intimated, that there may be other Sacraments, though not
generally necessary; and it belongs only to these two, that are generally
necessary that they be ordained by Christ himself etc. -- Thus you see, what
Injury your Parents have done you, by neglecting to teach you this Catechism in
your Childhood. But I Am afraid I have been too free with you. And it is well if
I have not provoked you to put me in Mind again, of my Want of good Manners; and
to accuse me of a Flood of railing virulent Language, etc. As in p 21. I shall
therefore add no more upon this, but return to the Consideration of what you
have further to offer.


You inform us, that, if this Definition of a Sacrament be true, then Kneeling
or Standing in Prayer is a Sacrament. For it is a visible Sign of our Fear and
Reverence of God; yea my ministerial Band is a Sacrament. -- For that is a
visible Sign of my being devoted to Christ in the Ministry. Well! suppose this
were true, who I beseech you are you disputing against? Who have determined
these two Things to be the only Parts of a Sacrament? But I must take Leave to
inform you, that these are groundless Surmizes, unless you can prove that every
one that Kneels or Stands in Prayer, and every Minister or Lawyer that wears a
Band, are gracious Persons. Nor would that do neither. -- For these are not
instituted either by God or Man, to signify any such Thing. -- And it is the
Institution that makes a Sacrament, as I observed before. And as I am utterly
averse to all human Sacraments, so in an especial Manner, to the giving by
Institution, the Honor of a Sacrament to a popish Idol, as you cannot but
acknowledge the Cross to be.

I had demanded in my Sermon, why this Honor was done to the Cross, on which
Christ was crucified, any more than to the Thorns with which he was crowned, to
the Traitor by whom he was betrayed; or the malicious Court by which he was
condemned? To which you answer, because the Scripture makes an honorable
Mention of the Cross frequently; but not of Judas and the rest. p. 22. You
instance in two Places of Scripture, Mat. xvi. 24. and 1. Cor. i. 17. p. 26.
But could you seriously suppose, that these or any other Scriptures that
mention the Cross, intend thereby the material Cross upon which Christ
suffered, or the Figure of it made in the Air? Let us see what Work we shall
make of it, if we understand these quoted Scriptures in that Sense. -- If any
Man will come after me, let him take up his Cross, (that is let him carry a
wooden Cross on his Back; or keep making an Aerial Cross on his Forehead) and
follow me. For the preaching of the Cross, (that is preaching about a wooden
Cross; or the Sign of it made in the Air) is to them that perish Foolishness;
but unto us which are saved, it is the Power of God. -- Can you think this a
just Interpretation of these Scriptures? If not, why are they quoted, if it be,
why is the wooden Cross laid aside? Why don't you wear Crosses upon your
Breast? Why are not Crosses painted on your Church Walls; and erected at every
Corner of the Streets? Why don't you cross your self upon every Occasion? I
believe you will be hard put to it to find any Thing in Scripture, that speaks
more honorably of your Use of the Cross, than of these Practices of the
Papists, which you have rejected. -- But the Truth is, wherever the Scripture
makes honorable Mention of the Cross of Christ, it intends the Death of
Christ, or Christ himself that suffered upon the Cross; and not either a Cross
of Wood, or the Sign of it. -- How impertinent therefore, are all those Pleas
or Pretenses from Scripture! And the same Answer is sufficient for your second
Pretense, that the Cross was reproached by Infidels; but so were not the rest.
-- That is, they reproached our Savior and his Followers, on Account of his
accursed Death. -- And what is this in Favor of the Sign of the Cross? Did he
not suffer this accursed Death, through the Treason of Judas, by the Sentence of
the malicious Court by which he was condemned; and with a Crown of Thorns on
his Head? And I venture to affirm, that there is no more honorable Mention
made in the Scriptures, of the Cross of Wood on which he suffered, than of
these. -- That is, there is no honorable Mention made of either of them.

But its Time to attend upon the Answers you give, to any that shall be so
impertinent, as to ask what Warrant you have from Scripture for the Sign of the
Cross, p. 25. And you tell us, The Scripture requires of us, that we express
our inward Sense of God and Duty toward him, by such Actions as general Custom
has made significant in like Cases. Ibid. But I Am afraid you have not
sufficiently considered this Rule of yours; and what Consequences must
necessarily follow from it. -- For if this be true, then the Scripture requires
of you, that you should paint God the Father in the Form of an old Man, Our
Savior in the Shape of a Younger Man upon the Cross; and the Holy Ghost in the
Form of a Dove. -- You should keep Images of Angels and Saints in your
Churches; and in your Houses. For yon know where these, and multitudes more of
such Abominations, are by general Custom, become significant of our inward
Sense of God and Duty toward him. If you say, these are evil Customs, be
pleased to clear the Custom in Question from that Imputation. And besides, the
Rule you have given, has made no Distinction in this Case. If it had 'twould
have been altogether impertinent.

You go on to argue, "glorying in the Sufferings of Christ is a Duty. Gal. vi.
14. But good Sir, is there no way to glory in the Sufferings of Christ, but by
making a Cross on the Forehead? For my Part I cannot conceive how this is
glorying in his Sufferings at all.

You add, making the Sign of the Cross, is an Action which by universal Custom
in all Ages, since the Apostles Time* has been applied to signify our glorying
in the Sufferings of Christ, A bold Assertion, without any Pretense of Proof!
Be pleased in your next to show, that the Cross in Baptism was ever once used
during the three first Centuries; and it will be more to the Purpose. -- But
suppose it were so, since it was not used in the Apostles Time, I enquire by
what Authority was that Custom introduced.

There is one Thing more, proposed as an Argument for this Use of the Cross;
and that is, It Is Part of our Christian Liberty, that God allows us to express
our Devotion, in such becoming Actions, as universal Custom has made
significant. p. 27. But is it Part of your Christian Liberty, to impose these
Things upon those that scruple them? Is your Liberty infringed, if you want
Liberty to excommunicate the half of the Kingdom? Have none any Claim to
Christian Liberty, but your selves? Or is it an Attempt upon your Liberty, to
peaceably debate these Things with you? I know not how you can pretend, that
your Liberty is in the least invaded, unless in these Instances. -- Thus I
have, though but briefly, yet (I think) fully answered all your Arguments for the
Use of the Sign of the Cross in Baptism; and shall under this Head only subjoin
some Qeries, which I hope you will particularly answer in your next.

Q. 1. I would first enquire, Whether any Church upon Earth, has Power to
impose doubtful and scrupled Rites, (such as you know the Sign of the Cross is,
to the greatest Part of the Protestant World) upon the Consciences of others;
and to excommunicate all that will not comply with them? And whether this be not
to judge another Man's Servant, who must stand or fall by his own Master?
Contrary to Romans xiv. 1.

Q. 2. Whether, since the Sign of the Cross has no divine Institution, and has
been abused to the most abominable Superstition and Idolatry, it ought not to
be treated as Hezekiah did the brazen Serpent, and called Nebushtan, 2 Kings
viii. 4? And whether God's Directions to his ancient People, that they should
utterly destroy all the Remainders and the Monuments of Idolatry, all that had
been abused and polluted by an Idolatrous Use, be not from the Nature and
Reason of the Thing obligatory upon us? See Deuteronomy. vii. 5, 25. Isai. xxx. 22.
and xxxii. 9.

Q 3. Whether that which is the principal Badge of Popery, has been a dreadful
Snare to Multitudes of poor deluded People, and has shed so much precious
Blood, which the Earth will not cover, should be advanced to the highest Honor
in a Protestant Church, without any just Pretense to a divine Warrant? And yet
you know all these Things are true, of the Sign of the Cross.

Q. 4. Whether the cursed Instrument of our blessed Savior's extreme
Sufferings, should (on the Account of its having been such to him) be had in
highest Honor and Reverence by us?

Q. 5. Whether any of the five Popish human Sacraments, have not as good a
Claim to our Observation, as the Sign of the Cross; which I have already proved
from your Prayer Book to have the Nature of a Sacrament, by the Institution of
your Church?

I am now prepared to consider your Arguments for Kneeling at the Lords Supper.
And I shall begin with that which you triumph most upon. But does he think (say
you) that the Apostles continued eating or sitting, whilst Christ was at Prayer
over the Bread and Wine. -- But if the Apostles rose up or kneeled, whilst
Christ prayed, where does he find that they sat down again to receive
immediately after the Consecration. Let Sitters answer this; or else let them
cease to tell us, that Christ when he used this Ordinance, did it in a Table
Posture: But this they can never answer. p. 32. -- The best Way to set this in
a clear Light is, to see how this Affair is represented by the Evangelists. We
are told by one of them, That when the Hour was come, he SAT DOWN, and the
twelve Apostles with him, -- And he took the Cup and gave Thanks, etc. Luke
xx^^ 14, 17. We are told by another of them, that Supper being ended, HE RISES
FROM SUPPER, and laid aside his Garments, Joh. xiii. 2, 4. And is not their
sitting down to the Table at the Beginning; and their rising up from it when
they had done, a sufficient Evidence, that they partook of this Ordinance
sitting? If not, I despair of ever seeing any Thing proved, by the most plain,
possitive and intelligible Expressions. Therefore as to your curious Question,
whether the Apostles continued sitting, whilst Christ was at Prayers over the
Bread and Wine? Or whether they arose and sat down again after the
Consecration? I answer, they might do either the one or the other. If the
former, it would not be the first Time that they sat by our Savior's express
Commandment, while he prayed for a Blessing upon his Table. See Mat. xiv. 19,
And he commanded the Multitude to sit down on the Grass, and looking up to
Heaven, he blessed and brake, etc. So also Mat. xv. 35. Nor do I see any
Incongruity in supposing on the other Hand, that they rose up whilst Christ was
at Prayer; and sat down again after the Consecration. Certain it is, if they
did rise at the Consecration of the Elements, they did sit down again, or else
they could not rise from the Table, when the Supper was ended. In short,
whether the Apostles sat or stood whilst Christ was at Prayer, we know that
standing is by divine Institution, a proper praying Posture, which is a
sufficient Warrant for our Conduct in standing up, whilst we pray for a
Blessing on the Elements. And the Example of Christ and his Apostles, is a
sufficient Warrant for our sitting, when we partake of them. We do not know,
whether they sat or stood whilst Christ blessed the Elements, and therefore may
attend upon that Part of the Institution, in a proper praying Posture. But we
do know that they sat, whilst they partook of the Elements, and therefore may
not deviate from that Pattern. Impertinent therefore are all those specious
Pretenses, urged from Bishop Beveridge, of Kneeling out of greater Humility,
Reverence, and the like. For where will the Charge of wanting Reverence,
Humility, etc. terminate? Was sitting the Posture that Christ himself
appointed; and shall his own institutions be charged with Irreverence? Or can
you pretend to refine upon his Institutions, and order Things better than he
has done? Would not this be the highest Reflection upon his Wisdom and
Authority? Our blessed Lord has given us an Example, which ought to be a
standing Pattern to his Church, this we are bound to imitate. We have no
Allowance to decline from it, no Authority to alter or change it, no Warrant to
contrive a more humble, decent, or reverend Posture, than he has exemplified.
And are therefore certainly safest, whilst we are Followers of him as dear
Children. For Obedience is the best Humility.

I must therefore again enquire; since the Church of England disclaims any
Adoration to the Elements, why does she use the Posture of Adoration? Why will
she symbolize with the Papists, in their Adoration of their Breaden God? And
why give such Countenance to their horrid Idolatry, to the Grief and Wounding
of so many of God's dear Children? I must observe to you, that your pretended
parallel Case, is altogether impertinent: For when I kneel before a Chair in
Prayer, I don't kneel down to any Sign, Representation or Image, with my Mind
and Eyes fixed upon that, as you do, when you kneel at the Lord's Supper; and
therefore can be in no Danger of Idolatry, when I kneel immediately to the
highest Object of Worship, without any intermediate Sign.

You deny that Kneeling was brought in by the Papists. -- And in Answer, I make
you this fair offer. -- If you will prove that Kneeling was used in any Church
upon Earth, at the Lord's Supper, before Transubstantiation was brought in, I
will acknowledge my Mistake, as publicly as you please.

You complain of my saying, that the glorious Author of this Feast, is pleased
to stoop to a friendly Familiarity with his Guests; and seem ignorant of what I
mean by it. -- I will therefore inform you, that I mean by it, that Christ is
dealing by us in this Ordinance, as a great Monarch does by his mean Subjects,
whom he invites to a Feast. -- He is suffering us to sit down with the King at
his Table; and allowing us most near and intimate Communion with himself. -- He
is here calling upon us saying, eat O Friends, Drink, yea drink abundantly, O
my beloved. -- And now I Will conculde this Head also, with a few Queries, which
I hope you will particularly answer in your next.

Q. 1. I first enquire, whether Bowing down or Kneeling to Signs or
Representations of God, and heavenly Things, does not incur the Guilt of
Idolatry and Image Worship, even when the Adoration does ultimately refer to
God himself? Whether this sort of Idolatry ben't expressly forbidden, by the
Letter of the second Commandment? Whether the Elements in the Lords Supper, be
not Signs and Representations of our Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore, whether
this don't look too much like that sort of Idolatry, to bow down or kneel to
these Elements; or whether it has not at least too much Tendency to lead weak
and ignorant Persons to it?

Q. 2. Whether Meditation and ejaculatory Prayer, ben't the proper Exercises to
be attended at the Time of Participation; and whether Kneeling be an instituted
Posture for the attending those Duties?

Q. 3. Whether appointing a different Posture in this Ordinance, from that
instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, under a Pretense of Humility, be not
according to the Letter of that Text, Col. ii. 22. A Show of Wisdom in
Will Worship, and Humility?

Q. 4. Whether those can be in any Danger of displeasing our Lord Jesus Christ,
who imitate his own Example in the Posture they use at this Ordinance? And
whether there be no Danger on the other Hand, in deviating from the Pattern he
himself has set us?

The next Thing that offers, is your Vindication of your Sureties in Baptism.
-- Upon this Head you tell us, that It Is no Wonder I find Fault with it; For I
have mistook the whole Matter. -- Here the Sureties make not one Promise of any
Thing, that they will do for the Child; but only are the Mouth of the Child;
and the Child promises and professes by them as Proxies. p. 30. 31. Then
according to this account of the Matter, the Sureties are under no Obligation
at all. -- They don't make one Promise of any Thing, that they will do for the
Child. -- What then do you mean by saying; that Though some Sureties are careless
of their Duty in this Regard, yet others do it very well. What Duty I beseech
you? They are under no Obligation. -- they are ONLY the Mouth of the Child, to
let the Congregation know for their Edification, what the Child ought to have
spoke, if he had been able to speak. What signifies it to tell us, that we may
see the Duties of the Sureties, in the Exhortation, at the End of the Office;
when they are under no Obligation to regard that Exhortation, any more than
their Neighbors? They have done their Part already. They are only the Mouth of
the Child, to speak in his Name; and that they have performed. And what is all
this, but a mere Piece of Pageantry? Could not the Minister acquaint the People
with the Nature of this Ordinance, and the Duties belonging to it, without all
this ado? And does not his Office oblige him to it? How came the Sureties by
their Call, to preach to the Congregation? The Child (you say) speaks and
professes by them, as his Proxies. As his Proxies for what? Who constituted
them his Proxies? How came they such without his Leave? Or how does the Child
promise and profess by them, when he knows Nothing of what they say? How
ludicrous is the Pretense! How vain and trifling is the whole Affair, if this
be a true State of the Case! But I suspect, that upon an impartial View, it
will appear in very different Colors.

Will you be pleased, Sir, to allow me once more a little of that former
Intimacy I have had with you, and answer me a Question or two, according to
your Catechism and Prayer Book.

D. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers promise for you?


B. They did promise and vow three Things in my Name. First that I SHOULD
renounce the Devil and all his Works; The Pomps and Vanities of this wicked
World; And all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. Secondly, that I SHOULD believe
all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And thirdly, That I SHOULD keep God's
holy Will and Commandments; and walk in the same all the Days of my Life.


D. Do thou think that thou art bound to believe and to do, what they have
promised for thee?


B. Yes verily, and by Gods Help so I will.


D. How long are Godfathers and Godmothers under the Obligation of that Vow and
Promise, they make for Infants.


B. An Infant faithfully promises by those that are his Sureties, until he come
of Age to take it upon himself.


D. And now, Sir, what do you say, is not vowing and promising that the Child
SHOULD renounce the Devil, the World and the Flesh; that he SHOULD believe all
the Articles of the Christian Faith; and that he SHOULD keep God's holy Will
and Commandments, and walk in the same all the Days of his Life, something more
than you pretended? Is not this what the Sureties have promised for the Child?
Is not this what they take upon them until the Child comes of Age, to take it
upon himself? How then can you say, that they make not one Promise of any
Thing, that they will do for the Child?


B. I see I was in a Mistake. But since they have taken these Vows upon them,
they must endeavor to perform them.


Thus your own Catechism and Prayer Book determines the Case against you. It Is
most certain, the Sureties do make all these Vows and Promises for the Child,
according to the Churches own Interpretation of the Obligations; and it is as
certain, that these are Promises beyond human Strength or Ability to perform.
For who can promise for an Infant, that it shall have the Exercise of Reason,
much less that it shall have the highest Exercise of Grace? As I observed
before. Nor may we pretend to (for we may not expect) divine Assistance, in
invading the divine Prerogative.

I had before observed, that God has never given, never promised Assistance to
any Man, in changing the Hearts, sanctifying the Natures, and governing the
Affections and Passions of others. Upon which you exclaim; -- This I confess is
as fine a Piece of Divinity, as ever I heard in my Life. And so go on to
gravely argue. If this Doctrine be true, it renders not only the Office of
Sureties vain; but all Endeavors of Parents to educate their Children. And why
does our Author preach, and endeavor to convert his People, when God will
never assist him, nor any Man, for the obtaining that End? But what a Pity it
is, you could not understand this plain easy and familiar Sentence, before you
got into such a Heat, as to cry out so vehemently, How madly will some Men lay
about them, when they design to scare People from the Church! Can you seriously
think, That there is no Difference between having God's. Assistance IN changing
Men's Hearts efficiently; and in using the appointed Means, for the Obtaining
that End? Is it the same Thing to be assisted IN doing the Work our selves; or
in being only Instruments in the Hands of the great Workman? Or in other Words.
Is it the same Thing for us to do it, or God to do it? To apply this to the
present Case. The Sureties promise what none but God can perform. They promise,
that the Heart of the Child shall be changed, the Nature sanctified, and the
Affections and Passions be under constant good Government. But are they Gods!
Is this in their Power? Or can they even expect divine Assistance IN doing that
which no Man ever did do, what no Man ever could do, or ever will do; and what
belongs to the divine Royalty to do? Can they enable the Child to renounce the
Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, to
believe all the Articles of the Christian Religion, etc.? If not, how can they
promise that he shall do it; since they have no Power, nor are ever like to
have Power, to endue him with that Grace, which they have vowed and promised
that he shall live in the Exercise of? I hope now you see, what little Reason
you had for that passionate Exclamation. -- And thus I Will conclude this
Particular, with a few Queries, unto which I shall expect your Answer.

Q 1. Have not Infants a Claim to Baptism, on Account of their Parents Covenant
Relation? According to that, 1 Cor. vii. 14. Else were your Children unclean,
but now are they (...).

Q. 2. Since Infants are baptized in their Parents Right, should not their
Parents dedicate them to Christ in this Ordinance, and come under proper
Covenant Obligations on their Behalf, to whom it belongs, to bring them up in
the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. vi. 4?

Q. 3. Whether you can agreeable to the Rules in the Prayer Book, allow Parents
to do their Duty in this Respect, to dedicate their Children to Christ in this
Ordinance; and to be (as they ought to be) Sureties for their Religious
Education?

Q. 4. Whether accepting of the Suretiship of Strangers, has not a direct
Tendency to make Parents unmindful of their Duty toward their Children; and
whether it be'nt therefore a great Prejudice, instead of a Furtherance to the
religious Education of the Children?

Q. 5. Whether there be any Direction or Warrant in the Word of God, for
Sureties in Baptism?

But it is Time to take some Notice of your Vindication of the Burial Office;
and here you observe to us, that when you say in sure and certain Hope of the
Resurrection, etc. It is only a Repetition of that Article of the Creed, We
believe there will be a Resurrection of the Body; and it is very injurious to
say, that this necessarily relates to the dead Person, so as to imply a
certainty of his happy Resurrection. I am then at some Difficulty to
understand, what you mean by saying, That it never was the Design of the
Church, that it should be used over a Person, let him have lived never so
wicked a Life; and dyed in the very Act of Sinning. I know of no Minister that
would; and I am sure I would not, use it over such a Person. But I pray, why
would you not use it over such a Person? Is it not as suitable that the People
should be put in Mind of the general Resurrection, at the Funeral of a wicked
Man as of a good Man; or is it not at least lawful to do so? But I must needs
tell you, that I am surprised at this wonderful Evasion; and that you could
publish to the World such an Exposition of the Church's Meaning, where the
Prayer Book can be had. Can you your self think, that there is nothing but the
general Resurrection intended by declaring, that it has pleased almighty God
of his great Mercy, to take TO HIMSELF the Soul of our dear Brother, here
departed? And is it nothing but the general Body of Mankind, that they commit
to the Ground; the general Earth; of all that are dead, to the Earth; the
general Ashes to Ashes; and the general Dust to Dust, in sure and certain Hope
of the Resurrection to eternal Life? Can you your self believe, that there is
nothing but the general Resurrection intended, by giving hearty Thanks to God,
that it has pleased him to deliver this our Brother, out of the Miseries of
this Sinful World? Or can you suppose that there is nothing else intended by
that Prayer, that God would raise us from the Death of Sin, unto the Life of
Righteousness, that when we shall depart this Life, we may rest in him, as our
HOPE is, this our Brother does? Whoever was the Author of this chimerical Gloss
upon the burial Office, should have persuaded the World to have received it
upon his Authority, and never to read a Prayer Book, or attend a Funeral, for
fear of being undeceived.

As to your trifling Accusation, that the Particle (the) was left out in my
Sermon. It only shows that you were glad to find something to carp at when so
small an Omission of the Press, must be made an Occasion of so much Triumph. --
And whoever informed you, that when I preached that Sermon, I said his
Resurrection instead of the Resurrection, was in a great Mistake at the best;
and entertained you with a false Report, which you have credulously published
to the World.

As to your Pretense, that it never was the Design of the Church, that this
Office should be used over those that have lived wicked Lives. -- I answer,
that there is no Way so certain to know the Mind of the Church, as to recur to
her own Declaration, what her Mind is. -- Let us then hear the Direction of
your Prayer Book in this Case. -- Here is to be noted, (says the Book) that
the Office ensuing is not to be used for any that die unbaptized, or
excommunicate, or that lay violent Hands on themselves. Are there any but these
excepted? Does the Church suppose, or do you suppose, that there are no wicked
flagitious Persons, that are not unbaptiz'd, or excommunicate, or
self-Murderers?

But this Office supposes (you say) the Visitation of the Sick to go before, p.
37. That is, it supposes that they are by the Priest absolved from all their
Sins, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and
then their Sins being pardoned, it may be safely concluded, that God has taken
their Souls to himself. But where does the Office suppose this? Is there a Word
of that Nature in all the Office? Is there any Direction that this Office must
not be used, over those that have died without the Priest's Visitation or
Absolution? This your Pretense (weak as it is) is founded upon Nothing, but
your own Imagination. -- I will again take Leave of this Article, with a few
Queries, to which I hope you will favor me with a particular Answer in your next.

Q. 1. Whether it does not directly tend to harden loose Sinners in a careless
sensual Life, to hear the eternal Salvation of such as themselves, so
possitively and solemnly declared, in your Addresses to God?

Q. 2. Whether it ben't an Affront to the glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth,
to solemnly declare in his Presence, and praise him for, the Salvation of
those, who have never by their Lives and Conversations evidenced their
Conversion to God; and thereby their Title to eternal Happiness?

Q. 3. Whether these Things which are such just Matter of Prejudice, can do any
good to the Dead or to Living; and if not, why are they retained to the Offense
and Scandal of so many good Christians?

Q. 4. Is it not much safer to let these Things alone, that are at the best so
very suspicious?

The next Thing that offers, is your peremtory and authoritative Absolving Men
from all their Sins, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. And do you verily believe (as you are ordered by the Prayer Book to
declare) that there is Authority committed to you, to absolve Men from all
their Sins? If so, what Fault can you find with the Popish Indulgencies? Have
not the Popish Priests as much Authority in this Case as you have? And cannot
they cite that Text Joh. xx. 23. in Justification of their Conduct, as
pertinently as you can? If it gives Authority to you to obsolve Men from all
their Sins, it also gives Authority to them to absolve Men from all their Sins.
But if Christ has yet retained the Prerogative of Pardoning Men's Sins in his
own Hands, it is impertinently urged by you, in the present Case.

But you pretend, that you mean no more, than that you think his Repentance is
sincere; and that if it be, God will certainly forgive him. But then why do you
declare any more than you mean? If you intend no more than that God will
obsolve him, upon his true and sincere Repentance, why do you declare, that you
absolve him from all his Sins? Is God's Absolving, and your Absolving, the same
Thing? Who has placed you in God's Stead; and vested you with that
incommunicable Branch of his Prerogative, to Pardon Sins? To what Purpose is
your Quotation from Mr. Baxter, that the Pastors of the Churches may as God's
Officers declare the conditional general Pardon, etc. wherereas it is an
Authoritative special Pardon, that we find fault with. A Pardon by Virtue of
the Power left by the Lord Jesus Christ to his Church. A Pardon pronounced by
Virtue of his Authority committed to the Priest. A Pardon not only prayed for,
but Authoritatively pronounced. I absolve you, etc. And do you think indeed,
that there is no Difference, between a Declaration of conditional and
Authoritative Pardon? Or between the Declaration of a general Pardon to all
that truly repent and believe; and a special unconditional Pardon, to this
particular Person, upon a bare Presumption of his Sincerity? I must needs say
(whatever you in particular may intend, when you pronounce the Absolution) the
Words are very exceptionable, and of a very ill Sound. And I cannot be
reconciled to that Office where the Minister must say one Thing, and mean
another.

Why, I beseech you, does he that finds Fault with the Absolution, at the same
Time condemn both the Sacraments, as you suggest? Is God's Conditional Offer
and Confirmation of Pardon at the Sacraments, the same Thing with the
Minister's absolute authoritative Declaration, That he absolve the sick Person
from all his Sins? How impertinent is this Pretense!

I shall not spend Time to debate with you the Meaning of that Text in Joh. xx.
23. which you seem to build upon, since you your self don't pretend, that it
authorizes an absolute authoritative Absolution, which is the only Thing here
in Question. But shall only observe, that this Text is generally supposed to
imply no more, than a gracious Promise to the regular Exercise of Church
Discipline. When by the Discipline of the Church, scandalous Offenses are
regularly remitted or retained, this is ratified in Heaven. Some there are (I
confess) that understand it of a ministerial and conditional Declaration of
God's Forgiveness. But no Protestant that I know of, so much as pretends, that
this Text gives any Man Authority, to actually discharge Men from their Guilt;
which is what your Office in Question seems to suppose. Nor any Authority, so
much as to positively declare, that their Sins are forgiven; though this is what
you seem to have especially brought the Text to prove. I shall add no more
under this Head; but only a few Queries, which you will be so kind as to give a
particular Answer to.

Q. 1. Has it not a direct Tendency to give ignorant Men a vain Confidence of
their good Estate, to hear a Minister positively and Authoritatively pronounce
the Forgiveness of all their Sins, in whatever Sense the Minister himself may
understand the Words?

Q. 2. If the Church has any good and safe Meaning in that Office, why was not
her Meaning plainly and intelligibly expressed? And why is this stumbling Block
in the Way? See Romans xiv. 13.

Q. 3. Whether any Man can with a good Conscience, perform that Office without
a mental Reservation; and without understanding the Words in a Sense very
different from their plain and natural Meaning? And except ye utter by the
Tongue, Words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken. 1
Cor. xiv. 9.

Q. 4. Whether any Man can allow that Office to be performed for him, without
giving that Honor to the Creature, which is due only to the Creator, who is
blessed for ever? For who can justify his Claim to forgive Sins, that cannot
also say to the Sick of the Palsy, arise and walk, Mat. ix. 5.

Let us next see whether your Reasonings will conclude in Favor of the Holy
Days, appointed by the Church of Rome, and by the Church of England. I reminded
you in my Sermon, that the Apostle particularly complains of the Galatians,
that they observed Days and Months and Times and Years, on which Account, he
was afraid he had bestowed Labor upon them in vain, Gal. iv. 10, 11. I
endeavored to show, that this Text militated as much against the Holy Days
observed by the Church of England, as against those observed by the Galatians;
that if it was unlawful to these, it must be so also to us. And why did you not
vouchsafe some Answer to this? Had you Nothing to reply? Or did you think it
would be more popular to endeavor, to retort the same Accusation upon us, than
to directly oppose and contradict the Scripture? -- Methinks this (you say)
sounds very oddly, in the Mouth of a Presbyterian, when they observe Holy Days
as well as we. And then demand, By what Authority are Dissenters Lectures kept;
and in New England annual Fasts and Thanksgiving Days enjoined? etc. p. 40, 41.
-- Your Pretense of our Lectures being Holy Days, is too trivial to deserve any
Notice, since in this Case, there is no Time sanctified, consecrated, or
dedicated to God. There never was any more intended or pretended by Lecture
Days, than an Agreement to meet together upon some set Day and Hour, to hear a
Sermon, and to attend upon the other religious Exercises that should accompany
Preaching. And I hope that you will allow that this is done by God's Authority,
who has expressly required Ministers to preach (and consequently People to hear)
in Season, and out of Season. 2 Timothy iv. 2.

And as to your other Demand, by what Authority are our Fast Days, and
Thanksgiving Days enjoined? I answer, by God's Authority. God has given us
Examples and Directions in his Word, that when we are under special Calls of
Providence to it, we should set apart Days to these Purposes. We have
particular Directions how a Fast Day should be celebrated; and to what End,
Isai. lviii. 3. forward. And many Examples as well as Precepts for the
Observation of such Days. See 2 Chronicles. xx. 3. Neh. ix. throughout. Jonah iii.
7. Joel i. 14. and ii. 15. Mat. vi. 17, 18. Mark. ii. 20 And in many other
Places. -- And the Argument is the very same, for Days of Thanksgiving. Though we
have not Authority from God to make any Time holy; yet we have Authority to set
apart Time for these holy Services, when his Providence calls for it. In
Obedience to his Authority, when we have eaten and are full, we may bless the
Lord, for the good Land which he has given us. Deuteronomy. iii 10 We may praise him
in the Midst of the Congregation: Our Praise be of him in the great
Congregation. And we may pay our Vows before them that fear him. Ps. xxii. 22,
25. We may offer the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and call upon the Name of the
Lord. We may pay our Vows unto the Lord, in the Presence of all his People, Ps.
cxvi. 17, 18. and we may agree upon some Time to that Purpose, according as the
special Dispensations of Providence call for these Thank Offerings. -- Thus you
see one Instance of very great Disparity between your Holy Days, and these that
you would have thought parallel to them. Ours are of God's directing and
appointing: Yours without any Direction or Warrant from him. And I think it is
not very good Arguing, that because we may observe Days which God has
appointed, that therefore we may consecrate Days which he has not appointed.
Besides these Days are set apart on such Occasions, and for such Services as
God has always, and every where approved of in his Word; whereas the greatest
Part of your Holy Days are set apart on such Occasions as God no where, ever
approves of in his Word. For Instance, I think you will not pretend to any
Scripture Approbation of any Saints Days, much less of such a Number of 'em.
And therefore in this Respect also, there is a great Disparity in the pretended
Parallel Cases. Moreover the Disparity is also manifest in this. The Days we
appoint for these special Services, are occasionally accommodated to the
present Dispensations and Calls of Providence. Your Holy Days by being
unalterably Stated, are often directly contrary thereto. -- When Providence
calls for Mourning and girding with Sackcloth, your Prayer Book often calls
for Feasting, and so on the Contrary, as I have observed before. I may add,
That the Days we set apart for the beforementioned Services, accur but seldom,
upon special emergent Occasions. Whereas your Prayer Book appoints above half
the Year to be kept as Holy Time. How consistent with the fourth Commandment,
it belongs to you to inform us. Allow us to observe once more. In keeping Days
of Fasting and Thanksgivings, we are followers of those, who from the first
Ages of the Church, have by Faith and Patience inherited the Promises. --
Whereas in the Observation of these Particular Holy Days, you have no higher,
nor better Example than the Church of Rome. And by far the greatest Part of
them have been brought in by her since her antichristian Apostasy. Thus you
see, you have not been very succesful in this Attempt.

As to your Reasoning from the Days of Purim and the Feast of Dedication, it
may be sufficient to transcribe a Reply to it, written before you was born. The
Days of Purim Esth. ix. were seven Hundred Years since objected by Papists unto
the Waldenses, and since by all Papists that have written against Protestants
about Ceremonies, as Gregorius de Valentia, Belarmine, Suarez. And we need not
seek for new Answers about it; for that which our Divines have answered to the
Papists is sufficient in two Words. 1. That it cannot be evinced, that these
Days of Purim were religious Feasts. Junius says Preceptum fuit Politicum,
they were only Days of civil rejoicing, they are called only the Days of Purim,
not the Holy Days of Purim. They are not called Chaggim. No particular
Sacrifice was appointed; nor any holy Convocation of the People enjoined. The
Ordinance required but Feasting and Joy; and sending of Portions to one
another. The Rest mentioned in Esth. ix. was from their Enemies. So much Work
as might stand with a feasting Day, was not forbidden. -- 2. Upon Supposition
of a religious Feast instituted by Mordecai, He did it, said Dr. Whitaker, God
inspiring him; and peradventure by order of some Prophet, as Zech. viii. they
changed their Fasts into Feasts, by the Mouth of the Lord, by the Ministry of
the Prophet. And though we do not read expressly, that either God or any Prophet
did require this Feast of Purim; yet forasmuch as it stands approved in
Scripture, there is no Doubt but it was done by Warrant from God.

The Feast of Dedication, Joh. x. 22, 23. has also been objected, from the
Time of the Waldenses. But it is not certainly known what Dedication this was,
and whether merely of human Institution. Some take it for that which Solomon
appointed. Some ascribe it to Ezra, others to the Maccabees. Neither is there
any Evidence, that Christ approved it. The Text only says, that he walked then
in Solomon's Porch, which he might do, without observing or approving it. If it
was nothing but a Tradition of the Elders, we may be sure that Christ who
testified against other Inventions of Men, did never observe this. Thus you see
that it yet lies upon you to prove, that the Days of Purim were ever observed
by the Jews, as a religious Feast. For it is certain that there were no
Exercises purely religious, required by the Institution to be attended upon
those Days, as on all other Religious Feasts. And it belongs to you to prove,
that if they were religious Feasts, that they were not appointed by divine
Inspiration. -- For Mordecai that instituted that Feast, is generally supposed
to be the Penman of the Book of Esther, and consequently divinly inspired. --
And it also lies upon you to prove that the Feast of Dedication was that
instituted by the Maccabees; and that our Lord Jesus Christ did ever observe
and approve that Feast, niether of which is capable of Proof. You tell us
indeed, that Christ was no Dissenter; but came many Miles in Winter, to keep
this Feast. p. 44 But how does this appear? There is not a Word of that Nature
in the Sacred Story. His walking in Solomon's Porch, is no Proof of it. He might
take that Opportunity of a Congress of People, as he did all other proper
Opportunities, to do good, without any Approbation of the Feast. Such is the
sandy Foundation upon which your Holy Days are built.

As for that most injurious Calumny upon New England* that They will annually
impose by civil Sanctions a Thanksgiving in November; yet of Choice they will
shun the fifth Day, because the King has appointed it. I wonder for your own
Sake, you would publish such a Story in these Parts of the World. -- And now
I Will take Leave of this Subject also, with a few Queries, which you will be
pleased to answer in your next.

Q. 1. Whether the Jewish Holy Days were not condemned by the Apostle, because
they were Shaddows of good Things to come, Col. ii. 16, 17? Whether it ben't a
Reflection upon him, who is the Substance pointed to by those Shaddows, to
imitate that typical Dispensation, as though it were not yet fulfilled, and done
away? And whether when God has by the Death and Resurrection of Christ, taken
the Levitical Yoke from off our Necks, it becomes Christians to wreathe a new
Yoke for their own Shoulders?

Q. 2. Whether the Observation of Saints Days among the Papists (from whom you
have taken them) were not appointed and attended by them for the Worshipping of
the Saints; and other most execrable idolatrous Purposes; which the Scripture
calls Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy iv. 1? And whether we should not on that
Account, reject them with Abhorrence, as we should Meat offered to Idols, 1
Cor. x. 20.

Q. 3. Whether the Lord Jesus Christ was not wise enough, to appoint Days
sufficient to keep in Remembrance his own Nativity, Birth, Resurrection,
Ascension, and all the other Wonders of Grace and Love, that he has done for
us? Whether he has not appointed one Day in Seven for this very End? And
whether it don't reflect upon his Provision for us; and upon the Holy Day he
has appointed, to consecrate more Time for this Purpose?

Q. 4. Whether it ben't a great Infringment of our Christian Liberty, that when
God has given us six Days to labor, your Prayer Book will not allow us more than
three Days in a Week, take one Time with another, through the Year?

I observed in my Sermon, that we had the same Complaint to make of the Prelacy
and its Attendants in the Church of England, and exemplified the Matter of
Complaint. And though it was not possible in so short a Time, to go through the
particular Evidences, in support of it; yet the World knows, that I have long
since published the Proof of what I then asserted, which none of your party
have yet pretended to answer. And you your self don't pretend, that there is
any Mention in the Scripture, of Arch Bishops, Lord Bishops, Deans, Prebends,
Arch.-Deacons, Vicars, Curates, and the like belonging to the Heirachy of the
Church of England. But you tell us, that it would have been more to the
Purpose, if I had given but one single Instance, either in the New Testament or
in Ecclesiastical History, for 1400 Years after Christ, of an approved
Ordination without a Bishop, which you say cannot be done. p. 44. By Bishop we
must here understand, an Officer by divine Appointment superior to Presbyters,
one that claims the whole Power of Jurisdiction and Discipline, as well as
Ordination to himself; or else you speak nothing to the Purpose. And don't you
know, that I have already given Instances enough of Ordinations without such
Bishops; and vindicated them against all the Exceptions of your Party? Why then
do you say, it cannot be done? What Bishop (in this Sense of the Word Bishop)
was concerned in the Ordination of Paul and Barnabas, Acts xiii. 1.? Who but
the Presbyters ordained Timothy, 1 Timothy iv 14.? How are Timothy and Titus
proved to be such Bishops? And yet the Power of Ordination was committed to
them, 1 Timothy v. 22. and Tit. i. 5. Are not all Presbyters Scripture Bishops;
and have they not all the Work and Duty of Bishops committed to them? Acts xx.
17, 28. 1 Pet. v. 1, 2. And were the Apostles themselves in their ordinary
Capacity, any more than Presbyters? 1 Pet. v. 1. 2 John i. and 3 John i. And
were not the Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction, committed alike to all the
Ministers of the Gospel, in Christ's Commission, Mat. xxviii. 19, 20? And have
I not particularly and (for what yet appears) unanswerably proved all these
Things, long since? What then could you mean by this wonderful Challenge? And
as for your Pretense from Antiquity, how often have you all been called upon,
to produce so much as one single Author, in the first three Centuries, that
asserts Bishops to be by divine Right an Order superior to Presbyters. But
this is what by the Acknowledgment of the most eminent of your own Party, can
never be done. We may therefore justly despise the Great Words of those, that
have but such weak Arguments; and must yet complain, that the depriving the
Ministers of the Gospel, of exercising a great part of the Charge committed to
them by the Lord Jesus Christ, is an Invasion of his Royalty, who is Head over
all Things to his Church.

I did complain, and think there is yet Reason to complain, of the Discipline
of the Church of England. It is wonderful, that the Church should every Year
confess and lament before God, above a Hundred and fifty Years together, the
Want of that Godly Discipline there was in the primitive Church, the
Restoration of which is much to be wished; and yet not take one Step toward
restoring of it. If it be so much to be wished, why is it not done? What stands
in the Way to hinder it? But you tell us, I may make my Complaint to the
Parliament. And how I pray does that vindicate your Constitution? You say, we
have nothing to do with Chancellors, etc. in this Country. I answer, you
therefore have no Discipline at all among you. If refusing to administer the
Sacrament to a scandalous Person, be all the Discipline that you desire, as you
tell us, p. 46. you desire much less than Christ has appointed. But what Plea
have you to make for your spiritual Courts, for having all your Discipline
managed by lay Officers, by Chancellors, Commissaries, Proctors, Apparitors,
etc. Officers that the Scripture knows nothing of? What Plea for carrying on
your Discipline by corporal Inflictions, Imprisonments and Fines, to the vast
Charge and temporal Injury of the Delinquents? Not one Word.

You complain indeed of New England Country Courts, punishing Men for their
Wickedness. But what is that, I beseech you, to Church Discipline? Do their
Country Courts pretend to be ecclesiastical Officers? is there any Thing of
that Nature done among you, but in Order to the Preservation of the Peace,
agreeable to the Laws and Customs of England? And did you make this Complaint,
to testify your Desire that Courses of Wickedness should go with Impunity; or
was it because you could find nothing else to say? You tell us, that in
England, if a Man be guilty of any Crime, and will manifest his Repentance to
the Satisfaction of his lawful Minister; and to other Christians, to whom it
belongs to make Presentment, he shall meet with no further Trouble. But you
don't tell us, how he must make his Repentance satisfactory. How much he must
give for his Time, and how much for the Fees of the Court, in Order to escape
Excommunication and Commitment. As to the broken Responses, you pretend to
vindicate from Mr. Baxter, I have not that Book by me, which you quote, nor can
I tell what he designed by the Words you quote from him. And it is impossible to
know what Scripture Command he referred to, there being no such Place in the
Bible as Ps. lxvii. 25. All I find Intended by Mr. Baxter in the Words, by you
alleged, is, that Responses may be used; but whether such Responses as yours
in the Prayer Book, there is nothing said. And it is manifest that he did not
think it a Duty to use them, by his not conforming to that Practice himself.
But it don't so much affect the Cause, what his Opinion was, as how God himself
has appointed his Worship to be managed. We have special Directions in this
Case, 1 Cor. xiv. from the 6. to the ^0. Verse. Where the Apostle at large
urges the Necessity, of all Worships being intelligibly performed. We must pray
so that our Understanding may not be unfruitful. verse. 14. We must pray with the
Spirit, and with the Unstanding also, verse. 15. We must pray, so that he who
occupies the Place of the Unlearned, may say Amen at our giving of Thanks, and
understand what we say, verse. 16. We must pray, so that others may be edified,
verse 17. And can it be pretended, That your Method of using Responses agrees
with those Rules? Is your Worship intelligibly performed, when all speak
together, and therefore none can know what is said by the Rest? Can the Stander
by say Amen, at your giving of Thanks, when he knows not a Word that is spoken?
Can others be edified by such Service, which is as unintelligible to them, as
if pronounced in Arabic? It Is plain, that if the Apostle Paul had been
consulted, he would not have recommended your Responses.

But you pretend that it is evident from Rev. xiv. 2, 3. And Rev. xix. 6, 7.
That this is the Method of Worship used by the Saints and Angels in Heaven. And
if this were true, what would it be to your Purpose? By what Argument can you
make it appear, that we are to use the same Methods of Worship here, that are
used in Heaven? If Responses are used there, the Perfection of their Knowledge
secures them from the like Dangers of not understanding what is said, as we are
in here-But it is proper to consider, what Sort of Worship you pretend to be
performed by Responses, from those Texts. Was it Praying, or Singing? If the
latter, what is it to you Purpose? And that it was Singing in Consort with
Harpers, is certain, and is expressly called singing a new Song in Rev. xiv. 2,
3. And the same is also evident from the xix. Chapter and 6 and 7 Verses, where
it is not only called praising God, but the Song begins with Allelujah. And what
Argument can you bring from hence? Is it just arguing, that because we must
unite our Voices in Singing, which you know we approve and practice as well as
you, that therefore we must all speak with uplifted Voices in Prayer, the Point
to be proved. But the worst on it is, that there are no Responses at all
mentioned in the Texts considered. -- There is not the least Appearance of it
in the first of them; and all that can be made evident from the second,
connected with the forgoing Verses is, That there was Praises sung to God, from
much People, from the four and twenty Elders, and from the Throne: But whether
in an immediate Succession, the Text says nothing. Or if they were in an
immediate Succession, how were they Responses, since they were several
Services, from several Companies or Congregations; and from several Places? And
lastly, these are but mystical and visionary Representations, and no Worship
actually performed by Saints and Angels in Heaven, at all. The Heaven here
represented, is generally understood by all Interpreters of Note, to be the
true Church of Christ upon Earth, called Heaven, from her heavenly Original,
and heavenly Doctrine and Manners; in Opposition to the Antichristian Church,
that had no Relation to Heaven. And these imaginary Responses, to be Nothing
else, but the Praises of the several Parts of the Christian Church, as well
from the newly converted Jews, as Gentiles, ascribed to God for the Destruction
of Antichrist. And what Foundation have you then, for your triumphant
Conclusion?

Thus I Have taken particular Notice of all the Arguments you have brought in
Vindication of your Rites and Ceremonies; and the Appeal must be made to the
World, whether the Exceptions in my Sermon are not fully justified. But what
was the Reason that you had not one Word in Favor of your canonical Vestments,
your Women's speaking in the Churches; and the manifest Curruptions in the old
Translation of the Psams, yet in use? Do you acknowledge these to be
indefensible?

And now shall we consider what you can say in defense of your Imposition of
all these Things. -- You seem to acknowledge the Charge, that you do impose all
these Things; and have nothing to vindicate your so doing but this, that there
neither is nor can be any Church upon Earth, but what has Terms of Communion
and Ceremonies imposed, which God has not expressly commanded. p. 51. And that
'the Presbyterians do the same.' Now suppose this were true. It is either well
or ill done of all these Churches, thus to impose upon People's Consciences. If
well done, you could easily have answered my Arguments against these
Impositions. If ill done, it is no Justification of your Guilt, that others are
in like Manner Guilty. These Arguments therefore conclude against you, as well
as against all others that are equally chargeable. Besides, if others also are
guilty of some Impositions, it does not appear from thence, that they are
guilty of imposing Things equally disagreeable to the Word of God, equally
wounding to Men's Consciences; and equally destructive to the Peace and Purity
of the Church. But let us consider how you prove your confident Assertion. Did
we ever punish or excommunicate any Man for believing the Lord's Supper should
be administered at Evening; or for not approving the New England Version of the
Psalms for regular singing; or for scrupling to receive the Sacrament at the
Hands of an unordained Deacon, or any Thing else of the like Kind; that you
pretend to bring these Instances against us? May Not every Body entertain their
own Opinions in these Points; and be treated with Kindness and Friendship,
having all sacred Privileges allowed them notwithstanding, among us? If they
will be peaceable with us, we should be so with them, and suffer them to abound
in their own Sense. If they will not impose upon us their own Humors or
Imaginations, neither will we impose upon them. They may peaceably neglect what
they cannot comply with, and yet be treated with Christian Love and Charity. How
then could you say, that they are excommunicated for these Things ipso Facto?
Be pleased to give one single Instance, of any Man that was excommunicated
among us for any of these Things, or for any Thing else of like Nature. But if
you cannot, it certainly concerns you to be more careful of publishing such
Things for true, which cannot be proved nor exemplified in one single Instance.
For my own Part I would admit any Man that I have Reason to believe a true and
sincere Christian, unto Communion in all the Ordinances of Christ, if he would
regularly and peaceably desire it; notwithstanding any lesser Differences in
Principle. And for ought I know this is the Mind of all the Ministers of our
Persuasion. But is it so in your Church? Are not the Stumbling Blocks of your
Rites and Ceremonies thrown in our Way? Must we not comply with these to every
Punctilio of a Ceremony (though never so much against our Consciences) or be
rejected, excommunicated, refused all Christian Privileges; and in England be
rendered incapable of any temporal Honors and Dignities, in the State? And can
there be so much as a Pretense, that these are parallel Cases? That we are as
much chargeable with Impositions, as the Church of England. The Principles of a
Church are best known by their public Formulas. Look into ours; look into the
Westminster Assemblies, and the New England Confessions, and into the Agreement
of the Synod at Philadelphia; search them thoroughly, and see if you can find
any thing of this Nature; any damning Creeds; or any Canons that excommunicate
ipso Facto, all that don't approve of our Rites and Ceremonies, that don't
approve of the Government of our Churches by an unscriptural Hierarchy, or that
pretend to groan under any Grievances imposed upon them by our Churches. But if
there can nothing of this Nature be found. If it appear upon strictest Search,
that these are the Peculiarities of your own Church, and are monopolised to
your selves, I hope you will have such a Regard to your Reputation, as not to
entertain us with any Thing more of this Nature.

That an imposing Power has ever been claimed by the Church of England, even
from her first Deliverance from the Papal Yoke and Smithfield Fires, is an
incontestable Truth. A Truth awfully evinced by the bloody Persecutions begun
in Queen Elizabeth's Reign; and long continued in the Reigns of her several
Successors. A Truth most apparent from the xx. Article of the Church; and
equally apparent form this Doctrine's being most openly and solemnly avouched
in your Book of Canons, that yet remain unrepealed and in their full Force,
whereby every one that conscienciously scruples the least Tittle of your
Injunctions, is excommunicated and deprived of all sacred Privileges in your
Church. Nay, the imposing Power has been so little questioned by the Church of
England, that they have even ventured to publish it with the holy Bible it
self, as a Part of the Contents of it. A flagrant Instance of which we have in
the Argument of the cxlix. Psalm; where we are said to be exhorted to praise
God, for the Power which he has given to the Church, to rule the Consciences of
Men.

And this is what has in all Times past raised the Wall of Separation, between
the Church of England and her nonconforming Brethren; and yet continues the
great Article of our Complaint.

This is what we cannot but esteem most inconsistent with the Rights of the
Christian Church; and even with Humanity it self. -- This is not only to make
us mere Machines, to receive our religious Sentiments from external
Impressions, without any inward Principles of Conviction or rational
Persuasion; but what we cannot but think a direct Invasion of Christ's Regal
Power. And while the Church continues the Exercise of this imposing Power; and
refuses to extend the Terms of Communion to all such as visibly comply with the
Necessary Terms of Salvation; and will not open the Doors of the Church to all
those that a Judgment of Charity obliges her to believe are sincere Christians;
there will forever remain Cause of Complaint against your Constitution. And I
trust there will ever be a Body of Men, that will stand up in Defense of the
Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free.

And though these Impositions are varnished over with the specious Pretenses of
Decency and Order: Yet they have fatally proved the unhappy Engines of dividing
the Christian Church, and destroying that Peace and Charity that are the
essential Characters of the true Disciples of Christ; -- I cannot but think it
would be more agreeable to the Nature and Design of the Christian Institution,
to receive one another as Christ also has received us to the Glory of God, than
to go on thus smiting our fellow Servants, by imposing upon their Consciences,
or depriving them of the Ordinances of Salvation, upon Accounts confessed to be
in themselves inconsiderable and of an indifferent Nature.

I cannot therefore but esteem it the peculiar Glory of our Churches, that we
open the Arms of our Charity and Communion, to all the visible Members of
Christ; and bear our Testimony against all Encroachments upon the Rights of
human Nature, and the Liberty and Privileges of Christians.

What Laws of New England you refer to I know not; nor do you give any Account
what they be. If there be any Laws that require the Persecution of those that
conscienciously scruple their Methods of Worship, as you insinuate, p. 51. I
have not one Word to say in their Justification. I acknowledge Persecution to
be as bad in them as in you; and to be an unmerciful Violation of the Laws of
Nature, wherever it is practiced. But you must pardon me, if I cannot give a
full Assent to your Representation of the Case; because I know there are a
Variety of Assemblies for public Worship, of very different Principles, in
New England, none of whom meet with the least Opposition from the Government.

I acknowledge that it is no Justification of the Principles of any Sect. that
they were handed down to them from their Progenitors. But yet it is a great
Apostasy, to renounce the pure Institutions and Worship of God, which our
Fathers maintained at their Peril, for those human Institutions and
unscriptural Impositions, which were the Cause of such dreadful Persecution to
them. If their Cause was good (as I before proved it to be) then to decline
from the good old Way of our Fathers would be displeasing to God, and injurious
to our own Souls: And this would be every where true, when Reformations in
Religion, that have been procured by our Progenitors, at the Expense of every
Thing that is dear to them of a worldly Nature, are given up, and a Declension
is made from a pure spiritual Worship, to such a Worship as is unscriptural,
without any divine Institution, wounding to the scrupulous Consciences; and
destructive to that Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. Which (I think)
I have proved to be the Case with Respect to the Rites and Ceremonies in
Question, with the People of Newark, as well as New England. And if you will
prove this to be the Case at Canada, I will allow, that the Argument concludes
for them too, and that your Harrangue is pertinent; but not otherwise.

You were not willing (I see) to conclude your Book, without giving us some
Intimation of what Manner of Spirit you are of. Its true ( you tell us many of
those who settled New England, came from what they called Persecution. p. 52.
But don't you call it Persecution too, as well as they? Was it not a real
Persecution to have Ministers silenced, sequestered and deprived; to have the
Laity excommunicated, plundered and ruined; to have Ears cut off, Noses slit,
Foreheads branded with hot Irons, unmerciful Fines imposed; to be barbarously
and cruelly whipped, and to be shut up in the most afflicting and loathsome
Dungeons; and banished to foreign Countries, etc. We see then, what we might
expect from you, if you had the Power in your Hands. If New England were guilty
of some unjustifiable Severities toward a mad Sort of Quakers, they don't
pretend to vindicate it, as you implicitly do, the barbarous Cruelties of the
High Commission.

You tell us, that it is certain, our Fathers did not cross the Atlantic for
Presbyterianism, but for Brownism, or Independency. p. 53. But I answer, they
did not cross it for either of these; but to fly from the Persecutions of
Episcopacy; and to enjoy the blessed Privilege of God's own pure unmixed
Institutions. As to Brownism, they all disclaimed it; and though the most of them
were of Congregational Principles; yet there were a considerable Number of
Presbyterians among them. There was from the Beginning and is yet, a Mixture of
both Sorts, who have always lived together as united Brethren. -- Some of the
people of Newark have indeed formerly been culpable, for managing a Controversy
with their worthy Minister, upon these points: And I hope your putting them in
Mind of it, may conduce to their Humillation, if there be any of them yet
living. But then, they did not imitate the Disposition of the people in
New England, in this their Opposition to that worthy Gentleman, who removed
from their Abuses to New England, was there received with greatest Kindness and
Love, advanced to the Rectoral Charge of their College, in which Station he
lived and dyed, in the highest Honor and Esteem among them all,
notwithstanding his Presbyterian Principles. -- In a Word, as both
Presbyterians and Congregationalists, were from the Beginning embarked upon the
same Bottom, so have they yet Reason to conclude, notwithstanding their lesser
trifling Differences in their Sentiments, that they have all the same common
Interests to pursue; -- What then does your Arguing reprove?

Thus I have endeavored to prove that the Sermon you took Notice of, was
agreeable to the Council of God. And I think I have proved it from the Word of
God. I hope therefore, I may now venture to say so, without the Hazard of such
a severe Reprimand, as you gave me before, for such a Declaration of my
Sentiments.

I have also offered you some Reasons, why I differ from you in some of these
principles you profess. But though we differ in these Things, there are much
greater in which we agree. -- And it is certain, we are both under the greatest
Obligations, by the sacred Bonds of Office, to agree in the most earnest
Endeavors, to be instrumental of the Conversion of Sinners to Christ. And it
greatly concerns us, not to spend all our Time, in filling the Heads of our
Hearers with these controversial points, so as to make them unmindful of the
weightier Matters, to the endangering of their Souls: But to endeavor so to
acquit the awful Trust committed to us, as that we may both save our selves,
and them that hear us.

That you may be a faithful Steward in our Lord's House, that the Blessing of
many Souls ready to perish may come upon you, that these may be your Crown and
Rejoicing in the Day of the Lord Jesus; and that we may both meet at last where
all Debates and Differences will be ended; and where we shall both unitedly
join in Communion and Consort, in the Praises of him that sits upon the Thron
and of the Lamb, for ever and eve is the Prayer of

Your humble Servant, Jonathan Dickinson
Elizabeth Town, Feb. 23, 1736, 7.

