CHRIST abolishing Death and bringing Life and Immortality to Light in the
Gospel.

A SERMON Occasioned by The DEATH of The HONORABLE Mary Belcher late Consort
of his EXCELLENCY our Present GOVERNOR. Delivered at Boston, N. E. October 17.
1736, being the Lord's Day after Her Funeral.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. And one of the Pastors of the South Church.

^ ^or. (...) 55, 56, 57 O Death Where is thy Sting? O Grave, Where is thy
Victory. The Sting of Death is Sin; and the Strength of Sin is the Law: But
Thanks (...) to God, who gives us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ

BOSTON: Printed by J. Draper, for D. HENCHMAN, over against the Brick
Meeting House in Cornhil. 1736

A Funeral SERMON UPON Madam BELCHER.
2. 1 Timothy I. 10. The Appearing of our Savior JESUS CHRIST; who has abolished
DEATH, and has brought LIFE and IMMORTALITY to LIGHT through the Gospel.


HOW full of rising Consolations are the Words before us! The glad Tidings of
the Gospel sounding, the Light of Divine Discoveries breaking forth, our
Savior JESUS CHRIST appearing, abolishing the Power of Death, and bringing
LIFE and IMMORTALITY to Light in this perishing and darkened World!

What greater or more happy Subjects can be though it of? What more describ^d in so
small a Compass? What more desirable, or what more welcome? The Sounding of
the Jubilee through the Land of Israel, the Proclaiming Liberty for the Jewish
Captives by the Decree of Cyrus, the Springing of the Day and the first
Appearing of the Sun to the Polar Regions; are all as nothing for the Joy they
bring to the Sons of Men.

By the APPEARING of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, the Context plainly leads us to
apprehend his past Appearance at his Incarnation. (...) The Word, as the
Learned observe, implies a clear, a bright Appearance; like the Sun emerging
from a misty Cloud, despersing his enlightening Beams, and drawing the Eyes of
all to view Him. So Erasmus, in Leigh's Critica Sacra. The Syriack in Bib.
Polyglot, a^^ (...) and Tremelius render it, the Manifestation: Beza -- the
conspicuous App^^^^^: and Piscator -- that illustrious Coming.
It seems to allude to those faint and less material Apparitions of this DIVINE
PERSON, to Adam, Abraham, Isaac, Jac^k, Moses and others in the early Ages;
when He only showed Himself in a mere Humane Form: But when He assumed our
Flesh and dwelt among us, how dim so ever his Divinity seemed to the most about
Him; yet WE, says one of his Disciples, Beheld his GLORY, the Glory of the only
Begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth. [Joh. I. 14.]

And by the GOSPEL, which signifies a Joysul Message, we are to understand all
those Accounts of our Salvation by this Divine Redeemer which are especially
reported in the New Testament.

But what is it He has accomplished for us upon this Appearing? The Apostle
seems to Sum up all in these 2 Articles. --

1. He has abolished Death, and 2. Bro't Life and Immortality to Light.
A great Variety of surprising Subjects are here presented: the chief of which
I would illustrate under these 4 Heads. -- 1. To give some account of that
Mortality which has entirely seized the Race of Men. 2. Of that perplexing
Darkness about a Future State which involves their Minds. 3. Of that
Abolishment of Death which our Blessed Savior has accomplished at his first
Appearing in Humane Nature. 4. and lastly, Of that Life and Immortality which
He then bro't to Light, and successively discovers to the evangelized Nations.


1. Of that miserable DEATH which has entirely seized the Race of Men.

DEATH, as even Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato and Cicero, with other Heathen
Philosophers have well defined it, is a Separation of the Soul and Body. For so
widely different are the known Properties of Matter from the Powers of
Consciousness, Perception, Contemplation, Choice, and voluntary Motion; that
they concluded these perceptive, conscious, intellectual and self-active Powers
were Properties of some other Substance of a Nature essentially ^^stinct from
Body, which they called the Soul. And as the prel^^^ State of Humane Life is
the mutual and constant Influence they (...) on each other; the Separation or
Destruction of this (...) Influence is Death: a Separation utterly abhorrent to
the Minds of Men, and yet they are universally Subject to.

If we search the ORIGIN of this Ca^am^ty; the Scripture-History tell us, It
arises from the bold Transgression of the Two fost Prents of all Mankind. While
they subsisted in their primaeval Innocence they had no Principles or Causes of
Mortality in them. And such a State indeed was but agreeable to the
Righteousness and Goodness of their Creator.

For however He may deal with Brutes, which are not moral Agents with respect
to GOD, are not capable of his moral Government, can neither know Him nor his
Laws, nor therefore brake them, nor receive from Him a proper Punishment: who
have no Conceptions of a Future World, nor any different Apprehension between
Death and Sleep: but in the present State, their Pains and Pleasures may be
entirely adjusted: and with respect to whom, it may be no more Unkindness in
their Creator to take away their Lives, then after a fatiguing Day to let them
fall asleep at Night, or in that Sleep to let them expire. Yet it would seem
inconsistent with his essential Justice to have created our first Parents moral
Agents, with Powers and Inclinations of looking forward to a Future State and
intense Desires of Immortality, with Powers of knowing and doing his Will; and
yet have made them in a natural Subjection to the Power of Death, when they had
neither Guilt nor sinful Inclination in them. And it would seem inconsistent
with his essential Goodness to have created them with sinful Inclinations,
which must have flowed from Himself alone.

As they first came out of the Hands of their Maker, they were therefore free
both from Sin and Death: they had neither (...) Appetites nor mortal Principles
in them: both perfe^^ ^^^^cence and Life then filled and reigned in their
Constitutio^^ and if they had retained their Innocence, they had never Die^^^
been subject to Mortality.

But as they were moral Agents, capable of knowing their Maker, of descerning
his Perfections, of discovering his Will, and of yiedling a free Obedience to
Him; it was but fitting they should be under his moral Government, and retained
in their spontaneous Subjection to Him. It was sitting, they should freely obey
his Will and avoid the contrary; that they should faithfully observe the Laws
of undepraved Nature, which must be his Will, and avoid the Violation of them.
It was sitting also they should have some positive Command and some positive
Prohibition; that they might have Occasion to give every kind of Instance of
their entire Obedience to his Will and Government. And 'twas likewise sitting,
the Command should be enforced with some attractive Promise, and the
Prohibition with some paenal Threatening.

Such was the innocent and happy State of our first Parents at their Creation,
the innocent and happy State of their internal Constitution and of the World
without them, especially while they lived alone; that we can scarce conceive
they should have any Temptations to violate the Laws of Nature. A Positive
Prohibition therefore in that their Circumstance, seems more requisite, that
they might give a clearer Instance of their entire Obedience and Fidelity. And
such was the Goodness of their Creator, that He gave them but a single
Prohibition; which was Not to Eat nor Touch the Fruit of one certain Tree; and
this among a Multitude of others full of all kinds of delicious Fruits, which
they might freely use; But upon their Eating that, the Punishment of Death was
sure to follow.

Ho^^^er, our first Parents, being persuaded by an Apostate Angel (...) in a
Serpent, were prevailed on to Take and Eat: and in their ^^^^y Eating, both the
Sentence and the Execution began upon them. The Words in the Original are more
emphatical than in the Body of our Translation, as you may see in the Margin.
For There they are -- In the Day Thou eatest thereof; Dying, Thou shall Dye. i.
e. You shall upon Eating thereof receive the Principles of Deat: into your
Constitution, which will immediately make you Mor^^^, and subject you in the
course of Nature to sure Mortality.

Nor was Death the only Evil threatened; but as the Tree was called the Tree of
the Knowledge of Good and Evil; i. e. the Boundary between the experimental
Knowledge of them; or as much as to say -- Till Thou eatest of this Tree, Thou
shall only have the Knowledge of Good, but if Thou eatest Thou shall have the
Knowledge of Evil also: By which it seems as if every kind of Evil were
contained in the original Threatening, though Death the principal is recorded only
in the Epitome of it. And as we know the Fruit of some Trees even now is such
as to effect great Disorders in the Body and Soul, and have a mortal Influence;
Some more especially affect the Fluids, some the Nerves, and others (...) cause
Pains of various Sorts; some stupify, some inflame, some poison (...) or less
Degrees; some destroy immediately, and some with a (...) Fatality: as we might
easily give numerous Instances: and some (...) know are Haereditary.
It seems possible therefore if not likely, that the very Nature of this Fruit
was such as to introduce both material and moral Disorders in our first
Parents; yea to make so great a Change in their Constitutions, as to produce
both sinful and mortal Principles and equally effect their Offspring.

The Fruit at first indeed might be entirely Salutary: But as our first Parents
were forbidden to Take as well as Eat; and as the Devil is represented to have
the Power of Sin and Death, and to be now the God and Ruler of this Lower
World; Acts xvi. 18.2 Tim. ii. 26. Heb. ii. 14. Joh. xii. 31. xiv. 30. with 2
Cor. iv. 4. Ephesians. ii. 2. vi. 12. etc.
whose pernicious Power and Reign began at our first Apostasy, as the ready
Executioner of Judgment on the guilty Sinner: He might be allowed upon our
first Taking the Forbidden Fruit, when their Sin began, to change its Nature
and make it so pernicious

The HOLY SCRIPTURES are but very brief Abridgments of large Histories. The
Threatening might be vastly larger and more particular than the Abridgment here
recorded: and in the view aforesaid might be of this Importance -- You owe me
and have Promised me an entire Obedience, and now I Will Try you -- There Is the
beauteous ^^is of that Tree before you -- I forbid you to Take and Eat it --
And if you do; it shall be the fatal Instrument of my Vengeance on you: It will
have such a baneful Virtue as to work all kinds of Disorders in you: It will
introduce the Principles both of Sin, Disease and Death into you: In your very
Eating you will both contract a sinful Constitution, and become infirm and
mortal: and the Virtue will be so piercing and so entirely alter the Frame of
Nature in you, as to become hereditary, equally affect your Offspring, and
make them like you.

What a fatal Fruit was this? and how exactly answerable do we find the
Consequence? While the Meat was in their Mouth, as the Psalmist speaks, the
Wrath of Heaven came upon them. What a sinful and mortal Venom then entered
our first Parents, and has defused from them unto all their Race; who have the
same Principles of Sin and Death which they derived from Eating the forbidden
Fruit. The same Principles of Frailty and Mortality have univer^^^^ ^^^'d our
Nature, are for ever working in us, for ever endan^^^ (...) sudden Dissolution
or at least are ever wearing away the (...) ^ame, and bringing sure Decays and
Death upon us.

But were not our first Parents seeble Flesh and Blood before their Fall? Did
they not dwell on the same Soil? did they not live by P^^^^hing in the same
Air; and by Eating, Drinking, Exercise, (...), and other inward Operations? How
then could they (...) from Dying? how could they prevent those Disorders (...)
which would produce Diseases and bring on Mortality? (...) at was the
Difference between their Bodily Frame before the ^all and after? What were the
immediate Causes why they before could live, and after could not but Die?

To Answer these arduous Questions -- I might here consider the perfect
Salubriousness of the Soil, the Air, and the Fruits of Eden, which were suited
only to their State of Innocence; with the vital Influence of the Tree of Life,
which seems to have been in Nature a sufficient Antitote to every Bodily
Disorder: from all which they were upon their Fall immediately excluded, if not
turned out into Soils, Airs and Fruits of a less healthy kind, prepared by the
Foresight of their Creator for their State of Guilt and Funishment; or vitiated
by the malignant Influence of Him who then became the Prince of the Power of
the Air without us, as well as the Spirit working in the Children of
Disobedience. Ephesians. II. 2.
However, the upper Part of the Earth with the Air about it, including Paradise
itself, seems to be filled with pernicious Substances at the Time of the Flood,
upon the Breaking up the Fountains of the Great Deep, wherein they were lodged
at the Creation, and reserved against this Day: when the Waters drowned that
most wicked Race; and these pernicious Substances, with the disorderly Seasons
following, It seems likely that before the Flood, the Sun and Moon were always
in the Equinoctial, and so -- a perpetual Spring throughout the Earth, etc.
would shorten the Lives of their Successors, and increase their Frailty,
Misery, and Mortality.

But to pass by these -- I would rather observe, that the Author of Nature
Himself has seemed to leave the Mark, and point out the more immediate Cause of
so great a Change, even in our present Frame.

For of the innumerable Threads of Nerves which are the Instruments of Motion,
Sense and Life in the Humane Body, there are only these 2 Sorts in General. The
one our sovereign Former is pleased to put under the Power and Will of the
Soul, whereby we move them and those Parts of the Body where they spread, as we
please. The other Sort He does not now subject to the Will or Power of the
Soul, but keeps them all in his more immediate Hands, and continually moves
them to preserve our Lives, at his sovereign Pleasure: These are all those
nervous Fibers, which move the the Heart, the Arteries, the Veins, the Glands,
the Bowels: which are all in perpetual Motion, which the Soul knows nothing of,
can neither cause or stop, retard or quicken; but yet are moved incessantly by
some other intellectual Power: Nicuentit says, the Former Sort proceeds from
the Forepart of the Brain; the ^^tter, from the hinder Part: But that both
Sorts meeting in the Lungs; by the former, when we are awake we move 'em as we
please; but when asleep, they are moved by the latter.
and what should this Power be, but the Sovereign Power that formed them, that
began their Motion, that is always with us, that never sleeps, is never
weary; that holds our Souls in Life, Psalm. LXVI. 9.
preserves our Spirits by his constant Visitation Job X. 12.
and in whom the Apostle observes we live and move and have our Being. Acts
XVII. 28.
.

Now it seems easy to conceive, that if at the Formation of our first Parents,
their Creator had put all these nervous Instruments of Motion, Sense and Life,
the one Sort under the Will and Power of the Soul as well as the other; there
could have been no great Disorder in us, especially in the State of Eden or of
the Antedeluvian Air: the Soul would have had a Power to prevent them: Or as
soon as any had begun, we could have removed it in a Moment; as easily as we
can now swallow a Morsel, breathe out the Air, or move a Finger: or much easier
than skillful Artizans can mend their Houses as soon as the smallest Part
begins to fail, and by perpetual Successions of Repairs, may keep them up for
ever.

Such a Power as this, with a perfect Perception in every Nerve, would have
sufficed while their Creator had continued it, to preserve them from every
mortal, yea from every hurtful Disorder or Impression. Such a Power it seems
likely He first endowed them with. Nor would this in the least have lessened
their Dependence on Him, any more than that He yet preserves our Power to move
any other Parts of the Body; since our Powers of every kind are both derived
from Him, and continued only by his Sovereign Will and Influence.

But upon their Eating the forbidden and mortal Fruit, they lost this Part of
their Power and their Posterity with them.

Since that fatal Action, our Souls have no immediate Power at all over the
greater Part of this Animal Frame: no Power to move, restrain or guide the most
needful Instruments of Life in the Body: not the least Degree of Power on that
Great Engine of Life the Heart; but on it moves, with its innumerable Train of
Nerves, Arteries, Veins, and Vessels; and are all now left exposed to many
hurtful Impressions and irregular Motions, which none! (...) GOD or his Angels
are able to foresee or hinder, and which are the ^^ward Causes of our Mortality.

Multitudes of fatal Disorders both in the Nerves and ^^a^es we cannot prevent:
Multitudes we cannot perceive even while they are working in us, but they
destroy the Life before we are ^^^are of Danger: Numberless others indeed
discover themselves but they yet come on, and there is no resisting their
impetuous? were. Yea our various Affections, Passions and Imagin^^^^ ar^^^ very
much out of our Government: and yet these have a mighty Influence on the more
vital Parts of this tender Frame, to produce disorderly Motions, and at once
disloive it, or gradually but surely wear it away.

And besides all this -- there are numberless Outward Causes, from the various
Qualities of the Air we breathe in, and the Food and Drink we constantly
receive; which may turn to Poisons by their own internal Fermentations, or draw
them from the Earth their great Repository, and have a baneful Influence in
these feeble Bodies. Yea both the Waters and Air without us, and from them the
Fluids in us, are charged with innumerable Seeds of little Insects too fine for
our bare Eyes to see: which upon the least Stagnation of the Elements wherein
they float, will hatch and swarm in Millions to produce Diseases and destroy
our Lives.

Thus the present State of Nature in this lower World appears in some sort
disordered; though doubtless in a wife Adjustment to the Moral State of Men in
general, for whom 'twas chiefly formed. For now, every Element is armed with
Vengeance: and how universal is the Reign of DEATH among the Race of Men! How
He sweeps their Multitudes often the Stage as fast as they successively arise!
How tormenting is He in his fierce Assaules; how ghastly in his ^^^^liate
Visage; how distressing in the dying Agonies; and what a horrid World would
this appear, if we could but have a universal View of the Multitudes at this
Instant laboring under his destroying Power! It would be too shocking for the
Heart of Man to bear.

For as by the latest Computations, there are near a Thousand Million People on
the Face of the Globe, and about a Thirtieth Part as many Dye in a Year; one
Day with another then there must be near a Hundred Thousand now a Dying, near
Seven hundred thousand in one Week, near Three Millions in one Month, and near
Thirty six Millions in one Year. And all these by the mere Course of Nature:
though there should not one be murdered, executed, drowned, or killed by Plagues
or Battles. See Sir William Petty, Mr. Grant, Dr. Haley, Dr. Davenant, and Dr.
Nichols. And the Account is thus -- By the Bills of Mortality, 24 thousand Die
in (...) London. Petty and Nichols say, there Die a 30th Part of the City.
(...) that the City is but an 11th, Grant says but a 14th Part of England.
(...) that England is but Half the British Empire; and the British Empire (...)
Part of all Mankind.


Nor is this all our present Misery: But

II. We are now to take some View of that perplexing DARKNESS about a FUTURE
STATE, which involves the Minds of Men by Nature.

This is plainly hinted in the Words before us: And by looking a little into
this gloomy Scene, we may more sensibly find the Need of that discovering Light
our Savior brings us, the more highly prize it, and the more rejoice in its
Illuminations.

And here it cannot be proper to consider what Discoveries of a FUTURE STATE
the mere Reason of Men is able to make. For we who are born, bro't up and live
in the midst of Revelation, have thereby received great Numbers of Ideas and
Reasons; which because we find agreeable to our improved Understandings, are
therefore apt to think our Minds might have discovered them without this
Revelation: when it is from this Revelation only we have derived them, and it is
difficult therefore if not impossible to know whether our most impro^^ ^^ands
without it could have made the Discovery.

Our Business then is to consider the universal Darkness about this Matter,
which in Fact involved the World before CHRIST appeared, and which even yet
involves the ungospelized Nations.

Nor need we look among the common Herd of Men, where the Ignorance even of the
most ingenious and penetrating Minds among them, appears amazing: as any may
find by consulting with their Slaves from Africa, or our more sagacious
American Indians who have not yet received the Gospel. Their Minds with all
their Powers have neither certainly discovered a Future State, nor even
scarcely that Universal Being, who made, pervades and rules the World. Some of
them indeed have some Notion of a Future Existence: Yet if you enquire, you will
find they have no Certainty, nor any Reasons, but rather merely some Suspicion;
or are inclined to think so, because some others as ignorant as they have told
them: But as for the Resurrection, it never entered their Suspicion. And such
extremely dark and uncertain Notions we may well suppose, that other common
Heathens had, who lived before the Time of CHRIST'S Appearing; as also those
who yet remain without the Influence of his Revelation.

But we may rather see this Darkness, by enquiring of the most improved Men
among the old Egyptians, Greeks and Romans. For Learning among the Gentiles
seems to have flourished 1st in Egypt; thence to pass to Greece, and thence to
Rome. And according to her ancient Progress, we may trace their Opinions in
this Particular.

Herodotus the Father of the Heathen History, says, the EGYPTIANS were the
First i. e. The First among the Heathen,
who held the Soul of Man to be Immortal: but then that the Body perishing, the
Soul goes into another: and when it has run through every kind of Creature in the
Earth, Air and Waters; it again enters into some new Humane Body: which Circuit
they also fancied to be completed in Three thousand Years.

Of the GREEK Philosophers -- Pythagoras, who was Born toward the End of
Nebuchadnezzar's Time, and began to flourish in the Reign of Cyrus, held the
same Opinion: and Diodorus Siculus says, He learned it of the Egyptians;
Laertius, that He bro't it first to Greece; but Plutarch says, He held, that
when the Soul goes out of the Body, it goes to the Soul of the World; and
Laertius says, He held that she walked in the Air like a Body.

Socrates, who was Born about a Hundred Years after the Birth of Pythagoras,
improved upon the Soul's Immortality. But in his fine Oration made to his
Judges upon his receiving the Sentence of Death; though He rises into noble
Suggestions of the Future State, yet his manner of speaking plainly makes them
to be pleasing Suppositions only, without any Certainty: and after all He
closes thus -- But now it is time for us to depart Hence, I to Dye, You to
Live: but whether of the Two be Best, the Immortal Gods only know; for I
believe no Man does.

Plato likewise, who was Born about 40 Years after Socrates, was his beloved
Disciple, and lived 8 Years with Him, even grew in this desired Opinion, and
pleaded more than any before Him for the Soul's Immortality. But the Sum of his
Reasoning is by Cicero reduced to This -- The Soul perceives it moves, and at
the same time perceives it moves by its own natural Force, and no external one;
neither can it be ever forsaken by itself; and therefore must be immortal. And
yet Cicero tells us, that Plato's Reasoning could not convince his Scholar
Panatius: who though He admired his Master, and on every Occasion calls Him
Divine, Wisest, Holiest, etc; yet approved not his Notion of the Soul's
Immortality, but opposed it with these two Arguments -- That what ever is Born
or Began to be must Die: and that nothing can grieve but it must be disordered;
that what may be disordered may Die; and that Souls being disordered, are
therefore subject to Mortality. As to Aristotle, whom Laertius styles the most
excelling of all the Scholars of Plato, and Cicero calls Him the most excellent
in Wit and Diligence; (t) it seems uncertain. For though Dr. Whithy represents
Him as a Condemner of the Soul's Immortality; yet both Hesychius, Laertius and
Cicero tell us, He held the Soul to be Incorporeal, and even invented a New
Word to express it; viz. (...) which signifies a peculiar Sort of a Substance,
that has a perpetual Power of Self Action in it.


Among the ROMANS, I need only mention Cicero; who may serve for all, as being
one of the greatest and most knowing, who had studied at Athens, and made
Himself a perfect Master of all the Learning of the Philosophers before Him;
who added further Contemplations of his own, and who Died but about 40 Years
before our Savior's Birth. In his noble Discourse of the Contempt of Death
Tuse. Quaest. I.
He gathers various Arguments to Prove this pleasing Point, and sometimes seems
persuaded of the Certainty. His chief Argument is this -- That unless we are
altogether stupid in Matters of natural Philosophy, we cannot doubt the Soul
has no dissimilar Parts; on this Account is not divisible; and therefore
cannot Die: and on this and such like Arguments, He says, Socrates relied.

And yet in the Entrance of his Dissertation, He says, -- Not that I would have
you take my Words for Apollo's Oracles, or think what I deliver is absolutely
certain; but consider me as one conjecturing only at Probabilites; for farther
than Likelihood I cannot go. And toward the Close, He appears again in some
Uncertainty, whether when our Souls expire, we return to an Eternal Mansion
proper for us, or only to a State of no Sensation.

Such a Vail of Darkness hung between the Present and the Future World; that
among the most learned Heathen, all seems little more than mere Conjecture: the
best and wisest of them rather wished and pleaded for the Soul's Immortality,
than attained the Certainty. Alas! how few were acquainted with these
Philosophic Arguments: and of those who knew them, there were endless
Disputations.

But then as to the RESURRECTION of the Body to Life; these learned Heathen
give not the least Intimation. And when the Apostle Paul spoke in the Market
Place at Athens, about JESUS and the Resurrection; some of the Epicurean and
Stolck Philosophers encountered Him, and some said, What will this Babbler say?
Then they carried Him to the Court of Areoapagus, saying -- May we know what
this new Doctrine whereof Thou speak is? for Thou bring certain Strange
Things to our Ears: and while He preached learnedly about the GOD that m^de the
World, they seemed to give Hini great Attention: but when He came to mention th
RESURRECTION from the Dead; some mocked and others said, we will hear Thee
again of this matter -- and broke up the Assembly. Acts XVII.

Nor was there much more Light among the JEWS themselves. For though they were
savored with the inspired Writings of Moses and the other Prophets; yet how
obscurely was the Future Life revealed in them! Clear enough it seems to us,
who now by the Gospel know how to perceive their meaning: yet not so clearly
then, as to prevent Dispute about it.

For a considerable Sect among them were the SADDUCES; who embraced the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, and yet Denied both A^gels, Spirits, and the
Resurrection. Mat. XXII. Mark XII. Luke XX. Acts XXIII.
And Josephus, who well knew them, says, they Denied the Soul's Immortality,
with the Rewards and Punishments of the Invisible World: De Bell. Lib. II. Chap.
12.
and held the Soul to be extinguished with the Life of the Body. A^^^. Lib.
XVIII. Chap. 2.
Their second noted Sect were the ESSEENS: who, as Josephus says, adhered to
the Holy Scripture, and held the Soul to be immertal; the Souls of the Good to
go into a pleasant Country beyond the Ocean; and the Souls of the Bad into
miserable Places full of Punishment without End (b) But from Josephus's
Account, I cannot learn they had any Notion of the Resurrection of the Body.
Their third and greatest Sect were the PHARISEES: who held the Soul to be
incorruptible (b) and immortal, (a) as the same Author, who was one of them
assures us: and the Writer of the Acts, that they confessed both Angels,
Spirits [i. e. Departed Spirits] and the Resurrection. Acts XXIII. 8.
But then the same Josephus in his Antiquities, says, they held, that the
separate Spirits passing through a Judgment under the Earth; the Bad are
condemned to a perpetual Prison, but the Good have an easy Return to Life. (a)
And in his Book of the Wars, that the Souls of the Bad endure perpetual
Punishment, but the Seuls of the Good go into other Bodies De Bell. Lib. II.
Chap. 12.
On which account Two learned Monderns say, It seems probable, they setched
their Opinions of these Matters, not so much from the sacred Writings, as from
the Doctrines of Pythagoras or Plato; since they believed a Transmigration of
the Souls of Good Men into other Bodies, which is a kind of Resurrection!
Beausobre and Lenfant, their Introduction to the New Testament.


This is some brief Review of that almost universal Darkness which overspread
this lower World till CHRIST'S Appearance, and where his Gospel has not shined.

We proceed to consider,

III. Something of that ABOLISHMENT of Death which our blessed Savior wrought
at his first appearing in Humane Nature.

Who has ABOLISHED Death -- [(...)] The Word literally signifies -- Has made
to cease: in the Araback -- it is -- Has abrogated: in the Vulgar Latin and
Montanus -- Has destroyed: in Erasmus -- Has obliterated: in Beza -- Has
made to vanish: But the Syriack, Aethiopick, Castalio, Calvin, Tremelius and
Piscator, with our English Version, and I think with a stronger and nobler
Emphasis -- Has abolished that fatal Enemy. Vatablus says, In Pol. Synopsi
Criticorum.
He has made the Power of Death to cease: Erasmus (p) that CHRIST has
Purchased for us the Abolition of Death both Temporal and Eternal, together
with the Abolition of Sin the Cause of Both: And Grotius's Comment (p) is, that
Death is represented Here as a Person: And as He has Dominion over those who
are alienated from the blessed GOD; so CHRIST has taken away that Dominion,
that legal Right, and in his own Time will also take away the Power, as we are
taught in 1 Cor. XV. 26. and Heb. II. 14.

But for the further Illustration of this most important Passage, we may
briefly view, both his destinguishing Accomplishments for this great Design,
with his actual Execution of it, How He wrought it, and What is this happy
Abolishment.

He being from Eternity, the SON of GOD, the Brightness [or Effulgence] of his
Glory, the express Image of his Person [or Substance] And with Him the Lord of
Life, the Creator, Upholder and Ruler of Heaven and Earth; Heb. 1.3. Joh. 1, 1,
-- 4. Acts III. 15. Col. 1.15, 6, 17. etc.
He is of infinite Excellence and Dignity; of absolute Knowledge, Wisdom,
Justice, Purity, Power, Truth and Goodness: And on these Accounts most
perfectly Accomplished to undertake the Office of a MEDIATOR between GOD and
Man; and of alsufficient Power to carry both HIMSELF and us through every
Opposition, and bring us to eternal Life and Blessedness.

To this great Office therefore He was designed from Eterinty. And having made
this lower World for us and produced us into Being, He became the active Medium
of Intercourse between the DEITY and our First Parents; familiarly conversing
with them, bestowing the Use and Dominion of the inserior Creatures on them
discovering to them the Will of GOD and Laws of Nature, warning them of Danger,
and instructing them for their Advantage But instantly, upon our Sin and Fall,
He Began to execute his mediatorial Office, by Interceeding for and obtaining
the Divine Forbearance, receiving as Mediator the Rule of the World, and
Revealing the gracious Councils and Designs of GOD for our Salvation, in that
most reviving Prophesy, that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents
Head; i. e. that from Her should descend a MIGHTY SAVIOR, who would happily
crush and ruin the Policy, Power and Dominion of Satan in this wretched World.

In all the preceding Ages to his Incarnation He still continually acted as
our MEDIATOR: By preserving this lower World from the absolute Power of the
Fallen Angels, from the utmost Reign of Sin, from perfect Misery and entire
Destruction; restraining the violent Lusts of Men, raising and governing
Kingdoms and Nations as well as particular Persons, for various excellent Ends;
bestowing innumerable Benefits both of a Temporal and Spiritual Kind on
Multitudes; communicating Inspirations, Virtues, and Graces to them; and
continuing the Lines of Desent to numberless others whom He had in his Gracious
Eye in the successive Ages.

To some few of the Ancients both before the Flood and after He sensibly
appeared; and gave progressive Notices of his Design to assume our Nature, and
therein appear and act as our Great Redeemer. Diverse Predictions of Him were
entered on faithful Records; as that He was to spring from Abrabam, then from
Isaac, then from Jacob, then from Judab, then from David: and a mighty Nation
was raised up from the Loins of Jacob to preserve those Records, to look for
his Appearance, proclaim their Expectations to the World, and bare witness of
it. And when about Four whousand Years were past from the Creation, the PRINCE
OF LIFE is Born of a Pious Virgin derived from David. When the Fullness of Time
was come, as the Apostle observes, GOD sent forth HIS SON, made of a Woman,
made under the Law, to Rediem them that were under the Law, [i. e. the
Condemnation and Punishment denounced therein] and receive the Adoptions of
Sons. Gal. iv. 4, 5.

For, our First Transgression being justly Threatened and Punished with Death;
the Threatening must be executed, the Punishment endured; the Divine Justice,
Holiness, Authority, Law and Government must not loose their due Regard or
Honor, but be magnified in every Eye, and the Divine Truth preserved
inviolate. For these great Ends He therefore takes our Nature, but in perfect
Purity, yet clothed with our Infirmities; that having no Sin of his own, He
might be entirely suitable to represent us, to bare the Punishment due to us,
and in our Nature yield that full Obedience and Regard to God which is due
therefrom, and which we have lost our Power to yield; that by the most perfect
and meritorious Sufferings and Obedience even unto Death of such a Person
infinite in Excellence and Dignity, He might Purchase for us complete
Redemption and eternal Happiness, with the rightful Power of bestowing them on
us; and that the Glory of every divine Perfection might appear and harmonize
throughout all the Progress of this stupendeous Work.

Obscure and faint indeed He was at his first Appearance; that He might
unobserved and unprevented, endure those Sufferings needful for our Redemption:
For He must be numbered among Transgressors, i. e. Publicly condemned as a Ma
esactor, and offered up a Sacrifice to Death even the most cursed painful and
ignominious Death, which was that of the Cross: and it the People among whom He
sojourned had but known Him to be the Lord of Glory, they had never crucified
Him. 1 Cor. II. 8.

Till He arrived to about 30 Years of Age, He livid a low, retired and servile,
though spotless Life; and then engaged in his Public Ministry: At his Entrance,
He overcame the Tempter in his most subtle, strong and assiduous Efforts; and
then He went about continually doing Good: Preaching the glad Tidings of
Redemption teaching heavenly and saving Doctrines, confirming them with
Miracles, adorning them with a most divine and perfect Life; healing all manner
of Diseases, forgiving Sins, ruling the Winds and Seas, controlling the Power
of Devils, making them to worship Him, turning them out of the Possessed, and
sending them away.

By such things as these He gave the growing Specimens of his superior Power to
those our mighty and destroying Enemies. But He advances in his Triumphs. For a
little before He left the World, He began to abolish Death it self, by raising
the Son of the Widow of Nain, the Daughter of Jairus, as also Lazarus to Life.
To the Two former, He only says, I say unto Thee arise, and they immediately
arose. To the last, at the Mouth of the Tomb wherein he had lain for 4 Days
among the Dead, He cries -- Lazarus come forth, and out he comes with the
Grave-Cloaths bound about him.

But to complete the Conquest, and become more Glorious, He must condescend to
Die; that for us He might entirely fulfill the Law, brake the Power of Satan,
Sin and Death among the Sons of Men, purchase our complete Redemption, and rise
a perfect Conqueror and Deliverer. For if He could raise Himself to Life; He
would obtain a perfect Victory, both for HIMSELF and us, and all things else
would be easy to Him. For as the Apostle argues; Heb II. 10, 14, 15. It became
Him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many Sons
to Glory, to make the CAPTAIN OF THEIR SALVATION perfect through Sufferings. --
And, Forasmuch as the Children are Partakers of Flesh and Blood; HE also
Himself likewise took part of the same: that through Death, He might destroy
Him who had the Power of Death, i. e. the Devil; and Deliver them who through
Fear of Death, were all their Life Time subject to Bondage.

Having therefore fulfilled all Righteousness, endured every kind of sinless
Suffering both in Soul and Body, and Finished the Work for which He was sent
among us; He submitted to be Crucified, Killed and Buried. But on the same Day,
his separate Soul entered into the Joys of Paradise; and on the Third Day
after, He abolished Death in his slain Body, by awaking unto Life and rising
from the Grave. At the same time, He shook the Earth, opened the Graves of many
others round about Him, enlivened and raised them with Himself: And in 40 Days,
He in the Sight of his Disciples, ascended up on high, and led Captivity
Captive: Having spoiled the Principalities and Powers of Darkness; He made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them. Being raised to Heaven, He is there
placed at the Right Hand of GOD, far above all Principality and Power and Might
and Dominion, and every Name that is named not only in this World, but also in
that which is to come; having all things put under his Feet, and being the Head
over them for the Good of his People. He is exalted to be a Prince and Savior,
to give Repentance and Remission of Sins: And is become the Author of Eternal
Salvation to all that obey Him.

For all this He did, as a Public Person, in behalf of all his Followers; and
as a visible and certain Demonstration, that He had purchased, and is both able
and resolved to accomplish their absolute Deliverance from all their Enemies,
has begun to brake their Powers, will entirely take away his People's Sin which
is the Sting of Death, at the Moment of their Dissolution, receive their
purified Spirits to Himself in Paradise, and in due Time will come again and
raise their Bodies to perfect and immortal Life and Blessedness.

This therefore brings us in the

IV. and last Place, To take a Prospect of that LIFE and IMMORTALITY, which He
then bro't to Light, and successively discovers by the Gospel Revelation.

Now by Life and Immortality, the Apostle doubtless means the same thing, with
this only Difference; that LIFE implies the Kind of our Existence in the Future
World, as being a State of active Powers, Perceptions and Enjoyments;
IMMORTALITY the never failing Duration of it; and both together represent a
State of perfect and endless Happiness.

The Word (...) indeed originally signifies INCORRUPTIBILITY: but yet it seems
to be used indifferently, both for Incorruptibility and Immortality, both by
this Apostle and by Profane Writers. For every vital thing that is
Incorruptible, must in its Nature be Immortal: and in both these Senses our
Translators use it. In 1 Cor. XV. 42, 50, 52, 53, and 54, it is therefore
rendered Incorruption: and in Rom II. 7, as well as in our Text by Immortality.
So in Romans 1.23, we read of the Incorruptible God (...) and in 1 Timothy 1.17, the
same Word is used for the King Immortal. Agreeable to this, I observe Josephus,
representing the Opinion of the Sadduces, Essecus and Pharisees, in the Places
above recited, indifferently uses the Words (...) and (...), to signify the
Soul's Immortality. And agreably we have the same Word in our Text, thus
beautifully rendered in the Book of Wisdom, Chap. II. v. 23. For GOD created
Man to be IMMORTAL, (...)
and made Him to be an Image of his own Eternity.

But then this Immortality seems plainly to respect the Soul, as well as Body:
and not only to look on forward to the Resurrection of the Body, which the
Heathen had no Though It of, and which the Jews disputed; but even nearer and
immediately to the Soul itself, in the state of Separation, which a few of Both
had some Glimps of, and earnestly desired.

And that the Apostle had this nearer Prospect, appears from these 4 Reasons --
1. Because by many Passages in his Writings, it appears He had been both a
Platonist in Philosophy and a Pharisee in Divinity, and retained so much of
their best Principles as was consistent with the Christian Revelation. And as
he knew that by Life and Immortality, they to be sure included the Life of the
Soul in its separate State, and He had been accustomed to use the Words in the
same View; He must still have the same View in his present using them. 2.
Because He knew that the Desire of Life and Happiness in every State is equally
co-natural to the foreseeing Mind of Man; the Desire of a happy Living in the
present World, the Desire of the Continuance of such a happy Living, and the
Desire also of Life and Happiness in the State of Separation; that the best of
Men both among the Heathen, Jews and Christians, could not but earnestly Desire
it; and that the System of the GOSPEL must needs excel the Doctrines of
Socrates and Plato, both as to the great Objects of our natural and rational
Desires, and the Certainty of their Discovery. 3. Because he knew that our
BLESSED SAVIOR at his late Appearing had brought to Light the Life and
Immortality of the humane Soul in its State of Separation. For in Mat. X. 28 He
had plainly said, that those who could kill the Body, were not able to kill the
Soul. In the Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus, He represents the Body of the
Rich Man as Dead and Buried, but his Soul in Hell, and desiring that his
surviving Brethren on Earth might be warned of coming into his Place of
Torment: And at the same time, that Lazarus was carried by Angels to Abraham's
Embraces, and There was comforted, while the deceased Spirit of the Rich Man
was tormented. Luke XVI.

In his Argument against the Sadducees; who neither believed the Resurrection,
Angels, Spirits, nor the Soul's Immortality -- He observes that GOD cannot be
so properly the GOD of the Dead as of the Living: and that continuing to call
Himself the GOD of Abraham, Isaac and Jacch after their Decease; He plainly
intimates, that in their vital Parts their Souls, they were still alive and
happy in Him, though waiting in full Assurance of the Resurrection of their
Bodies. Luke XX. 27, 40.

In his Transfiguration, He showed Moses as well as Elias to the Disciples with
Him. Mat. XVII. Mark IX.

In his Public Preaching He declares, that whoever hears his Word and
believes on Him that sent Him, is passed from Death to Life, and has Life
everlasting; Joh. V. 24.
that He was the Bread of Life who come down from Heaven and gives Life to the
World; and whoever eats, i. e. receives Him, shall never Hunger, never
Perish, never Die, but has eternal Life; that He is in them, and by Him they
live, and shall live for ever: Joh. VI. 27 -- 58.
that whosoever keeps his saying shall never see Death: Joh. VIII. 51.
that He gives them eternal Life, that they are in his Hands, that none shall
pluck them out, and they shall never Perish. Joh. X. 28.
To the Woman of Samaria He said, that if she had asked Him, He would have
given her living Water; and whoever drinks of this Water, shall never thirst
-- but it shall be in him a Well of Water springing up into everlasting Life.
Joh. IV. 10, 14.
And to his Disciples, he declares, If any Man serve me, let him follow me; and
where I am, there shall my Servant be: Joh. XII. 26.
that he was going to his Father, and his Disciples should follow him thither:
Joh. XIII. 1, 36.
and that in his Absence the Father would g^^^ them another Comforter, that he
may abide with them for ever; even the Spirit of Truth, who then dwelt in them
[as a Sanctifier,] and should be in them [as a Comforter,] and even this for
ever.] Joh. X. 28.


As He hung upon the Cross, he declared there was then a Paradise, a Place of
Happiness, suitable for the Residence of the separate Spirits of the
sanctified; into which He would on the same Day enter, and the believing
Malefactor dying with Him. And at the Moment of his Expiration, he commended
his departing Spirit into the Hands of his Father. Luke xxiii. 43 -- 46.

Upon his Resurrection; with respect to his whole human Nature, He says to
Mary, weeping at the Sepulcher -- I am not yet ascended to my Father, but go to
my Brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my
GOD, and your GOD: plainly intimating, that they being interested in the same
GOD and Father, should also at their leaving the present Life on Earth, ascend
in their Spirits after him; that where he is, they might likewise be, as he had
said before: And in 40 Days from this, he visibly ascended up to Heaven

Soon after his Ascension he pours down the supernatural Influences of the
Divine Spirit in abundant measures on his Disciples; inspires them with still
more clear Discoveries of this immortal Life, both of the Soul in its separate
State, as of the Soul and Body rejoined at the Resurrection. And He made all
these things most evident and sure, not only by his own Doctrines, Miracles,
Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension; but also by the Inspirations,
Doctrines, Lives, Miracles and Sufferings of his First Disciples.

4. and lastly, Because this Apostle therefore knew there is such an happy
State of the separate Spirits of the Sanctified, both by his own and others
Inspirations.


For as he was one of those who consented to the Death of Stephen; so he knew,
if he did not see, that inspired Person full of Faith and Power, doing great
Wonders and Miracles among the People; how the learned Jews were not able to
resist the Wisdom and Spirit by which He spoke; how his Face shined like an
Angel in the midst of the Jewish Council; how being full of the Holy Ghost He
looked steadfastly up to Heaven, and saw the Glory of GOD. and JESUS standing at
the Right Hand of GOD; and while they stoned him, how he cried out -- LORD
JESUS receive my Spirit. Act; VI, VII.

He also knew a Man, which seems plainly to be Himself, caught up to the third
Heaven, caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable Words, which it is not
possible for a Man to utter; though whether in the Body, or out of the Body, He
could not tell. Which plainly intimates that He apprehended his separate Spirit
might be There, as well as his united Soul and Body. 2 Cor. XII. 1, -- 4.

Such a mighty Impression did this leave upon him, as he tells the Phillipians,
that for him to Die would be Gain to Him: and though he dearly loved them, and
his Continnance in the Flesh was needful for them, that be was very loath to
leave them; yet his chief Desire was to Depart and to be with CHRIST, which is
far better. Phil. 1.3, 4, 8, 21, -- 25.
In the Name of Himself and Timothy, He says, -- We know, that if our earthly
House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of GOD, an House
not made with Hands eternal in the Heavens: For in this we groan earnestly,
desiring to be clothed upon with our House which is from Heaven: For we who
are in this Tabernacle do groan, being burdened: not for that we would be
uncloathed, but clothed upon, that MORTALITY may be swallowed up of LIFE --
Knowing that while we are at Home in the Body, we are absent from the LORD: We
are confident and willing, rather to be absent from the Body, and to be present
with the LORD: For we walk by Faith, not by Sight. 2 Cor. V. 1, -- 8.
Plainly intimating, that while we are present in the Body and absent from the
LORD, we only walk in the Faith of Him; but when we come to be absent from the
Body and present with Him, we shall come to see Him -- Our Faith will open into
immediate Vision. And with an Eye to this, he says to the believing Hebrews
Heb. XII. 22, 23, 24.
But ye are come [i. e. now in the lively View of Faith, but upon leaving the
Body will come in Sight] unto Mount Zion, and to the City of the Living GOD,
the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of ANGELS; to the General
Assembly of the Church of the first E^^n who are written in Heaven, and to GOD
the Judge of all, and to the SPIRITS of JUST MEN made Perfect, and to JESUS the
Mediator of the New Covenant.

It is the Life and Immortality of the Sanctified only that these Evangelical
Paslages look to: And no doubt it is only the same which our Text intends. But
a View of the Nature, Powers, Perceptions, Actions and Enjoyments thereof, both
in the separate Soul and in the raised Body, would open a Scene too vast for us
now to survey. I may only offer the following Hints,

I. For this Life of theirs in the separate State. -- By the Examples above,
their uncloathed Spirits may both See visible Objects and Hear Things
unutterable by the Tongues of Men; and this in a vastly higher Degree than now
in their Bodies. For to keep to the Apostle's Allusion; their Souls are now
confined to an Earthy House, can perceive no Light or Sound but in the Eyes or
Ears, and as these are dull and embarras'd so are their Seeing and Hearing. But
when their Spirits are out of their Bodies, they will be in perfect Liberty.
Yea they will be then made Perfect, as the Apostle describes them: and this
includes not only a spotless Purity which renders them fit for the Vision and
Society of Paradise; but also the Perfecting of all their Powers, and among the
rest their Powers of seeing the glorious Objects and hearing the ravishing
Language There.

Yea, by the Instances of the Martyr Stephen and of the Apostles Paul and John;
Acts VII. 55, 56. Acts IX. 3, -- 7. Acts XXII. 6, -- II. Acts XXVI. 13, -- 18.
Rev.
It seems as if the Heavenly World were open before us; and the Light, if not
the Language There, may now reach our Earth, though our Organs are not fine
enough to transmit their Impulse for the Soul to perceive. So the Light from
Multitudes of Stars, is by Glasles found to reach us, though our present Degrees
of Powers are not enough to perceive it by the naked Eye. And so both Light and
Sounds which are unperceived by some, are clear to others.

The separate Spirit may therefore open at once to the Glory if not the Harmony
of the Realms above. For what is Seeing, but the Soul's perceiving the Motions
of Light? and what is Hearing, but the Soul's perceiving the Motions of the Air
or Either? Now the Motions are greatly dulled and hindered; but then they may
come with their full Power upon us, and be perfectly perceived. So the Soul of
the Martyr Stephen could doubtless see the Rays of Light from Heaven, as soon
as out of the Body as well as before. Or the Power of GOD or his beneficent
Angels may contract the Rays, or enlarge our Power to see them, or waft the
Motions of Light and Sound from the World above; or produce the same Impulses
for the separate Spirit Here to perceive as if it were up in those blissfull
Regions, and all the while it is ascending Thither: which is within a few
Hours; as CHRIST expiring at the midst of the Afternoon, implies, in his Speech
to the believing Criminal -- THIS DAY Thou shall be with me in Paradise.

2. For their Immortal Life at the Resurrection. -- He also says, that in their
raised State as well as before, they will be like the Angels of Heaven. Mat.
XXII. 30. Mark. XII. 25. Luke XX. 36.
And the Apostle says, their Bodily Substance will be wonderously changed; they
will not be raised in the Form of Flesh and Blood; but in Incorruption, in
Glory, in Power; made Spiritual, Caelestial, Immortal; will bear the pure and
vital Image of the LORD from Heaven; be fashioned like to his glorious Body:
And then Mortality shall be swallowed up in Life, and Death in Victory. 1 Cor.
XV. Phil. III. 21.

Their bodily Dust will then be sublimated into a spiritr^us Substance, pure
and fine as Ether, bright and quick as Light, or rather like the more perfect
Substances in the heavenly World: free from the Laws of Gravity, not subject to
the least Disorder: absolutely under the Power of the happy and perfect Spirit:
Incorruptible, Immutable, Immortal: beauteous, strong and active like the
Angels: luminous like the Body of CHRIST at his Transfiguration: their whole
united Nature filled with all the Fullness of GOD; Ephesians. III. 19.
and Him will they for ever feel within them as an inseparable and perpetual
Spring of perfect Life and Strength, of Vision, Knowledge, Joy and Blessedness.

But we must now pass on to some IMPROVEMENT of these important Doctrines. And,

1. From our Consideration of that miserable Death which has universally seized
the Race of Men; we may form some extensive View of the extreme Evil of Sin,
its pernicious Nature, its infinite Dishonor and Offense to GOD; of his
inviolable Holiness and Justice, of his strict Regard to his Law, Authority,
Government and Honor; and of the tremendous Dispensation of his Judgments upon
this degenerate World.

What greater Demonstrations do the Minds of Men conceive of these things, than
in destroying Earthquakes, Plagues, Deluges and Conflagrations! Of innumerable
Plagues and Earthquakes I shall mention a sew.

About 467 Years before our Savior's Birth, a great EATRHQUAKE almost wholly
overthrew the City of Sparta, and destroyed Twenty Thousand People. In the Year
of CHRIST 1456, another in Calabria destroyed Thirty Thousand. In 588, another
at Antioch destroyed the City, and Sixty Thousand People perished. In 1667, by
another in Persia, there were Eighty Thousand swallowed up in a Moment. In
1692, 3, by another in Sicily, a Hundred and twenty Thousand perished. And in
526, there was such a one at Antioch, as destroyed Three hundred Thousand. See
Evagrius, Calvisius, Lowthrop, andAtlas Georgraphus.


In King David's Reign, a PLAGUE in Israel, in 3 Days destroyed Seventy
Thousand People. About 450 Years before the Birth of CHRIST, was so great a one
at Rome as carried off near Half the City: In 262 Years after, another There
carried off Five Thousand People in one Day. In the Year 1006 and 7, such a
Plague raged in Germany, that not Half the People survived: even the Country
Towns and Villages were so emptied of Inhabitants, that the Cattle and Sheep
strolled about, without any to look after them. In 1337, a Plague which had
ravaged in Asia, now comes into Europe, is most violent, and in 6 Years time
goes through the World: at Florence in Italy, it destroys Sixty Thousand; at
Lubeck in Germany, Ninety Thousand: And in Europe, it so wastes the People,
that scarce a Third Part survive. In the Year 542, began a Plague at
Constantinople, which destroyed Ten Thousand in one Day: And above 50 Years
after, Evagrius, who was then alive, writes, It has now raged this 2 and 50
Years, and has in a manner destroyed the whole Earth.*

How many Thousands were destroyed in one Day by FIRE from Heaven, in the 4
Cities of Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim! How many Millions were drowned at
the Deluge! And how many more will be consumed in the approaching Conflagration.

How glaring and how awful are these Discoveries of the Perniciousness of Sin,
and of the Divine Vengeance on this wicked World! But what are all these to
that universal and continual Destruction of the innumerable Multitudes of Men
in all their intermediate Generations, from the Creation to the Deluge, and
from the Deluge to the Conslagration? For as the Multitudes of Mankind increase
in every Age, the progressive Vengeance without a Moments Interruption, follows
them and cuts them off; until the overwhelming Fire comes down upon this
trembling and melting Earth, burning like a Furnace, and at once consuming
every Nation. The Mind of Man is unable to comprehend the wide and dismal
Prospect, to conceive it without Horror, and the full View would be too
terrible to bear.

2. Hence we may see something of the astonishing Depravity and Weakness of the
Minds of Men by Nature.

For though very few of the Heathens had a Taste for moral Contemplation, and
having Leisure made some Improvement of the growing Helps of those who lived
before them; yet alas, how dark were their Apprehensions of a future State, and
how uncertain their Discoveries! Yea it is highly probable, that their
Philosophers themselves, who held the Soul's Immortality, derived their Notices
even from Revelation it self. For as Cicero and others in his Time derived
theirs from Plato, He from Socraies, He from Pythagoras, and He from the
Egyptians; no doubt the Egyptians derived them from the Jews, with whom they
had maintained a friendly Commerce from the Days of Solomon. Yea from the
Scripture-History we learn, that in Nebuchadnezzar's Time, before Pythagoras
was born, Multitudes of Jews both small and great fled into Egypt, carrying
Jeremiah the Prophet with them, and settled There for Fear of the Chaldees.
Wherever they went, to be sure they spread their Doctrine: And with many of
these, no doubt, Pythagoras conversed when he traveled first to Sidon and
Mount Carmel, thence to Egypt, in Pursuit of Knowledge, and was carried by
Cambyses the Son of Cjrus from thence to Ba^^ion. Yea Josephus tells us, that
Pythagoras was not only well acquainted with their Religion, but even
transferred much of it into his Philosophy, and ^^^lously espoused it. Contra
Aplo^e^, Lib. I.


And yet how little could the Philosophers instill this Doctrine into the Minds
of Men, even at Athens itself, where they received the greatest Countenance.
Socrates owns, it is disbelieved by the greatest Part of Mankind: and at length
is publicly condemned and put to Death for denying the Athenian Deities. In
Plato's Time, the Academies were put down by Law, and Plato himself with the
Philosophers banished. Even in the Apostles Days, the City continues devoted to
the Worship of Idols; and their Philosophers openly deride him when He came to
mention the Resurrection, as we observed before.

And though many of the Jews had some dim Conception of Immortality; yet for the
infinitely greater Part of Men in every Nation, both before the Appearing of
CHRIST, and ever since to this Day where his Gospel has not shined -- Their
Case is that described in Scripture -- Darkness covers the Earth, and gross
Darkness the People, and they dwell in the Regions of the Shadow of Death:
being Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, having no Hope, and without GOD in
the World. Death appears in all its destroying Horrors: And with respect to the
Future State they have no sure Discovery, if they have any Conception.

3. But O the Glory and the Loveliness of our appearing SAVIOR! Who undertook
and accomplished the Abolishment of Death for his happy Followers; who drew
away the Vail, and laid open to View the Invisible World; and having purchased
a ^^^ned Life and Immortality for us, He brings them to Light and offers them
in the Gospel-Day.

How agreably do the sacred Scriptures describe Him, even in the believing
Prospect of his remote Appearance, as well as in the happier Vision!

Hear how the evangelical Prophet sings even 740 Years before, in the Joyous
Prospect -- Isa. IX. 2, 3. The People that walked in Darkness have seen a Great
Light: they that dwell in the Land of the Shadow of Death, upon them has the
Light shined -- They Joy before Thee according to the Joy in Harvest, and as
Men rejoice when they divide the Spoil. So the final Prophet, about 400 Years
before his Birth, declares, Mal. IV. 2. To you that fear my Name, shall the Sun
of Righteousness arise with Healing in his Wings. And upon the Birth of his
Forerunner, about half a Year before him, the inspired Zecharias says -- Thou
Child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest: For Thou shall go before the
Face of the LORD to prepare his Ways, to give Knowledge of Salvation to his
People, by the Remission of their Sins, through the tender Mercy of our GOD:
whereby the Dayspring from on high, has visited us, to give Light to them
that sit in Darkness and in the Shadow of Death, to guide our Feet into the Way
of Peace. Luke II.

When He is Born into the World, the Angel of the LORD comes upon the Jewish
Shepherds, watching their Flocks by Night; the Glory of the LORD shines round
about them; and the Angel says, -- Fear not; For behold I bring you good
Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to all People; For to you is born this Day
in the City of David, a SAVIOR which is CHRISY the LORD. When He is first
presented in the Temple, Simeon filled with the Holy Ghost, cries out, LORD Mine
Eyes have seen Thy Salvation, which Thou have prepared before the Face of all
People; a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy People Israel.
And when He begins his public Ministry; the Divine Historian tells us, that
agreeable to the ancient Prophesy, The People who sat in Darkness saw Great
Light; and to them who sat in the Region and Shadow of Death, Light sprung up,
Matthew. IV. 16.

How attentive were the Holy Angels to all the surprising Progress of His Life
and Sufferings! what Contemplations seized them at his Death and Burial! But
what a Tide of Joy rose in them at his awaking unto Life and rising from the
Grave! While He ascended up on high, How triumphant were those mighty Armies
that attended Him! And upon his entering Heaven, with what transporting Welcomes
did all the celestial Hosts receive Him, and see Him placed on his Throne of
Glory!

4thly, and lastly, Has our SAVIOR abolished Death, and brought Life and
Immortality to Light by the Gospel; what a vast Excitement is this to welcome
and embrace Him; what a vast Encouragement for his dying Followers to depend
upon Him for this happy Life, in their opening State of Separation, and for the
absolute Abolishment of Death in the Resurrection of their Bodies to
Immortality at his second Coming; and what living Consolations does this afford
us with respect to our departing and deceased Relatives, who Die and Died
earnestly looking to and believing in this most merciful and almighty SAVIOR!

Of this happy Number I am persuaded was that HONORABLE PERSON, of whose
Public Funeral we have Here the solemn Monuments before our Eyes.

Of her Descent, Alliance and Station, I need say nothing: nor yet of those
genteel Accomplishments, wherein from her early Days she shone among us. For
such things as these seem below the Design and Dignity of the christian Pulpit;
and have rather a Tendency to raise our Pride or Envy, than promote cur Virtue.
I shall only say those things of Her, which on higher Accounts may be useful to
us; which the public Voice acknowledges, which I have observed in my 18 Years
acquaintance with Her, which I have from the immediate Witnesses of those about
Her, and which may yield some Glory to HIM who made Her.

In the midst of all the Sprightliness of Youth, she was not ashamed of the
Gospel; but soon after her entering the married State, she made an open
Profession of her Faith in CHRIST and Subjection to Him, and joined to our
Communion. She always set a fair Example of Gravity and Attention in the
Public Worship. And I am assured by her nearest Relative, that she daily read
the Holy Scriptures; and with great Reverence and Fear, even to a faulty Degree
of Trembling, was ever wont to receive the Elements of the Holy Supper.

I always observed in Her a great Respect not only to the Ministers of CHRIST,
but even to all Good People.

In her raised Station, she was never above her Household Business: but till her
growing Infirmities hindered, she carefully looked to her Family, and governed
it with Decency and Order.

Nor did she think Herself too rich or high to speak to the low and poor; but
treated them, as well as others, with easy Condescension, Courteousness and
Gentleness.

Her Heart was very soft and tender to the afflicted and needy. It first
yearn'd with Sympathy, and then widely opened to relieve and comfort them. Even
some whole Families were in a great Measure supported by her liberal Hand. And
of all Sorts of People she could not tell how to bear that the Ministers of
CHRIST should suffer either Disrespect or Difficulty.

In her gradual Languishment, the Thoughts of Death were for a long while
frightful to Her. In my discoursing with Her she expressed a very humble Sense
of her great Unworthiness; much bewailed the Encumbrance and Hurry of her late
more Public State of Life, that her Heart had given too much way to the
Temptations of it, and that she had not duly glorified HIM therein who raised
Her. But she hoped through CHRIST, there was Mercy and Pardon for Her: And when I
was going to set before her his alluring Pity and Grace; her Heart and Eyes
grew full, and she soon prevented me, by breaking out into affectionate
Acclamations of THAT LOVELY SAVIOR, as she expressly called Him: and told me,
she had been many times overcome with the Consideration of his wonderful Pity
and Love to wretched, mean and unworthy Sinners; that she had nothing of her
own to recommend her to Him; but at his merciful Feet she was resolved to lie
for ever.

In such a Frame as this she continued: and I am informed by those about Her,
that for some Days before Her Death, when she grew too faint for her Friends to
visit Her, that she not only came to a Willingness, but even to a Desire to
Die; and in the sensible Approach of the gloomy Shadow, she cast Herself on the
Mercy of that lovely SAVIOR, and serenely resigned Herself to his Arms.

Let us be Thankful then for the Hopes we have that She has enterd the Life of
the heavenly World: And with such Views as these, let every mourning Relative
be refreshed and comforted.

Let her Honorable and Surveying CONSORT, remember His spending Life and
Opportunities; (...) be effectually quickened to Improve the short Remainder in
bringing as much Glory to GOD as possible; and in Doing all the Good He can for
this People, which will be to his Crown of Honor in the approaching Day of the
Appearance of CHRIST.

Let the bereaved Children turn off their Eyes from beholding the vain Pomp and
Vanities of this passing State, which will afford no Comfort in their dying
Hours. Let them learn to look to the invisible World, and be wise for Eternity.

May the Honorable and aged Mother, with the mournful Sister, and other
Relatives, see their growing Frailty, and Prepare to follow.

Let the fair and sprightly remember, their Beauty must fade, their Spirits
decay, and their Flesh consume; that they will soon be laid up in the joyless
Grave, and see this Life no more: but that the Grace of GOD is infinitely more
desirable, and will endure for ever; that if they are possessed of this, it
will be a perpetual Source of Happiness; and if they believe in CHRIST, He Will
receive their expiring Souls to the Joys of Paradise, and will one Day come and
new form their Bodies with ten thousand times greater Beauty, inspire them with
the freshest Bloom that shall never fade, and with a joyful Life that will
never decay.

And lastly, Let us all remember, that the present Scenes of Life will soon be
over; ETERNITY will open upon us, and our Souls must enter; that then all the
secular Delights and Affairs of this lower World will appear as Vanity, like
the Toys of Children now to those who are taken up wholly with Crowns and
Empires; and nothing then but the Alsufficient and Eternal GOD can satisfy or
fill our Desires. He alone can be an eternal and ever rising Fountain of Life
and Joy within us, and make us taste and feel a Measure of his own Felicity.

O let us therefore now and for ever, most earnestly labor to know HIM, to
discover his Glories, and to rise into the highest Apprehensions of Him,
especially as He appears in CHRISY; that we may Delight in Him, Love Him and
Desire Him above all compare, and say as the Psalmist -- Whom have I in Heaven
but Thee, and there is none upon Earth, that I desire besides Thee: My Flesh
and my Heart fails, but GOD is the Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for
ever: Thou will guide me by thy Council, and afterward receive me to Glory.
Therefore my Heart is glad and my Glory rejoiceth: My Flesh also shall rest in
Hope: For Thou will show me the Path of Life: In Thy Presence is Fullness of
Joy: at Thy Right Hand are Pleasures for evermore.

Extract from the Boston Weekly News-Letters, No. 1702 and 1703. BOSTON,
October 14. 1736.

ON Tuesday last in the Afternoon, the Corpse of the Honorable Madam MARY
BELCHER, Consort of His Excellency. JONATHAN BELCHER, Esquire our Governor, was
entemb'd here with great Respect and Honor: The Rev. Dr. Sewall, on this
solemn Occasion, made a very suitable Prayer at his Excellency's House, just
before the Funeral: The Coffin was covered with black Velvet and richly
adorned: The Pall was supported by the Honorable, Spencer Fhipps, Esquire our
Lieutenant Governor, William Dummer, Esquire formerly Lieutenant Governor and
Commander in Chief of this Province, Benjamin Lynde, Esquire Thomas Hutchinson, Esquire
Edmund Quincey, Esquire and Adam Winthrop, Esquire His Excellency with his Children and
Family followed the Corpse, all in deep Mourning; next went the several
Relatives according to their respective Degrees, who were followed by a great
many of the principal Gentlewomen in Town; after whom went the Gentlemen of His
Majesty's Council; the Rev Ministers of this and the neighboring Towns; the
Rev. President and Fellows of Harvard-College; a great Number of Officers, both
of the civil and military Order, with a multitude of other Gentlemen. His
Excellency's Coach, drawn by four Horses, was covered with black Cloth and
adorned with Escutcheons of the Coat of Arms, both of His Excellency and His
deceased Lady. All the Bells in Town were tolled on this mournful Occasion; and
during the Time of the Funeral Procession to the Tomb, the Half-Minute Guns
began first at His Majesty's Castle William, which were followed by those on
board His Majesty's Ship Squirrel and many other Ships in the Harbor, their
Colors being all Day raised to the height as usual on such Occasions: The
Streets through which the Funeral passed, the Tops of the Houses and Windows on
both sides, were crowded with innumerable Spectators.

October 21.

Last Lord's Day a Funeral Sermon was preached by the Rev. Mr. Prince, on
Account of the Decease of the Lady of his Excellency our Governor, from 2 Timothy
1. 10. -- Who has abolished Death, and has brought Life and Immortality to
Light by the Gospel. His Excellency's Pew, and the Pulpit, were upon this
Occasion, put into Mourning, and richly adorned with Escutcheons.

Madam DELCHER was Daughter to the late Hon. William Partridge, Esquire who was
several Years Lieut Governor and Commander in Chief, in and over the Province
of New Hampshire, having his Commission from the late King WILLIAM the Third.
Her Education in every Female Accomplishment was the best Her Country could
give: which with her great Personal Beauties, soon recommended her to the
Addr^sles of Mr BELCHER, our present Governor, to whom she was Married Jan.
4.1705, 6.

As Providence had placed her at the Head of her Sex in her own Country, she
graced her Station with all the Elegance of Good Manners and Affable
Condescension. She was of a sprightly Temper: But always grave and solemn in
Affairs of Religion. Her Bible was her principal Study, which she used to read
through in Course several Times a Year. Though she ever lived in the Splendor of
a Gentlewoman; in her Economy, it was her constant Maxim, Let nothing be lost.
The Poor can Witness to the Compassions of her Heart, and the Largeness of her
Munificence. The Terrors of Death long kept her in Bondage; but at last seemed
entirely vanished, and she expired in much Serenity, on the 6th instant.

TO His EXCELLENCY Governor BELCHER, on the Death of His LADY. An EPISTLE.

By the Reverend Mr. BYLES.

O quam miserum est nescire mori!

Sen. Agamem. To His EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR.
SIR,
AS Your EXCELLENCY has long honored me with a particular Friendship,
Gratitude demands that I attempt your Service: And as you are now in Mourning
under the Stroke of Heaven, the greatest Respect I can pay you, is, to assist
your Improvement under the Hand of GOD.

IN order to this, the Muse has once more resumed her Lyre: And her Aversion to
Flattery you will receive as her best Complement. Instead of copious Panegyric
upon the Dead, I have chosen rather, in solemn Language, to admonish the
Living; And when others, perhaps, would have embraced so fair an Opportunity
for an Encomium on your EXCELLENCY, I have only taken the Freedom of an
Exhortation. I know you will be pleased to observe, that while I employ the
Numbers of the Poet, I never forget the Character of the Divine. I am

May it please your EXCELLENCY, Your Excellency 's affectionate Nephew, and
most humble Servant, M. BYLES.
BOSTON, October. 13. 1736.
To His EXCELLENCY Governor BELCHER, on the Death of His LADY.
BELCHER, once more permit the Muse you loved,
By honor, and by sacred Friendship moved,
Waked by your woe, her numbers to prolong,
And pay her tribute in a Funeral song.
From you, great Heaven with undisputed voice,
Has snatched the partner of your youthful joys.
Her beauties, ere slow Hectic fires consumed,
Her eyes shone cheerful, and her roses bloomed:
Long lingering sickness, broke the lovely form,
Shock after shock, and storm succeeding storm,
Till Death, relentless, siez'd the wasting clay,
Stopped the faint voice, and caught the Soul away.
No more in Converse sprightly, she appears,
With nice decorum, and obliging airs:
Ye Poor, no more expecting round her stand,
Where soft compassion stretched her bounteous hand:
Her House her happy skill no more shall boast;
"Be all things plentiful, but nothing lost.
Cold to the tomb see the pale corpse conveyed,
Wrapped up in silence, and the dismal shade.
Ah! what avail the sable velvet spread,
And golden ornaments amidst the dead?
No beam smiles there, no eye can there discern
The vulgar coffin from the marble urn:
The costly honors, preaching, seem to say,
"Magnificence must mingle with the clay.
Learn here, ye Fair, the frailty of your face,
Ravished by death, or nature's slow decays:
Ye Great, must so resign your transient power,
Heroes of dust, and monarchs of an hour!
So must each pleasing air, each gentle fire,
And all that is soft, and all that is sweet expire.
But you, o BELCHER, mourn the absent Fair,
Feel the keen pang, and drop the tender tear:
The GOD approves that nature do her part,
A panting bosom, and a bleeding heart.
Ye baser arts of flattery, away!
The Virtuous Muse shall moralize her lay.
To you, o Favorite Man, the Power supreme
Gives wealth, and titles, and extent of fame;
Joys from beneath, and blessings from above;
Thy Monarch's plaudit; and thy people's love:
The same high Power, unbounded, and alone,
Resumes his gifts, and puts your mourning on.
His Fdict issues, and his Vassal, Death,
Requires your Consort's, -- or YOUR flying breath.
Still be your glory at his feet to bend,
Kiss thou the SON, and own his Sovereign hand;
For his high honors all thy powers exert,
The gifts of Nature, and the charms of Art:
So, over Death, the conquest shall be given,
Your Name shall live on earth, your Soul in heaven.
Mean time my Name to thine allied shall stand,
Still our warm Friendship, mutual flames extend;
The Muse shall so survive from age to age,
And BELCHER's name protect his BYLES's page.

