Mr. Holyoke'S SERMON At the Ordination of the Reverend Mr. James Diman, May
11. 1737,

OBEDIENCE and SUBMISSION to the PASTORAL WATCH and RULE over the Church of
CHRIST, Considered in a SERMON Preached at the ORDINATION Of the Reverend Mr.
James Diman To the Pastoral Office over a Church of CHRIST in SALEM; On the
Eleventh Day of May. 1737.

By Edward Holyoke, M. A. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Marblehead.

1 These. 5.12. -- We beseech you Brethren to know Them who labor among you and
are over you in the Lord, and to esteem Them very highly in Love for their
works sake.

Together with the CHARGE, by the Reverend Mr. BARNARD; and the RIGHT HAND OF
FELLOWSHIP by the Reverend Mr. CLARKE.

BOSTON: Printed by Thomas Fleet, at the Heart and Crown in Cornhill. 1737.

AN Ordination-SERMON.
Heb. XIII. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit yourselves:
for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give an Account: that they may
do it with Joy, and not with Grief: for that is unprofitable for you.


IN all Societies and Communities of Men whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, it is
absolutely necessary (to prevent Confusion and Disorder, and that the End of
their Combination into such political Bodies should be answered) that there
should be Rule and Government established among them: And where there is so,
there must be such as submit and obey, as well as such as rule and Govern: And
therefore our Lord Jesus Christ, the great head of the Church has directed to
this in his Word, that so all things may be done with Decency and Order: But
then how widely different is This his Government from That, which now obtains,
and has long done so, in the greatest part of the Christian Church, which has
long since gone off from that mixed Form which our Lord first instituted, and is
degenerated into a Monarchy: I say degenerated into it, for that however that
kind of Government (when well tempered and regulated as is the happy British
Monarchy) may suit a State; it is evidently unsuitable to the Church of Christ;
for hence have proceeded, That Popish Tyranny, That Error and Superstition,
That Pomp and Vanity which have so painted and adulterated the Face of the
Christian Church, whereby she has lost That Native Comeliness put upon her by
God Ezekiel. 16.14.
(with which she so charmed the World in the Days of the Apostles) and changed
it for the Factitious Beauty and Gaiety of an Harlot, and therefore is so
represented, by the Holy Ghost in the Revelation Rev. 17.5.
as the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth; Though that Form of
Government then, which has been so pernicious to the Church of God, is to be
rejected and refused, as what has not proceeded from Christ, is no where found
in the Scripture, and naturally tends to Idolatry and Superstition; Yet we are
by no means to lay aside Rule and Government, without which the Church of
Christ, no more than any other Polity, can subsist.

I shall not here spend Time in considering the several Forms of Government
which are at present existing in the several parts of the Christian Church, and
to recommend this or the other, for that, we already have a very good Form of
Government and Discipline, laid down in the Platform of our Churches, which
though I can by no means think obligatory upon us as the Scriptures, because it
wants Perfection, yet well deserves to be highly honored and reverenced as a
strong Guard against ecclesiastical Tyranny and Oppression, which has so much
defaced the Church of Christ, and made it a Nest of every unclean Bird. I have
therefore chosen to insist upon these Words to Day, that I might show if I can,
what this Rule is, which is to be exercised in the Church of God, and what
Obedience and Submission is to be yielded thereto, That you Brethren of this
Church of Christ may cheerfully pay such a Deference and Regard to that Rule
which our Lord has set up in his Church, as that the Servant of God now to be
set over you in the Lord, may be able to render his Account of you to his
Master, with Joy and not with Grief.

Obey Them that have the Rule over you and submit yourselves, for They watch
for your Souls as They that must give an Account: that They may do it with Joy
and not with Grief: for this is unprofitable for you.

The Jealousies and Suspicions of the Church of Christ, concerning the Rule and
Government assumed over them, by their Guides, have risen to such a height, and
I confess with regard to the Christian Church in general they have had Reason
eno' for it, though as to ourselves I think there is little need, because our
Establishment is in that respect low enough: But I say in consideration of the
Rule and Power assumed in the Christian Church in general by their Governors,
there has been such a Jealousy, that having read these Words it will be
necessary to look into the Original, to consider the just Import of the Terms
used in our Text, that we may more exactly know our Duty in this Regard, for
that there are many Words in all Languages that cannot (especially if they be
of various import) be truly rendered into any Other, by one particular Word,
that shall give us all the Ideas comprehended in the Original.

(...)
OBEY Them. This Word in the Original signifies also to persuade, or to assent
to, or comply with another, and when it is used for Persuasion, signifies, a
full Trust and Confidence, and so the Words should run thus, Rest with a full
confidence upon them that rule over you. Which certainly carries as strong an
Idea of Submission, as does the Expression in our Translation Obey Them. I
proceed,

That (...)
RULE over you. This is a Word very often used in the New Testament, and the
Greek Scholiasts observe, that it was used primarily in a Military and
Political Sense, to signify any Public Person that Presided either in the Camp
or City; hence such are called in our Translation Governors: 10. Mat. 18. and
ye shall be brought before Governors, and thus the same Word is used, 2. Luke
2. and from hence this Word was afterward applied by the Apostles to signify
such as Rule in Ecclesiastical Offices; the Word signifies also to Lead and to
Guide in the Way they should take. I go on,

And (...)
SUBMIT yourselves. This Word in the Original also signifies to Obey, or more
exactly to give way to Them; so that it is hence evident, that we do not speak
of the Rule and Authority of the Pastors of Churches, (for of such as I shall
say in the Sequel, are the Words universally allowed to be understood) I say we
speak not of the Obedience of the Churches of Christ to such, without our
warrant from the very Terms of the Scripture: And indeed no Man that designs
not to trample upon the natural Liberties of Mankind and Rule over their
Consciences too, will desire to have this Affair put into stronger Terms than
it is in our Text. Having thus considered the Original as to those Terms
relating to this tender Point, I shall without further criticizing upon the
Words, proceed to those Doctrinal Instructions that are fairly contained in
them, as they have an Aspect on the Affairs of this Day, viz. To show the Duty
of such as rule in the Church of God: And of Those who are taught, guided and
ruled by them. In doing this I shall proceed in this Method. To observe in the
Words, 1. A Duty enjoined. 2. The Reason of it, or the Argument used to enforce
it.


I. I observe in the Words a Duty enjoined. Obey them that have the Rule over
you, and submit your selves. And here I shall say, 1. Who are the Rulers here
meant. 2. What is the Rule and Authority to which this Obedience and Submission
is required.


1. I shall consider who are the Rulers here meant. As I have but now hinted,
they are universally allowed to be the Pastors of the Churches of Christ. It is
true, as the Episcoparians imagine the Bishop to be the only proper Pastor of
his Church (which they call his whole Diocese) they think the Rulers here
meant, are the Bishops of the Churches, in their Sense of that Office; though
there are not wanting of Dr. Whithy in Loc.
them that allow that Ministers or ordinary Pastors of Churches are also here
meant: But we who allow no such Bishop in the Church as they contend for, but
declaring for an Equality of all Presbyters, to which Order we suppose none, in
the Church, superior, So we must suppose that these Words are spoken of them,
namely of such as are the Pastors of the several Churches; That this is the
Order which the Apostle here has regard to, when he says, Obey them that have
the Rule over you: For, these are those Officers in our Churches, to whom is
properly committed the Care of the Souls of their Flocks; It is these that the
Apostle tells us, watch for our Souls, as they that must give Account; These
are they then, to whom this Obedience and Submission is required. I proceed to
say,

2. What is the Rule and Authority to be exercised by them, which the Flock is
to Obey and Submit to. This Head then must be well considered by us, for We
mean not to plead for any of that Rule and Authority, which through the Apostasy
of the Church of Christ from the Rules and Directions of the Gospel, has so
long ago secretly and by Degrees crept into the Administrations of it, till at
last it rose to such an enormous height, as to cast down the Thrones,
Principalities and Powers of this World: And though by the Grace and Favor of
God to the World it is much weakened, yet it still retains a strong usurpation,
not only over the Consciences, but also over the temporal Concerns and
Interests of Men. I shall therefore speak to this Head Negatively and
Positively.

1. Negatively. I shall show what is not the Rule and Authority that belongs to
the Pastors of the Churches of Christ, in these two Things. 1. Such have no
Authority in any of the temporal Concerns of their People. 2. They have no
Right to use any Force and Compulsion in Spirituals.


1. Such have no Authority in any of the temporal Concerns of their People.
Their Office is here expressly declared, to have regard only to Spiritual
Things, for they watch for your Souls; and therefore our Lord has given us his
own Example for our Conduct in this Affair: when one asked him, Luke 12.13.
Master, speak to my Brother that he divide the Inheritance with me; He answers
him, Man, who made me a Judge and Divider over you? So little should those who
take upon them this Ecclesiastical Office, have any Thing to do with the
Affairs of Civil Government, that they are to be cautious how they concern
themselves in a Judgment and Decision of temporal Concerns between their
private Neighbors; agreeable to this is that of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.4. No Man
that warreth, intangleth himself with the Affairs of this Life. Meaning hereby
to instruct Timothy, that a Minister of the Gospel ought not willingly and of
choice to engage himself in secular Affairs, and the Government of the
Temporals of his People, for he will hereby so necessarily expose himself to
the resentment of some of them, as will much impede his great Work, and hinder
his usefulness in spiritual Respects; Therefore the Apostle here advises him to
give himself wholly to these things, to the Ministration of the Word, and the
Ordinances of the Gospel, which he committed to him.

2. Such have no Right to use Force and Compulsion with their People in
Spirituals. In whatsoever Churches of Christ there is made use of External
Force and Compulsion in these Regards, so far they are gone off from the
Simplicity that is in Christ. If indeed by external Force and Compulsion we
could persuade Men to think otherwise than they do, doubtless these would be
very proper Engines to promote Religion in the Hearts of Men. The external
Affairs of Men in Civil Societies and Communities are carried on by overt Acts,
and therefore the Laws enacted in these Regards have respect to those Methods
whereby they may be controlled in their external Actions: And in these Respects
therefore corporal Punishments and Sanctions, which have their Influence upon
their Bodies, are found by Experience to be very proper, because often
effectual, but inasmuch as Religion, which it is the professed Design of
Ministers of the Gospel to promote and encourage among Men, has its Foundation
in, and depends upon, the Operations of the Soul and Mind, so external Force
has nothing to do with it; hereby indeed Men may be forced to speak and act,
according to the Influence of such external Punishments, but if they still
think otherwise it only makes Hypocrites of them, and then instead of promoting
Religion we have only forced them to act against their Consciences, which is
the greatest Contradiction to the Advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, and
therefore the Ministers or Pastors of his Churches should have no Hand in
making any Laws with Regard to the Spiritual Affairs of their People, by which
to bind their Consciences in Matters of Religion: Our Lord Jesus Christ has
already given us these his Laws in his Gospel, which are all of them of a
Spiritual Nature, and therefore no Man whatsoever, nor any Number or Body of
Men, have or can have any Right to make Laws for the Regulation of the
Spiritual Concerns of Men in the World. See Bp Hoadley's Sermon on John 18.36.
And to the same purpose a Great Man of our own.

"A Divine Precept is necessary to warrant every part of Religious Worship.
Instituted Worship must be able to prove its Legitimacy by Institution, for
because it is not natural but positive, it depends upon Authority; its
Obligation therefore can be of no greater Strength, than the Authority of its
Author can put upon it; and that must be founded in his Right to Command it.
All Instructions derive their Authority either from God or the Creature: If it
be from God, then He has signified his Mind about it in Scripture, and that in
particular; for He has no where by any general Indulgence given away this
Liberty of His to any other Authority in the World, to have the Dominion of the
Consciences of Men, or to give Rules of Worship, but has strongly prohibited
it, and severely threatened any that shall presume to do it.

Willard 's Sinfulness of Worshipping God with Men's Institutions. p. 22.


And this is evident because Christ's Kingdom in this World is a Spiritual
Kingdom, and such Laws pretend to regulate the Hearts and Affections of Men,
and Our Lord has in this Affair constituted no [humane] Authority, to make any
Addition to his Laws, which are full and complete, as He has delivered them
unto us. He that knew the Heart, knew all that was in Man, and therefore was
able to give him a complete Law. As to Men indeed, through the imperfection of
their Wisdom, and their Ignorance of the humane Nature, and how the Lusts and
Passions of Men will vary the Necessities of Things, they are often forced to
make an Act in Addition to an Act, but it is not so with our great Lawgiver,
but as his Laws are all the Result of infinite Wisdom, so there is no need to
add to them or diminish from them.

Indeed as to these Laws and Rules, proper to regulate Churches, considered as
Civil Societies, whereby the Prudentials of their temporal Concerns, are to be
conducted and concluded, here the Ministers of the Gospel, together with the
Assistance and Consent of their People and Flock, may doubtless make such Rules
and Orders as best suit them in these Considerations: But as to all those Laws
that have any Reference to the Soul and Conscience, to Men in Spirituals, they
are to be looked for in the Gospel. And therefore also we are to look there for
the Sanctions of His Laws, and those Rewards and Punishments, whereby He
designs to promote His Kingdom in the Hearts of Men, and these are, the
Promises of Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, in the Presence of God, upon our
Obedience, and the Threatenings of Eternal Misery and Sorrow upon our
Disobedience, in a Word, the Loss of the Favor of God, and suffering his Wrath
and Indignation; these are the only Sanctions which our Lord has given to his
Laws, and these may not be altered by Men, may not be added to, neither by
People nor by Ministers and those that have the highest Authority in his
Church. And therefore, as I said before, temporal Rewards and Punishments have
nothing to do in Religion, because they are such as the great Head of the
Church has not proposed we should be influenced by, for that they have no
tendency to persuade the Mind: It is the Heart which God looks at in all
Religious Actions, that if we worship him it should be in Sincerity and Truth,
but there is nothing of this tendency either in the Rewards of this World, or
in external Force. Prisons, Racks and Tortures, have no tendency to convince
the Conscience. Worldly Glories and Rewards are far from tending to raise the
Heart and Affections to heavenly Things, which is the Peculiar in true
Religion. But if we consider the terrors of the Wrath of God threatened to
Sinners, and the exceeding Weight of Glory promised to the Servants of Christ,
here we have the strongest Topics of Persuasion, and such as are infinitely
more weighty, than all the Arguments we can form from any worldly
Considerations; and which is beyond all, such as we have hope, the Spirit of
God will cooperate with, upon the Minds and Consciences of Men.

But as this external Force and Compulsion which has been so much used in the
Christian Church, has originated from a Spirit of Bigotry and a Servile Regard
to the false glosses and misinterpretation of the Laws of the Gospel, by such
as have assumed a Tyrannical Ecclesiastical Authority, Therefore I say further,
that the Ministers of the Gospel have no Right to impose their Interpretations
of the Laws of Christ upon their Flocks: Every Man is obliged to receive the
Laws of Christ, and to yield Obedience to them in that Sense in which he
understands them, and when we oblige them to yield Obedience to those Laws, in
the different Sense in which we understand them, it is in Fact making another
Law for them; every Man therefore is to judge for himself in these Things, and
to have no Imposition made upon his Conscience in Spirituals, for this is to
usurp that Dominion which our Lord has reserved to himself. It is true, it is
much of the Business of the Ministers of the Gospel, as they are Teachers, to
instruct their Flocks in the Mind of Christ, as they themselves understand it,
(which part of their Office I shall presently speak of) but this is quite
another Thing from imposing their Sense of Matters upon them, and pretending
they break the Law of Christ if they do not think in these Regards as they do:
For as every Man is to answer for himself, as to the Regard he has had to the
Laws of Christ, so he cannot be guiltless, though he act agreeable to the
Sentiments of the greatest Men upon Earth, if thereby he contradicts his own
Light, Reason and Conscience in that Affair. This shall suffice for the
Negative Consideration of that Rule and Authority which is to be exercised by
the Pastors of the Churches of Christ.

I proceed to the positive Consideration of it.

2. To show what that Rule and Authority is, which the Ministers of the Gospel
have committed to them, to which this Obedience and Submission of their Flocks
is required. And here, 1. The Pastors of the Churches are to be considered as
their Teachers and Instructors. 2. As they have Authority to reprove and
rebuke. 3. As those with whom it lies to call their Churches together, to order
their Procedure, and dismiss them. 4. As they are the first Officers of the
Church, by whom the judicial Sentence is to be pronounced in all the Censures
of the Church; in all which Respects is the Obedience and Submission here
specified, to be demanded from their Flocks or Churches.


1. The Pastor is to be considered as the Teacher and Instructor of his Flock,
and all that Submission and Obedience rendered to him, that is proper in that
Quality. I shall not spend Time here to prove that this is his Duty, because it
will be readily acknowledged, to be a principal Part of his Work, that is to
take up a great Part of his Time and Talents among them: To teach them the
Principles of Religion, to warn them of the various Errors in Doctrine which
they are to be aware of, and to feed them with Spiritual Knowledge, of which
also I shall say more hereafter: It is evident then that he that teaches and
instructs, must in that Regard (though in others inferior) have a priority to him
that is taught and instructed. I am aware that Teaching is used in
Contradistinction to Rule and Government, but yet it is nevertheless certain,
that the Right to teach and instruct implies an Obligation upon the Disciple to
receive and obey the Instruction, and I rather say this because the Word in our
Text translated, RULE over you, may be (as I have said) otherwise rendered,
them that Guide you, that is that Guide you in the way of the Christian Life,
that is (no doubt) by Teaching and Instruction: Such then as Teach, Lead and
Guide, must have some Rule over those that are taught, led and guided by them.
The Submission which is paid to any as a Teacher, certainly cannot be less than
to receive his Doctrine, in such manner as to think our selves obliged to
behave our selves agreeable to the Information, we so receive from him; that is,
as we consider him, giving his Instructions, agreeable to that Rule of Faith and
Manners, which we enjoy from God: For by no means are we to regard him, however
great his Name is and whatsoever Veneration we have for him, yet are we by no
means to regard any of his Instructions, farther than they are agreeable to the
Word of God: If any of the corrupt Parts of the Christian Church, think they
have any other Rule of Faith besides the Scriptures, yet to us who are of the
Protestant Communion, the Scripture is confessedly our only Rule in these
Things, and therefore you are to regard nothing, respecting either Faith or
Manners, which your Pastors teach you, if it at all digress from that unerring
Rule.

2. The Pastors of the Churches of Christ are to be considered as having
Authority to rebuke and reprove, and so is Obedience and Submission to be
yielded to them. If then they have Authority to teach and instruct, in what way
they are to walk, certainly when they err from that way, they are to restrain
them, to be check upon them, and rebuke them for their Wanderings; and the
Apostle directs Titus, 1 Chapter 13. to rebuke them and that sharply if need be,
that they might be sound in the Faith. This Work of the Pastor then implies
Rule and Authority, for as we bring you no Lessons or Instructions, or at least
ought not to bring you any other, than what we receive from the Word of God, so
have we the same Word as the Foundation of our Reproofs and Remonstrances
against any of your Actions, as they are opposite or contradictory to that
great Rule: Therefore when we rebuke and reprove, we ask not your Regard, your
Obedience and Submission, unless we prove by that Word, that you have done as
ye ought not to have done; but when we do this, we demand your Attention, you
are to reverence such Reproofs as what the Word of God has commanded, and
authorized us to lay before you: If you say, that this is an Obedience and
Submission to the Word of God, but not to your Pastors, Be it so, We ask no
more than that Regard which will necessarily accompany the Doctrines and
Instructions, Reproofs and Remonstrances of the Gospel, conscientiously
received by you. Just as the Case is in the Civil Government, we are to obey
such as have magistratical Rule and Power over us, but how do we render
Obedience to them, and what is it? Not as they are private Persons, but our
Obedience is to the Law of which they are the Ministers: But then when we
receive the Determinations of the Law from them, being in the Execution of
their Office, as they are Ministers of God to us for Good, we according to the
importance of their Posts give them Reverence and Esteem, and submit to the
Authoritative Sentence as it is by them pronounced upon us.

3. The Pastors of the Church of Christ are to be considered as having
Authority to call the Church together, to order their Proceedings, and to
dismiss them; and in this Regard is Obedience and Submission to be rendered to
them. Hence we have that, Act. 6. 2. Then the Twelve called the Multitude of
the Disciples unto them. And hence it is that our Platform tells us Platf. Chapter
Discip. Chapter 10. S. 8.
, That as Christ has committed Power to the Elders, to Feed and Rule the Church
of God, so they are accordingly to call the Church together, upon any weighty
Occasions, and when they bave done so, the Members so called, may not without
just Cause refuse to come, nor when they are come, may they depart, before they
are dismissed, nor speak in the Church before they have Leave from the Elders,
nor may they continue doing so when they require Silence, nor may they oppose
nor contradict the Judgment and Sentence of the Elders, without sufficient and
weighty Cause, because such Practices are manifestly contrary unto Order and
Government, and Inlets of Disturbances, and tend to Confusion.

4. The Pastor of the Church is to be considered as the first Officer in the
Church, by whom the judicial Sentence is to be pronounced in all the Censures
of the Church, either in public Admonitions, or Excommunication, and as such he
is to have Obedience and Submission paid unto him. Though it is, and always ought
to be, according to the Mind and Consent of the Church, with the Concurrence of
their Elders or Pastors, yet the Pronunciation of the Sentence is his Right;
which evidently speaks the Dignity and Superiority of his Station in the
Church: Hence also in Civil Judicatories, the Sentence is always pronounced by
the Chief Judge or most honorable among them.

Upon these Things laid together, we may see, what kind of Rule and Government,
the Pastor is to exercise over his Flock, and what Submission is to be rendered
unto him. He has no Right to use any external Force, if it were in his Power,
nor is he by any Influence he may have, ever to endeavor to move the Civil
Magistrate to do it: He is by no means to influence or govern his Church, in
their Spirituals, by any other Laws than Christ has laid down in his Gospel,
whose Force wholly depends upon Spiritual Sanctions, or Punishments and Rewards
that are properly Spiritual: He has no Right to impose his Interpretations of
the Gospel, upon his Flock, but when he has enlightened them by his Teaching
and Instruction as much as is in his Power, they must still be left to judge
for themselves, and to act according to their own Consciences, so that all
coercive Power is to be disclaimed by the Pastors of the Churches of Christ:
All the Force they are to use lies in rational Arguments, convincing the Minds
of their Flock strongly, and inlightning them with Knowledge, whereby they may
plainly see the Way, that they wander not from the Path of Life through any
Darkness of Error and Superstition. But if they do wander, that they restrain,
by rebuking and reproving them, and that sharply if need be. Thus Brethren, you
see what kind of Power and Rule we claim as your Pastors; Not such as is used
in the Corruptions of the Papacy, whose Strength lies in external Force, not
the Power of the secular Arm, which indeed is absolutely necessary to the
Support of their Hierarchical Pride and Tyranny: We desire not to have Dominton
over your Faith, nor to Lord it over the Heritage of God, acknowledging the
Necessity of your consent and compliance with all our Acts of Church-Censure
and Discipline; Only we expect, that as the Holy Ghost has set us in the
Church, to teach and instruct, to rebuke and reprove, to regulate the Order and
Proceedings of your Consultations as a Church, and pronounce in a solemn Manner
those Ecclesiastical Censures, which you, in conjunction with us, have agreed
to the Execution of, that you render that Obedience and Submission which our
Text here demands of you: For certainly in this, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor.
10. 14. We stretch not our selves beyond our Measure; and therefore, we also
say with him in the 8. v. of that Chap. Though we boast somewhat of our Authority
which the Lord has given us, for Edification and not for your Destruction, we
are not ashamed.

And thus I finish the Consideration of the first general Head I observed in
the Words, viz. A Duty enjoined, Obey them that have the Rule over you, and
submit yourselves. I proceed to the

II. To consider the Reasons of it, or the Argument used to enforce it, in
these Words, For they watch for your Souls, as they that must give Account,
that they may do it with Joy, and not with Grief: for this is unprofitable for
you. Which Argument will lie plainer before us, if we thus transpose the Words,
Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit yourselves, that they may
give up their Account of those Souls for which they watch, with Joy and not
with Grief, for this will be unprofitable for you. So that the Argument here
used is founded more especially upon the Topic of your own Interest and
Advantage; he argues not your Obedience to the Instructions and Reproofs of
your Pastors, so much from their Advantage as your own, in that otherwise the
Account which they must render of you to the great Shepherd, cannot be given up
with Joy and Cheerfulness, but with the greatest Grief and Sorrow, which will
be to your Destruction and Perdition. But I shall speak to this Head in this
Manner, and say, 1. The Pastors of the Church of Christ must render an Account
to him of the Souls committed to their Watch and Care. 2. That it will be to
the infinite Loss and Misery of those of whom they must give up this Account
with Grief and Sorrow. 3. If they obey not, nor submit themselves to those
Instructions and Warnings of God, which He sends by them, their Pastors must
give up their Account of them with Grief and Sorrow.


1. The Pastors of the Churches of Christ must render an Account to Him, of the
Souls committed to their Watch and Care. To this Head in its Parts. 1. The
Souls of their Flocks are committed to the Watch and Care of their Pastors. 2.
They must give an Account of them unto Christ.


(1.) The Souls of their Flocks are committed to the Watch and Care of their
Pastors. The Apostle says here, They watch for your Souls. They are Watchmen
that are set over the Flock by the great Shepherd; agreeable to that in the
Prophet, Ezekiel. 33.7. Son of Man, I bave set thee a Watchman over the House of
Israel. So here the Apostle says, they watch for your Souls, not for your
Bodies; it is the Spiritual Concern of the Flock, that lies before the Pastor
as his Charge, as I have before said. I shall here consider what is implied in
this Watch in these Things, 1. They are to guard their Flocks. 2. They are to
pray for them. 3. They are to teach and instruct them.


1. They are to guard their Flocks. This is what must be first intended, by
that Expression, They watch for your Souls. It intimates, that the Soul is in
continual Danger by some Enemy that designs its Ruin and Destruction; and alas,
how unhappy our State and Condition in the World in this Regard! while the
Souls of Men are in perpetual Hazard in this State of War, and how unequal is
the Strife, from the Number, the Subtilty and the Strength of the Adversary!
Our Lord therefore has given his Pastors to his Flocks, that they should watch
and guard them from all their spiritual Enemies; and as the Manner in which the
Enemy endeavors to entrap his Prey is various, so are they to improve their
whole Skill and all their Powers: Some times they are in danger by the rise of
Heresy, and the growth of Infidelity; these then are to be carefully heeded in
their first Rise, and the vain superficial pretender to Knowledge that vents
his Errors, to be timely, carefully and prudently opposed, while the Truth and
Excellency and divine Origin of the Scriptures is rationally evidenced to his
Flock: But above all, is he to oppose the greatest of all Heresies, Immorality
of Life and Manners, from whence most other Heresies proceed; for Men would
never be tempted to seek after other Schemes of Religion, and Principles of
Christianity, than are plainly delivered to them in the Scriptures, were they
not aware, that according to the present System and Doctrines they were not
safe: But when they have first immersed themselves in Vice and led an abandoned
Life, and thence see themselves liable to Misery and Ruin, they are tempted to
form a Set of Principles agreeable to their own Morals, that they may get rid of
the Fear and Distress, that must incumber their Souls, while they believe the
Sanctions of the Word of God.

The Pastor of the Church of Christ therefore is to oppose Vice and Immorality
with all his Force and Powers, and while he is exhorting them to Soundness of
Doctrine, and to perform those Offices of Religion that relate to the Divine
Worship, to attend the external Ordinances, that he omit not the weightier
Matters of the Law, that they behave themselves with all purity of Manners, in
all Temperance and Chastity with respect to themselves, with all that Justice
and Righteousness to others, that Uprightness and Sincerity in all their
Dealings with Men, the want of which is the Disgrace and will be the
Condemnation of many a zealous external Professor of Religion: The Pastors
therefore are thus to guard their Flocks, to watch and be diligent in these
Respects, that they may prevent the spreading of Error, and the increase of
every kind of Vice and Immorality.

2. The Pastors of the Churches of Christ, as a part of their Watch, are to
pray for their Flocks. After all that we can do, we have no Power to effect any
Thing as of ourselves; we may argue and remonstrate, and use our best
Endeavors with our Flocks, but we can bring nothing to Effect, without the
Assistance of the great Shepherd; when then we have done all we are able in
these Regards, we are to carry our Flocks to Christ in Prayer, and there
implore his Blessing upon our Endeavors with them, that He would guard and
defend them, that He would pardon and forgive them, that He would give them His
Divine Grace to help in Time of Need. Our Powers of Reasoning and convincing
the Minds of Men may be very great and considerable; and we may be able to stop
the Mouths of Gainsayers, but yet it is not in our Power to turn them from
Darkness unto Light; but for the converting Grace of God, we are to pour out
our Soul to him in Prayer, not only with our Flocks in Public, but our Souls
should weep in secret Places for their Sins, and be importunate for the Divine
Grace, on them and on their Children. These are the best Guards we can set
about them, these are the Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof, and more
their Defense than all the other Weapons of our Warfare.

3. Another Part of our Watch for the Souls of our Flocks, is teaching and
instructing them. I have before spoken something of this part of the Pastoral
Work, as intimating his Authority: I now further speak of the Way and Manner in
which these his Instructions are to be conveyed to his Flock, and say, they are
to give their Flocks these Instructions, 1. By their Word and Doctrine. 2. By
their Life and Manners.


1. They are teach and instruct their People by Word and Doctrine. As they take
their Texts and Topics of Discourse from the holy Scriptures, so (as we have
already said) they are to be careful to teach and instruct their People
according to them, and to deliver nothing to them as obligatory upon them, but
what is found in those Scriptures, either in express Terms, or rationally
deducible therefrom: To choose such Heads of Discourse also, as are best suited
to the Necessities of their People, that they may feed them with Food
convenient for them, giving them the Bread which came down from Heaven, that
they may be nourished to everlasting Life; that they most of all therefore,
insist upon those Doctrines, that tend to promore a Life of Faith, that tend to
convince them of their own Weakness and Impotence, and their absolute Need of a
Savior, that they may be filled with Love to God, as the Light of the Glories
of the Divine Nature is manifested in the Face of Jesus Christ, and exhibited
in the Doctrines of the Gospel. With these Doctrines is the Preacher to warm
the Hearts of his Hearers; they should therefore be delivered with Earnestness
and Affection, that while he feels the Energy of them in his own Heart, and
such his divine Musings have kindled a Flame in his own Soul, He may be happily
instrumental of communicating the same divine Fervours to others, that their
Hearts may also glow and burn within them, while beginning at Moses and all the
Prophets, he expounds to them in all the Scriptures, the Things concerning
Christ.

2. The Pastors of the Churches of Christ are to instruct their Flocks by their
Lives and Manners. It is an old Observation, that Examples teach more strongly
than Precepts; and therefore the Life of the Pastor should exemplify all the
Practical Doctrines which he delivers to his People. All the Directions and
Warnings of the Shepherd will never be able to keep his Flock in the Way, if He
himself leave the Path. If they are apt to wander from the Path, though He
himself keep right on his Way, how much more will they do so, when He sets them
the Example? It is therefore absolutely necessary, that we should be Examples
to our Flocks, of all the Moral Duties which we preach unto them; in
Temperance, in Humility, in Devotion, in Patience, in Love and Charity: that as
far as is possible they may see the Excellency of the Christian Doctrines
exemplified in our Behavior, that seeing our good Conversation, they may
glorify our heavenly Father. And thus are the Pastors to watch for the Souls of
their Flocks.

(2.) These Souls they must give an Account of unto Christ. Hence it is that
God tells the Prophet, when He had constituted him a Watchman, Ezekiel. 33.8. If
thou do not speak, to warn the Wicked from his Way, that wicked Man shall die
in his Iniquity, but his Blood will I require at thy Hand. When all Nations
shall be arraigned before the great and dreadful Tribunal of God, as every Man
must then give an Account of his personal Actions, so also of his Duty in the
several Relations he has stood in, to his Fellow Creatures: When the Books
shall be opened, and the great Judge of all the Earth shall make Inquisition
for the Blood of Souls, how happy shall we be, if then we are able to give up
our Account with Joy, and to say, each one for himself, Lord, here am I, and
the Children which thou have graciously given thy Servant! But on the other
Hand, how sad will be our Condition, if the Guilt of their Blood be found upon
us, because they have perished, either by our Neglect, or by our evil
Doctrines, or by the Influences of our bad Examples! -- And thus I finish the
first Head under the Argument used in the Text, viz. That the Pastors of the
Churches of Christ, must render their Accounts to him of the Souls committed to
their Watch and Care. I proceed to say,

2. It will be to the infinite Loss and Misery of those Souls, of whom they
must give up their Account with Grief and Sorrow. -- That they may give up
their Account with Joy and not with Grief, for this is unprofitable for you.
There is certainly a Meiosis in the Expression; for the meaning can be nothing
less than that those Souls, of whom their Pastors give up this sorrowful
Account, shall be the Subjects of the Wrath of God, as threatened in that
Gospel, which they have in vain preached unto them. How many Souls, alas, will
perish, notwithstanding all the Labor and Care of their faithful Pastors! But
of all these they will be forced to give up their Accounts with Grief and
Sorrow, these being such as are spoken of in the Prophet, Ezekiel. 33.9. If thou
warn the Wicked of his Way, and he do not turn from it, he shall die in his
Sins, but thou have delivered thy Soul. But though your faithful Pastors shall
thus deliver their Souls, yet how great is their Burden and Sorrow, to see so
many of them lost in Eternal Perdition! Which leads me to the

3. If you submit not your selves to these Instructions and Warnings of God,
which He sends to you by us, we must give up our Accounts with Grief and
Sorrow. Though the faithful Pastor of his Flock will have great Consolation, when
he is able to say, according to that in the Prophet, Isa. 49.4. Though I have
labored in vain, and spent my Strength for naught and in vain, yet surely my
Judgment is with the Lord, and my Work with my God: Yet when their People
regard not their Warnings and Instructions and Reproofs, with what Sighs,
Tears, Sorrow and heaviness of Heart must they be distressed, to see the Souls
of their People lost! When yet they must witness against you before God, that
they have called, but ye refused, when they have entreated and exhorted, when
they have urged you with Tears, that ye would be reconciled unto God, yet you
stopped your Ears and refused to hearken and return.

This is the sad and melancholy Account, which your Pastors will be forced to
give up to God, if you obey not nor submit to them, thus watching for your
Souls: And hence certainly the Argument concludes very strongly, that you ought
to have a reverent Regard to all those Instructions and Remonstrances, that
your Pastors bring you in the Name of Christ. Obey then Them that have the Rule
over you, and submit your selves: for they watch for your Souls as they that
must give Account; that they may do it with Joy and not with Grief: for this is
unprofitable for you. I shall now proceed to the Application of what we have
heard, in two or three Things.

I. Hence we learn the Dignity of the Ministerial Office. The Dignity of any
Office certainly results from the End and Design of that Office. It is certain
then, that there is no Office and Employment, can have a greater and better
Design than this, namely, to promote the Honor and Glory of God, and the Good
of his reasonable Creatures here in this World, and their eternal Happiness in
the World to come: This is the sole Business and proper End of the Institution
of this Office in the World: And hence it is evident, that the End and Design
of it, is superior to that of any Station and Office whatsoever, that relates
to this World only. The highest Office of the Civil State, that of the supreme
Magistrate, has Relation only to the present World, to promote the Convenience
and Happiness of Men, while they live here in Communities and Societies
together; but the Design and Intent of this Office, is both to promote the
Peace and Happiness of Men while in this World (both influencing to all
personal Virtues, and assisting and strengthening the Magistratical Rule and
Power in promoting all that Justice and Righteousness, and other social
Virtues, which it is his particular Province and Interest to support among his
Subjects) and also to persuade Men to secure their everlasting Happiness, that
when all Societies here shall be dissolved, they may be happy Subjects of the
Kingdom of Glory, for ever and ever, I say, the End and Design of our Office is
thus great and superior; but what then, do we therefore claim the Honors of
the World, superior to those of the Civil Magistrate? No, by no means; we leave
these to Antichrist, who has exalted himself, not only above all the civil
Powers of the World, but above all that is called God; No, our Lord Jesus
Christ has declared, his Kingdom is not of this World, and therefore his
Ministers being Ministers of a Spiritual Kingdom, ought to leave the Honors of
worldly Kingdoms to the Rulers of this World: And it is evident, that in those
parts of the Christian Church where the Ministers of the Gospel have been
raised to high Degrees of worldly Dignity, it has only tended to ruin the
Interests of Religion, by as much raising their Ambition in worldly Regards, so
that the Pride of Ecclesiastics has been very justly complained of in the
Christian World: But we declaring ourselves Ambassadors of the meek and the
lowly Jesus, it is ours to be content with so much of the Honors and Interest
of this World, as shall keep us above Contempt and without anxious Care (for so
much our Lord demands for us) and (aspiring after no civil Posts of Honor) to
wait for the Honors and Glories of the next World, which our Master has
promised, when we shall have fought the good Fight, and finished our Course.
All that we insist upon is that our Office should not be looked upon as
despicable and low, lest our Power and Influence in persuading even to
spiritual and divine Things should be weakened and impeded among you.

And I am led the rather to say these Things, in that there have been many
Endeavors in this Infidel Age of the World, to make our Character low and
despised, while we are represented as such as should be treated as The
Independent Whig.
Alms-Men of the People, and of consequence reduced to a beggarly Condition. It
is true, the Pride of some of the Order in the World, aspiring after Rule and
Dominion, has very much provoked this Treatment, but the Order and Office
itself is not to be aspersed for this; and therefore there is an Indecency and
Inconsistency in the Behavior of such as pretend to stand upon the Side of
Religion, and yet receive with so much Gust and Relish, those Writings which
are published with an evident Design to vilify that Character, which our Lord
has taken Care to guard against the Contempt of Men: Shall such pretend with
any Face to honor Christ, and yet despise those his Ministers, of whom he has
said, Luke 10, 16.
He that despises you, despises Me? If then the Clergy of other Constitutions
have stretched their Power, and too much exalted their State and the Dignity of
their Office; yet so have not we, Though now, agreeable to the Example of the
Apostle, We magnify our Office; for if as the Apostle says in another Place, 2
Cor. 12.11. I am become a Fool in glorying, ye have compelled me, for I ought
to have been commended of you, for in nothing was I behind the very chiefest
Apostles, though I be nothing. So may I say of the Pastors of these Churches of
Christ in general: Ye have compelled us, for we ought to have been commended of
you, for in nothing are we behind the Pastors, (I had almost said) of any
Christian Churches in the World, though we be nothing: If any particular Pastors
of any of our Churches, aspire after a larger Share of Rule than is compatible
to the meekness of their Character, let them be opposed in all their
Pretensions; but the Pastors of these Churches in general, have not arrogated
to themselves any Power or Dignity, other than what is allowed to them by the
Gospel of Christ. If then the Power and Dignity of our Office is at any Time
opposed, by the Adversaries of Ecclesiastical Rule and Authority, let it be
with Reason and Scripture, and in all Gravity, not with Ridicule and Banter:
For as the Writers against the Christian Religion, have shown their Spleen and
Indignation at it, in several Ways, so this has always been one, to make a
strong Opposition, not only to the Dignity of the Clergy, but also to their
very Being and Office; and of these, there are none scarce that have done it
more successfully, than such as have attacked them in the ludicrous Manner, and
therefore we object against it justly, as it is an unfair way of Treatment; for
it is no false Saying, but a certain Truth, which must be acknowledged by any
one that understands humane Nature, and considers the Manner of the World, that
it is no difficult Matter to gain a Victory by Banter and Ridicule, if the Wit
be keen and free, that would never have been carried by Reason and Argument:
And therefore a wise Man, though he be not afraid to have his Pretenses fairly
examined, in a grave and serious Consideration, yet will be afraid of Banter
and Ridicule; in the same Manner as one that is taxed as an Offender, conscious
of his Innocence, is ready to submit his Actions to public Jnstice, when at the
same Time he fears to stand the Trial of a precipitant and inconsiderate Mob of
Men, whose Humors, Fancy and Passions, are their Rule of Judgment. And such is
the Charm and and Fascination of Wit, the Sophistical Turn of Fancy, is apt to
elude the Examination of the Understanding, and looks like Reason and Argument,
especially to the less thoughtful, and injudicious (and such are the Bulk of
Mankind) and thus they get the Laugh and Sneer of the Multitude on their Side,
and carry all before 'em; and such a Procedure will certainly be always
pernicious to the best Cause in the World: Such a Sport is it to Fools to do
Mischief, they cast Firebrands, Arrows and Death, and say, Are we not in Jest?

II. From what we have heard, learn the Difficulty of the Ministerial Office.
The Enemies they have to oppose are many and strong, their Wiles and
Temptations numerous and subtle, and therefore our Work must be laborious,
diligent and perpetual, and what can more manifest the Difficulty of any
Employ? The Work is laborious and hard, to devise and select those several
Heads of Argument, and Means of Persuasion that shall best convince the Mind,
and suit our People, in their several Circumstances; and some times this or the
other particular Person, that is wandered from the Path of Life; and to apply
them in that peculiar hortatory Manner as shall best win upon their Affections
and Passions. The Labor is hard also, while we oppose by our Rebukes and
Reproofs, such as are great and powerful, to whose Umbrage and Resentment if we
expose ourselves, perhaps we run the Hazard of hurting our Usefulness and
Success. This our Labor must also be executed with Diligence, there is no Time
to stand still, lest the Enemy gain Ground upon us. Besides it is a Work that
is perpetual, it is never over, but as long as we live, we must do what our
Hands find to do with all our Might, to the pulling down the strong holds of
Satan. And is this the Office we have said, is an Office of such Honor and
Dignity? Painful Pre-eminence this, and we may well exclaim with the Apostle 2
Cor. 2.16.
Who is sufficient for these Things! Yea the Work is so various and difficult,
that an Angel would find it hard, how much more then shall we, who have all the
same Corruptions of Nature, and Temptations to Sin, that are to be opposed in
ourselves, as well as in those of our Flocks: And though we should sink under the
Burden as unequal to our Strength, were it not for the promised Presence and
Assistance of the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, yet when we consider that
He that has promised is true, that he is the great Head of the Church, and
rules with a despotic Power as over all the Powers of Darkness, so over the
Understandings, the Passions and Affections of Men; we have Reason eno' to
support our Hope, if we are diligent, laborious and perpetual in our Watch for
the Souls of our Flocks.

III. From what we have heard we learn, That if Ministers would have the
Obedience, Submission and Reverence of their People, they must do the Duties of
their Office.

However honorable the Office may be, yet the Officer can never be so, without
doing the Duty of his Office: If we would have the Esteem of our People, we
must study to deserve it, by a conscientious Execution of the great Charge
which we receive, when we are invested with this Ministry.

That we therefore show our Courage by a free Remomstrance against all Vice and
Immorality, in the great as well as the small, fearing the Face of no Man.
while doing our Master's Work; that we give them such Instructions as may
inlighten their Understandings, and tend to convince their Consciences; that we
therefore put them not off with extemporaneous Discourses, that cost us
nothing, for we are neither to wonder nor be affronted at the Disrespect and
Disesteem of our Flocks, when we ourselves answer not to the Dignity of our
Character, in the Solemnity, Gravity and Strength of our Discourses unto them.

Much less is the Preacher to think it strange if he is dispis'd, when his
Example contradicts his Doctrine. It will indeed be very ridiculous for us to
demand the Veneration of our People, if we thus bring Infamy and Disgrace upon
ourselves. We must therefore always guard our moral Character, with utmost Care
and Diligence, for we are set up to View in the fairest Light, whereby every
Spot will be easily discerned, and it is well if the Adversary be not sometimes
so sharp sighted, as to discover a Blemish where there is none? In vain, I say,
we shall demand Reverence and Esteem, when our Lives answer not exactly to our
Doctrine. What a Jest is it for us to preach the Doctrines of Meekness and
Humility, when we are thirsting after Power and Grandeur, either in the Church
or State? Or when we preach against Covetousness and Love of the World, can
they ever believe us in earnest, while they see us insatiable in our Desires of
worldly Riches, endeavoring to lay those Burdens of Self-denial upon other
Men's Shoulders, which we are loath to touch with one of our Fingers? Or how
shall we ever persuade them that we believe it the Christian's Duty to relieve
the helpless and miserable, when we ourselves shall like the Priest in the
Parable, turn aside from such as are in Want and Distress? In a Word, it will
be impossible, and ought to be so, for any Minister of the Church of Christ, if
he be licentious and a Libertine in his Conversation and Behavior among his
People, ever to attract any of their Esteem and Reverence; but as such are a
Disgrace to their Order, so let them suffer all that Disgrace and Infamy which
they have brought upon themselves, only let not the innocent, the watchful and
laborious, the meek and humble, the grave and religious Pastor, suffer with
these, by any general Aspersion cast upon the Order itself.

Here th^^ there are several other useful Lessons, might be taught from the
Words as we have now considered them, yet I shall add no more than only a brief
Address to those for whom, by the Affairs of this Day, the Doctrines of our
Discourse must be supposed to be particularly designed. And

First, I apply myself (SIR) to You, who are this Day to be set over this
People, in the Lord.

We have insisted upon the Dignity of the Office you are now to be invested
with, and have in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, claimed from his Churches,
Obedience, Submission and Reverence to their Pastors; that they should treat
them as the Messengers of God, as such as bring them the good Tidings of
eternal Salvation, and are sollicitous that they may be saved: And these
reverent Regards for their Pastor, do we now demand from this Church of Christ:
But do we therefore mean that you should exact and demand Reverence of them? By
no means: It is true, it is theirs to give this Reverence, and to act this
Obedience and Submission to their Pastor; but in Prudence, not yours to demand
it, in any other Way, than by your Actions answering all the Duties of the
Pastoral Care and Watch.

Indeed in Discourses of this more public kind, when we consider the Duties of
Minister and People, with respect to one another, because our Lord has directed
them how they shall behave toward their Pastor, it is doubtless a Duty to show
what this Obligation is: But in the particular Intercourses between a Pastor
and his own Church, it will certainly be his Wisdom, to force their Reverence
and Esteem, rather by that Meekness and Lowliness, that Love, and Concern for
their Welfare in Christ, which the Gospel has made his Duty. Our Blessed Lord
that knew what was in Man, and understands the humane Nature, better than all
Men, has therefore directed to this; and particularly guards his Disciples
against their aspiring after Rule and Dominion, and therefore when he found
them doing so, immediately remonstrates against it, telling them, Mar. 10.44.
It shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you, shall be
your Minister, and whosoever will be chief, shall be the Servant of all. And
the Argument he uses with them, is his own Behavior, for the Son of Man came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister. And certainly we cannot follow a
better Pattern, and He was thus meek and lowly of Heart. Hence our Lord not
long before his Sufferings, inculcated this Manner of Behavior upon his
Disciples, by himself condescending to that Servile Act of washing his
Disciples Feet. And as he applies it and says upon it, John 13.13.
The Servant is not greater than his Lord, nor be that is sent greater than He
that sent him. Follow then the Example of your Lord, by being ready to show
your Love and Regard to them, by doing any Labor of Love, howsoever you
therein condescend unto them: For we are often to give up our Right to the
external Tokens of Respect, and Evidences of Submission, that may yet be
expressly claimed by those that bear secular Offices; and certainly we may well
do so, when we rule in the Hearts and Affections of our People, which He shall
be always most likely to do, Caeteris paribus that shows the smallest Regards
to the external Marks of Rule and Dominion.

Thus you shall obtain a real Rule and Authority, while cautious of vindicating
your Right to the Show and Appearance of it: In which I imagine lies the Secret
of gaining that Esteem and Regard, for the obtaining of which, the industrious
Claims and Demands of Men, will for ever be in vain.

And when by this Meekness of Behavior, you have a Room in the Hearts and
Affections of your People, it will very much facilitate the great Difficulties
that lie before you. You have heard how great your Difficulties are, how hard
your Labor, how constant and perpetual, be not then hereby discouraged in your
Work, for your Master is with you, and his Grace is sufficient for you, while
you sincerely endeavor to do the Duties of the Ministry, you shall now receive
of the Lord.

Let then the Doctrines with which you instruct this People, be those of the
Gospel, teach them the peculiar duties of Christianity, that shall distinguish
them, as the Disciples of Christ, in that Love and Charity which our Lord has
made the proper Christian Characteristic: But forget not to lay those moral
Duties which our Lord has equally demanded of us, in the Foundation of this
spiritual Building, which, though a part of the Work, commonly least ornamental,
yet absolutely necessary to the Support of the whole.

And in this part of your Work, take care, in the administration of your
Reproofs that it be always with Courage, but with much Wisdom and Caution, ever
remonstrating against Vice whosoever is guilty, but take care that you give no
Occasion for any jealousy, that such your Remonstrances are the Effect of any
particular Pieque and Resentment; for your personal Reproofs are to be given in
private, and will always require a wife Consideration of the Tempers and
Dispositions of Men; watching also for that peculiar Situation of Mind, in
which the Reproof will be most likely to take with them, for the mollia tempora
fandi must never be neglected by a wife Reprover.

But of how little Advantage will all this wife Care and Caution in the several
Duties of your Office be, without Prayer? It is then absolutely necessary, that
you be a Man of Prayer: That you pray for the Divine Assistance in all your
Studies, in the composition of all your Sermons, and in the administration of
all your Reproofs to every Offender. That you always bear this your Flock upon
your Heart, before God in Prayer, that he would make you instrumental of
turning them from Darkness unto Light.

And to persuade you to be thus watchful for the Souls of your People, I cannot
use a stronger Argument, than that in our Text, viz. That you must give up an
Account of them to God. Remember then every Soul is dear to God, They are so
dear to Christ, that He has shed his Blood for them, and is it possible that
He should not demand how you have cared for them? This indeed is a
Consideration that is eno' to make us all tremble, lest any of those Souls
which our Lord has committed to our Care, should perish through our Neglect. Let
this Though It therefore, make you, insta^^ in Season and out of Season to rebuke
and exbort, with all long-suffering and Doctrine. And above all let your Life
and Manners be a Pattern to this People, that the Luster of your shining
Example, may make them in Love with the Beauties of Christianity, that
following you, as you follow Christ, you may present them faultless before the
Presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy.

Next, I apply myself to the Congregation and Church of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which are particularly concerned in the great Affair before us.

Whatsoever then we have said, BRETHREN, as to the Submission and Obedience
which is to be yielded to the Pastors of the Churches of Christ, we claim no
other for your Pastor now to be set over you, than what will be productive of
these necessary Things. 1. That you honor and reverence him, 2. That you love
him. And, 3. That you pray for him.

1. We demand of you that you honor and reverence your Pastor: Honor him as
such, for the sake of the Person he represents.

The Ambassador of a Prince is always received, according to that Deference
which is paid to his Master, The Person of an Ambassador is little considered,
but with regard to his Office, He is treated with all that State and Ceremony,
that is suitable to the Grandeur of his Sovereign. You must allow us the
Comparison, because the Apostle has legitimated it, though for it he has scarce
been able to Escape the Fleer and Scoff, of the profane Wits of the Age. 2 Cor.
5.20. where he says We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though Christ did beseech
you by us, to be reconciled to God. And what is here specified as the Office of
an Ambassador, is equally the Business of the Ordinary Pastors of the Church of
Christ, as it was of the Apostles themselves. When therefore such an one comes
to you in the Name of Christ, as his Ambassador, as this Servant of God does
this Day, if you honor his Master, you will reverence him, and otherwise, as
our Lord has told us, He will resent the evil Treatment, as though it were
offered to himself, forecited Luke 10.16. He that despises you, despises Me,
and be that despises Me, despises him that sent Me.

2. Love your Pastor. As Love is the fulfilling of the Law, that is, he that
has that true Love which the Gospel requires, will do all the other Duties
that are incumbent upon him: So it is in this Case; Love to your Pastor, will
comprehend all the Regards we expect from you. The Pastors of the Churches
therefore can desire nothing more than the Love of their Flocks. For if you
shall love your Pastor, you will be delighted with him; This will make you to
support him with Cheerfulness, so that he shall have no Reason to complain in
those Respects, which Complaints, however just they have been, yet have been
the unhappy Source of most of the Differences in our Churches. Again, if you
love him, you will attend his Teaching and Instruction; you will also be more
ready to receive his Instructions into your Hearts; you will more kindly
receive his Reproofs, for a Reproof is never received so well, as from one whom
we love; so that I was going to say, that he that is not beloved by the
Offender, should never offer to reprove him, or at least he does it with very
little prospect of Success. We demand then your Love to this your Pastor for
his Work sake, according to that of the Apostle to the These. 1: 5.12, 13. And
we beseech you, Brethren, to know them, who labor among you, and are over you
in the Lord, and to esteem them very highly in Love for their Work's skee. It
will be also greatly your Advantage, to love him personally, with Regard to any
lovely Qualities you find in him, for that as I said your Affection to Him will
facilitate the Operation and Influence of all his Exhortations and
Remonstrances to you. But I proceed,

3. Pray for your Pastor. It is true this Duty is included in Love, for as we
always desire the happiness of them we Love, so we give a good Evidence of such
Desires, when in the Sincerity of our Hearts we recommend them to the Divine
Care and Blessing: But in as much as Prayer for him will tend to the increase
of your Love to him, and the confirmation of those amiable Qualities, that
shall continually attract your Desire and Esteem, therefore I insist upon it as
a distinct Head, That you ever remember him in your Applications to the Throne
of Grace, wisely considering, that when you pray for him, you pray for your
selves and for your Children. We have already said, it is his Duty to pray for
you, let him then have your Prayers for him. Let him have your Prayers
continually in your Families; pray for him in your secret Devotions, that God
would make him an able Minister of the New Testament, that the Influence of the
holy Spirit may always accompany his Instructions and Warnings to you, that so
the Pleasure of the Lord may prosper in his Hand; that he may have many of you
and of your Children for his Crown; that he may be comforted and supported
under all the Difficulties of his Charge; that always coming to you in the
Fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Christ, he may at last render his
Account with Joy, and have Many both of you and yours, that as his Spiritual
Children shall then arise up and call him blessed.

FINIS.
The CHARGE.
THUS, Sir, we the Ministers of the Lord Jesus, and in His Name, do, by the
sacred Rites of Fasting and Prayer, and laying on of the Hands of the
Presbytery, solemnly ordain you unto the Work of the evangelical Ministry, in
the Church of the living GOD; and separate you unto the Office of a Pastor of
this particular Church of the Lord, with whom we are now assembled: and thus
publicly, and regularly introduce you into the sacred Ministry, and hand down
unto you that Commission, which our Blessed Master gave unto His Apostles, and,
in them, unto all his Ministers, to the End of the World; with full Power to
act the Part of a Gospel-Bishop, in this holy Church of the Lord Jesus: and we
do accordingly thus openly, and heartily, embrace you, our Reverend, and
Beloved, Brother, in our tender Affection, and Esteem of you, as one, and
equal, with us, in the Fellowship of the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ.

And now, though, we claim no manner of Authority over you yet, as Elder in
Years, and more Experienced in the Duties, and Burdens, of your Office, Suffer
us, our dear Brother, to lay the Admonitions, and Charges, of God, before you;
which we cannot better do than in the Words of the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, who, when he had sent for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, said
unto them, Act. xx. 28. Take heed unto your selves, and unto all the Flock,
over the which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of
God, which He has purchased with His own Blood.

So we advise, and Charge you, to take heed unto yourself. Let this be your
first and great Care, that you have yourself felt the Power, and tasted the
Sweetness of the divine Truths, that you may the more forcibly recommend them
unto others. Live under the constant realizing Belief of those Truths, and View
of the unseen World, which you invite others to believe, and hope for; and
endeavor, in your Life, to exemplify the Life of Christ, showing forth the
Excellency of Piety and Devotion, Temperance and Purity, Meeknesss and
Humility, Righteousness and Charity, in your daily Practice. Be assured that a
Conversation, contrary unto the Doctrine of Godliness, will pull down with both
Hands, what you seem to attempt to build with one; and therefore, in all
things, show yourself a Pattern of good Works; be an Example unto the Believer,
in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity; and
suffer no Man to despise your Youth.

We advise, and Charge you, to take heed unto all the Flock, over the which the
Holy Ghost has made you a Bishop. Take thou the Oversight hereof, not by
Constraint, nor for filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind. Remember that it is a
Flock dearly bought, and paid for, with no less a Price than the Blood of Him
who is God as well as Man. And surely, what cost the chief Shepherd so dear,
you, His under Shepherd ought by no Means to make light of: no; it should be
dearer unto you than any thing in this World. The Holy Ghost has made you an
Overseer of it for this very End, that you should be careful of it, and
diligently tend, and faithfully feed it; even all the Flock, the Sheep, and the
Lambs, the young, and the old, the high, and the low, the rich, and the poor.
For all Souls are alike precious in the Sight of God, and the poorest cost the
incarnate Son of God as much to redeem it, as the richest. And think not the
Flock to be confined to the narrow Limits of those that approach unto the Table
of the Lord, but look upon every baptized Person as belonging unto the Flock of
Christ, until he reounces his Baptism; and let them all have, according to
their different Circumstances, their proper Portion of Food, of Instruction,
Counsel, Admonition, and Warning, administered unto them, in due Season: and do
all you can to strengthen the weak and feeble, and to recover them that wander,
and to establish the strong. Thus endeavor to build up and increase this holy
Church of the Lord Jesus, and confirm it in the Faith, and Order, of the
Gospel, as it is professed, and practiced, in these Churches, so far as you
shall receive Light from the sacred Scriptures; and watch for their Souls, as
one that must give an Account.

Furthermore; we exhort and charge you, in the Style of the same Apostle to
Archippus, Col. iv. 17. Take heed unto the Ministry, which thou have received
of the Lord, that thou fulfill it. Remember, that you have received this
Ministry of the Lord JESUS, your Lord, and ours; and be very careful
diligently, faithfully, and constantly, to attend all the Parts thereof. Fulfill
thy Ministry by preaching the Word, be instant in Season, and out of Season;
reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all Longsuffering, and Doctrine; not handling the
Word of God deceitfully, but, by the manifestation of the Truth, commending
yourself to every Man's Conscience, in the Sight of God. Let your Preaching be
scriptural, plain, serious, cogent. Administer the Seals of the New Testament,
Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, unto all the proper Subjects thereof, as a
wise and faithful Steward, putting a Difference between the holy, and the
profane. Dispense the holy Discipline of the Church without Passion, or
Prejudice, with Courage, and Resolution, and yet with Wisdom, and Prudence, and
good Advice. And Bless the Congregation in the Name of the Lord. Neglect not
the Gist that is in thee, but give thy self wholly unto these things, that your
profiting may appear unto many; and study to show yourself approved of God, a
Workman that needs not to be ashamed. Thus, we charge you before God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels; that thou observe these things,
without preferring one before another, doing nothing by Partiality.

Once more; we exhort, and Charge you, in the Strain of the forementioned
Apostle, to his Son Timothy; 1 Timothy iv. 16. Take heed unto thy Doctrine,
continue in them. Remember, that it is the glorious Gospel of the Blessed
Jesus, that is committed, as a sacred Depositum. unto you to keep pure and
entire. Determine with yourself to know, and study, and preach, nothing so much
as JESUS CHRIST, and Him crucified; CHRIST, the End of the Law, the Author, and
Substance of the Gospel, the Wisdom and Power of God unto Salvation. Suffer not
the Doctrines of the Gofpel to be corrupted through your Neglect; but hold fast
the Form of sound Words, which thou have heard, in Faith, and Love, which is in
Christ Jesus, avoiding profane and vain Babbling, and opposition of Science,
falsely so called. Diligently improve all the Helps, and Advantages you may
have, to establish you in the Truth, and that you may be able, by sound
Doctrine, both to exhort, and to convince the Gainsayer. And therefore give
thyself to Reading, Meditation, and Prayer; for in so doing thou shall both
save thy self, and them that hear thee. And that Good Thing which has been
committed unto thee, keep, by the Holy Ghost, and the same commit thou unto
faithful Men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thus, we give thee Charge
in the Sight of God, who quickens all things; and before Christ Jesus, who
before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good Confession, that thou keep this
Commandment without Spot, unreprovable, unto the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Finally; Forasmuch as the ministerial Work has its Difficulties and Burdens,
as well as its Honors, we would fairly warn you thereof, and exhort, and
charge you, that you be strong, and quit yourself like a Man. The most easy
Part of your Work, and Station, we can assure you, is eno' to demand your
Vigilance, and Fortitude; and you will, we fear, have often Occasion to lament
the Unsuccessfulness of your Ministry. But besides, you may reasonably expect
that Satan, and his Instruments, will often, and fiercely assault you, since
your great Business is to beat down the Kingdom of the wicked one. And we may
tell you, Sir, that if those you take to be your greatest Friends, on whom you
mostly depend, and are ready to say, these same shall comfort me, and those you
have done the most to serve, should anon disappoint your Expectation, and treat
you unhandsomely, and, it may be, be the most forward to slight, and abuse you;
you will only experience what others have done before you. Therefore arm
yourself with the same Mind that was in Christ Jesus; and keep a strict Watch
over your own Spirit: that a worldly Temper may not betray you into Meannesses,
and expose you unto Contempt; nor a passionate and controverting Spirit throw
you into Mischief, and Consusion. As much as possible avoid all Strife in your
own Cause; choose rather patiently to bear what you meet withal: and while you
are courageous, and resolute in your Master's Cause, yet remember to show, out
of a good Conversation, your Works with meekness of Wisdom. We therefore
address you, in the Words of the Apostle, II. Tim. ii. 1, 3. Thou therefore, my
Son, be strong in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus; -- endure Hardness, as a
good Soldier of Jesus Christ. Remember whom you serve, and look to, and depend
upon him, for Help; and fear not the Faces of Men, neither shun to declare unto
them the whole Counsel of God; and thus keep yourself pure from the Blood of
all Men.

Thus, Reverend, and Dear Sir, we call upon, exhort, and charge you, before
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall Judge the quick and the dead at His
appearing, and Kingdom, that you take heed unto yourself, and to all the Flock,
over which the Holy Ghost has made you an Overseer, to your Ministry, and to
your Doctrine, and arm yourself against Temptations, and endure Trials.

And verily, Sir, if you keep this Charge, and approve yourself a wise, and
faithful, Steward of the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and fulfill the
Ministry which you have received of the Lord Jesus, know it of a Truth, that
your Reward shall be unspeakably great: the Lord of Hosts will number you among
His Angels, who doubtless observe the present Solemnities, and the Vow of God
which you have now taken upon you, and you shall shine as the Brightness of the
Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever; and, when the chief Shepherd
shall appear, you shall receive a Crown of Glory, which fades not away.

THE Right Hand of Fellowship.
THE Ceremony of giving the Right Hand of Fellowship, though it be not an
essential Requisite to the Ordination of Ministers (the Validity and
Sufficiency whereof being in the Nature of the Thing supposed as previous to
it) yet being, in general, founded on Scripture-Warrant, and not an Usage that
owes its Rise to humane Invention, it seems but a just and proper
Acknowledgement to be paid to those that are regularly and solemnly set apart
to the Work of the Evangelical Ministry, and on the Occasion of such their
Separation and solemn Introduction to that sacred Office.

The Significancy of which Rite is best understood from the primitive Pattern
(which we find on sacred Record) of the Apostles James, Cephas, and John (who
were distinguished as the Apostles of the Circumcision) who, when they had
received sarisfactory Evidence of the Divine Mission, and Authority of the
Apostle Paul to preach the Gospel to those of the Uncircumcision, and perceived
the Grace of God that was given to him, gave unto him and Barnabas, their Right
Hands of Fellowship, taking them for their Fellow Laborers in the Work of the
Gospel, with respect to the main Intintions of it, which they agreed a pursue
among those two large Divisions of Christians (which obtained in the early
Times of the Gospel) which went under the Denomination of the Circumcision, and
the Uncircumcision. Gal. 2.7.8.9.


Whence we may gather the true Import of this religious Rite, as it is now used
by the Ministers of the Gospel, conformably to the Aim, and Intent of this
Apostolical Example, which I apprehend to be,

First, An Acknowledgment of the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, conferred on a
Minister, qualifying him for the Duties of his Sacred Function. Secondly, A
Signification of their Approbation of, and Satisfaction in the Regularity and
Validity of his Call to the Office of the Gospel Ministry. Thirdly, A Testimony
or Acknowledgment of the Parity of ministerial Power and Authority. Fourthly, A
Symbol of sacred Friendship, Harmony and Consent in all the substantial
Doctrines of the Gospel, and of their Union and Agreement in the Prosecution of
the main Drift and Design of the holy Religion of our Savior, in promoting the
Salvation and Welfare of precious Souls, and endeavoring the Advancement of
the Kingdom of God among Men; whatever different Apprehensions may be among
them concerning Matters of less Moment. And Lastly, An Engagement to mutual
Assistance in their Work, as Occasion shall require.

And it is with such Views and Intentions as these, Sir, that I do now, at the
Request of the reverend Elders and Messengers here convened in Council, and in
the Name of the former, Give unto you, Dear Brother, the Right Hand of our
Fellowship; signifying, and declaring hereby our grateful Esteem of the
ministerial Gifts, Graces and Qualifications, wherewith it has pleased the
Father of Lights to enrich you, and that we look upon you as a true and lawful
Minister of Christ, regularly called, set apart, and introduced to the Pastoral
Office in and over this Church, entitled equally with us to all that
Office-Power in the Church which Christ has committed to his Ministers,
promising and engaging to you, and at the same Time expecting from you, such
Help and Assistance by Prayers and Counsels, according to our several
Abilities, as the Service of the common Cause of Christianity in our respective
Churches shall require.

And now, Brother, though the Work you have engaged in, be attended with peculiar
Difficulties and Temptations (and, I doubt not, you have reckoned upon the
Labors and Self-denials, the Prayers and Watchings, the Studies and Cares,
that the faithful Discharge of it will cost you) yet that which should balance
all, and enable you, and us, to surmount all discouraging Difficulties, is the
gracious Promise which our ascended Lord has left his Ministers, which has been
a tried Word, and still remains in full Force, to all that humbly, obediently,
and prayerfully depend upon it; Lo, I am with you always, even unto the End of
the World.

May our Blessed Lord, whose you are, and whom you have devoted yourself to
serve, afford you much of this his promised Presence, assisting, directing, and
succeeding all your ministerial Labors! May the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit
be increased in you, and abound in the exercise of them to the Conversion and
Edification of many Souls, that the Pleasure of our Lord Redeemer may prosper
in your Hands, and that by the faithful Execution of the solemn Charge you have
now received, you may both (...) and them that hear you!

With such Wishes and Prayers, We now (...) and you, Dear Brother, with the
Flock you (...) taken the oversight of, unto God, and the Word (...) Grace,
which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inberitance among all them
that are sanctified.

FINIS.

