Mr. Holyoke's ELECTION SERMON

May, 26. 1736.

Integrity and Religion to be principally regarded, by such as design others to
Stations of public Trust.

A SERMON Preached before His EXCELLENCY, Jonathan Belcher, Esquire; His Majesty's
COUNCIL, AND THE ASSEMBLY of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, ON THE Anniversary for the Election of COUNSELORS for said
Province, May 26. 1736.

By Edward Holyoke, M. A. Pastor of a Church in Marblehead.

Exodus xviii. 21. Moreover thou shall provide out of all the People able Men,
such as fear God, Men of Truth, and hating Covetousness and place such over
them to be Rulers. -- Magistratus cligi debent, primo, libere et incorrupte
sine Ambitu. Secundo, Religiose, i.e. Invocat^ prius Dei nomine et voluti Deo
consulto.

Magistratus debent ^ss^ P^j^^t Religios^, Justitiae et Sinceritatis amantes,
O^res avari^^^ and Munerum, amantes Bon^ public^, Viri Fortitudine et Animi
constantia praedi^i, non variis Affectibus ^erantur; sed Virtutum omniam,
imprimis aut^m Sobrietatis, Castitatis, hone^iaeque Conversationis Studiosi.

Bucan. Loc. Com. 49 de Magistratu. Pudet me et Miseret, qui Horum mores
cantabat mihi monuisse frustr^.

T^rent. BOSTON, in NEW ENGLAND: Printed by J. Draper, Printer to His
Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, for J. Eliot. 1736.

In Council, May 27. 1736. Ordered,
THAT Anthony Stoddard and Samuel Wells, Esqrs; give the Thanks of this Board
to the Rev. Mr. Edward Holyoke for his Sermon preached Yesterday, before the
Great and General Court or Assembly, and that they desire of him a Copy thereof
for the Press.

Attest. Simon Frost, Dep. Secr.

AN Election-Sermon.
Nehem. vii. 2. -- I gave to my Brother Hanani, and Hananiah the Ruler of the
Palace, charge over Jerusalem: for he was a faithful Man, and seared God above
many.
AN excellent Pattern and Example this, (of Nehemiah the princely Governor of
Judah) for the Imitation of such as are in Places of superior, magistratical
Rule and Power; and worthy to be copied, by all Kings and Princes of the World,
and all that in subordination to them, have the Rule and Government over any
People, if they mean their Welfare and Happiness, or would themselves sit easy
in the Places assigned unto them; for that these excellent Qualities here
mentioned are equally serviceable to the Governors of the World themselves,
and to all such as are subject to their Rule and Authority.

The Words read give us an Account of the appointment of some to a Place of
very considerable Weight and Trust, by Nehemiah, commissioned Governor over
the returned Captives of Judah, by Artaxerxes King of Persia; which Post he had
^ollicited for, from a Zeal to the Church and People of God; for being of the
Stock of Israel, he sought the Interest and Welfare of his own People with all
his Heart.

He had heard while he remained in Persia, in the execution of an Office of
great Dignity in that Court, (being Cup Bearer to the King) by his Brother
Hanani, mentioned 1 Chap. 2. v and one of these Persons named in the Text; I
say by him he had heard, That, though being returned to their own Land, they had
built the Temple in Jerusalem according to the Royal Mandates of both Cyrus and
D^rius yet that the Holy City lay still in its Ruins, and the Temple unguarded,
and the People therefore insulted by their envious and inhospitable
Adversaries, who inhabited round about them: He therefore immediately upon his
entering the Government, sets about the great Work for which he was sent,
namely, to rebuild the great City and fortify it, to set up the Gates, the
Bars, and the Locks thereof; that they might, without let or impediment, keep
the divine Law, and be secure in the Worship of the Temple of God; that he
might reform the great Abuses of the Sabbath they had been guilty of, in Buying
and Selling on that Holy Day. And in this he was obliged to be very resolute
and severe, having the Nobles of Judah to contend with in the Affair, 13 Chap.
15. and onward: For this excellent Man well considered, That the upholding the
public Worship of God in its Purity, and according to the Law, and making a
Reform of Vice and Immorality in the Capital of the Country, would have a
mighty Influence upon all the People, who all of them ascended there, several
Times in a Year, to attend the Temple Worship.

In this Regard the Charge over Jerusalem, which he is said to conferr upon
these Persons mentioned in the Text, was a very great Trust, and if well
discharged, would have an happy Influence over the whole Land.

This great Trust he commits to to Hanani his Brother, and to Hananiah,
distinguished here by the Post he already held under him, and styled the Ruler
of the Palace. The Place of his Residence being justly styled so, for that Pool
in Loc.
he lived like a royal Governor in great Splendour and Magnificence.

Upon the Expiration of his Commission, which was to continue but for a set
Time, 2 Chap. 6. v. he prepares to return to give an Account to his Master of
what he had done; and finds it necessary to appoint Governors over the City,
which he had come on purpose to rebuild, fortify and reform.

This Charge, I say, he commits to these two Persons mentioned in our Text, and
gives a very good Reason for it, For he was a faithful Man, and feared God
above many. HE was, This Pronoun has doubtless a Logical Reference to both the
Persons here mentioned; but as it is singular, so can have a Grammatical
Reference only to one of them, and this it is most likely was Hanani his
Brother; because Hananiah the other, was before, one of his superior Officers,
a sort of Steward of the Household. Whereby he had doubtless had large
Experience of his Faithfulness and Integrity, and therefore could depend upon
him in that Trust, he now commits to him; besides as he was a public Officer he
must have approved himself to others, and so had an established Character in
the City, and therefore there was no need to give a Reason, why he gives to
such a Man as he* this important Charge: But since Hanani the other, was his
Brother, Kinsman or Relative, it was necessary he should give a good Reason why
he committed so great a Trust to him; lest he should incurr a Suspicion of
Partiality to him, on account of his Relation, and therefore he says, He was a
faithful Man, and feared God above many.

Whence I make this incidental Note, That when those who are in superior Place
of Power commit any Post of considerable Trust, to such as are related to them,
it is expedient (with respect to the Reputation of their own Justice and
Impartiality) that such should have those Qualities that remarkably fit them
for that Station.

This Character then, as I said before, must have a Logical or Rational
Reference to both these Persons mentioned, and they were both of them faithful
Men that feared God above many.

The Word here translated Faithful comes from a Root that signfies to Nourish
or Nurse up, and is most commonly translated as in our Text, from the Faith and
Trust that is put in those, who have the Care and Charge of an helpless Babe,
who cannot support and defend it self, nor to any effect complain, of the wrong
done unto it; who therefore should always be such as are true, Faithful and
Steady to their Charge; and such he committed the Trust of this City, who were
Men of Integrity and Steadiness, as the Word is also used, Exodus 17. 12. were
it is said that Moses's Hand were steady: When therefore this is given as a
Character of the Mind, it denotes a Man that is not variable, a Man not easily
turned from his Purpose; but of this I shall say more under the Doctrine.

And as they were Men of Integrity, so they were Men of true Religion, for they
feared God above many. Religion the whole of it, is frequently expressed in the
Scripture by some one particular Grace or Act of Religion, sometimes by Faith
in God, sometimes by the Love of God, so here it is expressed by the Fear of
God; and here the Character given is, That he feared God above many, that is,
that they (for I have said the Character belongs to both) not only made a
Profession of Religion, and lived in a general Practice of those good Morals
required thereby, but from a full and thorough Knowledge of them; he looked
upon them as Men of true internal Religion and vital Piety: From the Words
then, as I have thus considered them, I propose for our Consideration this
Observation as apposite to the Occasion of this Day.

That those whose Province it is, to design others, to Stations of public
Trust, should have a principal Regard to their Integrity and Religion.

There are it is true, other Qualities necessary to such as are invested with a
public Character, as I shall say hereafter, but none that we ought to have such
a Regard to, as these; and therefore I call these the principal.

And though in the choice of this Subject, I vary from many of my Fathers and
superior Brethren, who (before me) have stood in this Desk upon the like
Occasion, in that they have chosen to discourse of the Apostasy of this People
of God, and drop their Tears over their Immoralities, while they urged all
Orders of Men, both Civil and Sacred, to endeavor a Reformation of Manners,
rather than to insist upon any Subject, that had a direct Aspect on the Affairs
of the Day, and the Duty of the Electors to have a peculiar Regard to the
Qualities of such, as are this Day to be constituted one Branch of the
Legislature. Yet the Reason (I know) has been, very much, because they looked
upon it as an Impropriety, and altogether in vain, to speak of necessary
Qualities, when the Persons themselves are already fixed upon, and (in Effect)
chosen before this; and that perhaps without any Regard to their Qualities,
only that they are such as will be sure to answer that Party-Cause and Interest
they are designed for.

When then, thus resolved, they come to hear the Arguments and Exhortations of
the House of God, and here pretend to address Heaven for their Direction in,
and a Blessing upon, their Elections, that they may be proceeded in, with Love
and Peace, with Freedom and Uprightness; which I take for granted to be the
original Design of these Solemnities; I say when they come, thus resolved to
carry their Point, whatsoever Animosities, Heats and Contentions they kindle
thereby.

Or when they neglect the divine Worship this Day, in order to attend some
select Juncto, where (without a Though It of God) they concert the whole Affair; it
is no other than a bold Praevarication with God, and such an impious Collusion,
as gives us a melancholy Prospect, and bids us fear that God will take away
Wisdom from the wise, Understanding from the aged, and lead Counselors away
spoiled.

And though we pretend not to Inspiration, yet we may very well apply to such,
that of the Prophet Jeremy, 42 Chap. 20. verse, Ye dissembled in your Hearts,
when ye sent me to the Lord your God, saying pray for us unto the Lord our God
and according to all that the Lord our God shall say, so declare unto us and we
will do it.

If then I am not so sanguine as to imagine to persuade such, as by these
Practices do in Fact declare as they did, 44 Jer. 16, 17. As for the Word which
thou have spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto
thee; but we will certainly do whatsoever goes out of our own Mouth. Yet
surely all are not of this Character; some I know there are that fear God, and
greatly Reverence his Word, and will therefore always think, Those Qualities
best fit a Man for a public Station, which that Word of God plainly directs to:
And as they have asked the divine Direction this Day, so will act in the
Uprightness of their Hearts: But if not, yet that of God to his Prophet is my
Warrant, and shall be my Direction to go on, 3 Ezekiel. 11. Go get thee unto thy
People and speak unto them, and tell them, Thus says the Lord, whether they
will hear, or whether they will forbear. And thus I proceed to the
Consideration of the Observation I have already noted from the Words, That
those whose Province it is to design others to Stations of public Trust,
should have a principal Regard to their Integrity and Religion.

Herein are plainly contained these Propositions, I. Prop. That it is the
Province of some to design others to Stations of public Trust. II. Prop. That
in this Designation, they should have a principal Regard to their Integrity and
Religion.


I. Prop. That it is the Province of some to design others to Stations of
public Trust.

This Proposition naturally offers itself to us in these two Parts, 1. A public
Station is a place of Trust. 2. It is the Province of some to Design others to
these Stations.


I shall speak to these Heads and so to this Proposition in but brief and
general Manner.

And,

1. A public Station is a place of Trust.

And how great is that Trust! It is true, This Trust is greater or less,
according to the Degree of the Importance of their several Stations; but all
that is dear to a People, is in general Entrusted with those who are in public
Stations.

Our Lives and our Interest our civil Privileges and Immunities, and our
Religion too, are all entrusted in their Hands; some one or other of these,
every Man in a public Station, is in some Measure entrusted with, whether he be
in a civil or military Post.

The military Officer has (especially in the Time of War) the Care of our
Lives and Interest too.

By his diligent Watch and Guard it is, that God sometimes draws a Line of
Protection round about us, and the Land of unwalled Villages is safe from Fear.

By his Conduct and Bravery it is, that God sometimes gives Conquest and
Victory to his People, when they are of good Courage, and play the Men, for the
Cities of their God.

Again, He that in civil Regards is in a public Station, and that considered
either as legislative or executive, has the Care of our most valuable
Interests, committed to his Trust.

The peaceable and quiet Enjoyment of our Interest, is entrusted with those who
are in executive Place of Power: Our civil Peace is put directly into their
Charge, and much of our Religion is under their Guard and Protection.

To them is committed the Dispensation of that distributive Justice, so
necessary to the Happiness of any People: and with them it lies to punish the
Breaches, that are from Time to Time made upon that commutative Justice and
Righteousness, so necessary to their Trade and Commerce.

Again, Such as are, in a legislative Consideration, in a public Station, have
an high Trust committed to them; even our civil Liberties and Privileges, and
the Cause of Religion too. It is these that prepare the civil Sword which is
put into the Hands of the executive Officer, and give it Keenness and Terror,
by the severe Sanctions of those wholesome Laws, which from Time to Time are
enacted against Vice and Immorality.

These have it greatly in their Power to encourage Religion and Virtue;

By placing strong Guards about all our religious Enjoyments;

By enacting such Laws whereby the Worship of God may be promoted, and his holy
Sabbaths more strictly observed; which alas! are highly neglected, though the
careful Observation of them are found to be the best Means of securing the
Religion of a People.

By strengthening the Hands and encouraging the Hearts of such as are properly
the Ministers of Religion.

With these it lies to take Care of the Means of Education; without which we
shall soon become an ignorant and a barbarous People

To make our Schools of Learning more effectually answer the Ends of their
Institution.

To take Care of our College, that Seminary of Literature and Religion, the
early founding of which was one of the greatest Glories of our Fathers, and a
Proof both of their great Wisdom and Religion.

Again, To these is committed the Care and Trust of our valuable, civil
Liberties and Privileges; and it is by their loyal and dutiful Behavior that
they are yet continued to us, as it is certainly in their Power, by a froward
and uneasy Carriage, by Stubborness and Contumacy, to betray them all; and
entirely defeat all the Good that was ever designed us, by the Royal Indulgence
in the valuable Charter, which we (by the Favor of God) yet enjoy. Thus have
all those who have any Share in the Legislature, a great Trust committed to
them.

But then,

Our Commander in Chief has all these valuable Interests of the People,
committed to his Trust.

As they lie divided among the several Officers in public Station, either in
the military Order, or in the civil Power, either Legislative or Executive; so
is the Trust of them all united in him.

The Lives and the Interest, the civil Liberties and Privileges, and the
religious Concerns of this whole People, are all under his Care; and it greatly
lies with him, as to advance, assist and encourage them all; so to dishearten
and discourage the Attempts and Endeavors of the most zealous Patriot, for the
promoting and strengthening these Interests of a People.

Thus I have briefly considered the great Trust that is committed to such as
are in a public Post and Station: This is the Matter of Fact.

But then,

How came they possessed of this Trust, and who has committed this Charge to
them?

I answer, He whose Kingdom rules over all. 8 Prove. 15, 16. By me Kings Reign,
and Princes decree Justice, by me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges
of the Earth.

And as God has done this sometimes by a peculiar Designation to such Station,
by the Mouth of some inspired Person, as in the Cases of Saul and David, and
some of the Kings of Israel: So is this generally in a providential Way and
Manner.

For as Rule and Government is absolutely necessary in the World, and the
Peace, Welfare and Happiness of a People depend upon it; so is it necessary to
the securing Religion and the Glory and Honor of God, and hence he claims it
as his Prerogative, to appoint over the Children of Men, whomsoever he will.

And therefore what Trust is committed to such, is committed to them by God;
they Govern and Rule for him, and he will expect an Account, and that a severe
one, from all Kings, Princes and Governors of the World, from all who have had
these Trusts in any Regard, committed to them, how they have answered that
Trust.

Every Kind of Power then and Manner of Rule (as they are very various) is of
God; and therefore the Apostle tells us in that 13 Romans beg. There is no Power
but of God, the Powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist shall
receive to themselves Damnation. Whereby a dutiful and loyal Behavior toward
such as are in Power, is secured, from a Consideration of the Ordination and
Appointment of God himself, by whose Authority they act. And therefore (says
the Apostle) Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers.

I mean not by these Texts, so often abused to that Purpose, at all to
Recommend the senseless Doctrine of passive Obedience and Non-resistence; a
Doctrine calculated for none, but a Nation of Slaves.

All Forms of Government originate from the People; that is, God in his
Providence has influenced them; some to fix upon one Form of Government, and
some upon another.

While some reserve the greatest Part of the Power to themselves, others invest
some of the Nobles and great Families among them with that Trust; while others
choose to submit themselves to a Monarch, and delight in one supreme Magistrate
or Head over all the Estates of the Realm.

As these Forms then have originated from the People, doubtless they may be
changed whenever the Body of them choose to make such an Alteration in their
State.

And therefore may they much more determine the Person and the Family, which
they choose should Reign over them.

And this Principle lies in the Foundation of that wonderful REVOLUTION, the
happy Effects of which, we feel this Day in the auspicious Reign of a great
KING, of the august House of HANOVER, in which illustrious Family KING WILLIAM
the Third, (of immortal Memory) took the wisest Measures (and it was none of
the least Actions of that great Monarch) to establish the Succession of the
British Crown.

And may the God who rules UNIVERSAL KING. ^ Sam. 7. 19,
speak concerning the Royal House of his Servant, for a great while to come;
and continue One of that Protestant Line; to Lead, Guide and Rule those
reformed Nations, and defend them as the powerful Bulwark of the Protestant
Interest, till the universal Reformation of the Church of Christ.

This Trust which God is committing unto Kings, and by them to all that are in
Stations of Trust subordinate to them; is to be used for God, and the Happiness
and Welfare of that People, among whom they exercise their Authority.

This shall suffice for the first Head under the first Proposition, That a
public Station is a place of Trust.

I proceed to say,

2. It is the Province of some to design others to these Stations of public
Trust.

For as the Body Natural as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 12. 14.
, is not one Member but many. So is it also in the Body Politic, And God has
set the Members every one in this Body (as well as the Body Natural) as it has
pleased him.

And here it is, as in the Body Natural, some Members are more honorable and
some are less so: For as the Offices to be executed among a People are many and
various, so is it necessary, there should be various Orders and Degrees of Men,
superior and inferior; and it is the Province of those who are in superior
Station, to appoint to Office, such as are Inferior, and to act in
subordination to them.

So is it the Province of the King as supreme, or because he is the supreme
Magistrate, to appoint others to Office; and this is done in a various Manner,
either mediately by the Power, with which he has before invested those, who
are near him and round about his Throne, or immediately and in a direct Manner;
so he delegates his Power and Authority to the Governors who are sent by him,
and set over any People, to represent among them his Person, and to execute in
his stead, a great Part of the regal Power: To whom, when they are thus
constituted by him, it belongs to design others to Places of Trust under them.

And according to the various Constitutions of several Governments, this Power
is communicated to others in a various Manner.

And such is the Power which the Electors this Day are invested with by the
Royal Charter, to choose one Part of our Legislature, and with the approbation
of His Majesty's Representative, to design them to a Place of very great Trust.

And thus I shall leave the first Proposition, That it is the Province of some
to design others to places of public Trust. I proceed to the

II. Prop. That in this Designation they should have a principal Regard to
their Integrity and Religion.

If those who are in such Authority answer their Duty, and rightly execute the
Powers committed to them, then those that are thus entrusted, must be fit for
that their Trust: and therefore they who design them to those Places, ought to
consider their Qualities and Dispositions, and therein their Ability to
discharge the Duties of that their Trust.

I shall speak to this Proposition in this Manner, 1. Show what we are here to
understand by Integrity. 2. What we are to understand by Religion. 3. Prove the
Proposition, That Integrity and Religion should be principally regarded, by
those that design others to Places of public Trust.


I. I shall show, What we are here to understand by Integrity.

Here I shall speak of this Quality, not ethically, or as a moral Virtue;
because I must presently speak of it, as a Part of the Character of a Man of
Religion, by which all those Qualities that are denominated by ethical Writers
moral Virtues are entirely absorp'd and disappear, as the feeble Light of the
Stars, when the Sun arises shining in his Strength.

So the dim Light of Nature is of little use to guide us in our Way, when we
have the more glorious Beams of the Sun of Righteousness, shining upon our ^ath.

But I shall consider this as a natural Quality: Natural, I mean, in
Contradiction not to moral but acquired.

For as Men by their Regard to the Duties of the Religion of our Lord and
Savior, which they profess, may attain to a great Degree of this Endowment; so
the Disposition thereto in some Men, may be such, that it may be considered as
Natural.

By Integrity then I understand, That natural Turn of the Mind, which disposes
a Man to act steadily and uniformly in all his Conduct, with an honest Regard
to the various Interests that are entrusted with him, whether Public or Private.

It is true, as our Nature is corrupt, and entirely depraved with Sin by the
^all, so there dwells in us no good Thing; and there are in us the Stamina or
Elements of all Sin: But yet there is nothing more evident, than that we are
not alike inclined to all, but more to some Sins than others; so are some Men
much less inclined to any Breach upon Truth and Uprightness, than others

And whether we can give a proper Reason for this, that shall satisfy us
Philosophically, or not, yet the Fact is evident.

And it appears very much to be natural, both, because we find this continued
frequently from Father to Son. And his Father's Steadiness and Integrity, or
his Insincerity and Turn to Cunning and Design, is plainly visible in the Son
that comes after him: And for that, we frequently see Men remarkable for this
Quality, that not only have no Religion, but that scarce pretend to any; yet
are they such as from this natural Cast, we are very ready to trust and confide
in.

This then is a Turn of Mind that is very serviceable in the World, and of
itself recommends a Man greatly to our Liking and Esteem: For though this Quality
will never serve a Man in spiritual Regards, saving, that such an one is nearer
the Kingdom of God than another; yet has it often done excellent Service in the
secular Affairs of the World, and in the civil Societies and Communities of
Men: Thus I shall close this Head, What we are here to understand by Integrity.

I proceed to say,

II. What we are to understand by Religion.

According to the Expression of our Text then, we are lead to say in general,
That the Man of Religion is one that Fears God and keeps his Commandments.

As here is doubtless to be understood, one that makes a Profession of
Religion, and explicitly declares his Resolution, for the Service, Honor and
Glory of his God, so hereby is not to be understood the external Professor
only, however exact and formal he may be in this Respect; but the Man of true
vital Religion; the Man who has the Interest of Religion at his Heart, as well
as upon his Tongue:

The Man that acts from a Principle of divine Grace in the Soul: He who is
influenced in all his Actions by the Views of another World; who lives his Life
in the World, by the Faith of the Son of God:

Such an one as is not influenced in his Duty to God, (I mean in the external
Profession of Religion) nor in that to his private Nei^bour, his Country or his
People, by any little and sinister Views of worldly Honor or Advantage: But
can wait for the promised Reward of all his sincere, though imperfect Actions,
till after Death:

Who infinitely prefers his Acceptance with God, and the blessed Euge he Hopes
for, from the great Judge of all; to all the vain popular Applause, that can be
given by Man:

In a Word, He that makes the Word of God his Rule, by which he acts steadily
and uniformly, according to the Dictates of a pure and upright Conscience:

This is the Man of Religion, whose Motives, Ends and Designs, in all his
Actions, both in public and private Life, are great and noble, right and true.

I proceed,

III. To prove the Proposition, That Integrity and Religion should be
principally Regarded by those that design others to Places of public Trust.

And here, The Manner of the Expression of this Proposition implies, That there
are other Qualities requisite to the proper Execution of such Trusts, in
relation to which, these are the principal.

And it is very true, There are other Qualities necessary, besides Honesty and
Religion; such as a good Understanding, Knowledge and Wisdom.

For it is not every honest and religious Man, has a Pretense to any one, much
less to all of these.

And to have such in Places of public Concern, who are weak and low in their
natural or acquired Accomplishments, tends to render the Government base and
contemptible.

Such then as are in public Stations, ought to be Men of a good Understanding,
Knowledge and Wisdom.

1. They should be Men of a good Understanding.

Men of good intellectual Powers, that have a Capacity, when they apply
themselves to Business, to understand the Duties of their Station; that so
their Weakness may not be a Snare to them, while they are lead blindfold by
others, and made the Tools of a Party, and become the Property of Men of Trick
and Design.

2. Such as are in public Stations should be Men of Knowledge.

That is such Knowledge as is proper to the Stations which they sustain: This
therefore is various according to the Variety of public Stations in which Men
are placed.

Such then as are in superior public Stations, should be such as were the Men
of Issachar 1 Chronicles. 1^. 32.
, Men: that had Understanding of the Times to know what Israel ought to do.

Such ought therefore to be Men of political Knowledge; knowing and
understanding in the Laws of their People; and well acquainted with the
Constitution and Interests of that civil Polity and Government, in which they
act their Part.

And as the former Head respects the Faculty, so this does the Application of
that Faculty: And there are many Men of good natural intellectual Powers, who
from the Narrowness of their Circumstances, and the necessary Diligence in the
Business of their Callings, have no Time to spend in procuring that Knowledge,
whereby they would otherwise be very fit for public Offices and Stations,
according to that of the Son of Sirach Ecclus. 38. 24, 25, 33.
, The Wisdom of a learned Man comes by Opportunity of Leisure, and he that
has little Business, shall become wise: But how can he get Wisdom that holds
the Plough, and that glories in the Good, that drives Oxen and is occupied in
their Labors, and whose Talk is of Bullocks. They shall not be sought for in
public Counsel, nor sit high in the Congregation, they shall not sit on the
Judges Seat, nor understand the Sentence of Judgment.

Again, Some through their Idleness and Indolence suffer a good Understanding to
lie barren and uncultivated.

So that a good Understanding only, does no way qualify a Man for such
Stations, unless it be informed and enlightened, with that Instruction and
Knowledge, proper for the Station he is assign^d to.

3. Such as are in public Stations, should be Men of Wisdom.

This Head is very different from the former, for that, a Man may be endowed
with great Treasures of Knowledge, and yet be far from Wise and Prudent.

Knowledge consists in the Possession of a great Number of Ideas, and Wisdom in
the proper Application of them, to our several Needs and Purposes in Life: So
that, Knowledge does by no Means certainly imply Wisdom: And the greatest
Clerks are not always the wisest Men.

It is true, the Man of Knowledge will shine in the beauties of Discourse; and
as most Men are apt to judge superficially, so will they be ready to imagine,
that he that can speak so finely, must also be a Man of equal Wisdom: But it is
very certain, That to Talk well and Act wisely, are very different Talents; and
oftentimes, do not meet in the ^ame Person (unless where the Genius is great
and superior); but frequently, the more remarkable he is for the one, the less
so is he for the other.

Wisdom and Prudence then are very necessary for such as are in public
Stations; whereby they may understand how to lead and govern the various
Inclinations and Tempers of Men, the various Parties they have to do with (for
there will always be such) and the various Interests which such Parties pursue;
so as to bring Good out of Evil, and advance, sometimes, the Interest of the
Public, by such as mean nothing less.

These Qualities, then, of Understanding, Knowledge and Wisdom, are all
necessary to Stations of public Trust; and yet, these are not mentioned in our
Text: but, rather such are ^ought for as are Men of Integrity and Religion.

And this for several Reasons; 1. Because there is not so much need of urging
the choice of Men of natural Powers; for that these Qualities are what Men are
generally apt to look first at: Often imagining, that the Capacity of doing
Service, and the Power and Ability to answer all the demands of the Place they
sustain, constitutes them fit and proper Persons for that Station. 2. Because
such is the Corruption of our Natures, that it is easier to find those that are
fit for a public Station, as to their natural Powers, than such as are properly
qualified by Morals. And then, Once more; Because a moderate Degree of these
natural Qualities, when they are well balasted with Integrity and Religion, is
much more likely to procure the Welfare and Happiness of a People, than the
highest Degrees of these natural Powers, when they are without the Moral: And
therefore are Integrity and Religion to be looked upon as principal Qualities
in those, who are designed to any Places of public Trust. Which Things are some
Proof of the Proposition. But I proceed to a more direct Proof of it in three
Things.

1. The Examples we have in the Scriptures, of the Care which the good Kings
and Governors over the People of God have taken in this Regard, are our
Direction herein.

As we are to yield a strict Obedience to the proper Precepts and Directions of
the Word of God so are the Examples which we have there recorded, of holy Men,
to have a great Weight with us for as the Apostle tells us, Romans 15. 4.
Whatsoever Things were written aforetime, were written for our Learning. And 1
Cor. 10. 11.
That all these Things happened to them for Ensamples, and are written for our
Admonition.

We find then, that those that had the Character of good Rulers, have made this
their Care, to put such in Places of Trust, as were Men of Religion, and a
strict Regard to the Law of God. Such is the Example of Moses, who was a King
in J^^urun: For when he set Officers over the People, and gave them that
Charge, 1 Deuteronomy. 1. 15, and onward, And I took the Chief of your Trives -- and
charged them at that Time, saying, hear the Causes between your Brethren, and
judge righteously ye shall not respect Persons, nor fear the Faces of Men, for
the Judgment is God's. It is hence evident, That those who had this Charge,
were such as he esteemed Men of Integrity, and a strict Regard to that Law of
God which he put under their Administration.

So when the good King Jehoshaphat appointed his Officers to public Trust, he
gave them that Charge, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. -- Take heed what ye do, for ye judge
not for Man, but for the Lord; wherefore let the Fear of the Lord be upon you.
This being his Charge then, we cannot imagine, but that he took the greatest
Care to commit this Trust, to Men whom he could confide in, that they would
answer the Charge so given them: Even Men of Integrity and Religion.

And such is the Example we have in our Text of Nehemiah, the pious Governor
of Judah, who regarded the Integrity and religious Fear of God, in these his
Officers, before every other Qualification; esteeming that a sufficient Reason,
why he gave them the Charge of the City of God.

2. We are directed to this in the Word of God.

Exodus 18. 21. Moreover, thou shall provide out of all the People -- Such as
fear God, Men of Truth and having Covetousness, and place such over them, to be
Rulers of Thousands, and Rulers of Hundreds, Rulers of Fifties, and Rulers of
Tens.

It is true, This is the Advice of Jethro, Moses's Father in Law, but it must
be looked upon as the Direction of God, if we consider what follows, 23 v. If
thou shall do this Thing and God command thee so. As then the Government of
that People was a proper Theocracy; so we are not to imagine, that Moses would
make such a considerable Alteration in it, without the divine Direction: And
therefore as he followed this Advice, we are to consider it, as the Direction
and Approbation of God himself.

We see here, that this Direction to Men of Uprightness and Religion is given
with respect to some of the lowest Officers, even to the Rulers over Tens, that
they should be Men fearing God and bating Covetousness. How much more then are
these Qualities necessary to the superior Officers, and such as Rule over the
Thousands of Israel.

And therefore have we a particular Direction given by God to Moses, as to the
supreme Magistrate, that he should be a Man that regarded the divine Law, in
all his Rule and Government over the People. Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. And when thou
shall set a King over thee, when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, he
shall write him a Copy of this Law; and he shall read therein, that he may
learn to fear the Lord his God, and keep these Statutes and do them, that he
turn not aside from the Commandment, to the right Hand or to the Left.

3. That such should be designed to Places of public Trust is evident, because
it is only such as are so qualified, will answer the Trust reposed in them.

When such as are thus entrusted answer not to the Importance of their Trust,
it is always a Reflection upon their Constituents, and intimates a Deficiency
of their Wisdom.

As the ultimate and general End of all the Actions of Men, and so of
Government, ought to be the Glory of the divine Being, so the next and more
immediate End, is the Happiness of the People.

This then ought to be the next and immediate Purpose of such as are in Place
of superior Power, and have the Authority of designing others to Places of
public Trust. And as it is a principal Part of Wisdom to pursue any End which
we propose to our selves, in that Manner that shall best and most certainly
attain it; so it is certainly the most egregious Folly, to defeat by any of our
Actions, that very End, which by such Actions we profess to endeavor after:
And this (by the way) is the Reason, why all Sin is Folly.

Now it will doubtless be universally allowed, that they that are in superior
Places of Power, such as are to give Authority and Power to others, ought to
act wisely: Which, if they design the Interest and Welfare of a People, they do
not, when they dispose of the Offices of public Trust to such as are not Men of
Integrity and Religion; because such as have no claim to these Characters, will
by no means answer the Trust reposed in them, by such Constitution and
Appointment; for that such are evidently deficient in those valuable
Endowments, which are always necessary to the Weal and Prosperity of such as
they govern.

But as Religion grasps in it all those excellent Virtues, both personal and
social, that tend to procure and establish the Privileges, the Interest, and
the Religion of any People; so he that deserves such a Character, must,
generally speaking, be the fittest Person of all others, to have these arduous
Affairs committed to his Trust.

I shall therefore here consider several of those truly noble Qualities,
productive of the public Weal, which are the genuine Effect of Religion: And
which therefore it binds a Man to act according to, whatsoever public Character
he is invested with.

And they are such as these, 1. Integrity and Uprightness. 2. Courage and
Fortitude. 3. Largeness of Heart productive of a public Spirit. 4. Justice and
Righteousness. 5. Liberality, in Opposition to Avarice or a sordid View to a
Man's own private Interest.

1. Integrity and Uprightness is a Quality necessary to a Man in public
Station, which is the genuine Effect of Religion.

I before considered Integrity as it is a Disposition of the Mind, which is
more natural to some than others. I now consider it as it is a divine Virtue.

And so,

It is that Habit of the Soul, whereby a Man is always inclined to act agreably
to his Conscience with every Man. (For I here consider this Head, only as it
has regard to our Actions toward Man) And so will he that is a Man of
Integrity, act in Truth and Sincerity with all with whom he has to do. He is
in this respect John 1. 47.
an Israelite indeed in whom there is no Guile. As he will not only, not lie to
his Nei'bour by the Word of his Mouth; so neither will he by any of his
Actions; for we may as well do so by the latter as the former: As such an one
is a Man of no Artifice or Dissimulation, so will he not delight in any
ambiguous Manner of Expression, whereby he may afterward flatter himself, he
is clear from any Obligation, which yet he knows his Nei'bour though it he had, by
such Expressions, laid upon himself.

Such an one speaks what he means, and his Words truly disclose the Intent of
his Heart: And he honestly Designs to act according to his Word, and always
does so, unless unavoidably prevented. And it is not any Disadvantage which
will accrue to him by his Faithfulness, that will make him forfeit his
Integrity; Psalms 15. 4.
For such a Man swears to his Hurt and changes not.

Now this, I say, is an Habit of the Soul: He is honest and upright, not in
this particular Affair, and at such a particular Time, or with respect to such
particular Persons, but he is so, as he has always a conscientious Regard to
his Actions.

And this Virtue or Grace is the genuine Fruit and Effect of Religion, as it is
analogous to one of the Perfections of God, whose Image it is the End and
Design of Religion, to restore to the Soul; and therefore it demands this
Quality of us, according to one of the Precepts of that divine Law, which the
religious Man professes to be the Rule of his Life, and that he is under the
highest Obligations to be obedient unto.

And when he that has that natural Turn to Truth and Integrity, as we have
before considered it, has also his Heart sanctified by Religion, What a
Firmness does it give to this noble Disposition of the Mind! And it appears in
all his Actions, and it is impossible to warp him from his Duty to God, and the
Trust that is reposed in him; and he says with Job, Job 27. 5, 6.
Till I die I will not remove mine Integrity from me: my Righteousness I hold
fast and will not let it go, my Heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.

The Man of true Integrity acts always under a Sense of his Duty to God, for
that he can never hope otherwise to dwell in his Presence, according to that of
the Psalmist, 5. 12. Who shall dwell in thine holy Hill, he that walks
Uprightly and works Righteousness, that speaks the Truth in his Heart.

And it is this Motive and Principle of the Action that distinguishes Integrity
from that unamiable Vice of Obstinacy, which very much Troubles any Community,
where the Leaders of it, pretend to Steadiness of Truth and Virtue under that
Disguise: For as Obstinacy is a bigoted Resolution to abide stiffly by any
Determination whatsoever, once made; so by this Stiffness, which has the Face
of a proper Constancy, it often mimicks Integrity. For as the World, which
seldom judges wisely of Things, generally account of a Man's Integrity,
according to the Steadiness of his Action, (though this of it self is no Virtue,
only as it is applied and directed,) so are they apt oftentimes to mistake
Obstinacy for Uprightness; though they very widely differ from one another.

For,

The Man of Truth and Sincerity acts steadily, because what he does he is
satisfied is just and right, and his Duty; according to the Character he
sustains. But,

The Man of Obstinacy acts steadily, because he vainly delights in the
Character that is given him, as not apt to Turn or Change. And tho h^ forfeit
any of his Interest, by this his Stiffness, which is very likely to fix his
Character for Truth and Sincerity: yet if he be not, in other Regards, a Man of
uniform Virtue, it only shows, that he is less covetous, than he is proud; and
that from the Enormity of this Vice, and the violent Attachment to his own
Will, he had rather himself suffer, and make every one else, who has had any
Dependence upon him, suffer with him, than make any Abatement of his
Stubbornness and Pertinacity Whereas the most upright Person and steady too, to
Truth and Virtue, if he be a Man of any Modesty, as he will after as often as
he receives good Reason for it; so will he open his Eyes to receive Light, and
be ready to hear the Reasons that are given to persuade him to change; though he
always acts steadily and uprightly according to his present View of Things.

So that he is one that may be depended upon, and Men put an entire Trust and
Confidence in such a Man, which is an unspeakable Advantage in all the Affairs
of Life.

2. Courage is a Quality necessary to him who is in a Place of public Trust,
which is the genuine Effect of Religion.

The Man of Religion is such an one as he in our Text, he fears God, and for
that Reason he does not fear Man: He is one of those, who has taken that
Advice of our Lord, Luke 12. 4, 5.
Be not afraid of them that kill the Body, but fear him, who, after he has
killed, has Power to cast both Body and Soul into Hell. The truly religious
Man does all his Actions as to God, that is, as in his Presence, and for his
Glory and Honor; and such an one is ready to suffer in the Cause of God, or
when his Conscience tells him it is his Duty.

And thus Religion influences a fearless Behavior in all Stations of public
Life.

This gives Life and Spirit to the Soldier, when Thousands fall at his Side,
and ten Thousand at his right Hand.

Religion fixes the Courage and Resolution of the executive Officer in civil
Power, when he causes the Sword of Justice to fall with irresistible Force upon
the Head of the guilty Criminal.

From hence proceeds Firmness and Stability, in all public Counsels and
Debates: and the Patriot, if he be a Man of true Religion, always speaks his
Mind freely, regardless whom it will offend, when he thereby keeps a good
Conscience, for in this Case, as much as in any, is that of the wise Man true,
Prove. 29. 25. The Fear of Man brings a Snare, but he that trusts in the
Lord, shall be safe.

He that relies upon the Protection of God, shall be safe from the Designs and
Resentments of all such as he offends, when thus he does his Duty. For such an
one says with the Psalmist, Psalm 56. 11,
In Gad have I put my Trust, I will not fear what Man can do unto me.

3. Largeness of Heart is another of those Qualities, which is the genuine
Effect of Religion, and necessary to such are in public Stations.

As it is the Tendency of Religion to dilate the Soul, so it is the End and
Design, the Beauty and Excellency of it, to release the Mind from that narrow,
contracted State which Sin has shrunk it into.

True Religion divests a Man of Self, and gives him a generous and extended
Concern for all that are round about him. For this is a natural Effect of true
Love to our Nei'bour, that is the distinguishing Mark of genuine Christianity:
For that our Lord Jesus Christ has given it as an infallible Token whereby all
the World might know his Disciples, John 13. 35.
Hereby shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye Love one another.

This Love, as it is an active Principle, so it does not center in it self. If
Charity begins at Home, yet it does not end there: But the Man endowed with
this Grace is always active in doing good to others, when he has an
Opportunity: Yea He rejoices to see all that are round him, in Prosperity; nor
envies his Nei'bour, when he rises above himself. He abhors those Actions which
we justly call mean and little, as what are as truly forbidden by the Law of
Christ, as any of those Actions which we are more ready to style sinful and
immoral: For Actions that are little and mean, are a direct Contradiction to
Christianity; which more than any other Religion, more than any one Set of
Principles whatsoever, tends to enlarge the Heart, and influence to great and
excellent Actions: And it is certain that he that has a narrow, selfish and
little Soul, can never be a Christian.

When, then, the Man in public Station is a Man of Religion too, he will
disdain to act from any little and ^ni^er Views: They are no Temptation to him*
but he endeavors to answer the Duties of that Station, let the Event and Issue
of such his Actions be what it will.

And though his Honor, Repute and Esteem with Men be dear to him, yet when they
come in Competition with the Honor of God, and the Peace of his own
Conscience, they appear to him, as indeed they are, Things of little Value.

And if by his acting in a generous, open and disinterested Manner, he pleases
neither Party, because he has not forwarded according to their Hopes, their
little and private Designs; yet a consciousness that he has acted according to
the Obligations of that Religion which he professes, is such a Satisfaction to
his Mind, that he is little affected with the Resentments which such his true
and generous Behavior may have raised against him.

This Magnanimity and Expansion of Heart, as it is necessary to Men in public
Station, so is it the genuine Effect of true Religion; for hence it is that we
sometimes see the Man of mean Extraction, and of the courser Employments of low
Life, by true Religion attain to that greatness of Mind, that is often found
wanting in such as are the Sons of Nobles, and have had the most open and
generous Education So necessarily does Religion enlarge the Soul; according to
that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 119 32 I will run the Way of thy Commandments when
thou shall enlarge my Heart.

4. Justice and Righteousness is another necessary Qualification of the Man in
public Station, which is the genuine Fruit of Religion.

This Quality, I say, is necessary to him that is made, any way, a Ruler over
Men; according to that, 2 Samuel 23. 3. He that rules over Men must be just.
Hence Job says, when speaking of himself in his judiciary Quality, Job 29. 14.
I put on Righteousness, and it clothed me: my Judgment was as a Robe and a
Diad^m. It covered him all over as a Garment; it was his Glory and Beauty, and
gave a Luster as the Jewels of a royal Diadem.

This is perpetually found where there is true Religion, for it is always a
Part of the Basis of it: And that Man's Religion is bottomed upon the Sand,
that has not this divine Virtue in the Foundation of it.

Those Virtues which the Heathen called Moral, and in which lay their highest
Seize, our blessed Savior has made a Part of the Christian's Duty, by
the Precepts of the Gospel: But then, they are but a low Part of it, and but
the ordinary Seize of a Christian: But however, absolutely necessary to
Christianity, and he can never be a Christian that wants them.

So that whatever necessity there is, of Justice and Righteousness in public
Life, the Man of Religion will certainly be possessed of these Qualities: And
we may depend upon a rigorous Impartiality in the Execution of every Office he
sustains.

5. Liberality, in Opposition to Avarice, or a sordid View to a Man's own
Interest, is another genuine Effect of Religion, necessary to Men in public
Station.

He who wants this Virtue, or which is all one, he that is properly a covetous
Man, whose Affections are wrapped in worldly Gain, cannot be a Man of true
Religion; for the Love of God (in which consists the Essence of Religion) can
never dwell in such a Soul.

For if it be true as our Lord tells us, Matthew. 10. 37.
He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me. How much
more is it true of him that prefers his Money to God! Is it possible that God
should dwell in that Heart, where he sees such an Idol in the highest Seat of
the Affections? No; but it is impossible such an one should have any Love to
God. Such a Soul knows no Fervours of Devotion, they are Strangers to his
Heart. He has no Aspirations after secret Communion with any God but Mammon.
The Tho^ts of the pure and holy converse of the heavenly World, give him no
Delight; neither if he were there could he take the least Satisfaction, unless
he finds the Apostle's mystical Description of that Place, literally true, Rev.
21. 2^.
That the Streets of it are of pure Gold.

The Man of true Religion then, will be just his Reverse: who as he has the
highest Regards to the spiritual Entertainments of Heaven, which are the Riches
of Righteousness, so will have but a mean Opinion of those of this present
Life; and as he is not anxiously careful for these Things, so will he never
make any Breach upon his Conscience, for the sake of obtaining them; but abhors
the Though It of dishonest Gain.

This Quality then is absolutely necessary to him who has the public Interest
of a People, any way at his dispose, least he convert it to his own private
Advantage. For as such an one always stands ready to ^queze himself into any
Station, whereby he may get something, if it be but a little: so every such
Station he will make the most of, whatever the Public suffers thereby.

So that by this immoderate Desire of Gain, and sordid Love of the World, he
not only d^stroys his own Soul in Perdition, but is also the Ruin of the public
Interest; when by Bribery and Oppression he makes a Breach upon his Oath and
the Vow he is under, to an impartial Administration of the Trust reposed in him.

He then that is mean and avaritious in his Desires of Wealth, is least of all
fit for a public Station, Prove. 28. 21.
For, for a Piece of Bread ^uch a Man will transgress. And let such an one
pretend never so much to forward the Welfare of his People, by a prudent
Management of their Treasury, whereby, though he recommend himself to their
Approbation, as a careful Steward; yet how often does he thereby hazard those
Interests and Privileges of a People, that are infinitely more valuable than
the triffling Proportion of their Taxes and Estates, which he means to save by
his ill-timed and pretended Thrift and Frugality? He then that is more saving
of the Public Moneys, than he is tender of the Privileges of a People, never
can deserve that honorable Title of, A Father to his Country, for a
parsimonious and niggardly Patriot, will always be a Contradiction.

And thus I have considered some of those excellent Qualities, which are always
necessary to such as have a public Trust committed to them, as the genuine
Fruits and Effects of Religion. And so I have proved that such are the fittest
of all others for the discharge of the Duties of a public Station. Hence the
Proposition is evident, That such as design others to Stations of public Trust,
should have a principal Regard to their Integrity and Religion. And thus I
proceed to the

APPLICATION.
And here though I might mention many Things that naturally arise from what I
have said, yet as the Time would fail me, I shall content my self with these
that follow,

1. If a public Station be a Place of Trust, then we learn, That all such
should be the Subjects of our Prayers to God.

Every Man who is in a public Station, has some valuable Interest of his
People, in some Degree, committed to his Care, by the neglect of which the
Public will suffer more or less, according to the Importance of that Interest.

As every Man then, should be concerned for the public Welfare, so should he
present such in Prayer to God; for his Assistance and Direction with them, in
all their Endeavors to advance such public Interests: Hence we have that
Direction of the Apostle to Timothy, 1. Tim. 2. beg.
I exhort therefore, that Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of
Thanks be made -- for Kings, and for all that are in Authority; that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty. And we are to
pray to God, because they are his Officers, such as he in his Providence has
set up; and therefore are we to apply to him to make them his Ministers to us
for good. We are also to give Thanks to God for such, when our Interests, in
general, flourish under their Administrations: And when this is the Case, it
proceeds from a murmuring Spirit and Disposition in a People, and is a Proof of
an unthankful and ungrateful Heart toward God, if, because every individual
Affair does not proceed according to their particular, and, perhaps, narrow
Tho'ts of Things, they shall endeavor to form Parties, and stir up Murmurs and
Complaints; thereby greatly disturbing the public Ease and Quiet, and ruffling
the Smoothness of the Administration.

2. From what we have heard of the Trust that is committed to those, who are in
public Station, we may argue, That such should, in the most serious and solemn
Manner, consider how they discharge the Trust committed to them.

It is a certain Proof, that that Man is not fit for the Duties of a public
Station, who thinks upon it only as a Place of Profit or Honor, without a
serious Consideration of the Weight and Burden of it. For, though such Rewards
may be his Encouragement, to accept of any Trust, yet (as this Affair has the
Nature of a Compact, implicit at least) he ought to consider he receives them
as Wages, for some Service he is to do for his People, by the Office he
sustains And that, as he has this Trust committed to him, by God in his
Providence, so that he has he^eby a Talent put into his Hands, which God
expects an Account of the Improvement of.

However then, such may not be accountable to Men, yet should they sadly think
of it, that they must hereafter account with the Judge of all the Earth, what
Service they have done for God and his People. For though we say of such with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 82. 6. I have said, Ye are Gods: and all of you are Children of
the most High: By which awful Titles, we guard that Duty and Reverence we owe
to them, while they are in their Station* Yet should all such think with
themselves, according to that in the 7.v. That they shall die like Men. Their
distinguishing Honors will not secure them from that Death which is their Lot,
because they are Men: And then shall they be equal with others, and upon a
level with them in the Grave; divested of all the honorable Badges and Titles
of their Offices; and alike liable to the impartial Examination and Sentence of
the last Tribunal: And if they 3. Col. 25.
have done wrong in their Administration, that they shall receive for the wrong
which they have done, and that there is no Respect of Persons.

3. Must those, who have the Power of designing others to Places of public
Trust, have a peculiar Regard to their Integrity and Religion, hence we learn,
Such ought themselves to be Men of these Qualities.

The wise Man tells us, Prove. 29. 12.
If a Ruler hearken to Lies, all his Servants are wicked. i. e. Pool in Loc.
If he be pleased with Flattery, or have any Delight in the Practice of Design
and Falsehood, all his Servants are wicked. For such an one will have little
Regard to such as are Men of Integrity, nor make choice of them for his
Officers. Besides, the Example of such an one will directly tend to the
Corruption of such, as by their Post and Station, are obliged to please him.
But when such are themselves Men of Integrity and Religion, then their
Resolution will be according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 101. 6. Mine Eyes
shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me: He that
walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me.

4. If those who have the Power of designing others to Places of Trust, should
have a Regard to their Integrity and Religion, hence learn, They ought to know
them; in some manner, either Personally, or in some other manner, to be
satisfied they are such as may be confided in.

Though the discerning of Spirits, which was an extraordinary Gift to the
primitive Church, and was a Fruit of the divine Inspiration; whereby the Hearts
of Men were discovered: As the Hypocrisy of Ananias, discovered by Pe^er Acts
3. The Faith of the impotent Man at Lystra, discovered by Paul, Acts 14. I say,
Though this extraordinary Gift has long since ceased, and we cannot pretend to
know the Heart; yet by a nice and curious Observation of the Manners and
Actions of Men, we may make a shrewd Conjecture how much they are to be
trusted: Which kind of Sagacity is very requisite to such as are in Places of
superior Power, who are to design others to Office. But this requires a
personal Knowledge, which indeed is the most full and perfect, and always
rather to be chosen by such as communicate to others, any Part of their Rule
and Authority: But as this is oftentimes impossible, so are such then to be
judged of, according to their general Character. Such was the Care taken by
Moses in his Appointment of others to Office. Deuteronomy. 1. 15. I took Men known,
and made them Heads over you. That is, such as by their general Character were
looked upon as Men ^it for that Station in the Government, which he had
assigned them to.

When, then, there is not this personal Knowledge, and their Character is
various; the next wisest Thing is to consider the Qualities of such as vouch
for them For that Men will (generally speaking) recommend such as are like
themselves: And the Man of Integrity and Uprightness of Heart will seldom
solicit, much less will be a Sponsor, for a Man of Falsehood and Deceit. For
it is the greatest Abuse of those in Authority, and deserves their highest
Resentment, when Men, from their own little and private Views and Designs, have
the Impudence to recommend to any Place of Trust and Importance, such
unqualified Persons.

5. If such as are designed to Places of public Trust should be Men of
Religion, then they must be such as have a reverential Regard to the public
Worship of God.

It is true, a Man may pretend the highest Reverence for the public Worship and
Honor of God; and, as we have heard, make the most exact Profession of
Religion; and yet have none at all: For the Kingdom of Heaven, in Men's Heart,
comes not with ^bservation. Not the keenest Search will discover the Hearts of
Men, which ly hid to all Creatures, and are discoverable only by him before
whom all Things are naked and open. But though the highest external Reverence,
and the strictest Profession, will not prove Religion in the Heart, yet it will
hold negatively, That he that has no Reverence for the social, public Honor
of God, is certainly not a Man of true Religion. For as the Man of Religion
has the Honor and Glory of God always near his Heart, so he will certainly
endeavor to advance and promote it by all his Actions: And therefore, as he
will gladly Covenant with God, in an explicit Manner, so will he continually
wait upon him to do him reverence in his House, when the Multitudes come up
there to keep holy Day.

It is necessary then, that the Man in a public Station should be a Man of
reverential Regard to the social Worship and Honor of God in the World: For
that, as the Externals of Religion are under his Guard and Protect on so will
he be very slack both in promoting and executing the Laws that support them,
when himself is a Delinquent.

And here, as to our committing the Guard of the Externals of Religion to such
as are of own manner of Profession, which is though it by many to be most
expedient, I say; That though every Man ought to enjoy the Rights of a good
Subject, that is one; notwithstanding his particular Sentiments of Religion,
where the Principles of that Religion do not tend to the Destruction of his
Loyalty and Obedience: And though it be abhorrent to christian Charity to
imagine, true Religion is confined to such as are of our own Mode of
Profession: Yet, when we think it most wise to choose rather to commit the Care
of these religious Privileges (which we our selves think tend most of all
others to advance Religion in Heart) to such as are of the same Profession with
our selves, we cannot be ^airly faulted by such as are yet most ready to blame
us for it, unless they acknowledge, it would be for the Interest and Welfare of
our Nation, that their Test and Corporation Acts should be repealed.

6. We learn from what we have heard, That such as are in a public Station,
should be Men of good Morals.

As he that professes Religion never so exactly, may be without the Religion
of the Heart, so it is very certain that he may be so too, that is very exact
in his external, moral Behavior toward Men. But yet, when we have gone this
length, when we have had a strict Regard to the Externals of Religion, and the
good Life and Morals of him that is to wear a public Character, we can go no
further. Then have we done all that God requires of us in that Affair, so far
as Religion is concerned in it; and must leave the Event to God.

Such an one as this, our Charity obliges us to think a Man of Religion; and
such an one, whether he be one of true vital Piety or not, yet will generally
stand upon the Side of Religion and Virtue.

But the Man of bad Morals is the least of all fit for a public Station; for as
he that is in such a Post, has both the Religion and the Morals of a People,
very much under his Care and Direction, so he needs all possible Obligations to
bind him to discharge faithfully that Trust committed to him, because in these
Interests are included all the Happiness and Welfare of any People; so he that
has the Ties of Conscience upon him, lies under the strongest Bonds possible,
to the Performance of his Duty.

But the immoral Man cannot have the Face to pretend he acts upon a Principle
of Conscience, because he declares by his general Life, that he Fears not God,
nor Regards Man.

With how ill a Grace must he pretend to act upon a Principle of Integrity and
Uprightness, who is a Man of known Fallacy and Deceit? Is he fit to punish
Prophanity and Irreligion, whose rash Tongue itself, often flies in his Maker's
Face? Is he a proper Person to punish Intemperance, who is himself a Drunkard?
Or how can he discourage Lewdness, who is a Man of insatiable Lust and
Debauchery? And shall he pretend to discountenance Theft, Unrighteousness and
Injustice, who is himself guilty of cheating and defrauding his Nei'bour* or
robbing the Public, which is the worst Theft and Injustice? Or how can he that
is in the Legislature, have any Zeal in promoting and enacting any wholesome
Laws against these Vices, when he knows himself shall be continually liable to
the Sanctions of them?

7. And Lastly, From what we have heard of natural Integrity, we learn, That
that Disposition will be a valuable Addition to the religious Qualifications we
have recommended.

For a Man of such a Disposition will more easily, or rather with less
Difficulty, be persuaded to act those several Duties, which we have considered
as necessary to a Station of public Trust; while the Man of a different Bias,
will find it much harder to bind himself to an uniform Practice of that
Courage, Truth and Fidelity, which yet are the proper Fruits and Effects of
true Religion.

For though the Design and Intent of Religion, be to correct all the Disorders
and Depravities of the Soul, yet that Disorder and Error that we are naturally
most inclined unto, or that Sin which does therefore most easily beset us, will
be the last corrected; or at least, such a Disposition will be always apt to
discover itself, in some Measure, in our Actions, however the Heart may be
truly sanctified.

So have I sometimes observed, such as have not only had a Name for Religion,
but such as by their general Course of Life, according to their strict
Profession, are well entitled to our Charity: yet having a natural Lurch to
Cunning and Intrigue, have sometimes made such Breaches upon their Uprightness,
as a Man of natural Integrity would have been ashamed of. And though afterward
they themselves were so too, and have had their Souls humbled for it; yet by
such their Dissimulation have they not only dishonour^d Religion, but greatly
hurt the Cause they were entrusted with.

But then, though Religion teaches and influences, produces and binds fast upon
us, that Integrity we have been speaking of, yet it is not what the World
commonly calls Religion, that does this. We commonly call him a religious Man,
That as he makes Profession of it, so his general Life is agreeable to such his
Profession; and we can tax him with no Immorality scarce, for that as to any
Thing we can discover, he generally keeps a Conscience void of Offense toward
God and toward Man: This we call a Man of Religion, and we ought to call him
so, for we ought to think him so: But if after all this he be not so, as it is
certain this may be the Case, notwithstanding our severest Scrutiny, for that
true Religion is invisible, and a Thing of the Heart, the Knowledge of which is
the Prerogative of God alone? And then, the Actions of such a Man are not done
in Purity of Conscience and from a sincere Regard to his Duty toward God: And
then, (it is evident) he has not those Ties and Obligations upon him, which he
had depended upon; and therefore may loose himself from all the Bonds of his
outward Profession, upon some large secular Advantage he may have in View.

And such a Man is certainly less to be depended upon, than he that has that
natural Inclination to Honesty and Uprightness, as we have before described it.
Upon the whole, it is evident, that this natural Disposition to Uprightness and
Steadiness* will add to our Reasons for depending upon him that is, besides, a
Man of Religion and Virtue.

I should now Conclude, but that the Reverence and Veneration I bear them, bids
me first make an humble Address of what I have said, to the FATHERS of my
Country:

To YOUR EXCELLENCY, our Governor and Commander in Chief, the Honorable Board
of Counselors, (by whom I have been ordered to stand here to Day) and to the
Honorable House of Representatives.

For with YOU in general, (my FATHERS) lies the Power of appointing to every
public Station, whether Civil or Military: And your joint Province it is this
Day, to elect and confirm (according to the Privileges of the Royal Charter)
the particular Persons of which, one Branch of our Legislature shall consist.

The eternal God Dan. 4. 34.
whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion from Generation to
Generation, who not only appoints the supreme Governors of the Nations, but
also, by his holy Providence, designs and marks out, every one that is
subordinate to them, to their several Stations, has given You the several
Offices You sustain; and thereby has committed a great and important Trust
into your Hands: Even all the valuable Interests of this People of God are
committed to your Care, whether they be Military, Civil or Religious: And as
these several Interests will be promoted and advanced, or otherwise, according
to the Behavior of those, whom you appoint to the several Places of Trust in
the Government: So it becomes your Duty to God and to this People, to fill the
several public Offices with such Men as are best qualified for them, and most
able to answer the Trust reposed in them; and therefore that those principal
Qualities for these Stations, which we have insisted on, namely, Integrity and
Religion, should be most of all regarded.

That as you appoint over the People, able Men, Men of Knowledge and Wisdom, so
that they should especially be such as have the Welfare and best Interests of
this People, near their Hearts: Such as according to your Wisdom, and political
Sagacity, you discern to be Men of Steadiness, Truth and Virtue; Such also as
are Men of true Religion, and a pure and upright Conscience, who will, of all
others, be most likely to answer all the Ends of Government: Whom the People
will most willingly obey, and according to whose good Example, they will be
influenced to form their Conduct and Behavior; and who, by their wise
Deportment, will reflect back upon you, a great deal of that Honor with which
they shine, by your direct Influence upon them: Such also as will always make
their Constituents most easy, while they hear no Complaints of their
Maladministration, but are from Time to Time refreshed and delighted with the
Accounts of their Truth and Fidelity.

For these Qualities, as we have heard, will enable a Man to do the Duties of
every Station he sustains, and that whether Civil or Military.

YOUR EXCELLENCY, as Captain General, will have no Reason to repent your
Favors to an Officer thus endowed; for that, Courage and a wise Conduct, is
the natural Produce of these Qualities: As such an one therefore will not
rashly proceed to Action, where he has little or no probability of Success;
but will Forecast all his Designs with Wisdom and Caution, so will he execute
them with Firmness and Steadiness: And when in the high Places of the Field, he
fights with Spirit and Bravery, because he thinks it his Duty. And all the
empty Notions of Honor, which are commonly though it good Reasons for being
prodigal of Life, are but Madness in comparison with the Motives which the
religious Man acts upon: And there is no such Foundation for Intrepidity and
Courage, as an upright Heart.

Again, If we consider this Officer, as concerned with the Wages and
Subsistence of his Men: Integrity and Religion will be a sure defense against
all Fraud and Deceit; here will be no Danger of false Muster-Rolls, and
charging the Public with Wages that were never earned; but such an one will
follow that Advice to the Soldiers, given by John Baptist, Luke 3. 19.
Do violence to no Man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your
Wages.

Again, If you shall consider the public Officer, as in a civil Post and
Station, and that whether in the legislative or executive Part of the
Government; these Qualities, we have insisted on, are his Strength, his Beauty
and Ornament.

Consider him as one of the Judges of his People, and how awful is he in the
Execution of his Trust; the Malefactor trembles before him, as severely Just
and Righteous; knowing that he will not forgive, when it is his Duty to punish;
and that he will by no means clear the Guilty.

And on the other Hand, what Joy do the Injured and Oppressed conceive from
these Qualities, when they come before him for Judgment: For such an one acts
like Job, that perfect and upright Man, when he sat in the Seat of Judgment;
and like him will have the Satisfaction of an happy Reflection upon his
judicial Actions, as being done in Truth and Uprightness, when he says with
him, Job 29. 12, 13.
I delivered the Poor that cried, and the Fatherless, and him that had none to
help him. The Blessing of him that was ready to perish, came upon me: and I
caused the Widow's Heart to sing for Joy. I was Eyes to the Blind, and Feet was
I to the Lame. I was a Father to the Poor: and the Cause which I knew not, I
searched out. And I brake the Jaws of the Wicked, and plucked the Spoil out of
his Teeth.

Again, If we look upon this civil Officer as in the Legislature, and sitting
at the Council Board; this Integrity and Religion gives him such a Luster, as
is incompatible to the brightest natural Qualities, the largest Knowledge, and
the most sagacious Wisdom, when they are in the least shaded with Fallacy and
Craft.

As such a Man will have a Zeal for God, so will he manifest it in his public
Capacity, by a continual Concern for the Advancement of his Glory, and the
perpetual Discountenance of Vice and Immorality. Hence, he is studious in
devising, and active in promoting, such Laws as are necessary in these Regards.

He has the civil Liberties and Privileges of his People always upon his Mind,
nor patiently bears any Appearance of the least Infringement of them. Such an
one will appear in all his Actions at that Board, with Courage and Resolution;
and is not so solicitous to know, whether his Votes and Debates there, be
agreeable, either to the Chair, or to such as have Elected him to that Station,
as whether they will issue in the Weal and Benefit of his People: Neither will
he ever look upon the Nomination of any Officer at the Board, as having any
Claim to his affirmative Voice, unless he thinks him qualified for such a Trust.

And inasmuch, as the Constitution of all civil Officers, lies very much with
that honorable Board, it is therefore highly necessary, that they should be
Men of Integrity and Religion, who will certainly be the most likely to keep
those out of any public Trust, that want those Qualities, which they themselves
have the greatest Regard to.

Moreover, As it is always the Advantage of the Administration, that the
several Branches of the Legislature should act freely, without any influential
Bias, from the other Part of it: And as the particular Persons that compose
this Part of the Legislature, depend upon the other Two for their Existence:
That they may nevertheless act independently and freely, it is necessary they
should act upon a Principle of Conscience, and therefore should be Men of
Integrity and Religion.

Besides, These Qualities will very much free them from a great deal of Trouble
and Uneasiness, which they are always liable to, from the very nature of the
Constitution of this Government: For that as the other Parts of the Legislature
do not always agree, so the Man of Artifice and Insincerity, that more values
his Seat at that Board, than the Interest of his People, will be oftentimes
(notwithstanding all his Art of Dissimulation) in the utmost Perplexity how to
act, so as to please the one, and not offend the other.

But as the Man of Integrity has not these Ends in view, but rather the
Satisfaction of his own Conscience, in (...) public Actions: He will be at no
loss with (...) speak the Sentiments of his Mind freely, and act in the
Uprightness of his Heart; believing it will be his Honor, if he be afterward
either neglected or frowned upon, for his Steadiness and Sincerity.

Upon the whole, Suffer me, my FATHERS, (for I speak in the Name of God) suffer
me to insist upon it as your absolute Duty, and as you will answer it to the
Judge of all the Earth, to appoint to the Offices of public Concern, such are
endowed with those Qualities we have so much insisted on.

Particularly, That you unite in the strongest Endeavors, that the Electors
this Day may have a peculiar Regard to them; That the honorable B^^rd should
consist of Men of Integrity and Religion; who as they have very much the Guard
of the royal Prerogative, as well as the Care of the Interests and Privileges
of the People, so will have a just and upright Regard to them both: which very
much tends to establish the Peace and Quiet of the Administration. Isai. 60. 17.
So shall our Officers be Peace, and our Exactors Righteousness. Isai. 1. 26.
So shall our Judges be as at the first, and our Counselors as at the
beginning, and we called the the City of Righteousness, the faithful City.

And now, may the God of Truth and Faithfulness, the God of Peace and Love, so
influence the Affairs of this Day, that all sinister Views and Designs being
laid aside, there may be such an happy Unanimity, in the several Elections, as
shall make a large Accession to the Joys of this Day of the Gladness of our
Hearts.

FINIS.

