MEMOIRS OF ODD ADVENTURES, Strange Deliverances, etc. In the Captivity of JOHN
GYLES, Esquire Commander of the Garrison on St. George's River.

Written by Himself.

Forgetful Youth! but know, the Power above
With ease can save each Object of his Love;
Wide as his Will, extends his boundless Grace;
Nor lost by Time, nor circumscribed by Place.
Happier his Lot, who many sorrows past,
Long laboring gains his natal Shore at last;
Than who too speedy, hastes to end his Life
By some Stern Russian, --
Homer's Odyss. BOSTON, in N. E.

Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queen Street, over against
the Prison. MDCCXXXVI.

INTRODUCTION.
THESE private Memoirs were collected from my (...) at the earnest Request of
my Second Consect, for (...) of our Family; that we might have a (...) ready at
Hand to excite in our selves Gratitude and (...) fullness to GOD; and, in our
Offspring, a due (...) their Depend^nce on the SOVEREION of the (...) from the
Precariousness and Vicissitudes of all (...) Enjoyments. In this State and for
this End they have laid by me for (...) Years: At length falling into the Hands
of some for whose (...) had a value^ I was pressed for a Copy for the Public:
and (...) string of me to extract Particulars from thence, which the (...) of
my Affairs would not admit, I have now determined (...) their Publication. I
have made scarce any Addition to this Manual, except in the Chapter (...)
Creatures, which I was urged to have made much larger^ and might have greatly
enlarged, but I feared it would grow beyond its Prop^rtion. I have been
likewise advised to give a particular Account of my Father, which I am not very
fond of; having no Depend^nce on the Virtues or Honors of my Ancestors, to
recommend me to the (...) of GOD or Men: Nevertheless, because some think that
it is (...) due to the Memory of my Parents, whose Name I was obliged to
mention in the following Story, and a satisfaction which their Posterity might
justly expect from me; I shall give some Account, though as brie^ as possible.

The flourishing ^tate of NEW ENGLAND (before the unhappy Eastern Wars) drew my
Father hither, whose first Settlement was on Kenn^bec^ Rives at a Place called
Merry-meeting Bay^ where be depe^t for some Years^ 'till, on the Death of my
Grand Parents. He with his Family (...) to England, to settle his Affairs. This
done ^ He came over with design to have returned to his Farm, but on his
Arrival at Boston, the Eastern Indians had beg^n their Hostilities. He
therefore began a Settlement on Long Island. The Air of that Place not so well
agreeing with his Constitution, and the Indians being peaceable, he again
proposed to resettle his Lands in Merry-meeting. Bay; but finding that Place
deserted, and that Plantations were carried on at Pemmaquid; he purchased
several Tracts of Land of the Inhabitants there. Upon his Highness the Duke of
York's resuming a Claim to those Parts, he also took out Patents upon that
Claim: And when Pemmaquid was set off by the Name of the County of Cor^wal in
the Province of New York, he was Commiss^^nated Chief Justice of the same, by
Governor DUNCAN. He was a strict Sabbatizer, and met with considerable
Difficulties in the Discharge of his Office, from the Immoralities of a People
who had long lived Lawless. He laid out no inconsiderable Income which he had
annually from England on the Place, and at last lost his Life there, as
hereafter related.

I am not insensible of the Truth of an Assertion of Sir Roger L'Estrange,
(...) Books and Dishes have this common Fate; there never was any one of either
of them, that pleased all Palates^ (And am fully of his Opinion, in this) It is
as little to be wished for, as expected; for an Universal Applause is at least
two thirds of a Scandal.

To conclude with the Knight. Though I made this Composition principally for my
Family -- Yet, if any Man has a Mind to take (...) with me, he has free leave
and welcome. But let him carry this Consideration along with him, That he is a
very unmannerly Guest, that presses upon another Man's Table, and then Quarrels
with his Dinner.

MEMOIRS Of Odd Adventures and Signal Deliverances in the Captivity of John
Gyles, Esquire
CHAP. I.
Containing the Occurrences of the first Year.
ON the second Day of August, SECT. I. Of the taking the Family of Thomas
Gyles, Esquire
Anno Christi 1689, in the Morning, my honored Father Thomas Gyles, Esquire went
with some Laborers, my two Elder Brothers and my self, to one of his Farms,
which lay on the River about three Miles above Fort-Charles Fort-Charles stood
on the Spot where Frederick's Fort was, not long since, founded the Hon
Col.DUNBAR: The Township adjoining thereto was called James Town, in honor to
the Duke of York: In this Town within a quarter of a Mile of the Fort was the
Dwelling House of Thomas Gyles, Esquire from which he went out that unhappy Morning.
, adjoining to Pemmaquid Falls; there to gather in his English Harvest, and
labored securely till Noon. But after we had Dined, our People went to their
Labor, some in one Field to their English Hay, the others to another Field of
English Corn, except my Father, the youngest of my two Brothers and my self,
who tarried near to the Farm-House in which we had Dined, till about One of the
Clock, when we heard the Report of several Great Guns from the Fort. Upon the
hearing of them my Father said, that he hoped it was a Signal of good News, and
that the Great Council had sent back the Soldiers, to cover the Inhabitants:
for on Report of the Revolution they had deserted: But to our great Surprise
about Thirty or Forty Indians discharged a Volley of Shot at us, from behind a
rising Ground near our Barn. The Indians have a Custom of uttering a most
horrid Howl, when they discharge Guns, designing thereby to terrify those whom
they fight against.
The Yelling of the Indians, the Whistling of their Shot, and the Voice of my
Father, whom I heard cry out, What now! What now! so terrified me; though he
seemed to be handling a Gun, that I endeavored to make my Escape. My Brother
ran one way and I another; and looking over my Shoulder, I saw a stout Fellow,
painted, pursuing me with a Gun; and a Curtlass glittering in his Hand, which I
expected every Moment in my Brains: I presently fell down, and the Indian took
me by the Left Hand, offered me no abuse, but seized my Arms, lift me up, and
pointed to the Place where the People were at Work about the Hay; and lead me
that way. As we passed, we crossed my Father, who looked very pale and bloody,
and walked very slowly. When we came to the Place, I saw two Men shot down on
the Flatts, and one or two more knocked on the Head with Hatchets, crying out,
O Lord, etc! there the Indians brought two Captives, one Man, and my Brother
James, he that endeavored to escape by running from the House, when I did He
was about Fourteen Years of Age. The eldest Brother whose Name was (...),
wonderfully escaped by Land to the Barbacan (a Point of Land on the West Side
of the River opposite to the Fort,) where several Fishing vessels lay, he got
on board one of them and came to Sail that Night.
After they had done what Mischief they could, sat down, making us sit with
them: and after some time arose, pointing to us to go Eastward. They marched
about a quarter of a Mile and then made a Halt, and brought my Father to us:
and made Proposals to him by old Moxus, who told him that they were strange
Indians who shot him, and that he was sorry for it: My Father replied, that he
was a dying Man, and wanted no Favor of them, but to Pray with his Children;
which being granted, he recommended us to the Protection and Blessing of GOD
Almighty; then gave us the best Advice, and took his leave for this Life,
hoping in GOD that we should meet in a better. He parted with a cheerful Voice,
but looked very pale by reason of his great loss of Blood, which boiled out of
his Shoes: -- the Indians lead him aside --! -- I heard the blows of the
Ha^cher, but neither Shriek nor Groan! [I afterward heard that he had five or
seven Shot-holes, through his Wastecoat or Jacket, and that the Indians covered
him with some Boughs]

The Indians lead us their Captives, SECT. II. Of their taking Pemmaquid Town
and Fort.
on the East side of the River, toward the Fort; and when we came within a Mile
and half of the Fort and Town, and could see the Fort, we saw Firing and Smoke
on all sides: Here we made a short stop, and then we moved within or near the
distance of three quarters of a Mile from the Fort, -- Of Mr. Gyles's Family in
particular.
into a thick Swamp. There I saw my Mother and my two little Sisters, and many
other Captives taken from the Town. My Mother asked me of my Father, I told
her, that he was killed, but could say no more for Grief; she burst into Tears,
and the Indians moved me a little further off, and seized me to a Tree.

The Indians came to New-Harbour, -- Of the Town and Fort in general.
and sent Spies several Days to observe how and where the People were employed
etc. who found that the Men were generally at Work at Noon, and left about
their Houses only Women and Children: therefore the Indians divided themselves
into several Parties, some Ambushing the Way between the Fort and the Houses,
as likewise between them and the distant Fields; and then alarming the farthest
off first, they killed and took the People, as they moved toward the Town and
Fort, at their Pleasure; so that very few escaped to the Fort. Mr. Pateshall
was taken and killed as he lay with his Sloop near the Barbican. On the first
stir about the Fort my youngest Brother was at Play near the same, and ran in,
and so by God's Goodness was preserved. Capt. Weems with great Courage and
Resolution defended the wrak old Fort two Days, till that he was much Wounded
and the best of his Men Killed, and then Beat up a Parley. And the Conditions
were,

1. That they, the Indians should give him Mr. Poteshall's Sloop.

2. That they should not molest him in carrying off the few People that had got
into the Fort, and three Captives that they had taken.

3. That the English should carry off in their Hands what they could from the
Fort.

On these Conditions the Fort was Surrendered, and Capt. Weems went off. And
soon after the Indians set on Fire the Fort and Houses: which made a terrible
Blast, and was a melancholy Sight to us poor Captives, who were sad Spectators!

After the Indians had thus laid Waste Pemmaquid, SECT. III. Of the
Transportation of the Captives to Penobscot, the nearest Indian-Village
Eastward of Pemmaquid.
they moved us all to New-Harbour New Harbor is about two Miles East of
Pemmaquid, a small Harbor, much used by Fishermen. Before the War there were
about twelve Houses, but the rumor of War, disposed them to secure themselves,
by forsaking their Habitations.
. And when we turned out Backs on the Town my Heart was ready to break! -- I
saw my Mother; she spoke to me, but I could not answer her! That Night we
tarried at New-Harbour, and the next Day went in their Canoes for Penobscot.
About Noon, the Canoe which my Mother, and that which I was in, came side by
side; whether accidental or by my Mother's desire, I cannot say. She asked me,
How I did? I think I said, Pretty well, (though my Heart was full of Grief). Then
she said, O, my Child! how joyful and pleasant would it be, if we were going to
Old England, to see your Uncle Chalker, and other Friends there? -- Poor Babe!
we are going into the Wilderness, the Lord knows where! -- She burst into
Tears, and the Canoes parted! That Night following the Indians with their
Captives lodged on an Island. A few days after, we arrived at Penobscot-Fort;
where I again saw my Mother, my Brother and Sisters, and many other Captives. I
think, we tarried here eight Days: and in that time the Jesuit had a great mind
to buy me. My Indian Master made a Visit to the Jesuit, and carried me with him
The Indian that takes and will keep a Captive is accounted his Master, and the
Captive his Property till he give or sell him to another.
I saw the Jesuit show him Pieces of Gold, and understood afterward, that he
tendered them for me. (...) Jesuit gave me a Biscuit, which I put into my
Pocket, and dare not eat; but buried it under a Log, fearing that he had put
something in it to make me Love him: for I was very Young, and had heard much
of the Papists torturing the Protestants etc. so that I hated the sight of a
Jesuit. When my Mother heard the talk of my being Sold to a Jesuit, she said to
me, Oh! my dear Child! if it were GOD's Will, I had rather follow you to your
Grave! or never see you more in this World, than you should be Sold to a
Jesuit: for a Jesuit will ^^in you Body and Soul! and it pleased GOD to grant
her Request, for she never saw me more! [Tho' she and my (...) Sisters were,
after several Years Captivity redeemed; she died before I returned: And my
Brother who was taken with me, was after several Years Captivity most
barbarously tortured to Death, by the Indians]. For

My Indian Master carried me up Pen^bsc^t River to a Village called Madawamkee:
SECT. IV. Of the Occurrences in my passing from (...) to St. John's, where the
next Eastern Tribe have their Rendezvous.
which stands on a Point of Land, between the Main River, and a Branch which
heads to the East of it. At Home I had ever seen Strangers treated with the
utmost Civility, and being a Stranger, I expected some kind Treatment here: but
soon found my self deceived, for I presently saw a Number of Squaws got
together in a Circle dancing and yelling; and an old grimace-Squaw took me by
the Hand, and lead me to the Ring, where the other Squaws seized me by the Hair
of my Head, and by my Hands and Feet, like so many Furies: but my Indian Master
presently laid down a Pledge and released me. Their Custom of (...) Captives,
and of redeeming them from Abuses at Dances.
A Captive among the Indians is exposed to all manner of Abuse, and to the
utmost Tortures; unless his Master, or some of his Master's Relations, lay down
a Ransom, such as a Bag of Corn, or a Blanket, or such like: by which they may
redeem them from their Cruelties for that Dance, so that he shall not be
touched by any.

The next Day we went up that Eastern Branch of Penobs^^t River many Leagues,
-- carried over Land to a large Pond, and from one Pond to another, till, in a
few Days we went down a River Medocktack River.
, which vents it self into St. John's River. But before we came to the Mouth of
this River, we carried over a long Carrying-Place A Carrying-Place is a Path or
Track in which they pass from one River, or part of a River or Pond to another:
it is so called, because the Indians are obliged to carry their Baggage over
them.
to Medoctack-Fort, which stands on a Bank of St. John's River. My Indian
Master went before, and left me with an old Indian and two or three Squaws. The
Old Man often said, (which was all the English that he could speak,) By and by
-- come to a great Town and Fort: so that I comforted my self in thinking how
finely I should be refreshed etc. when I came to this great Town.

After some Miles travel we came in sight of a large CornField, SECT. V. Of my
Treatment at my Arrival at 'Medoctack on St. John's River.
and soon after of the Fort, to my great Surprise: for two or three Squaws met
us, took off my Pack, and lead me to a large Hutt or Wigwam, where Thirty or
Forty Indians were dancing and yelling round five or six poor Captives, who had
been taken some Months before from Qu^checho, at the same time when Major
Waldein was most barbarously butchered by them Major Waldein was taken in the
beginning of April on the Night after a Sabbath. I have heard the Indians say
at a Feast, that there being a Truce for some Days, they contrived to send in
two Squaws to take Notice of the Numbers, Lodgings and other Circumstances of
the People in his Garrison, and if they could obtain leave to Lodge there, to
open the Gates and Whistle. [They said the Gates had no Locks, but were fastened
with Pins, and that they kept no Watch there] The Squaws had a favorable
Season to prosecute their Projection, for it was dull Weather when they came,
and begged leave to Lodge in the Garrison: they told the Major that a great
Number of Indians were not far from them, with considerable Quantities of
Beaver, who would Trade with him the next Day etc. Some of the People were very
much against their Lodging in the Garrison, but the Major said, Let the poor
Creatures Lodge by the Fire! The Squaws went into every Apartment, and observed
the Numbers in each, and when the People were all asleep, ^ose and opened the
Gates, and gave the Signal, and the other Indians came to them, and having
received an Account of the State of the Garrison, they divided according to the
Number of People in each Apartment, and soon took and killed them all. The
Major lodged within an inner Room, and when the Indians broke in upon him, he
cried out, What now! What now! jumpt out of Bed in his Shirt, and drove them
out with his sword through two or three Doors: and as he was returning to his
Apartment, an Indian came behind him, and knocked him on the Head with his
Hatchet, stunned him, and ha^'d him out, and set him upon a long Table in his
Hall, and bid him, Judge Indians again. Then they eat and stabbed him, and he
cried out, O Lord! O Lord! -- They bid him order his Book of Accounts to be
brought, and cross out all the Indian Debts (for he had traded much with the
Indians) and after they had tortured him to Death, they burned the Garrison and
drew off. This Narration I heard from their Mouths at a general Meeting; and
have Reason to think it true. And it should be a Warning to all Person^ who
have the Care of Garrisons: For the greatest Los^es we meet with are for want
of due Caution and Circumst^^^^.
. I was whirled in among them, and we looked on each other with a sorrowful
Countenance: and presently one of them was seized by each Hand and Foot, by
four Indians, who swung him up and let his Bac^ with Force fall on the hard
Ground, 'till they had dan^^d (as they call it) round the whole Wigwam, Their
manner of tormenting Captives.
which was thirty or forty Feet in length. But when they torture a Boy, they
take him up between two. This is one of their Customs of torturing Captives.
Another is to take up a Person by the middle with his Head downwards, and jolt
him round 'till one would think his Bowels would shake out of his Mouth.
Sometimes they will take a Captive by the Hair of the Head and stoop him
forward, and strike him on the Back and Shoulder, 'till the Blood gush out of
his Mouth and Nose. Sometimes an old shrivelled Squaw will take up a Shovel of
hot Embers and throw them into a Captive's Bosom; and if he cry out, the other
Indians will Laugh and Shout, and say, What a brave Action our old Grandmother
has done! Sometimes they torture them with Whips etc.

The Indians looked on me with a fierce Countenance, signifying that it would
be my turn next. They champ'd Corn-Stalks, and threw them in my Hat, which was
in my Hand: I smiled on them, though my Heart ak'd. I looked on one and another,
but could not perceive that any Eye pitied me: Presently came a Squaw and a
little Girl, and laid down a Bag of Corn in the Ring; the little Girl took me
by the Hand, making Signs for me to go out of the Circle with them: but not
knowing their Custom, I supposed that they designed to kill me, and would not
go out with them. Then a grave Indian came and gave me a short Pipe, and said,
in English, Smoke it: then took me by the Hand and lead me out, but my Heart
aked, thinking my self near my End, but he carried me to a French Hutt about a
Mile from the Indian Fort. The Frenchman was not at Home; but his Wise who was
a Squaw had some Discourse with my Indian Friend, which I did not understand.
We tarried about two Hours, and returned to the Village, where they gave me
some Victuals. Not long after, I saw one of my Fellow-Captives, who gave me a
melaucholly Account of their Sufferings, after I left them etc.

After some Weeks had past we left the Village, SECT. VI.
and went up St. John's River about (...) Miles to a Branch called
Me^ockscen^casis, where there was one Wigwam. At our Arrival an old Squaw
saluted me with a Yell, taking me by the Hair and one Hand; but I was so rude
as to break her hold, and 'quit my self: -- She gave me a filthy Grin, and the
Indians set up a Laugh -- so it passed over. Here we lived upon Fish,
Wild-Grapes, Roots etc. which was hard Living to me.

When the Winter came on, SECT. VII. The first (...) H^nting.
we went up the River till the Ice came down, and run thick in the River; and
then, according to the Indian Custom, laid up our Canoes till the Spring; and
then traveled sometimes on the Ice, and sometimes on the Land, till we came to
a River that was open and not Fordable, where we made a Raft, and passed over
Bag and Baggage For the Indian carry their House and Household Stuff on their
Backs in the Winter, and to these they add, in the Summer, their Vessels and
(...), Provisions etc.
. I met with no Abuse from them in this Winter's Hunting, though I was put to
great Hardships in carrying Burdens, and for want of Food: for they underwent
the same Difficulty, and would often encourage me, saying, in broken English,
By-by -- great deal Moose. But they could not answer any Question that I asked
them. So that knowing nothing of their Customs and way of Life; though I though it it
redious to be constantly moving from Place to Place, yet it might be in some
respects an Advantage: for it ran still in my Mind that we were traveling to
some Settlement; and when my Burden was over heavy, and the Indians left me
behind, and the still Evening came on; I fancied I could see through the Bushes,
and hear the People of some great Town: which Hope might be some support to me
in the Day, though I found not the Town at Night. Thus we have been Hunting three
hundred Miles from the Sea and knew no Man within fifty or sixty Miles of us.
We were eight or ten in Number, and had but two Indian Men with Guns, on whom
we wholly depended for Food: and if any disaster had happened, we must all have
perished. And sometimes we had no manner of Sustenance for three or four Days:
But GOD wonderfully provides for all Creatures! In one of those Fasts GOD's
Providence was remarkable. Our two Indian Men, in Hunting, started a Moose A
Moose is a fine lofty Creature about eight Feet high, with a long Head and Nose
like a Horse: with Horns very large and strong [Some of them are above six
Feet, from the Extremity of one Horn to that of the other] shaped and shed
every Year like the Horns of a Deer: likewise their Feet are cloven like Deers
Feet. Their hind Legs are long and fore Legs short like a Rabbit. They resemble
a Rabbit also in the length of their Ears and shortness of their Tail: The
Female have two Dugs like a Mare, though they sometimes bring three young Ones,
at a Foaling: they fo^l but once a Year, and at one Seas^n, viz. When the Trees
put out Leaves, for them. There are a sort of Moose that have a Main like a
Horse.
, their being a shallow-crusted Snow on the Ground; but the Moose discovered
them, and ran with great force into a Swamp: The Indians went round the Swamp,
and finding no Tract, returned at Night to the Wigwam, and told what had
happened. The next Morning they followed him on the Track, and soon found the
Moose lying on the Snow; for crossing the Roots of a large Tree, that had been
blown up by the Roots, having Ice underneath, the Moose in his furious Flight
broke through, and hitch'd one of his hind Legs in among the Roots, so fast that
by striving to get it out, he pulled the Thigh Bone out of the ^ocket at the
Hip. Thus extraordinarily were we provided for in our great Strait. Sometimes
they would take a Bear, which go into Dens in the Fall of the Year without any
sort of Food, and lie there without any four or five Mo^ths, never going out
till the Spring of the Year: in which Time they neither lose nor gain in Flesh;
if they went into their Dens Fat, they will come out so, or if they went in
Lean, they will come out Lean. I have seen some that have come out, with four
Whelps, and both Old and Young very fat Guillim in his Heraldry mentions it as
the Opinion of some Naturalists, that they bring sort (...) Unformed Embryo,
and lick their Litter into Shape: (...) a (...) I have seen their I (...) of
all Sizes, taken out of the (...), by the Indians, and they are as much, and as
well (...) as the Young of any Auip^l
, and then we feasted: and an old Squaw, and Captive, if any present, must
stand without the Wigwam, shaking their Hands and Body as in a Dance: and
singing, WEGAGE OH NELO WOH! which if Englished would be, Fat is my Eating.
This is to signify their thankfulness in feasting Times! and when this was
spent, we fasted till further Success.

The way of their preserving Meat is by stripping off the Flesh from the Bones,
and drying them over a Smoke; by which it is kept sound Months or Years, without
Salt.

We moved still further up the Country after Moose when our Store was out: so
that by the Spring we had got to the Northward of the Lady Mountains. And when
the Spring came on and the Rivers broke up, we moved back to the Head of St.
John's River; and there made Canoes of Moose-Hides sewing three or four
together, and pitching the Seams with Charcoal beaten and mixed with Balsom.
Then we went down the River to a Place called Madawescok; there an Old Man
lived and kept a sort of TradingHouse: where we tarried several Days, and went
farther down the River till we came to the greatest Falls in these Parts,
called Checanekepeag: where we carried a little way over the Land, and putting
off our Canoes, we went down Stream still: And as we passed down by the Mouth
of any large Branches, we saw Indians: but when any Dance was proposed, I was
bought off. At length we arrived at the Place where we left our Birch Canoes in
the Fall, and put our Baggage into them, and went in them down to the Fort.

There we planted Corn; SECT. VIII. Of the manner of the St. John's Indians
living in the Summer.
and after Planting, went a Fishing, and to look for and dig Roots; till the
Corn was fit to Weed: and after Weeding took a second Tour on the same Errand,
and returned to Hill our Corn: and after Hilling, we went some distance from
the Fort and Field up the River, to take Salmon, and other Fish, and dry them
for Food till Corn was filled with the Milk: Some of which we dried then, the
other as it ripened. And when we had gathered our Corn and dried it When the
Corn is in the M^^k they gather (...) large (...) on the Ears till its pretty
hard, and (...) it up and shed it of (...) Cobb with Clam-Shells, and dry it on
(...) in the Sun; and when (...) thro'ly dried, a Kernel is no bigger than a
Pea, and would keep (...) and boiled again it swells as large, and tastes
incomparably (...) other Cor^ --
, we put some into Indian Barns, i. e. in Holes in the Ground lined and covered
with Bark, and then with Dirt. The rest we carried up the River upon our next
Winter-Hunting Thus GOD wonderfully favored me and carried me through the
first Year of my Captivity.

CHAP. II
Of the abusive and barbarous Treatment which several Captives met with from
the Indians etc.
WHen any great Number of Indians meet, SECT. I. Of (...)
or when any Captives have been lately taken, or when any Captives desert and
are retaken, the Indians have a Dance; and a^ these Dances torture the unhappy
People who fall into their Hands My unfortunate Brother who was taken with me,
after about three Years Captivity, (...)! with an Englishman who was taken from
Casco-Bay, and was retaken by the Indians at New-Harbour and carried back to
Penobscot Fort: where they were both tortured at a Stake by Fire for some time,
then their Noses and Ears were cut off, and they made to eat them; after which
they were burned to Death at the Stake: The Indians at the same time declaring
that they would serve all Deserters in the same manner. Thus they divert
themselves in their Dances!

On the second Spring of my Captivity my Indian Master and his Squaw went to
Canada; SECT. II. Of their Barbarity to James Alexander, etc.
but sent me down the River, with several Indians to the Fort; in order to
plant Corn. The Day before we came to the Planting Field we met two Young
Indian Men who seemed to be in great haste: after they had passed us I
understood that they were going with an Express to Canada, and that there was
an English Vessel at the Mouth of the River. I not perfect in the Language, nor
knowing that English Vessels traded with them in time of War, supposed a Peace
was concluded on, and that the Captives would be released: and was so
transported with the Fancy, that I slept but little, if at all, that Night.
Early the next Morning we came to the Village, where the Ecstasy ended: For I
had no sooner Landed, but three or four Indians dragged me to the great Wigwam,
where they were yelling and dancing round James Alexander, a Jersey Man, who
was taken from Falmouth in Casco Bay. This was occasioned by two Families of
Cape Sable Indians, who having lost some Friends by a number of English
Fishermen, came some hundred of Miles to revenge themselves on the poor
Captives! They soon came to me, and tossed me about till I was almost
breathless, and then threw me into the Ring to my fellow Captive: and took him
out again, and repeated their Barbarities to him. And then I was haled out
again by three Indians, by the Hair of my Head, and held down by it, till one
beat me on the Back and Shoulders so long that my Breath was almost beat out of
my Body. And then others put a Tomhake into my Hand, and ordered me get up and
dance and sing Indian: which I performed with the greatest reluctance, and in
the Act seemed resolute to purchase my Death, by killing two or three of those
Monsters of Cruelty; thinking it impossible to survive their bloody Treatment;
but it was impressed on my Mind, It Is not in their Power to take away your
Life: so I desisted. Then those Cape Sable Indians came to me again like Bears
bereaved of their Whelps, saying, Shall we who have lost Relations by the
English, suffer an English Voice to be heard among us etc. Then they beat me
again with the Axe: Then I repented that I had not sent two or three of them
out of the World before me, for I though it that I had much rather die than suffer
any longer. They left me the second time, and the other Indians put the Tomhake
The Tomhake is a Warlike Club, the Shape of which may be (...) Cutts of (...),
one of the four Indian Chiefs, which (...) common amongst us.
into my Hand again, and compelled me to sing: and then I seemed more resolute
than before to destroy some of them; but a strange and strong Impulse that I
should return to my own Place and People, suppressed it as often as such a
motion rose in my Breast. Not one of the Indians showed the least Compassion:
but I saw the Tears run down plentifully on the Cheeks of a Frenchman that sat
behind; which did not alleviate the Tortures that poor James and I were forced
to endure for the most part of this tedious Day; for they were continued till
the Evening: and were the most severe that ever I met with in the whole six
Years that I was Captive with the Indians. -- After they had thus inhumanely
abused us, two Indians took us up and threw us out of the Wigwam, and we
crawled away on our Hands and Feet, and were scarce able to walk, etc. for
several Days. Some time after they again concluded on a merry Dance, when I was
at some distance from the Wigwam dressing Leather, and an Indian was so kind as
to tell me that they had got James Alexander, and were in search for me. My
Indian Master and his Squaw bid me run as for my Life into a Swamp and hide,
and not to discover my self unless they both came to me, for then I might be
assured the Dance was over. I was now master of their Language, and a Word or a
Wink was enough to excite me to take care of One. I ran to the Swamp, and hid
in the thickest place that I could find. I heard hollowing and whooping all
around me; sometimes they passed very near, and I could hear some threaten, and
others flatter me, but I was not disposed to dance: and if they had come upon
me, I resolved to show them a pair of Heels, and they must have had good luck
to have caught me. I heard no more of them till about Evening [for I think I
slept] when they came again, calling Chon, Chon, but John would not trust them.
After they were gone, my Master and his Squaw came where they told me to hide,
but could not find me; and when I heard them say with some concern, that they
believed that the other Indians had frightened me into the Woods, and that I was
lost; I came out, and they seemed well pleas'd^ and told me, that James had had
a bad Day of it; that as soon as he was released he ran away into the Woods,
and they believed he was gone to the Mohawks. James soon returned, and gave me
a melancholy Account of his Sufferings: and the Indians fright concerning the
Mohawks passed over. They often had terrible apprehension of the Incursion of
the Mohawks These are called also Maquas, a most ambitious, haughty and blood
thirsty People: from whom the other Indians take their Measures and Manners:
and their Modes and Changes of Dress etc.
. One very hot Season a great Number gathered together at the Village; A little
Comedy with your Tragedy.
and being a very droughty People, they kept James and my self Night and Day
fetching Water from a Cold Spring, that ran out of a rocky Hill about three
Quarters of a Mile from the Fort. In going thither, we crossed a large
Interval-Corn-Field, and then a Descent to a lower Interval before we ascended
the Hill to the Spring. James being almost dead as well as I, with this
continual Fatigue, contrived to fright the Indians: he told me of it, but
conjured me to Secrecy, yet said, he knew that I could keep Counsel. The next
dark Night James going for Water, set his Kettle on the descent to the lowest
Interval; and ran back to the Fort, puffing and blowing, as in the utmost
Surprise; and told his Master that he saw something near the Spring, that
looked like Mohawks: [which he said were only Stumps -- aside] his Master being
a most courageous Warrior, went with James to make discovery, and when they
came to the brow of the Hill, James pointed to the Stumps, and withal touched
his Kettle with his Toe, which gave it motion down Hill, and at every turn of
the Kettle the Bail clattered; upon which James and his Master could see a
Mohawk in every Stump on motion, and turned Tail to, and he was the best Man
that could ran fastest. This alarmed all the Indians in the Village. They though
about thirty or forty in number, packed off Bag and Baggage, some up the River
and (...) down: and did not return under fifteen Days, and the (...) of the
Weather being finely over, our hard Service (...) for (...) Season. I never
heard that the Indians understood the Occasion of the Fright, but James and I
had many a private Laugh about it.

But my most intimate and dear Companion was one John Evans, SECT. III. Of John
Evan's his Di^ficulties and Death etc.
a Young Man taken from Quochechs. We as often as we could, met together, and
made known our Grievances to each other, which seemed to ease our Minds: but
when it was known by the Indians, we were strictly examined apart, and falsely
accused, that we were contriving to desert; but we were too far from the Sea to
have any though it of that: and when they found that our Story agreed, we received
no Punishment. An English Captive Girl about this time, (who was taken by
Medocawand^) would often falsely accuse us of plotting to desert, but we made
the Truth so plainly appear, that she was checked and we released. But the
third Winter of my Captivity, he went into the Country, and the Indians imposed
a heavy Burden on him, though he was extreme Weak with long Fasting: and as he
was going off the Upland over a Place of Ice which was very hollow he broke
through, ^ell down and cut his Knee very much, notwithstanding he traveled for
some time: but the Wind and Cold were so forceable, that they soon overcame
him, and he ^at or fell down, and all the Indians passed by him: some of them
went back the next Day after him, or his Pack, and found him, with a Dog in his
Arms, both f^^ze as stiff as a Stake. And all my fellow Captives, were
dispersed and dead: but through infinite and unmerited (...) Goodness I was
supported under, and carried through all Difficulties.

CHAP. III.
Of further Difficulties and Deliverances.
ONE Winter as we were moving from Place to Place, SECT. I. Of a near escape
from Death by Frost.
our Hunters killed some Moose; and one lying some Miles from our Wigwams, a
Young Indian and my self were ordered to fetch part of it. We set out in the
Morning when the Weather was promising, but it proved a very Cold, Cloudy Day.
It was late in the Evening we arrived at the Place where the Moose lay: so that
we had no time to provide Materials for Fire or Shelter. At the same time a
Storm came on very thick of Snow, and continued till the next Morning. We made
a small Fire with what little Rubbish we could find around us, which with the
heat of our Bodies melted the Snow upon us as fast as it fell, and filled our
Clothes with Water. Nevertheless, early in the Morning, we took our Loads of
Moose-Flesh, and set out, in order to return to our Wigwams: We had not
traveled far before my Moose-Skin Coat (which was the only Garment that I had
on my Back, and the Hair was in most Places worn off) was froze stiff round my
Knees like a Hoop, as likewise my Snow-shoes and Shoe-clouts to my Feet! Thus I
marched the whole Day without Fire or Food! at first I was in great Pain, then
my Flesh numbed, and I felt at times extreme Sick, and though it I could not travel
one foot further; but wonderfully revived again. After long traveling I felt
very drowsy, and had thoughts of setting down; which had I done, without doubt
I had fallen on my final Sleep; as my dear Companion, Evans, had done before;
for my Indian Companion, being better Clothed, had left me long before: but
again my Spirits revived as much as if I had received the richest Cordial! Some
Hours after Sunset I recovered the Wigwam, and crawled in with my Snow-shoes
on. The Indians cried out, The Captive is froze to Death! They took off my
Pack, and where that lay against my Back was the only Place that was not
frozen. The Indians cut off my Shoes, and stripped the Clouts from my Feet, which
were as void of feeling as any frozen Flesh could be: but I had not ^at long by
the Fire, before the Blood began to circulate, and my Feet to my Ankles turned
black, and swelled with bloody Blisters, and were inexpressibly painful. The
Indians said one to another, His Feet will rot, and (...) die. Nevertheless, I
slept well at Night. Soon after the Skin came off my Feet from my Ankles whole
like a Shoe, and left my Toes naked without a Nail, and the ends of my great
Toe-Bones bare, which in a little time turned black, so that I was obliged to
cut the first Joint off with my Knife. The Indians gave me Rags to bind up my
Feet, and advised me to apply Fir-balsom, but withal said, that they believed
it was not worth while to use means, for I should certainly die. But by the use
of my Elbows and a Stick in each Hand, I should my self on my Bottom, over the
Snow, from one Tree to another, till I got some Fir-balsom, then burned it in a
Clam-shell till it was of a consistence like Salve, and applied it to my Feet
and Ankles, and by the divine Blessing within a Week I could go about upon my
Heels with my Staff. And through GOD's goodness, we had Provision enough, so that
we did not remove under ten or fifteen Days, and then the Indians made two
little Hoops something in Form as a Snow-shoe, and seized them to my Feet: and
I followed them in their Track on my He Is from Place to Place; sometimes half
Leg deep in Snow and Water, which gave me the most acute Pain imaginable, but I
was forced to walk or die. But within a Year my Feet were entirely well, and
the Nails came on my great Toes: so that a very critical Eye, could scarce
perceive any part missing, or that they had been froze at all!

In a Time of great scarcity of Provisions, SECT. II. -- By the Fall of a
Scaffold on my Head.
the Indians chased a large Moose into the River and killed him; and brought
the Flesh to the Village, and laid it on a Scaffold in a large Wigwam, in order
to make a Feast. I was very officious in supplying them with Wood and Water,
which pleased them so well, that they now and then gave me a piece of Flesh
half boiled or roasted, which I did eat with eagerness: and I doubt without
great Thankfulness to the divine BEING, who so extraordinarily fed me! -- At
length the Scaffold broke, and one large Piece fell and knocked me on the Head
[the Indians said that I lay stunned a considerable time] the first I was
sensible of was a murmuring Noise in my Ears, then my Sight gradually returned,
with an extreme Pain in my Head, which was very much bruised, and it was long
before I recovered, the Weather being very Hot.

I was once with an Indian fishing for Sturgeon, SECT. III. -- from drowning by
the overs^^^ing of a Canoe.
the Indian darting one, his Feet slipped and turned the Canoe bottom upwards,
with me under it; holding fast the Cross-bar (for I could not Swim) with my
Face to the bottom of the Canoe. But I turned my self and bro't my Breast to
bear on the Cross-bar: expecting every Minute, that the Indian would have towed
me to the Bank: But he had other Fish to Fry! Thus I continued a quarter of an
Hour without want of Breath, sounding for Bottom, till the Current drove me on
a Rocky Point, where I could reach Bottom; there I stopped and turned up my
Canoe. I looked for the Indian, and he was half a Mile distant up the River. I
went to him, and asked, Why he did not tow me to the Bank, seeing he knew that
I could not Swim? He said he knew that I was under the Canoe, for there were no
Bubbles any where to be seen, and that I should drive on the Point: therefore
he took care of his fine Sturgeon, which was eight or ten Feet long.

-- Fishing for Salmon at the Fall of about fifteen Feet of Water, SECT. IV.
Another Instance of preservation from drowning.
there being a deep Hole at the foot of the Fall; the Indians went into the
Water to wash themselves, and asked me to go in with them. I told them that I
could not Swim. They bid me strip [which was done] and dive across the deepest
Place, and if I fell short of the other side, they said they would help me. But
instead of diving across the narrowest, I was crawling on the bottom into the
deepest Place: but not seeing me rise, and knowing where-abouts I was, by the
bubling of the Water; a young Girl, dove into the Water, and seizing me by the
Hair of my Head, drew me out: otherwise I had perished in the Water Though both
Male and Female may be in the Water at a Time, they have each of them more or
less of their Clothes on, and behave with the utmost Chastity and Modesty.
.

While at the Indian Village, SECT. V. Of my pre^^rvati^n from being Murdered.
I had been cutting Wood, and was binding it up with an Indian-Rope in order to
carry it to the Wigwam, when a stout, ill-natured young Fellow about 20 Years
of Age, threw me backward, sat on my Breast, and pulling out his Knife, said
that he would kill me, for he had never yet killed an English Person. I told
him that he might go to War, and that would be more Manly, than to kill a poor
Captive who was doing their Drudgery for them. Notwithstanding all that I could
say, he began to cut and stab me on my Breast. I seized him by the Hair, and
tumbled him from off me on his Back, and followed him with my Fist and Knee so,
that he presently said he had enough; but when I saw the Blood run and felt the
Smart, I at him again and bid him get up and not lie there like a Dog, -- told
him of his former Abuses offered to me and other poor Captives, and that if
ever he offered the like to me again, I would pay him double. I sent him before
me, took up my Burden of Wood, and came to the Indians and told them the whole
Truth; and they commended me: And I don't remember that ever he offered me the
least Abuse afterward; though he was big enough to have dispatched two of me. I
pray GOD! I may never be forgetful of his wonderful Goodness! and that these
Instances may excite others in their Adversities to make their Addresses to the
Almighty; and put their Confidence in Him in the use of proper Means.

CHAP. IV.
Of remarkable Events of Providence in the Deaths of several barbarous Indians.
THE Priest of this River, SECT. I. The Death of those Savage CapeSable (...)
mentioned. Ch^ll Sect^^
was of the order St. Francis, a Gentleman of a humane, generous Disposition:
in his Sermons he most severely reprehended the Indians for their Barbarities
to the Captives: he would often tell them, that, excepting their Errors in
Religion, the English were a better People than themselves; and that God would
remarkably punish such cruel Wretches, and had begun to execute his Vengeance
upon such! He gave an Account of the Reta^^ations of Providence to those
murderous Cape-Sable Indians above mentioned. One of whom ran a Splinter into
his Foot, which ^ester'd and rotted his Flesh till it killed him. Another ran a
Fish-bone into her Hand or Arm, and she rotted to Death, notwithstanding all
Means that were used. In some such manner they all died, so that not one of
those two Families lived to return home. Were it not for this Remark of the
Priest, I should not, perhaps, have made the Observation.

There was an old Squaw who ever endeavored to outdo all others in Cruelty to
Captives. SECT. II. -- Of a Barbarous Old Squaw.
Wherever she came into a Wigwam, where any poor naked starved Captives were
sitting near the Fire; if they were grown Persons, she would privately take up
a Shovel of hot Coals, and throw them into their Bosom; or Young Ones, she
would take by the Hand or Leg, and drag them through the Fire etc. The Indians
according to their Custom left their Village in the Fall of the Year and
dispersed themselves for Hunting, and after the first or second removal, they
all strangely forgot that old Squaw and her Grandson about Twelve Years of Age.
They were found dead in the Place where they were left, some Months afterward,
and no further notice taken of them. This was very much observed by the Priest;
and seemed strange to all that heard it, for the Indians were generally very
careful not to leave their Old or Young!

In the latter part of Summer, or beginning of Autumn, the Indians were
frequently frighted by the Appearance of strange Indians passing up and down
this River in Canoes, SECT. III. Of a P^^gue among them
and about that Time the next Year died more than One Hundred Persons of Old
and Young: all or most of those that saw those strange Indians! The Priest
said, that it was a sort of Plague. A Person seeming in perfect Health, would
bleed at the Mouth and Nose, turn blue in Spots, and die in two or three Hours
[It was very tedious to me who was forced to move from Place to Place this cold
Season. The Indians applied red Oker to my Sores, which by GOD's Blessing cured
me.] The Indians all scattered, it being at the worst as Winter came on; and
the Blow was so great that the Indians did not Settle or Plant at the Village
while I was on the River, and I know not whether they have to this Day!

Before they thus deserted the Village, when they came in from Hunting, they
would be drunk and fight for several Days and Nights together, till they had
spent most of their Skins in Wine and Brandy, which was brought to the Village
by a French Man, called Monsieur Sige^ioncer.

CHAP. V.
Of their Familiarity with, and Frights from the Devil etc.
THE Indians are very often surprised with the Appearance of Ghosts and Demons;
SECT. I. Of their Powawing.
and sometimes encouraged by the Devil, for they go to him for Success in
Hunting etc. I was once Hunting with Indians who were not brought over to the
Romish Faith: and after several Days Hunting they proposed to inquire,
according to their Custom, what Success they should have. They accordingly
prepared many Hot-Stones, and laid them in an heap, and made a small Hutt
covered with Skins and Matts, and then in the dark Night two of the Powaws went
into this Hot-House with a large Vessel of Water, which at Times they poured on
those hot Rocks, which raised a thick Steam, so that a third Indian was obliged
to stand without, and lift up a Matt, to give it vent when they were almost
suff^cated. There was an old Squaw who was kind to Captives, and never joined
with them in their Powawing, to whom I manifested an earnest desire to see
their Management: She told me, that if they knew of my being there, they would
kill me, and that when she was a Girl, she had known Young Persons to be taken
away by an hairy Man: and therefore she would not advise me to go, lest the
hairy Man should carry me away. I told her that I was not afraid of that hairy
Man, nor could he hurt me if she would not discover me to the Powaws. At length
she promised that she would not, but charged me to be careful of my self. -- I
went within three or four Feet of the Hot-House, for it was very dark, and
heard strange Noises and Yellings, such as I never heard before. At Times the
Indian who tended without would lift up the Matt, and a Steam (...) up, which
looked like Fire in the dark. I lay there two or three Hours, but saw none of
their hairy Men or Demons: And when I found that they had finished their
Cerem^ny, I went to the Wigwam, and told the Squaw what had passed; (...) was
glad that I returned without hurt; and never discovered what I had done. After
some time, inquiry was made, what Success we were like to have in our Hunting^.
The Powaws said, that they had very likely Signs of Success, but no real,
visible Appearance as at other Times. A few Days after, we moved up the River,
and had pretty good Success.

One Afternoon as I was in a Canoe with one of the Powaws, the Dog barked, and
presently a Moose passed by, within a few Rods of us, so that the Waves which
he made by wading rolled our Canoe; the Indian shot at him, but the Moose took
very little notice of it, and went into the Woods to the Southward: the Fellow
said, I Will try if I cannot fetch you back, for all your haste. The Evening
following, we built our two Wigwams on a Sandy Point on the upper End of an
Island in the River, Northwest of the Place where the Moose went into the
Woods: and the Indian powaw'd the greatest part of the Night following, and in
the Morning we had the fair track of a Moose, round our Wigwams, though we did
not see or taste of it. -- I am of Opinion, that the Devil was permitted to
humor those unhappy Wretches sometimes, in some things.

An Indian being some Miles from his Wigwam, SECT. II. An Instance of the
Devil's frighting the Indians.
and the Weather being warm, he supposed the Hedge-Hogs would come out of their
Den, he waylaid the Mouth of it till late at Night. [See Chap. 6. Sect. 3.]
They not coming out as usual, he was going home, but had not passed far, before
he saw a Light like a Blaze, at a little distance before him, and darting his
Spear at it, it disappeared; then on the Bank of the River, he heard a loud
Laughter, with a noise like a rattling in a Man's Throat. The Indian railed at
the Demon whom he supposed made the Noise, calling it a rotten Spirit of no
Substance etc. He continued to hear the Noise and see the Light 'till he came
into the Wigwam, which he entered, in his hunting Habit, with Snow-shoes and all
on; so frighted, that, it was some time before he could speak to relate what
had happened.

That it may further appear how much they were deluded, SECT. III. (...) Indian
Fables.
or under the Influence of Satan, read two Stories which were related and
believed by the Indians.

The first; of a Boy who was carried away by a large Bird called a Gulloua, Of
an Indian carried away and returned by a Gulloua.
who builds her Nest on an high Rock or Mountain. A Boy was Hunting with his
Bow and Arrow at the Foot of a Rocky Mountain, when the Gulloua came diving
through the Air, grasped the Boy in her Talons; and though he was eight or ten
Years of Age, she soared alost, and laid him in her Nest, a Prey for her Young;
where the Boy lay constantly on his Face, but would look sometimes under his
Arms and saw two Young Ones with much Fish and Flesh in the Nest, and the old
Bird constantly beinging more. So that the young Ones not touching him, the old
One clawed him up and set him where she found him; who returned, and related
the odd Event to his Friends. As I have, in a Canoe, passed near the Mountain,
the Indians have said to me, There is the Nest of the great Bird that carried
the Boy away: And there seemed to be a great number of Sticks put together in
form of a Nest on the Top of the Mountain. At another time they said; There is
the Bird, but be is now, as a Boy to a Gians, to what he was in former Days.
The Bird which they pointed to, was a large speckled Bird, like an Eagle, though
some what larger.

The other Notion is, Of a Boy that was entertained by a (...).
That a young Indian in his Hunting was belated and lost his Way, and on a
sudden he was introduced to a large Wigwam full of dried Eels, which proved to
be a Beaver's House, in which he lived till the Spring of the Year, when he was
turned out of the House, and set upon a Beaver-Damm, and went Home, and related
the Affair to his Friends, at large. When from the Mountain-Tops, with (...) Cry
And cla^tering Wings the Hungry Harpies fly:
They Snatched --
-- And whether Gods or (...) they were,
Our Vows for Pardon and for (...)



CHAP. VI.
A Description of several Creatures commonly taken by the Indians on St. John's
River.
THE Beaver has a very thick strong Neck, SECT. I. Of the Beaver.
his fore Teeth, which are two in the upper and two in the under Jaw, are
concave and sharp like a Carpenter's Googe. Their side-Teeth are like a
Sheep's, for they chew the Cud. Their Legs are short, the Claws something
longer than in other Creatures; the Nails on the Toes of their hind Feet are
flat like an Ape's, but joined together by a Membra^^ as those of Water Fowl,
their Tails broad and flat like the broad End of a Paddle. Near their Tails
they have four Bottles, two of which contain Oil, the other Gum, the necks of
these meet in one common Orifice; the latter of these contain the proper
Castorum, and not the Testicles, as some have fancied, for the Testicles are
distinct and separate from these, in the Males only; but the Castorum and
OylBottles are common to Male and Female. With this Oil and Gum they preen
themselves, so that when they come out of the Water it runs off them, as it
does off a Fowl. They have four Teats, which are on their Breasts, so that they
hug up their Young, and suckle them, as Women do their Infants. They have
generally two and sometimes four in a Litter. I have seen seven or five in the
Matrix: but the Indians think it a strange thing to find so many in a Litter,
and they assert, that when it so happens, the Dam kills all above four. They
are the most laborious Creatures that I have met with. I have known them to
build Damms across Rivers which were thirty or forty Perch wide, with Wood and
Mud, so as to flow many Acres of Land: in the deepest part of a Pond so raised,
they build their Houses round in the Figure of an Indian Wigwam, eight or ten
Feet in height, and six or eight Feet diameter on the Floor; which is made
descending to the Water, the Parts near the Center about four, and near the
Circumference between ten and twenty Inches above the Water: These Floors are
covered with strippings of Wood like Shavings; on these they sleep with their
Tails in the Water, and if the Freshits rise they have the advantage of rising
on their Floor to the highest part. They feed on the Leaves and Bark of Trees
and Pond-Lilly-Roots. In the Fall of the Year they lay in their Provision for
the approaching Winter; cutting down Trees great and small, with one end in
their Mouths they drag their Branches near to their House, and sink many Cords
of it. [They will cut down Trees of a Fathom in Circumference.] They have Doors
to go down to the Wood under the Ice, and in case the Freshits rise, break down
and carry off their Store of Wood, they often (...). They have a Note for
conversing, calling and warning each other, when at Work or Feeding; and while
they are at Labor they keep out a Guard, who upon the first approach of an
Enemy so strikes the Water with it is Tail, that he may be heard half a Mile;
which so alarms the rest, that they are all silent, quit their Labor, and are
to be seen no more for that Time. And if the Male or Female die, the surviving
seeks a Mate, and conducts him or her to their House, and carry on Affairs as
above.

The Wolverin is a very fierce and mischievous Creature: SECT. II. Of the
Wolverin.
about the bigness of a middling Dog, having short Legs, broad Feet, and very
sharp Claws; and in my Opinion may be reckoned a Species of Cats. They will
climb Trees, and wait for Moose and other Creatures who feed below, and when an
Opportunity presents jump and strike their Claws in them so fast, that they
will hang on them 'till they have gnawed the main Nerve of the Neck asunder,
and the Creature dies. I have known many Moose killed thus. I was once
traveling a little way behind several Indians, and heard them Laughing very
merrily: when I came to them, they showed me the Track of a Moose, and how a
Wolverin had climbed a T^^e, and where he had jumped off upon the Moose; and
the Moose had given several large Leaps, and happening to come under a Branch
of a Tree, had broke the Wolverin's hold and tore him off: and by his Track in
the Snow, he went off another, with short steps, as if he had been stunned with
the Blow. The Indians who impute such Accidents to the cunning of the Creature,
were wonderfully pleased that the Moose should thus (...) the mischievous
Wolverin'

These Wolverins, go into Wigwams which have been left for any Time, scatter
the Things abroad, and most filthily pollute them with Ordure. I have heard the
Indians say, that they have haled their Guns from under their Heads, while they
were asleep; and left them so defiled. An Indian told me, that having left his
Wigwam with sundry Things on the Scaffold, among which was a Birch-Flask with
several Pounds of Powder in it: At their return they were much surpised and
grieved, for a light Snow had fallen, and a Wolverin visits their Wigwam,
mounts the Scaffold, and -- to plundering, heaves down Bag and Baggage; the
Powder happened to fall into the Fire, which filled the Wolverin's Eyes, and
threw him and the Wigwam some Rods. At length they found the blind Creature
rambling backward and forward, had the satisfaction of kicking and beating him
about, which in great measure made up their Loss: and then they could
contentedly pick up their Utensils, and rig out their Wigwam!

Our Hedgehog or Urchin is about the bigness of a Hog of six Months old, SECT.
III. Of the Hedgehog or Urchin.
his Back and Sides and Tail are full of sharp Quills, so that if any Creature
approach, they will contract themselves to a globular Form; if a Creature
attack them, those Quills are so sharp and lose in their Skins that they fix in
the Mouth of the Adversary and leave their own Skin. They will strike with
great force, with their Tails; so that whatever falls under the lash of them,
are certainly filled with their Prickles: But that they shoot their Quills, as
some assert they do, is a great mistake as to the American, and I believe as to
the African Hedgehog or Porcupine also; as to the former I have taken them at
all Seasons of the Year. See Chap. 5. Sect. 2.

It is needless to describe the fresh water Tortoise, SECT. IV. Of the (...)
whose Form is so well-known in all Parts: but their way of propagating their
Species is not so universally known. I have observed that sort whose Shell is
about fourteen or sixteen Inches wide: in their Coition or Treading they may be
heard half a Mile, making a noise like a Woman washing her Linen with a
batting Staff -- They lay their Eggs in the Sand; near some deep still Water,
about a Foot beneath the surface of the Sand. They are very curious in covering
them with the Sand, so that there is not the least mixture of it amongst them;
nor the least rising of Sand on the Beach where they lie: I have often searched
for them with the Indians, by thursting a Stick into the Sand, about the Beech
at random, and brought up some part of an Egg clinging to it: and uncovering
the Place have found near an hundred and fifty in one Nest. Both their Eggs and
Flesh are good-Eating when boiled etc. I have observed a difference as to the
length of Time which they are hatching, which is between twenty and thirty
Days, some sooner than others: Whether this difference ought to be imputed to
the various Quality or Site of the Sand in which they lay (as to it is cold or
heat etc) I leave to the Conjecture of the Virtuosi. -- As soon as they were
hatched, they broke through the Sand and betook themselves to the Water, as far
as I could discover, without any further Care or Help of the Old Ones.

Of the Salmon I shall only note, SECT. V. Of the Salmon.
that they come from the Sea early in the Spring, to the fresh Rivers; and with
great pains ascend the Falls, till they come to the Heads of the Rivers; where
the Water runs riffling over a coarse Gravel near some Pond or deep still
Water: there they work Holes to lodge in, and in the Night resort to them, by
^wo and two, the Male with his Female; thus lying together the Female ejects a
Spawn, like a Pea; the Male a Sperm like Milk, which sick among the Gravel. I
have often been fishing for them, with a Torch in the Night, when the Water
has been so shoal that they have lien with their Backs and Tails above the
Water: and if our Spear missed it is stroke, the Fish darted at, would flutter
and alarm the whole (...), (though it consisted of a vast Multitude) which
immediately repaired to the deep Water, and returned not in plenty for several
Nights. When the Leaf falls they have done (...), and return to the Sea.

CHAP. VII.
Of their Feasting, etc.
WHEN the Indians determine for War, SECT. I. Of their Feasting before they go
out to War.
or are entering upon a particular Expedition, they kill a number of their
Dogs, burn off their Hair, and cut them into Pieces; leaving only one Dog's
Head whole; the rest of the Flesh they boil, and make a fine Feast of it: after
which, the Dog's Head that was left whole is scorched, 'till the Nose and Lips
have shrunk from the Teeth, and left them bare and grinning; this done; they
fasten it on a Stick, and the Indian who is proposed to be Chief in the
Expedition takes the Head into his Hand and sings a Warlike Song: in which he
mentions the Town they design to Attack, and the principal Man in it,
threatening that in a few Days he will carry that Man's Head and Scalp in his
Hand, in the same manner. When the Chief has Sung, he so places the Dog's Head
as to grin at him whom he supposes will go his Second: who, if he accepts,
takes the Head in his Hand and sings, but if he refuse to go, he turns the
Teeth to another; and thus from one to another 'till they have inlisted their
Company.

The Indians imagine that Dog's Flesh makes them bold and courageous! I have
seen an Indian split a Dog's Head with a Hatchet, and take out the Brains hot,
and eat them raw, with the Blood running down his Jaws!

When a Relation dies; SECT. II. Of their Mourning for the Dead, and Feast
after it.
in a still Evening, a Squaw will walk on the highest Land near her abode, and
with a loud, mournful Voice exclaim, Oh hawe, hawe, hawe, with a long mournful
Tone to each hawe, for a long time together.

After the mourning Season is over, the Relations of the deceased make a Feast
to wipe off Tears; and they may Marry freely. If the deceased were a Squaw, the
Relations consult together and choose a Squaw (doubtless a Widow) and send her
to the Widower: and if he like her he takes her to be his Wife, if not, he
sends her back; and the Relations choose and send 'till they find one that he
approves of.

If a young Fellow determines to marry, SECT. III. A further Account of their
Marriages. 1st. Of a Son.
his Relations and the Jesuit advise him to a Girl: and the young Fellow goes
into the Wigwam where she is, and looks on her; and if he likes her, he tosseth
a Chip or Stick into her Lap, which she takes, and with a reserved, side-Look
views the Person who sent it; yet handles the Chip with Admiration, as though
she wondered from whence it came. If she likes him, she throws the Chip to him,
with a modest Smile; and then nothing is wanting but a Ceremony with the Jesuit
to consummate the Marriage; But if the Young Squaw dislike the Fellow, she with
a surly Countenance throws the Chip aside, and he comes no more there --.

If Parents have a Daughter^marrigeable A Virgin who has been educated, to make
Monoodah's and Bitch-Dishes, to lace Snow-Shoes and make Indian Shoes, to
string Wampum-Belts, (...) Bitch Canoes, and boil the Kettle, is esteemed as a
Lady of fine Accomplishments
, -- Of a D^u^ter.
they seek a Husband for her, who is a good Hunter. And if he have a Gun and
Ammunition, a Canoe, Spear and Hatchet; a Monoodah A Monoodah is an Indian Bag
and crooked-Knife, a looking-Glass and Paint; a Pipe, Tobacco and Knot-Bowl to
toss a kind of Dice in, he is accounted a Gentleman of a plentiful Fortune. [By
their sort of Dice they lose much Time, playing whole Days and Nights together:
and sometimes their whole Estate: though this is accounted a great Vice by the
Old Men.] Whatever the new-married-Man procures the first Year belongs to his
Wife's Parents. [If the young Pair have a Child within a Year and nine Months,
they are though it to be very forward, libidinous Persons.]

There is an old Story told among the Indians of a Family, SECT. IV. A
Digression containing on Account o^ a Rape committed by a Demon.
who had a Daughter that was accounted a finished Beauty, and adorned with the
precious Jewel of an Indian Education! So formed by Nature and polished by Art
they could not find for her a suitable Consort! At length, while they resided
on the Head of Penobscot River, under the White-Hills called the Teddon, this
fine Creature was missing; and her Parents could have no Account of her. -- Of
the (...) Hills (...) the (...), etc
After much Time spent, Pains, and Tears show'red in quest of her; they saw
her, diverting her self with a beautiful Youth, whose Hair like here is flowed
down below his Waste, Swiming, Washing, etc. in the Water; but the Youths
vanished upon their Approach (...)
. This beautiful Person, whom they imagined to be one of those kind Spirits who
inhabit the Teddon; they looked upon him as their Son-in-Law: so that
(according to Custom) they called upon him for Moose, Bear, or what ever
Creature they desired, and if they did but go to the Waterside and signify
their desire, the Creature which they would have, came Swimming to them!

I have heard an Indian say, that he lived by the River at the Foot of the
Teddon, and in his Wigwam, seeing the top of it through the Hole left in the top
of the Wigwam for the passing of Smoke, he was tempted to travel to it:
accordingly he set out early on a Summer's Morning, and labored hard in
ascending the Hill all Day, and the Top seemed as distant from the Place where
he lodged at Night, as from the Wigwam whence he began his Journey: and
concluding that Spirits were there, never dare make a second Attempt.

I have been credibly informed that several others have failed in the same
Attempt: particularly, that three young Men tow^'d the Teddon three Days and an
half, and then began to be strangely disordered and delirious, and when their
Imagination was clear, and they could recollect where they were, and had been;
they found themselves returned one Days Journey: how they came down so far,
they cannot guess, unless the Genii of the Place conveyed them! These White
Hills at the Head of Penobscot River, are, by the Indians, said to be much
higher than those, called Agiockochock, above Saco.

But to return to an Indian Feast, SECT. (...) Of (...) Feasts.
of which you (...) ^^quest a Bill of Fare, before you go; and if you (...) it
stay at Home. The Ingredients are Fish, Flesh, or Indian Corn and Beans boiled
together --, or Hasty-Pudden made of pounded Corn: Whenever and as often as
these are plenty; an Indian boils four or five large Kettles full, and sends a
Messenger to each Wigwam-Door; who exclaim^, Kub Menscoorebab! i. e. I come to
conduct you to a Feast: The Man within demands whether he must take, a Spoon,
or a Knife in his Dish which he always carries with him. They appoint two or
three Young Men to Mess it out, to each Man his Portion according to the number
of his Family at Home; which is done with the utmost exactness (...)
. When they have done eating, a young Fellow stands without the Door, and cries
aloud Menscommook, Come and fetch! Immediately each Squaw goes to her Husband
and takes what he has left, which she carries Home and eats with her Children.
For neither married Women nor any Youth under twenty years of Age are allowed
to be present: but old Widow-Squaws and Captive Men may set by the Door. The
Indian Men continue in the Wigwam, some relating their Warlike Exploits; others
something Comical; others give a Narrative of their Hunting; the Seniors give
maxims of Prudence and grave Counsels to the Young Men: though every ones Speech
be agreeable to the run of his own Fancy, yet they confine themselves to Rule,
and but one speaks at a Time. After every Man has told his Story, One rises up,
Sings a Feast-Song, and others succeed alternately as the Company see fit.

Necessity is the Mother of Invention. SECT. VI. Their extraordinary ways of
getting Fire and boiling their Food
If an Indian have lost his Fire-Work, he can presently take two Sticks, the
one harder than the other (the drier the better) and in the softest make an
Hollow or Socket, to which they will fit one end of the hardest Stick; then
holding the softest Wood fi^m between their Knees; they fix the end of the hard
Stick made fit into the Socket, and whirl it round in their Hand like a Drill,
and it takes Fire in a few Minutes.

If they have lost or left their Kettle, it is but putting the Victuals into a
Birch-Dish, leaving a vacancy in the middle, filling it with Water, and putting
in hot Stones alternately: and they will thus thro'ly boil the toughest Neck of
Beef.

CHAP. VIII.
Of my three Years Captivity with the French.
WHEN about six Years of my doleful Captivity had past, SECT. I. Of a
Contention among the Indians, which caused them to sell me to the French.
my second Indian Master dyed, whose Squaw and my first Indian Master disputed
whose Slave I should be; and some malicious Persons advised them to end the
Quarrel by putting a Period to my Life: but honest Father Simon, the Priest of
the River, told them that it would be a heinous Crime, and advised them to sell
me to the French. There came annually one or two Men of War to Supply the Fort,
which was on the River about thirty four Leagues from the Sea: The Indians
having Advice of the Arrival of a Man of War at the Mouth of the River, they,
about thirty or forty in Number went aboard: For the Gentlemen from France made
a Present to them every Year, and set forth the Riches and Victories of their
Monarch etc. at this Time they presented a Bag or two of Flour with some (...),
as Ingredients for a Feast. I, who was dressed up in an old greasy Blanket,
without Cap, Hat or Shirt, (for I had no Shirt for the six Years, but that
which was on my Back when I was taken) was invited into the great Cabin, where
many well rigged Gentlemen were sitting, who would sain have had a full view of
me: I endeavored to hide my self behind the Hangings, for I was much ashamed;
thinking of my former wearing Clothes, and of my living with People who could
rigg as well as the best of them. My (...) asked me, Whether I chose to be sold
aboard the Man of War, or to the Inhabitant^? I replied with Tears, I should be
glad if you would sell me to the English (...) whom you took me; but if I must
be sold to the French, I choose to be Sold to the lowest on the River, or
nearest Inhabitant to the Sea, about twenty-five Leagues from the Mouth of the
River: for I though it, that, if I were sold to the Gentlemen aboard the Man of
War, I should never (...) to the English. This was the first sight I had of
Salt Water in my Captivity, and the first time that I had tasted Salt (...)
Bread.

My Master presently went ashore, SECT. II. Of my being ^old to the French.
and after a few Days all the Indians went up the River; and when we came to
the House which I mentioned to my Master, he went ashore with me and tarried
all Night: the Master of the House spoke kindly to me in Indian, for I could
not then speak one Word of French: Madam also looked pleasant on me, and gave
me some Bread. The next Day I was sent six Leagues further up the River to
another French House. My Master and the Friar tarried with Mon^^e^r (...), the
Gentleman who had entertained us the Night before. Not long after, Father Simon
came and said, Now you are one of us, for you are sold to that Gentleman by
whom you were entertained the other Night. I replied; -- Sold! -- to a
Frenchman! -- I could say no more! -- went into the Woods alone and wept till I
could scarce see or stand! The word Sold, and that to a People of that
Persuasion, which my dear Mother so much detested, and in her last Words
manifested so great Fears of my falling into! -- the Thoughts of these almost
broke my Heart! When I had given vent to my Passions, I rubbed my Eyes,
endeavoring to hide my Grief: But Father Simon perceiving that my Eyes were
swollen, called me aside; and bid me not to grieve: for the Gentleman to whom I
was sold was of a good humor, that he had formerly bought two Captives of the
Indians, who both went home to Boston; this in some measure revived me. But he
added, that, he did not suppose that I would ever incline to go to the English,
for the French way of Worship was much to be preferred: also, that he should
pass that way in about ten Days, and if I did not like to live with the French
better than with the Indians, he would buy me again. On the Day following,
Father Simon and my Indian Master went up the River six and thirty Leagues, to
their Chief Village, and I went down the River six Leagues with two Frenchmen
to my new Master: Who kindly received me, and in a few Days Madam made me an
O^nabrigs Shirt and French Cap, and a Coat out of one of my Master's old Coats;
then I threw away my greasy Blanket and Indian Flap, and looked as smart as --.
And I never more saw the old Friar, the Indian Village, or my Indian Master,
till about fourteen Years after I saw my Indian Master at Port Royal whither I
was sent by the Government, with a Flag on Truce, for exchanging Prisoners: and
again about twenty four Years since he came (...) St. John's to George's to see
me, where I made him very welcome.

My French Master held a great Trade with the Indians, SECT. III. Of my
Employment among the French.
which suited me very well, I being through in the Languages of the Tribes at
Cape Sable's and St. John's. I had not lived long with this Gentleman before he
committed to me the Keys of his Store etc. and my whole Employment was Trading
and Hunting; in which I acted faithfully for my Master, and never knowingly
wronged him to the value of one Farthing. They spoke to me so frequently in
Indian, that it was some time before I was perfect in the French Tongue.
Monsieur generally had his Goods from the Man of War which came there annually
from France.

In the Year 1696 two Men of War came to the Mouth of the River, which had
taken the New-Port, Capt. Paxton Commander, and brought him with them: They
made the Indians some Presents, and invited them to join in an Expedition to
Pemmaquid, which Invitation they accepted, and so (...) arrived there; and
Capt. Chubb (...) Dr. Mather says wittily (as he said every thing) (...) (...)
found Opportunity in a pretty Chubbish manner, to kill the famous Edgeremet and
Ahenquid, a couple of principal Indians, with one or two other Indians, on a
Lord's Day, the sixteenth of February 1695 If there were any unfair Dealing in
this Action of Chubb, there will be another February, not far off, wherein the
Avenger of Blood will take their Satisfaction. Hist of N. E. B. 7. P. 79.
delivered the Fort, without much dispute, to Monsieur Debervel their Chief; as
I heard the Gentleman say whom I lived with, who was there present Our last
quoted Author says, on the fourth or fifth of August, Chubb with an
unaccountable ba^^^ess did Surrender the Brave Fort of Pemmaquid into their
Hands. "Unthinking Men no sort of Scruples make;
"And some are bad, only for Mischief's sake;
"But even the Best are guilty by Mistake.

. Early in the Spring I was sent, with three Frenchmen, to the Mouth of the
River, for Provision which came from Port Royal. We carried over Land, from the
River to a large Bay, where we were driven on an Island by a North-East Storm,
and were kept there seven Days, without any Sustenance, for we expected a quick
Passage and carried nothing with us; the Wind continuing bois^erous, so that we
could not return back, and the Ice prevented our going forward: After seven
Days the Ice broke up, and we went forward, though we were so weak that we could
scarce hear each other speak; and the People at the Mouth of the River were
surprised to see us so feeble; and advised us to be cautious and abstemious in
eating. By this Time, I knew as much of Fasting as they, and dieted on Broth,
and recovered very well, as also one of the others did; but the other two would
not be advised: and I never saw any Persons in greater Torment than they were,
till they obtained a Passage -- on which they recovered.

A Friar who lived in the Family invited me to Confession, SECT. IV. Of the
Frya^'s transaction while I was among them.
but I excused my self as well as I could. One Evening he took me into his
Apartment, in the dark, and advised me to confess to him what Sins I had
committed: I told him, that I could not remember a thousandth part of them
(they were so numerous:) Then he bid me remember and relate as many as I could,
and he would pardon them; signifying that he had a Bag to put them in. I told
him that I did not believe that it was in the power of any but GOD to pardon
Sin. He asked me, whether I had read the Bible? I told him that I had when I
was a little Boy, so long since, that I had forgot most of it. Then he told me,
that he did not pardon my Sins; but when he knew them he prayed GOD to pardon
them: when, perhaps I was at my Sports and Plays. -- He wished me well, and
hoped that I should be better advised, and said that he should call for me in a
little Time: Thus he dismissed and never called me to Confession more.

The Gentleman whom I lived with had a fine Field of Wheat, Of a Jesuit's
Ceremony to break up the Haunt of Black Birds.
which great numbers of Black Birds, visited; and destroyed much of. But the
French said a Jesuit would come and banish them; who came at length, and all
things were prepared, viz. a Basin of, what they call, Holy Water,; a Staff
with a little Brush to sprinkle withal, and the Jesuit's white Robe, which he
put on. [I asked several Prisoners, who had lately been taken by Privateers and
brought hither, viz. Mr. Woodberry, Cocks, and Morgan, whether they would go
and see the Ceremony? Mr. Woodberry asked me, whether I designed to go? I told
him that I did. He said, that I was then as bad a Papist as they, and a d --
n'd Fool. I told him that I believed as little of it as they did, but I
inclined to see the Ceremony, that I might rehearse it to the English.] They
entered the Field and walked through the Wheat in Procession, a young Lad going
before the Jesuit with a Basin of their Holy Water; then the Jesuit with his
Brush, dipping it into the Basin, and sprinkling the Field on each side of him;
next him a little Bell tingling, and about thirty Men following in order,
Singing, with the Jesuit, Ora pro N^bis; at the End of the Field they Wheeled
to the Left about, and returned. Thus they went through the Field of Wheat, the
Birds rising before them and lighting behind them. At their return I said to a
French Lad; The Friar has done no S^^vice, -- He had better take a Gun and
shoot the Birds. (...) Lad left me a while (I though it, to ask the Jesuit what to
say) and when he returned, he said, the Sins of the People were so great, that
the Friar could not prevail against those Creatures. The same Jesuit as vainly
attempted to banish the Musche^oes at Sigenecto, for the Sins of that People
were so great also, that he could not prevail against them, but rather drew
more as the French informed me^

Some Time after Col Hawthorn attempted the taking the French Fort up this
River: SECT. V. 1696. A^ Party of English Soldiers Attempt the taking Fort
(...).
we heard of them some time before they came up the River, by the Guard that
Governor Vielbon had ordered at the River's Mouth. Monsieur, the Gentleman
whom I lived with was gone to France; and Madam (...) with me -- She then
desired me to nail the Paper on (...) of our House (...)
, containing as follows:

I entreat the General of the English not to burn my House or Barn, nor destroy
my Cattle. I don't suppose that such a^ Army come up this River to destroy a
few Inhabitants; but for the Fort above us. I have shown Kindness to the
English Captives as we were Capacitated, and have bought (...) Captives of the
Indians and sent them to Boston: and have One now with us, and he shall go also
when a convenient Opportunity presents, and he desires it.

This done, Madam said to me;

Little English; We have shown you Kindness; and now it lies (...) your Power
to serve or disserve us, as you know where our Goods are hid in the Woods, and
that Monsieur is not at Home. I could have sent you to the Fort and put you
under Confinement, but my Respects to you, and assurance of your Love to us;
has disposed me to confide in you, persuaded that you will not hurt us nor our
Affairs. And now if you will not run away to the English who are coming up the
River, but serve our Interest, I will acquaint Monsieur of it at his return
from France, which will be very pleasing to him: And I now give my Word, that,
you shall have liberty to go to Boston on the first Opportunity (if you desire
it) or that any other Favor, in my Power, shall not be denied you.

I replied; Madam; It is contrary to the Nature of the English to requite Evil
for Good. I shall endeavor to serve you and your Interest I shall not run to
the English, but if I am taken by them, shall willingly go with them, and yet
endeavor not to disserve you either in your Persons or Goods.

This said, We embarked and went in a large Boat and Canoe two or three Miles
up an Eastern-Branch of the River that comes from a large Pond: and in the
Evening sent down four Hands to make discovery; and while they were setting in
the House the English surrounded it and took one of the four; the other those
made their escape, in the dark, through the English Soldiers, and came to us,
and gave a surprising Account of Affairs. Again, Madam said to me, Little
English; Now you can go from us, but I hope you will remember your Word! I
said, Madam, Be not concerned; for I will not leave you in this Strait. She
said, I know not what to do with my two poor little Babes! I said, Madam, the
sooner we embark and go over (...) great Pond the better. Accordingly we
embarked and went over the Pond. The next Day we spoke with Indians, who (were
in a Canoe and) gave us an Account that Sigenecto-Town was taken and burnt.
Soon after we heard the great Guns at Governor Vielbon's Fort, which the
English engaged several Days, killed one Man, and drew off and went down the
River; for it was so late in the Fall, that had they tarried a few Days longer,
in the River; they would have been froze in for the Winter. Hearing no report
of the great Guns for several Days, I with two others went down to our House,
to make discovery --: where we found our young Lad who was taken by the English
when they went up the River: For the General was so honorable that, on reading
the Note on our Door, he ordered that the House and Barn should not be burnt,
nor their Cattle or other Creatures killed; except one or two, and the Poultry,
for their Use: and at their return, ordered the young Lad to be put ashore.
Finding things in this Posture, we returned and gave Madam an Account: -- She
acknowledged the many Favors which the English had shown her with Gratitude;
and treated me with great Civility. The next Spring, Monsieur arrived from
France in the Man of War; who thanked me for my Care of his Affairs, and said
that he would endeavor to fulfill what Madam had promised to me.

And accordingly in the Year School, SECT. VI. Of my ^^lease, (...) to my Friends.
the Peace being proclaimed, and a Sloop come to the Mouth of the River, with a
Ransom for one Michael Cooms; (...) Monsieur in mind of his Word: I told him
that there was now an Opportunity for me to go and see the English. He advised
me to tarry, and told me that he would do for me as for his own etc. I thanked
him for his Kindness, but chose rather to go to Boston, for I hoped that I had
some Relations yet alive. Then he advised me to go up to the Fort and take my
Leave of the Governor: which I did, and he spoke very kindly etc. Some Days
after I took my Leave of Madam; Monsieur went down to the Mouth of the River
with me to see me safe aboard, and asked the Master, Mr. Starkee, a Scotch Man,
whether I must pay for my Passage? if so, he would pay it himself rather than I
should have it to pay at my Arrival at Boston, but gave me not a penny. The
Master told him that there was nothing to pay, and that if the Owner should
make any Demand, he would pay it himself rather than a poor Prisoner should
suffer, for he was glad to see any English Person come out of Captivity.

On the (...) of June I took my leave of Monsieur, and the Sloop came to Sail
for Boston; where we arrived on the (...) of the same at Night. In the Morning
after my Arrival, a Youth came on Board, and asked many Questions relating to
my Captivity, and at length gave me to understand that he was my little
Brother, who was at Play with some other Children, and upon hearing the Guns
and seeing the Indians run, made their escape to the Fort, and went off with
the Captain and People: and that my Elder Brother who made his Escape from the
Farm, whence I was taken, and our two little Sisters, were alive, and that our
Mother had been dead some Years, etc. as above related. Then we went ashore,
and saw our Elder Brother etc.

On the second of August 1689, I was taken, and on the (...) of June School,
arrived at Boston: so that I was absent eight Years ten Months and (...) Days:
In all which Time, though I underwent extreme Difficulties; yet I saw much of the
Goodness of GOD.

May the most powerful and beneficent BEING, accept of this public. Testimony
of it, and bless my Experiences to excite others to confide in his
All Sufficiency, through the infinite Me^ite of JESUS CHRIST!

APPENDIX.
Containing Minutes of the Employments, Public Stations etc. of John Gyles,
Esquire Commander of the Garrison on St. George's River.
AFter my return out of Captivity June 28 th. School, I applied my self to the
Government for their Favor --. Soon after I was employed by old Father Mitchel
of Mald^n, to go his Interpreter on Trading Account to St. John's River.

October 14. School, I was employed by the Government, Lieut. Governor STOUGHTON
Commander in Chief, to go Interpreter, at Three Pounds per Month, with Major
Converse, and old Capt. Alden, to Penobscot to fetch Captives -- at our return
to Boston I was dismissed. But within a few Days the Governor sent for me to
Interpret a Conference with Bommazeea and other Indians then in Goal.

Sometime after I was again put in Pay in order to go Interpreter with Col.
Phillips and Capt. Southack in the Province Galley to Cases Bay, to Exchange
said Indians for English Captives. December School, we returned to Boston with
several English Captives, and I was dismissed the Service, and desired to
attend it in the Spring. I pleaded to be kept in Pay that I might have
wherewith to support me at School -- I went into the Country to Rowley (where
Boarding was cheap) to practice what little I had attained at School.

March 1699. With the little of my Wages that I could reserve, I paid for my
Schooling and Board, and attended the Service upon Request; and was again put
into Pay, and went with Col. Phillips and Major Converse in a large Brigantine
up Kenebeck River, for Captives: and at our return to Boston, the Province
Galley being arrived from New York with my Lord BILLEMONY, and the Province
Truck put on board, I was ordered on board the Galley; we Cruised the Eastern
Shore: And in November 1699, I was put out of Pay, though I pleaded to be
continued under Pay seeing I must attend the Service in the Spring, and be at
considerable Expense in the Winter for my Schooling.

In the Spring 1700, I attended the Service and was put into Pay -- 27 th. of
August -- Orders from the Government to build a Fort at Cases Bay, which was
finished October 6 th. and the Province-Truck landed and I ordered to reside,
as Interpreter, with a Captain etc. in said Garrison. Not long after Governor
DUDLET sent me a Lieutenants Commission with Memorandum on the back -- No
further Pay but as Interpreter at Three Pounds per Month.

August 10 th. 1703. The French and Indians besieged our Fort six Days, Major
March Commander: On the 16 th. Day of the same, Capt. (...) arrived in the
Province Galley, and the Night following the Enemy withdrew.

May 19 th. 1704. I received a few Lines from His Excellency directing me to
leave my Post and accompany Col. Church on an Expedition ^ound the Bay of
F^nd^e. September following I returned to my Post without any further Wages or
Encouragement for that Service than the before mentioned Pay at the Garrison.

April 1706. There was a Change of the Chief Officer at our Garrison -- I chose
to be dismissed with my old Officer -- which was granted.

1706. His Excellency Governor DUDLEY presented me a Captain's Commission, and
ordered Col. Salte^stail to detach fifty effective Men, to be delivered to me
in order for a March --.

May 1707 I entered on an Expedition to Port Royal, Col. March Commander in
Chief, -- at return dismissed.

May 12 th. 1708. I received Orders from His Excellency to go to Port Royal
with a Flag of Truce to exchange Prisoners, and brought off all -- at return
dismissed.

1709. I received a Commission, and Col. Noyes had Orders to detach forty Men
and deliver to me, in order to join the Forces for Canada. At Hull, August 1
st. 1709, I received Orders from His Excellency to leave my Company with my
Lieutenant, and go to Port Royal with a Flag of Truce to Exchange Prisoners.

A Copy of which Desire or Order is as follows, viz.

Boston, August 1 st. 1709. Sir,
I Desire you to Embarque on the Sloop Hannah and Ru^^, Thomas Waters, Master,
a Flag of Truce for Port Royal, to whom when you are on board, you will give
Orders to Sail to Port Royal accordingly.

At your Arrival there attend Mr. S^percass the Governor, and give him my
Letter, withal acquainting him you have Nine French Prisoners on Board, which
are all that are in my Hands without reserve Receive his Direction for the
Landing of 'em: And let him know that I expect he do me a like Justice in (...)
have all the English Prisoners within his Power, which you are to demand and
(...) on agreably to his own promise last Year by your self. Demand to have
them forthwith gathered together, that you may see and speak with them, and
have them delivered to you, that you be not delayed.

Observe to him my just Resentment of his breach upon me, in not sending them
early this Spring, according to his parole of Honor the last Year by your
self; when I returned him upwards of Forty, and had made Provision for the
bringing home of mine: His detention of them then, puts me to a repeated Charge.

I expect he supply what may be further necessary for the Support of the
Prisoners in their Return, as I have done for his now, and at all times past.

Let not your stay there be more than six Days, if possible, and hasten back
with all imaginable Expedition.

Be not by any means diverted from your demand and expectation of seeing the
English Prisoners, and that you bring them with you; unless on your speaking
with them they are not willing to come, but make their Election to be
Transported elsewhere; as you have seen done by your Governor here.

I have ordered the Master to attend your Orders. He will show you his
Instructions, and I desire you will see they be strictly observed, particularly
in the Article referring to Trade, and the Government of his Company. I wish
you a prosperous Voyage.

And am, Sir, Your Friend and Servant, J. DUDLEY.
Make particular Inquiry after Capt. (...), and demand his and Company's
Release.

(...) Capt. John Gyles, (...) to Port Royal.




(...) at Port Royal, I was again kindly entertained by (...) (...), and
brought off above an Hundred Prisoners: soon after my return our Forces were
dismissed, and I received no further consideration for my Service than Pay as
Captain of my Company.

August. 1715. I was desired and had great Promises made me by the Proprietors,
and received Orders from His Excellency, to build a Fort at (...). Soon after
our Arrival there, the Indians came (...) the Night, and forbid our laying one
Stone upon another. I told (...) I came with Orders from Governor DUDLEY to
build a Fort, and if they disliked it they might aquaint him of it: and that if
they came forceably upon us they or I should fall on the Spot: After such like
hot Words they left us, and we went on with our Building, and (...) it November
25 th. 1715, and our Carpenters and Masons left us. My Wages were very small,
yet the Gentlemen-Proprietors ordered me only Five Pounds for my good Service
etc.

July 12 th. 1722. A number of Indians engaged Fort George about two Hours,
killed one Person, and then drew off to killing Cattle etc.

April 1725. I received Orders from His Honor Lieut. Governor DUMMER to go
ten Days March up Ammiscoggin River; and in my Absence the Indians killed two
Men at our Fort; -- I received no further Pay for said Service, -- only the Pay
of the Garrison.

December 12 th. 1725. I was dismissed from Fort George, and Capt. Woodside
received a Commission for the Command of that Place.

December 13 th. 1725. I was Commissioned for the Garrison on St. George's
River.

September 1726. I was detained some Months from my Post, by order of His
Honor Lieut Governor DUMMER, Commander in Chief, to Interpret for the
Cape-Sable Indians, who were brought in and found Guilty of Piracy, there not
being any other in the Province that had their Language; for which His Honor
and the honorable Council presented me Ten Pounds; which I gratefully received.

November 28. 1728. I was Commissioned for the Peace.

I have had the Honor to serve this Province under eight Commanders in Chief,
Governors and Lieut. Governors, from the Year School, to the Year 1736. And how
much longer my Service may continue -- I submit to the Governor of the World,
who overrules every Circumstance of Life which relates to our Happiness and
Usefulness, as in infinite Wisdom He sees meet.

Be calm, my D^lius, and Serene,
However (...) change the Scene^
In thy most (...) State,
Sink not (...) the Weight;
Nor yet when Happy Days begin,
And the full Tide comes rolling (...),
Let not a fierce unruly Joy
The settled Quiet of thy Mind destroy
However Fortune change the Scene,
Be (...), my (...), and Serene.
Horace
ERRATUM. Page 1 line 4 from the bottom read, so (...). p. 14. l. 26. r. as I p
15 l. ^6 ^. (...) p. 25. l. 36. r. another way p. ^4. l. 16. for to ^ from. p.
39. l. 1^. r. and. l 2^ for (...) r. 2^ th l 23. for 19 th r. 28 th l ^6. for
19 th. r. 28 th (...) for ^^. r. 26.


