Mr. Foxcroft's Funeral Sermon FOR The Reverend Mr. Wadsworth.

Elisha lamenting after the GOD of Elijah.

A Funeral Sermon Preached at Boston, March 27. 1737. Occasioned by the DEATH
of the Reverend Mr. BENJAMIN WADSWORTH, Late President of Harvard-College in
Cambridge, and formerly Pastor of the Old Church in Boston. WHO departed this
Life on March 16 th. Having just entered the 68 th Year of his Age.

By Thomas Foxcroft, Sometimes Colleague-Pastor with him.

2 Kin. 3.11. Here is Elisha, which poured Water on the Hands of Elijah.

2 Timothy 3.10. Thou have fully known my Doctrine, manner of Life, Purpose,
Faith, Longsuffering, Charity, Patience.

BOSTON, New England, Printed by T. Fleet, for SAMUEL ELIOT in Cornhill, and
JOHN PARKER at the Head of the Town-Dock. 1737.

To the Old or First Church in BOSTON.
Dearly Beloved,
IT was a sincere and high Respect for the Memory of my Reverend Father, your
late excellent Pastor, together with a View to your Edification, which induced
me to entertain you, in my public Discourse on the Sabbath after his Funeral,
with some Meditations suited to the mournful Occasion of his Death: and I doubt
not, the same Principles had their Influence in putting You upon so unanimous a
Vote, to ask a Copy for the Press.

I need not observe to You, with what Disadvantages a Performance of this
Nature from me (under my present Indispositions) must appear; while the
necessary Care of my broken Health forbids that Application of Thought and Care
of Exactness, proper in preparing and publishing a Sermon on such a Subject and
Occasion: which would have sufficiently pleaded in my Excuse, if I had declined
the Press. However, in Deference to your Judgment and Request, I have
sacrificed my own Inclinations; and venture into the public Light, hoping for
the same Candor to an imperfect Discourse from others in the reading, as it
met with from You in the hearing. It must be allowed, that an affected Niceness
of Method and Ornaments of Language make but an odd Figure in a melancholy
Funeral Sermon: and therefore I give you mine very much in its original
inaccurate Dress; though with some few Additions, which the scant Limits of a
single Hour obliged me to omit in the Pulpit.

As to the Character of the Deceased, so far as I went into it, it is a
Satisfaction to me, that I have your Concurrence: for the World must think your
printing the Sermon a loud Attestation to the Justice of my Observations on
that head. I spoke indeed with the greater Freedom, because in your hearing,
who could witness I spoke in the Words of Truth and Soberness.

It was the known Principle and Practice of the deceased Servant of God to use
a remarkable Caution and Modesty of Speech an such Occasions; nor could he
relish the flowery Pomp of Funeral Oratory, so common, and so often abused, in
praising the Dead, to flatter the Living: Yet where any appeared to him Persons
of distinguished Merits, and such as by general Suffrage would be allowed to
have something due to their Memory, he would set an Asterism on their
honorable Names, recommend their bright Example to Imitation, and speak of
their excellent Gifts, Graces, and Services, to the Honor of that God, who
blessed them, and made them Blessings to their Generation. Witness in
particular his Funeral Sermon for the late Rev. Mr. Thomas Bridge, his worthy
Colleague in the Pastoral Relation, and my immediate Predecessor: The Text and
the Discourse most sitly applicable for the Author's own Funeral Sermon. And
accordingly I recommend it to your serious Review on this Occasion.

I take Leave now to remind You, with what a numerous Succession of eminent
Lights this golden Candlestick has been distinguished. You have had your
Wilson, Cotton, Norton, Davenport, Oxenbridge, Allen, Bridge, and Wadsworth;
precious Gifts to you from our ascended Savior, Pastors and Teachers, who have
fed You with Knowledge and Understanding: Besides whom, You have enjoyed the
occasional Labors of several worthy Assistants ( Moodey and Bailey in
particular) for many Months, or Years together. Your evangelical Advantages
surely have been great: and if your spiritual Improvements be not in some
Proportion, your Account will be awful. And for my own part, when I consider, I
am afraid. It has often been a solemn Thought with me, In whose Room I stood
up; what aged, learned, laborious, wise, and venerable Men of God have
successively gone before me in this holy Ministry: and the Reflection has been
very humbling to me, by a Sense of my own comparative Insufficiency,
Inexperience, Unworthiness, Nothingness. Sure I am, I Have the greatest Reason to
stand astonished at the Divine Patience toward me: and to admire your Candor
to me, your kind Acceptance of my Labors, and the generous Tokens of your Love
in Reward of them, while I have been with many Imperfections ministering among
You, now full 20 Years. And though according to the general Run of human Life, I
may have still many Days to serve You; yet the surprising Blow of God's
chastning Hand upon me, not many Months since (when all about my Bed concluded
me under a Sentence of Death) and my habitual Infirmities in Consequence
thereof, did awfully warn me, and do daily admonish me, not to expect a long
Continuance in this present evil World. O join your Prayers with mine, that a
Life so wonderfully reprieved from Destruction, may be employed more than ever
for the Glory of God and the Service of your Souls, to which I hope it is
sincerely devoted; and that when called from You (God only knows how soon or
suddenly) I may be found with my Work done, and my Accounts ready, and may
finish my Course with Joy. I wish you a durable, as well as great Blessing, in
my dear Colleague, your other Pastor! And this I pray, that your Love may
abound yet more and more in Knowledge and in all Judgment; that ye may approve
Things that are excellent, and continue in the things which ye have learned,
and be watchful to strengthen the Things which remain that are ready to die.

Let us all concur in heartily lamenting the great and growing Degeneracies of
the present Day: and let us unite our fervent Prayers, our solicitous Cares,
and strenuous Endeavors for the happy Resurrection and Flourishing of Religion
and Virtue among us, which is our Life, our truest prosperity, and brightest
Crown. Surely it is Time to seek the Lord, till He come and rain Righteousness
upon us.

And have we not Reason to lay to Heart the many sorrowful Instances of
Mortality, we have seen in the Course of a very few Years, among our Pious and
Useful, and our Aged and Honorable? For behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts,
does take away from us the Stay and the Staff, the Judge, and the Prophet, and
the Prudent, and the Ancient, the honorable Man, and the Counselor, the
cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Orator. Verily by repeated Losses of Men of
Note in the Congregation, a holy sovereign God has been not only lessening our
Number, but thinning our Glory, impoverishing our Treasury, and weakening our
Strength. Their hoary Heads were a visible Ornament in our Assembly; their
shining Characters reflected a superior Luster upon it; and their several
Interests, Powers, and active Virtues abundantly strengthened our Hands, and
encouraged our Hearts. But now a melancholy Emptiness is seen, where they used
to appear and act. Alas, how sadly do we miss them! What lamentable Vacancies
do we behold in one Seat and another; and few of the like excellent Spirit and
Talents succeeding to fill up their Places! Have me not Reason to cry out, with
the Prophet! O Lord God, cease, I beseech Thee; by whom shall Jacob arise? for
he is small. -- Come and let us return to the Lord: for He has torn, and He
will heal us; He has smitten, and He will bind us up.

We are bleeding particularly by a fresh and deep Wound (...) the Decease of
that good and merciful Man, one of our worthy and faithful Deacons, the late
Mr. Jonathan Williams; over whose Grave I cannot refrain dropping a Tear of
Condolence with You, and paying a small Tribute to his Memory. May the God of
all Grace sanctify the Death of his Servant to the bereaved Children and
Relatives, to his mournful Brethren in Office, and to us all! We have lost in
him the amiable Example of a devout, just, peaceable, charitable, and humble
Christian, and the valuable Help of a very active, prudent, and useful Servant
of the Church. The main Qualifications of a Deacon, as they are laid down by
the inspired Apostle in his Epistle to Timothy, were visible in this our
Brother; Gravity, Integrity, Temperance, Generosity, sound Faith, and a pure
Conscience. We must bear him this Testimony, that he has used his Office well;
and having served his Generation according to the Will of God, he is (with
Stephen) fallen asleep. But if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even
so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him: and for our further
Consolation, in the mean time, we see Jesus who was made a little lower than
the Angels, for the suffering of Death, crowned with Glory and Honor; Head
over all things to his Church, and the Savior of the Body. Having ascended up
on high, he has received Gifts for Men: and of his Fullness may we still look to
receive, even Grace for Grace, Blessing upon Blessing. Ye that make Mention of
the LORD, keep not Silence: and give Him no Rest, till He establish, and till
He make our Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth, as in former Years, and as in the
Days of old; even until the Righteousness thereof go forth as Brightness; and
the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns. Let it be your Prayer day and
night, that a gracious God would pardon our Sins, and heal our Backslidings,
whereby we have exposed our selves to his fearful Judgments; That he would
return and visit his People, made weak by the Fall of so many of his righteous
Ones; and that He would close the Breaches in our Walls, by raising up a
Succession of Persons of a like excellent Spirit and exemplary useful Life, as
those that have left us, and who may be like Blessings to us, bright Pledges of
his spiritual Presence in the midst of us. He has promised his gracious
Presence to his Church to the End of the World. Let us be Followers of them who
through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. So we may hope, He will be
with us, as He was with our Fathers, and will never leave nor forsake us.
Rejoice in the Lord always: and again I say, Rejoice in Him, the inexhaustible
Fountain of Life, who (whatever Streams are dried up) remains the same for
ever. Be careful for nothing; but in every (...) by Prayer and Supplication,
with Thanksgiving, let your Requests be made known to God: And the Peace of
God, which passes all Understanding, shall keep your Hearts through Christ
Jesus: To whom be Glory in the Churches, World without End. Amen.

These are the sincere Sentiments, Advices and Wishes of,

Your affectionate Pastor, Thomas Foxcroft.
Boston, April 2. 1737.
Survivors inquiring after the GOD OF Their pious Predecessors.
II. Kings, 2.14. -- Where is the LORD God of Elijah?


AS there is no History in the World of like Antiquity with the Bible, so none
of such extensive and happy Influence; none of equal Use and Service to
Mankind. For in the sacred Story we have such Accounts of the Works of God,
Creation, Providence, and Redemption, as present his amiable (but still
tremendous) Perfections to our View in the best and strongest Light, far
transcending the highest Discoveries of mere natural Reason; and consequently
have a powerful Tendency both to awaken in every considering Soul very awful
Apprehensions of his Majesty and Greatness, and to encourage our Hope and
Confidence in his Wisdom, Goodness, and Truth: And here too we have such
Narratives of innumerable Saints and Servants of God in former Ages of the
World, their Character and Conduct, Experiences and Observations, Lives and
Deaths, as are eminently useful for the Direction of our Faith and Practice,
afford very convincing Arguments for the Reality, Excellency and Advantage of
Divine Revelation, and tend to acquaint us more fully with the glorious
Principles of our holy Religion, to establish our Belief of its important
Doctrines, and engage our Attention and Obedience to its incomparably wise and
righteous Precepts. As an admirable Harmony runs through all the Revelations of
God to the Sons of Men, so a beautiful Congruity every where appears in the
Faith, Worship, and Morals of all Saints (though variously excelling in
Proportion to the Divine Light and Grace dispensed to them) through all
successive Ages of the World. The inspired Records of the Apostolic Age may
have furnished us with the plainest and fairest, the most familiar and most
indefective Copies for our Imitation: Yet Moses and the Prophets are not to be
thrown by as useless, nor the Examples of Old Testament-Saints to be neglected,
as of no Importance to us under the Christian Dispensation; but even these are
applicable for the Regulation of our Belief, our Temper and Deportment, in the
most essential Instances, with relation to the Things of God and Eternity, and
for our Encouragement and Assistance upon many Occasions in the Course of the
Christian Life.

On the present Occasion, when we are called to mourn the Death of an eminently
pious and useful Servant of God, I have singled out the Example of renowned
Elisha (who had his Master taken from his head) to teach us the most proper
Conduct under such a Dispensation.

My Text stands in Connection with the remarkable Story of Elijah's Translation
to the Church triumphant above, and Elisha's Succession into his Place in the
Church militant below. We hear Elisha pathetically mourning the Departure of
the old illustrious Prophet: As he saw him ascend in a Chariot of Fire, carried
up by a Whirlwind into Heaven, he rent his Clothes, and with the Passion of a
bereaved Son cried after him, My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel and
the Horsemen thereof! -- However, he did not long stand gazing up into Heaven:
but presently taking up the Mantle of Elijah, that had fallen from him at his
sudden Rapture, and welcoming this desirable Memorial of his endeared Father,
the visible Badge of his Office, and a happy Pledge of his inheriting the
Blessing that had been promised him, he goes forth in the Spirit of Elias to
enter into his Labors, and goes on his way crying after the GOD of his Master,
and walking in the Steps of his Faith. That is now his solicitous Inquiry,
Where is the Lord God of Elijah? Not satisfied with having Elijah's Mantle, he
must have Elijah's GOD too, in the sensible Effects of his powerful and
gracious Presence with him (the same as had been with his holy Predecessor)
which would abundantly make Amends for the Loss he was mourning under, be the
most effectual Relief to his sorrowful Heart, the best Help to him in the
important Work now devolved upon him, and an encouraging Presage of his future
Usefulness. -- He does not employ himself in a fruitless Search for Elijah;
like the Sons of the Prophets, who could not believe his bodily Translation to
Heaven, but imagining that his dead Corpse might be dropped upon some remote
Mountain, or rather perhaps that he was transported alive to some distant
obscure Place, and (if so) ought still to retain his Dignity and Station, as
Head of the Prophets, would not be restrained from going in Quest after him.
Nor does he lay out any Thought or Pains in curious Speculations upon the
invisible World and hidden Life, the Prophet was exalted to: nor in passionate
Aggravations of his own and the public Loss, by the Departure of so eminent a
Man of God. Neither do we hear any rash Wishes for his Return; much less any
idolatrous Application to him for his Favor and Help: No, though Elijah be in a
State of Exaltation, a glorious and happy Saint, made like unto the Angels, yet
Elisha knows better than to pay him Divine Honors, or place him in God's
stead. But well aware that his Help is in the Name of the Lord, and hoping to
find him a very present Help, he looks off from the Creature, unto the Creator,
who is blessed for ever, and who will cause the Blessing to rest upon them,
that wait for him. He asks not for Elijah, but inquires after his GOD. Where is
the LORD God of Elijah? Or, as it may be read, Where is Jehovah, the God of
Elijah, even He! The Hebrew Words (APH HU) which our Version joins to the
following Clause, as spoken of Elisha, stand in the Original connected with the
Words foregoing, and are understood by learned Critics as adding an Emphasis
to Elisha's Question, Where is the LORD, the God of Elijah, even He, Himself?
It Is not the Language of Infidelity or Diffidence, the Expostulation of an
unbelieving or doubting Soul, that questioned the Being of Elijah's God,
disputed his Omnipresence, or suspected his Power or Faithfulness to accomplish
the great and precious Promise Elisha had lately received: But rather it is the
humble and earnest Expectation and Prayer of Faith, That Elijah's God would be
with his surviving Son and Successor, and now give an early Proof of Elijah's
Spirit being come upon him (according to his own former Wish, and the departed
Prophet's Farewel-Benediction) in a double Portion of Gifts, Graces, and
Blessings.

Our Text may receive some Illustration by comparing it with Isa. 63.11, -- 17.
(understanding Israel to be speaking there) Then he remembered the Days of old,
Moses and his People (recollected and reasoned upon the Story) saying, WHERE IS
HE that brought them up out of the Sea, with the Shepherd of his Flock? WHERE
IS HE that put his holy Spirit within him? That led them by the right hand of
Moses, with his glorious Arm, dividing the Water before them, to make Himself
an everlasting Name? -- Look down from Heaven: -- WHERE is thy Zeal and thy
Strength, the sounding of thy Bowels and of thy tender Mercies toward me? Are
they restrained? Doubtless Thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us,
etc. Thou Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is from Everlasting. O
Lord, return for thy Servants sake, the Tribes of thine Inheritance. It Is the
Church's Complaint of God's visible Withdraw from his People, and a passionate
Supplication for the Return of his favorable Presence; backed with a Plea from
their Forefathers Experience of the Divine Power and Mercy in commanding
glorious Deliverances for them: the Remembrance of which they now improve to
encourage their Faith and embolden their Hope in the present Day of Darkness
and Distress. So Gideon, when the Angel of the Lord appeared to him, saying,
The LORD is with thee, thou mighty Man of Valor; made that Reply, Oh my Lord,
if the LORD be with us, why then is all this befallen us? and WHERE be all his
Miracles, which our Fathers told us of? (Judge. 6.13.) As if he had said, Where
is the Lord God of our Fathers? Where are the Tokens of his powerful and
gracious Presence? We see awful Signs of his Departure from us: but where are
the happy Pledges of his Return to us! So the Prophet, Isa. 51.9, 10. Awake,
awake, put on Strength, O Arm of the LORD: awake as in the ancient Days, in the
Generations of old. Art thou not it that cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon? Art
thou not it which has dried the Sea; that has made the Depths of the Sea a
Way for the Ransomed to pass over? -- Thus in like manner Elisha, under a deep
Concern upon the awful Frown of Heaven in taking away Elijah (who had been a
Prophet mighty in Word and Deed before all the People, a Father to him and to
all the other Ministers of Religion and Sons of Learning, and an eminent Means
of Israel's Defense and Safety) and now upon his Return to the Business of his
Station, having the River Jordan in his Way, which he knew not how to get over,
takes the Mantle of Elijah, and smites the Waters, crying out, Where is the
Lord, the God of Elijah, even HE? -- One notes upon it, "There are the Remains
of great and good Men, which (like this Mantle) ought to be gathered up and
preserved by Survivors; their Sayings, their Writings, their Examples: that as
their Works follow them in the Reward of 'em, they may stay behind with us in
the Benefit of 'em. But what will it profit, what will it avail us, to have the
Mantles of those that are gone, their Places, their Books, their Patterns, if
we have not their Spirit, and their God?" -- We should set our selves with a
careful Hand to gather up whatever (in any kind) has fallen from our pious
Predecessors, that may be of Use to us: but above all we should make the Lord
their God our Choice, and his gracious Presence our Heart's Desire, our speedy
and constant Pursuit. Thus Elisha contented not himself with crying after
Elijah, My Father, my Father! and taking up his Mantle: But proceeds to call
upon his God, and cry after Him, Where is the LORD, the God of Elijah, even HE?

Here we may observe distinctly;

I. He inquires for JEHOVAH. -- Where is the LORD?

Being instructed by his Master concerning the Name of the LORD, and having
often heard him call upon JEHOVAH, that great Name of his God; Elisha follows
his Faith, adores the blessed God by the same exalted Name, asks the special
Tokens of his Presence, and covets a more improved Acquaintance and Communion
with Him. He professes his Belief in the One living and true God: implicitly
renouncing Baal and every Idol; for he knew, that an Idol is Nothing in the
World, and that there is none other God but One, whose Name alone is JEHOVAH
This singular Name JEHOVAH, which is in the Text, and throughout the Old
Testament, translated into our Language by the Word LORD (ever put in Capitals)
belongs to GOD, and to GOD only. Psalm. 83.18. -- Some observe, "The Heathen are
thought to have used it for their supreme GOD with a little Variation from
their Jo -- ve, as they, in one Case, call their Jupiter, whom we call Jove in
English, which is reckoned to be but a Contraction of our Jehovah. And ought we
not to let them know, Our Bible gives an Account of the Jehove, or Jehovah of
whom the most famous of their Ancestors had some dark Notices; employing our
best Interest and Influence that we may draw 'em to regard it"? -- TRIN. of the
Bible, etc. and Leigh's Crit. Sac.
. This is that incommunicable Name, by which the most High has made Himself
known, and stands distinguished from all other gods, who are very Vanity, and
can neither give nor receive a Blessing. Whereas JEHOVAH (according to the Idea
included in his Name) is an absolute eternal unchangeable Essence,
Self-existent, and Self-sufficient, and therefore All-sufficient; having
infinite Power, Perfection and Blessedness in Himself: and being the Fountain
of all created Nature, Existence, Excellence, Operation and Enjoyment. It Is of
the same Import with his Name JAH ( Psalm. 68.4.) and EHJEH ( Exodus 3.14.) I AM.
-- For He alone properly IS: and in Compare with Him all Things, as well in
Heaven above, as in Earth below, may be called Things that are not. He is the
Being of Beings, supreme, invisible, uncreated, everlasting, immense,
immutable, incomprehensible, independent, necessary; the first Cause and last
End of all other Beings; the adequate and sole Object of religious Worship and
of Happiness to the reasonable Creature; and a God in Covenant with his People,
true and steadfast for ever, willing and able and faithful to give Being to his
Promises, and Birth to the Purposes of His Will. He that comes unto God, must
believe that He IS, and that He is a Rewarder of them which diligently seek Him
"As to the Import of the Name JEHOVAH, it consists of Signs which attend the
Past, the Present, and the Future Time in Hebrew, as has been remarked by
learned Men. JE in this Name is a Note of the Time to come; HO of the Time
present; VAH of the Time past: And is as much as to say, He who is, and was,
and is to come. -- This Name is also taken Notice of, as made up of Letters all
called Quiescent or resting ones in the Hebrew Tongue: and as thereby pointing
us to observe, That there is no Rest short of JEHOVAH; but all Rest, Peace,
Quiet and Satisfaction to be had richly, from Him, in and with Him. -- This
Name refers us, as is agreed on all hands, to One who has his Being from no
other, and gives Being unto all Things; and among the rest, to his Words of
Promise and of Threatening, by bringing Things to pass according to them" --
Ibid.
.

NOTE, The Majesty of Heaven is to be adored by his Name JEHOVAH, and by this
Name we are to inquire after the true God: encouraging our Faith and Hope,
while we seek Him, from the Consideration of his immense Beings absolute
Perfection, and infinite Sufficiency.

He challenges this Name as His appropriate Glory, and expects to be known and
acknowledged by it. God spoke to Moses, and said unto him, "I am the LORD: and
I appeared unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by the Name of God Almighty; and by
my Name JEHOVAH was I (comparatively) not known to them. Wherefore say unto the
Children of Israel, I am the LORD: and ye shall know that I am the LORD your
God. THIS is my Name for ever, and this is my Memorial unto all Generations.
See now that I, even I, am He; and there is no God with Me. -- So he speaks by
the Prophet Isaiah; "I am the LORD; that is my Name: and my Glory will I not
give to another. Ye are my Witnesses, says the LORD, and my Servant whom I
have chosen; that ye may know and believe Me, and understand that I AM HE:
before Me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after Me. I, even I,
am the LORD. I am the First, and I am the Last, and besides Me there is no God;
I know not any. -- So He has said by the Prophet Jeremiah: "The LORD is the
true God, He is the living God, and an everlasting King. The Gods that have not
made the Heavens and the Earth, even they shall perish. The Portion of Jacob is
not like them: the LORD of hosts is his Name. "Thus says the LORD, let him
that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows ME, that I am
the LORD, which exercise Lovingkindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the
Earth: for in these Things I delight, says the LORD.

JEHOVAH is the tremendous Name, which stands at the Head of the Ten
Commandments. "God spoke all these Words, saying, I am the LORD. -- This
proclaims Him the only proper Object of Divine Homage and religious Service,
enforces our Obedience to Him, awakens a holy Fear in us, invites our Faith and
Love, and animates our Hope of a gracious Acceptance and Reward. It is written,
"Thou shall fear the LORD* Him only shall thou serve, and to Him shall thou
cleave, and swear by his Name, -- "Hear, O Israel, The LORD our God is one
LORD: and thou shall love the LORD thy God with all thine Heart, and with all
thy Soul, and with all thy Might. -- "Know that the LORD thy God, He is God,
the faithful God, which keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love Him and
keep his Commandments. -- "Thou shall remember the LORD thy God. -- Thou shall
not go after other gods: for the LORD thy God is a jealous God. -- Sanctify the
LORD God in your Heart. -- "If you do return unto the LORD with all your Heart,
then put away strange gods, and prepare your Heart unto the LORD, and serve Him
only. -- "Seek the LORD, while He may be found. -- -- "And when thou shall seek
the LORD thy God, thou shall find Him, if thou seek Him with all thy Heart and
with all thy Soul. -- "Take Heed to thy self that thou be not snared by
following the Way of the Heathen, and that thou inquire not after their gods.
-- "The Lord will be terrible unto them; for He will famish all the gods of the
Earth: and Men shall worship HIM, every one from his place. -- "I will stretch
out mine Hand, says the LORD, and will cut off the Remnant of Baal, and them
that are turned back from the LORD, and those that have not sought the LORD,
nor inquired for him. -- "Thus says the LORD to the House of Israel, Seek ye
ME, and ye shall live: But seek not Bethel. -- Seek HIM that makes the seven
Stars and Orion: The LORD is His Name. -- "Break up your fallow Ground: for it
is Time to seek the LORD, till He come and rain Righteousness upon You. Even
the LORD God of Hosts, the LORD is his Memorial: Therefore turn thou to thy
God; keep Mercy and Judgment, and wait on thy God continually. -- "Thus says
the LORD, Stand ye in the Ways and see, and ask for the old Paths, where is the
good Way, and walk therein, and ye shall find Rest for your Souls. -- "Thus
says the LORD, What Iniquity have your Fathers found in Me, that they are gone
far from Me, and walked after Vanity? Neither said they, WHERE is the LORD? The
Priests said not, WHERE is the LORD? and they that handle the Law, knew me not.
-- "But in the last Days it shall come to pass, that many Nations shall come
and say, Come and let us go up to the Mountain of the LORD: for all People will
walk every one in the Name of his god, and we will walk in the Name of the LORD
our God for ever and ever.

The Name of the LORD is the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost, the Three that bear Record in Heaven, and these Three are One. We
are baptized into this Name, and in this Name of our God we are to walk: living
a Life of Dependence upon Him, Devotedness to Him, and Communion with Him. We
must be inquiring after and seeking the LORD in all his Ways, Ordinances and
Providence. That must continually be the Question with us, WHERE is the LORD?
His gracious Presence must be our principal Aim and Desire, as that in which
lies all our Safety, Prosperity, Glory and Happiness. "Blessed is the Man, O
LORD, whom Thou chusest and causest to approach unto Thee. "The LORD is my
Shepherd; I shall not want: Yea, though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow
of Death, I will fear no Evil; for Thou art with me. "The LORD is a Sun and
Shield, He will give Grace and Glory, and no good Thing will He withold from
them that walk uprightly. -- To whom should we go but to HIM? Nor need we
enquire after any other god: for He is able to do for us exceeding abundantly
above all that we ask or think. If JEHOVAH be his Name, what may we not expect
from his favorable Presence! Thus He says, "Fear not, I am with thee.
"Behold, I am the LORD: Is there any Thing too hard for Me? Verily, the
Lovingkindness of the LORD is better than Life: and his Wrath worse than Death.
Who knows the Extent of his Goodness, or the Power of his Anger! -- Let all
the Inhabitants of the Earth venerate this great and terrible Name JEHOVAH, and
tremble at his Presence; for our God is a consuming Fire, and who can stand
before Him whence once He is angry! Cleanse your Hands and Hearts, ye Sinners:
Humble your selves in the Sight of the LORD: Stand in Awe, and sin not: Draw
nigh to Him, and He will draw nigh to You: Lift up your Souls to Him, and not
to lying Vanities; Seek the LORD, and his Strength: Seek his Face evermore. And
let the Heart of them that seek the LORD, be joyful. Ye Saints, glory in his
holy Name: Extol Him that rides upon the Heavens by his Name JAH, and rejoice
before Him. But serve the LORD with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling: for with
Him is dreadful Majesty, and He is terrible out of his holy Places.

A Pharaoh may insult and say, Who is the LORD, that I should obey Him? But let
Israel humbly submit and say, Whatsoever the LORD commands, that will we do,
and will be obedient. If Laban consults his Teraphim, and bows down to graven
Images; yet let Jacob seek JEHOVAH, and put away all strange gods, pay his Vows
to the LORD, and serve him only. Let the Prophets, which eat at Jezebel's
Table, follow Baal, and call on the Name of their Idol: But let Elijah follow
the LORD, follow Him fully, and call on the Name of JEHOVAH. Let the Children
of this World trust in the Abundance of their Wealth, and make Gold their
Confidence: But let the Children of Light trust in the living God, make the
LORD their Hope, and stay themselves upon JEHOVAH, with whom is everlasting
Strength, and in whose Favor is Life. Acquaint now thy self with Him, and be
at Peace: thereby Good shall come unto thee. Under afflictive Losses, make it
your Inquiry, Where is the LORD? Let none be heard saying, "They have taken
away my gods, and what have I more! "Many there be that say, Who will show us
any Good? Their Inquiries are, "What shall we eat? and what shall we drink? and
wherewith shall we be clothed? Where is there a good Bargain to be got? Where
is Mirth to be had? Which way shall we come to Honor? Thus they are full of
the Cares and Cries of Nature and Passion. But none of them says, WHERE is God
my Maker? That Is the Cry of Grace, "My Soul thirsts for God, the living God:
when shall I come and appear before God"? -- "O that I knew where I might find
Him! -- "Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? and there is none upon Earth that I
desire besides Thee. Lo, they that are far from Thee shall perish: But it is
good for me to draw near to God. -- Such should be the ardent Breathings of
Faith, Love, and Desire in our Souls toward JEHOVAH. We should be daily seeking
and asking for Him; having our Eyes ever to the LORD, deprecating his Departure
from us, and desiring his Presence with us. We should make it our Concern that
our Fellowship may be with the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, whose Name is
JEHOVAH. We should delight in approaching to Him: and Him we should acknowledge
in all our Ways. In the Day of Prosperity we should bless the Lord as the
Author of all our Mercies: and in the Day of Adversity we should consider his
Hand, and inquire wherefore He contendeth with us. Under all the Troubles of
Life and Apprehensions of Death, we should be inquiring early after the LORD
our God. When Religion is dying, we should cry, Where is the LORD? and pray,
Help LORD, when the godly Man cease. Under our most sorrowful Bereavements we
should remember, The LORD lives; and whoever dies and leaves us, still JEHOVAH
is nigh to them that seek Him, and is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever.
Though even an Elijah forsakes us; yet in this we may be confident, if the LORD
his God and our God be with us, we shall have our Loss abundantly compensated.
On such an Occasion then let Survivors be inquiring after the LORD God of
Elijah. -- Which brings me to observe, in the next place,

II. Elisha inquires for Jehovah, as the GOD of Elijah. -- WHERE is the Lord
GOD of Elijah, even He?

It may not be amiss to premise here, that the Majesty of Heaven is in our Text
and many other Scriptures styled JEHOVAH ELOHIM: upon which judicious Critics
have observed, that the singular Name Jehovah represents the Deity to us as
One, while that of Elohim, being plural, represents Him as More; and Jehovah
being joined with Elohim, this perhaps is designed to engage our Attention to
what both suggest at one and the same time, The Unity of Essence and the
Plurality of Persons in the Godhead. We are not to take Jehovah Elohim in our
Text as intending the Father only; however it may mean Him primarily, yet is
not to be understood exclusively of the Son and the holy Ghost. Nor is Jehovah
Elohim to be understood Jehovah ONE of the Elohim, but we fitly read it the
LORD GOD, the sacred THREE which are ONE. Elisha cries out, Where is the LORD
GOD of Elijah?

Let it be more particularly remarked:

1. He asserts, that Jehovah is GOD, the GOD. Elisha might now have in his
Thoughts what had happened in a late notable Controversy between Elijah and his
Adversaries, upon that grand Question, WHO is God? Elijah reproved all the
People, saying, "How long halt ye between two Opinions? If JEHOVAH be God,
follow Him: but if Baal, then follow him. -- And finally he put the Dispute
upon this Issue, "Call ye on the name of your gods, and I will call on the Name
of JEHOVAH; And He shall be the God that answers by Fire; He [Hu, the same,
Himself] the GOD! -- And when all the People saw the Fire of the LORD fall upon
Elijah's Sacrifice, they humbled themselves before the Prophet, and owned their
full Conviction, crying out, in that vehement and repeated Exclamation, JEHOVAH
Himself the ELOHIM! The LORD, He In the Original the Word is HU; which, some
think, is one of the Names of God: But most Expositors judge it only a common
Pronoun, and read it. He, Himself, or the same. -- Dominus ipse Deus. 1 Kin.
18.39.
is the God! It seems an Adoration something like that of the Apostle Thomas,
when in a Transport of Love and Joy, he broke out in that Address to the risen
Jesus, My LORD and my GOD!

As to the Import of Elohim or GOD, I take it not to be a mere relative Word,
or a Term of Office only, signifying a kind Providence and Dominion, as some
would carry it, and properly applicable to created Rulers and Benefactors: But
I look upon it to be rather of an absolute Signification (like the Word
Jehovah) and according to the Use of it in Scripture properly and strictly it
denotes the supreme Being, under the Character of the Almighty, including the
Idea of infinite Perfection, necessary Existence, and Independency. The
original and genuine Meaning of the Word, I conclude, may be best learnt from
the Use of it in such Texts as those, Ezekiel. 28.2. Say to the Prince of Tyrus,
Thou art a MAN, and not GOD. So Number. 23.19. GOD is not a MAN, that He should
lie; neither the Son of Man, that He should repent. And Hos. 11.9. I will not
execute the Fierceness of mine Anger; for I am GOD, and not MAN. There Is an
observable and beautiful Antithesis in these several Places, which must be
lost, and the Texts unintelligible, if the word GOD be properly a mere Term of
Office or Relation, and not of Essence or Nature, as well as the word MAN.
Evident it is, tint the Divine and Human NATURES are here put in
Contradistinction, one to the other: and while the words [ Man and Son of Man]
signify a Being created, a Nature frail, imperfect, and very mutable, the other
and opposite word [ God] is used to denote a Being uncaused and eternal, a
Nature absolutely and immutably perfect, infinitely good and glorious and
blessed in it self, and for ever independent; which, upon a little Reflection,
will be found Ideas essentially connected with, and inseparable from the
Character of Almighty. ELOHIM then, in the true, original, and complex Notion
of the Word, is a Name appropriate to JEHOVAH. Indeed there is a consequential,
subordinate and secondary Notion, in which the Term may be used sometimes, viz.
that of a Ruler and Benefactor; for these Characters are necessarily included
in the Idea of God Almighty: And by way of Analogy even Creatures, Angels and
Men, are in that View of the Word sometimes called Elohim.

But however, it primarily imports the OMNIPOTENT, the Supreme and First Cause:
and is a Name not communicable to any Creature, but in a lax, inferential, and
metaphorical Use of the Word. JEHOVAH, even He alone is GOD, in the proper
Application and strict Sense of the Term. None other are Gods by Nature; but
are falsely so called, or figuratively, allusively, and in the consequential
Notion of the Word: for none are really and properly Gods, if not so by Nature.
Unto us there is but One God; but one Being that is essentially and truly God:
Yet this ONE is (ineffably) somehow THREE, variously denominated, the Father,
the Word, and the holy Ghost. (1 John 5.7.) Natural Reason is capable of
strongly arguing the UNITY of the Godhead: but supernatural Revelation makes
the further Discovery of a TRINITY in Unity. The holy Scripture makes those
Personal Attributions to the sacred THREE, which manifestly infer their
different Modes of Subsistence: and yet it ascribes all Divine Perfections and
Honors equally to them all, which as manifestly infers their being One in
Essence. Not only the Father, but the Son and the Spirit likewise, are called
GOD in the genuine, absolute, sublime Sense of the Word, without any special
Limitation, without any Signatures of a figurative Use, or a diminutive and
imperfect Sense designed. All the essential Characters of GOD are attributed to
the Son and holy Ghost, in the same Heights of Language as to the Father,
without any apparent Marks of Distinction; even those peculiar Glories, which
the supreme Being has ever challenged as his sole Prerogatives, whereby He will
be known and distinguished from all that is called God besides, whether in
Heaven or Earth. Rev. 1.8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending,
says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.
When therefore the Law of the LORD says, Thou shall have no other gods before
me, it is to be interpreted as exclusive of Idols, and every mere Creature, but
still as inclusive of the Son and holy Spirit, who together with the Father are
the one Object of Faith, Devotion and Obedience. "Know ye, that the LORD, He is
GOD. "This is the true God and eternal Life. "There is none good but One, that
is GOD: and if thou will enter into Life, keep his Commandments. "Behold, the
Lord GOD says, I come quickly, and my Reward is with Me. "I am Alpha and
Omega, the Beginning and the End, the First and the Last. "I Jesus have sent
mine Angel to testify unto You these Things in the Churches. -- And since we
hear these Things, let it not be said of us, as it is of some, Romans 1.21. That
when they knew GOD, they glorified Him not as GOD, neither were thankful.

I come now to observe,

2. Elisha asserts Elijah's Interest in JEHOVAH, and special Relation to Him,
as the Lord his GOD. -- Where is the Lord God of Elijah?

For Explication of this it must be noted: Since the very Names JEHOVAH Elohim
carry in them an Idea of absolute Perfection, of eternal Power, and of infinite
Goodness and Happiness, hence when the supreme Being is said to be Jehovah
Elohim to a Person or People, it means his being That unto them, which He is in
Himself, his showing them his Glory, causing his Goodness to pass before them,
and giving them to see and enjoy Him as GOD. -- They that make the Term God a
mere Term of Office and Relation, have contrived to fix their narrow and low
Idea on the Word with a View to the weakening and eluding an eminent
Scripture-Argument for the true and proper Divinity of our Savior and the holy
Spirit, from one Place and another where they are expressly called God. But now
if we attend to the constant universal Use of the Word in Scripture, as applied
to the First Cause, we shall find it an essential Name, and carrying nothing
more of Relation or Office in it, than there is in the Name Jehovah. Words
indeed of an absolute Signification may put on a relative Form, by being
connected with Pronouns possessive, as My, Thy, etc. But still the primary
Signification is retained, and is well consistent with this Use of the Words.
Thus, when God says, "I will be thy God", it means (Ero tibi in Deum) I will
express the GOD to thee: which is but in other Words to say, I will be to thee
the Almighty, the All-sufficient (I will show my self JEHOVAH ELOHIM to thee)
will act the Part of the Lord God Omnipotent toward thee, in performing my
Promises to thee, and securing to thee a perfect Happiness in the way of the
Gospel Covenant. Accordingly, when the Lord is called the God of any, it
intimates his being their Covenant-God, in and through Jesus Christ the
Mediator, and his setting his Heart as the Heart of GOD upon them, his
exhibiting the Divine Nature to them in agreeable and blessed Effects, his
displaying the Character of GOD (an infinitely and immutable perfect and mighty
Being) in his tender Care of them, and wise and powerful Operations for their
Benefit and his own Glory from them, according to the Tenor of that gracious
Covenant, into which He has taken them: and on their part, it implies their
being under Covenant-Obligations to Him, owning Him in the Character of GOD,
revering his Perfections, paying due Acknowledgements to Him, and seeking their
Happiness in Him, as GOD, who is above all, blessed for evermore. -- Thus, the
LORD GOD of Elijah (in our Text) means the supreme Being considered as Elijah's
Covenant-God, his chosen Portion, his avouched Sovereign, and the Object of his
Worship, Faith and Hope, in Opposition to Baal, and the Creature, which others
served: or as having acted the GOD toward Elijah, taken him into Communion
with Himself, owned and honored him as his Servant, revealed Himself to him,
spoken by him, called and furnished him to the Office of a Prophet, protected
and succeeded him in it, and finally crowned him with a glorious Reward. In
these Regards the blessed God is called the GOD of Elijah. Not that He is so
called in Exclusion of all others, as if this were Elijah's peculiar Privilege:
for the Scripture puts the same Honor on many besides. Thus we hear God called
the Lord God of Shem, the God of Abraham, etc. importing the like near Relation
and endeared Affection between God and them, as in the present Case. But it is
to be understood as spoken in Exclusion of the Worshippers of Baal, and of
ungodly Sinners in general.

Indeed in a very large Sense Jehovah may be called the God of all Flesh, the
God of the whole Earth, as He is God unto all in some Regards; displaying the
Powers and Perfections of the Deity in their Creation and Preservation, and
doing those Things for every one, in common, which none but GOD most high can
accomplish: and as He is the only rightful Object of religious Worship, unto
all, and their alone satisfying Portion and Happiness. But there is a
transcendent and very peculiar Sense in which Jehovah is called the GOD of
Elijah, with other the faithful Saints and Servants of the Lord.

Here we may distinguish, and say briefly,

(1.) Consider Elijah merely as an Israelite, knowing and owning the true
Religion, JEHOVAH might be called his GOD; though but in Common with the rest of
the professing Hebrews. Though there was a very general Apostasy in this
Prophet's Day, insomuch that Elijah thought himself almost left alone; yet
there was a Remnant of some Thousands, in secret Corners of the Land, who had
not bowed the Knee to Baal. These were together with him under the external
Administration of the Covenant of Grace, separated for a peculiar People, under
a special Care of Divine Providence; and stood visibly entitled to the Lord as
their God. He is frequently called the Lord God of the Hebrews, of all Israel
in Common. And the Case is the same with every Christian People under the
present Dispensation. Is He the God of the Jews only? Is He not also the God of
the Gentiles? which in times past have not believed God, yet have now obtained
Mercy through their Unbelief. They that in former Ages were not a People, are
now the People of God and Children of the Promise, to whom pertains the
Adoption, and the Glory, equally as to Israel of old. And God is visibly their
GOD; He is in the midst of every Christian People, by the external Symbols of
his gracious Presence, and by his holy Spirit striving with them: while other
Nations that have not known the true Religion, and are without Christ, are
represented as having no Hope, and being without GOD in the World. -- O let us
admire the Condescension of the blessed God in taking any of the fallen
Children of Men into a Covenant of Grace, and affording them the Signs of his
favorable Presence and Means of Salvation. What is Man, O LORD, that thou art
mindful of him! and what the Son of Man, that Thou visitest him! -- And let us
adore His Sovereignty, in the visible Distinctions of His Grace, while He
discovers Himself in His Gospel to one Person or People, and hides his Face
from others. -- Let us tremble at the Apprehensions of our awful standing in
God's holy Covenant, mourn our Sins as peculiarly aggravated, and resolve upon
a future Care of keeping Covenant with God, at the same time embracing the
Promises by Faith. Isa. 48.17, 18. Thus says the LORD thy Redeemer, the holy
One of Israel, I am the LORD thy God which teaches thee to profit, which
leads thee by the way that thou should go. O that thou had hearkened to my
Commandments! then had thy Peace been as a River, and thy Righteousness as the
Waves of the Sea. But I proceed to observe,

(2.) Consider Elijah as an Israelite indeed, a truly pious and good Man; so
the LORD was his GOD in a more special and exalted Sense.

Elijah was one who cleaved to the Lord with Purpose of Heart, when all Israel
seemed to be revolted from Him; but yet there was a Remnant according to the
Election of Grace: and in common with these, Elijah had the LORD for his GOD.
There is an appropriate Sense, in which He is the Lord God of his Saints, or
true Believers. Real Saints have the Lord for their reconciled God, manifesting
Himself to them so as He does not to the World, and doing those Things for
their Souls, which none other can do: His most terrible Attributes speak
Friendship to them, and stand engaged for their Safety and Happiness: He is
their actual, as well as chosen Patron here, and Portion hereafter: As they
follow Him with their whole Souls, so He loves them and seeks their Good with
his whole Heart, and they are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto
Salvation: They are his Favorites in this World, and Heirs of Life in the next.
Hence the Psalmist's devout and joyful Soul broke forth in those exulting Words
(Psalm. 48.14.) This GOD is OUR God for ever and ever, He will be our Guide even
unto Death. To the same Purpose that triumphant Language of the Apostle (Romans
8.38.39.) I am persuaded, that neither Death nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present nor Things to come, nor Height
nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us from the Love
of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Even Death itself, which dissolves
all natural Unions and civil Relations, yet affects not the Saints Interest in
God, but brings their separate Souls into nearer Communion with Him. When He
takes them out of the World, He gathers their Spirits to Himself, and still
remains their GOD, to the most happy Purposes: and He will so in regard of
their outward Man too; for the Resurrection and Happiness of the Body is
implied in the Lord's being their GOD, according to our Savior's Argument,
Luke 20.37, 38. -- In a Word, To have the Lord for our GOD implies (in the
strict and full Meaning of the Phrase) all the Joy, Glory and Bliss, that human
Nature is capable of. Nothing on this side the Perfection and Blessedness of
Heaven will rise up to the just Import of that great and precious Promise, That
the Lord will be our GOD. All possible Excellencies concentre in Him, which are
his own infinite Happiness, and will be an all-sufficient Happiness to the
Saints in Light. Heb. 11.16. But now they desire a better Country, that is, an
heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he has
prepared for them a City. And there he will eminently display the GOD unto them
in a beatific Sense. Then shall the Apostle's Prayer for the Saints receive its
complete Answer, Ephesians. 3.19. That ye may be filled with all the Fullness of GOD.
The communicable Fullness of GOD shall be theirs entirely. Then in a very
exalted and now inconceivable Sense, they will dwell in GOD, and GOD in them,
throughout a blessed Eternity.

Allow me here to apply this Head, in a few REFLECTIONS.

1. See now the infinite Obligations we are under to Jesus Christ, the blessed
Mediator between GOD and Man, who suffered for us (the Just for the Unjust)
that he might bring us unto GOD, and in whom GOD is reconciling the World unto
Himself. In and through Christ only it is that JEHOVAH becomes our GOD and
Father, and takes us near to Himself. Behold, the Lamb of God, who was
delivered for our Offenses, and raised again for our Justification, and ever
lives to make Intercession for us! Ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Sing forth the Honor of his Name, and make his Praise glorious. Sing to Him
with thankful Souls in that adoring Language ( Psalm. 68.18.) Thou have ascended
on high, thou have led Captivity Captive: thou have received Gifts for Men;
yea, for the rebellious, that the LORD God might dwell among them.

2. Learn too the vast Advantage and Excellence of the Gospel, and how justly
Believers place the highest Value upon revealed Religion, that opens to us the
Covenant of Grace, and presents the blessed GOD in such an amiable attractive
Light to his People, as their GOD in Christ: which is a peculiar and exalted
Reflection, the most fruitful of beneficial and glorious Effects in them,
happily influential to enlarge, refine, and sublimate their Minds, and draw out
their Souls toward GOD, in fervent Desires, in supreme Affection and Delight,
firm Affiance and humble Submission, vigorous Hopes and raised Expectations,
the most sincere and solemn Self-Dedications, entire Love of Communion with
GOD, and constant Care of Obedience to Him; and by all tending to minister
abundant Peace and Consolation to them, under the various Troubles of Life, and
the awful Prospects of Death and Eternity: far above every Dictate of
Philosophy, far above all moral Considerations, that the mere Light of Nature
in its best Improvements was ever able to suggest. While the most enlightened
Heathen can argue but darkly about an unknown GOD, and have no solid and
rational Assurance that He is their GOD, We now through Comfort of the
Scriptures have Hope, a Hope that shall never make us ashamed. Well may the
Saints (as all real ones do) account their Bible a Treasure, prize the Oracles
of God above Thousands of Gold and Silver, make his Statutes their Songs in the
House of their Pilgrimage, and take his Testimonies as their Heritage for ever.

3. To have JEHOVAH for our GOD, what greater Privilege, Honor, or Blessedness
than this! It speaks the transcendent Happiness and Dignity of the Saints: and
it loudly calls upon 'em to admire and magnify the distinguishing and rich
Grace of God toward them, in becoming their God, and taking them into Covenant
and Communion with Himself, when Thousands of their Fellow Creatures round
about them (originally not greater Sinners, nor by Nature any more the Children
of Hell, than themselves) are perishing without Hope and without God in the
World.

4. How should we admire the Wisdom of the Saints, which God gives them? It is
seen in the Choice, they have made for themselves, of JEHOVAH for their GOD,
who is above all gods, the sole worthy Object of Divine Service, and the only
satisfactory Portion of immortal Souls, an almighty Friend, able to bless them
and make them a Blessing in this Life, and to complete their Happiness in the
next.

5. And if the LORD be their GOD, what a conspicuous and signal Glory does it
reflect on any Place, that abounds with Righteous Ones! Surely GOD is in the
midst of it, and He will appoint Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks round about
it. What is the Name by which the City of Truth, the Land of Uprightness, shall
be called? The God of Truth and Grace Himself has pronounced it (Ezekiel. 48.35.)
The Name of it shall be, JEHOVAH-SHAMMAH, The LORD is there. -- This
Inscription, most lovely and beautiful, was it not once seen, engraven in
fairest Characters, on BOSTON and NEW ENGLAND! When the People of this TOWN and
Land, in the Days of our first Generations, were as a noble Vine and wholly a
right Seed, then the GOD of Bethel was eminently the GOD of Boston; the GOD of
Israel, the GOD of New England: and how honorable a Place was it, a City of
Renown, the Glory of all Lands! But alas, now that we have deeply corrupted our
selves, and the Place is filled with degenerate Plants, how is our Glory
departed in a very lamentable Measure, and turned into Shame! Are there not
evidently but few (in Comparison) that can truly call the GOD of our Fathers
their GOD! Have not Multitudes, Multitudes, forgotten the Rock of Israel, and
practically despised and cast off the LORD, even the LORD, the Hope of our
Fathers! And what little Reason then have we to expect, that He will be a GOD
to us, in like manner as He was to them! If, with Ephraim of old, we sin yet
more and more, and do not return to our Fathers GOD, may we not fear the
Execution of that terrible Threatening (Hos. 13.7, 8.) Therefore I will be unto
them as a Lion; as a Leopard by the way will I observe them; I will meet them
as a Bear bereaved of her Whelps. -- I shall add the encouraging Words, which
follow: O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in Me is thine Help. -- O
Israel, return unto the LORD thy God: for thou have fallen by thine Iniquity.
Take with you Words, and turn to the LORD; So I will be as the Dew unto Israel,
he shall grow as the Lily, shall cast forth his Roots and spread his Branches,
his Beauty shall be as the Olive Tree, and his Smell as Lebanon. -- Let us
remember, that GOD is in the Generation of the Righteous, and He will exalt
them: But Woe to the Generation of his Wrath. O that we were wise, that we
understood this! May the blessed God pour out his Spirit from on high, and
revive his Work among us; that it may come to pass, which is written, "As yet
they shall use this Speech in the Land of Judah, and in the Cities thereof, The
LORD bless thee, O Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Holiness! -- Then
will Salvation be nigh to us, and Glory dwell in our Land.

6. What has been said, should teach us to love and honor the Saints; who have
the Image of GOD upon them, and a Propriety in Him as their GOD: And this
Reflection speaks Encouragement to such as are careful in all proper Ways to
show their Respect to the Godly Man, and put Honor upon the Faithful in the
Land: But it may well strike Terror on such as envy, hate, injure, or slight
them. The Righteous are a People near and dear to GOD, and He hears the
Reproach of Moah and the Revilings of the Children of Ammon, while in their
Pride they magnify themselves against the People of the LORD of Hosts, and the
LORD will be terrible to them: howbeit, our GOD will turn the Curse into a
Blessing, and He will bless them that bless his People. The Time is coming,
when He will gloriously plead the Cause of his People, and when He will make
his Saints an eternal Excellency, when they shall be as the Stones of a Crown,
lifted up as an Ensign upon his Land, and the Sinners in the Earth shall take
hold of the Skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with You, for we
have heard that GOD is with You.

7. Here Is a powerful Argument, which should persuade us all to be concerned,
that we may get into the Number of the Saints, and be able to claim a Propriety
in GOD, as our GOD. We should examine what Evidences we have of a
Covenant Interest in GOD, and vital Relation to Him as our GOD in Christ. O let
us all look to it, that we do not fail of the Grace of GOD; that we do not fail
of securing this great and most momentous Concern: for if the LORD be not our
GOD, in the Sense of the Gospel Covenant, He will be a Consuming Fire to us.
That Is the Doom he has passed on a hypocritical Nation, ( Hos. 1.9.) Ye are not
my People, and I will not he your GOD. However false Professors may boast in
the LORD, and say, He is our GOD; yet they shall find at last, that He will
reject their Confidences, and will be a GOD to them in no other than a dreadful
vindictive Sense, a God that judges Sinners: Verily their GOD will come with
Vengeance, to punish them with everlasting Destruction, who have not known Him,
nor obeyed his Gospel.

Finally, in a Word, let such as have sincerely avouched the LORD for their
GOD, see to it, that they walk worthy of the LORD unto all Pleasing, that they
adorn their high Profession by a good Conversation in Christ, and continually
be in Care to live and act up to their spiritual Dignity, Privileges and Hopes;
making it appear to the World, that the LORD is indeed their GOD, by exhibiting
the Image of GOD upon them, a visible Resemblance of his moral Perfections. Let
your Light so shine before Men, that they seeing your good Works, may glorify
GOD in You: and thus shall Christ be magnified in your Body, whether it be by
Life or Death, and in nothing shall you be ashamed, but you shall have Hope in
Death, and Boldness in the Day of Judgment, that great Day of our GOD, when He
shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that
believe.

I proceed now to the other and last Distinction I had in View.

[3.] Consider Elijah as a faithful Prophet and eminent Minister of Religion,
so the LORD was his GOD in a still more emphatic Sense. Being brought very nigh
to GOD, separated to special Service in the Kingdom of GOD by a peculiar
Covenant (like that we read of, Mal. 2.8. the Covenant of Levi) being endowed
with Ministerial Gifts and Graces in a remarkable Eminency, as also admitted to
a distinguishing Intimacy of Friendship and Communion with the GOD of Heaven,
and at the same time there being so few other faithful Prophets in the Land,
that Elijah, even he only had seemed to remain a Prophet of the Lord, at least
in Compare with Baal's Prophets, which appeared in mighty Crowds at the famous
Contest he had with them before Ahab and all the People) upon these
Considerations Elijah might well have this singular Honor put upon him, to
have the LORD called his GOD, the Lord God of Elijah.

However, the Scriptures put the same Distinction on many others. Thus we hear
Him called the Lord God of Shem, the God of Aaron, the God of Daniel, and other
Prophets. And this Honor is extended to the faithful Prophets in general, Rev.
22.6. The LORD GOD of the holy Prophets.

Now this, I think, is safely applicable (though in lower Respects) concerning
ordinary, as well as extraordinary Prophets. The faithful Ministers of Christ
(though not furnished with miraculous Gifts and Powers) may be called holy
Prophets: and it is no Presumption to claim Elijah's GOD for the LORD their GOD.
It is observable, John Baptist, though he did not the Miracles which Elijah is
famous for, yet Christ pronounces him more than a Prophet, greater even than
Elias, who was but a Type and Figure of John: yet at the same time he adds,
Notwithstanding, he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, is greater than he;
which Passage (though judiciously thought by some to have a confined Respect, as
spoken by Christ of himself) is applied by many Expositors as spoken of the
least Saint or the least Minister under the Christian Dispensation; and so
applied, it is true, of the faithful Minister especially, in some Regards.
However, Gospel Ministers in common being Divinely entitled Prophets, we need
make no Scruple of applying to the Case of faithful Pastors and Teachers, that
remarkable Scripture, The Lord God of the holy Prophets.

Here I may say distinctly, though very briefly,

1. The LORD may be called the GOD of Ministers in general, as they are by
their special Character and Calling Men of God; in an eminent Manner separated
from the World, and placed as Pillars in the House of the living GOD; dedicated
to a peculiar Ministry for the Interest and Honor of GOD in his Church;
commissioned in the Word of GOD, and called in the Providence of GOD, and by
the Spirit of GOD furnished and spirited to their sacred Employment; which is
to manage (in GOD's Name) a Treaty of Peace with Rebel-Mankind, showing Sinners
the Way of Salvation, and praying them in CHRIST's Stead (as though GOD did
beseech 'em by us) that they would be reconciled to GOD; to instruct in the
Truths of GOD, and inculcate the Precepts of GOD; to warn, reprove, exhort, and
comfort the People of GOD, according to their respective Cases, and according
to the Tenor of the Gospel of GOD; to administer the holy Seals of GOD's
Covenant; to lead in the public Devotions to GOD; to go before his People in
an Example of all holy Conversation, and a lively Walk with GOD. And thus being
by their Character and Office, eminent Professors of Religion, and peculiarly
the Servants of GOD, He may very properly be called the LORD GOD of Evangelical
Ministers in general now, in some sort as He was of Elijah and the ancient
Prophets. Indeed worldly and carnally-minded vicious Ministers, it is confessed,
are some of the worst of Mortals; and as having corrupted the Covenant of Levi,
deserve to be abandoned of GOD and Man: Yet while Ministers are in Behavior as
becomes Godliness, however their Hearts may not be right with God, they are
still to be held in Reputation by us as being by their Station and Character
Men of God, and visibly related to GOD as in a high Sense their GOD.

2. He is the LORD GOD of his holy and faithful Ministers in a particular
Manner and in a very superior Sense.

For (in the first place) Such do very eminently acknowledge and glorify GOD as
the LORD their GOD. They are true and upright Witnesses for GOD, in the midst
of a crooked and perverse Generation, as Elijah, who was very jealous for the
LORD God of Israel, and boldly stood up for Him against the Prophets of Baal,
an apostate People, and an ungodly Court. -- So they are much with GOD; giving
themselves to Prayer, as well as to the Ministry of the Word, and having their
Conversation in Heaven. -- They carry about with them much of the Image of GOD,
and make it the Business of their Life to bring peculiar Revenues of Glory to
His Name, by paying Him their own active Homages, and by persuading all about
them into due Acknowledgements of Him. -- And in Proportion to the Vigor and
Activity of Grace in them and the Supply of the Spirit of Christ, they are in
Fact special Instruments of promoting the Kingdom and Honor of GOD. -- In
these Regards every faithful Minister may be saluted with the same exalted
Title, as the Apostle gave to his own Son in the Faith (1 Timothy 6.11.) O MAN of
GOD! And indeed the same Apostle seems to apply this as the genuine Character
of good Ministers in Common (2 Timothy 3.17.) That the MAN of GOD may be perfect.
Surely this is sufficient to justify the Application of that other Text as
concerning them, The LORD GOD of the holy Prophets.

But further (in the second place) Such are in very signal Ways owned and
honored of GOD, as those that are his peculiar Servants, and especially
related to Him as the LORD their GOD. As He has called them to special Work,
and claims a special Propriety in them: So He extends a peculiar Favor to
them, and bestows peculiar Honors upon them, expressing Himself their GOD in
an emphatical Sense many Ways. He appeared the LORD GOD of Elijah and the
inspired Prophets by Instances of Favor and Honor done them, which were as
extraordinary as their Commission and their Gifts: But still his ordinary
faithful Prophets are owned and blessed of GOD in Ways more common, yet usually
remarkable, and sometimes very Singular. They have the Special Presence of GOD
with them, in their several Measures. They are the special Care of his Fatherly
Providence, and have holy Angels invisibly ministering to them. They have the
Spirit of GOD and of Glory resting upon them, and supplying 'em with Divine
Light, Grace, and Comfort, in various Degrees, as it pleases Him, and
sometimes very admirably, in their own Sense and in the Apprehension of others.
How have they at some Seasons experienced very apparently the Communion of the
Holy Ghost, in a high Degree! How has the Spirit of Supplication been poured
out upon 'em, that (like Elias) they have prayed earnestly! And how has GOD
honored them by signal Answers of Prayer! And in pleading his Cause, how has
He sometimes given them a Mouth and Wisdom, a Courage and Zeal, that the
Adversary could not resist! How have their Hearts flamed out in fervent Love to
Christ, their whole Souls been fired with a holy Indignation against Error and
Wickedness, and their melted Bowels gushed out in the tendered Compassions to
poor perishing Sinners! They have sometimes appeared full of GOD, in their
Divine Temper and Conduct: and have had GOD manifestly with them in their Work,
standing by 'em in their spiritual Encounters, strengthening them to fulfill
their sacred Ministry, and distinguishing them by making 'em the joyful
Instruments of supporting and promoting the Profession, Love, and Practice of
Religion, and thereby the Interest and Honor of GOD in the World! What
conspicuous Testimonies from Heaven have some of GOD's faithful Ministers
received, in the extraordinary Success visibly attending their Labors for the
Conversion of Sinners, and the Edification of Saints! And when at last called
off the Stage of Time, how gloriously have the Scenes of a holy and useful Life
shut up in a serene and peaceful, if not joyful and triumphant Death! -- Shall
we not own now, that JEHOVAH is the LORD GOD of the holy Prophets, in a blessed
transcendent Sense, very visibly in the present World?

Yet it must be remembered, even all this does not take in the complete Scope
and Intention of those comprehensive Words, The LORD GOD of Elijah: But the
Expression has a further View, and reaches to another and better and eternal
World. Elisha (in our Text) looks beyond the present Life, and even after the
Prophet's Departure out of this temporal State adores God as still the LORD GOD
of Elijah. In Truth, it is especially with an Eye to a better Country, that is,
an heavenly, into which the Saints are translated finally, that GOD is said to
be not ashamed to be called their GOD: There it is that He bestows (...) 'em
perfect Happiness and Glory, according to the full Emphasis of this big
Expression. And in that blessed upper World holy Prophets have distinguishing
Rewards assigned them. None indeed was ever (that we know of) translated
thither in a Chariot of Fire, and without seeing Death, save Elijah and Enoch,
and perhaps few have a greater Reward in Heaven: Yet every Saint arrives as
safe, under the Conduct of good Angels, in the World of happy Spirits, though by
the common and inferior Road of Mortality, and every faithful Prophet meets a
glorious signal Reward in the Mansions above. In the City of God there are
different Degrees of Happiness, a Diversity of Privileges and Honors. And the
blessed God will decree a very advanced Glory and Felicity to his holy
Prophets, discriminating them in their future Recompenses, in Proportion to the
varying Measures of their present Improvements in real Holiness, and of their
intended Services, if not their actual Usefulness in this World. Peter, an
inspired Prophet and Apostle, not only hopes himself to be a Partaker of the
future Glory, but assures the faithful Elders and uninspired Prophets, that
when the CHIEF SHEPHERD shall appear, They also shall receive a Crown of Glory
which fades not away: and it will, as to many, be a very rich and refulgent
Crown, a far more exceeding (as well as eternal) Weight of Glory. As the
aspectable Heavens in their several Parts vary to our Eye in their Degrees of
Light and Splendour: So likewise is it with the Saints in their separate State,
and in the Resurrection-World. They (says the Prophet) that are wise (wise to
Salvation of their own Souls) shall shine as the Brightness of the FIRMAMENT
(which is a great, yet fainter Brightness) and they that have turned many to
Righteousness (so approving themselves wise to win others Souls) shall shine
forth as the STARS (with a superior and more remarkable Luster) for ever and
ever. The SUN of Righteousness will shine on such with his superlatively
splendid and benign Rays: and the SAVIOR will express the GOD to them in a
most transcendent Manner, by possessing them of the sublimest Happiness, and
transforming them into the Image of his own Glory, with a peculiar Perfection
and Eminence that shall put a visible eternal Distinction upon them.

And now the happy Thought we have been dwelling upon, might be improved to a
great Variety of excellent practical Purposes, in a large APPLICATION: But I
shall suggest only the following important Conclusions.

1. Here Is Matter of Encouragement and of Awakning to the Children of the
Prophets; I mean their natural Offspring. Such are eminently Children of the
Covenant: and by their Fathers very high Profession, and near Relation to GOD,
are themselves also visibly brought nigh to Him. The Promise is to them, at
least in common with other the Children of religious Parents; for the Blessing
of Abraham is come upon the believing Gentiles, I will be a GOD to Thee and to
thy Seed: And while they wait on the LORD, they may encourage their Faith and
Hope by an Application of this great and precious Promise. But then at the same
time it should awaken a holy Fear in their Souls, to consider the awful Vows of
God which are upon them.

Though the Children of Ministers in Gospel-Days are not holy to the LORD, in the
same peculiar Sense, as were the Sons of Levi under the Mosaic Dispensation:
yet they are so in a Sense, at least in that common to all Children of
Christian Parents; separated from a World lying in Wickedness, externally
called with an holy Vocation, devoted to GOD as his visible Children, and
engaged to honor Him by all Christian Duty and Service. Yea, the Minister's
Standing in the Church of God (as well as the Advantage of an Education in a
Family well-ordered, as his ought to be) seems to raise and increase the solemn
Obligations upon his Children to a very virtuous, holy and heavenly Life. It Is
required of the Bishop (1 Timothy 3.4.) That he rule well his own House, having
his Children in Subjection with all Gravity; and (Tit. 1.6.) Having faithful
Children: which not only speaks the Parent's Obligation, but hints also the
Children's Duty. As it is expected of Ministers, that they show themselves
Patterns of good Works in general, and of relative Duties in particular: so
it is expected, that their Families (above all the Families in Israel) be
Patterns of Devotion, Order, Unity, Sobriety, Gravity. We would then command
our Households to keep the Way of the LORD. O our Children, in particular, we
exhort you to be faithful Children, and to labor for all Gravity, in Thought
and Temper, in Speech and Behavior. We warn and beseech you in the Name of
Christ and by the Love of Christ, see to it, that you do in the first place
sincerely choose and avouch the GOD of your Fathers for your GOD, and then that
you walk before Him and be perfect, walk worthy of Him, and as becomes your
Baptismal Engagements, your religious Descent, and ministerial Parentage.
Verily the Glory of GOD, the Interest of CHRIST, the Honor of the Ministry,
the Fame of New England, the Credit and Comfort of your anxious Parents, your
own Reputation and Usefulness, present Peace and future Happiness, and the
united Expectations both of Heaven and Earth from you, are all very weighty and
forcible Arguments, conspiring with one Voice, to demand and urge your
thoughtful Solicitude, earnest Prayer, and active Use of all proper Means, that
you may be found early and faithful Keepers of GOD's holy Covenant. O let that
be the upright, present and persevering Profession and Resolution of your Souls
(Exodus 15.2.) The LORD is my GOD, and I will prepare Him an Habitation; my
Fathers GOD, and I will exalt Him. Read and apply the Royal Saint's dying
Charge to his Son Solomon, 1 CHRONICLES. 28.9. Together with that very quickening
Word from the Mouth of your blessed Savior, PROVE. 8.17. -- Turn down the
Leaves where you find the Places in your Bible, and make these Texts
particularly familiar to you, often and closely meditating upon 'em, and
praying over them. O that the blessed SPIRIT of Grace may set in with the
Words, and give them a powerful and lasting Impression on your Souls! -- And
for the Direction of your general Conduct, I recommend to your frequent Perusal
(among other Parts of Scripture) that very copious, the' short Chapter, the
Second in the Epistle to Titus.

[And now on this Occasion I would apply what has been said more particularly
to my own Children, and take the Opportunity in this public manner to leave my
most solemn Charges upon them. Hear, my Children! You will easily believe me
when I tell you, GOD is my Record, how greatly I long after you all in the
Bowels of Jesus Christ. And now I command and exhort You by the Lord Jesus
Christ, I warn and charge You now before GOD and the World, that You observe
these Things, and have 'em always in Remembrance: that You make it your first
Care to win Christ and secure an Interest in GOD as your GOD in Christ, and
then that You govern your whole Life and Practice in a just Conformity to the
holy Religion You profess; deeply concerned, and very vigilant, that the Name
of GOD and his Doctrine may never be blasphemed through YOU. Thus You may hope
for the gracious Presence of GOD with You, which is the only Source of all true
Prosperity. That was the Sum of David's passionate Wish for his beloved Solomon
(1 Chronicles. 22.11.) Now, my Son, the LORD be with thee, and prosper thou! And in
the believing prospect of this, he could cheerfully die, and leave him: for
that was his Hope, when going the Way of all the Earth, 1 Chronicles. 28.20. David
said to Solomon his Son, Be strong, and of good Courage, and do it; for the
LORD God, even MY God, will be with thee, He will not fail thee, nor forsake
thee.]

But to proceed in our Improvement of the Point;

2. This affords Direction and Incentive to Candidates for the Ministry, in
their preparing for and entering into it. Undoubtedly, as the Apostle observes,
This is a true Saying, If any Man desire the Office of a Bishop (or
Gospel-Minister) he desires a GOOD Work; a Work good in it self, and good in
its Tendency, acceptable to GOD, and profitable to Men, delightful in its
Nature, and happy in its future Reward. We may well think, it is very pleasing
in the Eyes of GOD to see any desiring this Office (so nearly relating to His
own Kingdom and Interest) if their Thoughts be uprightly bent upon it, as well
as their Genius and Talents suited to it; if they have indeed given their
Hearts to the LORD, taken hold of his Covenant, and chosen Him for their GOD in
Christ: Such unquestionably have just Grounds to look on themselves Divinely
called to the Work, and may humbly hope in GOD* That He will bestow a Blessing
on their Studies, to increase their Furniture of Knowledge, Prudence, and other
a requisite Accomplishments for it; That He will open a Door for their regular
Entrance into it; And that He will be with them in it, to direct, assist, and
happily succeed them. Students in Divinity standing for the Evangelical
Ministry, are not unfitly entitled Sons of the Prophets: and should improve
this their honorary Character, as loudly monitory to 'em of their incumbent
Duty, to know and seek the LORD GOD of the holy Prophets. And they that
(together with a becoming Care of Proficiency in useful human Learning) are
solicitous, above all their Gettings, to get necessary Divine Knowledge, to get
an Understanding enlightened and sanctified, to discern spiritual Things, and
to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of GOD, to behold the Lamb of GOD, to
behold Him that is invisible, and to know Him that is True; they that begin
here, and go on with this, do very hopefully bid fair to be good Ministers of
Jesus Christ, and Workmen that shall not need to be ashamed; such really make
the best Preparations for Gospel-Service; they enter into it with the best
Advantages; lay the best Foundation for Hope of Success in it, and of Peace in
Life and Death; provide the best for a future Day of Accounts, and build strong
for a happy Eternity. The Man in CHRIST will be emphatically the Man of GOD:
and such an one the Apostle pronounces a Vessel unto Honor; a Vessel of Mercy
prepared unto Glory, and in which GOD will make known the Riches of his Glory.

But if any dare thrust themselves into the Ministry, without having first
yielded themselves to the LORD; without having first learned CHRIST, and
acquainted themselves with GOD; without having GOD enthroned in their Hearts,
and reigning over all the Powers of their Souls, over their whole internal
Temper, Principles, Views and Thoughts, as well as external Life and Actions,
having at best only the Form of Knowledge, without any Vitality in it, and the
Form of Godliness, without the Power of it; and consequently without the
necessary Evidences of a real and saving Union to Christ, Strangers to the
Communion of the Holy Ghost, and to an experimental Sense of what it is to have
the LORD for their GOD; surely such (how excellent soever a contemplative
Genius, and whatever intellectual Acquirements, or moral Ornaments they may
have, as so many plausible Marks of a Divine Mission, to recommend 'em in the
Sight of Men) can never hope to show themselves approved unto GOD, and must
stand continually exposed to the Resentments of an accusing Conscience, which
will very probably be often whispering in their Ears those just and cutting
Reproaches, Art thou a Master in Israel, and know not these things! Thou
which teach others, teach thou not thy self! -- Alas for the carnal
graceless Minister, whose god is his Belly or the World, or whose Idol at best
is Self, a false imaginary Pharisaical Self! how much more abundant Reason has
such an one very evidently (under his strong Symptoms, if not actual Sense, of
an unregenerate Mind) than the holy inspired Apostle, to entertain the jealous
Thought with a trembling Soul, which that humble Saint had his Heart so deeply
affected with (1 Cor. 9.27.) Lest that by any Means, when I have preached to
others, I my self should be a CASTAWAY! -- This awful Text stands at the
Pulpit-Door as a flaming Sword which turns every way, to guard it from the
rude Encroachments of every unhallowed Foot. How little Account soever any may
justly make of the pretended Necessity of an uninterrupted Line of Succession
from the Apostles, and an authoritative human Commission from Episcopal Hands
in Virtue thereof, to the Being of holy Orders; yet certainly Persons of any
solid Reflection must allow, that the holy Nature and Ends of the Work of the
Ministry, the holy Qualifications of the Scripture-Bishop, and the holy Vows at
his solemn Separation, the holy Eye of God upon the Preacher, and a holy future
Reckoning, are Considerations which speak the Pulpit a very sacred Enclosure,
not to be thrown open to all in Common, nor invaded by Persons essentially
deficient, in their intellectual, or moral and religious Character. We may
pertinently apply here that of the wise Man, Eccl. 5.1. Keep thy Foot when thou
go to the House of God, and be more ready to hear, than to give the
Sacrifice of Fools: for they consider not that they do evil. And that of the
Apostle to Timothy (1 Epist. 5.21, 22.) I charge thee before God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, -- Lay Hands SUDDENLY on no Man, neither be
Partaker of other Men's Sins; keep thy self pure: this (I say) is not only a
solemn Caution to the Ordainer, but strongly implies likewise a Divine Warning
to the Probationer, not to rush upon the Ministry suddenly and unprepared,
ignorant or in his Sins. 1 Timothy 3.6. Not a Novice, lest being lifted up with
Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. -- But now says the Apostle,
(2 Epist. 2.21.) If a Man purge himself from these, he shall be a Vessel unto
Honor, sanctified and meet for the Master's Use, prepared unto every good Work.

How fitly then may those Apostolical Exhortations be brought home to himself
by every Candidate for the Ministry! "Thou therefore, My Son, flee these
Things, flee youthful Lusts; but follow Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love,
Patience, Meekness, Peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure Heart:
Be strong in the Grace that is in JESUS CHRIST: Study to show thy self approved
unto GOD: Lay hold on eternal Life". -- And now he that observes and does these
Things, will highly recommend himself to the tender Affection and Delight of
his Fathers in the Ministry, as well as the People of God; and that will be
their united earnest Wish for such an one, in the Language of the Apostle's
comprehensive Benediction on his dearly beloved Son (2 Timothy 4.22.) The Lord
Jesus Christ be with thy Spirit! Amen.

3. The Point before us might be applied to recommend the Schools of the
Prophets; Colleges or Academies for the training up meet Persons to be employed
in the Ministry. Such we read of as being in Israel of Old, under the
Inspection of the Prophets, Samuel, Elijah, and Elisha: they are left on Record
for an Example to future Ages, and the Imitation thereof is doubtless very
pleasing to the LORD GOD of the holy Prophets.

A well-manag'd Education of Youth for the sacred Purpose of Gospel-Service
must needs be highly acceptable unto GOD (and therefore ought to be approved of
Men) for as His Institution has founded the Order of the Ministry, and that for
a perpetual Continuance, so His Interest and Honor are not a little concerned
in the Introduction of such into it as hopefully exhibit the Character of Men
of GOD; Men in Christ, and Men of Understanding, well studied in the Theory of
revealed Divinity, well stocked with sound Scripture-Principles, apt to teach,
able rightly to divide the Word of Truth, able also to convince Gainsayers, and
resolved to fight the good Fight of Faith, rooted and grounded in the Love of
Christ and in the Hope of the Gospel, avouching the Lord for their GOD, and
under the credible Marks of a sincerely disposed (together with a
well-furnish'd) Mind, devoting themselves to the Business of winning Souls to
Christ, that others also may have the LORD for their Covenant-GOD. The Student
thus nourished up in the Words of Faith and of good Doctrine, and knowing how
he ought to behave himself in the House of God, may truly be said to purchase
to himself a good Degree, in the Church as well as the School: and how
acceptable in the Sight of GOD, how happy the Nurseries of Learning, that are
wisely governed with a steady and prevailing View to this their principal
Design, the qualifying of Youth with sacred Knowledge, and forming the
Christian, as well as the Scholar! The Excellency and Advantage of such an
Education, and the important Duty of Tutors and Students in the public School
(as well as of Parents and Children in the private Family) are pointed out in
those remarkable Passages of the Apostle to Timothy, 2 Epist. 3.14, -- 17.
which I will leave you to consult your Bible for: and pass to observe,

4. The present Doctrine suggests one apparent Reason of Satan's Malice and
Rage against the Gospel Ministry. Against this his Heart burns with
Indignation: against this he levels the whole Artillery of the Kingdom of
Darkness. He abhors the Business, and hates the Design of the Ministry; he
dreads the Success of it; he envies and maligns the Persons employed (...) it,
and in special the more faithful, active and zealous of the Order: he confronts
them with all his hellish Arts and Powers, has his Emissaries abroad
continually, is ever laying unhappy Snares for them, and indefatigably carries
on the most vigorous Opposition to them. Hence the Divine Apostle himself
complains that Satan hindered him, and that such as were the Devil's Tools did
him much Evil, and greatly withstood him. Now what must be the Principle lying
at the bottom of this Spite at Ministers, this accursed Malignity against their
Persons, their Office and Labors? It arises doubtless chiefly from his
inveterate Hatred of GOD and the LAMB, whose they are and whom they serve. He Is
full of Rage at the Captain of our Salvation, and therefore cannot but vent his
Malice upon the good Soldier of Jesus Christ.

5. This Point affords abundant Consolation and Counsel to the Ministers of
Christ.

This directs and calls them to see to it, that they make sure of GOD for their
GOD in Truth and Reality, and that they make it their Care to carry it in all
Regards as becomes the Dignity and Sacredness of the Relation they stand into
GOD. 1 Timothy 6.11. But thou, O MAN of GOD, flee these Things, and follow after
Righteousness, Godliness, etc. They should study to exhibit the Character of
Men of GOD in their whole Ministry and Life, in their public Work, and private
Walk. How humble, lowly and self-denying should they be! how kindly affection'd
and endeared to one another! how compassionate to the Souls of Sinners! how
delighted with the Image of GOD on his Saints! how spiritually minded, devout
and prayerful! how thoughtful of GOD, zealous for his Honor, and fervent in
Spirit, serving the LORD! how resolved and how vigilant against the Powers of
Darkness, the Enemies of GOD and Enemies of all Righteousness! how bold in
their GOD, to espouse his Cause, and vindicate his Truths and Ways! how
attached to their Divine Master's Instructions and Orders, careful to show all
good Fidelity in speaking from the Mouth of the LORD, neither going beyond his
Word, and so being wise above what is written, nor yet shunning to declare the
whole Counsel of GOD! All this Duty their Profession dictates, and their
Relation to God invites to. Are they professedly Men of GOD, and will He be a
GOD to the faithful Prophets? What a powerful Motive is this to put them upon
thus taking Heed to themselves, that they fulfill their Ministry! and how
abundantly improvable for their Direction in it!

What refreshing Prospects and Reflections may this afford the faithful Servant
of GOD! Is the LORD indeed his GOD? then how joyful may he be in the
Consideration of his Interest in all the precious Promises of the Gospel, and
his Security against all the dreadful Menaces of the Law! How joyful in the
Sense of a gracious Pardon, of the Justification of Life, the Adoption of Sons,
present persevering Grace, and future everlasting Glory! Is the LORD verily
Elijah's GOD? How little Reason has he to be discouraged by any Oppositions
from Earth or Hell! W^^^ though Ahab persecute him as the Troubler of Israel, and
what though Jezebel be his sworn Enemy? If GOD be for him and with him, what can
Men or Devils do unto him! His GOD will certainly be his Shield in Danger, his
Support in Affliction, his Light in Darkness, his Defense against the
Reproaches of the Enemy, his Guide and Help in the Course of his ministerial
Work and religious Walk, the Strength of his Life, and his Hope in Death. The
holy Prophets, in a believing View of GOD as their GOD, who is nigh to them at
all times and who will never leave them, may have strong Consolation and good
Hope through Grace: and while they show themselves approved unto GOD, they need
not be ashamed of the Gospel, nor afraid of their Adversaries, nor even in
Terror of Death, the last Enemy. For the God of their Life will preserve them,
that every one shall accomplish as an Hireling his Day: and when they have
finished their Work, their Reward above will be sure and great; a Thought which
must needs be sufficient to reconcile them to Death, and make them easy under
all Events of Life.

These are some of the glorious and blessed Considerations, which that
Minister, whose GOD is the Lord, has in the midst of all his worldly Wants and
spiritual Cares, Trials, and Exercises whatsoever, to refresh his weary Soul.
By them he may and should encourage himself, when (as Elijah, who was a Man
subject to like Passions with us) he is ready to faint in his holy Warfare. By
them should he animate his Faith, invigorate his Hopes, and fortify his
Courage; and by them inflame his Zeal, quicken his Alacrity, and prompt his
Diligence in the Service of GOD: Yea, under the most melancholy Thought of a
Ministry unsuccessful, he may thus quiet his anxious Spirit, as the holy
Prophet amidst his Tears on the like sad Ocasion (Isa. 49.4, 5.) Surely my
Judgment is with the LORD, and my Work with My GOD. Though Israel be not
gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the Eyes of the LORD, and my GOD shall be
my Strength. -- So the Apostle Paul tells us his happy Experience and
triumphant Assurance (2 Timothy 4.7, -- 18.) I have fought a good Fight, --
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown. -- All Men forsook me;
notwithstanding, the LORD stood with me, and strengthened me, -- and the LORD
will preserve me to his heavenly Kingdom: Unto whom be Glory for ever and ever!
Amen.

6. Hence we may collect much of the Duty incumbent upon Christians in respect
of the Gospel Ministry, and a powerful Argument to recommend this Order of Men
to the Love and Esteem of the World in general.

(1.) Is JEHOVAH the GOD of Elijah? Is He the LORD GOD of the holy Prophets?
How then should all Men every where, that have any Sense of the Being of GOD,
entertain his Ministers with thankful cheerful Hearts; whom He now sends, not
to the Jews only, but together with them unto the Gentiles! How inconsistent,
how senseless, absurd and mad the common Prejudices of a blind and wicked World
against this Order of Persons! Behold, these Men are the Servants of the most
high GOD, which show unto us the Way of Salvation! A significant and attractive
Character, that justly invites Affection and Complacence, and should make them
welcome to all the perishing Sons of Adam. As it is written (Isa. 52.7.) How
beautiful are the Feet of Them that preach the Gospel of Peace, that publish
Salvation, that say unto Zion, Thy GOD reigns!

(2.) This points out the Obligation upon Christian Professors, in choosing the
Place of their Habitation, to fix (if possible) where they may have the
Advantage of a Gospel Ministry; at the same time it loudly rebukes them who for
worldly Accommodations forsake the Levite, and the House of God: And this
infers too the Wisdom of those that prefer the Ministry of such as have most of
the Image of GOD shining upon 'em, and most of the Spirit of GOD visibly
breathing in them; But it detects the Folly of Those who (merely out of a fond
Humor for some little differing Formalities in Worship and Discipline, out of
an angry Pique, or for some trifling Convenience, or other frivolous Pretense)
will easily forsake and cast off a Ministry owned of GOD, by the sensible
Tokens of his special Presence and Blessing, and perhaps come to give up all
Regard for it, yea lose even all Charity to it, as a regular and faithful
Christian Ministry; while yet they can glory in others, it may be, who have at
least as little of GOD appearing in their Character and Ministry, have as
little of the Truth of the Gospel with them, as little of the true Genius of
Christianity in their Preaching, and as little of the Power of Religion in
their Devotion and Practice. Hear how the Apostle rebukes this unhappy Spirit
of Schism and Envy (1 Cor. 3.4, -- 7.) For while one says, I am of Paul; and
another, I am of Apollos; are ye not carnal? Who is Paul, and who Apollos, but
Ministers, by whom ye believed, even as the LORD gave to every Man? So then
neither is the one nor the other any Thing; but GOD, who gives the Increase.
And in some following Words he thus exhorts them, Covet earnestly the best
Gifts: and yet show I unto you a more excellent Way; -- Follow after Charity,
Let all your Things be done with Charity. And the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you: My Love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.

(3.) The present Doctrine serves for Direction to the Churches of Christ in
their Election of Persons into the Relation of Bishops or Pastors among them;
which is undoubtedly their Right, by the Laws of Reason, and the Tenor of
Scripture, and justified by ancient Usage: but if they would employ this their
Privilege and Power with Wisdom and with Success, they must in the first Place
look and seek to the LORD GOD of the holy Prophets for his Guidance in the
important Affair. As when a People have received the Blessing of a Man set over
the Congregation, to go in and out before them, that is an able and faithful
Minister for the House of their GOD, they should give GOD the Praise; (Ezra
8.18.) By the good Hand of our GOD upon us, they brought us a Man of
Understanding: So likewise in the Want of such a Blessing, GOD expects by
Prayer to be sought to for it. We have that primitive Example left on Record
for our Imitation in this Regard; Act. 1.24. They prayed, and said, Thou LORD,
which know the Hearts of all Men, show whether of these two THOU have
chosen. -- And then in forming their Judgment and Choice, they must be careful
to conduct themselves by Scripture-Rule, which states the just Character of a
christian Bishop or Elder very particularly: upon an Examination of which it
will be obvious, that a Regard is to be had to his Qualifications moral, as
well as intellectual, to his spiritual and divine Endowments, as well as
rational Talents and human Virtues. Such an one stands first recommended, who
has chosen the LORD GOD of the Prophets for his GOD, and who has most of the
Spirit of the holy Prophets visibly resting upon him, the Spirit of Prayer, the
Spirit of Love and of Power and of a sound Mind; who has obtained like
precious Faith, and who adds to Faith Knowledge, especially Knowledge
Theological, both practical and experimental, as well as speculative. And to
such an one surely the thinking serious Christian will be ready to say, as the
Woman to Elijah (1 Kin. 17.24.) Now know I by this, that thou art a MAN of GOD.
Of such an one it may most probably be hoped, that the Word of the LORD in his
Mouth is Truth: and such an one is the most likely to have GOD with him in his
whole Ministry.

(4.) The Consideration of GOD, before whom they stand, should govern a People
in their Conduct toward such as are over them in the LORD; and it teaches them
to esteem 'em very highly in Love for their Work's sake. Their very Work and
Office, and the external Relation they bear to GOD and to his People, may well
endear 'em to every considerate serious Soul: but especially the faithful and
good Minister, who is internally related to GOD as his GOD, as well as united
with the People of God as his People by the common Bond of the Spirit, he who
in his Labors and Life shows himself approved unto GOD, and commends himself
to every Man's Conscience in the Sight of GOD, such an one is truly and
eminently worthy of double Honor. He himself seeks the Honor that comes from
GOD; yet deserves Esteem from Men: nor indeed can he but desire an Interest in
their Affections, with a View to their greater Satisfaction in his Ministry and
better Edification by it. And this we know, that if we have but your Hearts
engaged to us upon right Principles, inward Love will (in proportion to its
real Prevalence) dictate outward Respect, and forbid all unworthy Slights,
unkind Neglects and Discouragements. Obadiah showed how greatly he feared GOD,
when he expressed the tender Care and Bowels of a Father to the Sons of the
Prophets, and when to the Father of the Prophets he paid the Veneration and
Duty of a Son: as you may read, 1 Kin. 18.7, -- 13.

There Is a Variety of Ways, in which People may exhibit their just and friendly
Regards to the Ministry. They should maintain worthy Thoughts of the Office,
for its Relation to GOD, and Importance to Men; should diligently attend on the
public Adminstration of it, and that in all the several Branches thereof,
waiting upon GOD in all his Ordinances in Season and out of Season; should join
in Divine Worship with Seriousness and exemplary Devotion, and receive the Word
with Meekness, a grave Attention, and faithful Self-Application; should subject
themselves to the regular Acts of Ecclesiastical Discipline, and carefully
support all Gospel Order; cultivate Peace and a holy Unity among themselves,
that the Gospel may not be hindered; and do all in their Power to encourage the
Hearts, and strengthen the Hands of their Ministers, while watching for their
Souls, as they that must give an Account: help 'em by a comfortable and decent
Maintenance, by an amicable and open Correspondence with them, by affectionate
and obliging Carriage toward them on all Occasions, and by fervent daily
Prayers in the Family and Closet for them: But above all, they are desirous to
see their People edified by their Ministry, profiting by their public Labors
and private Visits; so will they thank GOD, and take Courage, whatever
Infirmities, Difficulties, Temptations, they may have to conflict with in this
present evil World.

Finally, when the Man of God dies and leaves the World, he should be followed
to his Grave with all suitable Marks of public Respect, and his Memory receive
all proper Honors. The Consideration of his special Relation to GOD, and of
the special Presence of the LORD his GOD with him, should awaken very serious
Thoughts in Survivors, and awe our Minds into a solemn Pensiveness, and holy
Mourning: for not to resent the Death of such an one, would be at once an
Indignity to his Memory, and Ingratitude to GOD, the LORD his GOD, who
displayed his own Being and Perfections to us in the Gifts and Graces of his
Servant, and used and honored him to be an Instrument of bringing many
Blessings to us, as well as keeping off Judgments from us.

When a faithful Minister dies among his People, as their Loss is great, their
Sorrow should be in Proportion. When an Elijah departs, well may they (with
Elisha) express their Grief in all the Gestures and Accents of a bitter
Lamentation: Yet in the midst of their disquieting Thoughts they have this for
their Consolation, that as their faithful MINISTER is translated to a better
World (for whither else can the holy Prophet be taken?) so the LORD his GOD
still lives and remains among them, with whom is the Residue of the Spirit.
While then they are weeping for themselves and for their Children, and while
they pay their mournful Respects to the Memory of the Dead, they may make the
living God their Confidence, and trust in Him to repair the Breach made upon
them.

And a People are called to take a solemn Notice of the Dispensation of
Providence, when any Man of God is taken out of the World, who had formerly
stood in a Pastoral Relation to them. All Survivors should lay to Heart the
Death of any publicly useful and pious Person: and when such an one has once
been related to us so nearly in the Station of a Pastor over us, it cannot but
be owned the highest Condecency, that we distinguish ourselves among the
Mourners at his Funeral, and pay very singular Respects to his Memory in all
proper Ways.

AND here filial Duty commands me to make a respectful Mention of that Man of
GOD, the Reverend Mr. BENJAMIN WADSWORTH, who for so many Years was a burning
and shining Light in this Candlestick of the LORD; though for some Years past at
the Head of the School of the Prophets among us: but has lately received a
Dismission from his Post below, to receive his Reward above.

Surely Death has in this Instance closed the Scenes of an active, useful,
valuable Life, devoted to the Honor of GOD and Benefit of his People, and worn
out with long Application to Divine Studies, fervent Prayers, and important
Services. For that was his proper Motto, SERVING THE LORD: and this must be the
honorable Inscription on his Tomb, HE HAS DONE GOOD IN ISRAEL, BOTH TOWARD
GOD, AND TOWARD HIS HOUSE.

I might go now into a very particular Account of the many good Things which
were found in him toward the Lord his God, and might venture upon a large
Encomium (even to the acknowledging of every good Thing, which was in him in
Christ Jesus) with as little Hazard of giving Offense to the most enviously
captious, as perhaps in any Case that has fallen within my Notice: But as it
has been my known Custom of late Years (for some peculiar Reasons)
industriously to decline bringing Funeral-Characters into the Pulpit, I would
even now avoid a too pompous Appearance, and Affectation of Embellishment, though
I could not persuade myself to be wholly silent on this uncommon Occasion; when
without Controversy so much is due to the Memory of the Dead, and so much
presents it self to be spoken for the Instruction of the Living, and to the
Honor of that Divine Grace, by which he was what he was.

If we should here trace him back to his first Days, and look at him as a
Student in the public School, those who were his Contemporaries, bear Witness
to his early Piety, singular Gravity, Probity, Modesty, and universal good
Behavior; to his exemplary Docility, his laudable Industry in Academical
Studies, and Proficiency in useful Literature: though, his Favorite-Study was
Divinity, the noblest Entertainment to every serious Mind, and a just
Improvement in the theoretical and experimental Knowledge of it, certainly the
best Preparative for that sacred Work, on which his Eye was fixed, yea his
Heart engaged; nor indeed without that can it be expected, any should be wise
to win Souls, without which happy Skill the most accomplished Master of Arts is
like to prove but a blind Guide, an uncouth Minister, and must make a very
awkward Figure both in his public Performances, and his private Applications
to Families and Persons under his Charge.

Or if we pass over to his last Years, and view him as presiding in the School,
we shall behold a vigilant and compassionate Father to the Sons of Learning:
continually standing before his GOD, to speak Good for them, and turn away
Wrath from them: heartily mourning the Follies of ignorant and dissolute
Youths, and weeping over them day and night in his Prayers for their Conversion
and Reformation, but rejoicing in the hopeful Prospects from others of a sober
and religious Character: highly solicitous to carry on the best Education, and
assist in forming Men and Christians for future Service in the Church and
Commonwealth; to propagate sound Principles, and encourage the most profitable
Studies; to promote the Flourishing of universal Virtue, Godliness and Honesty;
to establish the wholsomest Laws and Orders, inculcate a due Observation of
'em, and enforce them by an impartial Execution; to secure the College its
several Rights and Properties, and further the Prosperity of all its
substantial Interests. -- With what Diligence and Attention, with what Patience
and Self-denial, with what Humility and Moderation, what Gravity and Constancy,
what Caution and Circumspection, and a Care of showing all good Fidelity, he
accquitted himself in the Conduct of that Society, those (I doubt not) will
readily testify, who were the more immediate Eyewitnesses, and to whose
Province it more properly belongs.

For my peculiar Situation rather seems to call me to the Consideration of him
in this Ministerial Capacity, while so long and nearly related to this Church
and unto Me. And here I might sum up his amiable Character, in that descriptive
Language of the Apostle; A beloved Brother in CHRIST, and a faithful Minister,
and Fellow Servants in the LORD, my Fellow-Worker unto the Kingdom of GOD, which
has been a Comfort unto Me, and a Helper of your Joy.

I must confess, it was very much the superior Affection and Reverence I bore
to him, for his known general Worth, and his Reputation for Candor and
Kindness in particular, that determined me to accept the Call of this Church,
and (contrary to my first Views and Purposes) to settle so early in the
Ministry, where I might enjoy the Assistance of so pious, so prudent, so tender
a Colleague, as the Guide of my Youth. -- I Have ever looked on it indeed as a
remarkable Instance of his Meekness and Condescension, that he so willingly
conceded to the (perhaps too hasty) Desires and Attempts of his People for the
fixing one so young, unfurnished, and unexperienced, a Partner with him, in the
Charge of this ancient and then flourishing Congregation. -- Sure I am, I Have
great Reason to be thankful for the Benefit of his fatherly Advices, as well as
effectionate Prayers for me, and the excellent Example, in which he went before
and led me, for so many of my Years in the less discreet Age of human Life: Nor
was it (I trust) without some Degree of a mutual Satisfaction, that I aimed to
walk in the same Spirit, and to serve with him, as a Son with a Father, in the
Work of the Gospel. -- But do I begin to commend my self? I am checked by that
Divine Caution, Let another Man praise thee, and not thine own Mouth. However,
this Caveat against Self-Applause evidently implies in it a Permission to give
others their deserved Praise, Honor to whom Honor is due. It Is difficult
indeed sometimes to commend the Living without being suspected of Flattery: but
one would think, that in praising the Dead we should be very sincere, when we
have the awful Views of the Grave and Eternity before us. The Apostle
celebrated his living Partners, as the Glory of Christ, whose Praise is in the
Gospel throughout all the Churches: and he has drawn up a numerous Catalogue of
deceased Prophets and Worthies, whose Memory be consecrates to all Posterity.
By a Faith which wrought Righteousness, the Elders obtained a good Report: and
they are had in everlasting Remembrance.

So concerning our deceased Elder and Father, may I not apply the Commendation
given of Demetrius, and say, He has good Report of all Men, and of the Truth
it self; yea, and we also bear Record, and ye know that our Record is true! I
may appeal to You, as many of You as were of Years to observe and be acquainted
with him while among us, concerning his Ministry and Practice, Ye know after
what Manner he was with us: and your selves ( some of You of more advanced Age)
can remember and know what Manner of ENTERING in he had unto You, that it was
not in Vain Mr. Wadsworth some time in the Year 1693 (when he commenced Master
of Arts) was called by a Vote of this Church to be assistant to their Teacher
(the Rev. Mr. Allen) as a Candidate: and continued preaching statedly once or
twice a Month (alternately with the Rev. Mr. Bailey) by repeated Desires of the
Church, until they proceeded to call him to the Pastoral Office; unto which he
was ordained on Sept. 8. 1696. -- And he remained with us till the Close of
July 1725, when he went to reside at Cambridge, having been some Weeks before
installed the President of Harvard-College. -- So that this Church enjoyed his
Labors for about 30 Years.
. Ye are Witnesses, and GOD also, how holily and justly and unblamably he
behaved among us: as ye know, how he exhorted, and comforted, and charged every
one of us, as a Father does his Children.

In the Christian Life he was an Example and a Reproof to us all. An excellent
Spirit was in him, which shed a visible Influence on his external Life, Words
and Actions. He was happy in being able usually to preserve a remarkable
Tranquillity of Temper, by the Advantage of which he possessed his own Soul, as
by his mild Behavior he spread a Glory over his whole Character, endeared his
Person, and recommended his holy Profession and Ministry. He was not the Man of
Contention, the wrangling Disputant, or the furious Bigot; but hated the
detestable Name and Thing under every head, and was for letting his Moderation
be known to all Men: yet he could occasionally be warm, when he thought the
Cause would bear, and Duty required it. And as he was governed by solid
Principles, he was much for walking by the same Rule, for minding the same
Thing, and not meddling with them that are given to Change; though habitually as
well cautions in Action, as deliberate in Judgment, yet when once resolved and
clear in his Thoughts (especially if the Case was of Moment, and Conscience
sensibly interested) he would be firm and steady to his Point: however, still
not self-willed, not perversely and criminally obstinate, but ever professing
an Openness to Conviction, and able many times to give Way to the Inclinations
of Others for Peace-sake. -- He ever expressed a high Reverence for Authority
and Order, and was for supporting them in the Societies where he was concerned:
exhibiting himself a Pattern of Submission to Rulers, Respectfulness to
Superiors, and Condescension to Men of lower Degree. Yet neither at any time
used he flattering Words, or a Cloak of Covetousness, nor of Men sought he
Glory.- He conversed with much of an unaffected Composure, Simplicity and
Truth: knowing how to show Civility, without Complements; and to be affable and
pleasant, without Lightness or the usual Airs of an unguarded Mind, as well as
to be serious and reserved, without the Humors of Preciseness, or Austerity:
Easy of Access, familiar in his Visits, and his Speech seson'd with Salt,
peaceful, gracious, and such as might minister Grace and Peace to the Hearers.
-- He knew how to bear the severe Trial of froward Censures, and injurious
Treatment, with a dispassionate Silence; not rendering Evil for Evil, or Railing
for Railing, but patient, not a Brawler, no Striker. Nevertheless, he was a
faithful Reprover, and could sometimes even rebuke sharply (where he
apprehended, the Fault deserved, and the Case demanded it) as became a Hater of
Sin and Lover of Holiness, careful to keep himself pure, and not be a Partaker
of other Men's Sins: But still he would temper his Admonitions with a just
mixture of compassionate Tenderness; especially if any Man that is called a
Brother, were overtaken with a Fault, would he restore such an one in the
Spirit of Meekness, as considering himself a Man subject to like Passions with
others. -- Though ever prudent in his Economy and Expenses, sober and temperate
in all Things, not given to Wine, to Luxury and Extravagance: yet neither was
he greedy of filthy Lucre, not covetous, but a Lover of Hospitality, a Lover of
good Men, just, holy, blameless as the Steward of God; according to the
Scripture-Character of the worthy Bishop or Elder. Having his Conversation thus
without Covetousness, as he was himself content with such Things as he had, so
he forgot not to do Good unto others; knowing that with such Sacrifices GOD is
well pleased. But constantly with a religious Punctuality and Exactness laying
by the Tenth of his Incomes, sacred for ever to the Uses of Charity and
Benefaction, he had something of a Fund to repair to, as Cases presented: and
was ready to distribute, willing to communicate; sending up very frequent
Memorials before God, in giving much Alms to the People. He considered others
to provoke them unto Love, and to good Works, both by Pattern and Proposal. He
went about ( in Imitation of his Divine Master) doing Good: his Hands and his
Lips together feeding many, refreshing the Bowels of the poor Saints and
causing the Widows Heart to sing. When the Ear heard him, then it blessed him:
and when the Eye saw him, it gave Witness to him. He was a Father to the Needy:
and how often did the Blessing of them which were ready to perish, come upon
him!

He always bore the Reputation of a steady faithful Friend, and a kind obliging
Neighbor: and many at all times found in him a Counselor and a Comforter,
ready to afford 'em his best Assistances under every Difficulty.

He studied Usefulness in his own Family, both by his daily Instructions and
Prayers, showing a Deep Concern for the Souls of all under his Charge. And that
he might be found walking within his House with a perfect Heart, he was greatly
solicitous to have the Sabbath sanctified in his Dwelling: and took Heed to
himself, as well at home as abroad, that by an unblemished Example he might
induce others to a strict Observation of the Lord's Day.

In the House of Prayer, he showed an exemplary Gravity in his whole Mein and
Carriage, as one that reverenced God's Sanctuary: and when sitting under the
Administrations of others, he was a very candid, as well as attentive Hearer.
GOD's Tabernacles were truly amiable to him, and hither he would repair with a
holy Pleasure, not to be detained at any time by the little Impediments which
many plead in Excuse of their frequent Absence. Nor was his Closet less his
Delight in its Season: But GOD alone was Witness to the Spirit and Manner of
his secret Devotions. -- He was one (we have Reason to think) that having chosen
the LORD for his GOD, had his Fellowship with the Father and with his Son Jesus
Christ, and prayed always in the holy Ghost. He feared GOD above many, and used
his Name, which is Holy and Reverend, with a visible Awe upon his Mind. He
showed a great Reverence to the sacred Scriptures; honored the Works of GOD,
and adored his wise and holy Providence. He exercised himself unto Godliness in
all the various Branches of it: and was particularly remarkable for his Trust
in God, his Patience under Divine Corrections, and a humble Resignation to the
Will of Heaven, concerning him and his, as to all Events. He truly waited upon
GOD: and waited for his SON from Heaven.

In Sum, we beheld in him the rare Spectacle of an uniform Christian, the
perfect Man and the upright, consistent in his Principles and Tempers,
Profession and Practice. Yet none surely will understand me now to assert his
absolute Perfection. Even Aaron, the Saint of the Lord, was an Instance of the
Law' s making Men Priests, which had Infirmity: and Peter, that mighty Apostle,
was an Instance of the Gospel 's making Man Ministers, which are sometimes
justly to be blamed. And perhaps seldom has any one lived more under the
humbling Sense of his native Pravity and remaining Infirmity, than the deceased
Servant of Christ. However, You all knew him to be one who very conspicuously
exercised himself always to have a Conscience void of Offense, both toward God
and toward Man: and You cannot but testify with what Evenness, Constancy,
Diligence and Patience he ran his christian Race among us. The Spirit of his
Mind and Tenor of his Conversation were evidently such as spoke him an Ornament
to his Profession: and not many good Men, not many Ministers, pass through the
World with a more unsullied Reputation. Ye knew the Man and his Communication:
and I Am sure, his Memory as the devout and the just Man, the real and the
improved Saint, is precious among You.

And as the good MINISTER of Jesus Christ, I doubt not, Many are ready to rise
up and praise him. We have considered him as an Example to the Believer: the
solemn Care of which is made one special Duty of a Teacher, and the actual
Being of which is of great Consequence, to invite just Regards to his Person,
to facilitate some of the more difficult Parts of his private Work, as well as
give his public Preaching a peculiar Force and Weight, and to procure his
whole Ministry the Advantage of a special Endearment among his People. And will
You not now bear your deceased Pastor this additional Testimony, That while
among You he was a faithful Steward of the Mysteries of God, feeding your Souls
with the Bread of Life, and careful to give unto every one his Portion in due
Season! Ever mindful of the Honor and Interest of his LORD, and ever seeking
the Welfare of his Charge. I thank CHRIST JESUS our LORD (who enabled him) for
that He counted him faithful, putting him into the Ministry; and for that,
having obtained Help of GOD, he was continued so long your Servant for JESUS
sake. In him you enjoyed the nursing Father, the vigilant Bishop, and the
prudent Guide, a Seer in the Matters of GOD, who took You by the Hand and led
You in the Paths of Righteousness and Truth, with much of the Wisdom that is
from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, full of Mercy and of good Fruits, without Partiality and without
Hypocrisy. The Watchman of Ephraim was with my GOD: and how did he watch for
your Souls, as one that expected to give an Account!

He well knew how he ought to behave himself in the House of GOD, which is the
Church of the living GOD. In Prayer and Sacramental Administrations, the Man of
God wept, while he poured out his Heart before the Lord. He approached the
Throne of Grace with a filial Freedom, and yet with a godly Fear, as knowing he
had to do with a holy, as well as a gracious, heavenly Father. His
Pulpit-Prayers were usually filled with Adorations of the Attributes and
Providence of a faithful Creator, as well as the Compassions of a merciful
Redeemer: were large in the Confessions of Sin, particular in Supplications for
the most needful Mercies, and often abounded with Thanksgiving. Nor was he
unmindful to make Intercession; to pray for all Men, for Kings, and for all in
Authority, for the Churches of the Saints at home, and for the whole Israel of
God abroad. He bore the Public much on his Heart: and never forgot the Poor
and distressed.

His Sermons ( however appearing to others plain and easy) cost him usually not
a little Pains, as well in the composing them, as in the committing them to
Memory. He did not offer to his God of that which cost him nothing, nor put You
off with extemporal Effusions, or with hasty Productions. I have heard him, at
the same time that he spoke very humbly of his Performances in the Pulpit, yet
say how his Brains have sweat in the Study, and how the intense Thought of his
Mind, together with the diligent use of his Pen, has been a Weariness to his
Flesh.

He labored for the most perspicuous Method: and searched the Scriptures, to
collect the most pertinent and affecting Texts under every Head, which were
commonly numerous, and judiciously chosen. Having cleared his Doctrine, he
would follow it with Inferences, usually practical; and enforce all with a
closer Application to Conscience, in some moving Words of Exhortation. He made
it his Custom to pen down his Discourses at large, even to the writing out the
Words of every Scripture-Quotation: finished his Preparations in Season; and
then with Care got 'em by Heart. I know not, that ever he was seen to use his
Notes in the Pulpit: and being distinguished with the uncommon Talent of a very
sure and tenacious Memory, he delivered his Sermons memoriter with much
Readiness, and with a punctual Exactness (as I have sometimes had Occasion to
observe, upon the nicest Examination) according to the very Letter (not the
Spirit and Scope only) of his Premeditations, as written in his Papers; which
still he was wont to bring with him to the public Exercises, to prompt his
Memory, if there should be Occasion. However, though he sat so fair a Copy, he
never took any Pains to draw me to follow it in this Instance: nor could I ever
observe him to recommend very much this Memoriter-Delivery, when I Have conferred
with him upon it: but he rather judged the Minister's Care to impress his
Sermons upon his own Heart and Conscience, by a previous Review for practical
Ends and personal Uses, the wisest Care, as apprehending this to be the best
Way of getting Sermons by Heart. And this he would inculcate: but as for the
other, he was not for laying an unreasonable Burden on any: as it is written,
All Men cannot receive this Saying, save they to whom it is given; He that is
able to receive it, let him receive it. -- Now as to his Manner of Expression,
though in his young Days (as I have known him observe) he was pleasingly
captivated with the Rhetorical Diction of many celebreted Writers (and in
particular our famous and Rev. LEE, whose learned Labors he highly valued) yet
he soon grew less in Love with a florid Style, and addicted himself to the
using great Plainness of Speech, as conceiving it best adjusted to the Ends of
Gospel-Preaching, especially in a common Audience, and "best becoming the
Divinity and Riches of the Matter, which some while they think to adorn, do but
adulterate it", and often raise a Cloud, instead of reflecting Light. Plainness
of Phrase he certainly affected: and if at any time he might be thought to
carry this Point to a Degree beyond what an itching Ear would rather be pleased
with, we were not wont to impute it to a faulty Negligence, but assigned a
better Principle, that is, an humble Zeal to accommodate his Ministry to the
lowest Capacities, and feed the very Lambs of the Flock, the ignorant and
young, whose Souls were equally precious to him as others, while he thought
himself a Debtor both to the Wise and the Unwise alike.

As for the Subjects of his public Discourses, they were generally the
weightier Matters of the Law, or the more important Mysteries of the Gospel. He
often went over the Perfections of GOD, the Offices of CHRIST, the Graces of
the SPIRIT, the Duties of the Christian Life, (in particular, Closet-Devotions,
Family-Religion, Sabbath-Sanctification, Covenant-keeping, Plain-dealing,
Sober-mindedness, etc.) and the contrary Evils, the prevailing Sins of the
Times, the Folly of Wickedness, and Wisdom of practical Godliness, the Vanity
of this present World, the Happiness of Heaven and Misery of Hell, the Terrors
of Death and Judgment to carnal Sinners, but the Joys of both to real Saints:
such were the Points he dwelt much upon, and frequently touched on the most of
'em, with solemn Memento 's, almost in every Sermon. He fed us with the most
wholesome Food, prepared with Care and Skill, though without much of artful
Ornament; as aiming, not so much to gratify a delicate Fancy, as to nourish the
hungry Soul. -- As became a Watchman on the Wall, he seldom failed of
accommodating the Tenor of his Discourses to the various Emergencies of
Providence; that he might speak Words in Season, and take the Advantage of
Men's present Thoughts and Tempers, to awaken Sinners and quicken Saints to a
greater Mindfulness of that GOD, who governs all Events.

He performed all his Administrations with a holy Affection: discovering the
Power of Things divine and spiritual upon his own Heart, and a Thirst to
inspire the like sacred Warmth into the Hearts of others. Nor did he do the
Work of the LORD negligently, but may be truly said to have been abundant in
Labors: serving GOD day and night with unceasing Prayer, with diligent Study,
with religious Conference, and many Labors, both seen and unseen; willing to
spend and be spent in the Service of his MASTER in Heaven, and willing to have
imparted unto Us, not the Gospel of God only, but also his own Soul, because we
were dear to him.

Though he loved his Closet and Books; yet loving his Neighbor as himself, and
remembering those Words of our LORD, It is more blessed to give than to receive,
he was much abroad, usually every Day more or less, going a religious Circuit
among his People: for which Purpose he wisely redeemed the Time at home by a
diligent Use of his Morning-Hours. He judged Visiting the Flock (sick and well)
every One at his own Dwelling, too important an Instance of the Pastoral Care
to be unnecessarily omitted, as affording peculiar Opportunities for watering
the Seed sown in his public Preaching, by private dealing with Souls, and more
direct Applications to Families and Persons. He neglected not therefore the
Gift that was in him: but was instant, in Season and out of Season; no Man more
abounding in Pastoral Visits: they were seldom long indeed, yet seldom too
without Attemps to do Good, as he had Opportunity, at least by dropping some
weighty and savoury Sentence, some seasonable Counsel or Reproof. And he has
been much remarked for his Impartiality, visiting all his Charge, without
prefer^^^g one before another; communicating the Gospel privately to them which
were of Reputation, as well as unto others, and not overlooking any the meanest
Cottages, while he passed along to the richer Houses. Yet He went not up and
down as a Talebearer, or as a Busy-body in other Men's Matters, nor was he
carried about by an Athenian Temper, spending his Time in nothing else but
either hearing or telling some new Thing: But he was like the good Shepherd
that is diligent to know the State of his Flocks, and looks well to his
Herds. And very observant at the same time was he of that Apostolic Canon;
Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a Father, and the younger Men as
Brethren; the elder Women as Mothers, the younger as Sisters, with all Purity.
-- He walked circumspectly, having no Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of
Darkness, but rather reproving 'em by Word and Example. He watched in all
Things, to give none Offense, that the Ministry might not be blamed: and to
please all Men in all Things for their Good to Edification, as not seeking his
own Profit, but the Profit of many, that they might be saved. And perhaps his
private were no less useful than his public Labors: besure his Visits were of
high Account among his People, and answered this valuable End, to enlarge your
Hearts in Affection to his Person, which by a natural Efficacy conduced to make
him unto You as a very lovely Song, and not Hatred in the House of his GOD. How
often have your Souls blessed him in your secret Thoughts, and your Ears hung
upon his Lips, while You heard the gracious Words which proceeded out of his
Mouth!

And in (what I must not neglect to mention) that important Work of Catechizing
the Youth, which he took a tender Father 's Pleasure in, cannot many of You
remember how upon such Occasions, while you were yet as feeble Lambs, he
carried you often in the Arms of his Faith to the Throne of Grace for a Divine
Blessing, always praying over you with a paternal Pity and Affection, that your
Souls might be bound up in the Bundle of Life with the LORD his GOD! At the
same Time how did he feed your young Minds, according as they could bear, with
the sincere Milk of the Word; gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her
Children!

I may now appeal to you, Fathers, and say, in some select Passages of blessed
Paul 's Farewel-Speech to the Ephesians, justly applying them to the present
Case: Ye know, from the first Day that he came among You, after what Manner he
has been with You at all Seasons, serving the LORD with all Humility of Mind,
and with many Tears, and Temptations which befell him: and how he kept back
nothing that was profitable unto You, but showed You, and taught You Publicly,
and from House to House, testifying unto you all Repentance toward GOD, and
Faith toward our Lord JESUS CHRIST (which were the general Theme and constant
Drift both of his public Sermons and private Visitations) nor ceased he to
warn every one night and day with Tears. And I well remember, the happy
Consciousness of his own Integrity and Faithfulness enabled him, often in the
Course of his Ministry, to make that solemn Address to You, in the Language of
the same Apostle, I take You to Record this Day, that I am pure from the Blood
of all Men: for I have not shunned to declare unto You all the Counsel of God.
And such was his Firmness of Mind and Resolution in his Master's Work, that he
could say, still in the Apostle's Words (which too he would frequently bring
into his Sermons) Bonds and Afflictions await me; but none of these Things move
Me, neither count I my Life dear to my self, so that I might finish my Course
with Joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord JESUS, to testify
the Gospel of the Grace of GOD.

Nor was he without a desirable Success, and Acceptance in his Ministry. GOD
hunoured him before us by visibly owning his Labors, and crowning them in many
Instances with an effectual Blessing. Both in his Preaching and Visits how did
his Doctrine drop as the Rain, without Noise, but with good Effects; his Speech
distill as the Dew, prosperously, though silently, as the small Rain upon the
tender Herb, and as the gentle Showers upon the Grafs, while he published the
Name of the LORD and preached the acceptable Year of our GOD! He was truly a
Barnabas among us, A good Man, and full of the holy Ghost and of Faith, and
much People was added to the LORD, and we glorified GOD in him. -- In the
Esteem, as well as the Success he met with, GOD clothed him as with white
Robes; and I doubt not, in that Day when GOD shall open his Book of Remembrance
and bind up his Jewels, this his faithful Servant (...) be dignified with a
glorious Testimony from the Mouth of his blessed JUDGE. (Like that in Mal. 2.5,
6.)

Verily, not he that commends himself, is approved, but whom the LORD
commends: and it is the good Man that obtains Favor of the LORD. Nor does
He seldom give to such that loving Favor from Men too, which is preferable to
great Riches.

The deceased Servant of GOD was in our Eyes a real Grace to his Order and
Blessing to his Generation: accordingly held in much Reputation among us,
justly valued by his Fellow Servants in the Gospel, and highly beloved of his
People. And others that saw him, as he went the Rounds among his Flock, to
visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, yea (like another Paul or
Barnabas) to visit all the Brethren in every House, and see how they did, were
ready to rise up and call him Blessed, and to say to one another in the Words
of the Shunamite to her Husband concerning the Prophet, Behold now, I perceive
that this is an holy Man of GOD, which passes by us continually.

It will be asked by some perhaps, How then came He willing to relinquish his
Charge, or this Church to give up their Title to his Ministry? -- I remember
well my own Anxiety, and your Tears, as well as his, at our Parting (now nigh
12 Years since) when, though (I Am persuaded) we were in his Heart to die and to
live with us, yet a View to more extensive Service, and therein to the Glory of
GOD, a Care for the School of the Prophets, and therein for all the Churches,
overruled to carry him from us. No other Principles, I Am satisfied, could have
prevailed to overcome his Reluctance to leave his dear Flock, nor any other
Considerations have brought this Church into the Vote of Resignation,
concerning their beloved Pastor, which not without many Thoughts of Heart they
passed on that Occasion: such was the reciprocal Endearment between us. And I
believe, that all would have had the Springs of Grief more sensibly awakened in
them, I Am sure the aching Hearts of some had been almost disconsolate, if we had
imagined it a final Farewell ( as in that remarkable Case not altogether unlike
ours, -- Act. 20.36, -- 38.) For though we had expected to have frequent
Opportunities for seeing his Face and hearing his Voice in occasional Labors
among us, yet GOD was pleased very soon to extinguish our Hopes, by arresting
him with grievous Pains and great Infirmity, which he quickly fell into, and
which much confined him, not suffering him for these many Years to be often or
long from home. However, through the Favor of GOD to his Servant, still he was
wonderfully sustained under his Burden, and carried on in the Duty of his
Station, spirited to attend his daily Labors and Cares at the College (not
regarding his Life, when cautious Friends would sometimes check his Zeal,
saying, Master, spare thy self) and to prosecute his Studies at Home, both with
an assiduous unfainting Perseverance, till called off by the Presages of his
End coming on; the LORD (in his Providence) saying in him, as to Moses, Behold,
thy Days approach that Thou must die! And while confined (for a few Weeks) to
his Sick-Chamber, he still found that Grace sufficient for him, which had ever
been his whole Dependence in all Conditions. The LORD stood with him in his
last Encounters, and strengthened him on the Bed of Languishing, with Strength
in his Soul. As his outward Man perished, the inward Man was renewed day by
day; for which Cause he fainted not: But lay calm and patient, strong in Faith
and full of humble Submission; desiring to depart and be with CHRIST, and
wishing the blessed Time might be hastened, yet still resigned to the Will of
his heavenly Father. Favored with living Comforts in his expiring Moments, he
could and did with a lively Hope commit his Soul into the Hands of his dear
REDEEMER, in whom he had believed, and whom he had preached and served; leaving
his dying Testimony for CHRIST, his Truths and Ways; trembling for the Ark of
GOD, and praying for the Peace of Jerusalem; commending all about him to GOD,
and to the Word of his Grace, and expressing the best Wishes in solemn manner
for one and another that made their respectful Visits to him. -- May I never
forget the Blessing wherewith the Man of GOD blessed Me before his Death! And
may the LORD GOD of Elijah, who only can command the Blessing, cause it to rest
upon me, in my Service here on Earth, while the happy Spirit of my departed
Father is enjoying his Reward in Heaven, as his Flesh, now laid in the Dust,
rests in Hope.

SUCH WAS THE MAN, WHOM GOD HAS TAKEN!

I pretend not indeed to have drawn his Character at full Length, and in all
its lovely Proportions, though I Have held you long upon it, beyond my first
Intention. There may have happened some material Defects; but I am not
conscious of any faulty Excesses, nor yet of any artful Glosses, to set it in a
false Light. The Reflection now is obvious, that we find, an uncommon
Assemblage of very valuable useful Qualities form his amiable Character; such
as speak him Great in the Sight of the LORD, and such as may well make his Name
precious with all that have a just Idea of real Greatness.

It may not be amiss to repeat here an Observation I Have met with: "Though many had
made a brighter and greater Figure in the Eye of the World, than John, yet
CHRIST prefers him to them all; There has not risen a GREATER than John the
Baptist. Those are the greatest Men, that are the greatest Saints, and the
greatest Blessings, under the vital Influence of the Spirit of God and of
Glory. -- I may therefore with a singular Propriety apply that well known
Lamentation, in the present Case, Know ye not that a GREAT MAN is fallen this
Day in Israel!

And now shall we not all mingle our Tears over the Grave of the Man of GOD,
mark the perfect Man, and mourn our own and the public Loss in the Death of a
Father in Israel!

We heartily sympathise with the bereaved Family and Relatives: and pray GOD to
comfort the many Mourners on this Occasion. May the GOD of all Grace and
Comfort, in particular, support his Handmaid, the desolate Widow, under her
heaviest Sorrow! May her MAKER still be her Husband, and remember her, the
Kindness of her Youth, and Love of her Espousals, and yet more sensibly espouse
her to Himself in Loving kindness, give her now the Oil of Joy for Mourning,
and the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness!

May the bereaved College have this Stroke of the Divine Hand upon it
sanctified, both to the Master and the Scholar, even to all belonging or
related to it! And may the GOD of the Spirits of all Flesh choose out an Elisha,
to succeed in the present Vacancy, on whom He will cause to rest a double
Portion of the good Spirit, so visible on the Elijah taken from their Head! --
May this Death be sanctified also to Ministers, and all of public Character!
May We, the Ministers of this Church in particular, hear GOD's Voice, speaking
to us in louder Accents, and be excited to our Work, as by the Thought of
Mortality and a future Account, so by wise Reflections on the Example left us
by the deceased Servant of GOD! -- Brethren, pray for us.

O that this Church and Congregation may have the Spirit of GOD speaking
powerfully to them on this Occasion, awakning a due Remembrance of the Man of
God, and reviving the good Impressions of his Ministry! GOD expects, we
remember and hear the Words, which He has cried to us by his former Prophets
(Zech. 7.7, 12.) and by his Apostles (Jude, ver. 17.) And that Exhortation
seems to refer to the ordinary standing Ministry (Heb. 13.7.) Remember them
which have spoken to you the Word of God, etc. -- It Is observable, Our Lord (as
in Matthew. 11) spoke honorably of John, when he had finished his Testimony and
was fallen into some Oblivion; intending by what he said, to retrieve his
declining Memory, and to restore his dying Work by reviving the People's Regard
to his Preaching, which they had formerly (...) zealous to hear, and which
therefore they ought now to think it worth some Care to recollect. -- In
Conformity to this great Example, I have been stirring you up, by Putting you
in Remembrance: I Have done it with a View to your Profit, as well as to the
Praise of the Deceased, and in both to the Glory of GOD. Let us give GOD the
Honor of all the Gifts, Graces and Usefulness of his Servant; be thankful that
we enjoyed such a Blessing in his Ministry; examine our Improvements under it,
and pursue the Ends of it by a lively practical Remembrance.

Reading his printed Works will serve to keep up his Memory, and (as it were)
perpetuate his Ministry among us. I commend to you in particular his valuable
familiar Explanation of the Assembly's Catechism, his labored Treatise on
Conscience, and his judicious Guide to the Doubting. That was the Text which
animated him in his many Publications, 2 Pet. 1.12, 15.

We shall do well to stir up one another by way of Remembrance. -- We shall do
well to review him as in the Pulpit and in his Visits, and recollect in
particular (as we are able) any remarkable Instructions, Advices, or Reproofs,
we received from him: and let us be careful to maintain a good Remembrance of
him always, even as it is meet, being mindful of his Tears, and following his
Faith. I trust, there are some among You, that were his Hope on Earth, and will
be his Joy and Crown in Heaven: let such still live the Credit of his Ministry
by a holy Perseverance. But may we not fear, there are others, whom the Word
preached by him did not profit? Yea, are not some of You conscious, You were a
Grief to his righteous Soul? Let such tremble it the awful Prospect of his
standing a Witness against you in the Day of Judgment. And (as it is written,
Ezekiel. 33.33.) when it comes to pass (lo, it will come) then shall ye know that
a PROPHET has been among you. O fear, left you be put to mourn at the last,
when there is no Remedy.

Let us all hear GOD speaking to us in those Calls of his Providence and Word
(2 Chronicles. 20.20.) Believe in the LORD your GOD, believe his Prophets. And (Jam.
5.10.) Take the Prophets, which have spoken in the Name of the Lord, for an
Example. -- Let us suppose the Man of God himself addressing us (as in Phil.
4.9.) Those Things which ye have both learned and received, and heard and seen
in ME, do; and the GOD of Peace shall be with You.

To conclude, Let us all now (as they, 1 Samuel 7.2.) lament after the LORD; and
with Elisah, inquire for the GOD of Elijah: making it our great Concern to
secure the gracious Presence of the ever-living GOD with us, which was the Sum
of our departed Friend and Father's dying Wishes for us. Let our Inquiry be
frequent and persevering, fervent, penitent and believing, sincere and
practical. A just Respect to the Memory of the Deceased, the Honor of God, and
the Interest of Religion, our own Safety and Happiness, are Considerations that
unite to persuade us into such an Inquiry. This is one genuine Fruit of the
Divine Nature in us, and a hopeful Sign of the Divine Presence with us; and it
bodes well to us for the coming World. If we have Elijah's Grace, we shall
attain his Glory too. Faith, Love, Hope and Desire intense are as the fiery
Chariot and Horses to mount us up into heavenly Places now: and Angels will
conduct us thither when we die, gathering our Souls to the Assembly of
glorified Spirits in Paradise: and in the Resurrection-Day we shall see one
another's Faces with Joy. GOD will raise the dead Bodies of the Saints, and
show them alive to us, as He did Elijah with Moses to the Disciples in the
Mount of Transfiguration: but with this happy Circumstance of Difference, that
ours will be a final Meeting, and in greater Glory; for we shall dwell together
in the blissful Presence of GOD through the Ages of eternal Futurity. Read 1
These. 4.13, -- 17. and comfort one another with these Words. Now the God of
Peace be with us all! AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 8. lin. 13. read, But by my -- P. 14. l. 12. read, meaning the -- P. 42
l. 35. read, the Hope of future -- P. 61. l. 35. read or Reproof --.

N. B. Then are a few lighter Escapes of the Printer: but that of the Author in
his Prefatory Epistle especially asks Candor; the Hint (I mean) of some few
Additions to the Sermon. For, notwithstanding I really intended no other, when
I sent the Preface to the Printer, this having been dispatched before I entered
upon the Transcript of my Sermon, yet (through the Divine Favor my Hands being
strengthened beyond my Fears, as I was newly under a Return of great
Indispositions) I found an Inclination to make some Additions not at first
designed. Because when I came to the several Heads of USE (most of which were
barely hinted in the Pulpit) I could not persuade my self to let them pass the
Press without something of Inculcation; so I freely indulged the Impressions
upon me. And they are the Enlargements here, that have swelled the Sheets to
this enormous Size. However, I hope the Reader will find his Edification the
better consulted upon the whole: and if so, as I surely shall not repent my
Paint, so others will the more easily forgive me this Wrong.


