A Chronological History OF NEW ENGLAND In the Form of ANNALS:

BEING A summary and exact Account of the most material Transactions and
Occurrences relating to THIS COUNTRY, in the Order of Time wherein they
happened, from the Discovery by Capt. GOSNOLD in 1602, to the Arrival of
Governor BELCHER, in 1730.

WITH AN INTRODUCTION CONTAINING A brief Epitome of the most remarkable
Transactions and Events ABROAD, from the CREATION: Including the connected Line
of Time, the Succession of Patriarchs and Sovereigns of the most famous
Kingdoms and Empires, the gradual Discoveries of AMERICA, and the Progress of
the REFORMATION to the Discovery of NEW ENGLAND.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A.

VOL. 1.

Deuteronomy. XXXII.7. Remember the Days of Old, consider the Years of many
Generations.

Job VIII.8. For enquire, I pray thee, of the former Age, and prepare thy self
to the Search of their Fathers.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed by KNEELAND and GREEN for S. GERRISH, MDCCXXXVI

To His EXCELLENCY JONATHAN BELCHER, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief
i^ and over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England,
etc. To the Honorable SPENCER PHIPPS, Esquire Lieutenant Governor, And to the
Honorable His Majesty's COUNCIL and House of REPRESENTATIVES of said Provi^ce.
THE PROVINCE under your united Care being the Principal of the NEW ENGLAND
Governments, containing especially the Two first Colonies of PLYMOUTH and the
MASSACHUSETTS, from whence the Others chiefly derived, and having the greatest
share in the following Work; To whom could a Son of the Province more properly
offer this Fruit of his Labors, than to Your EXCELLENCY and HONORS?
Especially when he beholds you as mostly if not wholly Descendants from the
worthy FATHERS of these Plantations: whom Yourselves and Posterity cannot but
have in everlasting Honor, not only for their eminent self Denial and Piety,
wherein they set Examples for future Ages to admire and imitate; but also for
their great Concern that the same VITAL and PURE CHRISTIANITY and LIBERTY both
Civil and Ecclesiastical, might be continued to their Successors; for which
they left their own and their Fathers Houses in the most pleasant Places then
on Earth, with many of their dearest Relatives, and came over the Ocean into
this then hideous Wilderness: And the peaceful Fruits of whose extraordinary
Cares, Labors, Hardships, Wisdom, Courage, Patience, Blood and Death, we under
the DIVINE Protection, and the Justice of the Best of KINGS, enjoy.

It is to these we firstly owe our pleas^nt Houses, our fruitful Fields, our
growing Towns and Churches, our wholesome Laws, our precious Privileges, our
Grammar Schools and Colleges, our pious and learned Ministers and Magistrates,
our good Government and Order, the Public Restraints of Vices, the general
Knowledge of our common People, the strict Observation of the Christian
Sabbath; with those Remains of Public Modesty, Sobriety, Social Virtues, and
Religion; for which this Country is distinguished among the British Colonies,
and in which we are as happy as any on Earth.

In the midst of our great Advantages, you will doubtless take a noble and
useful Pleasure, in reviewing the Names and Actions of your PREDECESSORS; that
you may imitate their Virtues: as also in surveying the gradual STEPS that led
to our present Situation; together with the Train of PROVIDENCE appearing for
us, sometimes indeed afflicting and then delivering, but preserving us through
all our Dangers, disappointing the Designs of Enemies, maintaining our
invaluable Liberties, and causing us to grow and prosper; that the SOVEREIGN
POWER who has formed, preserved and blessed this People, may receive his due
and grateful Adorations.

It is the orderly Succession of these Transactions and Events, as they
precisely fell out in Time, too much neglected by our Historians, that for some
years past I have taken the greatest Pains to search and find, even vastly more
than in composing, and which through a world of Difficulty and much Expense, I
here present You: not in the specious Form of a proper History, which admits of
artificial Ornaments and Descriptions to raise the Imagination and Affections
of the Reader; but of a closer and more naked REGISTER, comprizing only Facts
in a Chronological Epitome, to enlighten the Understanding: some what like the
Form of Usher's ANNALS, which a competent Historian may easily fill up and
beautify.

Nor is the Design of this Dedication, as is usual with Others, to implore your
Patronage of the Work in General at all adventures, or to palliate or excuse
the Faults or Mistakes therein: but rather humbly to appeal to your collective
and superior Knowledge, that it may more thoroughly be examined, every Mistake
of Fact discovered, and the Remainder only justified.

It would be too high a Presumption in me, as well as too intruding on your
more important Cares, to supplicate a Public Examination or Correction of this
Composure. But if it were as worthy as the Reverend and Learned Mr. HUBBARD's
Narrative of the Indian War; for the Perusing and Approving which, three
honorable Magistrates were deputed by the Governor and Council of the
Massachusetts Colony in 1677, One of whom was a Major General, and the other
Two were after -- Governors: Upon rectifying every Error, such a Public
Approbation would Consign it as a true Report of Facts, to the Regard and
Credit both of present and of future Generations.

I should now conclude, were it not for an Observation of too great and public
Moment to be here omitted; which is as follows, --

That when the Founders of these Colonies came over, it was a Time of General
Tyranny both in Church and State through their MOTHER ISLAND; under which the
British Kingdoms loudly groaned, as the united Voice declared both of their
LORDS and COMMONS in several PARLIAMENTS both of ENGLAND and of SCOTLAND, the
only National Representatives and the most proper Witnesses of the National
Oppressions; a thousand times more credible than any particular Writers. From
which those Kingdoms could never obtain a Legal and Established Deliverance
till the Glorious REVOLUTION in 1688; nor could apprehend it to be sufficiently
secure^ till the happy ACCESSION of King G^ORG^ ^he I, to the (...) THRONE in
1714: a (...) who was a Grandson by the Princess SOPHIA of that most Excellent
KING and QUEEN of BOHEMIA; whom the P^ritans admi^'d and loved, whom they
grieved to see so much neglected in their bitter Sufferings by the Court of
ENGLAND, and whom those who came over Hither represented to their Posterity in
^he most amiable Character. Of which I can my self bare Witness: for though Born
in a remoter Corner of this Land, yet while in the Arms of a knowing and
careful Mother, a Granddaughter of the first Race of Settlers; next to the
Scripture History, she gave me such a View of the Reformation, and of the
Sufferings and Virtues of those renowned PRINCES, as raised my Joy with Others
when the first hopeful Prospect opened of their PROTESTANT DESCENDENTS in the
ILLUSTRIOUS HOUSE of HANOVER being advanced to the BRITISH THRONE, and carried
us into unbounded Transports when our Eyes beheld it.

Upon this Occasion HIS EXCELLENCY will forgive me, if for the Honor of His
Country, as well as for his own, we boast of One among us, who inspired with
Zeal for the Succession of that ILLUSTRIOUS HOUSE, even in the Joys of Youth,
twice brake away, viz. in 1704 and 1708, and passed a double Ocean; that He
might with Rapture see, and in his Country's Name express the Ardour of their
Vows to THAT MOST IMPORTANT FAMILY; in which under Heaven all the Welfare of
three mighty Nations, and even of all the Protestant States and Kingdoms in the
World, as well as the Liberty, Religion and Felicity of these Colonies and
Province were involved. A celeb^ated Instance pe^uliar to Himself alone; that I
presume no other American can pretend to; and for the Fatigue and Pains, I
suppose no other Subject of the whole British Empire: which redounds to the
Glory of the LAND that bred Him, that parted with Him and received Him with
Applause; and the happy Consequence whereof, at the Head of his Country, He now
enjoys.

May that BLESESD FAMILY remain upon the Throne and Prosper as long as the Su^
endures: May they spread their ^^^^NCHES to every State and Kingdom round
about, (...) therewith extend the British Happiness. May THESE PLANTATIONS,
flourish under their benign Influence to the End of Time. May YOUR EXCELL^NCY
enjoy their Smiles to the lastHour of Life; and thereby with the Divine Grace
and Bles^ing, long lengthen our Tranquillity and advance our Welfare. May YOUR
HONORS, now taking your Turn to rise and Shine in the exalted Places of your
wise and pious Predecessors, follow their bright Examples, preserve the dear
DEPPOSITA resigned to your faithful Trust, and transmit them safely to your
Successors: In all yourCouncils may you look to future as well as present
Generations; whom you may see depending on your Care and Wisdom, as we unborn
depended on the Care and Wisdom of those before us: and may You ever keep in
View the Principal and Noble ENDS of these Religious Settlements. So will you
be with our Dear FOREFATHERS, an eternal Excellence, and the Joy and Praise of
perpetual Generations.

Your Excellency's and Honors most Obedient Humble Servant, Thomas Prince.
Boston, Nov. 24 th. 1736.
The PREFACE, Relating the RISE, DESIGN, and PROGRESS of this Composure.
NEXT to the sacred History, and that of the Reformation, I was from my early
Youth instructed in theHistory of thisCountry. And the first Book of this Kind
put into my Hand was the New England Memorial composed by Mr. Secretary Morton:
being the History of PLYMOUTH COLONY from the Beginning, to 1668. Gov. Thomas
Dudley's Letter to the Count^ss o^ Lincoln, informed me of the Beginning of the
MASSACHUSETTS COLONY Mr. WilliamHubbard and Mr. In^rease M^ther's Narratives of
the Indian Wars in 1637, 16^5 and 1676, with Mr. Cotton Mather's Hist^^^ of the
Indian W^rs from 1688 to School, gave me a sufficient View of those calamitous
Times. Mr. Matthew Mayhew's Account o^ the Vineyard-Indians, Mr. Increase
Mather's Record of Remarkable Providence, Mr. Cotton Mather's Lives of Mr.
C^tt^n, Norton, Wilson, Davenport, Hooker, Mitch^l, Eliot, and Sir William
Phipps, increased my Knowledge: And much more ^as it advanc^d, upon the coming
out of the last men^ioned Author's Eccl^siastical History of NEW ENGLAND, in
(...) in 1702

Yet still I longed to see all these Things disposed in the Order of Time
wherein they happened, together with the ^^se and Progress of the several
Towns, Churches, Counties, Co^onies, and Pro^inces throughout this Country.

Upon my entering into the College, I chanced in my l^isure Hou^s to read Mr.
Chamberlain's Account of the (...) Libr^ry: Which excited in me a Zeal of
laying hold (...) every Book, Pamphlet, and Paper, both in Print and Manus^ri^t
which are either written by Persons who lived here, or that have an^ Tendency
to enlighten our History.

When I went to England, I met with a great Variety of Books and Pamphlets, too
many here to name, relating to this Country, wrote in ancient Times, and which
I could not meet with on this Side the Atlantic. Among others, in a History of
NEW ENGLAND, from 1628 to 1651, Printed in Quarto London 1654, I found many
Particulars, of the Beginning of our several Churches, Towns and Colonies,
which appear in no other Writer. The r^nning Title of the Book is
Wonder-Working Providence, etc: and in the genuine Title Page, no Author is
named. Some of the Books were faced with a false Title Page; wherein the Work
is wrongly assigned to Sir F. Georges: But the true Author was Mr. Johnson of
Woburn in New England, as the la^e Judge Sewall assured me, as of a Thing
familiarly known among the Fathers of the Massachusetts Colony.

In my foreign Travels, I found the want of a regular History of this Country
every where complained of: and wa^ often moved to undertake it, though I could
not think my self equal to a Work so noble as the Subject merits. The
extraordinary Talents which Le Moyn and others require in an Historian were
enough to deterr me. And yet I had a secret Though It, that upon returning to my
native Country, in case I should fall into a State of Leisure, and no other
engaged; I would attempt a Brief Account of Facts at least, in the Form of
Annals.

But, returning home in 1717. Providence was pleased soon to settle me in such
a Public Place and Circumstance* as I could expect no Leisure for such a Work,
and gave it over. I could propose no other than to go on with my Collections,
and provide Materials for some otherHand: Which I have been at no smallExpence
to gather: Having amassed above a Thousand Books, Pamphlets, and Papers of this
Kind in Print, and a great Number of Papers in Manuscript: So many indeed, that
I have never yet had Leisure enough to read them. For I should want at least as
long a Time as Dio: Who says he had been not only Ten Years in Coll^cting ^or
his History, but also Twelve Years more in Compiling it: And yet by his Book of
Dreams and Prodigies, presented to Severu^* one would think he had sufficient
Leisure. Lib. ^2. c. Xip^ilino.


In 1720 came out Mr NEAL's History of NEW ENGLAND, which I was glad ^o see,
and pleased both with his Spirit Style and Method. I could wish nothing more
than that he had all the Helps this Country affords. And though he has fallen
into many Mistakes of Facts which are commonly known among us, some of which he
seems to derive from Mr. Oldmixon's Account of NEW ENGLAND in his British
Empi^^ in America; and which Mistakes are no doubt the Reason why Mr. Neal's
History is not more generally read among us: yet considering the Materials this
worthy Writer was confined to, and that he was never here; it seems to me
scarce possible that any under his Disadvantages should form a better. In
comparing Him with the Authors from whence he draws, I am surpised to see the
Pains he has taken to put the Materials into such a regular Order: And to me it
seems as if many Parts of his Work cannot be mended.

Upon the Account of th^se Mistakes as also many Deficiencies which our written
Records only are able to supply; I have been often u^ged here to undertake our
History, but as often declined for the Reasons aforesaid. However being still
solicited, and no other attempting; at length in 1728 I determined to draw up a
short Accoun^ of the most remarkable Transactions and Events, in the Form of a
mere CHRONOLOGY; which I apprehended wo^ld give a Summary and regular View of
the Rise and Progress of our Affairs, be a certain Guide to futureHistorians,
make theirPerformance easier to them, or assist Mr. Neal in correcting his
Second Edition; and which I supposed would not take above Six or Eight Sh^ets,
intending to write no more than a Line or two upon every Article.

The Design was this, --

A summary and exact ACCOUNT of the most material Occurrences rela^ing to these
Parts of the World from their first Dis^overy in the Order of Time in which
they happened: Wherein, besides the most REMARKABLE PROVIDENCE; such as
appearances of Comets and Eclipses, Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations*
Droughts, Scarcities, Fires, Epidemical Sickn^ss^s, memorable Accidents and
Deliverances, Deaths of M^n of Figure, with their Age and Places where they
lived and died, as also of the most aged with the Number oftheir Offspring*
there will be brief Hints of our HISTORICAL TRANSACTIONS, as the Rise and
Changes of Governments, the Elections of chief Mag^strates, the Grants
andSettlement^ of Towns and Precincts, their Indian and English Names, the
F^rmations of Churches and Counties, the Ordinations and Removals of Ministers,
building Houses for public Worship, Forts and gre^^ Bridges, erecting Grammar
Schools and Coll^g^s, extraordinary public Fasts an^ Thanksgivings,
Propagation of the Gospel, remarkable Law^ and Ex^cutions, as also Wars,
Assaults, Expeditions, Battles, Pea^e, etc* The diff^rent Dates assigned to
various Occurrences, wi^^ be car^ful^yCompared and Corrected, and the very
Years, Months and Days, if possible as^er^ained. Together with an INTRODUCTION,
containing a Brief Account of the most remarkable Persons, Transactions and
Events abroad,

1. From the CREATION to the Birth of CHRIST, according to the Computation of
the b^st Chronologers.

2. From thence to the Discovery of the NEW WORLD by CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS.

3. From thence to the Discovery of NEW ENGLAND by Captain Gosnold.

The Ministers throughout this Country were desired to make their careful
Enquiries and send in their accurate Accounts as soon as possible; that such
material Pass^ges might be preser^ed from Oblivion, and so desirable a
Collection might be hastened to the public View.

Upon my publishing this Design, I first engaged in the INTRODUCTION: but
quickly found, as Chambers in his Cyclopaedia observes, Chronology to be vastly
more difficult than one can imagine who has not applied himself to theStudy*
and as Alsted in his Thesaurus, says, That his other Labors were but as Play
to ^^is* In my Pr^faces to the several Periods and the follo^ing Notes, I
observe the Writers with whom I agree and differ, as also some of the greatest
Difficulties. And as I would not take the least Iota upon Trust if possible; I
examined the Original Authors I could meet wi^h: and some of the Articles were
so perplexed, as i^ cost me Fortnight`s Thought and Labo^r before I co^ld be
fully satisfied. The mee^ Tables and Calculations I was forced ^o make would
compose a Folio To find out not only ^he Year and Month, but even the Day of
every Article, I was obliged to search a great Number of Writers: And the
knowing Reader will see that so many precise Poi^^s of Time, are no where to be
found, but by such a Collection as I have for this Intent perused.

As to the LINE OF TIME -- It is measured by the continued Succession of
Patriarchs and Sovereigns of the most famous Kingdoms and Empires. For the
three First Periods, viz. (1) Of the Patriarchs, (2) Judges of Israel, and (3)
Kings of Judah to the Destruction of the first Temple and of ^erusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar; I leave the Samaritan Pentateuch, the Septuagint and Ios^phus,
which several Writers both ancient and modern follow; and I strictly keep to
the HEBREW BIBLE, of which it is said, our old English Bid wa^ the first who
made it theRule^of ancientChronology. In the fo^rt^ Period, viz. from thence
through the Reigns of the Babylonian, P^rsian, Grecian and Egyptian Monarchs, to
the Roman Emperors; I keep to Ptolemy's famous Astronomical Canon, and give it
exactly through the Period. In the fifth and s^xth Periods from thence to the
Monarchs of England; I make use o^ Tac^tus, Su^tonius, Dio, Herodian, Eusebius,
Evagrius, Socrates Scholasticus, Calvisius, Helvicus, Petavius etc. And in the
seventh and last, from thence to the Beginning of the Reign of K. James I. in
England, when He became the first Monarch of GREAT BRITAIN; I keep to the
anc^^nt Au^^ors in Latin to the Reign of Edward II: of all which I am sorry
that I could not find the Saxon Chronicle in this Country.

But whereas in the Times before the CHRISTIAN ERA, I cite several Authors;
such as Calvisius, Hel^icus, Alf^ed, Petavius, Usher* etc. as agreeing in the
same Year ^ffixed to an Article, though they called that Year a different Ye^^ of
the World: I ne^d not tell the learned, that in those Articles those Authors do
not differ, as to the same Real Years, or Years of the Julian Period, or
Celestial Characters assigned to them, or in their Distance from the Christian
Era. Thus for Instance, as to the Time when Augustus took Alexandria, and put
an End to the Egyptian Kingdom; Calvisius calls it Aug. 1. in the Year of the
World 3920; Usher calls it 39^4, beginning 39^5 in the following Month: but we
beginning this Year wi^h I^nuary as the Julian Year begins, we place this
Arti^l^ (...) Aug. 1. in ^9^5: And yet this is the very same Re^l Yea^, Month
and Day, viz. Aug. 1. in the Ye^r of the Iul^an Period 4684* Cycle of the Sun
8, of the M^on 10* and the 3 ^h Year before the Christian Era; the f^^st of
which is the Year of the Julian P^riod 4^14* as all Chronologers agree. In our
Use of those Authors therefore, we turn their Years of the Julian Period into
t^ose Year^ of the World which answer them in our Chronology*

In the Introduction I also observed this Rule; that the nearer I drew to the
later Ages, wherein we grow more concerned, the larg^^ I made my Periods: And
in the Process of this Work, was gradually led on and persuaded to exceed my
first Design, which was to have made the five later Periods near a^ short as
the two former.

By that time I finished the Introduction, I found so great a Number of
Historical Manuscripts, both old and new; containing all Sorts of Records both
Public and Private, Religious, Civil and Military: that our Printed Histories
are but a small part in Comparison with them, and made me still more ready to
yield to the Solicitations of Others, to enl^rge my Design and give the
Public an Abridgement of them. For I considered that as several ancient
Records of Towns and Churches have been unhappily burnt, and some lost
otherwise; If I did not now in this Way preserve the Substance of these
Historical Memoirs, it would be daily in Danger of perishing beyond Recovery.

TheMANUSCRIPTS I haveOpportunity to search are these

In Folio -- 1. Gov. Bradford's HISTORY of PLYMOUTH People and Colony, from
1602 to the End of 1646* in 270 Pages: With some Account, at the End, of the
Increase of those who came over with Him, from 1620 to 1650, and all in his own
Handwriting. 2. The ancient Church of Plymouth Records; began by Mr. Secretary
Mor^on. 3. A Copy of the GRAND CHARTER of NEW ENGLAND, granted by K. James I.
on Nov. 3. 1620* in 86 Pages. 4. The ancient Records of the Massachusetts
Colony. 5. The ancient Records of the County of Suffolk: In the first Volume
whereof are several Letters from the M^ssachusetts Company at London to Mr.
Endicot, before they came over. 6. The ancient Records of the Town of
Charlestown: In the first Volume whereof is a particular History of the first
Coming and Settling of the English there, and in the Neighboring Places. 7.
The ancient Records of the Town of Boston; as also of the First, Second, Thi^d,
and several other later Churc^es t^ere. 8. The ancient Records of the first
Church of Roxbury, written by the famous and Rev. Mr. Eliot, and his successive
Colleagues the Rev. Mr. Danforth and Walter: In a separa^^ Part of the Book are
recorded Hints of various ancient Transactions and Events, in other Towns and
Colonies. 9. An ancient Record of the first New England Synod, viz. at
Cambridge* in 1637. 10. Plymouth Colony LAWS, from 1626 to 1660, inclusively.
11. The ancient Records of the Hon. Artillery Company. 12. The Rev. Mr. William
Hubbard s General HISTORY of NEW ENGLAND from the Discovery to 1680, in 338
Pages: And though not in his own Handwriting, yet having several Corrections
made thereby.


In Quarto -- 1. A Book of PATENTS of several Parts of NEW ENGLAND. 2. An
Original Record of the Rev. Mr. Peter Hobart of Hingham, relating Hints of
Matter^, both in his own and some Neighboring Churches also. 3. Major Ma^on's
ancient Account of the Pequot War in 1634, 5, 6, 7. 4. Major General Gookin's
History of the New England Indians, to 1674, inclusively. 5. An Original
Iournal in Latin, composed by the late Rev. Mr. Brimsm^ad of Ma^lborough, and
in his own Handwriting, from 1665 to 1695, inclusively. 6. An Account of
memorable Things in New England, from 1674 to 1687 inclusively, written by the
late Rev. Dr. Increase Mather, in his own Hand. 7. An Original Iournal of the
late Capt. Lawrence Hammond of Charlestown and Boston, from 1677 to 1694,
inclusively. 8. An Original Iournal of a very Intelligent Person deceased, who
desired not to be named; relating remarkableMatters from 1689 to 1711,
inclusively.


In Octavo -- 1. A Register of Gov. Bradford's, in his own Hand, recording some
of the first Deaths, M^rriages and Punishments, at Plymouth: with Three other
Miscelaneous Volumes of his. 2. A little ancient Table Book of his Son Major
William B^adford, afterward Dep. Gov. of PLIMOUTH-COLONY, written with his own
Hand, from 1649 to 1670. 3. Capt. Roger Clap's Account of the ancient Aff^irs
of the MASSACHUSETTS COLONY 4. An Original Register wrote by the Rev. Mr. John
L^throp, recording the first Affairs both of Situate and Bar^stable; of which
Towns he was successively the first Minister. 5. Two Original Books of Dep.
Gov. Willoughby and Capt* Hammond; giving historical Hints, from 1651 to 1678
inclusively. 6. Interleav'd Almanacks of the late Honorable John Hull and
Judge S^wall of Boston, Esqr^; of the Rev. Mr. Shepa^d the last of Charlestown,
of the late Rev. Mr. Joseph G^rrish of Wenh^m, and several others from 1646 to
1720; wherein the Facts were wrote at the Time they happened* though the Notes in
several being wrote in diverse Sorts of Shorthand, to which I was an utter
Stranger, put me to no small Pains to find out their Alphabets and
otherCharacters.


In loose Paper^ -- 1. Extracts from the PUBLIC RECORDS of the Colonies of
Pl^mouth, Conn^cticut and Rhode Island. 2. A great Number of ancient Letters
and other Papers which I have collected from several Libraries and particular
Person^. 3. Near 200 Chronological Letters sent me, collected from the Records
of several Towns and Churches throughout thi^ Country, as also from private
R^gisters, Gravestones, and the Information of aged and Intelligent Persons*


The Reader will easily conceive how large and difficult a Field now lay before
me; when all these Manuscripts were to be perused, examined, and compared both
with Themselves and with those Accounts already publ shed; their Varieties and
Contradictions sol^ed, their Mistakes discovered; the Chronological Order of
all their Passages found out; one regular Abridgement taken from them; what
several wanted, to be supplied from others; and the most material and proper
Passages, Words and Phrases selected from them all, and placed together in a
natural Order, and so as to enlighten each other*

F^r in my tracing several Authors on this Occasion: I soon sawCause to come
into the same Sentim^nt and R^solution with the Rev. Mr S^rype in his Preface
to the first Volume of his Annals of the Re^ormation; which I shall mention in
his own Words, -- I have c^osen commonly to s^t down Things in the very Words
of the Records, and Origi^als, and of the Aut^ors themselves, rather t^an in my
own, wit^out framing and dr^ssing them into more modern Lan^uage; w^ere^y the
Sense is sure to remain entire as the Writer^ mea^^ it: Wher^as by affecting
too curio^sly to change and model Words and Sent^nces, I have obser^ed theSens^
it self to b^ often ma^^ed and disguised. Yea more Scrupulous than Mr. Strype
on thi^ Account -- For instead of commonly, I have so universally observed this
Rule, that where I have inserted Sentences o^ Words of my own, for
Illustration, I have either enclosed them in Crotchets [], or added them at the
End of P^ragraphs, without any Author cited after them. And I know not that I
have ever changed an^ Word^ or Phrase^, unless they were very uncouth, or
obsolete; and then I have taken special Care to answer them ^ith other^ of the
same exact Importance: Only in some very few Instance^ I have used a softe^
Term for a severer.

In the History of o^r own Times, we may freely use our own Expressions: But in
all Accounts of Events before* every Writer must take from Others, whether he
mentions his Originals or no. And though it be more l^^oriou^, yet it seems not
only more ingenuous to cite them, but also carries more Authorit^, and gives
the inquisitive Reader greater Satisfaction. But those who have no Regard to
those Authorities, may in the reading omit them; unless where they think the
Pass^ge of too great Moment.

And here I must Observe, That Mr. Morton's History* from the Beginning of the
Plimo^th People to the End of 1646, being chieflyGov. Bradford's Manuscript
abbreviated; from hence it comes to pass that in many Article^ and Paragraphs
which I cite from Gov. Bradford, both Mr. Morton and I happen to use the same
Words and Sentences: Not that I deduce them from Mr. Morton, but because they
are the original Words and Sentences in Gov. Bradford.

Some may think me rather too criti^al: Others that I relate some Circumstances
too minute: And others, that I need not have interrupted the reading with so
many Notes in the Margin. As for the first, I think a Writer of Facts cannot be
too critical: I^ is Exactness I aim at, and would not have the least Mistake if
possible pass to the World. I^ I have unhappily fallen into any; it is through
Inadver^ency only, and I shall be obliged to those who will be so kind as to
send me their Corrections. As to the second, those Things which are too minute
with Some, are not so with Others: Those minu^e Things are observed wit^
Pleasure by the People who live in the Places where they were transacted, which
are inconsiderable to Those who never saw them: And there'^ none who
attentively re^d^ aHistory either ancient or modern, but in a great many Cases
wishes the Writer had mentioned some minuter Circumstances, that were then
commonly known, and thought too needless or small to be noted Besides, smaller
Matters are of greater Moment among a smaller People and more affect them,
which are les^ important and aff^cting as the People grow more ^^m^^ous. And I
have therefore thought it a proper Rule in History, to mention smaller Things
in the Infancy of these Plantations, which I shall gradually omit as they grow
a greater People. But as to the third, I wish I had placed many of the Notes in
the Body of the Page; and propose to do so in the Rest of the Work.

As to Impartia^ity; I know it is usual for the Writers of History to assert
it; some in their Pr^faces, others in the Front of their Works; some in the
strongest Terms, who have been notoriously guilty o^ the contrary; and I am apt
to think that many are partial who are insensible of it For myself, I own, I am
on the side of pureC^ristia^ity, as also of Civil and Religious Liberty; and
this for the Low as well as High, for the Lai^y as well as the Clergy: I am for
leaving every one to the Freedom of Wo^shipping according to the Light of his
Conscience; and for extending Charity to ever^ one w^o receives the Gosp^l as
the Rule of his Faith and Life: I am on the side of Meekn^ss, Patience,
Gentleness and Innocence: And I hope, my Inclination to these great Principles
will not by ass me to a Misrecital of Facts; but rather to sta^e them as I
really find them for the public Benefit Nor will the Nature or Design of this
Work, which is rather a Register or Coll^ction of ^atters as described by
Others, so much admit of Partiality, as a proper History where the Writer
allows himself the Freedom of using his own Expressions.

In ci^ing Fuller, for the Births, Ages and Characters of Persons, I sometimes
mean his AbelR^divivus, but o^herwise, his Church History of England. And
whereas I observe some M st^kes in Mr. Hubbara's History of New England; the
Reader may consider, that as we have only a Copy of that valuable Work, the
Substance whereof I propose to give the P^blick; some of those Mistakes may be
owing to the Transcriber only, and some that learned and ingenious Aut^or fell
into for want of Gov. Bradford's History and some other Materials which I
happen to be favored with.

In short, I cite my Vouchers to every Passage: And I have done my utmost first
to find out the Truth, and then to relate it in the clearest Order. I have
labored after Accuracy: And yet I dare not say, that I am without Mistake; nor
do I desire the Reader to conceal any he may possibly find. But on the
contrary, I offer this Work to the Public View, that it may be perused with
the most critical Eye, that every Error may be discovered, and the Correction
published in the following Volume: Which I hope will not be long a composing;
having passed through the much greater Difficulties in this First, and
abstracted many of my Materials toward the Second.

CORRECTIONS.
p page. l line. f for. r read. d dele.

In the Introduction.
PAge 2 line 5 f KINGS r MONARCHS. l 6 d and Greek. l 7 f VI. the KINGS r VII
the MONARCHS. l 11 f Arrival of the FIRST PLANTERS of Plymouth in New England,
r Discovery of NEW ENGLAND and Death of Queen ELIZABETH. p 7 l 29 f 930 r 940 p
9 l 12 f III r IV. p 22 l 30 f 943 r 945. p 24 l 9 r Brutus and Cassius. l 18 f
967 r 968. f Dec. 31. (18) r July 16. l 21 f ( c u) r ( c) l 22 d 968. Marg^n d
the whole Note (18) p26 l 5 f 750 * r 750, i. e. according to Varro and
Dio'sAccount which we here use; * Marg. l. 3 f later r ealier. p 41 l 2 d Greek
or l 5 for Restoration r Revival. p 53 l 27 f Dies r Born p 55 marg. l 2 f
Punish r Reproach. p 72 l 12 r Oct. 19. K John dies ( w f) p 89 l 17 d and that
neither the Clergy nor Convocation shall exact any Canons contrary to Law, or
without the King's Consent ( k) [This Pass^ge belonging to 1534, Ian. 15. See
Additions at the End of this Volume]

In Part I.
P 4 Mar. l 4 f calls r call. p 23 l 23 f this Winter r (...) Winter (p c) Feb.
5 ( pg). p 2^ l 21 f ( p r) r ( p s) p ^0 l 3 f The English Voyagers r Mr.
Brewster, Carver, Bradford, Winslow, with the other English Voyagers. p 77 l 20
d ( B).

In Part II. Sect. 1.
P 83 l 10 f June 12. r June 12. etc. p 91 l 28 f the r these. p 96 l 2 d Line
2, 3, 4, 5. p 105 l 23 f we agree to send, r we [agree to] send. p 114 l 9 f (
B. W) r ( B* W) or 37 ( sm. p s) p 156 Between the 2d and 3d Paragraphs insert,
Oct. 8. ( cb. pn) Lord Viscount Wim^^^^ton with 80 Ships ( cb. us) * and Ten
Thousand Land Soldiers ((...)) sails from Plymouth for Cadiz, and begins the
WAR with Spain (cb. rs.) In the Marg insert* cb, Continuation of Baker's
Chronicle. pn, Pointer. us, Rushworth. i^, Mr. James Howel's Letter^ * Dr.
Howell says 120 Ships: Mr. James Howel says above 80 of ours, besides a
Squadron of 16 Hollanders. p 15^, 158 In the Titles put K. of Great Britain,
Charles I. in the Middle a between him and the K. of France; and a between K.
Charles and the K. of Spain. p 195 l 29 f John r Io In the Marg. insert, Thus
it is written in the Massachusetts Colony Records, but whether Joseph or John be
meant, uncertain p 198 l 17 f ( bd) r ( bc) Marg. l 2 f old r odd. p 200 l 2 f
((...)) r ( crc) Marg. l 1 f old r odd. p 202 l 5 r confirm their. l 11 f as r
all. p 203 l 26 f came r come. Marg l 4 f 1629 r 1630. p 205 Marg. l 5 f seems
r seem. p 208 Marg. at the End of Note [93] insert: Unless they mean of the
Arrival of the Fleet at Charlestown. p 212 l 14 Between ( M^r) and [9^] insert
Mr. W. Vossal. Marg. l 1 d also. And at the End of the Note insert, By which it
seems he returned thither before the first Court of Assistants, which is on
Aug. 23. p 2 9 l last but one, r Alterations. In the Marg insert, But as Burnet
observes, In K. Edward's FIRST BOOK, Copes and other Garments [i. e.
PopishGarments] were ordered to be used; in his SECOND BOOK, all was laid aside
except the Surplice; yet the Queen who loved Magnificence, returns to the rules
in K. Edward's FIRST BOOK. p 250 in the two last Lines, d Section of the II. p
253 l 33 d Sect I.

A LIST of the SUBSCRIBERS.
HIS Excellency JONATHAN BELCHER, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief
over His Majesty's Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire in
New England. (for Six)

The Honorable SPENCER PHIPPS, Esquire: Lieut. Governor of the Massachusetts.
(for Two)

The Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire late Lieut. Governor of the Massachusetts.

A
THe Hon. John Alford, Esquire (for Six) Richard Abbe, Esquire of Windham. The Rev. Mr.
Hull Abbot of Charlestown. * Mr. Moses Abbot. Mr Abijah Adams. Jedidiah Adams,
M. A. The Rev. Mr. John Adams. Mr. John Adams of Wrentham ( for Six) Mr.
Matthew Adams. Samuel Adams, Esquire William Adams of New London, M. A. The Rev.
Mr. Benjamin Allen. Mr Bozoune Allen. junr. Printer. Mr Jeremiah Allen, of
Marblehead, Merchant. Jeremiah Allen, Student at Harvard Colleg The Rev. Mr.
James Allin of Brooklin. Job Almy, of Tiverton, Esquire Mr. Nathanael Ames, of
Dedham. The Rev. Mr. Nathanael Appleton, of Cambridge. Capt. Jonathan Armitage,
Merchant. Edward Arnold, of Duxbury, Esquire Mr. Jonathan Atwater, of New Haven, (
for Six) The Rev. Mr. John Avery, of Truro. John Avery, M. A. Merchant. Mr.
Joseph Austin, jun. of Charlestown.
B
The Hon. Melatiah Bourn, of Sandwich, Esquire The Hon. Theophilus Burril, of Lynn,
Esquire* The Hon. Thomas Berry, of Ipswich, Esquire Mr. Benjamin Babbidge, ( for Two)
Mr. Stephen Badger, of Charlestown. The Rev Mr. Thomas Balch, of Dedham. The
Rev. Mr. William Balch, of Bradford. * John Ballantine, Esquire Mr. John Banks. The
Rev. Mr. John Barnard, of Marblehead. Mr. Matthew Barnard. Mr. Lazarus Le
Baron, of Plymouth, Physician. The Rev. Mr. Samuel Barret, of Hopkinston. The
Rev. Mr. Benjamin Bass, of Hanover. The Rev. Mr. Joseph Baxter, of Medfield.
Mr. Gregory Baxter, of Braintree. Mr. Thomas Baxter. Mr. Samuel Bayley. Mr.
Elisha Beal, of Hingham, ( for Two) Mr. John Becham. Mr. Joshua Beck, of
Newbury. Andrew Belcher, Esquire (for Two) Jonathan Belcher, Esquire Counselor at Law
of the (...) Temple, London. Mr. Jeremiah Belknap, ( for Three) Nathanael
Bethune, B. A. Mr John Billings. Mr. Richard Billings. * The Rev. Mr. William
Billings, of Windham. Mr. Jonathan Bixby, of Boxford, ( for Two) Mr. James
Blake, of Dorchester. Mr. John Blake. Capt Joseph Blanchard, of Dunstable. Mr.
Joshua Blanchard. Pyam Blower, M. A. Merchant, (for Two) Wi^liam Bollan, Esquire
Mr. Edm^nd Booth, of Stratford, (for Six) Francis Borland, Esquire (for Six)
William Bosson, of Roxbury, M. A. (for Two) The Rev. Mr. Joseph Bourn, of
Sandwich. The Rev. Mr. Shearjashub Bourn, of Situate. Mr. ^tephen Boutineau,
Merchant. William Bowdoin, B. A. Merchant. Capt Thomas Bowen, of Rehoboth. John
Bowls, of Roxbury, ( for Six) John Boydell, Esquire (for Six) Mr Thomas Boylston.
Dr. Zabdiel Boylston, F. R. S. * Zabdiel Boylston, jun. M. A. Mr James
Bradford. Mr. Joseph Bradford, ( for Two) Simon Bradstreer, jun. of
Charlestown, M. A. Mr Joseph Brandon, Merchant. William Brattle, of Cambridge,
Esquire Mr. John Breck. ^benezer B^^dge, B. A. (for Two) Joseph Bridgham, M. A.
(for Six) Mr* Samuel Bridgham, (for Two) Mr. Michael Brigden, of Charlestown*
Fr^ncis Brinley, Esquire Mr John Brintnall. * Thomas Brintnall, M. A. Mr Edward
Bromfi^ld, Merchant. ^^nj^min Brown, of Salem, Esquire. (for Two) The Rev. Mr.
John Brown, of Haverhill. Josiah Bro^n, B. A. Mr Simeon Brown, of Salisbury, (
for Two) Wil^i m ^row^e, of Salem, M. A. Merchant, (for Two) Mr. William Brown,
of Newport. Lemuel Bryant, Student at Harvard-College. Mr. Richard Buckley,
Merchant. * The Rev. Mr. John Bulkley, of Colchester. John Bulkley, of
Colchester, Esquire The Rev. Mr. Nehemiah Bull, of Westfield. Mr. Jeremiah
Bumstead. Mr. Benjamin Bunker. Mr. Samuel Burr, of Charlestown. John Burt, B.
A. Mr. John Bushel, Printer. The Rev. Mr. Mather Byles.
C
The Hon. John Cushing, of Situate, Esquire The Hon. John Chandler, of Woodst ock,
Esquire. The Hon. Thomas Cushing, Esquire The Rev. Benjamin Colman, D. D. The Rev. Mr.
Marston Cabbot, of Killingley. * Mr. John Caldwell, of Hartford, Merchant, (for
Six) The Rev. Mr. Elisha Callender. Mr. John Callender. The Rev. Mr. John
C^llender, of Newport. Mr. Nathanael Capen, of Topsfield, ( for Six) Mr. John
Carnes. The Rev. Mr. Ezra Carpenter, of Hull. Samuel C^ry, of Charlestown, Esquire
John Chandler, of Worcester, Esquire Josiah Ch^se, Student at Harvard-College.
Stephen Chase, M. A. The Rev. Mr. Charles Chauncy, ( for Two) The Rev. Mr.
Sam^el Checkley. The Rev. Mr. Ames Cheever, of Manchester. Ezekiel Cheever, of
Charlestown, Esquire Capt. Joshua Cheever, ( for Two) The Rev Mr. Thomas Chenev, of
Brookfield. Mr David Cheseb^ough, of Newport, Merchant. The Rev. Mr. John
Chipman, o^ Beverly. Mr. Ebene^er Choat, o^ Newb^ry. Charles Church, Esquire
S^^riff of the County of Bristol. Mr. Hopestill Clap, of Dorchester. The Rev.
Mr. Nathanael Clap, of Newport, ( for Two) Mr. Nehemiah Clap, of Milton Noah
Clap, of Dorchester, B. A. The Rev. Mr. Thomas Clap, of Taunton. The R^v. Mr.
Thomas Clap, of Windham. Mr. Benjamin Clarke. Mr. John Clarke, Physician. Mr.
Jonas Clarke. The Rev. Mr. Ward Clark, of Kingston. Mr Thomas Cobb Peter
Coffin, of Exeter, M. A. Mr. Tristram Coffin, of Newbury, ( for Six) Capt.
Nathanael Coggeshall, of Newport, ( for Six) The R^v Mr. Timothy Collens, of
Litchfield. Mr. Henry Collins, of Newport, Mercha^t. Mr. David Collson. Mr.
James Converse, of Woburn, ( for Thr^e) Mr. Amos Coolidge, of Sherburn. S^muel
Coolidge, of Watertown, M. A. Mr John Coomer, of Newport, ( for Three) The Rev.
Mr. William Cooper, ( for Two) Mr. Peter Cotta, ( for Six) Capt. Elias Cotting,
( for Six) The R v Mr. John Cotton, of Newton, ( for Twelve) * The R^v. Mr.
Nathanael Cotton, of Bristol. To and Cotton, M. A. The R^v. Mr. Ward Cotton, of
Hampton. George C^^^ock. (...)* ( for Three) Josiah C^o^ker, Student at Harvard
College. Mr. N^th^nael Crosman, of Taunton C^pt. N^thanael Cunningham,
Merchant, (for Six) The Rev Mr. Caleb Cushing, of Salisbury, ( for Six) The
Rev. Mr. Job Cushing, of Shrewsbury, ( for Six) J^hn Cushing, jun. of Situate,
Esquire (...) N^than^el Cushing, ^. A. Thomas Cushing, ju^r. M. A. Merchant, (for
Twelve) Ammi-R^h^mah Cutter, M A.
D
The Hon. Paul Dudley, of Roxbury, Esquire (for Two) Richard Dana, of Marblehead, M
A. Mr. Samuel Dana, of Pomfre^, ( for Six) Samuel Danforth, of Cambridge, Esquire
Mr. John Danill, Mr. John Darrell. Mr. Thomas Dawes, jun. Mr. Jacob Dehane, of
Newport. Mr. Samuel Deming. Mr. John Dennie, Merchant, (for Two) The Rev. Mr.
Josiah Dennis, of Yarmouth, ( for Six) Mr. Michael D^nnis, Books^ller. The Rev.
Mr. Samuel Dexter, of Dedham. Mr. Benjamin Dolbeare, Merchant. The Rev. Mr.
Benjamin Doolittle, of Northfield. Capt. William Down, ( for Two) The Rev. Mr.
Samuel Dunbar, of Stoughton* Capt. Edward Durant, of Newton. Mr. Jonathan
Dwight, ( for Six) Joseph Dwight, of Brookfield, Esquire The Rev. Mr. Josiah
Dwight, of Dedham. Mr. John Draper, Printer, (for Six) Mrs. Lydia Draper, ( for
Two) Mr Joseph Dyar.
E
* John Eastwicke, Esquire Mr. Joseph Edwards, Bookseller, (for Six) Mr Andrew
Eliot. Andrew Eliot, jun Student at Harvard College. Mr. Benjamin Elio^,
Bookseller, (^or Six) The Rev. Mr. J^cob Eliot, of Lebanon, ( for Six) Mr.
Samuel Eliot, Bookseller, (for Twelve) John Ellery, jun. M. A. Merchant. Daniel
Emerson, Student at Harvard College. Mr. Edward Emerson, jun. (for Three) * The
Rev. Mr. John Emerson, ^f Portsmouth. The Rev. Mr. John Emerson, of Top^field.
The Rev. Mr. Joseph Emerson, of M^lden. Mr. Jacob Emmons. C^pt. John Erving,
Merchan^. John Air, of Portsmouth, M. A.
F
The Hon. Francis Foxcroft, of Cambridge, Esquire (for Tw^) Mr. William Fairfield,
jun. David Farnum, Student at Harvard College. John Fayerweather, Esquire Mr.
William Fenwick, Merchant. The Rev. Mr. Benjamin Fessenden, of Sandwich, (
forThree) Mr. Josiah Fessenden, of Cambridge. Stephen Fessenden, Student at
Harvard College. Mr. Grafton Fe^eryear, ( for Six) Mr. John Fiske, of Haddam, (
for Six) Mr. Nathan Fiske, of Watertown, ( for Six) The Rev. Mr. Phinehas
Fiske, of Haddam, ( for Two) The Rev. Mr. Samuel Fiske, of Salem. Benjamin
Fitch, jun. M. A. * John Fitch, M. A. (for Three) * John Fitch, of Newbury, M.
A. (for Two) Mr. Joseph Fitch. Mr. Benjamin Flagg* jun. of Worce^^er. Mr
Ebenezer ^legg, of Woburn, M. A. Mr. Thomas Fleet, Printer, (for Six) Mr.
Francis Fletcher, of Concord. John Flint, Esquire of Concord. Capt. James Flucker,
of Charlestown. Henry Flynt, Esquire Fellow of Harvard College. Mr. Joseph Frost,
of Charlestown. Mr. J^mes Fosdick, Mr. Hopestill Foster, Bookseller, (for
Tw^lv^) Rich^rd Foster, Esquire Sheriff of Middles^x. Mr. Thomas Foster, ( for Two)
The Rev. Mr. Thomas Foxcrof^. William Foye* Esquire Treasurer of the Province of
the Massachusetts Bay. M^* Wi liam Foye, jun. M^ Abraham Fra^ci^, (...). Mr.
John Franklin. Mr. Josiah Franklin, ( for Two) Mr. Gersho^ Frazer, (for Two)
Enoch Freeman, M. A. Merchant. The Rev. Mr. Thomas Frink, of Rutland. Simon
Frost, M A. Deputy S^cretary. Mr. John Frothingham of Charlestown. Capt. Samuel
Frothingham, of Charlestown. Mr. Richard Fry, of Stroudwater. Mr. Edward
Fuller, of Newton. Mr. Jonathan Fuller, of Newton. Mr. Joseph Fuller, of
Newton.
G
The Hon. Edward Goddard, of Framingham, Esquire Mr. Joseph Gale. The Rev. Mr.
James Gardner, of Marshfield. John Gardner, M. A. Joseph Gardner, M. A. Mr.
Richard Gardner, of Roxbury ( for Six) Mr. Samuel Gardner, Merchant. Mr. Samuel
Gardner, Merchant. Mr. Nathanael Gardner. Mr. Francis Gatcombe, Merchant. The
Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Gay, of Hingham. Ebenezer Gay, Student at Harvard College.
Mr. Bartholomew Gedney. The Rev. Mr. Joshua Gee, ( for Three) Mr, John Ge^rish
of Salem. Mr. John Gerrish* jun. Joseph Gerrish, of Newbury, Esquire Mr. Henry
Gibbs. Henry Gibbs, jun. of Cambridge, M. A. Robert Gibbs, of Providence, Esquire
Mr Josiah Gilman, of Exeter, Physician. Nicholas Gilman, of Exeter, M. A. Capt.
Peter Gilman, of Exeter. Capt. Samuel Gilman, of Exeter. Capt Daniel Goffe. Mr.
Rich^rd Goldsmith. Mr. Nathanael Gilman of Exeter. Mr. Ezekiel Goldthwait. (
for Si^) Mr. Thomas Goldthwait. Capt. James Gooch, jun. Mr. Thomas Goodwill.
Mr. Nathanael Goodwin. * The Rev. Mr. Nathanael Gookin, of Hampton, ( for Six)
* Mr. Samuel Grainger. Mr. Samuel Grant, ( for Two) Mr. Benjamin Gray, (
Bookseller) Ellis Gray* B. A. (for Two) Mr. William Gray, Bookseller, (for
Three) Thomas Greaves of Charlestown, Esquire John Green, M. A. Mr. Jonas Green, of
Philadelphia Printer. The Rev, Mr. Joseph Green, of Barn^^able. Joseph Green,
M. A. Merchant. Mr. Nathanael Green, of New London. Mr. Timothy Green of
New London, Printer, (for Twelv^) Mr* Timothy Green, Printer, (for Twelve)
Stephen Greenleaf, M. A. Mr. Thomas Greenough. Mr. William Greenleaf. The Rev
Mr. John Greenwood, of Rehoboth, ( for Six) Is^ac Greenwood, M. A. Hollisian
Prof^ssor of the Math^maticks, etc at Harvard College. Mr* Nathanael Greenwood
Samuel Greenwood, Esquire Jeremiah Gridley, M. A. Mr. William Griggs.
H
The Hon. Thomas Hutchinson, Esquire* The Hon. Edward Hutchinson, Esquire Treasurer of
Harvard College. The R^v. Mr. James Hale, of Ashford. N^than Hale, Student at
Harvard College. Robert Hale, of Beverly, Esquire E^^hu Hall, of Wallingford, M. A.
Hugh Hall, Esquire The Rev. Mr. Samuel Hall* of New C^^shire, (for Six) Stephen
Hall, of Charlestown, Esquire Mr. Benjamin Hallowell, (for Two) Mr. Thomas Hancock,
Merchant, (for Six) Mr. Joseph Harman of York. Mr. Charles Harrison,
Bookseller, (for Three) Mr. Peter Harris, of New London. Mr. Nathanael Hasey.
Elias Haven, M. A. of Hopkinston. Mr. William Hay^ of Charlestown, Apot^^cary.
Mr. Nathanael Hayward. Mr. Richard Hazzen, jun. of Haverhill ( for Two) Mr.
Israel Hearsey. Joseph Heath, of Roxbury. Esquire Mr. John Helyer. Mr. Ebenezer
Hemenway, of Framingham. Capt. Daniel Henchman. The Rev. Mr. Nathanael
Henchman, of Lyn. Mr. S^muel Hendly, of Charlestown, Merchant, (for Two) Mr.
Charles Henley. Mr. Daniel Henshaw. ( for Two) Mr. William Hickling. Mr.
William Hide, of Newton. Mr. Thomas Higgins, of Bellingham. Mr. Thomas Hill,
Mercha^^* The Rev. Mr. Nehemiah Hob^rt, of Hingham. The Rev. Mr. Noah Hobart,
of Fairfield Mr. William Holberton, Merchant (for Six) Mr. George Holmes, ( for
Six) Mr. Nathanael Holmes ( for Twelve) James Holt, ^tudent at Harvard College.
Mr. John Holyoke. Mr. Samuel Holyoke. Mr. Amos Hovey, of Newton. Mr. James
Hovey, of Plymouth* Abiel Howard of Bridgwater, M A. Capt Isaac Hubbard, of
Long Island ( for Six) Nathanael Hubbard of Bristol, Esquire Mr. Richard Hubbard*
Thomas Hubbard, M. A. Merchant (for Two) * Mr. John Huggins of Springfield. (
for Six) Mr. E^iphalet H^ll of Fairfield ( for Three) Mr. J^mes Humphrey, of
Weymouth. Mr J^^ez Hunt. John Hunt Esquire (for Six) John Hunt, B. A. Mr. Samuel
Hunt of Billeric^. Mr. Hezekiah Huntington of Norwich, Merchant (for (...)) Mr
J^cob Hurd of Charlestown. Mr. J^cob Hurd, Goldsmith (for Six) Francis
Hutchinson, B A. Thomas Hutchinson, jun. M. A. Merchant.
J
The Hon. John Jeffries, Esquire Edward J^ckson, M A. (for (...)) Mr. Joseph
Jackson. Mr. Thomas Jackson jun. Mr. Leonard Jarvis Merchant, (for (...)) The
Rev. Mr. Samuel Jefferds of Wells. D^vid Jeffries, M* A. Merchant. The Rev. Mr.
William Jenison of S^lem. Thomas Jenner of Charlestown Esquire* Mr Isaac Johnson of
Charlestown. Mr Thom^s Johnson. Mr. Thom^s Johnson of Middletown. Mr. Elisha
Jones of Weston. Mr. Ephraim Jones of Concord, ( for Six) John Jones of
Hopkinston, Esquire
K
Mr Caleb Kenrick of Newton. C^pt. Eben^zer Kent of Charlestow^. M^ John Kent
of Suffield. Mr. James Kettle of Charlestown. Mr. Willi^m Kettle of
Charlestown. Mr G^rshom Keys, Merchant (for Six) Mr. D^^son Ki^c^ Mr Jonathan
Kimbal of Wenham. M^ Constant King, of Long Island ( for Three) Mr. Eleazer
Kingsbery of Needham ( for Six) Mr. John Kneeland, jun. Mr. Samuel Kneeland,
Printer.
L
The Hon. Ezekiel Lewis, Esquire (for Six) Capt. John Larrabee, Lieutenant of
Castle William. Dudley Leavitt, Student at Harvard-College. Mr. Hezekiah
Leavitt of Hingham. Henry Lee of Worcester, Esquire Mr. John Lee of Lime. Joseph
Lee, M. A. Merchant. Joseph Lemmon of Charlestown, Esquire Elkanah Leonard of
Middleborough, Esquire Mr. Zephaniah Leonard of Raynham ( for Six) Mr. Joseph
Lewis. The Rev. Mr. Daniel Lewis of Pembroke. Josiah Lewis, Student at Harvard
College. The Rev. Mr. Isaiah Lewis of Eastham. The Rev. Mr. Samuel Lewis of
Colchester, ( for Six) Mr. Theophilus Lilly, Merchant. Benjamin Lincoln of
Hingham, Esquire Mr. Ebenezer Lincoln of Hingham. Mr Benjamin Little of Newbury (
for Six) Mr. Thomas Livermore of Watertown. Mr. Benjamin Lhommedieu of
Long Island. Mr. Henry Lloyd, Merchant. Solomon Lombard of Province-Town, M. A.
(for Six) The Rev. Mr. Benjamin Lord of Norwich ( for Six) Mr. Benjamin Loring
of Hingham. Caleb Loring of Hull, Esquire Mr. Daniel Loring. Mr. John Loring o^
Hull. Mr. Jonathan Lo^ing ( for Two) The Rev. Mr. Israel Loring of Sudbury. Mr.
Nathanael Loring, jun. Merchant. Mr. William Lorkin of Liecester. ( for Six)
Mr. Joseph Lovett of Chelmsford. Mr Michael Lowell. Mr. Peter Luce, Merchant.
Joseph Lunt, Student at Harvard College. Mr Edward Lutwyche. Byfield Lyde, Esquire
(for Two) Capt. Caleb Lyman. Benjamin Lynde, jun. of Salem, Esquire (for Six)
M
The Hon. Jeremiah Moulton of York, Esquire Thaddeus Maccarty, Student at Harvard
College. Capt. Joseph Majory of Marblehead, Merchant. Capt. James Manson of
Kittery ( for Four) Mr John Manson. Mr. Samuel Manson of Portsmouth, ( for
Four) The Rev. Mr. Edmund March of Almsbury, ( for Three) Thomas Marsh of
Hingham, M. A. * Mr. John Marshall of Braintree. Mr. John Marshall, Merchant,
(for Six) Israel Marshfield of Springfield, Esquire Mr. David Mason. Thaddeus Mason
of Charlestown, M. A. The Rev. Mr. Samuel Mather, ( for Three) Mr. John
Maverick, ( for Six) The Rev. Mr. Experience Mayhew of Chilmark, (for Six)
Joseph Mayhew M. A. John Maylem, M. A. (for Three) Mr. John Mead of
Southborough. The Rev Mr. Andrew Le'Mercier, (for Two) The Rev. Mr. Henry
Messenger of Wrentham, ( for Two) Mr. Eliezer Metcalfe of Providence, ( for
Six) John Metcalfe of Dedham, Esquire Mr. Jonathan Metcalfe of Lebanon, ( for Six)
Mr. Alexander Middleton, Merchant, (for Two) Mr. Richard Miller of Charlestown.
Mr. George Minot, Merchant. Mr. James Minot, Merchant. Mr. Thomas Moffa tt. The
Rev. Mr. Samuel Moody of York. Ebenezer Morse, Student at Harvard College. *
The Rev. Mr. Joseph Morse of Stoughton. The Rev. Mr. Samuel Moseley of Windham.
Mr. Ephraim Mower. Richard Mower, Student at Harvard College.
N
Mr. Nathanael Newell. John Newman, Student at Harvard College. Israel Nichols,
M. A. Mr. William Nichols. Belcher Noyes, M. A. Cornelius Nigh, M. A.
O
The Hon. John Osborne, Esquire * The Rev. Mr. Josiah Oaks of Eastham, ( for Six)
Woodbridge Odlin, Student at Harvard College. Andrew Oliver, M. A. Merchant.
Mr. Brattle Oliver, Merchant. Nathanael Oliver, jun. M. A (for Three) Peter
Oliver, M. A. Merchant (for Six) The Rev. Mr. John Owen of Groton in
Connecticut Mr. William Owen ( for Six) Mr. Thomas Oxnard, Merchant.
P
The Hon. Thomas Palmer, Esquire (for Two) The Hon. William Pepperrel, of Kittery,
Esquire The Hon. John Peagrum, Esquire Surveyor General of his Majesty's Customs in
North America, ( for Six) Mr. Christopher Paige of Billerica. The Rev. Mr.
Thomas Pain. Job Palmer, Student at Harvard College. Samuel Palmer, of
Middleborough. M. A. Mr. Ebenezer Papillion. Mr. John Parker, Bookseller (for
Six) The Rev. Mr. Jonathan Parker of Plimpton. Mr. Isaac Parker of Charlestown.
Mr. William Parker, jun of Portsmouth. The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Parkman of
Westborough. Elias Parkman, jun. Student at Harvard College. Mr. William
Parkman, ( for Six) The Rev. Mr. Joseph Parsons of Bradford. Mr. Joseph
Parsons. Richard Patteshall, B. A. Mr. John Pain. * The Rev. Mr. Edward Payson
of Rowley, ( for Six) Mr. Joseph Payson. The Rev. Mr. Oliver Peabody, of
Natick, ( for Two) Capt. Daniel Pecker, ( for Six) * Capt. James Pecker, ( for
Two) Josiah Pierce, B. A. Mr. Moses Pierce. Capt. Edward Pell. Benjamin
Pemberton, Esquire The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Pemberton, of New York. Mr. Joshua
Penhallow, of Portsmouth, ( for Two) Mr. James Penniman. The Rev Mr. Daniel
Perkins, of Bridgwater. Mr. John Perkins, Physician. Mr Eleazer Phillips, of
Charlestown, Bookseller (for Twelve) * Henry Phillips of Charlestown, Esquire Mr.
John Phillips, ( for Six) Mr. Nicholas Phillips jun. of Weymouth. The Rev Mr.
Samuel Phillips of Andover, ( for Six) The Rev. Mr. Theophilus Pickering of
Ipswich. Mr. Joseph Pitkin of Hartford, ( for Three) James Pitts, M. A.
Merchant. Mr Thomas Plaisted, jun Mr. Benjamin Pratt of Hingham. The Rev. Mr.
John Prentice of Lancaster. Joshua Prentice, Student at Harvard College, ( for
Two) The Rev. Mr. Solomon Prentice of Grafton. Benjamin Prescot of Groton, Esquire
Mr William Price. Mr. James Prince of Salem. Capt. Joseph Prince of Boston.
Capt. Joseph Prince of Stratford. Capt. Moses Prince ( for Two) Nathan Prince,
M. A. Fellow of Harvard College. Mr. John Procter Mr. Nathanael Procter,
Bookseller (for Six) Joseph Pynchon, M A. Mr. William Pynchon of Springfield (
for Six) William Pynchon, jun. of Springfield, Esquire
Q
The Hon. Edmund Quincy of Braintree, Esquire The Hon. John Quincy of Braintree,
Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of Representatives.
R
The Hon Jonathan Remington of Cambridge, Esquire Mr William Rand, Apothecary (for
Six) Solomon Reed, Student at Harvard College. Mr John Rice of Sudbury Mr.
P^inchas Rice David Robinson, Student at Harvard College. The Rev. Mr. John
Robinson of Duxbury ( for Six) Matthew Rockwell of Windsor, M. A Daniel Rogers,
M. A. Fellow of Harvard College. Mr. Gamaliel Rogers, Printer. Mr. George
Rogers, Merchant (for Six) The Rev. Mr. John Rogers of Ipswich. The Rev. Mr.
Nathanael Rogers of Ipswich. The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Rossiter of Stonington. Mr.
William Rotch ^f Province Town ( for Six) David Rowland of Fairfield, M. A.
Jacob Royal, Esquire John Ruck, Esquire Mr. Benjamin Russell. Chambers Russell of
Charlestown, M. A. Daniel Russell of Charlestown, Esquire Capt. Giles Russell of
Marblehead, Merchant. Mr. Joseph Russel. Mr. Thomas Russell. Mr. William
Russell of Middletown ( for Two)
S
The Hon. Anthony Stoddard, Esquire The Rev. Joseph Sewall, D. D. Nathanael Sartle
of Groton, Esquire Mr. John Savell. Mr. Jonathan Sayward of York. Mr. John Scollay.
Mr. Joseph Scott. The Rev. Mr. John Seccombe of Harvard. Mr. Simmons Seccombe (
for Three) * Mr. Jonathan Sewall. Samuel Sewall, Esquire (for Six) Stephen Sewall,
M. A. Fellow of Harvard College. Capt. Edward Sheaf of Charlestown. Mr. Joseph
Sherburn, jun. William Shirley, Esquire The Rev. Mr. William Shurtleff of
Portsmouth. Mr. John Simpson. Mr. John Simpson ( for Two) Mr. Jonathan Simpson.
Mr. Jonathan Simpson, jun. Thomas Skinner of Charlestown, M. A. The Rev. Mr.
William Smith of Weymouth. The Rev. Mr. Samuel Spear of Province-Town. John
Sprague Student at Harvard College. Mr. William Spring of Newton. Mr. Samuel
Stacey of Marblehead. Mr. John Staniford. Mr. Jonathan Stebbens of Springfield.
Capt. John Steel, Merchant. Samuel Steel, Student at Yale College. Ebenezer
Stevens of Kingston, Esquire The Rev Mr. Nathanael Stone of Harwich, (for Two) Mr.
Samuel Stone of Sudbury* Mr. Ebenezer Storer. The Rev. Mr. Seth Storer of
Watertown. Mr. Samuel Sturgis of Fairfield ( for Three) Mr. Samuel Sturgis of
Yarmouth, M. A. Mr. Richard Sutton of Charlestown. Seth Sweetser, of
Charlestown. M. A. Mr. Benjamin Swetland of New London ( for Thre^) Mr.
Benjamin Swett of Hartford ( for Six) Mr. John Symmes. Mr. Thomas Symmes of
Charlestown.
T
The Hon. Samuel Thaxter of Hingham, Esquire The Rev. Mr. John Tailor of Milton.
Mr. Gershom Tenney. Mr. Josiah Thatcher of Norwalk. Oxenbridge Thacher, M. A.
The Rev. Mr. Peter Thacher. The Rev. Mr. Peter Thacher of Middleborough: Peter
Thacher, jun. Student at Harvard College. Mr. Cornelius Thayer. * The Rev. Mr.
Ebenezer Thayer of Roxbury. Mr. Nathanael Thayer. Mr. John Thorold of Newbury.
Mr. Nathanael Thwing Thomas Tilestone of Dorchester, Esquire Mr. John Trail,
Merchant. Mr. James Trumbal of Charlestown. Mr. Samuel Trumbal, of Charlestown.
Mr. Samuel Tompson of Braintree. Mr. John Torrey of Weymouth. The Rev. Mr.
Jonathan Townsend of Needham. Mr. Solomon Townsend. Solomon Townsend, jun. A. B
(for Two) The Rev. Mr. John Tufts of Newbury ( for Six) Mr* Andrew Tyl^r,
Goldsmith, (for Three) Thomas Tyler, M. A. (for Six) Mr. Samuel Tyley.
V
Mr. Hugh Vans, Merchant. Mr. Elijah Vin^l. John Vinton of Stoneham, Esquire Capt.
Nathanael Vose of Milton.
W
The Hon. Isaac Winstow of Marshfield, (...) ( for Twelve) The Hon. Adam
Winthrop, Esquire The Hon. Josiah Willard, Esquire Secretary of the Massachusett The
Hon. Jacob Wendell, Esquire The Hon. Samuel Wells, Esquire The Hon. Joseph Wilder of
Lancaster, Esquire The Rev. Edward Wigglesworth, D. D. Hollisian Profess^^
Divinity, at Harvard College. The Rev. Mr. Daniel Wadsworth of Hartford. John
Wainwright of Ipswich, Esquire Mr. Cornelius W^ldo, Merchant. Mr. Isaac Walker,
Merchant, (for Six) John Walley, Esquire The Rev* Mr. Ne^emi^h Walter of Roxbury (
for Two) John Walton of Providence, M. A. * The Rev. Mr. Robert Ward of Wenham.
Thomas Ward of Newpo^t, M A. * Mr. Thomas Ward of Cha^lestown. Mr. Elihu
Wardall. Mr. Benjamin Were of Wrentham, Physician. Jonathan Ware of Wre^^ham,
Esquire Mr. William Warner. Peter Warr^^, (...) Commander of ^is Majesty's Ship
Sq^ir^^ ( for Two) Samuel (...) The Rev Mr. Benjamin Webb of Eastham ( for
Three) The Rev. Mr. John Webb. Mr. Joseph Webb ( for Six) The Rev. Mr. Nath^^
Webb Mr. Samuel Webb of Charlestown. Mr. Samuel Webb of Newport. Mr. John
Welsh. Mr. Jonathan Welsh. Franci^ Wells of Cambridge, Esquire The Rev. Mr. William
Welsteed. Mr. John Wendell jun. Merchant. Mr. Samuel Weston of Dux^^ry.
Jeremiah Wheelwright, B. A. Mr. John Wheelwright, Merchant Mr. William Whipple
of Kittery, Merchant (for Two) Ebenezer White, M. A. The Rev. Mr. John White of
Gloucester. Mr Josiah White of Lancaster. * Mr. Samuel White, Merchant* (for
Two) Oliver Whiting of Billerica, Esquire The Rev. Mr. Samuel Whitman of
Farmingtown. Ezra Whitmarsh of Weymouth, M. A. Mr. Jonathan Whitney of Wrentham
( for Twenty Four) The Rev. Mr. Samuel Wigglesworth of Ipswich ( for Two) John
Wight of Bristol, M. A. Mr. ^ames Wilder of Lancaster. The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer
Williams of Pomfret ( for Two) The Rev. Mr. Eleazer Williams of Mansfield ( for
Six) The Rev. Mr. Elisha Williams, Rector of Yale College in New Haven. * The
Rev. Mr. John Williams of Deerfield ( for Six) The Rev. Mr. Nathanael Williams
( for Three) Mr. Sendall Williams. The Rev. Mr Solomon Williams of Lebanon (
for Six) The Rev Mr. Stephen Williams of Springfield. The Rev. Mr. Warham
Williams of W^tertown. The Rev. Mr. William Wil^^^^^ of H^tfie^d. The R^v. Mr
William Wi^^^^ms of Weston. William Williams, M A. (for Tw^lv^) Mr. Ephraim
Wilson, jun of D^^^ham Mr. Henry Wilson of R^xb^^y Edward Winslow, Esquire* S^^riff
of (...) ( for Six) Joshua Winslow, Esquire (for (...)) The Rev. Mr. Jeremiah (...)
P^leg Wisw^ll, M. A. M^ster (...) Grammar School. Daniel Wi^liam, M A. Mr.
Alexander Wolcott of New Haven ( for Six) John Wood of Dover, M. A. (for Six)
The Rev. Mr. Ashbel Woodbridge of Glastenbury ( forTwo) Benjamin Woods of
Marlborough, Esquire (for Six) Mr. Hezekiah Wright of Northampton. Mr. James Wright
(for Six) Capt. William Wire of Charlestown, Merchant.
Y
Mr. William Young.
SUBSCRIPTIONS received since the former Part of the List was Printed.
MR. Joseph Bean of Cambridge. Mr. Ephraim Breed of Charlestown. Mr. Michael
Brigden of Charlestown. Mr. Samuel Burr of Charlestown. Mr. Caleb Call of
Charlestown. Mr. John Codman of Charlestown. Mr. Daniel Collings of
Charlestown* Mr* Daniel Cook of Newton. Samuel Dummer, of Wilmington, Esquire Mr.
Peter Edes of Charlestown. Capt. Alexander Forsyth, Merchant* Mr. Daniel Foul,
Printer. Mr. Joseph Frost of Charlestown. Mr. Joseph Hopkins of Charlestown.
OUR Subscription being begun in 1728, and several (...) the Subscribers being
since deceased, who are mar^^ with a [*] This may notify the Relatives of such
dece^^^ Persons, that if they incline to take up the Books subsc^bed for, they
may do it, provided they come or send (...) them in a short time.

AND seeing some Gentlemen's Names in the List (...) to be printed without
their proper Additions, and (...) it may be so wi^h others, we crave Pardon for
(...) Omissions.

THE INTRODUCTION.
AS an Introduction to the NEW ENGLAND Chronology, it may be grateful to many
Readers, to see the Age of the World when This Part of the Earth came to be
known to the Other; and the Line of Time, with the Suc^cession of the Principal
Persons, Events and Transactions, which had been running on from the Creation
to the Settlement of this Country by a Colony from ENGLAND. And this I shall
briefly show under the following Articles: which seem to me, the most clear and
natural Heads, or successive PERIODS of Chronology; Especially for an English
Reader.

I. The Scripture PATRIARCHS. II. The JUDGES of Israel. III. The KINGS of
Judah. IV. The Babylonian, Persian, Grecian and Egyptian KINGS* V. The Roman
and Greek EMPERORS. VI. The KINGS of England. 1. From EGBERT the 1st King of
England, t^ the 1 st. Discovery of the New World b^ CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS. 2.
From thence to the Arrival of the FIRST PLANTERS of Plymouth in New England.

And that I may crowd the more Matter in a little Room; I shall make use of the
following Plain an^ Easy Characters, For Words and Sentences that (...) very
frequently occur in this Composure.

As, Y. Stands for - YEAR. Y L. for - Year of LIFE. Y R. for - Year of RULE or
REIGN. Y W. for - Year of the WORLD: i. e. from the CREATION of the WORLD Y C.
for - Year of CHRIST: i. e. from the BIRTH of CHRIST. b. for - at the BEGINNING
of the Ye^^ either a little before or after. e. for - at the END of the Year,
either^ little before or after. m. for - MONTH. d. for - DAY. K. for - KING.


And the Years are supposed to be Solar, and nea^ complete, i. e. either a
little more or less; and (...) Begin at the Spring.

I. Period. THE Chronology of the Scripture PATRIARCHS* in a continued Line,
From the Creation of ADAM to the Death of MOSES; containing nearly 2553
com^pleat Years.
Though the Year of the World 1656, is Generally reckoned to be the Year of
NOAH's FLOOD; Yet taking the Years of the Patriarchs for Full Years or
thereabouts, i. e. either a little over or under, sometimes one and sometimes
the other, and so complete in the whole, as Helvicus, Petavius, Usher and most
Chronologers seem to allow; I think it is very Plain, that as ADAM lived 130
Years before SETH was Born, and ADAM was not 130 till the Beginning of the Year
of the World 131, so SETH was Born at the Beginning of the same Year; and so --
of the other Patriarchs: which will therefore unavoidably bring the Beginning
of the FLOOD to the Beginning of the Year of the World 1657. And to this agree
the Learned Func^cius, Bucholz^r, Scaliger, Reusner, Calvisius, Willet, Alsted,
and Swan; who therefore seem in this Computation to be most accurate. And though,
From Genesis XI.26. many Moderns and all the Ancient Chronologers, even down to
BEROALDUS a Professor of Geneva, have set the Birth of ABRAHAM at the 70 Year
of TERAH; and the Samaritan Version in Genesis XI.32. makes TERAH to live no
longer than 145, and so to have Died when ABRAHAM was but 75: Yet inasmuch as
the Hebrew, with all the other ancient Versions See Bib. Polyg^^t.
and Josephus also, make TERAH to live 205; and as ABRAHAM at 75 Removed from
Haran, Genesis XII.4. and Stephen tells us that this was after hi^ Fathers Death,
Acts VII.4; therefore BEROALDUS seem^ rightly to have set the Birth of ABRAHAM
as the 130 Year of TERAH: and has drawn the following Trai^ of celebrated
Writers after Him -- Calvinus, P. Martyr, Mus^ulus, Iunius* Pareus, S^harpius,
Capelli Tres, Diodati, Rivetus, Broughton, More, Willet, Ainsworth, Lightfoot,
Usher, Richardson, Swan, Allen, Carry, Whiston, Lloyd, Marshal, Dr. Prideaux,
and others; whom we choose to follow for further Reasons which our designed
Brevity will not allow us here to mention.

No Birth Decease First Y L Y W Last Y L. 1 ADAM 1 b I m, 6 d, Adam CREATED 2
Seth 131 b Adam Aged 130, Seth is Bor^ 3 Enos 236 b Seth Aged 105, Enos is Bor^
4 Cainan 326 b Enos Aged 90, Cainan is Bor^ 5 Mahalaleel 396 b Cainan 70,
Mahalaleel Bor^ 6 Jared 461 b Mahalaleel 65, Iared Born. 7 Enoch 623 b Jared
162, Enoch Born. 8 Methuselah 688 b Enoch 65, Methuselah Bor^ 9 Lamech 875 b
Methuselah 187, Lamech Bor^ 930 e Adam Adam Dies, Aged 930. 987 e Enoch Enoch
TRANSLATED Aged 365. 1042 e Seth Seth Dies, Aged 912. 10 Noah 57 b Lamech 182,
Noah Born By Genesis VII.6, 11, and VIII.13, 14, It seems that Noah (...) not ^orn
till the III m of this Y.
140 e Enos Enos Dies, Aged 905. 235 e Cainan Cainan Dies, Aged 910. 290 ^
Mahalaleel Mahalaleel Dies, Aged 895. 422 ^ Jared Iared Dies, Aged 962. 11 Shem
559 b Noah 502, Shem Born. 651 ^ Lamech Lamech Dies, Aged 777. 656 e Methuselah
Methuselah Dies, Aged 969. 657 b II m, 17 d, FLOOD B^gt^^ ^ little before
Noah's 600 ^ Ends According to the Note above, and the ^r^face to this Period.
658 b II m, 27 d, FLOOD (...) and Noah goes out of the Ar^ 12 Arphaxad 659 b
Shem 100, Arphaxad Born. 13 Salah 694 b Arphaxad 35, Salah Born* 14 Eber 724 b
Salah 30, Eber Born. 15 Peleg 758 b Eber 34, Peleg Born. 16 Reu 788 b Peleg 30,
Reu Born. 17 Serug 820 b Reu 32, Serug Born. 18 Nahor 850 b Serug 30, Nahor
Born. 19 Terah 879 b Nahor 29, Terah Born. 996 e Peleg Peleg Die^, Aged 239.
1997 e Nahor Nahor Dies, Aged 148. 2006 e Noah Noah Dies, Aged 950. 20 Abraham
9 b Terah 130, Abraham Born. 26 e Reu Reu Dies, Aged 239. 49 e Serug Serug
Dies, Aged 230. 83 ^ Terah Terah Dies, Aged 205. 84 b I m Abib, 15 d, Abraham
be^ing 75, and Receiving the PROMISE, Goes out of Haran for Canaan. 96 ^
Arphaxad Arphaxad Dies, Aged 438. 21 Isaac 1^^9 ^ Abraham 100, Isaac Born. 126
^ Salah Salah Dies, Aged 433. 158 e Shem Shem Dies, Aged 600. 22 Jacob 169 b
Isaac 60, Jacob Born. 183 e Abraham Ab^aham Dies, Aged 175. 187 e Eber Eber
Dies, Aged 464. 23 Levi 256 b Jacob 87, Levi Born. 288 e Isaac Isaac Dies, Aged
180. 24 Kohath 290 b Levi 34, K^hath Born Helvicu^ out of Epiphanius.
299 b Jacob 130, Goes into Egypt 315 ^ Jacob Jacob Dies, Aged 147. 25 Amram
364 b Kohath 74, Amram Born (...) again out o^ Epiphanius.
392 e Levi Levi Dies, Aged 137. 422 e Kohath Kohath Dies, Aged 133. 26 Moses
434 b Amram 70, Moses Born Helvicus out of Nicepheru^ and E^sebiu^.
500 e Amram Amram Dies, Aged 137 514 b I m Abib, 15 d, the 430 Y of Bondage
Ends; and Moses 80, Begins to lead the Israelites out of Egypt. 553 e Moses XII
m, 1 d, Moses Dies, Aged 120 and Joshua of Ephraim succeeds Him as Ruler of
Israel.

II. Period. THE Chronology of the JUDGES of Israel. From the Death of MOSES to
the Death of SAMUEL and SAUL: Containing about 396 complete Years.
By 1 Kings VI. 1. and 2 Chronicles. III. 1, 2. compared with Numb. XXXIII. 3. It
appears there were 479 Years and 1^ Days complete, From the coming out of
EGYPT, to the Founding of SOLOMON's TEMPLE: whereof 39 Years, 10 Months and the
odd 17 D^ys may be assigned to MOSES; 40 Years to DAVID; and 3 Years, 2 Months,
to SOLOMON; 83 Years* 17 Days, in all. But the remaining 396 Years, being
attended with many Difficulties; there have been various Schemes proposed by
Learned Men for their Solution: And perhaps the last, devised by Sir John
Marsham, (...) followed by Whisto^, Lloyd and Marshal, may be the best; who
suppose the Years o^ several both of the Oppressi^^s and Judges, to be
Contemporary However, I shall here lay do^n the PRESIDENCY of the several
Judges in a Successive order, according to the Years assigned them in the
sacred Records, inclusive of the several Oppressions as happening in their
Times; and as supposed by Scharpius, Alsted, Baylly, Broughton, Lightfoot,
Swan, and Allen; as also I^^ni^s, Pantaleon, More, Perkins, Helvicus, i, e. One
of the Two different Schemes in Helvicus.
Isaacson and Tallents* only that the latter, supposing it to be 480 Years
complete and 17 Days, From the coming out of EGYPT to the Founding of the
TEMPLE, make JOSHUA's Rule to be 18 Years whereas the other more exactly make
it but about 17, as follows No Judges Y R Tribes Y W 1 Joshua. 1 Ephraim. 2554
b Joshua Begins to Rule. I. m Abib, 10 d, He leads the Israelites through Jordan
in^^ Canaan. 17 570 e He Dies, Aged 110. 2 Othniel. 1 Judah. 571 b Othniel
Begins to Rule. 40 610 e de Dies 3 Ehud. 1 Benjamin 2611 b Ehud Begins to Rule.
4 Shamgar It Is uncertain when Ehud Died and Shamgar began to Rule.
i. e. 80 Years From the beginning of Ehud's Rule.
80 690 t Shamgar Dies. 5 Deborah 1 691 b Deborah Begins to Rule. 6 and Barak
Naphtali It Is uncertain when Barak began to Rule, or who outlived.
i. e. 40 Years, From the beginning of Deborah's Rule.
40 730 e They Die (i. e. the last Survivor) 7 Gideon. 1 Manasseh 731 b Gideon
Begins to Rule. 40 770 e He Dies. (8) Abimelech 1 Manasseh 771 b Abimelech made
King. 3 773 e He is Killed. 9 Tola. 1 Issachar 774 b Tola Begins to Rule. 23
796 e He Dies 10 Jair. 1 Manasseh 797 b Iair Begins to Rule. 22 818 e He Dies.
11 Jephtha. 1 Manasseh 819 b Iephtha Begins to Rule. 6 824 e He Dies. 12 Ibsan.
1 Judah 825 b Ibsan Begins to Rule. 7 831 e He Dies. 13 Elon. 1 Zebulon 832 b
Elon Begins to Rule. 10 841 e He Dies. 14 Abdon. 1 Ephraim 842 b Abdon Begins
to Rule. 8 849 e He Dies. 15 Sampson. 1 Dan 850 b Sampson Begins to Rule. 20
869 e He Dies. 16 Eli. 1 Levi 870 b Eli a Priest, Begins to Rule. 40 909 e He
Dies, Aged 98. 17 Samuel. 1 Levi 910 b Samuel Begins to Rule. 30 939 e His
Solitary Rule Ends. Helvicus, out of Cedrenus, says that Saul was made K, 10
Years before David.
(18) Saul. 1 Benjamin 930 b Saul made King. Helvicus, out of Cedrenus, says
that Saul was made K, 10 Years before David.
10 949 e Samuel and Saul Die Broughton, out of Sedar Olam, says, that
Samu^^^^nd Saul Died the same Year, i. e. Samuel at the Beginning, and Saul at
the End.
and David, of the Tribe of Judah succeeds K Saul, as K of Judah

III. Period THE Chronology of the KINGS of Judah in a Line^ Succession, From
the Beginning of the Reign of DAVID, to the End of ZEDEKIAH's: Containing about
467 Complete Years.
The precise Adjustment of the Years of this Period with the Reigns of the
several KINGS of Judah and Israel, is encumbered with so many great
Perplexities, as have exercised the Wits of the most Sagacious Men as much as
any other Part of Scripture Chronology. Whether Mr. Whiston's surprising
Hypothesis may be allowed with safety, who solves them by supposing, that
Jeroboam Diminished the Year for the Observance of the 10 Tribes, by 1 Month,
while the Kings of Iud^ kept to the former Computation; I may not venture to
determine. But among all the Systems I have met with, Bishop USHER's seems the
clearest; which Swan, Whiston, Lloyd Marshal and Dr. Prideaux almost entirely
follow; and which is nearly the same with Petavius's, lately followed by Le
C^^^ and Perizonius. And here I must observe upon a strict Examination, that Bp
USHER's English Annals being Pri^^^ after his Decease, have many Errors of the
Press in Figures whereas his Latin Annals being Published in London while h^
was Living there, and no doubt Corrected by Himself, t^ very rarely need
Amendment. But whereas that Leare^ Writer Begins the Y of the Creation at the
FALL, and ^ rather choose to follow Those who raise it to the SPRING before in
the same Y of the Julian Period 710; It therefore happens that our Numbers of
the Mundane Era assigned to (...) same Events which came to pass in the Spring
and Summer are more by 1 than His, both in this and the other Period though those
Events which happened in the Fall and Wi^ will co-alesce in the same Y of the
World as Mi^; with the only Difference, that they are in the Former Part of His
but in the Latter of Ours.

No Y. W Y R. Kings 1 2950 b 1 David Begins to Reign over Judah, 7 Y 957 b 8 He
Begins to Reign over all Israel, 33 Y. 9^9 ^ 40 He Resigns the Kingdom to his
Younger Son Solomon. 2 990 b 1 Solomon Begins to Reign: and David Dies 6 Months
after. 993 ^ 4 II m, Ziph, 2 d, the TEMPLE Founded. 3000 ^1 VIII m, Bull, the
TEMPLE Finished. 1 12 VII m, Ethanim, in the 1st Y of the III Millenary of the
World, and at the Opening of the 9th Iubile, the TEMPLE Dedicated. In the Y of
the Julian Period 3710: and before the Real Birth of CHRIST 1000, but according
to the Common Account 1004.
29 e 40 Solomon Dies. And his Son 3 30 b 1 Rehoboam Begins to Reign, and 10
Tribes fall off to Jeroboam. 46 ^ 17 Rehoboam Dies. And his Son 4 47 b 1 Abijam
Begins to Reign, 3 ^^ars. 49 ^ 3 He Dies. And his Son 5 50 b 1 Asa Begins to
Reign, 41 Years. 90 e 41 He Dies. And his Son 6 91 b 1 Jehosapha^ Begins to
Reign, 25 Years. 101 11 Homer Born, 4^0 Year before Herodotus. So say,
Herodotus Himself: and agreeably Sir I. Newton ^ is, that both Hesiod and Ho^er
^^ourish'd 870 Y before the Christian Era, which Bp Usher se^s in the Y W 3135.
108 b 18 Iehosaphat Going against the Syrians, makes his Son Iehoram Viceroy.
7 112 b 22. 1 Jehoram Made Copartner in the Kingdom, u^^n Iehosaphat's going
against Moab. 115 e 25.4 Iehosaphat Dies. And his Son 3116 b 5 Ie^oram Reig^s
a^one, 4 Year^ more. 119 e 8 He Dies. And his Son 8 120 b 1 Ahaziah Reigns 1
Year, and is slain by Iehu. (9) 121 b 1 ( Athaliah) Ahazia^'s Mother Begins to
Reig^ 6 Years. 126 e 6 She is slain by Ie^oiada. And 10 127 b 1 Jehoash Son to
Ahaziah, Begins to Reig^ 40 Years. 166 40 He i^ Killed. And his Son 11 1
Amaziah Begins to Reign, 29 Y. 194 e 29 He is Killed. And his Son 12 195 b 1
Uzziah Begins to Reign, 52 Y. 229 35 July, 23 So Calvisius and Alsted.
the 1st OLYMPIAD Restored by Ip^itus, when (...) Historical Age Begins. An
Ol^mpiad contains the space of 4 Year^, wa^ commonly ^^^l^brated ^t the 1 st
Full Moon after the Summ^r Solstice, and the Olympiaa B^gin^ in the Y o^ the
Julian Peri^^, 3938, and before Christian Era 776: so Calvisius, Helvi^us,
Petavius, Usher, (...) Carry, Newton, etc.
246 e 52 Uzziah Dies. And his Son 13 247 b 1 Jotham Begins to Reign, 16 Y. 252
b 6 April 21 in the 3d Y of the ^ Olympiad, ROME Founded b^ Romulus and Remus,
a^cordi^^ to Varro. Approved by Cicero, Pomponius Atticus, Au^ustus, Plutarch,
(...) Pa^er^ulus, etc in the Y of the Julian Period, 3961, and before the
Christian Era 753.
258 b 12 The Ancient Assyrian Empire under Sardanap^lus, destroy^ and parted
by his Two Com^manders, Tiglathpilesor of Me^dia, and Nabonasser of Babylon
(...) ERA of Nabonasser, now K of Babylon, Begins this Spring, on Feb. 26, at
Noon, being then the 1st Day of the Egyptian Y. In ^he b of the Y of the Julian
Period 3967, and 747 before the Vulgar Era of the Bi^th of CHRIST, by the
Consent of all Astronomers. W^eth^r He Began to Reign before, seems uncertain:
but this to b^ (...) i^ the 1 st Eg^ptian New Year Day of his Reign. Ptolemy.
3262 e 16 Iotham Dies. And his Son 14 263 b 1 Ahaz Begins to Reign, 16 Y. 15
278 b 16. 1 Hezekiah Son to Ahaz made Partner with Him in the Kingdom. e ^haz
Dies. 283 e 6 Shalmanesar, K of Assyria, take Samaria, and carries the 10
T^ibes into Captivity. 306 e 29 Hezekiah Dies. And his Son 16 307 b 1 Manasseh
Begins to Reign 55 Y. 324 e 18 Esarhaddon, or Asnapper, K of Assyria seizes
Babylon, and adds it to his Empire. Feb. 9, at the e of this Y, being the 1st
Egyptian New Year Day of his Reign Acco^di^g to P^ol^my ^ Mathematical Canon.
361 e 55 Manasseh Dies. And his Son 17 362 b 1 Ammon Begins to Reign, 2 Y. 363
e 2 He is Killed. And his Son 18 364 b 1 Josiah Begins to Reign, 31 Y. 365 2
Thales, the Father of the Greek Astronomers, Born at Miletus, and lives 93 Y.
366 3 Solon Born in Salamis, and lives 80 Y. Sir I. N^wto^ Places the Birth of
Solon 10 Y after.
3379 ^ 16 NabopollaserGeneral to Chyniladanus K of Assyria and Chalde^,
rebels against his Master, and makes Himself K of Babylon Jan. 27, at the e of
this Y, being the 1st Egyptian New Year Day of his Reign. Acco^di^g to Ptolemy.
395 b 31 Pharaoh Necho leading his Army out of Egypt, slays Josiah in Battle
at Megiddo, and passes o^ to the Euphrates. 19 Jehoahaz Iosiah's 2d S^n, Reigns
3 Mon^^^ Necho beats the B^bylonians, taken Carchemis^, returns through Judea,
and carries Iehoahaz into Egypt. 20 1. Jeho^akim Iosiah's Eldest Son, sometim^
this Summer Begins to Reig^ 11 Years. 398 3 This Summer, Nabopollaser mak^ his
Son NEBUCHADNEZ^ZAR Partner in the Empire and sets him at the Head of hi^
Armies So B^r^si^s in Josephus.
Whence the Scripture calls this the 1st Y of N^buchadnezzar. 4 Whereupon,
Nebuchadnezzar be^^ Necho's Army at the Euphrate^ retakes Carchemish, and
march^^ to Judea. 4 IX m. Chistieu, Nebuchadnezz^^ takes Jerusalem, and carr^
Daniel with a great many Others to Babylon: Whence (...) 70 Years of the Jews
CAP^TIVITY Begin. 3400 5 Nabopoll^^er Dying thi^ Su^mer, Nebuchadnezzar Begins
to Reign alone, 43 Y. But Ian. 21, at the e of this Y, which is at the b of the
Y of the Julian Period 4110, being the 1 st Egyptian New Year Day of his Reign;
Ptolemy therefore Begi^s his Reign from thence, according to his usual Method.
406 b 11 Iehoiakim taken by the Cha^deans and slain. Whereupon his Son 21
Jeconias Sometimes called Coniah, Conias and Iehoiachin.
Reigns 3 Months 10 Days: and then with Ezekiel is carried to Babylon, by
Nebuchadnezzar, in the 8th Y of hi^Reign. 22 1. Zedekiah Iosiah's 3d Son,
succeeds in the Km: and this Y, CYRUS the Persian is Born. 417 11 IV m, 9 d, i.
e. July 27, Nebuchadnezzar s Army breaks up Jerusalem: and Zedekiah ^^ken, and
carried to Babylon. V m, 7 d, i. e. Aug. 24, Nebuzaradan enters Jerusalem; and
10 d i. e. Aug* 27, sets the Templ^ and City on Fire, and breake^ down the
Walls and^ Which is in the Nineteenth Y o^ Nebuchadnezzar 's Reign from his
Heading the Army, and the Seventeenth from the First Egypti^n New Year Day
aft^r his Father's Death: In the Year of the Julian Period 4126; and 588 before
the Vulgar Christian Era* Usher, Prideaux, Newton, etc.

IV. Period. THE Chronology of the Babylonian, Persian, Grecian and Egyptian
MONARCHS successively, from the Destruction of the Kingdom of Judah by
Nebuchadnezzar, to ^he Destruction of the Kingdom of Egypt by Octavius Caesar:
Containing exactly 558 Years.
Thus far the Hebrew and inspired Guides alone have led (...) in a continued
Path from the CREATION. But the Succession of the Kings of Judah sailing, we
must now look to the Grecian Histories for the following Course of Time to the
Beginning of the Roman Empire. And here the most knowing Enquirers have been in
a perpetual strife till the Common of CHRIST 1613; When the famous MATHEMATICAL
CANON of Claudius Ptolemy He was a Great Astronomer of Alexandria in Egypt.
was happily discovered i^tire in England. Which being founded on Astronomical
Appearances and Calculations, drawn from the Records of the Chaldean and
Egyptian ^istorians and Astronomers, was received with great Joy by the Learned
World, and soon became the decisive Umpire among Chronologers, as agreein^ with
Scripture, with the best ancient History, and with Astronomy; to which they
have therefore almost ever since appealed as to an uncontested Oracle. It
begins with the Reig^ of NABONASSER K of Babylon, on the 1st d at Noon the 1st
Egyptian m, called Thoth, Thoth was the Egyptian Mercury: And as the 1 st d of
their Ye^^ were devoted to Him; both the d and the m were named from Him.
Gregory.
which then was Feb. 2^ of the Julian Period 3967; accounts by Egyptian Years
of 36^ Days continually without Intercalations; reaches down (...) the Reigns
of the Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, Egyptian and Roman Monarchs, to ANTONINUS
PIUS, when Ptole^^^ flourished; and numbers the Years of their Reigns by (...)
Number only of the Thoths, or rather Egyptian New Year D^^ included in them. To
this Canon therefore we keep invariably in the Present Period: Having carefully
examined it in Greek and Latin both in Calvisius and Petavius, in Greek only in
Mr. Gregory, and in Latin only in Mr. Carry and Mr. Whiston* I have observed
several Errors in the 4 former Prin^ed Copies, whereas the Table in Mr. Whiston
seems to be free from any, except in the Column He adds of the Years of the
Julian Period, which seem to be too many by 1 down from the b of the R of
Darius Hystaspis, i. e. Darius the Son of Hystaspes.
and which I have here Corrected But as we must reduce the Egyptian Y in this
Ancient Canon to the present Julian; I shall from this time forward Begin the Y
with the 1st of January through out our following Chronology.

N Y W 1 st E^yp^ new Y.D. Y. R. Monarchs I. BABYLONIAN Monarchs. 1 3417 17.
Nebuchadnezar VII m, His Governor Gedaliah Killed. 421 21 Nebu^aradan carries
the Rest of the Jews to Babylon. 437 Pythagoras Born, and lives 80 Y. Stanley,
who critically s^arches into this matter.
443 ^ 43 Nebuchadnezzar Dies, and his Son Evilmerodach succeed^ b XII m, 25 d,
i. e. April 15, Ieconias released from Prison. Ian, 11, this Y is
Nebuchadnezzar's 43 Egyp New Y d, and in the following Summer, the 37 Y of
Ieconias's Captivity Ends: Nebuchadnezzar therefore Dies between Ian, 11, and
April 15 of this Y.
2 444 b Jan. 11 1 Evilmerodach Reigns 2 Y. This is the 1 st Egyp New Y d of
Evilmerodach's Reign: and so of the Rest.
445 2 He is Killed by Nericassolasser, his Sister's Husband 3 446 b 10 1
Nericassolasser Reigns 4 Y. 3449 4 He is Slain in Battle by C^axeres (i e.
Darius the Mede) and Cyrus. Nericassolasse^'s Son Laboroso^rchod Reigns 9 m,
and then is Kil^* But there being no Eg^p New Y d in his R, the Canon Omitts His
4 450 b 9 1 Nabonadius i. e. Belshazzar, Son to Evilmerodach, Reigns 17 Y 466
17 Babylon taken, and Belshazz^^ slain. II. PERSIAN Monarchs. 5 467^ 5 1 Cyrus
With his Uncle Darius Reign together 2 Y. 468 2 Darius Dying, CYRU^ Reigns 7 Y
more. ^ 3 In this 1st Y* Both the Scripture and Xenophon call this the 1 st Y
of Cyrus.
He giv^ LIBERTY to the Ie^* to Return from their 70^ Captivity. 475 9 He Dies.
And his Son 6 476 b 3 1 Cambyses Reigns 8 Y. 483 8 He Kills his Brother Smerd^^
and Dies: and the Man Line of Cyrus ends. For the Reason above, the Canon
leaves our Smerdis ^ Counterfeit (...) Cyrus, who suc^^eded Cambyses 7 m, and
was then discovered and (...)*
7 484 b 1 1 Darius Hystaspis made K by Lo^tery, and Reigns 36 Y. 485 Pindar
Born. Calvisius and Helvicus.
489 ^ 6 XII m, Adar, 3 d, the (...) TEMPLE Finished. 497 Kings of Rome
Expelled, (...) Consuls 1st Elected Calvisius, Helv^cus, Carry, Strauchius,
Newton, etc.
513 Zoroastres appears at (...) Persian Court. Dr. Pri^eaux.
3515 The Persians invade Attica, and are beat at Marathon. Usher.
519 Darius Dies. And his Younger son 8 ^ Dec. 23 1 Xerxes by Attossa Daugh^er
to Cyrus, Reigns 21 Y. 521 Herodotus B rn Ushe^.
525 Xerxes passes ^n ^ Greece wi^h 2 Million Men and his vast Nav^ beat at the
Straits of Salamis. Ushe^.
534 Thucydides B rn Usher.
536 Socrates Born, and Lives 70 Y. 540 21 Xerxes Killed. And his younger Son 9
e 17 1 Artaxerxes Longimanus, Reigns 41 Y 545 Democritus Born: and soon after,
Hyppocrates Diogenes Laertius.
547 b 7 I m, 1 d, Ezra being appointed to Restore the Religious State of
Judea, sets out from Babylon. V m, 1 d, He Arrives at Jerusalem 559 e IX m,
Chislieu, Neh^miah informed of the wretched state of Judea and Jerusalem. 560 b
I m, Nisan, He is appointed to Rebuild the City, and made Governor of Judea
for 12 Y. By Comparing the 2 last Articles it seems that Artaxerxes Began his
R^ign between Nisan and Chislieu in Y W 3540.
569 Isocrates Born, and Lives 98 Y. 3573 M^ton observes the (...) Solstice to
be on June 1^ in the Morning, and (...) the LunarCycle of 19 Y (^^ 574 b
ThisSpring, the Peloponessi^ War Begins. ( u) 577 Plato Born, and Lives 80
(...) 581 Artaxerxes Dies* His only lawful Son Xerxes Succeeded, but was
quickly Killed (...) Succeeded by his Brother So^dian, and He by his Brother
No^h^^: but as the 2 former Reigned but 8 Months, and had no Egyp New I ^
included; the Canon therefore leaves them both out.
(...) his Bastard Son 10 ^ Dec. 7 1. Darius Nothus, Reigns 19 Y 600 19 He
Dies. And his Son 1^ ^ 2 1. Artaxerxes Mne^^oncall'd Arsaces, R 4^ 604 At the
Battle of (...) Cte^ias taken Captive, and Xen^phon Retreats (...) Greece (u)
621 Aristotle Born, and (...) 63 Y ( u) 624 Demosthenes Born, and (...) 59 Y.
(^) 646 46 Mnemon Dies, aged 94. (...) his Son 2 ^ Nov. 21 1. Ochu^ Artaxerxe^,
Reigns 21 Y* 649 This Summer Alexander (...) Great Born ( u) 664 Epicurus Born,
and * 72 Y ( d. c. ^) 667 21 Ochus Poisoned. And (...) youngest Son 1 ^ 16 1*
Arogu^ called Arses, Reigns 2 Y. 669 2 He is also Poisoned, and (...) whole
Race of (...) cut off. Though He had 3 Sons by his Queen, and 11^ Sons by
Concubines.
4 3669 ^ Nov. 15 1 Darius Codoma^^us, Great Grandson of Nothus Reigns 4 Y. 671
b Alexander Sails to Asia. (u) May 20, He beats the Persian Army at the
Granicus (u) 672 November, He beats Darius at Issus. (u) 673 4 He Found^
Alexandria in Egypt. Whence the Canon Begins his R. ( u) III. GRECIAN Monarchs.
1 ^ 14 1. Alexander the Great, Reigns 8 Y. 674 October. 1, Strauchius.
He bears Darius near Arbela, and takes Babylon etc ( u. Strauchius.
) 675 June 28, Darius Killed by his Officers, the Persian Empire goes to the
Grecians, and Calippus Begins hi^ Period of 76 Y ( u. Strauchius.
Alsted.
) Strauchius says it Began at the Summer Solstice; and Alsted, on June 28.
681 May 22, Alexander Die^. And his Bastard Brother 2 ^ 12 1. Philip Arideus,
Reigns 7 Y. 688 He is Killed. And Alexander's Son 3 ^ 10 1. Alexander AEgus, by
^oxana, Reign: The Canon makes it 12 Y from the b of his R to the b of the R of
Ptolemy Lagus over Egypt.
693 Sept. 6, Alsted.
Seleucus seizes Babylon, and Reigns. Whence the Era of the Seleucides Begins
with the Eastern Nations* except the Chald^ans who begin it in the following
Spring, and the (...) Book of Maccab^es in the Spring before. (Alsted)
^694 ^ 6 Alexander AEgus Killed The following 6 Years being Times of great
Confusion, through (...) Strife of Alexander's Generals for the several Parts of
the Empire, (...) Ptolemy Lagus comes to be Settled K of Egypt; the Canon
thereof (...) the said 6 Years also to AE^us.
696 The Bastard Son of Alexan^^^ the Great, Killed, his (...) Ends, and his
Empire Divide^ among his Gener^^s Carry.
700 Ptolemy Lagus se^^led K (...) Egypt, Phaenicia and Iud^^ [The Ptolemies]
IV. EGYPTIAN Monarch^. 1 e Nov. 7 1. Lagus Reigns 20 Y. 704 Seleucus seizes
Syria. 714 Archimedes B, and Live 79 Y. Carry.
720 20 Lagus resigns to hisYou^g^^^ Son 2 ^ 2 1 Philadelphus Who Reign^ 38 Y.
721 Lagus Dies. 728 The Hebrew BIBLE Translated into Greek. ( u. Dr. Prideaux
) 745 Berosus, being Old, Writ^^ 752 Hannibal Born, and Live^ 70 Y. ( c. u) 755
The Parthians under A^s^ces, Begin the Parthi^^ Empire. 758 38 Philadelphus
Dies. And hi^ (...) 3 Oct. 24 1. Euergetes. I Reigns 25 Y 769 ^. Scipio B, and
Live 52 Y ( c) 772 Cato the Censor B, and Liv^ to the 85 Y. ( c. u) 783 25
Euergetes Dies. And hisSo^ 4 18 1. Philopator Reigns 17 Y. 3793 Syracuse taken,
and Archimedes Slain. 800 Polybius B, and Lives 82 Y (c) ^7 Philopator D. And
his Son 5 Oct. 13 1. Epiphanes Reigns 24 Y. 801 Antiochus the Great, K of
Syria, seizes Palestine. 803 P Scipio Overthrows Hannibal in Africa. 815 L
Scipio bears Antiochus the Great, and forces him to quit the Lesser Asia 821 P
Scipio Africanus D, Aged 52 ( c) 822 Hannibal Drinks Poison and D, Aged 70 ( c.
u) 824 24 Epiphanes Killed by Poison. And his Son 6 7 1. Philometor Reigns 35
Y. 835 Antiochus Epiphanes, K of Syria, Plunders Jerusalem and the Temple. 837
His Army cruelly Destroy^ the City, sets up the Image of Jupiter in the Temple,
and Persecutes the Jews. Whereupon Mattathi^s a Priest, and his Sons the
Maccabees take Arms From Him Succeeds a Race of Princes ruling in Judea, till
the Roman Senate gave the Km from K Antig^nus to Herod an Idumaean.
843 Hipparchus Begins his Celestial Observations, and finds the Autumnal
Equinox on Sept. 27 ( c. u) 856 Cato the Elder D, AEtatis 85. ( c. ^. u) 3859
35 Philomet^r, Wounded in Battle, D. And his Son (...) Killed by Phil^^et^^'^
Brother, viz. 7 Sep. 29. 1. E^erget^s II. called Physco^, who R 29 ^ 862 Sept.
28, Hipparch^s Beg^^ his Period of 304 Y. ( c. u.^ 888 29 E^erg^tes D. And his
(...) 8 21 1. Soter called L^th^rus, R 36Y The former Part of his R His Mother
Governed.
898 Cicero B, and Lives 64 Y. ( c^) 899 Pompey the Great B, and Li^^ 58 Y. (
c. u) 905 Julius C^sar B, and Live 56 Y. ( c. u) 924 36 Soter D Cicero and
Sue^oniu^ say, that S^ter's only Legitimate Off-spri^^ Bernice immed^ately
Succeeded Him and Married her Cousin Al^^^ander, who quickly Ki^ing her,
^eigned 25 Y; and then the Eg^^^tians c^pelling Him, raised Auletes to the
Throne: But Appian (...) that Alexander Reigned but 19 d after He Killd his
Queen; and (...) the Egyptians Killing Him, Auletes Succeeded; ( u) And (...)
CANON follows Appian.
And his Ba^tard Son 9 12 1. Dionysius Neos, called Auletes, R. 29 ^ 933 Herod
the Great B, and Li^^ 69 Y. ( u. p) 935 Virgil B, and Lives 52 Y ((...) 940
Horace B, and Lives 57 Y ((...) Pompey Puts an End to (...) of the S^leucidae
Kings (...) Syria, and makes the (...) a Roman Province. 942 Octavius B, and
Li^^ 76 Y. ( c. u) He was Julius C^sar's Si^er's Grandson by her Dau^hter (...)
Dec. 28, Pompey takes Ier^salem ( c. u.) 943 Diodorus Sic^lus Flourishes
((...) 3945 Pompey, (...) and ^ulius Caesar form the 1st Triumvirate. 946 Livy
B, and Lives 76 Y ( c. Helvicus.
Isaacson.
) 950 Aug. 26 Julius Caesar 1st Lands in Britain. ( c. l. Dr. Halley in
Philosoph. Transac.
) 951 This Spring, he Lands the 2d time in Britain. ( c. l. Dr. Halley in
Philosoph. Transac.
) Crassus Plunders the Temple of Jerusalem. 952 He is slain in Battle by the
Parthians. 953 Dionysius Neos D. He had 2 Legitimate Sons: But by Julius
Caesar's Favor, Cleopatra, is Preser'd before them.
And his Daughter 10 Sept. 5 1. Cleopatra Reigns 22 Y. 955 Caesar Passes the
Rubico^ and Begins the CivilWar. (^) 957 Pompey Beats Caesar at Dyrrachium: but
is Beat by Caesar at Phars^lia, and Killed in Egypt (c. Helvicus.
u) 959 Cato the Younger Kills Himself at Utica. (c. u) Caesar, as High Priest,
^eforms the Roman Calendar. (c. u) In order to which, by the Direction of
Sosigenes He makes this Y to consist of 445 d, ( Lydia^, Peravius, Usher,
Strauchins, Prid^aux, etc.)
960 b Ian. 1 being now placed a^ the Winter Solstice, the 1st Julian Y Begins
( c. u) These Y are called Julian from Julius Caesar who appointed them: They
contain 365 d, 6 hours; which 6 hours in 4 Y make 1 d, and added in Feb. every
4^h Y, makes that Y to consist of 366 d, and is called a Leap Y: But through
Mistake, the Romans made every third Y a Leap Y for the 1 st 36 Y of this
AEra^; and then August^us reduced them into Order. ( Lydiat, Cal^is^us,
Petavius, Us^er, Prideaux.)
3961 b March, 15, Caesar Killed i^ the Senate ( c. u) 962 Ovid B, and Lives 59
Y. ( c. ^) Octavius, Antony, and Lepid^^ form the 2d Triumvir^te* And Antony
Kills Cicero, Aged 64. ( c. u.) 963 Octavius and Antony vanqui^^ Brutus and
Cassius (...) Philippi. (c. u) 965 The Parthians Conquer Syria and Phaenicia,
and take Jerusalem: and Herod flying to Rome, the Senate vo^ Him K of Judea.
(c. u) 966 Ventidius beats the Parthia^ out of Phaenicia and Syria (c. ^) 967
Dec. 31, By the Mistake above, this was called the 1 st of Ian. of the
following Y.
By the Help (...) Sosius, Herod takes Jerusalem and therein K A^tigonus. (c.
u) 968 This Summer, Antony Kills (...) Antigonus at Antioch. By the continual
Instigation and Bribery of Herod. (u. p)
969 Octavius deposes Lepidus from the Triumvirate. (c u) 974 Sept. 3. By the
Mistake above, this was called the 2 of Sept.
the Marine Victory of Octavius over (...) and Cleopatra at Actium (c. h. u.)
975 Aug. 1, Octavius takes Alexandria: at which Antony Kill^ Himself, and soon
after Cleopatra: and Egypt is made ^ Roman Province. (c. h u.)

V. Period. THE Chronology of the Roman EMPERORS succ^ssively, From the
Beginning of the Reign of AUGUSTUS, to the Death of CONSTANTINE the Great, the
1st Christian Emperor, when the Empire came to be Divided: being the Spaceof
365 Years, 9 Months
Having brought the Reader through the darker Scenes of the ^ncient Ages to the b
of the Roman Emperors; we are opening now into fairer Prospects, and the Path
of Time grows clearer and more certain; partly by the Regulation of the Y by
Julius Caesar, and par^ly by the Advance of Learning in the Roman Empire. But
though theCourse of Time through the present Period meets with little or no
Difficulty; yet the punctualDates of those great Events -- the Decease of
Herod, and the Birth, Ministry and Death of JOHN the Baptist and our Blessed
SAVIOR, have perplexed the Minds of the most learned men as much as any other
Points of History. For the New English Reader'^ fuller view of these famous
Problems, I must refer to Scalig^r, Calvisius, Petavius, Strauchius, Gregory,
Light^oot, Swan, Whiston, Whitby, Prideaux, Marshal and Lardner, whose
Performance^ are ^ound among us; but above all, to the critical Examination of
Paterculus, Josephus, Tacitus, Suetonius and Dio, compared with the Writers of
the New Testament: without consulting whose Originals, I find there can be no
Safety or Exactness in our Reasoning^ from them.

However, to oblige my Readers that cannot come at these authen^ick Records, I
may briefly observe, as to the DEATH of HEROD, -- That though A Bp. Usher and Mr.
Whiston place i^ in November; yet Josephus plainly representing that he Died a
little before the Passover, and the Jewish Writer from whom they take that End
of Herod's Li^e, being a Modern Author and of little Credi^, as Dr. Whitby
observes from Dr. Allix; the Learned therefore seem to be giving up this
Article, and the great Enquiry is, whether Herod Died in the Spring of the Y of
Rome 750, 751, or 752, i. e. according to Varro's Computation, which Petavius,
Carry and Perizonius follow in their Chronological Tables: though the very same
years are called 749, 750, 751, according to Cato; followed by Helvicus,
Isaacson, Swa and Tallents. Now because Josephus mentions an Eclips^ of the
Moon at Jericho in the Time of Herod's Final Illness; A^stronomers sea^ching
for this C^^lestial Character, Kepler (...) Petavius have found it on March 13
in the Y of Rome 750 See the Calculation of (...) Eclipse at the e o Mr.
^histo^'s (...); though his Calculation is for the Meridian o^ (...) which mak^s
it something later in the M^rning than it appeared (...).
and therefore place the Decease of ^erod between this Phaeno^^en^n and April
11, the d of ^e ollowing Passover ho' Herod had not arrived to the 3 (...)
entire Y from the He was declared King by the Rom n Sena^e; ye^ if Ioseph^^
Begins his Jewish Years with the 1st of Nisan, as Ptolemy -- (...) Egyptian
with the 1st of Thoth; then on the 1st o^ Nisan in 750* Herod entered his 37th
Y, and there is no Difficulty.

For (1) Josephus tells us, that Herod was declared King by the Romans in the
184th Olympiad, Calvinus and Pollio being Consuls: Dio says, that these were
Consuls in the Y of Ro^ ^14: and the Learned all agree that this Olympiad ended
(...) ^he Summer of this very Y. But by comparing these 2 Authors: seems to me
that Herod did not Sail to Rome till the Winte^ ^oming on at the End of 714:
and though Calvinus and Pollio began their Consulships in the 184th Olympiad; yet
the 185^h began in the Summer befo e Herod's Voyage; which Josephus expressly
tells us was after Pentecost and ((...),) in the Wi^^^^ Season. (2) Josephus
also says, that Herod Reigned 37 Y that his Son Philip Succeeded Him in Part of
his Dominion R^led also 37 Y, and Died in the 20th Y of the Empire o^ ^iberius:
and all Chronologers agree that the 20^h Y of (...) Began on Aug. 19, in the Y
of Rome 786 By this (...) ^lain, Josephus means, not entire Years, with respect
to either Son or Father, but the 37th Y current only. (3) Josephus (...) ^o wri
es in his Book of the War, that Archelaus S^cceed^ Herod in another Part of his
Kingdom, viz Judea, and bei^ ^ccus'd in the 9th Y of his Government, He was
Banished (...) ^ienna: But in his Book of Antiquities written after the other
and we may suppose more Correctly* He says, that Archel^^^ was Accused and
Banished in the 10th Y of his Government; (...) in his own Life, He repeats the
same, asserting that His Father's Birth was in the said 10th Y of Archelaus. By
which it seems that Archelaus was accused and sent to Rome in the Spring o^e of
his 9th Y, and was got into his 10th before his Trial ther^ and Exile. And Dio
says, He was accused and banished to Vi^enna and his Estate confiscated in the
Y of Rome 759, Lepidus and Aruntius being Consuls. (4) Josephus also tells us,
tha upon Archelaus's Banishment, Augustus sent Cyrenius, who seize^ his Estate
in the 37th Y after Antony was beat by Octa^vius at Actium: and the Learned all
agree that the 37th Y from that Event Began on Sept. 2. in this very Y of Rom^
which Dio speaks of, viz. 759.

If therefore, 714, ending with the last Month Adar of the Jewish Y, be
reckoned by Josephus for the 1st of Herod's Reign and so his 2d Y Beginning
with the 1st of Nisan; Then the latter e of Mar. 750 will be in his 37th Y;
Then Mar. 759 will be in the e of Archelaus's 9th, and the rest of the Y will be
hi^ 10th; Then his Estate will be seized in the same Y, sometim^ after Sept. 2;
And then the 37th of Philip will begin in Mar. 786 and He must Die between Aug.
19 this same Y (when Tiberius enters on his 20th,) and the Nisan of the next,
when otherwise Philip would enter into his 38th.

B^t if we fix the Decease of Herod to theSpring of 751; then we slight the
Eclipse abovesaid (which no Astronomer will be free to) and cannot so easily
make Josephus and Dio agree. And if we carry his Death to the Spring of 752;
then we both sligh^ the Eclipse, and make Josephus interfere both with Dio and
with Himself also. Whereas if we keep to the Caelestial Character* with the
natural and easy Supposition above; there is a perfect Harmony in all their
Numbers.

Now, the 750 Y of Rome is the 4710 of the Julian Period* and in the Spring of
this Y, I at present incline to place the Decease of Herod: though if a Lunar
Eclipse at Jericho, could be found by Mr. Flamsted's Observations, and Sir I
Newton's Theory, in the Latter part of this Y, or b of the next; I should then
incline to think his Death was in the Spring ensuing. And by Mat. I* we know
that CHRIST was Born before Herod Died; as by Luke I The Birth of JOHN was
about half a Year before our SAVIOR'S.

No Y. W Emperor 1 3975 Octavius Aug. 31. By the mistake above, this was call d
Aug. 29* and hence (...) Egyptian Era begins, by the Consent o all
Chronolo^^ers.
The 1st Eg^p. new Y d of (...) C^nquering Anthony and Egypt, and becom^ing
Sole Military Head of the Roman Em^pire, for 43 Y ( Suetonius.
Dio.
Ptolemy.
etc.) 978 Ian. 7 He receives the whole Administr^^^^on from the Senate: Ian.
13. So Ovid: but Censorinus on Ian. 17 Calv^sius.
Ushe^

the Name Him Augustus: and the REPUBLIC^ Turned into a MONARCHY ( Calv^sius.
Petavius.
Ushe^
etc.) 984 Marc Agrippa By whom she had A^rippina and Agrippa-Posth^m^s, etc (^)
Marries Iulia, only (...) of Augustus Calv^sius
985 The BLESSED VIRGIN Born Nicephorus.
986 Virgil Dies at Brundusium, AE^atis 52 (^) 987 Herod Begins to Rebuild the
Temple Josephus.
Lloyd.
M^rsh^^.
992 Lepidus the High Priest of Rome Dies, an^ Augustus succeeds Calv^sius.
993 March 19 M. Agrippa Dies (^) 995 Tiberius Marries Iulia Calv^sius.
But had no Iss^^ by Her: though He had a Son by a former Wife. (^)
997 Augustus Begins to Rectify the Julian Calv^sius.
Ushe^
Prideau^.
By omitting the 3 Intercalations for the 12 Y^^rs fo^^owing Calv^sius.
Ushe^
Prideau^.

Horace AEtatis 57, and Mecenas Die Calv^sius.
998 Dionysius Halicarnasseus Begins to write (^) 4000 JOHN the Baptist B in
the Former Part of (...) Y, and CHRIST in the Latter Petavius.
Ushe^
Swan.
Car^.
Lloyd.
Prideau^.
4001 Herod D. AEt. 70 Josephus.
Between an Eclipse of the Moon on Mar. 13 and the P^ssover o^ April 11
Josephus.
Dio.
K^pl^r.
Petavius.
Car^.

and his Son A^^chelaus Governs in Judea 9 Y Josephus.
Dio.
K^pl^r.
Petavius.
Car^.
4004 The last Y Cycle of the Sun 9, Y o^ Rome according to ^arro, T^citu^ and
(...) 753, Julian Y 45, and Y of the I^lian Period 4713; 2 all Chronologers
agree.
before the Vulgar Christian (...) I. CENTURY. 1 Ian I. Begins the 1st Y of the
Christian or Dionysian Era, called Anno Domini 1 st brought into use by
Dionysiu (...) in the common Y C 527, who supposin^ CHRIST was Born on December
25 o^ the foregoing Y, Begin the (...) Era with thi^ 1 st o^ Ian.
4 At the End of Feb. the Julian Y comes right, and so continues ( c. u. etc) 6
Archelaus Accused before Au^ustus, is Banished to Vienna (j. d. p. u etc)
Between Sept. 2 this Y and Sept. 2 next, Judea made a Roman Province and
Annexed to Syria (i. d. c. u etc) 8 November, Ovid Banished ( c u.) 12 Tiberius
made Prince and Colleague with Augustus in the Provinces and Armies (
Paterculus.
Ta^itus.
^. d.) 1443. Aug. 19 Augustus Dies AEtatis 76, and his only Grandson Killed by
2 Tiberius He wa^ of the Claudian Family, and (...) Son in Law to Augustus. (s)
Who Reigns 22 Y, 6 m, 27 d So T^cit^^ and Suctonius, though Dio to d more.
17 Ovid Dies in Exile, AEtatis 59 ( c. u) 18 Livy Dies AEtatis 76 (^) and
Strabo Publishes his Geography (pr) 25 Strabo Dies Helvicus.
26 Valerius Maximus and Velleius Patereulus Flourish Helvicus.
28 15. JOHN Begins his Public Ministry and Baptizes CHRIST In the 15 Y of the
R of Tiberius; which Begins Aug. 19 this Y* ( L^k. III. p^. ^. s^. (...)
m.) Though A B p Usher, and Dr. Prideaux place the b of the Baptist's Ministry 2
Y (...), viz. in the 15th of Tiberiu^'^ P^in^^pality, (see Luke III. pr.
L^rdner.
Paterculus.
Ta^itus.
s. d)
29 The Passover, on Lord's Day April 17 ( c) 30 The Passover, on Saturday,
April 8 ( c) 31 The Passover on Tuesday March 27 () 32 The Passover on Tuesday,
April 15 Bp Richardson.
33 The Passover on Friday April 3. when CHRIST was Crucified ( c Bp Richardson.
u. s w cr. w ll m. etc) In the 19th Y of the R of Tiberius, which Ends Aug.
19, ( ^. ^)
Lord's Day, April 5. He Arises from the Dead ( c Bp Richardson.
u. ll etc) Thursday, May 14. He Ascends to Heaven. ( c. Bp Richardson.
u. etc) Lord's Day, May 24 the d of Pentecost, the HOLY GHOST pour d ou^ ( c.
Bp Richardson.
u. ll. etc) 34 Steph^n the 1st Christian Martyr Stoned ( ll) 35 Saul Converted
and called Paul (p u ll) and Tiberius proposes in the Senate to Deify CHRIST (
u) 37 March 16 So Taci^us and S^e^onius; though Dio ^0 d aft^r.
Tiberius Dies AEtatis 78 ( ^ s d s p u) and his only Grandson Killed by his
Brother's Grandson 3 Caligula Son to A^rippin^ by Germanicus the Son of Dru^u^
younger Bro^ther of Tiberius (^)
Who R 3 Y, 10 m, 8 d ( c p u) So Tacitus and Suetoni^^; though Dio to (...).
Ioseph^^ Born between Sept. this Y and March next ( j^ 38 June 13 Agricola the
R^man General B ^ t) 40 Philo. Iudaeus goes Ambassador to Rome (^) and the
BLESSED VIRGIN D, AEtatis 60 (^) 41 Jan. 24 Caligula killed, AEtatis 30 (^) and
hi^ Uncle 4 Claudius Younger Bro^her to G^^man^cus, and Both Sons ^f Dr^su^
(...) Anto^ia minor, Dau^^t^r of Ma^c Antony by O^tavia Siste^ o^ Au^ustus (^)
Reigns 13 Y, S m, 20 d ( t. s. d. c. p u) 43 Plautius and V^spasian sail to
Britain, figh^ suc^ces^^ull^, and Claudius follows them ( u) 44 Claudius
Returns to Rome, Triumphs, and cal^^ his Son Britannicus (t. c) 46 Apollonius
Tyaneus Flourishes ( u) 48 Quintus Curtius Flourishes (^) 52 The 1st Famous
Council at Jerusalem (u ll) 54 Oct. 13. Claudius Poisoned AEtatis 64 ( t s. d
and^) and his only Son Killed by 5 Nero Son of Domi^^^s by Agrippina Jun^
Daught^r of Germanicus by (...) ^en^ (^)
who Reigns 13 Y, 7m, 28 d ( t s. c. u) 60 Paul seized at Jerusalem (u. ll) 61
Boadicia a British Q kills 70 (t) or 80 thousand Romans with their Associa^es
(d) But Paulinus in 1 Battle Slays as many Britons: and Boadicia Kills Herself.
( t. d. c) 62 Persius thePoet Dies, AEtatis, 29 () 64 Nero 1st Persecutes the
Christians at Rom^ (c u) 65 Seneca and Lucan put to Death by Nero (t c. p 66 In
May, G^ssius Florus Begins the Jewish War (j c u) 67 June 29, Paul Beheaded,
and Peter Crucified at Rome (p. u ll) 68 In March, the Army in Spain set up
Galha (t. c u) June 8 Nero Kills Himself, AEtatis 31 ( t. d.) 32 ( s) And thus
the I^li^n, Octavian, Claudian and Domitian Familie^ expire.
And 6 Galba Comes to Rome and Reigns ( t. s. d c. u) 69 Ian. 3. The Army in
Gaul set up Vitellius (t. c. u) Jan. 15. Galba Killed at Rome, AEtatis 73 ( t.
s. d. u) by 7 O^ho Who Reigns There* 94 d. (t. c. u) April 19, Oth^ Kills
Himself, AEtatis 37 (t. d. c) 38 ( s) And 8 Vi^el^us Comes to Rome and Reigns (
t. s d. c. ^) July 1. The Army in Egypt Proclaim Vespasian (t. s. c. u) Dec 20.
(t. m) Vitellius Kil^'d at Rome, AE^atis 55 ( d) 57 ( t. s) Galba, Otho and
Vite^lius were of several F^m^lies: and (...) Rei^ns b^ing sh^r^ and
int^r^er^ng, Ptolem^ omits them, and sets (...) Nero.
9 Vespasian R. (from July 1.) 10 ^, wanting 6 d ( s. ^. ^) 70 April 14, The
Passov^r Begins, and Titus lay^ seige to Jerusalem (j. c. p. u) July 17, The
Daily Sacrifice ceases (j c. u ^) Aug 10, The Temple Burn^, and the Roman
E^signs set on the E^stern Ga^e ( j. u. m) Sep 8, Titus takes and destroys the
(...) City (j. c. u. m) 73 Judea entirely subdued, laid waste and quieted (j c.
u) 77 Pliny Dedicates his Natural History to Titus (^ 79 June 24, Vespasian
Dies, AEtatis 70. ( s d. c. ^ And his Eldest Son 10 Titus Reigns 2 Y, 2 m. 20
d. ( s. d. c. p) Agr^cola goes into Britain, and conquers (...) Isle of Man,
etc. ( t. c) Nov. 2, Pliny Dies by the Eruption of Ves^^vius (c p) 81 Sept 13,
Titus Dies, AEtatis 41 ( s c. p) (...) his Younger Brother 11 Domitian Reigns
15 Y, 5 d ( s. d. c) Agricola Discovers and Conquers New Nati^^ in Britain (t.
c) 82 ^uvenal and Martial Flourish ( c) Agricola 1st Discovers Britain to be an
Islan^ and Conquers the Orcades (t. c) 83 Having Conquered Britain, He goes
(...) Ireland (t. c) 85 Statius the Poet Flourishes ( c) 87 Agricola Re^^rns to
Rome (c) 90 The Apostle JOHN Banished into Patmos (^ 93 ^lem^ns Romanus writes
to the Corinthians (^ Aug. 23. Agricola D* AEt. 56 ( t. c) 94 Josephus Fini^hes
his Antiquities, AEt. 56 ( j. c) Between Sept. last Y, and March this, ^n the
^3th Y o^ Domitian (j)
95 JOHN writes the Revelation ^ and Quintillan Dies ( c) 96 Sep 18, Domitian
Killed, AEt. 45, ( s. d. c. p) The Last of the 12 CAESAR'S (Julius being ^he 1
st) described by Suetonius: and in Domitian the Vespasian Famil^ also Ends.
And 12 Nerva Chose b^ the Senate, ^ 1 Y, 4 m, 9 d ( d. ^) 97 Apollonius
Tyaneus D. AEt. 100 ( d. Philostratus.
Tillemont.
) 98 Tacitus writes of the German Manners (c) Jan. 27, Ner^a D, AEt. 66 ( d. c.
p) And 13 Trajan A ^pan^ard Herodian.
R 19 Y, 6 m, 15 d. (d. c. p) Of Obs^ur^ Birth, and the 1 st Emperor that was
not a Roman t tho He carried the Empire to the greatest Extent, From the
Or^ader of Scotland, to the Bounds of India (d. Herodian.
)
99 JOHN the Apostle D, at Ephesus (c) 100 Clement R^manus D, (p) and the
Apostolic Age Ends. II. CENTURY. 102 Pliny junr, goes Proconsul to Bithynia
(c) 107 Ignatius thrown to theLions at Rome (c) Petavius says in the Year after.
108 Trajan subdues Arm^nia, and extends the Empire from the Euphrates to the
Tigris (d. c) 115 He takes Arbela, etc. and subdue^ Assyria (d. c) 117 Aug. 10,
M^ D, in Cilicia, AEt. 64 ( c. p) an^ 14 Adrian A Spaniard also, R 20 Y, 11
(...) ( d. c) 119 Plutarch Flourishes ( c) 122 Adrian goes into Britain (c) and
Builds a Military Wall of 80 Miles in Length H^^rn.
123 Appian, the Historian, Flourishes (^) 125 Ptolemy Begins his Celestial
Observations (...) Alexandria (c) 127 Su^tonius, the Historian, Flourishes ( c.
b) 138 July 10, Adrian D, AEt 63 ( d. c. p) and 15 Antoninu^ Pius R 22 Y, 7 m,
26 d ( c. p) He makes his Son in Law, LUCIUS VERU^ his Colleague (d. c. p)
Justin Martyr, a Philosopher, becomes Christian (c) 142 Pausanias writes his
History ( c) 144 Justin the Historian, (^) Galen the Phisici^^ And Aquila,
Flourish ( c) 147 Arrian, the Historian, Flourishes ( c) 148 Diogenes Laertius
Flourishes (^) 150 Justin Martyr writes his 1st Apology ( c^) 161 Mar. 6.
Antoninus D, AEt. 75 ( c) and (...) in Law. 16 Aurelius Reigns 19 Y, 11 d ( d.
c) 162 Justin Martyr writes his 2d Apology (^) 163 June 1. He is Beheaded at
Rome (c) 164 Christianity Countenanced by Royal (...) in Britain (c) 167 Mar.
22, Polycarp Burnt at Smyrna (c. p) 169 In Dec. LUCIUS VERUS, Emperor, D. (...)
172 Epictetus, the Philosopher, Flourishes (^) 180 Mar. 16, Aurelius D, at
Vienna, (...). 59 ((...) and his Son 17 Commodus Reigns 12 Y, 9 m, 14 d. ( d.
c. p) 181 Lucius, a British K, promotes Christianity (...) 182 Theodotion makes
his Greek Version ( c) 185 Origin Born, and Lives 69 Y ( c p) 190 The Jewish
Misna written ( c) 192 Dec. 31. Commodus Strangled, AEt. 32 ( d. c. p) 18 193
Pertinax Ian. 1, Chose by the Senate, R 87 d. ( d c*^ Mar. 28, AEt 68, He is
Killed by the (...), who sell the Empire to 19 Julian Who Reigns 66 d ( d. c.
p) NIGER set up by the Army in Syria, (...) Albinus in Britain (hd. c) June 1,
Julian AEt. 61 ( d) is Killed by 20 Severus An African, set up by theArmy in
Illyricum, R. 17 Y, 8 m, 3 d ( d. c p) 194 Clemens Alexandri^us Flourishes ( c)
Severus beats Niger at Issus, and beheads Him at Antioch (bd. c) 195 Tertullian
Begins to Write ( c) 198 Severus beats Albi^us at Lyon^, who is there beheaded
( bd. c) III. CENTURY. 201 Symmachus sets out his Greek Version ( c) 202 Lucius
Florus and Philostratus Flourish ( b) 203 Irenaeus Bp. of Lions put to Death (
c) 208 Severus Goes to War in Britain (c. p) 209 Minutius Felix Flourishes (c)
211 Feb. 4 Severus D, at York, AEt. 66 ( d. c. p) and his Sons 21 Caracalla And
GETA Reign ( d. hd) Caracalla R 6 Y, 2 m, 2 d ( d. c. p) 212 Feb. 25. He Kills
his Brother Geta, AEt. 23 ( d. c. p) and 217 April 8, AEt. 30 ( d) He is Killed
in Mesopotamia, by the Intrigue of 22 Macrinus A M^or, Chose by the Army The
Army 1 st Chose AUDENTIUS; but He Refused theEmpire ( h^)
R 1 Y, 1 m, 28 d ( d. c) 218 June 9, He and his Son Killed ( d. c) by 23
Bassianus A Syrian Priest, set up by the Soldiers A Counterf^it Son of
Car^ealla, and went by the Name of Antonine, Avitus, H^liogabal^^, etc. ( d)
R 3 Y, 9 m, 4 d ( d. c) 220 Julius Africanus the Historian Flou^^^hes ( c) 221
Tertullian writes Ad Scapulam (c) 222 Mar. 10, Bassianus, AEt. 19, Killed by
the Soldiers ( d. c) and his Cousin 24 Alexander Another Syrian Priest, R 13 Y,
9 d ( c. p) 226 Artax^rxes a Persian, Rebels against the Parthians (c. p) 228
AElian, the Historian, Flourishes ( c) 229 Artaxerxes beats and Kills Artabanus
King o^ Parthia, and takes his Kingdom ( c) Here Dion Cassius Ends his Roman
Hi^ (d^ 230 Longinus Writes ( c) 231 Origin compleats his Tripartite Bible (c)
235 Mar. 18, Alexander Killed in Germ^^^ AE^a^i^ 2^ ( bd) by 25 Maximine Set up
by the Soldiers, R 2 Y, 6 m ( c. p) He had been a Thracian Shepherd, of mean
Birth, and preferred (...) for his Great Body and Courage ( hd)
236 GORDIAN the Father and Son set up in Afri^^ But the Son being overcome and
Killed, (...) Father ^angs Himself, AEtatis 80 ( c. p) 237 (...) October,
Maximine and his Son Killed (...) Aquilla (bd. c) And ^6 Maximus And ALBINUS,
chose by the Senate, (...) together ( bd. c. p) 238 In March, They are Killed
by the Soldi^^ ( bd. c. p) who make ^7 Gordian Emperor, AEtatis 14 ( bd) Who
Rei^^^ 6 Years ( c. p) He was the Son of Gordian the Elder 's Daughter (hd)
Here Her^dian Ends his ^om. Hist. (...) And Cons^rinus Written ( c. p) 244
(...) March, Gordian AEtatis 20, is Killed (...) Pers^a, (c. p) by ^8 Philip
Arabs, set up by the Soldiers, R 6 Y ( c) H s Father had been Captain of a Band
of Robbers (c)
248 Cyprian made Bishop of Carthage (p) 2^0 Philip Killed in Battle at Verona
(c) by 29 Decius An Hungarian, set up by the Soldiers, (...) 1 Year 3 m ( c)
251 He and his Son Slain in Battle by (...) Goths (c. p) and ^0 Gallus Chose by
the Soldiers, R 2 Y, 4 m ( p. ^^ 253 He and his Son Killed in Battle by his
Officer ( c) (...) 31 AEmilian Set up by the Soldiers in Illyr^^^m He was of
M^^rish Extract and Born of obscure Parents (c)
But in the 3 m after, They Kill Him ( c. p) for Fear of 32 Valerian Set up by
the Army in Germany, Reigns near 7 Years ( c) 254 Origin Dies, AEtatis 70 ( c)
258 Cyprian, with his Elders, Banished (c) 259 Valerian taken and Killed by the
Persians (c. p) And his Son 33 Gallienus Reigns 9 Y ( ^r) In his R, about 30
Officers set up Themselves in Diverse Parts of the Empire: but are at length
Destroyed (c)
Sept. 14. Cyprian Beheaded ( c) 260 ODENATUS of Palmyra, Repell^ the Pers^ans
(c) 264 He Conquers the Eastern part of theEmpire, and is Proclaimed King ( c.
p) 266 He being Killed, hi^ Queen Zenobia mal^^^in^ the Empire ( c) 268 Mar.
21. Ga^^tenus, AEt. 50, with his Brother, Killed at Mila^ (c. p) And 34
Claudius II A Dalm^tian, R 1 Y, 10 m, 15 d ( br) 269 Zenobia seizes (...) Egypt
(c) Claudius, in 2 or 3 Battles, Slays above 300 thousand Scy^hians, Goths,
etc. ( c. p) 270 Feb. 5, Claudius D. ( c. p) and his Brother 35 Q^intillus
Assumes the Empire ( c p) But Feb. 22, the Soldiers Kill Him at Aquil^a (c. p)
and choose 36 Aurelian A Daci^^, of Obscure Birth, R near 5 Y ( c. p) 273 He
takes Zenobia and Palmyra, and puts L^ngi^us to Death ( c. p) 274 CONSTANTINE
the Great Born ( p) 275 Jan. 29, Aurelian is Killed near Byzantium (c. p) And
37 Tacitus Sep. 25. chose by the Senate, R 6 m, 20 d ( c. p) 276 April 13, He
Dies ( c. p) and his Brother 38 Florian Assumes the Empire, R 2 m, 20 d c) July
3, He is Killed by the Soldiers in Cilicia (c. p) And 39 Probus An Hungarian,
chose by the Senate, R 6 Y 4 m ( c. p) 277 In severalBattles He slays near 400
thousand Germans, recovers 60 Cities and beats them out of Gaul (c) 282 Nov. 2,
The Soldiers KillHim in Hungary (c) (...) 40 Carus An Illyrican, Reigns above 1
Y ( c. p) 283 He Dies by Lightning in Persia (c. p) And his Sons 41 Carinus And
NUMERIANUS succeed Him ( c. p) 284 Apr. 21 Numerianus Killed in Asia (c)
SABINUS sets up in Italy; but Carinus overcomes Him at Verona (c) 42 Dioclesian
An Illyrican, of obscure Bir^h, set up by the Soldiers, R 20 Y. ( c) Aug. 29,
Begins the Egyptian Era of Di^clesian, or Era of Martyrs (c. p) P^tavius,
from the Alexandrian Chronicle, tells us, that on Sept. 17 this Y, Dioclesian
was Proclaimed Emperor at Chalce^on.
Dioclesian beats Carinus in 2 Battles. ( c) 285 Carinus Killed in Maesia by
one of his Officers ( c. p) 286 Apr. 1. Dioclesian makes MAXIMIAN (...)
Colleague ( c. p) Carausius sets up in Britain, and R 7 Y (c) 288 Achilles sets
up in Egypt (c) 291 Dioclesian and Maximian make Constanti^^ and Galerius,
Caesar's ( c. p) Con^tantius was the Son of Eu^ropius by the Daughter of Cris^^^
Brother to Claudius II. ( c)
292 Carausius Killed by his Intimate Alecto, who Reigns in Britain 3 Years (
c) 294 Dioclesian overcomes and Kills Achilles, and Reduces Egypt (c) ^95
Alecto is overcome, and Britain Reduced ( c) 297 Arnobius Writes and Flourishes
in Africa. (p) IV. CENTURY. 303 In March, The Emperors put out a most severe
Edict against the Christians (c. p) Whereby Their Meetin^s are dissolved, their
Churches pulled down* their Bibles Burnt, etc. In Egypt only, which is but one
Province of the Empire, there were 144 thousand Killed and 700 thousan^
Banished ( c)
304 April 1 ( p) or 21 (c) They both lay down their Empire. And 43 Constantius
Chlorus Reign^ in the West, and GALERIUS in the East (c. p) And are the first
who Divide the Empire. Eusebius.
Vales^us.
306 Constantius Resigns Italy and Africa to Galerius (c) July 25, Constantius
Dies at York (c. p) and his Son 44 Constantin TheGreat, AEt. 33, R 30 Y, 9 m,
27 d ( c. p) Sept. 25, the Soldiers at Rome set up MAXENTIUS (c. p) 309
Maximian, Rising against Constantin, is taken and put to Death (c) So
Calvisius, from Zosimus: But Eusebius says He hanged Himself and Pe^av us sets
it in the Y C 310.
311 ^alerius D, and LICINIUS R in the East (c. p) Constantin Declares Himself
a Christian (c) 312 Sept. 24, He overcomes Maxentius near Rome; who flying,
isDrown'd in the Tiber: and Constantin Recovers Italy (c. p) 313 Constantin's
Son Constantin Born ( c) Oct. 2. A Number of Bishops meet at Rome, and first
Condemn Donatus and his Followers c. p) Dec. 3, Diocl^sian D, in Retirement, at
Salona (c) 314 Oct. 8 Constantin Beats Licinius in Hungary: and again in
Thrace; and they Agree and Divide the Empire (c. v^ 315 Arius put out of the
Presbytery at Alexandria, on the Account of his Heresies ( c) 317 Constantin's
Son Constantius Born ( c) 320 Licinius Persecutes the Christians; Forbidding
them to meet in Synods, etc ( ^. c) 321 Constantin's Son Constans Born ( c) 322
Lactantius Writes his Divine Institutions (c) 323 July 3, Constantin Beats
Licinius near Adrionople ( Sigoniu^, in Valesius.
c) Petavius and Valesius, from Idatius, place this Victory in the following Y
with the other.
324 Sep. 18, He defeats Him finally, near Chalcedon, Of Licinius's Army of 130
thousand in this Battle, scarce 30 thousand escaped ( c)
Becomes Sole Emperor, Restores the Christian Liberties (c. p. v) and Here
Eusebius Ends his History (^) 325 Licinius, Conspiring, is put to Death (c. p)
May 20, The Famous 1st GENERAL COUNCIL* meets at Nice It consisted of 318,
Bishops, or Pastors of Churches, besides Elders, Deacons etc. ( c. p) and
Valesius, From the Alexandrian Chronicle etc. places their Convention on June
19 this Y: But this being Saturday* and May 20, (...) Thursday, I rather
incline to sc. p.
Condemns Arius and his Opinions, and Asserts the Deity of CHRIST ( Socrates
Scholasti^us.
p) 326 Athanasius made Bishop of Alexandria (c. p) 330 May 11, Constantin
Dedicates Byzantium, and make it the 2 d Seat of the Empire (c. p) Ca^^ing it
N^^ R^me: But the name of Constantinople soon Prevailed, and still continues (
c. Socrates Scholasti^us.
)
336 Arius Dies at Constantinople (c p) 337 Constantin falling ill, is
Baptized: and May 22, Dies a^ Nicomedia, AEt. 65 Socrates Scholasti^us.
By Will Dividing the Emp^^^ among his 3 Sons (c. p)

VI. Period. THE Chronology of the Greek or Eastern EMPERORS, From the Complete
Division of the Empire at the Death of CONSTANTIN the Great, to the Restoration
of the Western Empire by CHARLES the Great of France, and the Beginning of the
Reign of EGBERT the first King of England: Containing about 463 Years, 7 Months.
We are now arrived at the fatal Partition of the Roman Empire. For though Marc
Antony, Octavius and Lepidus, and sometime after, Sextus Pompey with them,
assigned themselves their several Shares thereof, to Reduce to Order, Defend
and Govern; Yet, as Dio Observes D Cassius; Lib XLVI-XLIX.
this was at first for 5 Y only, and then Renewed for 5 Y more, while the
Empire remained united in Rome the Capital. And thus it likewise held entire,
while Dioclesian and Maximian, with their 2 Caesar's under them, took their
several Provinces to Reduce and Vindicate. But when Constantius and Galerius
received the Empire, they Parted it at least for Life, if not for Property: and
Eusebius tells us, Eccl. Hist; Lib. VIII, Cap. 13.
, that this was the first Division of the Empire; It was a thing, says He,
which never sell out before. However it seemed to continue in some sort entire,
while Rome remained the Imperial City, without a Rival.

But when Constantin the Great, had with extraordinary Magnificence Rebuilt and
Adorned Byzantium, and in the Solemn Dedication given it the Name of NEW ROME;
He made it the Imperial Seat of the Eastern Provinces, and to have no
Subjection to the Other. Here He therefore fixed his Residence, and Reigned
over the whole, S prea^^ wi^h his 3 Sons under Him, till his Decease in the Y C
337; When the Empire came to be Parted in the most effectual manner. CONSTANTIN
the eldest had Europe on this side of the Alps: CONSTANTIUS the 2d had Thrace,
Asia and Egypt; being nearly the same with the now Turkish Empire: and CONSTANS
the Youngest had the Rest of Europe and Africa.

The Part which fell to Constantin was indeed in the 3 Year after, united to
the Dominion of Constans: and both together bearing the Name of the WESTERN
EMPIRE, was miserably harras'd and rent to pieces by the Picts, Scots, and
Saxons in Britain; and by the Goths, Vandals, Francs, ^eruli, and other
Barbarous Nations in the Continent; till it entirely ended with Augustulus, in
the Y C 476; though in a measure Revived at the End of the present Interval by
Charles the Great of France, in the Year 800. But the Part which fell to
Constantius had the Name of the EASTERN EMPIRE, and endured the attacks of the
Persians, Saracens, Turks, and Others, till 1453; when it was forced to yield
to the Ottoman Arms.

The Succession of these Eastern Emperors I therefore ch^^^ to follow through
the present Period: and the more for this, that they were not only the Greatest
Princes that were then in the World, but the Affairs of Learning then subsisted
chiefly in their Dominions, and the Times of their Succession are more exactly
stated than those of other Monarchs^ For though the polite and fine way of
Writing among the Roman and Greek Historians declined greatly in the latter
part of the foregoing Period, and expires in this, yet the Notes of Time were
so well preserved, that Disputes among Chronologers grow less and less
considerable They chiefly, I think refer to the Roman Pontiffs in the Western
Empire; wherein Onuphrius and Baronius disagree, which seem indeed to be very
uncertain and incapable of Decision, and with which we are little concerned.

Note, In the Present Period, where no Historian is cited, the Articles are
taken from CALVISIUS.

N Y. C Eastern Emperors Sect. I To the Destruction of the Western Empire. 1
337 Constantius May 22, R in the East, 24 Y, 5 m, 12 d Calvisi^s.
Petavius.
340 In March, Constantin invading Constans, is slain near Aquilea: and
Constans takes his Part of the Empire Calvisi^s.
Petavius.
Eusebius, the Historian, D. Calvisi^s.
Petavius.
and Ierom B (...), tho Petavius says that Prosper sets his Birth in 3^0.
350 Jan. 18, Magnentius se^s ^p in Gaul for the Western Empire, and at the
Pyren^s Kills Constan^, AEt 30 Socrates Scholasticus.
Calvisi^s.
Petavius.
June 3, Nepotianus sets up at Rome Socrates Scholasticus.
Calvisi^s.
Petavius.
He was Son to Eu^^opia, Daughter to Constantius Chlorus Petavius.
Valesius.

July 1, Magnentius's Army overcomes and Slays Nepotianus, and seizes Italy
Calvisi^s.
Petavius.
and Africa Socrates Scholasticus.
352 Constantius beats Magnentius near Mursa in Pannonia Calvisi^s.
Petavius.
353 He beats Magnentius twice in Gaul Aug. 11 So p and v from Idatius: though
Socrates says Aug. 15 Socrates Scholasticus.

Magnentius Kills Himself in Lions: and Constantius becomes Sole Monarch of
both the Empires Calvisi^s.
Petavius.
Valesius.
354 Julian H^ was Son to Julius, Son to Constantius Chlorus (hr)
Studies at Athens with Nazia^zen and Basil 355 Nov. 13, Augustine called
Austin, B (^) or 354 Petavius.
359 Ammianus, theHistorian, is in the Persian War 361 Julian Rebels in Gaul,
and marches to Thrac^ Nov. 3, Constantius Dies in Cilicia, AE. 46 Socrates
Scholasticus.
Calvisi^us.
H^ leaves an un^orn Daughter; after Married to theEmperor (...), but lest no
I^s^^.
And 2 Julian Reigns 1 Y, 7* m, 22 d ( sc. c. p) 362 He is an Apostate to
Hea^henism, and Persecures the Christians, Prohibiting the Schools, etc. (sc.
c) 363 (...) 26, He is Slain in Battle with the Persians, AE^. ^1* ( sc. c. p)
And in Him the Imp^rial Line o^ Constantin the Great and o^ Constant^^s Chlorus
Ends.
And 3 Jovian A Pannonian; (p) June 27, Chose by (...) Army, ^ 7 m, 22 d ( c p)
364 Feb. 17, ( c) or 19 (p) Iovian D by the Vapor of Ch^rcoal in Gal^tia, AE^.
34 ( sc. c ^) 4 Valentinian A Pannonian, (p) Feb 25, Chose by (...) Army, R
over the whole 34 d, and the^ in the West only, 11 Y, 7 m, 18 d: (...) making
M^ Brother 5 Valens Apr. 1, Emperor in the ^ast, R 14 Y, 4^ 9 d They were the
Sons of One Gratian, a Roper by Trade (hr) (...) D^^in.
Theon, the Astronomer, Flourishes 365 Hilary, Bp of Poi^iers, D ( c) 367 ( du)
367 The^dosius the Ro^^a^ General, Rep^lls the Picts and Scots who had invaded
Brit^^ 369 (...) made Bishop of Caesarea in Cappad^^^^ (c. du) 370 ( p) The
Jerusalem Talmud Finished by Ioha^^^ 371 Athanasius Dies ( ^ p) 373 Galsilas,
an Arian Bp, Translates the Bi^^^ into Gothic. 374 Ambrose, a Civil Officer,
chose by the People* Bp of M^^an. and Bap^iz'd 8 d after ( c) 375 p Epiphanius
a Bp in Cyprus, writes of Heresie^ 375 Nov. 17. Valentinian D, with a sudden
(...) of Anger, AEt. 55. and his Sons GRATIAN and VALENTINIAN II Reig^^ in the
West (c. p) 376 They Divide the Western Empire (...): king Britain, Germany,
Gaul and Spain; and VAL^NTINIAN (...), Ill^r ^um, Sicily and Africa (c)
378 Jan. 1. Basil D. ( c) 379 ( p) Aug. 9. ( p) or 10 (c^ Valens beat by the
Goths, flying wounded into a Cottage in Thrace, Is Burnt to Death AEt. ^0 ( c.
p) and his Nephew 6 Gratian Rules the Eastern Empire till Ian. 16 following
Nazianzen made Bishop of Constantinople (c) or in Nov ^79 ( p) 379 Jan. 16,
Gratian makes his General 7 Theodosius Colleague in the Empire; Reigns in the
East 16 Y, 2 d, ( c. p) He was called Theodosius the Great, and was S^u to
Theodos^^^ the (...) ^eneral in Brit^in. (^)
381 In May, The II General Council meets at Constantinople It (...) of but 150
Bishops, or Pastors of Churches, (...), and asserts the Deit^ of (...)
When Nazianzen Resign^ ^his Bishopric, and retires to a Private Life ( ^. p)
383 Austin AEt 29, teaches Rhetoric at Rome. MAXIMUS the Roman General drives
the Scots out of Britain into Scandia, where they keep 27 Y: sets up for
Emperor and pastes into Gaul. Aug. 25, He Kills Gratian, AEt 25, and Possesses
Britain, Gaul, Spain and Africa, for 5 Y. 2 d ( c. p) ^87 Maximus Marches to
Italy, and Valentinian flies by Sea to Thessalonica. ^ustin, AEt. 33, Becomes a
Christian (p) 388 July 28 Theodosius beats Maximus near the Alps ( p) Aug. 27,
Maximus Killed at Aquilea ^s^. c) and Theodosius Restores the Western Empire to
Valentinian. 389 May 9, Nazianzen Dies (c p) 392 May 15, Val^ntinian AEt 27.
Strangled at Vienna by the Intriegue of EUGENIUS, (...) Assumes the Western
Empire ( sc. c. p. v) He was of obscure B^rth, and from a Grammar Schoolmaster
became a Scribe and Trea^urer to Valentinian (c)
393 This was the Last Olympi^d observed in Greec^ 394 Sulpitius Sev^rus
embraces Christianity. Sept 6, Theodos^us Bea^^ and Kills Euge^^^^ near
Aquilea, and Recovers the Weste^^ Empire ( c. p) 395 Ian. 17, He D at Milan AEt
61 (sc. c. p) (...) by Will, his Sons 8 Arcadius AEt. 18, ( p) R in the East 13
Y, 3 m, 1^d and HONOR^US, AEt. 11 ( p) in the (...) 28 Y, 6 m, (c) Austin
Ordained Bishop of Hippo, in Afric^ Ierom Turns the Hebrew Bible into Lat^* 397
Apr. 4, Ambrose D, AE^. 64 ( c. p) 398 Jan. 26, ( c) or Feb. 26 (sc. p)
Chrysos^^^ Ordained Bishop of Constantinople. 400 The Goths under Alaricus
Brake into Dalmatia and Pannonia. Sulpitius Severus Writes his History, From
the Creation to this Year. V. CENTURY. 401 Apr. 10, Theodosius II Born to
Arcadius (sc. c p) and Bap^^z'd by Chrysos^om. Alaricus brakes into Noricum and
Italy. 402 Stilicho He was a ^^andal by Birth ( p) But chei^ Minister of State,
(...) General to Honorius (c)
Beats Alaricus back to Illyric^^ Epiphanius, Bishop in Cyprus, Dies ( c. v)
404 June 20. Chrysostom Banished by Arcadi^^ into Cilicia (sc. c. p) 405
Pelagius grows noted for his Errors Petavius says He was a Scotsman; Hearn says
a Welshman.
Radagaisus leads 200 thousand Scythians and other Barbarians into Italy: But
Stilicho Slays 100 thousand with Radagaisus, and the R^st Surrender ( c. p) 406
Dec 31, Godigisilus leads the Vandals and other Barbarians to the Rhine (c p)
407 They miserably waste the bordering Country (...) The Roman Soldiers in
Britain mu^iny, and choose one Constantin Emperor He was one of mean Deg^ee, and
Chosen ^mperor, for the Name sake only ( c. p)
who going over to Gaul, the Soldiers there Receive Him also ( c. p) Sept 14 (
v) or Nov. 14, Chrysostom AEt 53, D in Exile, near the Euxine Sea ( sc. c. p)
408 May 1, Arcadius AEt 31, D^es at Constantinople (sc. c. p) and his Son 9
Theodosius The II, R 42 Y, 2 m, 28 d ( c. p) The Vandals march into the W^st
and S^uth Parts of Gaul, and waste them. Aug. 23, Honorius Beheads S^ilicho:
and Oct. 13, The Vandals March for Spain, and se^ze it. 409 Alaricus marches
into Italy, and besieges Rome Aug. 24, By Stratagem He ^akes the City, compells
the Citizens to Renounce Honorius, and Retires. 410 ^laricus Returns to Rome,
and Besieges it again ^pr. 1, He takes the City, gives it ^ Day^ to the Plunder
of his Army: and then ^ays waste the Rest of Italy (c. p) 411 Alaricus Dies in
Italy, and the Goths choose Athaulphus King. Constantin Overcome and taken by
Constantius An Illyrican by Birth and General to Honorius (c. p)
in Gaul, and put to D at Ravenna (c p) N Y. C The Scots, under Fergus, Return
from Scandia to Britai^ Athaulphus quits Italy, and seizes the Southern Part of
Ga^^ 41^ Oct 18 sc. c) Cyril made Bishop of Alexandria (c. p 415 Athaulphus
quitting Gaul, Goes into Spain, and is Killed ( c. p 416 Two Councils in Africa
Condemn ^elagius (c. p^ Honorius Gives Wallia King of the Goths Part of Spain,
(...) condition of Warring against the Vandals. 417 Wallia beats them in many
Battles, and Honorius Give Him the Western Part of Gaul also. 418 Apr. 24,
Pharamond chose Duke of the Fran^^ in Franc^^i^ and July 23, He takes the Title
of King He is the 1 ^t of the (...) who wears the T^tl^ of King ( ^)
419 July 2, Valentin^^^ III Born Son to Const^n^ius the Roman General by (...)
Daughter (...) Theodos^^^ the Great ( sc. c. p)
420 Ierom Dies, and Buried a Beth^^^em (c p) 423 Theodoret chosen Bishop of
Cyrus in Syria (c. p) Aug. 15, Honorius Dies at Rome, AEt. ^39, and his
Secretary JOHN assumes his Empire ( sc. ^. p) 425 In Feb. John seized and put
to Death at Ravenna (c. p) Oct. 15, ( c) or 23 ( p Theodosius makes VALENTINIAN
III Emperor of the West, who R 29 Y, 5 m 427 In May, the Vandals under
Gensericus quitting Spain* with 80000 pass to Africa and seize Mauritania (c ^^
429 The City of Venice Founded. 430 Aug. 28, Austin D at Hippo, besieged by the
Vandal^ (^) 431 Iun 22, the III GeneralCouncil meets at Ephesus (sc. c. p) It
had ab^ve ^00 Bishops, and Condemns Ne^torius (c. p)
435 Feb. 11 Valentinian by Treaty yields Numidia to the Vandals. Feb. 25
Theodosius Publishes his Code of Laws It (...) a Collecti^n o^ all the (...)
Law^ from Constanti^ the G^^at (c)
439 Socrates and So^omen here end their Histories ( sc. c) Oct. 20 (^) or 29
(p) Gensevicus ta^es Carthage. 44^ Attila K of the Hunns wastes Thrace,
Macedonia and Gre^^^ 44^ He returns to Scythia with 120 thousand C^ptives. 444
Apr. 9 (^) or Jun 9 (p) Cyril of Alexandria Dies. N Y. C E^stern E^pe^ors 445
Prosper here Ends his Chronicle Meroveus Begins to Reign over the Francs, and
was their 1st K who subdued part of Gaul 44^ Theod^sius adds to his Code, The
Novellae. 448 The Britons harassed by the Picts and Scots, send to the Saxons
for Aid. 449 Meroveus seizes the North Eastern Part of Gaul Henoist and Horsa,
Brothers, Transport the Saxons in 3 Ships to Britain 450 Aug. 1. Theodosius,
Thrown from his Horse a Hunting, Dies (c p) and Aug. 25 (...)
10 Marcianus A Thracian R 6 Y, 6 m ( eg. c. p. (...)
) (...) II, a Vir^in, (...). 52, took Him for (...), and advanced Him t^ the
^mpi^^, thou^h a Man (...)
451 Attila with 700 thousand Men, wastes Germany and enters Gaul (^) But Sept
27 (^) the Romans and Goths under AEtius and Theudoric beat Him; when Theudoric
wi h 180 thousand on both sides were Slain in Battle* and 90 thousandDye of
their Wounds Thi^ (...) wa^ Fought near (...) and (...) make the (...)
th^usand; (...) say^, (...) re^kons, 170 thousand; and (...), ^00 thous^^d.
Oct. 8. The IV General Council meets at Chalcedon (^ p) It had 630 Bishop* or
^astors, and Condemns (...) and hi^ (...)
452 Henois^ makes Peace with the Picts, and falls on the Britons. 453 Attila
driven by Thorismund King of the Goths into Scythia, Dies. 454 Valentinian
Kills his General AEtius (^. ^) 455 Mar. 17. MAXIMUS Kills Valentinian, And in
Him the Emperial Line of (...) the Great, Ends.
and se^s up for Emperor of the West ^c. p) Upon which Genseric sails from
Africa: Iun. 12 comes to Rome and Kills Maximus: Iun. 15, En^ers the City,
spoils it for 14 d, and Returns ( c. p) July 10, The Roman Soldiers in Gaul
make AVITUS Emperor of the West (c. p v) 456 May 17. He is forced to Resign sg.
c) Vortimer, a British King, Kills Horsa and forces Hengist back to Saxony. 457
Jan 26 Marcianus Dies ^ c. p v^ and (...) 11 Leo I A Thracian Crowned, Feb 7 (
v) R 17 Y ( eg. c. ^) MAJORANUS sent by Leo, Crowned Apr ^ at Ravenna R 4 Y, 4
m ( c p v) Hengist Returns to Britain, takes the Km of Kent, which he transmits
to his Posteri^^ 461 Aug. 2, Majoranus Deposed, and A^g. (...) Killed by his
General Ricimer c p) Nov. 19, SEVERUS Declared Emperor of the West, Reigns 3 Y,
9 m ( c. p) 465 Aug. 15. (...) D ( c. p) by Poison ( p) and the Sena (...) to
Leo for another. 466 Pros^er of Acquitain Dies. 467 ANTHEMIUS, sent by Leo,
Crowned Apr. 1^ Reign^ 5 Y, 3 m ( eg c. p) 472 Ricemer R^ses against Anthemius:
July 11, Kills Him, and sets up OLYBRIUS, who R ^ m, 12 d ( c. p) Though
Calvis^^s and Petavi^s agree b^th in the b and e of the (...) of OLYBRIUS yet
Calvis^^s plainly (...) in making his Reign 3 m, 23 ^
Aug. 18, Ricimer* and Oct. 23, Olyb^i^s D ( c. p^ 473 Mar. 5, GLYCERIUS
Crowned a Raven^^^ Reigns 1 Y, 3 m, 19 d ( c. p) 474 In Jan. ^p) Leo Die^ ( eg.
c. p) and 12 Leo II In^an^Son of Zeno by Ariadne Daughter to (...) and Verina
(^g c. p) Reigns ^ m. ^eo II D, AEt. 1 Y, 6 m: and his Father 13 Zeno An
Isaurian, Reigns 17 Y, 3 m ( eg c) NEPOS sent by Leo I, deposes Glycerius, and
June 24 is Crowned Emp. of the West (c p) 475 Childeric King of the Francs
Begins to Beat the Romans out of Gaul. Nepos makes Orestes a Goth his
Colleague: Aug. 28, He deposes Nepos at Ravenna: Oct. 31, He makes his Son
Momyllus Emperor of the West (c. p) For his low Stature, He is called
Augustulus (c) and Evagrius call Him Romulus (^g)
14 476 Basiliscus Brother to Verina (eg) Drives Z^no into Isauria (c. p and R
1 Y, 6 m ( c) 2 Y ( eg) And all the while, Ze^o and hi^ Wife Ari^dn^ live only
on R^ots, Herbs and Water (c. p)
Odoac^r King of the Heruli comes into Italy, and takes Orestes: Aug. 23, is
Proclaimed King of Italy: Aug. 28, Kills Orestes: Sept. 4, Banishes Momyllus:
and Entering Rome; Puts an END to the WESTERN EMPIRE (c. p) Sect. II. To the
Revival of the Western Empire. 4^7 Childeric wins a great Part of Gaul. More
Saxons Go into Britain under Ella. ( Zeno) Recovers the Eastern Empire, and
Basiliscus Starved to Death ( eg. c. p) 479 The Lombards, so called for their
long Beards, ( c. p) from Scandia, take Pomerania, and keep it 40 Y. 480 May.
9, Nepos, late Emperor, Killed ( c. p) by his Officers. 481 Vortigern, a
BritishKing, drove into a Towe^ and Burn^, by his own People Calvisius, by
Mistake, calls Him Vo^timer.
486 Clovis King of the Francs, ex^end his Kingdom in Gaul (c. p) and pu^^ an
l^nd to the Roman Power There. 490 Theodoric, King of the Go^^s in (...) Th^s^
were called, (...), or Eastern Goth^* those in Gaul and Spain, were called
Visi-Go^h^, or We^tern Goths (c. ^)
marches to Italy, and bea^^ Odoacer in 3 Faules. 491 Zeno Dies He came to Lif^
in the Tomb: whence his d^lor^u^ Cries were heard: But his ^ife* Fo^bidding to
open it* He Dies for Hunger, having (...) the Flesh (...) his Arm^ to the B^ne
(^)
and his Wife raises and Marr^e^ 15 Anaste^ius A Grecian below the Se^atorian
Order* Apr 9, Crowned* R 27 Y, 3 m* 3 d ( eg c. ^ 492 Ella Begin^ the South
Sa^on K^n in Britain 493 Theodoric Kills Odoacer, and seizes the Kingdom of
Italy (c p) 494 Pope Gel^sius calls a Council of (...) B shop^; in which He
asserts his Primacy over all C^urches 495 Cerdic, a Saxon, Sails to Britain
with 5 Ship, and Bea^s the Britons. 500 Theodoric Enters Rome in Great
Splendour. VI. CENTURY. 506 Feb. 2, Alaric, King of the Goths in Gaul, and Spain
(c. p) Publishes his Abridgment of the Theodosian Code. The Babylonian Talmud,
Collected by Rabbi Aser, Pub ished. 507 Clovis Beats and Kills Alaric, and
takes Part of his Kingdom ( c. p) (...) D^a^h, hi^ (...) su^cee^s to the K n in
Sp^in onl^, an^ (...) tak^ the (...) Part of (...) ( c. p)
514 Cassiodorus Sole Consul of Rome. 518 Proclus, the Mathema^ician,
Flourishes. July 9, (c) Anastasius D, AEt. 88 ( p) (...) in ^n exceeding strong
Bu^lding, (...) by (...) to secure Him from it ( ^. p)
and 16 Justin Set up by the Guards ( eg. c) R 9 Y, 23 d He was a Thrac^an of
the meanest Birth, being in his Youth a (...) (^) and could not Write hi^ name
( p)
Arthur Begins to Reign in Britain 24 Years 519 Cerdic Begins the West Saxon
Kingdom. 526 May 29, a Great Earthquake at Antioch, ^eg c p. v^ wherein 300
thousandPerish ^ v) Theodoric puts Boethius to Death, and D ( c p) Priscian
Flourishes at Constantinople. The Lombards seize Pannonia (c. p) and stay 42
Years. 527 Dyonisius Exiguus Begins to Reckon the Years from the Birth of
CHRIST (...) was a Sc^thian by D. scent, and Placed the Birth of CHRIST (...)
or 4 Ye^^s too late, as is generally now agreed.
Apr. 1, Justin makes his Sister's Son, Justinian, Colleague ( c. p) Aug 1,
Justin D. (eg. c p) AEt. 77 ( p) and 17 Justinian AEt. 45 ( p) R 38 Y, 3 m, 12
d. The Francs subdue Thuringia (c) or 528 ( p) 529 Feb. 7, Justinian Publishes
his Code of Laws. The Francs subdue Burgundia (...).
533 In Nov, Belisarius Beats the Vandals in Africa, and Tak es Carthage (c. p)
In Nov, Justinian Publishes his Institutions, and in Dec. his Digesta (...)
Digesta are a Collection; and the Institutions, an Abridgment of (...) Roman
La^^^ which had been made for 1200 Y past (^)
534 Belisarius Finishing the War in Africa, puts an end to the Vandal Kingdom,
and carries their King to Constantinople (c. p) 535 Belisarius Reduces Sicily
(c. p) 536 Evagrius Scholasticus Dies in Syria (eg. v) Belisarius Reduces the
Eastern Part of Italy; and Dec. 10, Enters Rome (c. p) N Y. C 537 Vitiges King
of the Goths in Italy, Q^its the Gothic (...) of Gaul to the Francs: Hence
called France. 538 The Goths and Burgundians take Mila^, and Kill 300 t^^^sand
People By the Wars in Italy, the Fields lay until d, and so great a (...)
followed, that in Pic^^um 50 thousand Men Perished, the Wom^n (...) their
Ch^l^ren, 2 Women Killed 17 Men and Eat them (^)
540 Belisarius takes Ravenna with Vitiges; and called to R^^pel the Persians,
carries Him to Constantinople (c. p^ 541 The last Election of CONSULS at Rome.
Belisarius Ravages Ass^ria. 542 So Great a Plague at Constantinople, that 10
thousa^^ Dye in 1 day Eva^rius says, This Pla^us spread over the Wo^ld, lasted
52 Year^ and in a manner Destroyed the whole Earth (eg)
547 Ja^ 17, Totilas King of the Goths in Italy, takes Rom^ But B^lisarius
Returning, Enters and Defends (...) and Bea^s Him away. Ida, the Saxon, Begins
the Kingdom of Northumberl^^^ 549 Belisarius Recalled to Repel the Persians.
550 Totilas Beseiges an d takes Rome again. The S^lavi under Lechus Seize on
Poland, and Begin the (...) 552 July 9, The Armenians Begin their Era Their
Years are ^xa^tly in the Form of Nabonasser's, which the^ obser^^ to this d (^)
553 May 1, The V General Council meets at Constantinople It had abov^ 150
Bis^ops; and Condemns the Erroneous Writi^^^ of Theodorus, Theodoret and (...)
(^g. c. p. v)
Narses sent to Italy, Bea^s Totilas, Wounds Him to Dea^^ and by the end of
July Recovers Rome and (...) all Italy (c. p^ Narses was by Descent a Pe^sian,
and an Eunuch, but a (...) Commander ( p)
554 In Feb. Teias, the last King of the Goths in Italy, (...) Overcome and
Slain. 556 Narses Finishing the War in Italy, Puts an End to (...) Gothic
Kingdom There. No Y. C Eastern Emperors 563 Belisarius Dies in Honor The Story
of his Blindnes^ and Begging, is a Fi^tion of the Papists, to Punish Him for
the Power He exercised over their Ponti^s (c)
565 Nov 13. ( c) or 14 (p) Justinian Dies, AEt. 84, (hr) and his Sister's Son
18 Justin II* Reign^ 12 Y, 10 m, 22 d. 567 Justin sends Longinus, the 1st
EXARCH, to Ravenna. 568 Alboin King of the Lombards leaves Pannonla, and seizes
the North of Italy (c. p) 569 S pt. 3, ( c) He marches in^othe Western Part (c.
p) 570 May 5, MAHOMET Born; Lives 63 Y. 571 Alboin subduing the Western Part of
Italy, is Proclaimed King of Italy. 578 Sept. 26, Justin makes Tiberius, a
Thracian, his Colleague ( c p v) Oct 5, Justin Dies ( c. v) and 19 Tiberius
Reigns alone 3 Y, 10 m, 9 d ( eg. c. p) 580 Gildas, the British Historian,
Flourishes. 582 Aug. 13, Tiberius Marries his Dau'ter to Mauricius a Roman, and
makesHimColleague (eg. c. p) Aug. 14, Tiberius Dies ( c. p^ and 20 Mauricius
Reigns 20 Y, 3 m, 9 d. 588 An Earthquake destroys 60 thousand more at Antioch.
59^ A Council in France Declares the Lord's Day to Begin at Evening. 593
E^agrius Writes his History this Year In the 12 Year o Mauricius (eg) which is
between Aug. 14 this Year and Au^. 14. next (c. ^. v)
595 ^^hn, Bishop of Constantinople, Assumes the Title of Universal Bishop. 596
P^pe Gregory sends Austin, a Monk, to Britain, to Christianize the Saxons (c.
p) 597 (...) 25, He and his Companions Bap ize Edelbert King of Kent, and 10
thousand of his Subje^^^. VII. CENTURY. 21 602 Phocas A Centurion set up by the
Army; Nov. 23 Installed at Constantinople: Nov 27, Kills Mauricius's Sons
before his Eyes, at Chalcedon, and then cuts off his Head ( p) 604 May 26,
Austin the Monk, D in Britain (c. Sammes Britannia.
. 606 Feb. 6, Boniface III, Chose Pope, calls a Council of 72 Bishops, who
Decree, that not the Patriarch of Constantinople, but the Roman Pontiff shall
be styled Universal Bp. 22 610 Heraclius The Roman Governor in Africa (c. hr.)
in July (c) Sails to Constantinople, Beats and takes Phocas: Oct. 3 ( p) cuts
off his Head, and R 30 Y, 7 m, 8 d. 611 Constantin Born to Heraclius. 614 Deus
Dedit chosen Pope (c) who 1st Forbids Parents to Answer for their Children a^
Baptism ( c. hr) 615 The Persians take Jerusalem, and Kill 90 thousand People (
c) or in June, 614 (p) 622 July 15, at Sunset, Mahomet Files out of Mecca:
Whence the Arabian, Hegira of Era Begins ( c p) July 15 at Sunset is the
Beginning of Friday July 16 according to the Oriental Reckoning; And these
Arabian Years* are Lunar, of 12 Months; whereof the Odd have 30 d, the Even 29;
354 in a^l.
628 The Persians Restore all to the Grecians (c. p) 630 Clotair King of France
overcomes the Westphalians and Frisians. 631 June 17 ( c Mahomet Dies, AEt 63 (
c. p) 632 June 16 The Saracens Beat and Slay the Persian King Izdegird: whence
the Persian Era Begins The Years are of the same sort with Nabonasser s: and
the Persians still make it the Head of their Civil Computations ( c)
634 Aug. 23, The Saracens take Damascus. 635 They invade Egypt. 636 They take
JERUSALEM Which continues in their hands 463 Y to Y C 1099, when Godfrey of
Bulloign retakes it ( c)
and Antioch. ^39 They take Edessa and all Mesopotamia. 641 May 11. Heraclius
Dies: and his Son 23 Constantin By his 1 st Wife, Reigns 4 m ( c. p) In Sept,
his Mother in Law Martina Poisons Him and makes her Son 24 Heracleon Emperor:
who Reigns 6 m. The Saracens take Caesarea, in Palestine. 642 In Feb, the
Senate depose Heracleon, cut off his Nose and his Mothers Tongue ( c. p) and
set up 25 Constans Constantin's Son: who Reigns 27 Y ( c. p) 645 The S^lavi,
under Zechus seize Bohemia. 648 With 1700 Sail, the Saracens take Cyprus. 653
They take Rhodes. 668 This Summer Constans Killed in a Bath at Syracuse: (c. p)
and his Son 26 Constantin Pogonatus, Reigns 17 Y ( c p) The Saracens take 80
thousand Captives out of Africa. 670 Beda, the British Historian Born. 680 Nov
7, The VI General Council opens at Constantinople, and holds to Sept. following
It has 150 Bps, (c) and Condemns the Monothelites (c. p)
685 In Sept, (c) Constantin D ( c. p) and his Son 27 Justinian II, AE^. 16,
Reigns. 28 694 (Leontius) Deposes Him, cuts off his Nose, sends Him into
Banishment, and Reigns 3 Y. 697 The Saracens drive the Romans out of all
Africa: Upon which the Army sets up 29 (Absimarus) Who Sails to Constantinople,
takes Leontius, cuts off his Nose, shuts Him up in a Monastery, and Reigns 7 Y.
( c. p) 698 Absimarus wa^^e^h Syria, and K^^ls 200 thousand Saracens* VIII.
CENTURY. 703 (Justinian II, Takes Constantinople, Recovers the Empire and hangs
Absimarus. ^04 Aripertus K of Lombard^, Gives the Cotti^n Alp^, which is the
1st Province Given to the (...) 711 In May the Saracens under Taric land at
(...) Which (...)
beat Roderi^^s Army in 2 (...) In Dec, The Army on the Eu^ine Sea set up 30
Philippicus Who Sails to Constantinople, K^lls Justinian with his Son, (c p)
and Reigns 1 Y, 6 m: And thus the Imperial Line of ^eraclius ends 712 The
Saracens take several Cities in Spain. 713 June 3. An Offi^er privily (...) out
Philippicus's Eyes ( c. p) and 31 Ar^emius June 4, Begins to Reign (c. p) Sept.
10, The Saracens, after 7 Days Fig^t, Slay King Roderic, and sei^e ^is (...)
714 The Army, in Phenicia, set up Theodosi^^* Collector of Taxe^ ( c. p) and a
Man of (...) Ex^ract ( ^r) and Besiege Constantinople 6 (...) 32 715 Theod^sius
Takes the City, with Artemius, shaves and send* Him into a Monastery. 33 716
Leo III An Isaurian Capt. ( c) of obsc^re Birth (^) Set up by the Army in
Armenia; Mar 2^ Theodosius abdicates, and with his Son, Retire into a
Monastery; and Leo ^ 25 Y, 2 m, 24 d 718 In Dec, Constantine Born to Leo. 726
The Saracens breaking into France, Charles Martel Bea^s, and in one B^ttle
Kills 3^0 thousand (^) or 375 thousand (^) He was the FRENCH GENERAL, the (...)*
72^ ^na, K of the West Saxons goes to Rome, and makes his Kingdom Tributary to
the Pope (...) to Pay a Roman Penny (i. ^. seven pe^e^ halfpenny) a (...)
Thence called P^t^r Pe^ce (c)
^3^ J^n. 7, Leo iss e^ out an Edict against Images (p) ^31 Beda, AE^ 59
Finishes his Hist. of the English (c p) ^34 Beda D es on A^cention Day, May 6
(...), on Ascenti^n d (...), May 6, (p) Bu^ Ascension (...) Y (...) Man 26,
(...) seems to be Right.
^4^ Iun^ 18, Leo Dies ^ c. p) and his Son 34 Constantin Reigns 34 Y, 2 m, 27
d, c. p) June 27, He marches against the Saracens: and 35 Artava^da^* Who had
Married his Sister, Sets up at Constantinople 742 Charles the Great Born to
Pepin, Son of Charles Martel. ^43 In Sep^, Constantin Besieges Constantinople.
( Constantin) Nov. 2, Takes it, and Puts out ArtavasdasEyes ^44 The Hunns seize
on Transylvania. 750 Ian. 25, Leo Born to Constantin (c. p) 752 Pope Zachary
Deposes Childeric K of France, Orders Him into a Monastery, Releases Pepin of
his Oath, and Assigns* Him the Km ( c p (...) was the las^ o^ the M^rov^^n
Line: an^ Pepin was his (...) of Stat^ and General ((...))
Aistulp^us King of Lombardy takes Ravenna and puts an End to the Exarchate in
Italy, which had lasted 1^2 Y. ^54 Feb. 10 ( c) a General Council meets at
Constantinople, (c* p and holds to Aug 8. ( c) It (...) 33^ Bps, cond^mns
Images, (^. p) an^ the Eastern Churches call i^ the VII General Co^^cil: tho
the (...) of Images will not (...) it (^)
^55 Pepin makes Aistulphus yield to the Pope all the Places He had taken from
the Exarch. 759 Fro^ola, a (...) King in Sp^^^, beats the Saracens, and S^ays
52 thousand in one Battle 766 Organs first bro't to France from Constantinople.
Aug 17 Constantin makes an E^ict to Dis^solve the Mon^steries in Europe 767
Another, for Dissolving those in Asia. 768 Sept. 24, Pepin Dies; and his Son
Charles Reigns ( c. p His Brother Charleman R with him: but D in 771, without
(...) Male, and leave, the whole (...) Charles sirnam'd the Great (c. p)
771 Ian 14 ^ p) Constantin Bo^^ to Leo (c p) 774 Charles Takes D^sideriu King
of Lombardy, puts an end to the Kingdom, adds it to his own and carries the
King to France. 775 He subdu^s Westphalia and Fris^^. Sept. 14, Constantin D (
^. p.) and his Son 36 Leo IV AEt. 26 ( p) R^igns 5 Y ar^, 6 Da^s 780 Charles
subdues the Saxons a^ far as the (...) Sept. 6 ( c) or 8 (p) Leo Dies, and his
Son 37 Constantin With his Widow Irene R togeth^r 10 Y, 1 m 787 Charles subdues
Bavaria. Sept. 24, a General Council meets at Nice ^c. p) and continues to Oct
13 ( p) It has 350 ^ps, (p) (...) the Worship of Images, (^. ^) (...) not with
Divine H^nour ( c) and the Papists call this the VII General C^^ncil.
788 The Danes 1st come to the South of Britain in 3 Ships, and waste the S a
Coasts. 790 Charles wastes the Sea-Co^sts of Spain, and drives the Saracens
out of several Places In October, Irene Deposed ( c. p) 791 Charles bea^s the
Hungarians as far as the River Raab. 79^ In Aug, Constantin puts out his U^c es
Nicepho^rus (c p) and Christopher's Eyes ( c) Syncellus Writes his Chronology.
793 Alphonsus a Gothic King of Spain, Rebels a^gainst the Saracens, Slays 70
thousand, an^ frees Himself. The Dance a 2d time waste the South of Britain 794
A Great Council at Francfort (c. p) It has 300 B^s, (...) etc. from all Parts
of Charles's Dominions ( c) and (...)
795 Thudunus King of the Hunns yields Himself and his to Charles. 3^ 797 Irene
^ug. 19, ^ c) Orders her Son Constantin's Eyes to ^e D^g out, who Dies a few
days after ( c p) and then Killing Nicephorus and Christopher, the Reigns alone
They were her Husband 's Brothers: And th^^ the Race of Leo, the (...), End^.
800 Nov 24, Charles enters Rome: Dec. 25, Pope Leo Crowns Him EMPEROR of the
WEST ( c p) which the People approve with loud Acclamations. About the same
time EGBERT Begins to Reign over the West Saxons; who subdues the Rest, and
becomes the 1st Monarch of ENGLAND.

VII. and Last Period. THE Chronol^gy of the ENGLISH Monarchs, From the Revival
of the Western Empire by CHARLES the Great of France, and b of the R of EGBERT,
1st Supreme K of England in the Y C 8^ to the D of Q ELIZABETH, and b of the R
^f JAMES, the First Monarc^ of Great Britain, in 160^ Being 802 Y^ar^, 3 Months.
Having pass^d through the most busy and confused Period (...) World has known,
we are now arriving at a more se^tled (...) of things, Especially in the West
of Europe. And the End of the Y C 800, seems to be one of the most rema^kable
Points of Time in History, on these 2 accounts, (1) The Revival of the West^^^
Empire in CHARLES the Great of France, Crowned Emperor of the West at Rome, on
Dec. 25 this Y (2) The b of the R of EGBERT the Great, as R^pin ca^ls him,
about the sa^e Time asc^nding the T^^one of W^ss^x Wess^x, or the (...)
co^tain^d that Part of (...) excepting (...) on the South sid^ of Thames: the
Km (...) and incorp^r^ted* to Wessex by (...) in Y C 722. ((...))
, who in the cour^ of 28 Y conquers the 5 other S^x^n Kingdoms in the South
Part of Britain, and becomes the ^st Supreme K of Englan^

The E^stern E^pire indeed continues 652 Y, 5 m longe^ But as this is dwind^ng
away by degrees, and both the Power and Trans^ctions in the West of Europe grow
more consider^^ble, as well as more nearly affect us, and the Successions of
the Monarchs both of the Fran^s and English are pretty certain adjust d; we
shall therefore shif^ the Scene of our Chronolog^ from the Eastern to the W^st
rn Parts of the Ancient Rom^^ Empire, and annex it to the Lines of the Kings of
England. And inasmuch as our Introduction is thus drawn out to an unexpected
Length, and our English Histories are in the Hands of many; I shall therefore
spare my Readers here, and give them little more than as accurate a List, as I
am at present able to compose, of our own Monarchs

But there offers a material Difficulty at the very Head of the present Period,
which I m^st apply mys^lf to solve, as I have met with non^ that have attempted
it before me. It concerns the b of the R of Egbert. For (1) Some place it in
the Y C 800; as Ethelwerd, Malmsbury, Huntingdon, Hoveden H^w^den say^, (...)
Quid^m volunt 802.
; and from them the following Moderns, Polydore Virgil, Pan^taleon, Sir H.
Savil In his F^^i (...) Antii^, and^.
, Glover and Mills, Mundy, Speed, Helvi^cus, Isaa^son, Alsted, Boxhornius,
Fuller, Milton, Whitlock, the Indi^es at the End of Littleton and Cambridg
Dictionaries, Tallents, Eachard, Rapin; and so Baker, Howell, Pointer and
Salmon seem to imply (2) Some, in 801; as Harrison, and Holins^ed, Calv^sius,
Perizonius, Hubner and Anderson. (3) Others in 802; as M of Westminster, And
yet M o^ (...) the D of Egbert in 837, after a R o^ 37 Y, ^ m, which (...) the
(...).
Stow, Howes, Daniel, and Tyrrel. Hoveden says, Some b the R of Egbert in 802:
and Tyrrel says that Ass^^, S of Durham and the Bp of Litchfield are of the
same Opinion.

To clear this matter, I (1) Observe that Rapin tells us, When E^bert was
chosen K of Wessex, he was at ROME with CHARLES the Great, who was soon after
invested with the Imperial Crown* and There he took his leave of that Great
Prince, etc. Though whence Rapin had this Intelligence, I should ^e glad to find.
(2) Liecthenaw, Cario In h^s (...), chi^fly made by (...) and (...).
, Calvisius and Ricciolius infor^ (...) Charles ^he Great, traveling from
France, entered Rom^ (...) v. 24* 800; was crown^d Empero^ the^e Dec. 25, and
(...) and Calvisius (...) that City on Apr 24, (...).

B^ this it seems (1) That Egbert set out with Charles from France some time in
October or November, and that Britric K of Wessex was then alive. (2) That
between Nov 24, and Dec 25, Egbert not only heard a^ Rome of his Election, but
also se^ out thence for England. (3) We must therefore place his Election about
November; and the b of his actual R about the same i am with the b of Charles's
Empire. Or however, to define This Period more precisely -- From the e of the
Las^ ^o the e of This; i. e From the Imperial Coronation of Charles at Rome, to
the D of Q Elizabeth, the Last mere Monarch o^ England, and b of the R of
James, the First of Great Britain, i^ exactly 802 Y 3 m.

Sect. I. To the Discovery of the NEW WORLD by Columbus in 1492.
Having compared above 30 noted Lists and Histories of ou^ Kings, both in
English and Latin, I found so many Inconsistenci^^ and Mistakes among them,
especially in the Years before the Norman Conquest; that I was forced to lay by
all the la^e Historian^ and betake myself entirely to those more Ancient and
Original ^^thors Ethelwerd, Ingulphus, Malmsbury, Hu^^ingdon, H^veden, M of
Westminster, and R of Chester; who are the only old Writers on that former Part
of the Period I can hear of in this Country: the 6 First in Latin, the last
translated out of that Language into English by Trevisa in 1357, as Trevisa
(...) Caxton tell us. And as I have carefully perused them; I (...) draw the
following last entirely from them as far as they go* Excepting, where they are
wanting in the preciser Notes of Time I s^^ll then take out of Holinshed, Stow,
Speed, Tyrrel, Eachard, R^pin, or any other wherever I find them.

N. B. Wherever I use the Words Elect, Elected, (...) Chosen; they are so
Expressed in the Original A^th^r^ ^ited.

No Y. C I. The WEST SAXON Line. 1 800 EGBERT, Descended from C^rdic, b ^o R
over Wessex Ethelwerd
Malm^bury.
Huntingdon.
Hoveden.
Reigns after Charles's Coronation 37 Y, 1 m, 10 d. He was the 17th successive
K of Wessex, though not in a direct Descent; and with a Q Dowager made Q Regent,
he was the 18th succ^ssive Monarch. Malm^bury.
Huntingdon.
Hoveden.
M of Westminster.

809 He reduces Cornwall and adds i^ to his Kingdom M of Westminster.
814 (i. e. 813, 14) Jan 28 CHARLES be Great D Calvisius.
Petavi^s.
AE^ 71 Petavi^s.
and his S^n LEWIS R Calvisi^s.
Petavi^s.
824 Egbert subdues the Kms of Kent and Essex, and add^ them to his own
Ethelwerd
Malm^bury.
Huntingdon.
Hoveden.
and the Km of the East Angles submi^s to his Protection Ethelwerd
Huntingdon.
Hoveden.
827 He makes the Ks of Mercia and Northumberland his Vassals Ethelwerd
Huntingdon.
Hoveden.
828 He makes the Ks of Wales his Tributaries Ethelwerd
Huntingdon.
Hoveden.
837 (i. e, 837, 8) He D Ethelwerd
Malm^bury.
Huntingdon.
Hoveden.
M of Westminster.
(...) 4 Speed.
Eachard.
In the Margin of Malmsbury, we therefore read 838 Malm^bury.
and 2 ETHELULPH, Son of Egbert Ethelwerd
Malmsbury.
Huntingdon.
Hoveden.
M of Westminster.
Reigns 19 Y, 11 m, 9 d. 838 The Scots ex^irpate the Pictish Nation Polydorus
Vergilius.
Buch^nan.
Calvisius.
840 June 20. LEWIS Emperor D: upon which his 3 Sons Divide the WESTERN EMPIRE;
Charles the Youngest taking FRANCE; Lewis, GERMANY; and Lotharius the Eldest,
ITALY, Burgundy and Lorrain, with the Imperial Dignity Calvisius.
Peravius.
849 Alfred B to Ethelulph Hoveden.
M of Westminster.
857 (i. e. 857, 8) Ethelulph Dies Ethelwerd
Malm^bury.
M of Westminster.
Ian. 13^ R of Chester.
and 3 ETHELBALD, 1st surviving Son of Ethelulph Ethelwerd
M of Westminster.
R of Chester.
R 2 Y, 11 m, 7 d, after the D of his Father More, Helvicus and Daniel
strangely omit him.
861 He D Ethelwerd
M of Westminster.
Dec. 20. Speed.
Eachard.
and 4 ETHELBERT, 2d surviving Son of Ethelulph (e. w. c^) R 5 Y, (e. m. hn.
hv) 866 He D (e ^v. w) i e. at the end of 866 and 5 ETHELRED I, 3d surviving
Son of Ethelulph (e w ch) R 5 Y. and a little more ( hn) 87^ He D (e. (...)
m hv) Apr. 23 ( w. ^^) So that the R (...) Et^elbert an^ Ethel^ed amount
exactly to 10 Y 4 m, 3 d, and 6 ^LFRED, 4 ^ surviving Son of Ethelulph (e m w.
ch) R 29 Y* 6 m, 5 d, though his E der B^other's Son Ethelwald was liv^ng (...)
the while ( m. ^.) 901 He D (e m hn) Oct 26. ( e) or rather Wednesday Oct. 28
(l u w)
and 7 EDWARD I S^^ of Alfred (e. m. ^r. ^v w) Elected (...) ( ^^ v ^) R 23 Y*
( m. ^ mw) Though his Father's elder Brother's Son Et^elwald was living, and
C^aim'd the Crown (m w) 924 H^ D ( ^ w and ( Ethelw^^d) 1st Legitimate Son of
Edward b to R* bu^ D a few days after his Father ( m) is by this means le^^ out
of the Catalogue of Kings and 8 ATHELSTAN, base Born Son of Edward (^i. w) AE^
^^ ( m) Elected K ( m. hn w) ^hile ^e h^d 3 Legiti^mate Bro^hers living ( m hv.
w) R 16 Y ( m ^v) 940 He D (m. ^v. w) Oct 27 ( ^v. w^ (...)
o tha^ the R (...) ^^ward and A^^^lstan amount exactly to 39 Y. and 9 EDMUND
I, 2d ^u^vi^ing and Legi^im^^e Son of Edward (m ^^. w) A^t 18 m. ^^^ R 5 Y, 7 m
(^^) 943 Ed^ar Born to King Edmund (^v. w^ 946 K Edmund kil^'d in a F^ay (m. hv
w) Tuesday May 26 ^ c. i. m. hn. hv. ^) and 1^ ^DRED, 3d Surviving and
LegitimateSon of Edward (m. hv. w) R 9 Y, 6 m, ( e. m) (...) says Edmund I, and
(...) were Sons of Athel^t^n. (^^)
955 He D (m hv w) Nov. 23 ( e) without Issue, ( ch) and 11 EDWIN, 1st Son of
Edmund (m hn hv. w ch) R 4 Y (e. m hn w) or rather 3 Y, 9 m ( hv) 95^ H^ is
renounced by the Northern Half of the Km* which Elects his younger Br Edgar K
(hv. w. ch) 959 Edwin Dies ( m. hv. w) and 12 EDGAR, 2d Son of Edmund (m. hn.
hv. w. ch) AEt 16 ( m. h^. ch) Elected K over the whole ( hv. w) R near 16 Y (
m) 975 He D (i m hv. w) Thursday July 8 ( e. hv) AEt 32 ( i. hv) So that the R
of Edwin and Edgar amount exactly to 19 Y, 7 m, 15 d. And here Ethelwerd ends
his Hist^ry (e) and 13 EDWARD II, 1st Son of Edgar (i. m. w) after a great stri
e Elected K ( hv. w) R 3 Y, 8 m, 10 d. 978 (i e 978 9) He is killed ( ^v. w) by
his Stepmother (m hv w) March 18 (tr tn) Malmsbury therefore s^ys 979 ( m) The
Monki^^ Writer^ ca'l him (...) the Mart r, only becau^^ he wa^ a Friend to
their Superstitions R^pin.
and March 18, from hi^ Death, is called St Edward's Day. Tind^l in the margin
o^ (...).

and 14 ETHELRED II, 2d Son of Edgar (m. w) AEt II ( m. ch) R 37 Y, 1 m, 5 d.
i. e. accounting to the d of hi^ D; but to the Conquest o^ Englan^ by Swan^, no
more than 3^ Y. ^ m.
987 The Nobl^s of France Reject the Race of CHARLES the Great, and choose Hugh
Capet, Earl of Paris, King; from whom the Kings of France have since Descended
(c. p) 1013 Swane K of Denmark Lands in Kent (hn. hv. w.) in (...). Tind^l
inthe margin o^ Rapin. r. Rapin.
July (h^. w) Thence sail^ to ^^e Humber, and conquers all ^he North and West
of England (m. hn. hv. w) In Aug (m w) Ethelred quits London, flies to the Isle
of Wi^^t, and Swane is universally acknowleg'd K of England (m. hn. hv. w) II.
The DANISH Line begins. 1 SWANE, in Aug. conquers England, having no Relation
^o the Crown b^ B ood. 1014 (i. e 10^3 14) Beginning of Ian. Ethelred flies
from the Isle ^f Wight to Normandy (m. hv. w) Fe^ 3. ^wane Killed ( hv. w ch)
i. e. 1013, 14 And 2 CANU^E, ^on of Swane, Elected K by the Da^es m hn hu. w)
But the English send for ( Ethelred) They send for and promise to stand by him,
upon condition ^e would Rule better. ( m. hn. hv. w. ch)
who in L^nt returns to England (hv. ch) drives Canute to Denmark, and resumes
theCrown, (m. hn hv w) 1015 This Summer (m) Canute returns to England, Land^ in
Kent, and Recovers the Southern part of the Kingdom ( m. hn. hv. w) Hoveden
seems to Place Canute's Return between Aug. 15, and Sep. 8. (bv)
1016 Monday, Apr. 23, Ethelred Dies at London (hv. w. ch) Malmsbury by mi^take
says, St. Gregory's for St. George's d: (...) so Holinsh^d observes.
and 15 [EDMUND, II] called Ironside, 1st Son of Ethelred, Elected ( ^. hn) and
Proclaimed K by the Citizens* ( m. w) R 7 m, 7 d. But the rest of England El^ct
Canute their K, ( m. hv. w. ch) Oct. 18, is their last Ba^tle ( w) upon which
they agree to divide the Km; Edmund taking the S^^thern Part and Canute the
Northern, (m. hv. w) Nov. 30 K Edmund Killed ( m. bv Hoveden mistakes in
calling this the 15th Indict, when it is the 14t^*
w. ch) and ^ Canute) by the whole Km is Elected K ( hv) while 3 Sons of K
Ethelred and 2 Sons of K Edmund are living ( m. hv. w) R 18 Y, 11 m, 13 d,
after Edmund. 1035 Wednesday, Nov. 12, Canute the Great D ( ^v. w) He was K of
England, Denmark, Norway (i. m. hn. hv. w) and part of Sweden (i. m) and a
little before he D, made his Sons, Swane K of Norway, and Ha^dicu^t^ K o
Denmark. (hv. w. ch)
and 3 HAROLD I, B^se Born Son of Canute (w) after a great strife ( ch) Elected
K ( i. m. hn. hv. w. ch) Reigns 4 Y, 4 m, 5 d. 1040 He Dies ( w. ch) in April
(m) 16 Kal Apr. Tyrre^ from the Saxon Annals.
i e. March 17 and 4 HAR^ICNUTE, a younger Son of Canute (m. hn. hv w. ch)
Elected K ( hn) and the chief Men of the Km se^d for him beyond Sea ( hv. w.
ch) while several of Ethelred's Offspring are living, ( m. hv. w) R 2 Y, 2 m,
22 d. 1042 He Dies ( hv. ch i. e. Malm^bury in his Continuation of ^ede.
) Tuesday June 8 ( ch) hv by mistake says 6 (...) July, Tuesday; wherea^ 6 Ides
July this Year is Saturday: He should therefore have said 6 Ides June, which is
Tuesday June 8, at Che^ter ha^ it.
and III. The SAXON or ENGLISH Line Returns. 1 EDWARD III, the 3 d Son of
Ethelred, Elected King ( i hn) while Edward Son of his Elder Brother K Edmund,
is living ( m* hv. w) R 23 Y, 6 m, 27 d (hv) or rather 28 d. And he is styled
by the Monkis^ Writers, The Confessor, for being addicted to their
Superstitions. 1066 K Edward D ( i. hn hv w) Thursday Ian. 5 ( hn. h^ w ch) i.
e Jan. 5, 1065, 6 and 2 HAROLD II, a Son of Godwin Earl of Kent, o^ no Re^ation
to the Crown by Blood, Elected King, R 9 m, 9 d, ( hv) and the Lords made him
K, ( c^) while Edgar Atheling with his 2 Sisters, Children o^ Edward S^n of
King Edmund II, are living in England (m hn. hv. ch) Sept. 28, Holinsh^^d.
William, Base-born Son of Robert Duke of Normandy, neither of Saxon nor Da^^s^
Royal Blood, Lands near Hastings in Sussex; where he stays 15 d. ( m. w. ch)
Saturday Oct. 14, slays K Harold there in Ba^tle, and gains the Crown (hn. hv.
w. ch) (...) say^ right, this ^attle (...) on (...) b^ing S^turda^, which (...)
O^t. 14: but wrong in c^lling this (...) Call. Nov. which is (...) 2^, and a
(...).
and IV. The NORMAN Line begins. 1 WILLIAM I, called sometimes the Conqueror
and sometimes the Bastard, R 20 Y, 10 m, 28 d, (hv. w) or, more exactly 26 d.
1067 E^gar Atheling goes into Scotland, marries his Sister Mar^aret to Malcom
the K, ( hn. w. ch) from whom the Scottish Kings desc^nd. ( m. hn. hv. ch) 1085
Here Ingulphus Ends his History. (i) 1087 William I, Dies (m. hv. w. ch) Sept.
9 ( hv. w) AE^ 59 ( m ch) m and ch mistake in saying he D in the 22d Year of
his R.
and 2 WILLIAM II, cal^'d Rusus, 2d surviving Son of Wil^liam I, succeeds,
while his Elder Brother Robert is Living ( m. hn. hv. w. ch) R 12 Y, 10 m, 23
d. 1100 He is accidentally slain a Hunting ( m hn. hv w c^) Thursday, Aug. 2 (
m. hn hv) AEt 44 ( c^) and 3 HENRY I, the 3d surviving Son of William I,
Electe^ K while his Elder Brother Robert is Living, ( m. ^^ w. ch) AEt 32 ( m.
w. ch) Nov. 11, he marries Maud, Daughter of Malcom K of the Scots by Margaret
abovesaid, and R 39 Y, 4 m. ( m) 1135 He D ( m. hn. hv. w) Dec 1. ( m. hn. hv)
(...) viz. M^ud, to who^e (...) But (...) 3^ Yea^* 3 m^n^^^.
and 4 STEPHEN, a young^r Son of Stephen Earl of Blois a Norman (m. hn. hv) b^
Adela Daughter of William ^ ( m. hn. w) accepted K ( m. hn) while Maud Daughte^
of Henry I, is Living ( m. hn. hv. w. ch) R 18 Y, 10 m, 24 d, comprehending his
9 Months Captivity. 1141 Feb. 2 (i e. 1140, ^) (...), Lord^day Feb. 2, 1^42:
For Lordsday Feb. 2, (...).
K Stephen taken in Battle and carried to MAUD (hn. hv. w ch) who is hereupon
acknowledged Queen by the whole Kingdom excepting Kent. (hn hv. ch) Nov. 1 K
Stephen released ( m w) Recovers the Kingdom ( hn. hv. w. ch) 114^ Here
Malmsbury ends his History and Novellae (m) 1154 K Stephen D (hn. hv. w) Oct,
25 ( ^n. w) and Here Huntingdon ends his History (hn) And (...), H^ntin^don
en^^^ his Hi^t^ry in 113^.
and V. The FRENCH Line, or Plant^ganets of the House of Anjou, Begins* 1 HENRY
II, a Son of Geoffry Plantaganet Earl of Anjou (w ch) b^ Q Maud, Da^ghter of
Henry I (m. ^v w ch) AEt 22, ( hv. w) R 34 Y, ^ m, 11 d. (...) K of England
sine^ (...) the (...), that has (...) having (...) only (...) his Mo^h^^; though
(...) S^otla^^ ar^ o^ Prior (...).
1171 Saturday, Oct. 16 ( hv) he S^ils from Milford-Haven for Ireland, (hv w
ch) arrives at Cork the next d* upon which all Ireland receive him for their
Sovereign Lord (hv) 1189 He D ( hv. w ch.) Thursday July 6 ( hv. w) and 2
RICHARD I, Eldest surviving Son of Henry II ((...)) R 9 Y, 9 m. 1199 He D of a
Wound received at a Siege in Fra^^^ (hv. w. chapter an old Manuscript of the 7th
Part o^ Fabian's Chronicle.
) Tuesday Apr. 6 ( hv ch) and 3 JOHN, Youngest Son of Henry II, Succeeds, while
Arthur Son of his Elder Br Geoffry is Living ( hv. w. chapter an old Manuscript of
the 7th Part o^ Fabian's Chronicle.
) R 17 Y, 6 m, 13 d. 1202 Here Hoveden Ends his Annals. (hv) 1215 June 15, K
John Grants the 1st Magna Charta o^ England. So the Latin Charter, in Tyrrel.
1216 K John D ( w. an old Manuscript of the 7th Part o^ Fabian's Chronicle.
) Oct. 19 ( w. an old Manuscript of the 7th Part o^ Fabian's Chronicle.
) being Poisoned by a Monk ( chapter an old Manuscript of the 7th Part o^ Fabian's
Chronicle.
) and 4 HENRY III, Eldest Son to K John (w. chapter an old Manuscript of the 7th
Part o^ Fabian's Chronicle.
) AEt 9 ( chapter an old Manuscript of the 7th Part o^ Fabian's Chronicle.
) R 56 Y, 27 days. 1224 (i. e. 1224, 5) Feb. 10, the 9th Y of his R, he (...)
the present Magna Charta. So the Latin Charter in Coke's Institutes: In some
things diff^r^^^ from the other, as they appear compa^'d in Tyrre^.
1272 Nov. 16, he D ( w. chapter an old Manuscript of the 7th Part o^ Fabian's
Chronicle.
) AEt 65. ( w) and 5 EDWARD I, or rather IV, Eldest Son of Henry III, ( w. chapter
an old Manuscript of the 7th Part o^ Fabian's Chronicle.
) R 34 Y, 7 m, 21 d. ( w) 1282 Leolin P of Wales Rebelling, is Killed in a
Figh^ ( w. chapter an old Manuscript of the 7th Part o^ Fabian's Chronicle.
) viz, Dec. 3 an old Manuscript of the 7th Part of Fabian's Chronicle.
1283 David Brother to Leolin Taken ( w. chapter an old Manuscript of the 7th Part
o^ Fabian's Chronicle.
) June 24 an old Manuscript of the 7th Part o^ Fabian's Chronicle.
Drawn and Hanged ( w. chapter an old Manuscript of the 7th Part of Fabian's
Chronicle.
) about October. an old Manuscript of the 7th Part of Fabian's Chronicle.
And Wales wholly Subdued and Subjected to the Englis^ Government. ( w. ch an
old Manuscript of the 7th Part of Fabian's Chronicle.
) 1305 Flavio of Amalfi near Naples, 1st discovers the (...) virtue of the
Loadstone, and applies it to Navigation Stow.
1307 Edward I. D ( w* chapter s) Friday July 7 ( w. an old Manuscript of the 7th
Part of Fabian's Chronicle.
) AEt 6^ Years, 20 days. ( w) Here M of Westminster Ends his History. And f. an
old Manuscript of the 7th Part of Fabian's Chronicle. st. Stow. hl. Holinshed.
pl. Polydorus Vergilius. g. Galvanus. cx. Caxton. p. Petavius. c. Calvisius. a.
Alsted. fl. Fuller.
6 EDWARD II, surviving Son to Edward I ( ch f) AE^ 24 ( w. f^ R 19 Y, 6 m, 18
d. 1312 Nov. 13. Prince Edward, Born to King Edward II. ( chapter hl st) 1326 (i.
e. 1326, 7) Tuesday Ian. 13* a Parliament at Westminster agree to Depose him (
chapter f. hl) Jan. 25, They actually Renounce him ( f. hl. st) and raise his Son 7
EDWARD III, AEt 15, to the Throne ( chapter f. pl) R 50 Y, 4 m, 28 d ( hl) Sept.
21, Edward II, D in Prison ( chapter f) by a violent Death ( f. hl. st) AEt. 43 (
pl) 1344 Macham, an Englishman, Sailing from England for Spain, driven out of
his Course, 1st Discovers the Isle of Madera Galvanus.
1357 Here Chester ends his Chronicle (ch) and Caxton carrie^ it on to 1460.
Caxton.
1376 Lordsday, June 8, the famous Black Prince, eldest Son to K Edward III,
Dies ( f. hl. st) AEt 46 ( pl. hl) Thursday, Feb. 19, 1376, 7, John Wickliff,
the 1st English Reformer, brought before the Bishops in Paul's Church, London
(st) and silenced ( hl) 8 1377 June 22, Edward III, Dies ( f) AEt 65 ( pl. hl.
st) and RICHARD II, Son of the Black Prince, AEt 11 ( Caxton.
f. pl) Reigns 22 Years, 3 months, 8 days ( f) 1380 GUNS 1st used by the
Venetians; the Nature of the Powder being before accidentally discovered by a
German Chemist (pl. Petavius.
) viz Berthold Schwartz a Monk Calvisius.
Alsted.
Alsted says, Froi^^ard makes mention of Guns in 1340; and that in 1380,
Schwartz Publishes the Manner of using them. And Calvisius says, Mariana
Describes the Moors in Spain as using Guns in 1342.
1382 Wickliff finishes his Translation of the BIBLE into English Fuller.
1384 Dec 31, John Wickliff, Parson of Lutterworth (...) there ( st) 1395 The
Spaniards 1st Discover and Settle the Canaries (g^ 1399 The Parliament depose
Richard II ( cx. f. hl. st) Tuesday* Sept. 30 ( s hl) and choose for King ( cx.
hl. st) 9 HENRY ^V, Son to the Duke of Lancaster, 3 d So^ of Edward III, While
^he Heirs of the Duke of Clarence the 2 d Son are living ( cx. s^ R 13 Y, ^ m,
21 d (^^) or rather 20 d ( st) 1400 (i. e. 1399, 400) Richard II, Killed in
Prison ( cx. f) AEt 33 (p^) March 12 bro't, Dead, to London (cx f) 1412 (i e
1412, 13^ Henry IV, Dies (cx f) March 20 ^ f. ^l. st) AE^ ^46 ( pl hl st) and
10 HENRY ^V, (...) 26 (...)
Son of Henry IV, succe^ds while the Senior Heirs of the Duke of Clarence and
Living ( cx. f) R 9 Y, 5 m, 10 d (f) or rather 11 (...) 1415 The Coasts of
Africa, not being known beyond (...) Non, in 29 Degrees North Latitude; the
Portuges^ discover Cape Bajador 3 Degrees farther ( g) 1419 June 11, Henry V,
marries the ^rench K's Da^ghter, and is made Regent and Heir of that K^ ( cx.
^) Caxton and (...) say, Trinity Sunday, in the 7th Ye r of Henry V, which is
(...) 11, (...) and (...) Day (...), in the ^th Y ^ Henry V, which i^ June 3,
1^20.
1422 In Aug. Henry V, Dies (cx) Aug. 31 (f. hl. st) AEt 3^ (cx. pl) and 11
HENRY VI, only Son of Henry V, AEt 8 m, 23 days succeeds ( cx s) R 38 Y, 6 m, 4
d ( f) 1428 LAWR^NCE COSTER at Ha^rlem in Holland, Begin^ to PRINT (...)
from Letters at first cut on (...) T^bles, then in Leaden, and then in Tin
(^j) 1431 Dec 7, Henry VI, Crowned K of France in Paris (cx. f. ^^) 1440 At
Christmas John Faustus, Servant to COSTE^, Runs away with his Master's
PRINTIN^-TOOLS (...)
to Mentz; where he Practices the Ar^, and claims the Honor of its Invention (
hj) 1441 Gonsales and Tristan* Portugese, discover the Coasts of Africa as far
as Cape Blanco (g) 1442 Faustus first Prints a Book at Mentz (hj. (...) in
Alsted.
with COSTER's Types ( hj) 1446 John Guttenberg of Strasburg con^rives the Art
(i. e. the present Way) of PRINTING, removes to Mentz, and here compleat^ it
the (...) of Li^^thenaw.
Faustus being assistant to him ( a) Denis Fernandes Esquire of Lisbon, 1st
Discovers the River Senega a Mouth of the Niger, and the famous Cape De Verde
in Africa (g) 1449 The Portugese 1st Possess the Azores (g) 1450 Faustus 1st
Prints a Book at Mentz with Copper and Leaden Types Mariangelu^ in Boxhornio.
Mariangelus ascribes the Invention of Copper and Leaden Type^ to (...): The
Colonian Ann^li^t ascribe^ the present way of PRINTING (i. e. by separat^
Letter^) to Guttenberg: and they both, with Cluverus agree on the 1 ^t Printing
o^ a Book therewith, in 1450. (See Cluveru^ and (...))
1453 May 29, Tuesday, the Turkish Monarch Mahomet takes Constantinople (c. p)
and puts an end to the Greek Eastern Empire 1460 (i e. 1460, 1) March 2 ( st)
the Lords meet and Depose Henry VI, and Elect 12 EDWARD IV, Eldest Son to
Richard Duke of York, for King ( cx. s hl ^) AEt 18 ( st) March 4, They
Proclaim him K ( cx. f hl. st) Reigns 22 Years, 1 month, ^ days ( f) and Here
Caxton ends his Chronicle (cx) 1462 De Noli a Genoese sails from Portugal, and
1st discovers the Cape De Verde Islands (g) 1467 Oct 28, ERASMUS Born at
Rotterdam in Holland (c) 470 Oct. 3 ( st. Edward IV, Flies to Flanders, and
Saturday, Oct. 1, ( Henry VI) Delivered out of the Tower, and admitted King
again ( f st) Nov 26, Polydore also says Nov. 26; but wrongly sets it in 1471.
A Parliament meets at Westminster, and K Edward Proclaimed Usurper ( f. hl)
1471 (i e. 1470, 1) March 14 (hl) Edward IV, Land^ in the North of England (f.
hl. st) ( Edward IV) Apr. 11 f says, Sherethrusday, which is Maundy Thur^day
(M^nshew) and this Y, April 11. and pl say Apr. 11, but wrongly places it in
1472.
comes to London, takes K Henry again ( f. hl. st) and sends him to the Towe^ (
st) where he is Killed, the night after May 21 ( st) and the next d hisCorps
exposed in Paul'sChurch, London (f. st.) f says on Ascension Eve, May 22, which
is Right: hl also say^ Ascension Eve, but hi Margin is wrong, in calling this
May 2^, and consequently in Placing the Death of K Henr^ on May 23.
This Year, Desare^ and Descouar discover Guinea for the King of Portugal (g)
1472 S^guira Discovers Prince's Island near the Equinoctial, and St. Thomas's
Island under it, with the western Coast of Ethiopia as far as Cape Catharine.
He is the first that passes the Line (g) 1483 Apr. 9, Edward IV, Dies ( f. pl
hl. st) AEt 42 ( st) Sir T. More, in hl, and st, says AEt 53: But Stow corrects
him, and says it should be 42.
50 ( pl) and his Eldest Son 13 EDWARD V, AEt 1^ ( f. hl. st) bears the Name of
King 2 months, 11 days ( f) Wednesday, June 18, some of the chief of the
Nobility and Commons set up for K, his Father's younge^^ Brother Richard; who
takes the Royal Style and Power in Westminster Hall on Thursday June 1^ ( f. hl
st) and Friday June 20, is Proclaimed Kin^ ( s) f call^ Thursda^, June 20, and
Friday, 21: and st in the margi^ calls Wednesday, June 22, and Thursday 25;
whence other Historian follow their mistak^s; when Wednesday this Year is June
18, etc.
by the Name of 14 RICHARD III, and R 2 Y, 2 m, 1 d ( hl. st) or rather 2 ^ (
f) soon after which, Edward V, with his onl^ Brother Richard are Killed in the
Tower ( f pl. kl Sleidan.
) Nov. 10, LUTHER Born at Eysteben in Saxony Sleidan.
Calvisius.
1484 Diego Coon Knight sails to the River Cong^, and discovers the Shores of
Africa to the Tropic of Capricorn (g) 1485 Aug. 22, K Richard Slain in Battle
by Henry Tudor Ea^l of Richmond; who thereupon is Proclaimed K in the Field (
f. hl. st) pl says also, Aug. 22; but wrongly places it in 1436.
R 23 Y, 8 m ( st) And Here the Manuscript of Fabian's Chronicle Ends. VI. The
WELSH Line, or Line of Tudors. 1 HENRY VII, Oct. 30, Crowned at Westminster
(hl. st) Nov. 7* a Parliament of his Calling, Mee^s ( hl. st) Attaints the late
K Richard* and se^^les the Crown on K Henry VII, and his Heirs ( hl) His only
Relation to the Crown is by his Mother, Grandaughter to John Beaufort, a
Base-born Son of John a Ga^n^.
1485 (i. e 1485, 6) Ian 18, He marries Elizabeth the eldest Daughter of K
Edward IV ( hl. st) 1486 Aug. Bartholomew Diaz, Sails from Portugal, 1st
Discovers the famous Cape of Good Hope, the Southermost Point of Africa, and
returns in Dec. 1487 Purchase.
Sept. 20 G^^ver and Mille^.
Speed.
Arthur Eldest Son to K Henry Born (hl. st) In ou^ Place, (...) sets his Birth
in the 2d Y o^ Henry VII; In another Place he sets it in the 3d Y, which seems
more likely.
1487 (i e. 1487, 8) Jan 1, ZUINGLIUS B in Switzerland Fuller.
1489 Nov. 29, Margaret* Eldest Daughter to K Henry, B Speed.
1491 June 22, Henry, 2d Son to K Henry, Born, afterward King Henry VIII ( hl.
st)

Sect. II. To the Discovery of NEW ENGLAND, and Death of Q ELIZABETH*
The united Continents of Asia, Africa and Europe, have be^^ the only Stage of
History, from the CREATION to the Y C 1492. We are now to turn our Eyes to the
West, and see a NEW WORLD appearing in the Atlan^ick Ocean to the great
Surprise and Entertainment of the other. CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS or Colonus, a
Genoese is the 1 st Discoverer. Being a skilful Geographer and Navigator, and
of ^ very curious Mind* He becomes possessed, with a strong Persuasion, that in
order t^ Balance the Terraqueous Globe and Proportion the Seas and La^d^ to
each other, there must needs be formed a mighty Continen^ on the other Side,
which Boldness, Art and Resolution would soon Discover. He 1 st proposes his
undertaking to the Genoese, and then to John King of Portugal; but being
denied, He applie^ to Ferdinand and Isabella King and Queen of Spain, who after
5 Years urging, are at last prevailed upon to furnish him with; Ships and 90
Men Herera sa^ 90 Men; but Ga^vanus say, 120.
for this great Enterprise; which through the growing Opposition of his fearful
Mariners, he at length accomplishes, to his own immortal Fame, and the infinite
Advantage of innumerable others. And as we are now Bound for this Western
World, I shall chiefly fill our final Section with the principal and gradual
Discoveries and Plantations there, till (...) 1 st Discover the North Eastern
Part we now call NEW-ENG^LAND: with the most material Hints of the Rise and
Progress of that Reformed Religion, which at length Produced its present
Settlement.

N. B. We still begin with the famous Julian Year, viz. wi^h Ian. 1, which I
think the whole Christian World observes, except the South Part of Britain.

Y C K of England Henry VII K of Spain Ferdinand 1492 Friday, Aug. 3, H^^ris
and the Atlas Geograph^^s m^stak^ in saying Aug. 2.
Columbus (...) ^^om Palos in Spain: Calls at the Canaries: (...)
H^^era.
Thursday, Sept. 6, Sails thence Westward: Sept. 14, 1st observes the Variation
of the Compass: At 10 in the Evening between Oct. 11 and 12, lie defo^^^^ a
Light: At a next Morning, Roder^c Tr^^na 1st Discovers Land; H^^era.
Gal^an^^ say^, They Discover Land on O^t. 10. and perhaps Herer^ mi^^t
mistake, (...) the Seamen 's method; who set down at N^on O^t. 1^* (...) of the
24 Hour^ proceeding, and give 'en the Da^e of O^t. 11.
being Guanahani, (g. H^^era.
^ one of the Islands of the New World, called Lucayoes: H^^era.
where Columbus goes ashore and calls it St Salvador (...)
H^^era.
being about 25 Degrees. North Latitude (...)
Saturday Oct 2^, Discovers Cuba. Dec. 6, arrives at Bobio, which he calls
Hispaniola H^^era.
where he builds a Fort and leave^ 38 men (...)
or 39, H^^era.
1493 Wednesday, Ian. 16, he sails from Hispaniola: Saturday, Feb. 18, arrives
at St Mary's, one of the Azores: M^nday, March 4, at the River of Lisbon; and
Friday March 15, at Palos. H^^era.
Bartholomew Diaz sails from Portugal, 1st Pass^s the Cape of Good Hope, and
sails to the ancient Ethiopia. (...)
Wednesday, Sept 25, ^^lvanus mist^kes in ^aying O^t. 25.
Columbus sails from Cadiz in Spain: Lordsda^, Nov 3, Discovers one of the
Caribbees, which he calls Dominica: next day sails Northward to another, which
he calls Marigalante: next day to another, which he calls Guadelupe: Nov. 10,
Discovers another, which he calls Monserrat: then another, which h^ call^
Anti^ua H^^era.
and 50 more to the Northwestward Atlas Geo^raphu^.
with Boriqu^n, now called Porto Rico: (...)
H^^era.
Friday, 22, arrive^ at Hispaniola. H^^era.
1494 Thursday, Apr. 24, He sails for Cuba: Apr. 29, des^cries i^: sails along
the Southern Shore, and spies Iamaica (...)* May 14, arrives there: Returns to
Cuba and (...) H^^era.
1496 March, 10, Columbus sails for Spain: and June 11, arrives at Cadiz (h)
This Spring John Cabota, a Vene^ian, sails with 2 Ship^ from England, steers
Westward: Discovers the Shore of the New World in 45 Degr. North Latitud^:
(...) alon^ the Coast Northward, to 60, and then So^thward to 38* Some say ^o
Cape Florida, in 25: and returns to England (g) Smith say^, that John carries
hi^ Son Sebastian with him, who a^^terwards pro^eed, in these Discoveries.
Whence Stow, Purc^^^^ Harris, the Atlas, and others, erroneously ascribe them
all to S^bas^tian only. Purchase say, Sebastian in Ramusio, Places hi 1 st
Voy^^^ in 1496: though the Map under hi^ Picture in the Privy Gallery, (...)
Cambden, in 1497, and so Smith. But Stow in 149^; unless (...) Voyage he
men^ions be another.
1497 Thursday, Feb. 16, Melancthon Born at Bretten, in the Palatinate (c) June
20, Vasques Gama sails from Lisbon Southward* Passes the Cape of Good Hope, 1st
sails to the East Indies* and returning by the same Cape, arrives at Lisbon i^
Sept. 1499 ( g) 1498 Wednesday, May 30, Galv^n^s se^ms to mistake in placing
this 3 d Voyage of Colu^^^^ in 1497.
Columbus sails from San Luca^ in Spain: July 31, Discovers an Island, ( h)
which (...) calls Trinidada (g. h) in 9 Degrees North La^^ ude: ( g) Wednesday,
Aug. 1, he 1st Discovers the CONTINENT ( h) sails along the main Coast
Westward, ( g. h) Discover^ Margarita (h) and many other Islands ( g. h) for
200 Leagues to Cape Vela (g) crosses over to Hispaniola (g. h^ where, being
seized and sent Home in Chains by a ne^ Spanish Governor, he arrives at Cadiz,
Nov. 25. 1500 ( ^) 1499 May 20, Alonso Ojeda, sails from St Mary's in Spain*
with John Cosa as Pilot, and Americus Vespucius a Florentine, as Merchant:
Steers Westward: In 27 days Discovers Land 200 Leagues East of Trinidada (about
5 Degrees* North La^) sails along the Coast Westward to Cape Vela* Thence arrives
at Hispaniola Sept. 5: Thence sail^ (...) Porto Rico: and thence to Spain. (h)
Nov 13 (g) Vincent Tannez Pin^on ^ai^s from Palos in Spain, for the Southern
Part of the New-World: and passes the Equinoctial. ( g. h) 1500 F^b. 26, ( h)
He Discovers Cape Aug^stin (g. h) in* 8 Degrees. South La^. ( g) Thence sailing
along Northw^sterly, Discovers the River Amazons, and the Coast and Riv^rs of
Brazile to Trinidada: (g. h) Thence at the end of Sept. (h) or Sept. 28 ( g)
arrives in Spain. (g. h) Monday, March 9 (h) Pedro Alvarez Cabral sails from
Lisbon, for the East Indies: (g. h) S^eers so far Westward, as on Apr. 24 ( h)
he happens to Descry Brazile and enters a River there which he calls Port^
Seguro (g. h) i^ 17 Degrees. South Latitude: whence he crosses over to the Cape of
Good Hope and pursues his Voyage ( g) Gaspar Corterial, by License of the K of
Portugal* sail^ from Tercera, (g) Discover^ the Nor^h Eastern Coast of the New
World, in 50 Degrees. North Latitude ( g. h) from him called Corterialis, and
returns home to Lisbon. (g) 1501 Ian. ^, Roderic Bastidas sails from Cadiz to
Cape Vela* Discovers 100 ( h) or 200 Leagues ( g) Westward, all a^long the
Coast at St Martha, Cartagena, the Gulf o^ Dari^n, and as far as the Port
afterward called Nombre d^ Dios: then Sails to Hispaniola. (h) Galvanus places
Bastidas's Voyage after Ojeda's, and both in 1502.
Soon after, Alonso Ojeda se^s out on his 2d Vo^age, and Americus Vespucius
with him: Sail to the same Place after Bastidas, and so to Hispaniola (h)
Neither, Hackluyt, Purchase, Harris nor Perrier mention any Voyages of
Americus. The Atlas Geographus give^ u^ a from Gry^a^s; the 1 st in 1497, and
the 2 d in 1500: But* Herera say^, they were p^ov'd to be mere Impositions of
Americus, and he only went twice with Ojeda.
Lordsday, Nov. 14, Prince Arthur of England, AEt 1^ ( st) or 16 ( hl) marries
at London to Kathar^ne, AEt 18, Daughter to Ferdinand K of Spain (hl. st) One
great Occasion of the Reformation in England, as we shall see her^after. 1502
March 12 gm) A^r* beginning (st) Apr. 2 ( sp) Pri^^^ Arthur Dies (hl. st) May 9
(h. pr) Columbus sails from Cadiz to Hispaniola: Thence to the Continent:
Discovers the Bay of Hondur^^ Lordsday, Aug. 14, Lands. ( h) Thence sails along
the main Shore Easterly 200 Leagues ( g) to Cape Gracias ^ Dios, Veragua, Porto
Bello and the Gulf of Darien (g. h) This Y, Sebastian Cabot brings to K Henry
VII, 3 (...) taken in the Newfound Islands (st) 1503 Ian. 6, Columbus enters
the River Yebra in Veragu^* where ^e 1st begins a Settlement; but soon breaks
up, and sails to Cuba, Iamaica, and Hispaniola. (h) Aug. 8 (st) Margaret,
eldest Daughter of Henry VII marries at Edinburgh, to James IV, K of Scotland
(hl. ^^ 1504 Sept. 12, Columbus sails from Hispaniola, arrives at (...) Luca^,
and going to Sevil, finds Q Isabella Dead ( h) S^e Dies Nov. 26, this Year, (
c) 1506 May 20 ( h. at) Galvanus says in May 1506: and H^r^r^, on (...) day,
(...) 20, this Year; But May 20 this Year, is Ascension day Eve.
Dies (^. h) at Valid^lid (...) Spain: his Body carried over and buried in the
Ca^hedral of St Domingo in Hispaniola: (h) and his Son Iame^ succeeds as Heir.
( g. h. pr) K Ferdinand orders 2 Bishops for Hispaniola, and establishes the
Tithes there for Support of the Clergy (^) 1507 Americus Vespucius goes from
Lisbon to Sevil, and K Ferdinand appoints him to draw Sea Charts, with the
Title of Chief Pilot: Whence the NEW WORLD af^erward unjustly takes the name of
AMERICA ( h) 1508 John Diaz Solis and Vincent Yannez Pinson sail from S^vil to
Cape Augustine, Discover the Coast of Brazil Southward ( h) to 35 Degrees. South
Lat. where they find the Great River Paranaguazu, which they call Rio de Plat^,
or River of Silver (g) go on to 40 Degrees. South La^itude, and return to Spain (h)
Galvanus sets this Voy^ge in 1512.
1509 Apr. 21 (pl) or rather 22, King Henry VII, Dies ( hl st sp) Lived 52 Y (
pl. hl) and his only surviving Son HENRY VIII, AEt 18 ( pl. hl. st) R 37 Y* 9
m, 6 d. Iun^ 3, ( hl. st) he marries his Brother Arthur's Widow, by Pope
Iulius's Dispensation ( pl. hl. st) Jul^ 10, CALVIN Born at Noyon in France
Beza in Vit Calv.
Nov. 10, Alonso Ojeda sails from Hispaniola, and James Nicuessa follows him,
to settle the Continent: they Land and meet at Cartagena; but are beaten off:
and Ojeda begin^ a Settlement at St Sebastian, on the East side of the Gul^ of
Darien. (h) Nicuessa begins another at Nombre de Dios, on the West side, ( g.
h) But are both soon broken up through* the Opposition of the Natives (h) Galvanus
place^ these Attempts under 1508: and '^is likely, this was the Year when they
set sail from Spain: and so Herera seems to make it.
1510 John de Esquibel Sails from Hispaniola, and begins a Settlement at
Iamaica (h) John Ponce begins to settle Porto Rico (h. Atlas Geographus.
) Fernandez de Enciso and Basco Nunnez, begin to set^le St Mary's at Darien (h)
1511 James Velasquez begins to settle Cuba (h) 1512 Thursday, March 3, (i. e.
1512, 13) John Ponce sail^ from Porto Rico Northwards: April 2, Discovers the
CONTINENT in 30 Degrees. 8 min. North Latitude, call^ it Florida, goes ashore,
takes Possession: sails along the Coast Southerly: Lordsday, May 8, Doubles the
Cape* Thence sailing Southerly, Discovers the Baha^aes, and returns to Porto
Rico (h) 1513 Basco (h) or Vasco (g) Nunnez, hearing a Rumor of the SOUTH SEA;
Sept. 1, sets out from Darien; (g. pr) Sept. 25 (g. h) from the Top of a High
Mountain (h) 1st Discovers that Mighty Ocean: (g. h) Sept. 29, comes to it ( g)
Embarks upon it, and Returns. ( g. h) 1515 Gaspar Morales marches from Darien
across the Land to the South Sea, Discovers the Pearl Islands in the Bay of St
Michael's, in 5 Degrees. North Lat ( g) John Arias begins to People Panama on the
South Sea, and Discovers 250 Leagues on the Coast to 8 Degrees. 30 (...). North
Lat. ( g) Gonsales Ferdinandus Oviedus Discovers the Island of Bermudas.
Purchase.
The Complutension Bible Published Calvisius.
at Antwerp Cro^ai Elenchu^.
which proves a Principal Instrument of ^he Reformation. 1516 Jan. 23,
Ferdinand, K of Spain, Dies, and his Daughter's Son Charles of Austria Reigns.
( Calvisius.
h) Feb. 11, ( st) or 18 ( hl) K Henry's Daught^r Mary B Both st and hl Place
it in the 7th Year of Henry VIII, which (...) be Feb. 1515, 16: but 1518 in the
margin of hl is wrongly Printed.
Sir Sebastian Cabot and Sir Thomas Pert sail from England to the New World,
and Coast the Continent the 2d Time to Brazile. Purchase.
Feb. 8 (h) Francis Fernandes Cordova sails from Cuba and Discovers the
Province of Yucatan (g. h) in 20 Degrees. North Lat. ( g) and the Bay of Campechy.
(h) The Beginning of the REFORMATION. 1517 Oct. 31, Calvisius.
LUTHER, an Augustine Friar Sleidan.
sets (...) 95* Theses against the Pope's Indulgences, on the Church Door
Calvisius.
at Wirtemberg in Saxony Sleidan.
and begins the Reformation in Germany. 1518 Apr. ^, (h) John de Grisalva sails
from Cuba to Yucatan* and Discovers the Southern Coast of the Bay of Mexico (g
h) with the Head of the Bay to St John de ulua, and 1st calls the Country NEW
SPAIN. ( h) Francis Garay sails from Iamaica to Cape Florida, in 2^ Degrees. North
Let. H^r^ra say, he only sends Iam^s de Comargo.
Discovers 500 Leagues Westward* on the Northern Coast of the Great Bay of
Mexico to the River Panuco in 23 Degrees. North Lat. ( g) at the Bottom o^ the Bay.
1519 Jan. 12, MAXIMILIAN Emperor of Germany Die^* and June 28, CHARLES K of
Spain chosen Emperor. Sleidan.
Beginning of this Y, ^uinglius comes to Zurich; soon Preaches against the
Pope's Indulgences, and begins the Reformation in Switzerland. (sl) In Feb. (g)
Fernando Cortes sails from Cuba to Yucatan, and then to St John de ulua: Whence
Francis de Mar^ejo and Roderic Alvarez sail Northward, and Discover ^he Coast
to the River Panuco: Friday, Apr 22 Cortes L^nds and begins a Town, which he
calls Vera Cruz: (h) at the end of Aug. sets out for Mexico; (g) Nov. 8, enters
that Great City, then containing 60 thousand Houses. ( h) Aug. 10, Ferdinand de
Magellanes, (g. h) a Portugese (h. ps) sails from Sevil to find out a South
West Passage to the East Indies, and go round the Earth, (g. h) Dec. 13,
D^scries Brazile and enters the River Ianeiro, in 23 Degrees. 45 min Sou^h Lat:
sails along the C^ast Southward: and Oct. 21, 1520, D^scovers the Cape at the
Northern Entrance of the famo^s Straits which bare his name: He calls thi^
Cap^, The Virgins, because Discov^r'd on St Ursula'^ day, ( h) and M^ll
m^^takes in calling it the Vi^gin Mary's.
Nov. 7, enters them; and Nov. 27, opens the great Southern Ocean (h) which he
calls the Pacifick: (ps) sails Northwesterly 3000 Leagues* March 31, 1521,
Discovers the Philipine Islands; In one of which, viz. Z^bu, he is slain in a
Fight with the N^tives, Apr. 27. Upon which his Ship sails to Borneo; where the
Men choose John Sebastian del Cano their Captain: Nov. 8, he arrives at the
Moluccaes: In the beginning of 1522, sails thence to the Cape of Good Hope; and
Sept 6, arrives at San Lucar (h) with ^u^ a Dozen Men ( ps) Being the 1st that
ever encompassed the Earth. ( g. h) 1520 Dec. 20, Luther burns the Canon Law,
publicly, at Wirtemberg. (^l) 1521 The Augustine Friars at Wirtemberg leave off
the Mass, and are the 1st who do so. ( sl) Tuesday, Aug. 13, Cortes takes the
City of Mexico, and puts an end to that Great Indian Empire. ( h. and G^g^)
1521 K Henry VIII, writes against Luther (st) ^or which (i. e. 1521, 2) Feb. 2,
^he King receives a B^ll from the Pope* wherein he and his Successors for ever,
are Declared, Defenders of the Christian Faith (bl) 1523 Ian. 29, the Senate of
Zurich reject the Traditions of Men, and declare the Gospel shall be taught
according to the Old and New Testament. (^.) July 1, John and Henry, 2 Augustine
Friars, Burned at Brussels for professing the Holy Scriptures to be the only
Rule of Faith, etc. (sl) [N. B. The REFORMATION coming on and crowding us with
more important Matters; I shall only Recite the Voyages to the NORTH EASTERN
Parts of the NEW WORLD.] 1524 John Verrazano, a Florentine, sent from France by
K Francis I, coasts along the North Eastern Part of the New World, from 28 to
50 Degrees North Lat. ( ps) He is the 1st that sails from France thither. 1525
Stephen Gomez sails from the Groyn to Cuba and Florida, and thence Northward to
Cape Razo in 46 Degrees. North Lat, ( g) in search of a North West Passage to the
East Indies, and returns to the Groyn in 10 Months: (g. h) The 1st Spaniard who
sails on these Coasts. Herera represents this Voyage as be^inning Northward and
endin^ at Florida, and so to ^uba, etc.
Apr. 13, The Magistrates of Zurich abolish Mass and all the Popish Ceremonies,
in their Dominions. ( sl) Albert, 33d Master of the Teutonick Order, made Du^^
of Prussia, and embraces the Reformed Religion. (sl) By K Henry's leave and the
Pope's confirmation ( hl) Cardinal Woolsey suppresses 40 Monasteries in
England, for the building of his Colleges in Oxford and Ipswich (st) 1526 About
Aug. Patrick Hamilton, Abbot of Fern in Scotland, returning from Germany,
where he had been a Schoollar to Luther, is Burnt for the Reformed Religion (
hl) at St Andrews on Feb. 28, following, ( Fox) (...) places this in 1527.
He is the first Martyr for it in Scotland. 1527 March 18, Gustavus Erickson
King of Sweden, calls the States together, and begins the Reformation there. (
^) Cardinal Woolsey in^uses Scruples into K Henry's mind, about his Marriage
with his Brother's Widow. ( hl. st) Francis Colb and Berthold Holler having
Preached the Gospel at B^rn; Dec. 17, the City appoints a Public Assembly and
Disputation there, and the Scriptures to be the only Rule, and to have the sole
Authority in all the Debates. ( sl) 1528 Ian. 7, the Great Assembly and
Disputation, begins at Bern and holds to Ian. 26; wherein Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius, Capito, Bucer, etc. Defend the Reformed Religion; and thereupon
Popery is abolished in Bern and Constance, and in their Dominions. ( sl) In
March, Pamfilo de Narua^z sails from Cuba with 400 men, for the Conquest of
Florida: April 12, arrives the^e (h) marches to Apelachen ^ Thence coming down
to the ^ea, and Coasting Westward, is lost with many more in a S^orm about
Mid-November, which de^eats the Enterprise. ( ps) H^ (...) to be lost about the
Mouth of the Great River Mississippi* (see (...).)
1529 (...) 9, Piles of Images burnt before the Cathedral at Basil: and Feb.
12, Popery abolished there. ( sl) Feb 20, Mass abolished at Strasburg. (sl) The
(...) of the Empire at Spire making a Decree against the Re^orma^ion; Apr. 19,
the Elector of Saxony^ (...) Marquess of Brandenburg, Ernest and Francis Dukes
of Lunenburgh, the Landgrave of Hess, and Coun^ of An^^lt, publicly read their
PROTEST against it, seve^al C^^^es joining with them: whence they take the
fa^ous Name of PROTESTANTS. ( sl) Oct. 19, King Henry takes the Great Seal from
Cardinal Woolsey, (s^) Holinshed mistakes in placing this on Nov. 17.
Nov. 3, The Parliament of England meets, ( hl. st) complain^ of the Clergy's
Non-Residence, Pluralities, and Exactions on the People: But the Bishops
oppose, and hinder many of the Regulations ( hl) 1530 At the beginning of this
Y, (hl) William Tindal Publishes his Translation of the New Testament in
English beyond Sea; which King Henry Prohibits, and orders the Bishops to make
a new one (^l st) June 20, The ^amous D^et of the Empire at Aus^^^g, begins:
and June 25, the Protestant Confession of Faith* drawn up by Melancthon, since
called the AUSBURG CONFESSION, Read in the Diet. ( sl) Sept. 19, K Henry, by
Proclamation, forbids his Subject^ to purchase any thing from Rome. (hl. st)
Tuesday, Nov. 29, Cardin^l Woolsey Dies: and (...) Cl^^gy of England being
Guilty of a Praemunire, for m^intaining the Cardinal's Le^antine Power; ^hey in
Convocation, agree to Pay the King 100 thousand Pounds for Pardon, make their
Submission to Him, and own him Supre^^ Head of the Church of England, (hl. st)
which they never confes^'d before ( hl) And Here Polydore Vergil ends his
History. ( pl) Dec. 22, Diverse Protestant Princes and Deputies (...) Cities in
Germany, meet at Smalcald, and enter into a League Defensive ( sl) 1531 Aug.
19, Thomas Bilney Burnt at Norwich (hl) for Preaching the Reformed Religion (
Fox) N. B. There were many others ^urnt for the same Religion, in (...) Parts
of the Kingdom, (...) before and after: For which we must (...) ^o Fox's (...).
Oct. 11, Zuinglius slain, AEt. 44, in a Bat^le between the Zurichers and their
neighboring Enemies ( sl. c) 1532 Ian. 15, ( Keeble) The Parliament of England
meet* complain of the Cruelties of the Bishops, and Enact, They shall Pay no
more M^ney to the Pope, ( hl. st) they having Paid the last 42 Y, Sixty (st) or
160 thousand Pounds. ( hl^ July, K Henry Suppresses the Priory of
Christ-Church, London. (st) Aug. 23, William Warbam, Archbishop of Canterbury
D; and Thomas Cranmer Succeeds. ( st) Sept. Farel and Saunier, from Preaching
in Piedmont, come to Geneva and begin to Preach the Reformed Religion in
Private Houses. (Sp^n) Nov. 14, King Henry privately marries Ann Bulleign (hl
gm) but Stow says, Ian. 25, 1532, 3. (st) Nov. Calvin obliged to fly from Paris
to Basil, for the Reformed Religion. (bz) 1533 Feb. 4, (...).
The Parliament of England meets; Enact^ that none shall appeal to Rome; that
Katharine shall be no more called Queen, but Princess Dowager of Prince Arthur,
(hl. st) and that neither the Clergy nor Convo^ca^ion shall exact an^ Canons
contrary to Law, or without the King's Consent. (...).
March 28, Liberty of Private Opinion; and June 26, Liberty of Private Worship
allowed at Geneva. (sn) Lordsday, Sept. 7, The Princess Elizabeth Born to King
Henry. (hl. st) 1534 March 1, Farel, the 1st Protestant who Preaches Publicly
at Geneva. (...).
Apr. James Cartier sails from St Malo's in France: In May, arrives at
Newfoundland, (ps) Falls with Lat. 48 and 30, Discovers the Great Bay of St
Lawrence; sails to 51 Degrees. North, in hopes to pass to China, but is
disappointed and returns ( g) July 22, John Frith, and Andrew Hewet a Young
Man, Burnt in Smithfield, London, for not owning the Bodily Presence of Christ
in the Sacrament. (hl. st) Aug. 15, Ignatius Loyola (B in Spain in 1^^1) now,
with 9 others at Paris, begins the Society of I^^^its. Ricc^olius.
Dupin.
Nov 3, Keeble says Feb. 3, 1^34, 5.
The Parli^ment of England meets, Enacts the King's Supremacy, and abolishes
the Pope's Authority through the Realm. ( hl. st) Nov. A Persecution of the
Prote^tants, Rages in France, and many Burnt. ( sl) 1535 James Cartier sails
again from France, Discovers the River Canada, sails up 3^0 Leagues ( g) to the
Great and Swift Fall, Builds a Fort, (ps) calls the Land NEW FRANCE, Winters
there, and next Y goes home. ( g) Aug. 27* The Roman Catholic Religion
abolished in Geneva. (...) Oct. ((...)) K Henry sends Thomas Cromwell, (st) Dr.
(...) and others, to visit the Priories, Abbeys and Nunneries; who set all at
Liberty under 24 Years of Age, with those who are willing to go out, and shut
up the rest. ( hl. st) The Senate of Ausburg receives the Reformation. (sl)
1536 Feb. 4, The Parliament of England meets and gives the King all Religious
Houses of the value of 200 Pounds and under, with all their Lands and Goods. (
hl. st N. B. The Numb^^ o^ Houses, (...) 3^6; value of (...) Ye^rly, above 32
thousand Pounds; moveable Good^, above 100 ^^^^sand Pounds; Persons put out of
them, above 10 Tho^san^. ((...))
May 1, The Parliament of Ireland meets at Dublin, and Pass Laws for the King
and his Successors to be Su^ream Head of the Church of Ireland; abolishing the
Pope's Authority; Suppressing of Abbeys; and make it a Praemunire, to pursue
any Process from the Sea of Rome Holinsh^^'^ Hist^^y of Ireland.
Ho^^^sh^d is right, in plac^^^ this in the 28 th Y of K Henry; (...) wrong in
(...) 1539 in the Margin.
May 19* Q Ann Beheaded, with a Sword, (hl st) and the next Day ( st) K Henry
marries Jane Seymour. (hl. ^^) June, K Henry abrogates a number of Holydays,
^specially in Harvest Time ( hl) July 10, Cromwell made a Lord; and July 18,
made Knight and Vicar General, under the K, over the Spiritualty; i. e. over
all Ecclesiastical and Religious Affairs and Persons.
and sets diverse times as Head over the Bishops in Convocation. (hl. st) July
11, (c) or rather 12 Boxhorni^s.
Enasmus Dies at Basil. Aug. 1, Calvin Publishes his Institutions at Basil So
the Date of the Dedication.
then goes to Farel and Viret at Geneva, and carries on the Reformation there.
Beza in Vit Calv.
Sept. Cromwell orders the Parsons and Curates, to Teach the Lord's Prayer,
Ave, Creed, and 10 Commandments, in English. (hl st) William Tindal Burned at
Villefort near Brussels, for the Reformation. ( hl) Bale and Fox call him The
Apostle of the English (fl. Fox)
1537 Aug. 12, Christian K of Denmark Crowned, calls the States together,
deposes the Bishops, and Reforms the Km. ( c) Oct. 12, Prince Edward Born to K
Henry. (hl. st) 1538 Lordsday, Feb. 24, The famous Rood or Image of Borley in
Kent, made with dive^se Wires to move the Lips and Eyes, showed at Paul's by
the Preacher, and Broken to ^ieces. ( st) May 23, a Rood in London, with his
Tabernacle, pulled down and broken to Pieces* ( st) Diverse Abbeys Suppressed
to the King's use. (st) Sept. Cromwell takes away all the noted Images, to
which Pilgrimages and Offerings had been made, with ^he Shrines of counterfeit
Saints, as Thomas a Becket, etc. Stow says, Those Images were bro't up from
diverse Parts of England and Wales to London, and Burnt at Chels^y: That he
Suppressed the Abb^y at Canterbury, with Becket's Shrine, and commanded his
Bones to be Burnt ( st)
Suppresses all the Orders of Friars and Nuns, with their Cloisters and Houses
( hl. st) and orders all the Bishops and Curates through the Realm to see, that
in every Church, the BIBLE of the largest Volumn Printed in English, be so
placed that all may Read it. ( st) Nov. John Lambert Burnt in Smithfield, for
not owning the bodily Presence of Christ in the Sacrament. ( hl. st) 1539 Apr.
28, The Parliament of England meets, ( hl st) Gran^ all Religious Houses to the
K for ever, ( st) and Enacts the 6 Articles, which sets up an Inquisition in
the Km, and brings many honest People to Death. (hl) May 12, (^) or 18 (ps)
Ferdinand de Soto, with 900 Men besides Seamen, sails from Cuba, to conquer
Florida* May 30 ( ps) or 31 ( h) arrives at the Bay of Spiritu Santo: Travels
Northwards 450 Leagues from the Sea* There meets with a Great River a quarter
of a Mile over and 19 fathom Deep, ( h) on whose Bank he Dies; and i^ Buried in
it, May 21, 1542, (ps) AEt 42, (h) upon which his Successor Alverado, Builds 7
Brigantines; (h. ps) (...) 29, 1543, embarks, and sails down the River, in 17
days, 400 Leagues, Here they Guessed the River to be 15 Leagues wide, found it
opening with 2 Mouths into the Sea, and judged it 800 Leagues (...) the Head.
(h) By which, I think, it is plain, This is the ^reat Missi^ipp^ River. (see
(...))
and in 2 days more, ( h) viz July 18, goes out to Sea, ( ps) sails Westerly
along the Coast, ( ^. ps) and Sept. 10, arrives at Panuco (ps) 1540 Apr. 18,
Keeble says, the Parliament meets Apr. 12, ( k)
Parliament of England meets, Dissolve^ the order of the Knights of Rhodes or
St. John's, in England, (hl st) and Ireland, (st) and gives their Houses and
Esta^e to the King. ( st) July 19, Cromwell attainted in Parliament for Heresy
and Treason, without being heard; and July 28, Beheaded. ( hl. st) July 30,
Robert Barnes, D. D. Thomas Garrard, B D* and William Ierom, B. D. Burnt at
Smithfield, for the Reformed Religion. ( hl. st) Sept. 27, The Pope Establishes
the Order of Jesuits, (p. d) and May 14, 1543, makes Ignatius Loyola their
General. (d) 1541 June 13, The Parliament of Ireland meets at Dublin* Enacts
the K and his Successors to be Entitled Kings of Ireland, (hli. st) whereas
they had been only called Lords of Ireland before. ( hli) Ho^in^hed, in his
His^o^y ^f Ir^l^nd, mistake^ in placing this Sessio^ of Parliament in 15^2; But
(...) in sayin^ the 33 ^ Y of Henry VIII.
1542 Ian. 23, King Henry first Proclaimed at London, King of Ireland. (hl)
Feb. 15, The Parliament of Ireland meets at Limerick, and makes an Act for the
Suppression of Kilma^nam and other Religious Houses. (hli) The French K sends
Francis la R^che, Lord of R^^ewell, his Lieutenant, with 3 Ships and 200 Men,
Women and Children, to Canada: where he Builds a Fort, Winters and Returns. (
ps) Dec 7, Mary B to K James V, of Scotland: Dec. 14, he D, (AEt 31) H^ was the
Son of K James IV, o^ Scotland, by Margaret Eldest D^ughter to K Henry VII, of
England; and (...) mistake^ in saying he (...), AEt 33; and (...) tells us he
was Born Apr. 11. 1512.
and she Succeeds: But the Earl of Arra^ made Regent, (...)
Buch^n^^.
who professes the Reformed Religion, causes Friar Guilliam to Preach against
Images and other fruitless Ceremonies, and gives Liberty for ^he Bible to be
had in English, and published universally through Scotland (...)
1544 June, The Letany set forth in English, and ordered to be Read in every
Parish Church in England. (st) 1545 Nov. 23, ( hl) or 24, ( st) the Parliament
of England meets, and commits to the King, all Colleges, Chantries and
Hospitals, to Order as he thinks Expedien^ ( hl. st) Dec. 13, The Council of
Trent begins ( c. ri. d) 1546 Ian. b, The Elector Palatine embraces the
Reformation; and Ian. 10, instead of Mass, has Divine Service said a^
Heidelberg, in the Vulgar Tongue (sl) Feb. 18, Luther Dies at Eys^eben, AEt 63
( sl) March 1, (Fox) George Wisehart Burnt at St Andrews in Scotland, for
Preaching the Reformed Religion ( (...)
Fox) which he had Learnt in the Schools of Germany (...)
(...) calls him Sophec^rdini.
154^ Ian. 28, K Henry Dies (hl. st) AEt 56, and his only Son EDWARD VI, AEt
10, Reigns 6 Y, 5 m, 8 ^. ( hl) Feb. 1, Sir Edward Seymou^ Earl of Hertf^rd,
Chosen (hl. st) and Proclaimed ( hl) (...) Protector; and Feb. 17, made Duke of
Somerset. (hl s^ March, (st) The Protector forbids Processions; Order^ the
Gospel and Epistle to be Read in English, (st) and send^ Commissioners through
the Realm to remove Images out of Churches, and w^^h them, Preachers (hl. st)
to dissuade the People from their Beads and such like Ceremonies ( st) Sept.
The K's Council causes the Book of Homilies and Paraphrase of Erasmus to be set
forth and had in Churches. ( hl) Nov. 4, The Parliament of England meets at
Westminster; Repeals the Statute of the 6 Articles, (hl. st) Enacts the
Sacrament to be given in both kinds; (st. k) and grant^ the K, all Chantries,
Free Chapels, and Brotherhoods. (hl. st) Nov. 16 (hl) or 17 ( st) The Rood and
other Images pulled down in Paul's, London: and soon after in all other
Churches in England (hl. st) Nov. end, Peter Martyr, a Florentine, who had for
5 Y with great applause, ^aught at Strasburg, goes into England, at the
Invitation of Cranmer in the K's Name, and made Professor of Divinity in
Oxford. (sl) 1548 March, The K, sends forth a Proclamation for administering the
Sacraments in both kinds, to all who should be willing from Easter forward:
whereupon at Easter begins the Communion and Confession in English. (st) ^a^ter
this Year is Lordsday, Apr. 1, and H^^inshed p^aces thi^ a Year before: But
from the A^t of Parliament in Nov, (...) seem^ to be Right.
Nov. 4, The Parliament of England mee^s: wherein the Mass is wholly abolished,
and a Book for uniformity of Divine Service is established. ( hl. k) 1549 Apr
6, A Proclamation (...) put down Mass, through the Realm. (st) Apr. 10, The
Cloister, Chapel and Charnel House at Paul'^ London, begin to be pulled down.
( st) 1550 June 11, The High Altar in Paul's Church, London, pulled down, and a
Table set in the Room; and soon after, the like in all the Churches in London.
(st) 551 Feb. 27, Bucer Dies at Cambridge. (sl) Sept. 1, The French K's
Ambassador enters the Council of Trent, and delivers a Protestation, that his
Master own^ them not for a General or Public Council, and that neither He nor
his People would be obliged to submit thereto. ( sl) 1552 Ian. 22, The Duke of
Somerset Beheaded. ( hl. st) Ian 23, The Parliament of England mee^s; wherein
the Book of Common Prayer, newly Corrected and Amended, is Established. ( hl)
July 31, The famous Pacification at Passaw concluded, between the Emperor and
the Protestant Princes of Germany; wherein it is agreed, that none shall be
molested for Religion, and that Protestants be admitted into the Imperial
Chamber. ( sl) Nov. 1, The New Service Book begins to be used at Paul's, and
through the whole City of London: and all Copes, Vestments, Hoods and Crosses,
therein forbidden are laid aside, as by Act of Parliament Ordered. After which,
the upper Quire of Paul's Church is broken down, and the Communion Table set in
the lower Quire. (st) 1553 Apr. and May, Commissioners sent for all the Parish
Copes and Vestments, Gold and Silver Candlesticks, Censors, etc. in all the
Churches through the Kingdom. ( st) July 6, K Edward Dies, (hl. st) AEt 16:
having by Will appointed for his Successor, JANE Gre^* Grandaughter to Mary,
Youngest Daughter of Henry VII, ( hl. st) who on July 9, (hl) or 10 ( st) is
Proclaimed Queen at London But July 19, MARY I, E^dest Daughter of Henry VIII,
is there Proclaimed Queen, Prevails* Aug. ^, enters the City, ( hl st) and
Reigns 5 Y, 4 m, 11 days. ( hl) i. e. (...) Death o^ Edward VI.
Aug. 27. The Latin Service begins to be sung at Paul's* (st) Oct. 5. The
P^rl^ament of England meets at Westminster, which Enacts the Church Service to
be said in Latin: as in the last Year of Henry VIII. (st) Dec. 20, The Church
Service begins to be said in Latin through the Km, according to the Act of
Parliament. ( st) 1554 Feb. 12, Q Jane Beheaded ( hl. st) within the Tower.
(^l) July 20, Philip, Son to the Emperor, Lands at Southhampton to Marry the
Queen, (sl. hl. sp) July 25, he mar^ries her at Winchester, (s^ hl. st) the
Emperor's Ambassador presenting him a Resignation of the Kingdoms of Naple^ and
Jerusalem. (sl. hl) Wednesday, Nov. 21, Cardinal Pool from Rome, Land^ at
Do^er: Nov. 28, ( hl) comes into Parliament and exhor^s them to return to the
Church, and re-submit to the Pope's Authority: Next day, the whole Parliament
dra^ up a Supplication to the K and Q, to interceed with the Cardinal to
restore them to the Bosom of the Church, and Obedience of the Sea of Rome: Next
d, Present it, (hl. st) upon which, the Parliament being on their Knees ( hl)
(...) by a Power from the Pope, Absolves them; and they all go to Chapel and
Sin^ with great Joy for this Reconciliation. ( hl st) 1555 Feb. 4, John Rogers
Burnt in Smithfield. (hl. st) Feb. 8, Lawrence Saunders at Coventry: Feb. 9, Bp
Hooper at Gloc^ster; and Dr. Tailor at Hadley; (Fox) and July 1, John Bradford
in Smit^field, (hl. st) all, for the Reformed Religion. ( ^ox) Bishop Hooper
and Mr. (...), we^e the Heads of the Nonco^formists in England (^^)
Sept. 25, The Diet of Ausburg Decree, That both, Those of the Augustine
Confession and the Roman Catholics, shall enjoy their Religion freely. (sl)
Oct. 16, Bp Ridley and Bp Latimer, Burnt at Oxford, for the Reformation. ( hl
st) Oct. 25, The Emperor resigns the Kingdom of Spa^^ to his Son Philip II* (
c) Cardinal Pool appoin^^ Dr. Story and others, to visit every Church in London
and Middlesex, and repair the Rood-Losts and Images ( st) Dec. 18, John Philpo^
Burnt in Smithfield, for the Reformed Religion. ( Fox) AE^ 44 ^ hl) ^556
Sa^urday, March 21, Archbishop Cranmer Bu^nt at Oxford, for the same, ( ^l st)
and the next day, Cardinal Pool is Consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury. (st)
Charles, Marquess of Baden, Embraces the Augustan Confession, and begins to
Reform his Churches. ( s^) July 31, Ignatius Loyola, Founder of the Jesuits,
Die^ ( p. (...)
Dupin.
) at Rome, (...) 65; having spread his Order through the World, and set up 100
Colleges in diverse parts of Christendom* (...)
Nov 21. Io^n Fecknam installed Abbot of Westminster, and 14 Monks receive the
Habits with him. ( st) De^ 3, The Pro^estant Nobility in Scotland, begin to
sign an Associa^ion to Promote the Reformed Religion. Ca^derwood.
1558 Feb. 24, Charles V, Resigns the Emperial Dignity: (...)
March 18, His Brother Ferdinand chosen Emperor: and Sept. 21, Charles V, Dies.
( c. (...)
) April, (bc) 20 (Fox) Walter Mill condemned at St An^drews in Scotland for
the Reformed Religion, and B^rn^ ( bc. Fox) 2 days after, Aged 82 Years. Petri^.
He is the Last Mart^r (...) Protestant Religion in Scotland, (^ox) and his
Death the Death of Popery there: Petri^.
For upon this the Protestants through the Km ^^ite in their Defense against
their Enemies. ( bc. Petri^.
)
Apr. 24, The Queen of Scots Married in Paris to Francis the Dauphin of France.
(hls) Nov. 1^, Queen Mary of England, D in the Morning, AEt 43: Cardinal Pool
in the Evening ( hl. st) And her Y unger Sister Q ELIZABETH, Reigns 44 Y, 4 m,
7 days. Dec. 3, Sets forth a Proclama ion in London, that the Gospels and
Epistles for the day, shall begin to be Read in Mass-time, in English, in the
Churches, on Lordsday, Ian. 1, which is accordingly observed in most Parish
Churches in the City. ( st hl) 1559 Ian. 25, The Parliament of England meets,
restores to the Crown, the Supreme Government of the State Ecclesiastic^l, and
orders the Book of Common Prayer to be used in English, and as in the time of K
Edward VI ( st hl) March 2, A Council of the Prelates and Clergy of Scotland
meet at Edinburg; when the Temporalty Demand to h^ve Divine Service in the
Sco^ish Tongue, with other Reformations; which the Bishops Refuse, and occasion
great Troubles in the Kingdom. ( hl) May 2, John Knox, arrives at Leith, from
Geneva, and goes to a Convention of Pro^estants at Perth: (cl) May 10* They
pull down the Images and Altars there, and in the neighboring places: (hls)
^une 4, E^rl of Argile and Lord James Stuart, the Q's Natural Brother, do the
like at St Andrews: June 26, at Sterling, and then at Edinburg, (^t) and other
Lords at Glas^ow: upon which a Civil War arises and Q Elizabeth helps the
Protestants. ( ^ls) Lordsday, May 1^, Divine Service begins in English i^ the
Churches of England, according to the Common Prayer* Book in K Edward's Time
(hl st) June 28, The Pro^estant Ministers of France hold their 1st Synod at St
German's Boh^en's Co^^inu^^ion of Sleidan.
when they agree on their Confession of Faith, drawn up by Calvin. Quick^
Synodicon.
July 10, Henry II, K of France D: and his Son Francis II, who had married the
Q of Scots succeeds. ( hls. p) In July, There are 13 or 14 Bishops, with many
other Clergy deprived in England, for refusing the Oath to the Q^een's
Supremacy. ( hl. st) Fuller says, There was but 1 of all the Bishop^, ^iz. of
(...) who Con^o^m'd to the Queen'^ Command^.
Saturday, Aug* 12 By Order of Dr Grindal, newl^ Elect Bp of London, the high
Altar of Paul's Church, with the Rood and Images of Mary and John taken down, (
hl) and Aug 23, 24, 25, Roods and other Images in Churches, wi^h Copes,
Vestments, Altar Clothes, Books, Rood Los^s, etc. Burnt in London. (hl. st)
Dec. 17, Dr. Parker Consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, by 3 deprived
Bishops; and then they Consecrate the rest ( fl) 1560 Apr. 19, Melancthon D (
c) at Wirtemberg (fl) AEt 64. F^ller mis^^k^s in say^ng AEtatis ^3.
The English begin the Trade of Fishing a^ Newfoundland. King I^mes's Pa^ent of
Newfoundland in Purchase.
July 7, ( st) or 8, (bc. cl) Peace Concluded in Scotland: and Aug. 13, a
Parliament meets at Edinburg: Aug. 17, agrees on a Protestant Confession of
Faith; (cl. pt) and Aug. 24, ( ^l) make 2 Acts for Abo^ishing the Mass, and the
Pope's Authority in the Kingdom. ( cl. pt) (...) mistakes in 1 st placing These
Acts in the Parliament of Dec. ^5, 15^7; when they were only Renewed and
further R^tified. (See cl and pt.)
Dec. 5, Francis II, K of France Dies, ( bc. c) AEt 17; and his Brother Charles
IX, Succeeds, ( c) AEt 10 ( d) Dec. 20, The first National Assembly of the
Reformed Church of Scotland meets at Edinburg. (cl pt) 1561 Ian. 17, The first
Book of Discipline allowed by the Council of Scotland, (pt) Subscribed by a
great part of the Nobility. (cl) May 21, The Parliament of Scotland meets, and
makes an Act for Demolishing all the Monasteries. (bc) Aug. 20, ( ^ls. cl) or
21, ( bc) The Queen of Scots arrives at Leith from France. (hls cl. bc) 1562
Ian. 17, An Assembly of Delegates from all the Parliaments of France, meet at
St German's; wherein is Passed the famous Edict, allowing Liberty of Conscience
to Protest^^^s, and of Worship without the Cities, and of Synods in Presence of
a Magistrate. (bo) Chatillon, Admiral of France, sends John Ribalt to Florida:
arrives at Cape Francis in 30 Degrees. North Lat: May 1, enters a River, which he
therefore calls the River May: Discovers S others; one of which he calls Port
Royal, sails up the same many Leagues, Builds a Fort, calls it CHARLES, and
leaves the^^ a Colony; which soon Mutinies, kills their C^p^. Albert for his
Severity, and brakes up. ( ps) There are this Year accounted 2150 Assemblies of
Pro^estants in France. (ho) 156^ ^an. 12, The Convocation of the English Clergy
meets: ^an. 31, they finish the 39 Articles. Of the Lower House, 43 Present are
for Throwing out the Ceremoni^s; but 35 for keeping them: However, These, with
the help of Proxies, carry it by 1 Vo^e above the other. ^^r^pe's Annal^.
The Bishops now beginning to urge the Clergy to Sub^scribe to the Liturgy and
Ceremonies, as well a^ the Ar^icles; Cove^dale, Fox, Humfr^y, Sampson,
Whittingham, and others, Refuse to Subscr^be* And this Begins the AE^a of
NONCONFORMITY in England (fl ^^r^pe's Annal^.
Coverd^le had been Bishop in the R of Edward VI, and (...) to Consecrate
Ar^hbishop (...) Fox was the (...) Dr. Humfrey was (...) Profess^r of Divinity,
and (...) College, O^ford: Dr. (...) wa^ D^an of Christ' Church, Oxford: and
Mr. Whittingham D^an of Dur^am
Dec, 4, The Council of Tre^t dissolves ^ c 1564 Chatillon sends Rene Laudoni^r
to Florida: In Apr. se^s sail wi^h 3 Ships: June 22, Arrives 10 Leagues above
Cape Francis, and then in the River May; B^ild a Fo^^ thereon; and in Honor of
his King, Charles IX, ca^^s i^ CAROLINA ( ps) Man 27, Calvin D at Geneva: Aged
54 Y, 10 m, 17 d (bz) 1565 July, Henry Stuart, Lord Dar^ly, made by the Q of
Scots* Duke of Albany: (^^s) July 29* ^^e marries him; and ^he next day, they
are Proclaimed K and Q. (^c) (...) says, She Proclaimed him King on Satur^^y,
July 28, at Eve^; and the next Morning, Marri^s him: But this (...) unlik^l^.
Aug. ^, Capt. Ribalt arrives from France at Florida, again, with 7 Sail: But
Sept. 4, Pedro Melendes, with 6 great Spanish Ships, comes into the River,
Massacres Ribalt and all his Company, Possesses the Country, Builds 3 Forts,
and puts 1200 Soldiers in 'em: Laudonier escaping to France. (ps) 1566 Capt.
Savalet, of Gascony in France, begins to Fish at Lacady; and goes every Y,
making 42 Vo^ages, to 1607 ( ps) June 19, James B to the Q of Scotland. (hc.
hls. st) 1567 ^eb 10, His Father Killed ( hls. st) by Earl Bothwell; whom the
Queen soon after marries. ( ^c hls) July 24, The Queen of Scots Resigns the
Crown to her S^n, and makes (...) Murray Regent, ( ^ls) and ^uly ^9* ^er said
Son, JAMES VI, is Crowned. ( hc st. cl) (...) in (...) the Coro^ation on July
1^.
Capt. D^min^que de Gour^es, wi^h 3 Ships, sails ^ro^ Fran^e to Florida: Apr.
1568. arrives in the River May, ^^ays most of the Spaniards, takes their For^s,
Razes (...): and in June, arrives at Rochel. (ps) And thus the French Attempts
on F^orida End. N. B. (...) West si^e (...), in the Country since cal^'d (...):
But the Fren^^ Attemp^, ^n the (...) side, in the Coun^^y since called Ca^olina.
1568 May 16 ( st) or 17 (...)
The Queen of Scots comes into England; and i^ soon secured. ( st (...)
) 15^^ Cartwright, Margarets Professor of Divinity at Cambridge, begins ^o
oppose the Hierarchy, and is deprived. ( str^ (...) G^vernment of the Church by
Archbish^^^, (...), Arch D^^cons, etc.
1571 The Parliament of England begin; and make an Act, to Deprive all
Cl^rgyman who subscribe not to the 39 Articles, ^ k^ upon which many Clergymen
are D^priv'd. (fl. str.) 15^2 Aug. 24, and few days after, Seventy thousand
^rotestants Massacred in Paris, and other parts of France. (c) Nov. 20 (...)
The 1st Presbyterian Church in England set up at Wandsworth near London; when
they choose XI Elders. (fl^ 1574 May 30, Charles IX, of France Dies: and his
Brothe^ Henry III, Reigns ( st. p) 1575 May 17, Archbishop Parker Dies, ( st
hl) and Feb. 15, Edmond Grindal E^ected Archbishop of Canterbury. (st) 1576
June 15, Capt. Pro^is^e^ sails from Blackwall, (sl) June 18, from Harwich (...)
to find a N W Pass^ge to the East Indies: July 20, Discovers a C^pe he (...) Q
Elizabeth's Fore^and; and then the Straits which ^a^e his name, (st) Aug. 9,
Enters a B^y in L^. 63, (...)
sails 60 Leagues, Lands, takes a Savage ( s^) But the s^e ob^iges him to
return; and arrives in England, Sept. 24 (...)
(...) to (...) in placing his Arrival i^ E^^land, in Aug.
1577 Dec. 13, C^pt. Francis Drake sai^s fr m ^limouth round the World, and
Returns to Plymouth, Nov. 3, 1580. ( st. (...)
ps) ^579 Ian 23, The 7 Dutch Provinces Unite at Utrecht. Petit.
Sir Humphry Gilbert obtains a Pa^ent of Q Elizabeth* for Places not posses^'d
by any ChristianPrince, provided he takes Possession within 6 Years. H^rri^.
1581 Ian. 16, The Parliament of England meet, and Enact a Fine of 20 Pounds
aMonth, on every one that comes not to Common Prayer, (k) and in July, sundry
are Fined ( st) 1582 Oct. 5, The New ^tyle begins, which calls it the 15th ( ri
(...)
) Robert Brown Publishes a Book upon Reformation (^) wherein he written against
the Common Prayer, (st) and condemns the Church of England, as no Church. ( cm^
1583 June ^, Elias Thacker; and June 6, Io^n C^ping (...) to Death at Bury in
Suffolk, for spreading Brown's Books against the Common Prayer. ( st) June 11,
Sir Humphry Gilbert sails from Plymouth for Newfoundland: Aug. 1, arrives at
the Bay of Concepti^n* Aug. ^, a^ the Harbor of St John's: He finds here 20
(...) and (...) Fi^hing Vess^^s, and (...) of other Nations. H^rris.

Aug 5, taken Possession: Aug. 20, Sails for the Southern Parts: Aug. 29, loses
a Ship on the Shoals of Sablon: Aug. 31, (...) homeward: At midnight after
Sept. 6, he sinks in a great Storm; and Sept. 22, the other Ship arrives at
Falmouth H^rris.
July 6, Archbishop Grindal Die^: and Sept. 23, John Whitgift made Archbishop
of Canterbury, (st) who zealously presses Subscription to the Articles and
Common Prayer* which occasions incredibleDistractions in the Church. (cm) 1584
Mar 25, Sir Walter Raleigh obtains a Pa^ent of Q Eliz* for foreignParts not
possessed by any Christian Prince Purchase.
Apr. 27, He sends Philip Amidas and Arthur Barlow (...) 2 B^rks, Purchase.
Smith.
from the Thames: July 2, Descry the Coast of Florida: Sail 40 Leagues for a
Harbor; (...) one, 7 Leagues West of Roanoak: Smith.
July 1, take Possession for Queen Elizabeth; and from her call the Country
VIRGINIA: Purchase.
This Country i^ sin^^ cal^'d N^rth Caro^ina; and the land (...) E^stward
suc^^^ds in (...) N^m^ (...).
July ^* They come to Roanoak* and Mid September, arrive in En^land. Smith.
1585 Apr. 9, Sir Walter sends Sir Richard Greenvil (ps s) from Plymouth: June
20, falls with ^lorida: June 26, Anchor^ at Wococon, (ps) leaves the first
Colony of above 100 People under Mr. Ralph Lane, at Roanoak: (ps. s) July 25,
Sir Richard sails, discovering theCoast North Eastward, to the Ches^pians, (ps)
and Sept. 18, arrives at Plymouth. (s) Capt John Davis sails from England, to
find a N W Passage to the East Indies: sails up 66 Degrees. North, in the Straits
that bare his Name; the next Year to 80 D^gr. and afterward to 83 Degrees. (cm)
These Straits ^unning up near one No^th and ^o near the Pole, and having
different c^^our'd P^opl^ on the several sides; seem to be the Dividing Sea
between Greenland and America.
1586 Ian 1, Sir Francis Drake arrives at Hispaniola, ( Cate^'s Account of this
Voyage, Printed in 1589.
cm) takes St Domingo: Sails to the Continent and takes Cartagena: Sails to
Florida; ( Cate^'s Account of this Voyage, Printed in 1589.
st cm) May 29, takes St John's Fort at St Augustine; Both cm and p^ mistake St
Anthony's for St John's; and also in saying, that he took St Helena. (S^e
Cates's Account, who was in the Voyage.)
June 9, arrives within 6 Leagues of the English at Roanoak; and June 18,
sails, with this 1st Colony for England. Cate^'s Account of this Voyage,
Printed in 1589.
A Fortnight after, arrives Sir Richard Greenvil; and not finding the first,
leaves there a second Colony of 15 Men, ( ps) or 50, ( s) and Returns to
England. (ps. s) 1587 Feb. 8, The Q of Scots Beheaded in England. (st. cm) Sir
Walter sends another Company to Virginia under Mr. John White, Governor, with
a Charter and 12 Assistants: July 22, arrives at Hatarask, finds the 2nd Colony
at Roanoak Destroyed, ( ps) and lands 115 for a 3d Plantation. (s) Aug. 13,
Manteo, the 1st Savage Baptized* Aug. 18, the 1st English Child Born of Mrs.
Dare, and named Virginia, (s) and Aug 27, The Governor sails Home for Supplies.
( ps) 1588 July, The Spanish Armada Destroyed in the Chane^ of England (st cm)
1589 July 22, K Henry III, of France, stabbed ( c) by a Iacobin Friar, (d) D ^he
nex^ d, ( c) and Henry IV, succeeds. ( c. p) ^590 March 20, G^vernour Whit^
sails from Plymouth; (s) Aug 15, arrives at Hatarask, but finding not a Man of
the ^hird Colony, returns. ( ps. s) Thu^ the 3 ^ Colony of Old Virginia is
broken up: and though Sir Walter sends (...) to seek them, ( ^s) yet never one of
them (...) to this day, 1622. (^)
1593 Apr. 6, Henry Barrow, Gen^ and John Greenwood, Clerk, put to Death at
T^burn, for Publishing certain Books Howes.
against the Hierarchy. (n) May 29, ( n) Mr. John Penry put to Death at St.
Thomas Watering's Howes.
for a Manuscript found in his Study against the Hierarchy and Pe^secution. (n)
1598 The French K Grants the Marques^ De la Roche a Commission to conquer
Canada and other Countries no^ posses^'d by any Christian Prince; Perier.
and in April, gives the famous Edict of Nants, to the Protestants (^) ^ept. 3,
Philip II, K of Spain Dies, ( p. Howes.
) AEt 72, Howes.
and his Son Phi^ip III, Succeeds. ( p. Howes.
^ 1602 March 26, Ca^^ Bartholomew Gosnold sails from Falmouth, for the
NorthPart of Virginia, with 32 Persons; 12 of whom are to begin a Plantation:
May 10, Discovers Land in 43 Degrees: sails along the shore to May 15; when he see^
a Head-Lana in 42 Degr; Anchors; and catching great store of Cod-Fish, names it
CAPE COD, and goes a shore: May 16, sails round the Cape; May 21, Discovers an
Island in 41 and 15; May 22, Lands, and calls i^ Martha's Vineyard* May 24,
comes to another next it, which he names Dover Cliff, and then to another,
which he calls Elizabeth Island* May 31, Lands on the Main, and returns to
Eliz. Island* June 1, Determines on a Settlement here, and begins a Fort: June
13, the Men who were to stay, recant and resolve for England; June 17, They all
set Sail; and Friday* July 23, Arrive at Exmouth (ps) 1603 March 24, Q
Elizabeth Dies, AEt 70. (cm. Howes.
) And JAMES VI of Scotland, Proclaimed K of England, Howes.
and Begins the BRITISH MONARCHY.

The End of the Introduction.
THE New England CHRONOLOGY

PART I.

FROM The Beginning of the BRITISH MONARCHY, in the Accession of King JAMES,
the First Monarch of GReAT BRITAIN. March 24, 1602, 3.

TO The Beginning of the NEW ENGLISH COLONIES, in the Settlement of the First
at PLYMOUTH, Dec. 31. 1620.

Being a Brief Account of Matters relating to those new discovered Countries
while settled only by the Aboriginal Natives: Reciting the several VOIAGES from
England Thither; with the most material AFFAIRS, especially of Great Britain,
that led the Way to their Settlement by English Inhabitants.

THE New England Chronology.
PART I.
HAVING passed through the Seven Great Periods of Time, from the CREATION, to the
Beginning of the BRITISH EMPIRE, with the Discovery of that INDIAN SHORE which
is soon to be the Theater of our Chronology; a New Face of Things appears both
to the Wes^ern Parts of EUROPE and the Eastern of AMERICA. For though 110 Years
are elapsed, since the N^w World became known to the Old; yet neither the
French, Dutch, nor English, nor any but Spaniards, have made any effectual
Settlement in these Newfound Regions And as the Gold and Silver Mines had
drawn the Spaniards to the Southern and Wester^ Quarters; I cannot find, at
this Point of Time, so much as one European Family in all the vast Extent of
Coast from Florida to Gr^enland.

The (...) take (...),

That the next Year after COLUMBUS's Discovery, the POPE was pleased to give
the Crown of SPAIN the Sole Title to all the Lands lying above 100 Leagues West
from the Meridian of the Azores: the Bull was Signed at Rome, May 4. 1493: See
the Bull in Purchase and Harris.
and such was then the Ignorance that reigned in Europe, as scarce any though it
but he had a Right to Give them. Within 30 Years indeed, the Reformation coming
on, began to open the Eyes of many; yet both England Scotland, Ireland, France,
and the Netherlands, were so fully engaged for near 4 score Years, with their
own internal Broils about Religion, as well as mutual Wars on this and other
Accounts, that they had neither Power nor Leisure to attend to Foreign
Settlements.

But in 1598, FRANCE was quieted with the Edict of Nants in April; and by a
Peace in May, with Philip King of Spain and Portugal. Just before Queen
Elizabeth Died the Disturbances in IRELAND were quelled; and she expires in
Peace with all the Princes and States in Europe, except Philip King of Spain,
and Archduke Albert Sovereign of the Spanish Netherlands. And King James, as
King of SCOTLAND, being then in Amity with all the World; upon his Accession to
the English Throne, the 2 British Crown become united on Him; and, as King of
ENGLAND, He soon leaves the Dutch to defend themselves, and conclude a Peace
with King Philip and Archduke Albert. So the^ all the Western Powers of Europe
are in Tranquillity; except the War continued between the Dutch on one side, and
the King of Spain with the Archduke on the other.

The French and English being thus at Liberty, begin to look more seriously now
than ever, to the Newfound World First they send to Fish and Trade, and then
to Settle: the FRENCH to Canada and Acadia; the ENGLISH to South and North
Virginia, Newfoundland and Bermudas. For the Engli^^ at this Time extend
VIRGINIA, from Florida to the Bay ^f Fundy, divide it into South and North: and
the NORTH: (...) we are now to attend: though it seems not to take the Name of
NEW ENGLAND till 1614.

Diverse Attempts are made to Settle this rough and Northern Country; First by
the FRENCH, who would fai^ account it Part of Canada; and then by the ENGLISH
and B^th from mere secular Views. But such a Train of Crosses accompany these
Designs of both the Nations, that they seem to give it over as not worth the
Planting: till a Pi^us People of England, not There allowed to Worship their
MAKER according to His Institutions ONLY, without the Mixture of Humane
Ceremonies, are spirited to attempt the Settlement; that Here they might enjoy
a Worship purely Scriptural and leave the same to their Posterity. And they
succeeding, open the way for the following Colonies.

In this FIRST PART, I shall therefore Recount, as well the most material
Events in Great Britain, wherewith they were chiefly affected before their
leaving it; as the several Voyages and Attempts to Settle these long neglected
Shoars, till their Arrival in 1620: Keeping a particular Eye on those
remarkable Steps of Providence that led to this happy Enterprise; and not
omitting the Primary Settlements of the Neighboring Countries.

In the English History, besides a number of an^ient Pamphlets Printed within
this Period, and which I found in an old broken up Library in England; I
chiefly follow Howes i e. both Howes's Continuation of Stow in Folio, Printed,
1631; as also Howes's Abridgment, in Octavo, Printed 1618, wherein are several
Remarkables not mentioned in the Folio.
and Tuller. In the Voyages and Attempts of Settlement; I chiefly make use of
Purchase, Smith and Gorges, who lived in the Times they wrote of, and the Two
last personally interested in those Affairs. Harris omitting many valuable
Accounts of these Parts of the World preserved in Purchase, and Purchase being
more of an Original, I prefer the latter. In the Passages relating to the
PLIMOUTH-PLANTERS; I chiefly use their Governor Bradford's Manuscript History
of that Church and Colony, in Folio, who was with them from their Beginning to
the End of his Narrative; which is now before me, and was never Published. And
in reciting from them, for the greater Satisfaction, I keep so closely to the
Words of my Authors, as I have in the last great Section of the Introduction,
that the Reader may conceive them as speaking in their several Articles.

As for the RISE of these Plimouth-Planters; Governor Bradford informs us in
the following Terms, That several Religious People near the joining B^rders of
Notinghamshire, Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, finding their Pious MINISTERS urged
with SUBSCRIPTION, i. e. Subscription to the Books of Common Prayer,
Ceremonies, and all the Articles (Fuller)
or Silenced, and the People greatly vexed with the Commissary Courts,
Apparitors, and Pursevants, which they bare sundry Years with much Patience;
till they were occasioned by the Continuance and Increase of these Troubles,
and other Means, to see further into these Things by the Light of the Word o^
GOD* How that not only the Ceremonies were unlawful; but also the Lordly and
Tyranous Power of the Prelates, who would, contrary to the Freedom of the
Gospel, load the Consciences of (...) and by their compulsive Power make a
profane Mixture of Things and Persons in Divine Worship: that their Off^ces,
Courts and Canons were unlawful; being such as have no Warrant in the Word of
GOD, but the same that were used in Popery, and still retained Upon which, This
People shake off this Yoke of Antichristian Bondage They are Gov. Bradf^rd 's
Words, as are all the rest in this Citation, and He seems to call this,
Antichristian B^ndage; as He judged the Inventions of Men in Worship imposed on
the Conscience, to be a Bondage bro't into the Church by the Papal Policy and
Power, against the S^p^rior Law of CHRIST, the Genius of his plain Religion,
and Christian Liberty.
; and as the LORD's Free People, join themselves by Covenant into a
Church State, to walk in all his Ways, made known, or to be made known to them,
according to their best Endeavors, what^ver it cost them.

Governor Bradford's History takes no notice of the Yea^ of this Federal
^ncorporation: But Mr Secretary Mort^^, in his Memorial, places it in 16^2. And
I suppose he had the account, either from some other Writings of Governor
^rad^ord, o^ the (...) W^i^slow, or from Oral Con^erence with them or o^^er of
the 1st Planters; with some of whom he was co^temporary, and from whence, he
^ells us, he received his In^elligence.

And these are the Christian People who were the Founders of Plymouth Church
and Colony: who seem to be some of the 1st in England, that ^ere brave enough
to improve the Liberty wherewith the DIVINE AUTHOR of our Religion has made us
Free, and observe his Institu^ions as their ONLY RULE in Church Order,
Discipline and Worship: for which they dearly suffered and left their Native
Country, and who laid the 1st Foundation of the New England Settlements. But we
shall hear no more of them till 1606, when under all their Sufferings they grow
into Two Congregations. And that the Reader may have some Idea of the PURITANS
so often mentioned in the Histories of those Times, and from whom this People
derive, I shall only relate the Definition which Dr. Fulk, a famous Church of
England Writer, has given us of them; They are called PURITANS, says he, who
would have the Church thoroughly Reformed. i. e. Purged from all those
Inventions, which have been bro't into it since the Age of the Apostles, and
reduced entirely to the Scripture-Purity.

But I Begin with the Voyages of Others. And though the First I mention seems to
commence a few Days before Queen Elizabeth Died; yet the Reader will quickly
see the Ship leaves not the Shore of Britain, till above a Fortnight after.

N. B. (1) I still keep to the JULIAN YEAR; and where Foreign Authors use the
New Style, I reduce it to the Old. (2) E stands for East, W for West, N for
North, S for South, N E for North-East, etc. (3) b and e added to the Months,
signify, their Beginning or Ending* (4) That the Reader may more destinctly see
the Chronological Articles of the PLYMOUTH PLANTERS, their Lines begin with
Commaes.
Mar. 20 THE Bristol Men, by Leave of Sir Walter Raleigh, send Capt. Martin
Pring, with a small Ship of 5^ Tuns, 30 Men and Boys, and Wil^liam Brown with a
Bark of 26 Tuns, 13 Me^ and a Boy; who then sail from King-Road I suppose
King-Road is near Brist^l in E^gland.
for the ^urther Discovery of NORTH VIR^GINIA. April 10, They sail from Milfor^
Haven. In June, They fall with the MainCoas^ and a Multitude of Islands in 43
Degrees. and 3^ Min. N. land upon them, coast along the Shore, bare into Cape Cod
Bay, sail round the Cape, anchor on the South Side in 41 Degrees. and 25* Min.
where they land in another Bay and excellent Harbor, make a Barrica do, stay^
Weeks. July, e. the Bark goes homeward* laden with Sassafras, and arrives safe.
Aug. 8 or 9, the Ship sets sail, and arriv^s at King-Road again Oct. 2. Purc^as.


Mar. 31. K. JAMES Proclaimed at E^inburgh, King of Scotland, England, France,
and Ir^land Cald^rwood.


Apr. 3. Lord's Day, He declares in the Great Church at Edinburgh; that as GOD
has promoted Him to a greater Power, He must endeavor to establish Religion
and take away Corruption in both the Countries; and that he had so settled both
the Church and Kingdom in that State which h^ intended not to alter any ways
Cald^rwood.
Petric.


Apr. 5. K. JAMES sets out from Edinburgh Cald^rwood.
Howes.
Saturday May, 7 Enters London (...)
Howes.
In hi^ way ^o London Vice Chanc^ll^r etc, of Oxford, in their Answer Printed
(...), 16^3. who say, the Petition was ex^ibi^^d in (...).
^4^ Ministers of the Church of England, out of 2^ Counties of the 40 in
Eng^land and the 12 in Wales, Present him a Petition, desiring R^formati^n of
certain C^remonies and Abuses of the Church Abr^d^ment of the Book which the
Ministers of (...) P^esented to the King on Dec 1. 16^4. and Print^d in ^uarto*
16^5, wherein there is a List o^ the N^mber of the said Petitioners in each of
the s^^d 25 Counties: v^^ 30 in London, 57 in Essex, 71 in (...) etc.
called the millenary Petition. (...).


May 10. Bartholomew Gilbert, in a Bark of 50 Tuns* sails from Plim^uth, to
s^ek for the 3d Colony l^^t in South Virginia June, 16, arrives at St. Lu ia:
17, at Dominica: 19, at M^vis: Thence sails for South Virginia: But Friday
July, 29 Landing near CHESEPICC BAY, the Capt. an^ 4 more are slain by the
Indians: the Rest se^ sail and arrive at Ratcliff near London in the En^ of S
ptember. (ps)

June 4 A Grace passes in the University of Cambridge: that whoever shall
Publicly oppos^ either in Word or Writing, or any other Way in the said
University, either the Doctrine o^ Discipline of the Church of England, or an^
Part thereof; shall, ipso Facto, be excluded from having any D^gre^, and
Dep^iv'd of every on they have taken. Vice Chan^^ll^r etc, of Oxford, in their
Answ^^ Printed T^e^^ in ^uarto, 16^3. who say, the Petition was ex^ibi^^d in
(...)*


June 1 -- 8. Arrive Ambassadors from Holland* France, Spain, Archduke Albert
etc. ( hs. Sir Ri^^ard Baker.
)

July. Sir Walter Raleigh and others apprehended and committed to the Tower. (
hs Sir Ri^^ard Baker.
)

July 25 Monday K. James, with his Queen, Crowned at Westminster. (sp. hs)

Sept. 21. Sir Walter Raleigh and others Indicted o^ High Treason, (hs)

Nov. 10. Thursday, Sir Walter Raleigh, and 5 others, Removed from the Towe^
^^wards Winchester, Sir Ri^^ard Baker inaccurately places this on Nov. 4^ when
^^ly the Lord Gray and ^^b^am were re^oved.
Nov 12, C^mmitted to Win^hester Castle (hs) Nov 17, arraigned and decl^^'d
Guil^y, (sp. hs) and December. 15, Returned to the Tower o^ London (hs)

Dec. 22 From D^c. 23, last Year, to this day, Died ^f the Plague in London
30,578: and of all Diseases 38*244: ( hs Sir Ri^^ard Baker.
) But the Year following, London is cle^^ of the Infect^on, and all the Shires
in Englan^ g^iev^usly visi^ed (hs)

Dec. 27* The fam^us Mr. Cartwright, Dies in England, a^ the Age of 60 (fl) and
Fuller says, He was most Pious* an excelle^^ S^holar* pure Latinist, accurate
Grecian, exact Hebrician. (fl)

1604.
Jan. 14. SAturday, the CONFERENCE in the Pri^vy Ch^mber at HAMPTON COURT,
Begins, between K. James and the Bishops Party only: wherein He tells them*
that However He had lived among Puritans, yet since He was Ten Years old, He
ever disliked their Opini^ons; and as CHRIST said, Though He Lived among them, H^
was not of them. Dr. Barlow, Dean of C^^st^r, his sum of the Conference,
Printed in Quarto, ^^ndon, 16^4.
and yet he had twi^e Sworn and subscribed their Conf^ssi^n o^ Faith, vi^ in
15^1 and 1590; and in their General Assembly of Aug. 1590, solemnly Praised GOD
that He was Born to be King of such a Church, the Purest in the World, and that
the Service of the Church of Engla^^ was an ill said M^ss in Engl^s^* (cl. pt.)


Jan. 16 Monday, the 2 d Conference between the King, and both the Bishops and
Puritan Parties together; wherein the Agents for the mil^lenary Plantiffs are
Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Sparks* Mr. K^ows^ubs and Mr. Chaderton: And though They are
willing to conform and subscribe according to Law, I should have obs^rv'd,
under 15^0, that the Act of Parliament requ^red subs^^iption T^ all the
Articles of Relig^^n, which ONLY concern the Confession of the true C^^istian
^aith, and the Doctrine of the Sacram^nts (Keeble) an^ under 1583, that
Ar^h-Bishop Whitgi^^ extend^^g (...) to all the Arti^les wit^^ut Excepti^on,
occasio^^d all the Troubles the Puritans endured
the King declares, I will have One Doctrine, and One Discipline, One Religion
in Substance and in Ceremony: Tells the Lords and Bishops again, He had lived
among such sort of Men as the Puritans, ever since he was 10 Years old; but
might say of Himself as CHRIST, Though I lived among them, I was never of them;
nor did any thing make me more to de^test their Courses, than that they
dissallow'd of all things which had been used i^ Popery ^ By this it appears,
He mistook or misrepresented the Puritans: F^r t^eir main (...) was only
against (...); and their being used in Popery, was a^ additio^^l R^ason to put
them away.
swares by his Soul, He believ'^ E^cl^stasticus was a Bishop: says, that a
Scottish Presbytery as well agrees with Monarchy, as GOD and the Devil: at his
Going away, says to some, If this b^ all they have to say, I shall make them
Conform* or I will harry them out of the Land, or do worse: and One of the
Lords said, He was fully persuaded His Majesty spoke by the Instinct of the
SPIRIT OF GOD. (db)

Jan. 18. Wednesday, the 3 d and last Day's Conference (1st) between the King
and Bishops Party only: wherein the King Defends the High Commission, with
Subscription to all the Articles and Common Prayer Book, as also the Oath ex
Officio: and though One of the Lord's Most of the Lords of his Majesty's Council
were (...)
pleaded, that the Proceedings of the High C^mmission Courts were like the
Spanish Inquisition, wherein Men are urged to subscribe more than the Law
required, and that by the O^th Ex Offi^io, they were enforced to accuse
Themselves, that they were examined upon ^^ or 24 Articles upon the sudden,
without Deliberation, and for the most part against themselves; yet the King
approves and vind^cates them all, an^ says; I^ any, after things are well
ordered will not ^e Quiet and show his Obedien^e, the Church were b^tter
without Him* an^ (...) were worthy to be HANGED: the Lords and the Rest stood
amazed at his Maj^sty's wise (...) Bi^hop Whitgist said, Un^oubtedly His
Majesty spak^ by the special Assistance o^ GO^'S SPIRIT: Dr. Bancro^t Bp. of
London, up^on his Knee protested, His Heart melted wit^ Joy, and made haste to
acknowledge to Almigh^ty GOD the singular mercy received at his H^nds in gi^ing
such a King, as since CHRIST his Time, the like He though it has not been; where
to the Lords with one Voice did yield a very affection^te Acclamation. (2ly)
Then Dr R^yn^l^s and his Ass^ciates were called in: and though they entreated
that the Cross in Baptism and Sur^lic^ might not be urged upon some honest,
Godly and p^inful Ministers; yet his Majesty w^lled that the Bishop should set
a Time, and if they would not yield, whatsoever they were* to remove 'em:
Either let them Conform, and that shortly, or they shall hear of it. (db) I
r^cit^ th^se Passages to show the King's and Bishops D^sposition toward the
Purit^ns, and what little Fav^^r (...) ^ould now expect from the Other.


Jan. 31. K James issues a Writ for a Convocation of the P^ovince of Canterbury
to meet before Arch-Bish^p Whitgist as President at St. Paul's* London* on
March, 20 Book (...) Canons Printed in Q^arto, London, 1616.


Feb. 29. Wednesday, Arch Bishop Whitgist Dies, AEt 73 ( ^s (...) Angli^^
) and Dr. Borlow says, that not many Days before He was stricken, He most
earnest^ly desired that He might not live to see the Parliament which is to
meet on March 19.

Mar 5. K. James issues a Proclamation; that the same Religion with Common
Prayer, and Episcopal ^urisdiction, shall fully and only b^ Publicly
exercised, in all Respects, as in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth* without Hope o^
Toleration of any other. (hs) Both Howes Abridgment and Sir Richard B^ke^
wrongly Place This in the following Year.


Mar. 9. The Archbishop being Dead, K. Ia^es issues a 2d Writ, for the
Convocation to appear before Dr. Bancroft, Bishop of London, as Pre^sident. (
cn)

Mar. 19. K. James's 1st Parliament meets, at Westminister (hs. Keeble.
) when He declares the Puri^tans to be a sect unable to be suffered in any well
Governed Common Wealth; acknow^ledges the Roman Church to be ou^ Mother Church,
although defiled with some Infirmities and Corruptions; professes He would be
content to meet Her in the mid way; and that since hi^ coming, He has been so
far from Increasing the Burdens of the Papists that He had a^ much as either
Time, Occasion or Law could permit, lightened them etc. K. James's Speech,
Printed in Quarto, London 1604*


Mar. 20. Convocation meets at St Paul's London, before Bishop Ba^croft
President. ( cn)

Apr. 12. And June, 25, K. James issues his Letters Patents, to empower the
Convocation to agree on such Ecclesiastical Canons as they should think fit:
they accordingly draw up a Book of 14^ Canons, and desire the King's assent to
them which he Grants, confirming the said Canons, and commanding the same to be
observed both in the Provinc^ of Canterbury and York. (cn)

J^ly 6 K James ^s^ues a (...): where^^ He orders the Puritan Ministers, ^ither
to Con^form, Arch Bishop Bancroft, in his Letter to the Bishop^ of his
Province, Dated, Dec. 18. 1604
before the last of November A Tract entitled Certain Demands, etc, Printed in
Qu^rto 1605.
or Dispose of themselves and Famili^s some other way, as being Men unfit for
their O^st nacy and Contempt, to occupy such Places Arch Bishop Bancroft, in
his Letter to the Bishop^ of his Province, Dated, Dec. 18. 1604


Aug. 18. Articles of Peac^ and Commerce Concluded at London, with the King of
Spain and Archduke Albert Arti^les of Peace etc, Printed in Quar. London 1605
August 19, Lordsday, King James swares to the said Articles; and Af^ernoon,
the Peace Proclaimed (^s)

Sept. 20 Ostend surrendered by the Dutch to the Spaniards, having been
besieged from June, 25, 1601: and During the Siege, there Died in the City
72,900 Persons, and many more of the Spanish Besiegers without it Ca^visius.


Oct 24 K. James Proclaimed King of Great Britain. (hs)

Dec 10 Dr Bancroft Bishop of London, Transl^ted to the Arch Bishopric of
Canterbury (hs) who drives on Conformity very fiercely through all his Province (
fl)

Dec. 18. Arch Bishop Bancroft writes a Letter to the Bishops of his Province:
wherein He calls the Puritan Ministers Disobedient, Obstinate etc: Requires
that none be admitted to Ecclesiastical Functions without Subscriptio^ to the
Can^ons; and toDeprive those who ar^ in theChurch, unless they will both
Conform and also subscribe according to the Canons. Arch Bishop Bancroft, in
his Letter to the Bishop^ of his Province, Dated, Dec. 18. 1604


Mar. 31. Lord's Day, Capt. George Wey^^uth, with 29 Persons, ^ails from the
Downs (ps) being employed by the Lord Arundel of Wardor, for the Discovery of
a N. W. P^ssage to the East Indies. But falling sh^rt of his Course* Sir
Ferd^na^^o (...), Governo^ of the Island and (...) of P^im^uth in (...), in his
Narration, etc.
Tuesday, May. 14* descries Land in 41 Degrees and 30 Min N, in the midst of
dangerous Rocks and Shoals: upon which He puts off to Sea* the Wind blowing
H^rd at S S W and W S W many Days Friday May* 1^* descries Land again: the next
Day, finds it an Island, anchors on the North side, lands and calls it GEORGE's
Island* whence He sees the Main Land and many other Islands. Lord's Day, May,
19, weighs and sails to another Island, 3 Leagues nearer the Main* goes into an
excellent Harbor, which He calls Pentecost Harb^ur; and the next day, goes
ashore in the Shallop. Thursday, May, ^0* sails in a Shallop up a Great River,
and the next day Returned. This seems to (...) and Sir ^* Gorges doubtl^s^
m^st^ke in calling it (...) River
Tuesday, June, 11, goes up the River in his Ship, 26 miles; says it is Half a
mile wide, for 40 miles into the Country. Thursday, June, 13, sails in his
Shal^lop or Pinace, 20 miles into the western Branch of the River, and sets up
a Cross. Friday* June* 14, the Ship goes down the River: upon a Rock in the
m^dst of the Harbor, He finds the Lat. 43 Degrees 20 min. and the Variation 11
Degrees. 15 min W. Lord's Day, June, 16, ^ets ^ail: and Thursday, July, 18, arrives
at Dartmouth (ps) Sir F. Gorges, says, Capt. Weym^uth bro't Thence 5 Natives;
and happening to put into Plymouth, Sir Ferdinand then Governor There,
received 3 of them, viz. Manida, Sketwarroes and Tisquantum, and kept them full
3 Years.


Apr. 8. Mr. John Stow, being 80 Years Old, a laborious Writer of the English
Annals, for 47 Y. is Buried, and Howes continues them ( hs)

July 2. Tu^sday, the General Assembly of the Church of S^^tland meeting at
Aberdeen; the King 's Commissioner presents them a Letter from the Lords of the
Council requiring them to dissolve without appointing another Assembly: How
ever, according to Custom, they appoint another to meet on Sept, 24, and then
dissolve: For which the Council sends Mr. John Forbes the Moderator and 13
other Ministers to several Prisons. (cl pr)

Oct. 13. Lord's day, B^za Dies at Geneva Continuati^ Calvis^i.
Melch Ada^us.
Aged 86 Years, 3 Months, and 19 Days. Melch Ada^us.
Peta^i^s mistakes in saying Oct. 25; and Alsted, in placing his Death in 1600.


Nov. 1. The Names being taken of the Puritan Ministers Deprived, under
Admonition and denied Admittance, for not Subscribing, amount to above 270: and
yet of 8 Bishoprics no account is Given. Some had Preached in the Ch^r^h 10,
some 20, some 30 Years, some more: and till now, in some Churches, the
Ceremonies had been disu^'d for 10 Years, in others 20, in others 30, in others
more. A Quarto Tract, Entitled, Certain Reasons why the Prea^hers who Refuse
to Subscribe, should not be Removed (...) inhibited to Preach. Printed in those
Times.


Nov. 5. Tuesday, at 3 this morning, the GUNPOWDER TREASON Plot discovered to
have been Executed this Day by the Papists, by Blowing up the Parliament, who
were to meet this Day* with 36 Barrels of Gunpowder laid under the House, (
Discourse of the Treason, Quar. Printed by the King'^ Printer, at London, 1605.
Calvisius wrongly place^ the Gunpowder Treason in 1606.
sp. hs) and when the Blast was made, it was to be charged on the Puritans.
Benj. Hubbard's Sermo Secula^is, Printed, in Quar. at London, 1648.


Nov. 9. Saturday, K. James comes to Parliament, and makes a Speech; (hs)
wherein He Cautions them against Judging rashly of the Roman Ca^tholicks in
General; says that many among them may remain Good and faithful Subjects; but
detesting and thinking the Cruelty of Pu^ritans worthy of Fire, that will admit
no Salvation to any Papist. K. James's Speech* Printed in Qu^r. at London, 16^^


1606.
Jan. 10. THough 'twas commonly though it the Deliverance from the Popish Powder
Plot would have moved the King to desist from troubling Ministers in England
for Noncon^forming to the Ceremonies, and Ministers in Scotland for standing to
their confirmed Liber^ty; yet this Day, by the King's Command, the Moderator
and 5 other of the imprisoned Mi^nisters in S^otland are arraig^'d of Trea^^n
at Lithgow, for Declining the Jurisdiction of the Council in Ecclesiastical
matters: and after deal of tampering, flattering, threatening and^ the major
Part of the Court brings them in Guilty: upon which they are ordered into
closer Ward, and none allowed Access to them (cl. pt) and Feb 5* a Proclamation
at Edinburgh, that none speak against the Proceedings of the King, Council, or
Court in Trying and Punishing them, or against any other Proceedings of the
King, Council, or State, past, present or to come, upon Pain of Death. (cl)

Sir John Popham Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, prevails on many Lords
and others, to Petition King James for the settling two Plantations on the main
Coasts of America: upon which, ( gr)

Apr. 10. K, James, by Patent Divides VIRGINIA into 2 Colonies: the SOUTHERN
called the First Colony, between 34 and 41 Degrees North, H^ Grants to the London
Company: the NOTHERN* called the Second Colony, between 38 and 45 Degrees North, He
Grants to the Plymouth Com^pany; Forbidding both to Plant within a 100 Miles of
each other; and Giving each Colony, a Council of 1^, to Rule, Coin etc. (ps)

May 21. K. James writes to Mr James and Andrew Melvin and 6 other principal
Presbyterian Ministers in Scotland, to come to him before Sept. 15, to treat
with them for the Peace of the Church There: This being the Pretense; b^t the
Event proves that the Policy is to detain and confine them, that by their
Absence, Episcopacy may be advanced in Scotland. (cl)

July b. Parliament of Scotland meets at Perth: which against the Protestation
of the Comissioners of the Presbyteries through the Kingdom Restores the state of
Bishops to their ancien^ Dignities, Prerogatives, T^thes, Rents, Third^ etc;
contrary to the Constitution and Doctrine of the Church of Scotland Preached
these 46 Years, and cont^ary to the Confession of Faith Sworn and Subscribed in
1581 and 1590 by the King and his Household etc: (cl)

July Sir Edward Coke made Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in England.
(hs)

Aug. 12. Tuesday, Lord Chief Justice Popham, Sir F. Gorges, and some others of
the Plymouth Com^pany, send Capt. Henry Challons (ps) a brave Gentleman
Praesid^nt and Council's Relation of the Discovery and Plantation of Ne^
England, Printed in Quarto London, 1622
from Plymouth, in a Ship of 5^ Tuns, 29 English, with Mannido and Assecomoit 2
of the 5 Savages bro't last Year from a goodly River thrice discovered by Him
in NORTH VIRGINIA, in 43 Degrees. 20 N; to make a further Discovery of th^se
Coasts, and if occasion offers, to leave as many Men as He could spare, in the
Country: But sailing to Medeiras, St. Lu^ia, Porto Rico, and thence toward
North Virginia; on Nov. 10, He is taken (ps) by the Spanish Fl^et (gr) of 8
Ships (ps) coming from the Havana (gr) who carry Him into Spain (ps. gr)

Shortly afterCapt. Challons's Departure from Plymouth, the Lord Chief Justice
sends another Ship ^^om Bri^^ol (gr) under Thomas Hanam Commander and Martin
Prinn Master, with more supplies to second Capt. Challons: But not finding
Capt. Challons There, they Return to England. (pc) Sir F. Gorges says, the said
Prinn makes a perfect Discovery of all those Rivers and Harbors, and brings
the most exact Account of that Coast that ever ^^^e to my Hand since (gr)


Aug e. The 8 Scots Ministers which the King had wrote to, being arrived at
London, are there Detained, without any Reason but the King's Pleasure: and
S^pt. 30, are by His Majesty obliged to hear Dr. King Preach a most virulent
In^vective against Presbyteries; Crying to the King Down, Down with them. (cl)

Oct. b. The King orders the 6 condemned Ministers in Scotland to be Banished
his Dominions all their Days, and the other 8 imprisoned There, to be confined
in several Places remote from their former Dwellings. (cl)

The Purely Reformed Church in the North of England, by reason of the Distance
of their Habitations, are obliged to Assemble in two several Places and become
two distinctChurches In One, besides several of Note, is Mr. John Smith, a Man
of able Gifts and a good Preacher, who is chosen their Pastor: But these
afterward Going over into the Low Countries, and falling into errors; There,
for the most part Bury themselves and their Names. But in the OTHER CHURCH,
(the Subject of our Chronology) besides several worthy Men, is Mr. Richard
C^^ton, a (...) and Rev. Preacher, and the Famous Mr. Io^^ Robins^n, who is
afterward their Pastor for many Years, till G^d takes Him away by Death: as
also Mr. William Bre^^ster, a Reverend Man, who afterward is chosen Elder, and
lives with them till O^d Age. Governor Bradford's History in Manuscript.


Dec. 20. Saturday, The London Company send forth Capt. Christopher Newport,
with a Ship of 100 Tuns, another of 40, and a Pinace of 20* for SOUTH VIRGINIA:
who then sail from London, but 1st to the West India Islands. (ps)

1607.
Mar. 3. ONE of the Scots Ministers at London al^low'd to Return, on account of
his Wife's dangerous Illness, providedHe would neither go toS^nods nor
Presbyteries: April 26, Lord's day, the King'sCouncil send Mr A Melvin to the
Tow^er; where they keep Him above 4 Years, for writing a Latin Epigram upon the
Altar in the King's Chapel: and May, 6, the other 6 Scots Minist^rs at London
ordered to be confined in several Places in the 2 Kingdoms, for no other
Pretense than that they had not given the King Satisfaction in the Questions He
proposed to them about his own arbitrary Power inChurch Matters. (cl)

Apr. 26. Capt. Newport Descries South (...), Enters CHESIPEAK BAY, and lands.
April, 29. He Names the Southern Point* Cape Henry. May, 13, they Choose Mr.
Edward Wingfield Praesident for 1 Year. May, 14, Land all their Men and begin a
Colony, at a Place they call JAMES TOWN. Monday, June, 22, Capt Newport sails
for England* leaving the Praesident with 104 Persons. Aug 22, Dies in this
Southern Colony, Capt Barth* Gosnold, the 1st Mover of this Plantation, and one
of the Council. Sept. 11, Praesident Wingfield displaced by his Council, and
John Ratcliff chosen Praesident (ps)

May 21. Thursday, Dr. John Reynolds. King's Prof^ssor of Divinity in Oxford,
Dies There (hl. fl) AE atis 58. He had been Dean of Lincoln, but exchanged it
for the Praesidentship of C. C. Col. Oxon (fl) and Fuller says, He was
acquainted with all Arts and Sciences; most excellent in all useful Tongues;
had read over all Writers, Profane, Ecclesiastical, Divine; Councils, Fa^thers,
Histories of the Church: His memory miraculous, his Judgment mature; his Piety
most eminent; m^^^est, courteous, affable (fl) and the Chief of the Puritans at
the Hampton Court Conference. (^^)

May ^1. The Pli^^^^h. Adventures send forth Capt Georg^ Popham, as P^aesident,
and Capt Rawley Gilbert, as Admiral Capt. John Smi^h.
with 2 Ships and 100 Landmen (pc) who then set sail from Plymouth, (...) NO^TH
VIRGINIA. Aug 11, they fall with Monahigan: Sir F. Gorges says, three Ships,
and that they arrive at their Place of Rendevouz on August 8. ( gr)
and settle at the Mouth of Sagadehook, 9 or 10 Leagues to the South w^^d*
Capt. John Smi^h.


Aug. 24 Mr Thomas Brightman, Rector of Haunes in Bedfordshire, Dies, about the
51st Year of his Age, (fl) and Fuller says* He wrote a learned Comment in most
pure Latin on the Canticles and Revelations; He always carried a Greek
Testament with Him, Read it out every Fortnight* His Life was most Angelical; a
great Opposer of the Cer^monies; his daily Discourse against Episcopal
Government; and was never known to be moved with Anger. (fl)

THOMAS LAD, a Merchant of Yarmouth, having been long imprisoned by the High
Commission, co^'d not be Bailed; because having formerly answered on Oath
twice, before the Bishop's Chancellor of Norwich, to certain Articles about a
Conventicle, He refused to answer on a New Oath, without sight of his for^mer
Answers; and RICHARD MANSEL, a Preacher, being charged to have been Partaker in
a Petition exhibited to the House of Commons, and refusing the Oath Ex Officio,
to answer to certain Articles propounded to Him, was long imprisoned by the
Commissioners at Lambeth, and could not be Bailed: Both Prisoners are now bro't
to the Bar, upon the Writ of Habeas Corpus; where Mr NICHOLAS FULLER, an honest
Man and an eminent Lawyer Pleaded, that they ought to be discharged; by an
Argument to prove, that the Ec^lesiastical Commissioners have no Legal Power to
put the Oath Ex Officio, nor I^prison, nor Fine any of his Majesty's Subjects
For which Archbishop Bancroft Gets this Lea^ned Councel^or into Prison, and
Prosecute^ Him there to Death. (sl) Though Dr. Fuller mentions not the Year of
this Prosecution; yet by the Preface to the Lawyer's Argument, Printed in Quar*
this Year, in Holland, it appears, He was now in Prison.


This F^ll, Mr. ROBINSON's Church in the North of England, being ex^reamly
Harras'd some cast into Prison, some beset in their Houses, some forced to
leave their Farms and Families; they begin to fly over to HOLLAND, for Purity
of Worship and Liberty of Conscience. (B)

Nea^ Winter, C^pt. N^wport arrives at SOUTH-VIRGINIA, with ^resh Supplies, and
stays 14 Weeks: And this Winter, Iames-Town catching Fire is Bu^nt; bu^ soon
repaired. (ps)

Dec. 15. The 2 English Ships sail from SAGADEHOCK (gr) with all their Company,
except 45, for England. (sm)

1608.
THIS Winter, Extreme Cold, both in Europe and North America* (ps gr) and in
the midst thereof ( pc) the Storehouse, most of the Provisions (gr) and
Lodgings at SAGADEHOCK are Burnt; which exceedingly distresses the People: And
this Winter old Capt. Popham, their Praesident Dies, in this North Plantation,
the only one of the Company that Dies There; and Capt. Rawley Gilbert succeeds
as Praesident. ( pc)

Upon the Ships Arrival in England from SAGADEHOCK, L. Chapter Justice Popham
orders the Council of Plymouth to send them back with Supplies (gr)

The Spring approaching Capt. Newport sails from SOUTH VIRGINIA for England;
and Capt. Nelson arrives at Iames-Town: These 2 Ships bring near 100 Men, and
120 Persons. (ps)

Feb. 25. Mr. Murray Minister of Leith in Scotland, having been committed to
the Ca^^le of Edi^burgh, for opposing the Ri^e of Bishops; is this day bro't
before the King's Council There, and dismissed: For which the King sends them a
sharp Rebuke, and a Warrant to the Captain of the Guard to commit Him again: so
without any new Citation, not convict d of any off^nce, upon the King's private
Direction on^y, He is committed to the Castle again, and there detained a Year:
And then the King orders the Council to send Him to a remote Part of the
Kingdom, and there confine and forbid Him to Preach. (cl)

This Spring, more of Mr. ROBINSON'S Church, through great Difficulties from
their Pursuers, get over to H^LLAND: And afterward, the Rest, with Mr Robinson
and Mr. Br^wster; who are of the last, having Tar^y'd to help the weakest over
before them. They 1st settle at Amsterdam; and stay There a Year: where Mr.
Smith and his Church had gotten before them. (B)

This Spring, By the Lord Chief Iustice's Order (gr) Two Ships are furnished
with ^re^h Supplies for NORTH VIRGINIA (sm) and as they a^^ waiting for a Wind,
they hear of his Death Sir F. Gorges says, the Lord C^ief Iustice's Death
suddenly followed the Death of the Praesident. (gr)
However they sail, and a^rive at SAGADEHOCK (gr) not long after the Death of
Praesident Popham (sm)

Soon after these Ships sailed from England* Sir John Gilbert Dies, and leaves
his younger Brother Ra^^ley Sir F. Gorges's Printer mistakes in naming Him
Ralp^ Gilbert.
Gilb^rt his Heir; (gr) and Sir Francis Popham, Son to the Lord Chief Justice,
with some of the Adventurers, send a new Supply (pc) and this Ship also arrives
at SAGA^EHOCK in some small time after the other: (sm) By these Ships the
Plantation being informed 1st of the Death of Lord Chief Justice Popham and
then of Sir John Gilbert; (sm) and Capt. Gilbert the Praesident being obliged
to go home and take care of the Estate his Brother left Him; the whole Colony
brakes up and Returns with Him (gr) this Year to England: And thus this
Plantation Begins an^ Ends in one Year; (sm) brand the Country as over Cold and
not Habitable by our Nation; and the Adventurers Give over their Design. ( gr)

After this, Sir Francis Popham send^ Capt. Williams (sm) diverse Times to this
Coa^^ for Trade and Fishing only; (pc) and Sir F. Gorges also sends Vines with
a Ship to Fish, Trade and Discover, for some Years together, and hires Men to
stay the Winter, wherein the Plague raged among the Indians (gr) [which I
suppose is the Winter 1616, 17],

But upon theColony's Braking up, the French settle themselves within our
Limits. (pc)

July 25 Tuesday, a General Ass^m^ly mee^s at Li^lithgow in Scotland, entreats
the King, as several Presbyteries and Synods h^d before, to grant the Banished
and Confined Ministers their Liberty; But it could not be obtained ( cl)

This Year, Capt. John S^ith sails up the Rivers and Discovers the Inland Parts
of SOUTH VIRGINIA: Sept. 10, He receives from England Letters Patent, to be
Praesident: And now, it seems that Capt. Newport arri^es, with 70 Persons more;
and sailing f^r England, leaves 200 in all the Colony. (ps)

1609.
MR. Robinson's CHURCH having stayed at Amsterdam about a Year; seeing Mr.
Smith and his Company was fallen into Contention with the Church that wa^ There
before Him, and that the Flames thereof were like to break out in tha^ Ancient
Church itself (as afterward lamentably came to p^ss) which Mr. Robinson and
Church prudently foreseeing; they think it best to Remove in Time, before they
were any way engaged with the same: though they knew it would be very much to the
Prejudice of their ou^ward Interest, as it proved to be; yet valuing Peace and
spiritual Comfort above other Riches, they therefore Remove to LEY^EN, about
the Beginning of the 12 Years Truce between the Dutch and Spaniards. Choose Mr.
BREWSTER assistant to Him in the Place of an Eld^r; and there live in great
Love and Harmony both among themselves* and their neighbou^ Citiz^ns for above
Eleven Years, till they Remove to NEW-ENGLAN^ (B) By this it appears that both
Baylie and Hornius are Mistaken, in representing that Mr Smith set up his
Church at L^yd^n; when it was to avoid Him and his Company, that Mr Robinson
and his Church Removed from Amsterdam to Leyden. And by several Passag^s in
Governor Bradford's Manuscript, it seems, as if they B^g^n to Remove to L^yd^n
at the end of 1608. C^l^i^ius.


Apr. 9. The Dutch agree to the Twelve Years Tru^e with the King of Spain and
Archduke Albert (c)

May. King James Establishes the East India Company for ever (^s)

The Council for SOUTH VIRGINIA having moved the King to call in
theirCommission, and R^ceiv'd a new One; they make Sir Th mas West Ld de la
War, General of the Colony; Sir Thomas Gates, his Lieutenant; Sir Ge^rge Summers
Admiral; Sir Thomas Dale High Marshal; Sir Ferdinand Wainman General of the
Horse; and Capt N^wport Vice Admiral. (sm)

May 15. Sir Thomas Gates and Vice Admiral Newport, sail with 7 Ships from
Woolwich for SOUTH VIRGINIA: May 20, arrive at Plymouth, where Sir George
Summers joins them with a Ketch and a Pinnace: Friday, June 2, they all sail,
with 500 People, (ps) Men, Women and Children (hs) from Plymouth: and June 8,
from Falm^uth (^s)

^une. Sir John Bourcher brings the making of Alome, to Perfection in England
(hs)

July 10. Or thereabout, Capt. Samuel A^gal arrives in SOUTH-VIRGINIA, to Fish
for Sturgeon (ps) who now 1st discovers the direct Passage from England
Thither, and not to Go by the West Indies, as before. ( hs)

July 24 Monday, the South Virginia Fleet crossing the Gulf of Bahamas, a most
vehement Storm separates them. July, 28, Friday, Sir George Summers descries
BERMUDAS; from Him therefore called the Somer-Islands; is forced to Run the
Ship ashore; and in their Boats, all get safe to Land; being 150 Men, Women and
Children: and there they Live till May following; Sir Thomas Gates and
Vice Admiral Newport being in the same Ship with them. ( ps) This Shipwreck
bringing the Bermudas to the special Knowledge and Esteem of the English, proves
the Occasion of their Settling and Possessing them.


Aug. 11. Four other Ships of the Fleet arrive at SOUTH-VIRGINIA: a few days
after, 2 more; and after this the Pinnace. And Capt. Smith, the Praesident,
being exceedingly Burnt with Powder, and the new Comers setting up against Him
( pr) about Sept. 29, He sails for England (sm) and they Choose Mr, Francis West
P^aesident, who soon follows Him: And then they Choose Mr. George Piercy
P^aesident. ( ps)

This Summer, Mr. Henry Hudson an Englishman, but employed by the Dutch,
searching for a N. W. Pass^ge to the East Indies, sails to Newfoundland, and
all along the Coast, to Cape-Cod ^n^ Virginia, as far as 3; Deg^ees Harris.
and now I suppose it is that He discovers HUDSONS RIVER.

Oct. 9 James A^minius Profess^r of Divinity at Leyden Dies Pref. ad Acta synod
Dordrec.
there, AE^atis 49, Continuatio Calvisii.
and Conradus Vorstius called to supply his Place. Pref. ad Acta synod Dordrec.


Nov. b. At the King's Direction, the Council o^ Scotland confine Mr. Fairfull,
Minister of Dumserling, during the King's Pleasure; only for Praying for the
distress^d Ministers, both within and without the Country. ( cl)

Mr. NICHOLAS FULLER, who was cast into Prison by Arch Bishop Bancroft in 1607,
for Pleading in Defense of his Clients, against the Power of the Ecclesiastical
Commissioners, i^ still by the Archbishop kept in Prison: many were his
Petitions to the King for Enlargement, But the Archbishop preacquainted the
King and represented to Him, that this Lawyer was the Champion of the
Nonconformists: So that He lay in Prison till He Died this Year* ( fl)

Dec. 21. Mr. William Ames, Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge, Preaches
in St. Mary's against Playing Cards and Dice: at which many are so offended,
that to avoid Expulsion, He goes beyond Sea: and the States of Friesland not
long after Choose Him Prof^ssor (fl) of Divinity in their University of
Franeker. Dr. Thomas Fuller places this about 1610, 11, and his Preaching on
St. Thomas's day, which is Dec. 21; yet by Publishing his Puritanismus
Anglicanus at Franc^ort in 1610, I choose to place this Preaching on Dec. 21.
1609, rather than 1610.


1610.
Feb. 15. THe King erects 2 High Commission C^urts in Scotland; under the
Archbishops of St. Andrews and Glasg^w, and over their several Provinces:
which Commission puts the King in P^ss^ssi^n of absolute Power to use the
Bodies and Goods of his Subjects at Pleasure without Form or Process of Common
Law: and now the Scots Bish^ps are become Patrons of B^n^fices, Lords of
Parliament, Council, Exch^quer, Sessi^n High Commission etc (cl)

Feb. 28. The Lord Del^ware has his Patent sealed by the South Vi^ginia
Company, to be Lord Governor and Capt General of all the Colonies Ther^, during
his Life: and before March 24 He s ils with 3 Ships and 150 M^n* accomp^ny'd
wi^h Knig^t^ and Gentlemen of Q^ality; Capt A^gal c^nducting Him Thither. (hs)

Apr. 27. King James Gran^s to diverse Persons ^ Patent of Incorpora^ion, etc:
to settle a Col^ny in NEWFOUNDLAND; Howes sets the Date of the Patent on May,
2, thi^ Year; But I adhere to Purchase, who recites the Pat^^
In June, they send Mr JOHN GUY, as Governor, with 39 Persons: who arrives
There; Begins the Colony in Conception Bay; and There Winters* ( ps)

May ^. Thursday, the French Queen Crowned at Paris, (hs Petavius.
) the next day, King Henry the IV her Lord, stabbed to Death ( c. Petavius.
) by a Popish Priest Pointer.
in his Coach: and his Son Lewis XIII, Reigns: ( c) But the Queen made Regen^
during her Son's minority. ( Petavius.
hs)

May 10. Sir Thom^s Gates, Sir George Summers and Vice Admiral N^wport, sail
from Bermudas in their new-builtPinaces for SOUTH VIRGINIA, leaving two Men,
who refused to come aboard them: Monday May 21. they descry South Virginia,
sail into Chesepiak Bay, and find Mr. George Piercy Praesident: Wednesday May
23, they anchor and land at James Town, with about 150 Persons: But finding the
Colony* from 500, when Capt. Smith went away, reduced to 60, and in a wretched
state; they all resolve for England: and on June 7, the whole Company gets
aboard, leaves JAMES TOWN, and sails down the River. [ And thus the FIRST
COLONY there Brakes up.] But the next da^ the Lord Delaware from England, meets
them: upon which they return and land at the Tow^ again. ( ps)

June 10. Lord's Day, the Lord Delaware arrive^ with his three Ships and 150
Men, at Iames^ Town, lands, and takes upon Him the Govern^ment. June 19, Sir G
Summers and Capt. Arga^ sail from James Town for BERMUDAS for Pro^visions. (ps)

June. Another Ship, with 20 Men and a year^ Pro^visions, sent after the Lord
Delaware from England, for South Virginia. (hs)

July 15. Sir T. Gates sails for England: and July 16, Sir G. Summers and Capt
Argal* meeting with violent Storms and contrary Winds, bar^ away for CAPE COD;
and July 26, for SAGADEHOCK: the Night after, being very foggy, they lose sight
of each other: July 29, Capt Argal comes to a Rocky Island, in 43 Degrees and 40 N
lands upon it, finds great store of Seels, and calls it Seel-Rock: Aug. 14,
shapes his Course for Cape-Cod; to the back side of which He comes on Aug. 19,
in 41 Degrees. 50 min. finds the Variation N. 13 degrees. W: In the Margin of Purchase,
it is N. 15 Degrees. W.
The next day sail^ for SOUTH-VIRGINIA; Aug. 27, anchors in 9 Fathom, in a very
great Bay; the Southern Cape of which, is in 38 and 20N: This seems to be the
Bay since cal^'d Delaware-B^^
August 31* arrives at Cape Charles, the N. Cape of Chesepiack Bay. Sir G.
Summers also sails, first to Sagadehock, then to Bermudas; where he Dies* and
his Pinace returns to England, leaving three Men behind them* (ps.)

October. 21. By the King's Commission, the Bishop^ of London, Ely, Worcester and
Rochester, conse^crate the Scottish Bishops in the Bp of London'^ Chapp^l; viz
Mr John Spotswood -- A Bp. of Glasgow, Mr Gawen Hamilton, -- Bp of Galloway,
an^ Mr. Andrew Lamb, -- Bp of Breechin. (hs)

Nov. 2 Rich Bancroft, A. Bp of Canterbury, Dies. (sl)

Dec. 31. The King, by Proclamation, Dissolves his first Parliament. (hs. bk)

This Year, comes out -- a Justification of Separation from theChurch of
England, by JOH^ ROBINION, Pages 4^6, in Quarto See the ^ook it self; which is
doubtless Printed at Leyd^^
, and about this Time, and the follo^ing Years, many come to his Church at
Leyden, from diverse Parts of England; so as they grow a Great Congregation.
(B) and this Year, Dr. AM^^ Publishes his Puritanismus Anglicanus, in Latin*
Octavo, at Francfort in Germany (Lib. ipse)

1611.
THis Winter f^ur of the English Die (...) NEWFOUNDLAND. ( ps)

Mar. 15. Or thereabouts, Sir Thomas Dale, sails for SOUTH VIRGINIA, with 3
S^ips, 300 People, 12 Kine, 20 Goats, and all things needful for the Colony (hs)

Mar. After 8 Months Illness there, L. Delaware sails in Capt. Argal for
England; leaving upward of 200 Men, and Capt. George Piercy his Dep Gov. 'till
Sir T. Dale arrives; whosePower is also to end upon Sir T. Gates's arrival. (ps)

This Year, Mr Edward Harlie and Nicholas Hobson sail to North Virginia (ps)
and of this Voyage I suppose it is that Capt. Smith writes, that the Earl of
South Hampton and those of the Isle of Wight, employ Capt. Edward Har^low to
discover an Isle supposed about Cape Cod: But falling with Monahigan, they
detained three Savages, viz Pechmo, Monopet and Pekenimne: But Pechmo leaped
overboard and got away. Not far from thence, they had three Men sorely wounded
with Arrows: and anchoring at the Isle of Nohono, the Savages in their Canows
assault the Ship, 'till the English Guns make them retire; yet Here they take
Sakaweston: and at Capawe they take C^neconam and Epenow. But at Agawam, the
Natives use them more kindly; and so with five Savages they retur^ for England:
But of Plantations, there a^^ no more Speeches. (sm)

April 9 Tuesday, Dr. George Abbot, Bp of London transferred to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury (hs) and Fuller says, He was not much belov'^ by
the Inferior Clergy, as being over-austere and rigid. (fl.)

May 10. Sir T. Dale arrives at S. VIRGINIA, with his 3 Ships and 300 People
etc. in 8 Week Passage ( ps) Toward the end of May, Sir T Gates sails from
England thither, with 3 Ships and 3 Carvells, 280 Men, 20 Women, 200 Kine, as
many Swine etc. (hs) and Aug. 1, or 2, arrivesThere, with his 6 Ships, 300
People etc. (ps)

[SOUTH VIRGINIA being thus Settled, I shall leave their History.]

May 22. K. James begins the order of Baronets; and this Day, creates 18.
Salmon.


May e. Mr. Stratoun, Minister of Forress in Scotland, warded in the Castle of
Inn^rness, for Preaching against the state of Bishops. (cl)

Nov. Vorstius ordered to retire from Leyden, to his House at Tergou. (pa)

This Year, the New Version of the BIBLE into English, finished by 47
Translators. (fl)

1612.
THe Curators of the University of Leyde^ call Simon Episcopius to be Professor
of Divinity There, against the mind of Polyander the other Professor, and to
the great Grief of the Churches. ( pa)

Mar. 3. Bartholomew Legate condemned to theFire by the Bps in the Consist^ry
of Paul's London, for Arrianism: March 11, the K issues his Writ to Burn Him
(fl) and Wednesday March, 18, He is Burnt in Smithfield (hs. fl.) in a vast
conflux of Spectators, about 40 years of age. (fl) Fuller says, that Bp King of
London, called so many Bps* Divines and Lawyers, to his Trial; that the
Consistory seemed not so much a large Court, as a little Convocation. ( fl)


Apr. 11. Edward Wightman, having been convicted by the Bp of Litchfield of the
like or worse Heresies, is There, this day Burnt. Which Executions raising the
Compassions of the People; the K. chooses that Heretics should waste away their
Lives in Prison. (fl)

The BERMUDAS ISLANDS being within the Limits of VIRGINIA, and theCompany
finding Land enough on the Main, sell these Islands to 120 of the same Company;
who name them the SUMMER ISLANDS, obtain a Charter, and so hold them of His
Majesty, (hs) and

Apr. 28. They send the first Colony Thither, of 60 Persons, under Mr. Richard
Moor Gov. There for 3 years, (pr. hs) who now embark in aShip at London, and go
down to Gravesend: May, 9 sail from the Downs: July, 11, descry and land at
Bermudas: Aug. 2, subscribe to 6 r^ligious articles of Government: and this
Year, 30 Passengers more arrive Here. (ps)

June 7. Mr. Guy arrives at NEWFOUNDLAND again: and thi^ Summer, Capt. Peter
Easton, the famous Pirate, comes Thither, with 10 good Ships W^ithourn, in his
Discourse of Newfoundland, Printed in 4 to, London 1622.
takes 100 Men out of the Fishing Vess^ls in Conception Bay, besides what he
takes in others, man's 6 Ships (ps) and sails to the Streigh^s W^ithourn, in his
Discourse of Newfoundland, Printed in 4 to, London 1622.
Whithourn, by mistake, sets this in 1611: and i^ seems most likely that the 6
Ships are part of the 10 and that he came but with 4.
and this Year, the Newfoundland Colony increases to 60 Persons. (ps)

Aug. 4. Mr. Hugh Broughton Dies at Totnam High Cross, aet. 63. Light^^ot in
his Preface to Mr. Broughton's Works.


In these Times are Great Troubles raised by the Arminians in Holland: In
Leyden especially there are daily and hot Disputes in the Schools about the
Arminian Doctrines; the two Divinity Prof^ssors being divided; Episcopius
Teaching for 'em, Polyander against them: and the Contention grows to that
pass, that few of the Disciples of the one will hear the other. But Mr.
ROBIN^SON, though he Preaches thrice a Week and wrote sundry Books, besides his
other mani^fold Labors; yet goes constantly to hear them both: whereby He is
grounded so well in the Controversy, sees the Force of all their Arguments,
knows the Shifts of the Armi^nians: and being himself otherwise very able; none
is fi^ter to engage them, as appears by sundry Disputes: so as he begins to be
Terrible to the Arminian Party (B)

October. 16. Parliament of Scotland meets; and still enlarges the King's and
Bishops Powers. (cl)

The same Day Frederick, P. Palatine of the Rhine, arrives at Graves^nd (hs bk)
and Lords day, 18, at White H^ll, to marry the Princess Elizabeth, K James's
only Daughter (hs)

Nov. 6. Friday, The most hopeful, Henry Prince of Wales, Dies of a malignant
Fever; aged 18 years, 8m. 17d (hs bk) and Fuller says, He was never known to
have uttered a pro^^ne Oath (fl)

1613.
Feb. 14. LOrds day, the Princess Eliz married to the P. Palatine, (hs. bk) on
which day, are Tilting and ^^her Royal Entertainments of Time, ( hs) at Night*
a Mask of Lords and Ladies: Saturday, Ap^^l, 10 the P. Palatine and Lady set
out from White Hall for Heidelberg. (hs. bk) and Howes says, that during the
Palatine's abode in England, He behaved himself so nobly, thatHe won the Hearts
of the wholeNation. (hs)

Mar. 27. Nicholas Guy's Wife delivered of a Son at NEWF^UN^LAND (ps) which
seems to be the first English Child Born There.

June A^rives* from England, atBERMUDAS, a Vessel with 60 Passengers: sometime
after, another with 40: two Months after, a 3d, with 100: two Days after a 4th.
with 180: and fourteen Days after 2 Frigates, with 160. (sm)

[BERMUDAS being thus Settled, I shall leave their History.]

The Government of S. VIRGINIA, hearing that the French had settled within our
Limits, send Capt. Argal to dislodge them: who sail^ to Sagadahock, and seizes
their Forts at Mount M^ns^l, St Croix* and Port Royal; and carries their Ship
and Pinace, Ordnance, Cattle and Provision t^ Iames-Town (sm ps) Though neither
the Month, nor ^ear of this Expedition, are certified, either by Gorges, Smith
or Purchase; yet by comparing them together, it seems to be this Year, and some
time between May and the following Winter.


October. 25. Monday. LordChief Justice Cook removed to the Kings Bench, and made
Lord Chie^ Justice of England. (hs)

This Year, Mr. Randal Bates, a Rev. Preache^* Dies in Prison, having lain in
the Gate House* about 20 month^, only for opposing the Prelacy and Ceremonies
used in the Church (bh) and Mr. Cotton says* He was an Heavenly Saint, suffered
for the same cause, choked in Prison: nor could be released, though Dr. Hering a
learned and beloved Physician, earnestly solicited Bp Neal for hi^
Enlargement, as He tendered his Life: But the Physician's suit was repulsed
with Reproaches* and the Life of his Patient spilt by that Rigor Cotton's
Bloody Tenet wash^d.


And about this Year, it seems, that EPISCOPIUS sets forth sundry Arminian
Theses at Leyden, which He would defend in Public against all opposers. Upon
which POLYANDER and the chief Preachers of the City, desire Mr. ROBINSO^ to
dispute against Him. But being a Stranger, He was loath to engage. Yet the other
telling Him, that such was the ability and expertness of the Adversary, that
the Truth is in Danger to suffer, if he would not help them; are so
importunate, as at length He yield^* and when the Day comes, He so defends the
Truth and soils the Opposer, as He puts Him to an apparent ^on plus in
thisGreat and Public Audience. The same he does a 2d or 3d time* upon the like
occasions: which as it cause^ many to give Praise to GOD that the Truth had so
famous a Victory* so it procures Mr. Robinson much Respect and Honor from
thos^ Learned Men and others: and it is said by some of no mean note, that were
it not for giving offense to the State of England; they would Prefer him
otherwise, if he pleased, and allow his People some Public Favor. (B)

1614.
Jan. 21. MR James Melvin, having suffered 7 years Exile at the King's Pleasure,
not convict of any Offense, Dies at Berwick the Place of his Confinement: He
was one of the wisest Director^ of Ecclesiastical Affairs the Church of
Scotland had in his Time: and the King being set upon advancing the State of
Bps, called Him toCourt, and never suffered Him to Return, least He should
hinder their Designs. (cl)

Mar. 3. Capt. John Smith, with 2 Ships, and 45 Men and Boys, sails from the
Downs for N. VIRGINIA, (ps) to make Trial of a Mine of Gold and Copper: and if
these fail, then to Fish and Trade, carrying Tantum an Indian with him, (sm)
April 30, arrives at the Isle Monahigan, (ps) in 43 and 30 N. (sm) where H^ is
to stay with 10 Men, to keep Possession, if the Whaling answers Expectation:
But being disappointed He builds 7 Boats, in which 37 Men make a great Fishing
Voyage, while with 8 Men in a small Boat he ranges the Coasts, and Trades with
the Natives (ps) from Penobscut to Sagadehock, Acocisco, Passataquack,
Tragabigzanda, called Cape Ann; the Massachusetts Isles, on which they say, are
3000 People, fights with 40 or 50 of them, finds two French Ships Smith's first
Account of New ^ngl^nd, Printed in 4 to. London. 1616
who had been here six Weeks (sm) and made a great Voyage by Trade, Smith's
first Account of New ^ngl^nd, Printed in 4 to. London. 1616
Thence He sails to Accomack, where He also fights and kills some Indians:
Thence to Cape Cod, where he sets Tan^tum, ashore. On the Main, against
Monahigan, finds a Ship of Sir Francis Pophams's, which had many years used
that Port only, ( sm. 1.) July 18, Capt. Smith sails for England (ps) in the
Bark, and leaves the Ship under Tho Hunt Master, to fit for Spain (sm) Aug. 5.
Capt Smith puts in at Plymouth (sm. 1.) and in the end of the month, arrives at
London (ps) draws a Plat of the Country, and first calls it NEW ENGLAND. (sm)
After Smith le^t NEW ENGLAND (sm) Hunt gets 20 Indians aboard Him at Patuxit
Relation of the P^oceeding^ of the English Planta^ie^ at Pl^mouth in New
England, Published by G. Mount, (...) 4 to. London, 1622
one of whom is called Squanto (B. Relation of the P^oceeding^ of the English
Planta^ie^ at Pl^mouth in New England, Published by G. Mount, (...) 4 to.
London, 1622
) or Squantum or Tisquantu^ (B Relation of the P^oceeding^ of the English
Planta^ie^ at Pl^mouth in New England, Published by G. Mount, (...) 4 to.
London, 1622
W^rslow's Good News from New England, Printe^ in 4 to. L^ndon 1624.
.) and 7 more at Nausit Relation of the P^oceeding^ of the English Planta^ie^
at Pl^mouth in New England, Published by G. Mount, (...) 4 to. London, 1622
and carries them to Malaga, and sells them (sm) for Slaves, at 20 Pound a Man,
Relation of the P^oceeding^ of the English Planta^ie^ at Pl^mouth in New
England, Published by G. Mount, (...) 4 to. London, 1622
which raises such an Enmity in the Savages against our Nation as makes further
attempts ofCommerce with them very dangerous, ( pc. B. Relation of the
P^oceeding^ of the English Planta^ie^ at Pl^mouth in New England, Published by
G. Mount, (...) 4 to. London, 1622
F. Gor^^s, Esquire his America Painted to the Life, Printed in 4 to. London, 1659.
)

[ From this time therefore, we shall distinguish N. VIRGINIA by the Name of
NEW ENGLAND, and confine the Name VIRGINIA to the SOUTHERN COLONY]

Mar. 4. A Proclamation at Edinburgh, commanding Ministers and People to
celebrate the Lor^'s Supper on E^ster following, viz Apr. 24. the Pretense
being for Trial of Popish Recusants; (...) the wiser take it as a Trial how the
People will bare Innovations; there being Acts of the General Ass^mbly in Force
against them. (cl)

^pr 5. The K's 2d. PARLIAMENT of England Begins (^^. (...).
) complains of his admitting Papists into his Council, his silencing many
watchful and diligent Ministers, and his several Treaties to marry the late P.
Henry and present P. Charles with the Daughters of Popish Princes; all which
disheartens Pr^testants and encourage Papists (ec.) and the House of COMMONS
beginning to Question Bp Harsenet and Bp N^al, for offensive Speeches; to save
them from the Storm, is supposed the Reason of the King's abrupt dissolving
them (fl) on June 7. Upon which the K. imprisons several Members, without Bail
or Mainprize, for the Freedom they had taken; and raises Money on his Subjects
by way of Benevolence. (e^ (...).
)

June Some of the Plymouth Company, (pc) viz Sir F Gorges with the Earl of
Southampton Commander of the Isle of Wight, send Capt. Henry H^rl^y and Capt.
Ho^s^n (...) the Edward Harlie and Nicholas Ho^son (...), and whether Sir P
(...), seems uncertain.
Commander of some Land Sol^iers, in a S^ip (gr) from Plymouth (ps) for the
Isle of CAPA^I^^, (gr) or Capa^ack, (sm) l^ing southward of C^pe C^d, (gr sm)
carrying two Indi^ns, v^z E^^n^^e and M^n^^et (pc) (...) I^d ans, vi^. Ep now,
Assa^e^^^^t (...) to mistake in ^^^ing that (...) carried away (...) to have
been carried away b^ (...) in (...) was carrie^ home (...) 1615.
in search of a Gold Mine which Epenow told them of, with a Design only to get
Home (sm) But arriving at the Harbor where Epenow wa^ to make good his
Undertaking, a little afte^ Hunt had carried the Indians away, Mana^^^ Dies,
(pc) and Epenow jumps over board and ge^ ashore, while the Indians in 20 Canows
attac^ them (gr) and wound the Master of the Shi^ and many of his Company. (
sm) Upon which the English Return without doing any thin^ further: ( gr) and at
this the Western Men are s^ discouraged, as they regard not the Country til^
they see four Ships sail from London and Capt Smith at Plymouth in January
next. ( sm)

This Summer, Sir Henry Manwaring is (...) NEWFOUNDLAND with five good Ships.
(w. ps)

1615.
Jan. THe Virginia Company at London* send fo^^ Ships with Michael Cooper, (ps)
who had been Master of the Bark under Capt Smith la^^ Y, ( sm) to Fish on the
Coast of NEW ENGLAND^ who arriving There in March, and making their Voyages; 1
sails to Spain, 1 to Virginia to r^lieve that Colony, and 2 Return to England.
(ps)

Jan. Capt Smith goes from London to Plymouth: In March, sails in a Ship of 200
Tuns, with ^^^ther of 50 (ps) furnished by Sir F. Gorges (...) others, for NEW
ENGLAND; being to leave 1^ Men There to Begin a Settlement: But (...) He sails
120 Leagues, a great Storm parts Hi^ from the other Ship, breaks all his Masts,
an^ forces Him to Return to Plymouth: when leaving his Ship, He gets into a
Bark of 6^ Tuns: and June 24, sails again with 30 Men 16 of whom are to Begin
the Settlement. A^ Fyal, meets with 2 French Pirates; 1 of 20^ Tuns, the other
of 30; engages, and beats the^ off: But near the Isle of Flores, 4 French Me^
of War take and carry Him to France. (sm) The other Ship parted from Him in the
Storm a^ 1st, proceeded, arrived at New England in May, made her Voyage, and
comes home in Aug (ps)

Mar. 25. A Proclamation at Edinburgh, to celebrate the L's Supper at Easter in
all Times coming. ( cl)

Apr. 23. Lord's day, George Villars, Esquire sworn Gentleman of the King's Bed
Chamber; the next day Knighted (hs) and becomes the K's Favorite: (bk) Aug.
27. 1616, made a Lord: Ian. 5 1616, 7. made Earl; Ian. 1. 1617, 8. Marquess;
(hs. Segar's Honores Angl^cani.
) and May 18* 1623, Duke of Buckingham Segar's Honores Angl^cani.


This Y. Capt. Richard Whitbourn goes to NEWFOUNDLAND, with a Commission from
the Admiralty to Empannel Iuries etc. ( w. ps) and this Y, at Newfoundland, are
many Thousands of English French, Portugees and Others: the French and
Biscayans resorting chiefly to the N and W. Parts, where the Indians also
chiefly keep. ( ps)

[NEWFOUNDLAND being thus Settled, I shall leave their History.]

^uly. The Londoners send 2 more Ships, to Fish at NEW ENGLAND: But going by
the West Indies, arrive not in New England till May 1616; One returning in 2
months after. ( ps)

Oct. Sir Richard Hakins sails from England, with Commission from the Council
of Plymouth, to try what Service He could do them as Praesident for this Y, ^t
NEW ENGLAND: But arriving and finding the War at the Height, and the principal
N^tives almost destroyed, He passes along the Coast to Virginia, stays There
some time, and sails for Spain, (gr)

This Year, the A. Bishops, Bishops, and the re^^ of the Clergy of Ireland, in
the Convocatio^ holden at Dublin, agree upon 104 Articles of Religion, for
avoiding Diversities of Opinions and establishing Consent touching true
Religion Articles, Printed in 4 to, London, 1629.


1616.
FEb. and March, sail for NEW ENGLAND, 4 Ship^ from Plim^uth, (ps sm) and 2
more from London, (ps) Smith's first Account and General History say, 4 from
London: But it seems that these 4 include the 2 that sailed Thence in July
l^st, and return this Year from New England.
but only for Voyages of Profit (sm) by Fish and Trade. (ps) One of the
Plymouth Ships gets in 1 Month to New England, and thence goes to Spain; the
other 3 return to Plymouth within 6 Months, (sm) One of the Londoners gets in 6
Weeks to New England, and within 6 Months returns to England: the other goes to
the Ca^naries: and all 6 full Laden. (ps)

Jun 20 K James goes into the Star Chamber, and makes a Speech to the Judges
and others There, ( King J^mes 's Speech it self, Printed at London, in 4 to.
hs) wherein he says, The STAR CHAMBER Court has been shaken of late; and the
last Year had received a sore Blow, if it had not been assisted and carried by
a few Voices: and charges the Judges -- Let not PAPISTS nor PURITANS be
countenanced. In another Place He, says -- As I have said in Parliament H^use,
I can LOVE the Person of a PAPIST, being otherwise a Good Man and honestly
bred, never having known any other Religion; though the Person of an Apostate
Pa^pist I hate, etc. King J^mes' s Speech it self, Printed at London, in 4^^.


Jun. 18. Comes out, A Description of NEW ENGLAND* Or the Observations and
Discoveries of Capt John Smith* (Admiral of that Country) in 1614, wit^ the
Success of 6 Ships that went the next Yea^ 1615, and the Accidents befell him
among the French Men of War; with the Proof of the present Benefit this Country
affords, whither, this Y 1616 Eight Voluntary Ships are gone, to make further
Trial: Printed in 4 to. London, 1616.

Aug. 13. A General Assembly meets by the K's Orde^ at Aberdeen in Scotland:
when the A. Bp of St. Andrews steps into the Moderator's Place with out
Election, against the Act of the Church yet unrepealed, and a Number of Lords
and others set without lawful Commission: who under the K's Guard, receive a
new Conf^ssion of Faith, order theCommunion to be celebrated every Yea^ at
Easter; and empower Committees to draw up a new Cate^hism, a Common Prayer
Book, and a Book of Canons, for the King's allowance. ( cl)

Sep. 29. Lord's day, Dr. Andrews, Bp of Ely, sword a Privy Councellor. ( ^s)

Nov. 4. K. James crowns his Son Charles Prince of Wales: and Lord's day, Nov.
10. in Honor of his Creation, 25 Knights of the Bath, with all Magnificence,
ride to White Hall, and are there Knighted by His Majesty. ( ^s)

Nov. 16. Saturday, Sir Edward Cock, L. Chapter Just. of the King's Bench
discharged of his Office. ( hs)

Sometime this Fall a French Ship cast away at the N E. part of Cape Cod: But
the Men getting safe ashore, the Indians watch and dog 'em till they kill 'em
all but 3 or 4, which they send from one Sachim to another to make spo^t and
use 'em worse thanSlaves, till 2 are redeem'^ by Capt Dermer in 1619 (B. pl)

1617.
Jan. b. K. James notifies theCouncil of Scotland o^ his Design of coming
Thither; and Promises that what he does There shall be with the Applause of
all: yet in repairing his Chapel at Halyrood House, a Place is prepared for
Organs, and the Images of the 12 Apostles and 4 Evangelists wro't in Wood and
Gilt, are ordered to be set up: But the People murmuring, the Scots Bps
dissuade the K. from setting them up; though with a sharp Rebuke and Check of
Ignorance, both from the King and A Bp. Abbot; the King telling the Sco^s Bps,
that his English Doctor^ would instruct 'em in these and other Points. ( cl)

This Winter and the Spring ensuing, a Great PLAGUE befalls the Natives inNEW
ENGLAND* which wastes them exceedingly; and so many Thousands of them Die,
that the Living are not able to Bury them, and their Skulls and Bones remain
above Ground at the Places of their Habitations for several Years after* ( gr.
B. re) By Capt. Dermers Letter of Dec. 27. 1619. in Purchase, and of June 30.
1620. in Gov. Bradford, compared with Gov. Bradford's own Account, it seems
that the Narragansets in the West and Penobscuts in the East, escaped this
Plague, and that it raged only in theCountries lying between them, and prepared
the way for another People.


Mar. 7. Sir Francis Bacon, K's Attorney, made Lord Keeper; and Ian. 4.
following, made Lord Chancellor, (hs)

Mar. 14. Friday, K. James sets out from White Hall for Scotland. (hs) May 16,
Enters Edinburgh: and next Day, has the English Service; when Playing on
Organs, Quiriste^^ and Surplices are first heard and seen in the King's
Chapel. (cl)

Mar. 22. Mr. Thomas Parker, AEta. 22, only Son to the famous Mr. Robert
Parker, made master of Arts at Fran^ker. He afterward goes to New England and
become a Minister of the Church at Newbury: and though his Diploma i^ dated
April, 1. I conclude it means the New Style, which is March 22, in ours


This Spring, Capt. Smith is provided with 3 good Ships at Plymouth, and 15 Men
to stay and Settle in NEW ENGLAND: But being Wind bound 3 months, the Voyage is
frustrate: For which and his other Losses and Disappointments about this
Country, the Commissioners of the Plymouth Company contract with him to be
Admiral of N^w England for Life (ps)

June 8. Being Whitsunday, by the King's command, the Lord's Supper is first
observed after the English Form, with Kneeling at Halyrood House, contrary to
the order of the Church of Scotland, and several Lord's forbear to Communicate.
Tuesday following the King commands them to Communicate after this new manner
the next Lord's day: But though some Noblemen and Bps Communicate Kneeling, yet
not half the No^blemen ^equired. (cl)

June 17. Tuesday, the Parliament of Scotland meets: Wherein the Lords pass a
BILL, that the King with the Archbishops, Bishops, and such Ministers as He
should Choose, sh^^l have in all times coming, full Power to conclude matters
decent so^ the external Policy of the Ki^k, nor re^ugnan^ to the word of God,
and such Conclusi^^s shall have the Power of Laws: But 56 Ministers Protest
against it, and the Bill falls, to the Kings great Displeasure. (cl)

July 11. The King goes to St. Andrews, to set in the High Commission Court,
upon the Protesting Ministers: The next day sets therein and makes a Speech,
declaring -- We took this order with the Puritans in England, who stood out as
long as they were deprived only of their Benefices* Preaching still, and living
on the Benevolence of the People that affected their Cause: But when we
deprived them of their Office, many yielded to us, and are now become the best
Men we have: Let us take the like Course with the Puritans here: So they went
to work and deprived 3 o^ the Protesting Ministers. (cl)

Aug. K. James, returning from Scotland, through Lancashire; says, He rebuked
some PURITANS and precise People, for prohibiting and punishing People there
for using their lawful Recreations and honest Exercises (as he calls them) upon
SUNDAYS, and publishes his Pleasure under his own hand, that they should not be
prevented for the future, King James's Declaration (called the Book of Spo^t^*
Printed in 4^0 L^ndon. 1618.
and Sep. 15, He arrives at London. (hs. bk)

This Year, Mr. Robinson and his Church, begin to think of a Remove to AMER^CA.
for several weighty Reasons: As (1) The Difficulties in Holland discouraged
many from coming to them out of England, and obliged man^ to return. G.
Bradford says on this Head; that Many who came to them and desired to be with
them, could not endure the great Labor and hard Fare, with other
Inconveniences which they endured: But though they loved their Persons, approved
their Cause, and honored their Suffering; yet they left them as it were
Weeping, as Orpah did her Mother-in-law Naomi; or as those Romans did Cato in
U^ica, who desired to be excused and borne with, though they could not all be
Cato's: For many, though they desired to enjoy the Ordinances of GOD in their
Purity, and the Liberty of the Gospel with them; (...) alas, they admitted of
Bondage with danger of Conscience, rather than to endure these Hardships: yea
some preferred the Prisons in England, rather than th^s Liberty in Holland with
these Afflictions. (B)
(2) By reason of these Diffi^culties, with the Licentiousness of the Youth and
Temptations of the Place, many of their Children left their Parents, some
becoming Soldiers, others taking to Foreign Voyages, and some to courses
tending to Dissoluteness and the Danger of their Souls; to the great Grief of
their Parents, and Fear least their Posterity, through these Temptations and
Examples should degenerate and Religion die among them. (3) From an inward Zeal
and great Hope of laying some Foundation, or making way for Propagating the
Kingdom of CHRIST to the remote Ends of the Earth; though they should be but as
stepping Stones to others etc. Mr. Morton mentions another Reason, which He
doubtless had from the Original Planters; viz. that the great Neglect of
observing the Lord's Day, was very Griev^us to them. MORTON's New-England's
Memorial.

Upon their talk of Removing, sundry of note among the Dutch, would have them
go under them and make them large Offers: But choosing to go under the English
Government, where they might enjoy their Religious Privileges, without
molestation; after humble Prayers to Go^, they first debate whether to go to
Guiana or Virginia: And though some and none of the meanest are earnest for the
former, they at length determine for the l^tt^r; so as to settle in a destinct
Body, but under the general Government of Virginia. Upon which they send Mr.
Robert Cushman and Mr John Carver, to treat with the Virginia Company, and see
if the King would give them Liberty of Conscience There (b(

Nov. 4. Commissioners for a General Assembly in S^otland having been chosen in
Presence of the Bishops there, and those nominated who mis' liked Episcopal
Government, being not allowed by the Bishops; a General Assembly is this day
Proclaimed at Edinburgh to meet at St. Andrews on the 25th current. And Nov 2^
the General Assembly meeting accordingly* the Commissioners of 7 Diocies are
absent for want of time: The Arch Bishop of St. Andrews in his Sermon, bitterly
inveighs against many worthy Men of the Ministry deceased, and said some of
them deserved to b^ ^ang'd: The King in his Letter wills the Assembly to
conform to his desires, or otherwise threatens that He would use his own
Authority: and to gratify Him, they agree (1) to minister the Commumuni^n to
the dang^r^usly Sick, (2) that the Ministers shall de^l the Elements to every
one with their o^n H^nds: Bu^ deferring the Considerati^n of H^ly D^ys, the K.
is highly ^ffended (cl)

Nov. 12. Sir Edwin Sandys writes from London to Mr. Robinson and Mr. Brewster;
wherein He says, your AGENTS have carried themselves with that Discretion as is
both to their own Credit and theirs from wh^m they came: And the 7 Articles
subs^ribed with your Names, have given the G^ntlemen of the COUNCIL for
Virginia, that satisfaction which has carried them on to a Resolution to
forward your desire in the best sort that may be for your own and the Public
Good, etc: (B)

Dec. 15. (I suppose Old Style) Mr. Robinson and Brewster date their Letter
ofThanks from Leyden to Sir Edwin: wherein they write -- We have set down our
Requests, subscribed with the Hands of the greatest Part of ourCongregation,
and sent them to the Council by our Agent John Carver, to whom we have also
requested a Gentleman of our Company to ad join Himself -- and for your
Encouragement we will not forbear to mention these Inducements. (1) We verily
believe and trust the LORD is with us; to whom and whoseServic^ we h^ve given
ourselves in many Trials, and that He willGraciously prosper our endeavors
according to the simplicity of our Hearts. ( 2) W^ are well w^aned from the
delicate Milk of our Mother Country, and inured to the Diffi^ulties of a
strange Land. ( 3) The People are, for the Body of them, industrious and
frugal, we think we may safely say, as any Company of People in the World, ( 4)
We are knit together as a Body, in a most strict and sacred Bond and Covenant
of the LORD; of the violation whereof we make great Conscience, and by virtue
whereof we hold ourselves straightly tied to all care of each others Good, and of
the whole. ( 5) and lastly, It is not with us, as with other Men; whom small
things can discourage, or small Discontentments cause to wish our selves at
Home again. etc. (B)

This Year, the Rev. Mr. Paul Baine Dies: who had succeeded the famous Mr.
William Perkins, as Lecturer at St. Andrew's Cambridge: But after wards was
Silenced by Archbishop Bancroft's Visitor Mr. Harsenet, for Nonsubscription
and Nonconformity. Life, before his valuable Exposition of the Ephesians


From 1519, to this Year 1617, have been Entered in the Register Books of Sevil,
15^6 Millions of Gold bro't to Spain from the W. ^ndies (Perier)

1618.
Jan. 8. SIR Rob^rt Nanton sworn the King's Secretary. (hs. Lloyd's
State-Worthies.
)

Jan. 26. Archbishop Spotswood calls together the Bishops and Ministers at
this time in Edinburgh and reads them the King's Letter: wherein He wills them
to approve the 5 Articles under their Hands, or the Bishops to suspend them
from their Ministry and Stipends: The 5 ARTICLES are, (1) For Kneeling at the
Lord's Table. (2) Giving the Communion Privately to the Sick (3) For Baptizing
in Private. (4) For Confirmation by the Bishops. (5) For observing the Holy
Days of Christmas, Good Friday, Easter Sunday, Assention-Day and Whitsunday.
And Ian. 28, a Proclamation at Edinburgh for a universal Cessation on these
Holy Days; and those who refuse, to be punished with Rigor, as disobedient and
rebellious Persons, and con^temners of the King's Authority: though the General
Assembly had not consented, and Acts of Parliament against them are yet
unrepealed ( cl)

Jan. 27. Mr. Robinson and Brewster write from Ley^den to Sir John
Worstenholme; wherewith they send an account of their Principles, to be
communicated to the King's Privy Council, who had received some ill Impressions
against them. viz. Touching the ECCLESIASTICAL MINISTRY, namely of Pastors for
Teaching, Elders for Ruling* and Deacons for destributing the Church's
Contributions, as also for the 2 Sacraments Baptism and the Lord's Supper; we
wholly agree with the French Reformed Churches, according to their Public
Confession of Faith: though some small Differences are to be found in our
Practice in some accidental Circumstances, as (1) Their Ministers Pray with
their Heads covered; ours uncovered. (2) We choose none for Governing Elders,
but such as are able to Teach; which Ability they don't require. (3) Their
Elders and Deacons are annual, or at most for 2 or 3 Years; ours perpetual. (4)
Our Elders administer their Office in Admonitions and Excommunications for
Public Scandals, Publicly before the Congregation; theirs more Privately and
in their Consistories. etc: (B)

Feb. 14. S B. who delivered this Letter writes that upon Sir John's reading
it, I asked his Worship what good News He had for me to write to morrow? He
told me; very good News' for the King's Majesty and the Bishops have consented:
But for your Letters, He would not show them at any Hand, least H^ should spoil
all (B)

Mar. 30. The Provost and Bailiffs of Edinburgh are commanded by a Letter from
the King, to see that the People observe Good Friday: Apr. 1. The Charge for
observing the Holy Days, Published again at Edinburgh: And Apr. 5. being Easter
Sunday, the Bishops in Scotland celebrate the Communion Kneeling ( cl)

Apr. b. (hs) L Delaware sails in a Ship of 250 Tuns, with 200 People for
Virginia: But dies at Sea; Sir Richard Baker mistakes in representing as if the
L. Delaware arrived and died at Virginia.
the Ship baring for New England, there meets with a small Frenchman rich in
Bevers and other Furr: and there refreshing with Fish, Fowl, Wood and Water;
after 16 Weeks arrives at Virginia. (ps. sm)

This Spring, 2 Ships sail from Plymouth, to Fish at New England: one of 80
Tuns, who carries her Fish to Bilboa; the other of 200, which returns Laden
with Fish to Plim^uth in 5 months (ps. sm) But in this larger Ship, Sir F
Gorges The Praesident and Coun^il of New England say WE s^nd etc ( pc) By which
it seems as if Sir F. Gorges act^d in behalf of some at least of the Plymouth
Company
sends Capt. Edward Rocroft, alias Stallings, So Smith and Purchase call Him.
with a Company hired on Purpose: who at his Arrival on the Coast meets with a
small French Bark of Diep (gr) in a Creek a Fishing and Trading, and takes
(...) Sir F. Gorges says, that in such Cases, He had Liberty granted Him to
seize Her: And Smith says, the (...) offered some affront.
sends the Master with his Company in the gr^a^est Ship for England: and with
this Bark R croft and his Company intend to k^ep the Coast thisWinter: But some
of his Men conspi^^ing to kill Him and run away with the Priz^ He is forced to
put 'em ashore at Sawguatock whence they soon get to the Isle of Monahigon 15
Leagues off and 3 Leagues in the Sea: where they stay the Winter. (pc) But in
De^ Rocroft with 10 or 12 Men (sm) sail in the Ba^k, with Fish to Virginia,
there to Trade and stay the Winter. (pc sm)

May 4. The King Commands the Lords of the Privy Council in Sco^land to
celebrate the Com^munion in the Chapel, on Whitsunday, Man 24, when the
Ceremonies are observed, before the Gene^al Assembly had allowed them. ( cl)

May 11 C^nti^u^tio C^lvi^^i.
or 21 New Style A^st^d.
The Popish Arch Bish^p of Prague destroying and shutting u^ the Churches of
the Protestants in Bohemia, the States of the Kingdom meet this day at Prague
to consult how to preserve theirPrivileges ( c^

May 13. C^nti^u^tio C^lvi^^i.
or 23 N. S. A^st^d.
The Emperor Mathi^as's 3 Offi^^rs opposing and provoking them C^nti^u^tio
C^lvi^^i.
the States throw them out of their Chamber window, C^nti^u^tio C^lvi^^i.
A^st^d.
though they escape unhurt, A^st^d.
and the States send their Apology to the Empero^ C^nti^u^tio C^lvi^^i.
A^st^d.
entreat for Pardon C^nti^u^tio C^lvi^^i.
and the Remov^^ of Evil Counselors: but in vain R^shworth.


May 23. ( cc) or Iun. 2. N. S. The Stat^s publish a Decree that all the
I^suits shall depart the Kingdom in 8 days, and never Return. ( cc)

May 24. Lord's day, K. James issues his Declaration; wherein, He Requires the
Bishop of Lancashire, to Present all the PURITANS and Precisians within the
same; either constraining them to conform, or to l^ave the Country: that those
who attend on Church on SUNDAYS, be not desturbed or discouraged from Dancing,
Archery, Leaping, Vaulting, having May-Gam^s, Whitson-Al^s, Morris Dances,
s^tting up May-Poles and other Sports therewith used, or any other such
harmless Recreation, on SUNDAYS after Divine Service: that this Declaration be
Published by Order from the Bishop of the Dioces^ through all the Parish
Churches: and Commands these Directions given last Year in Lanca^hire, with a
few words added most appliable to these Parts of our Realms, to be Published to
all our Subjects. K. James's Declaration, called the Book of Sports, Printed in
410 London, 1618.
And as all Ministers were obliged to Read it in their Churches; those who
Refuss'd, were Summoned into the High Commis^sion Court, Imprisoned and
Suspended. Echard.


Though the Agents of Mr. Robinson's People find the Virginia-Com^any very
desirous of theirGoing to their W India Territory, and wil^ling to grant them a
Patent with as ample Privileges as they co^'d grant to any, and some of the
chief of the Company doubted not to obtain their suit of the King for Liberty
in Religion, and to have it under the Broad Seal, as was desired; yet they
found it a harder piece of Work than they expected. For though many means were
used, and diverse of Worth with Sir Robert Nanton, chief Secretary of State,
labored with the King to obtain it, and others wrought with the A Bishop to
give way thereto; yet all in vain. They indeed prevail so far, as that the King
would connive at them and not molest them, provided they carry peaceably: but
to tolerate them by his Public Authority under his Seal, would not be Granted.
Upon which the Agents return to Leyden, to the great Discouragement of the
People who sent them.(B)

July 10. (or 20 N. S. ( a) The Emperor sends an Army of 10 thousand Men
toward Bohemia: Which begins the famous Religious War, be^tween the Papists
and Protestants in Bohemia and Germany, that rages 30 Years, and destroys above
325 thousand People. (a)

Aug. b Sundry pious Citizens being at a private Meeting in London, many are
^eiz'd and com^mitted to the Counter Prison: but Mr. Stares^more and some
others esc^ping, are betra^'d by one of the Company, for which the A Bisho^
gives the Betrayer great applause and his solemn Blessing in open Court. And
S^p 4. Mr. Staresmore writes to Mr. Carver, that upon Re^presenting his
extraordinary piteous Case to Lord Co^k and the Sherives, He supposes He should
gain his Liberty, if they were not overrul'd by others; but He could get no
answer till the Lords of the King's Council give Consent. (B)

Aug 3. A Proclamation at E^inburgh for a Gene^ral Assembly to meet at Perth
the 25th Inst^ Where they meet accor^ingly; the Com^missi^ners of 4 Diocies and
of some Presby^teries absent for want of Time; Archbishop Spo^swo^d assumes
the Moderators Chair with^out El^ction, allows Noblemen upon the K's missives
only, Reads the King's ^etter of July 10; who says, He was once fully r^s^lv'd
never to call any more Assemblies, because of the Dis^grace offered Him by the
Assembly at St. An^drews in neglecting ^is Godly Desires; that H^ would not
have them think the 5 Articles H^ ^^oposes might not without their Consent be
en^joyn^d by his Authority, which would be a dis^cl^iming his innate Power from
GOD, to disp^se of Things external in the Church as H^ t^ink^ fit; and that He
will be conten^ with nothing but the direct A^ceptation of the Articles in the
Form He sends them After which, the Archbishop said, The King wou'^ be m^re
Glad of their Consent to the 5 Articles than of all the Gold of India; but in
Case of their Refusal, He as^sures them that the wh^l^ S^ate of the Church
w^u'd ^e ov rthrown, some Minist^rs w^u'd b^ Banish^d, others d^prived of t^eir
S^ip^nd and O^^fi^e, and all bro't under the Wrath ^f Authority: And though the
m^j^rity of the Commissioned oppose; yet the Archbishop neglecting many who
could get no Vote, and admitting other^ who had no Commission* He carries it
for the 5 A^^icles. And Oct. 26. A Pr^clamation b^ the King at E^inburgh*
commanding all strict^ly to observe them, and certifying that thos^ who do to
the contrary, shall be holden as seditious, factious, Disturbers of the Peace
of the Kirk* contemners of his just Command, an^ shall be Punished in their
Goods and Perso^^ with all Rigor and Extremity at the A^bitre^ment of the
Privy Coun^il (cl)

^ct. 2^. W^dnesd^y, (^^) Sir W^lter R^leigh, by Gon^da^^^e the Spanish
Embassador's Instigation^ (...) this day bro't to the King's Bench* and
order^ed to suffer Death to m rrow, upon his Sentenc^ in 16^^; and at 9 next
Morning* B^headed ((...)) in Parliament yard (^s) AE^ 66* (^c) H^ was next to
Drake, the scourge and hate of the Spaniard, (^k* ^c) and Ll^yd says* that
Princes ha^ interceeded for Him, the whole Nation pitied Him, and K. James
would not execute Him without an Apology (...)
But He fell a Sacrifice to the King's earnestly desired Match of Prince
Charles with the Popish In^anta of Spain. (ho. ec)

Nov. 3. (or 1^ N. S) Tu^sday (...)
the famous S^nod of D rt begins (...)
(...)
when there Enter and set with them, Dr. Carl^ton Bishop of Landaff (...)
after of C^i^hester, (...)
Dr. H^ll Dean of Wor^cester (...)
after Bishop of Ex^ter and Norwi^^, (...)
Dr* Davenant, Public Professor of Divinity and Master of Queens College,
Cam^ridge (...)
after Bishop of Sali^bury (...)
and Dr. Ward Maste^ (...) S^dn^y College, Ca^brid^e, and Archdeacon of
T^unton; b^ing s^nt by K James in behalf of the Church of Engl^nd, (...)
(...)
and the State^ allow them 10 P^^nds Ste^ling ^ Day (...)


Nov 4. (or 14 N S.) We^n^s^^y, the Syn^d Choose Mr John Bo^e^m^n, Pastor of the
Church of L^^a^den in Friesl^nd, their P^^s^^ent. (...)


(...)
Nov. 18 Wedn^sday, a great Comet appears over Eu^rope; first in the Morning,
then in the Evening and continues visible to Wednesday Dec. 16 (hs)

Dec. 10. (or 20 N. S.) Walter Balcanqual B. D and Fellow of Pembrook Hall in
Cambridge, enters the Synod of Dort, being sent by K James, on behalf of the
Church of Scotland. (ac fl)

1619.
Feb. KIng James Publishes his Meditation on the Lord's Prayer in a small 8 vo:
at the beginning of which* He spends 15 pages in Reflecting on the Puritans,
with those of the Separation; and Proving the Former to be the Fathers of the
Latter. K. James's Book itself Printed in London 1619.


Notwithstanding the great Discouragement the English at Leyden met with from
the King and Bps refusing to allow them Liberty of Conscience in America, under
the Royal S^al; yet casting themselves on the Care of Providence, they Resolve
to Ven^ture, and send two other Agents By Mr. (...) Letter from London, of May
8 this Year, they seem to be Mr. C^^^man Himself and Mr. Brad ^^d.
^o agree with the Virginia Company. But the said Virginia Company falling into
great Desturbances and Factions, these Affairs are long delayed. (B^

This Spring, Sir F. Gorges The (...) and (...) of New England say, W^ (...)
and (...) b^f^re in Note 28: and Smith says there goes but one (...) to (...)
this Year from Plymouth
sends Capt Thomas Dermer (gr) from Plymouth in a Ship of 200 Tuns (sm) for the
Fishing B^siness at New England; assigning Him a Company* ^o join with Rocroft
and his People; and sending with Him Squanto or Tasquantum, one of the Na^tives
which Hunt had bro't away: But Arriving, and not finding Rocroft, He is in
doubt wha^ to Do: yet hearing by the People at M^na higan, that He was gone to
Virginia, hopes for his Return, till He hears of his Disaster. (pc)

Mar. 2. Tuesday, Q. Ann, Consort to K. James, Dies at Ham^tonCourt (hs bk)
Aged 45 Years (ec) R^shworth mistaken inP^acing herD on Nov. 17* 16 18


Mar. 10 (cc) or 20 N. S. ( Pe^a^i^s.
Ri^^iolius.
) Mathias Emperor of Germany Dies AEt 62 Pe^a^i^s.
63. ( cc. Ri^^iolius.
)

Mar. 12. The High Commission Court at Edinburgh, deprive and confine Mr.
Richard Dickson, for giving the Communion to the People setting and not with
his own Hands. And about this time, the King sends a Command to the Offi^ers of
State at Edinburgh, (...) of the Privy Council and Sessions, and Advocates, to
Communi^cate in the GreatKirk there Kneeling, on Easter^ Sunday the 28th
current, on Pain of Loosing their Offices; and enjoins the Magistrates of
Edinburgh to Communicate Kneeling. (cl)

Apr. 18. Sir George Yardly arriving as Governor at Virginia, (sm) and finding
Recroft ready to sail for New England, commands Him aboard* who taking the
Boat, with half his Men goes aboard the Governor's Ship, is forced to stay all
Night; and a Storm rising, the Bark, for want of Hands is driven ashore and
Sunk: However the next Day, the Governor and Captain, labor so, that at length
they free Her: But while Rocroft is sitting for New England again, He happens
to to be killed in a Quarrel with one of Virginia and the Bark is a 2d time
sunk and last ( pc

Apr. 22. The High Commission Court at Edinburgh suspend Mr. H^g from his
Ministry, and order Him to be confined during the King's Pleasure, for
Preaching against Bishops and the 5 Articles, and declining their Judicatory,
and afterward deprive Him of the Ministry: They also Depose and Confine the
Rev. Mr. Duncan for declining their Judicature. (cl)

Apr. 26 (or May 6 N S) Monday, the Synod of Dort at their 153d Session,
Proceed to the Great Church of that City and Publish their Sentence on the 5
Points, in condemnation of the Arminian Doctrines: And Apr. 29. Thursday, at
their 154th Session, they break up, with mutual Embraces and Tears. ( ac)

May 6 The States of Hungary meet and proscribe the Jesuits (cc) May 23 (or Iun
2 N. S.) The States of Moravia proscribe the Jesuits. (a) Iun 14 ( ^c) (or 24 N
S ( a)) The States of Silesia agree to banish the Jesuits. (^c. a) And July 13
the States of Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, and Lusatia, Confederate together for
their Preservation ( cc)

May 8 Mr. Cushman, one of the L^yden Agents at London, writes, that Sir T.
Smith having desired to be eased of his Office of Treasurer and Governor of the
Virginia Company, Sir Edwin Sands was chosen. Sir Edwin Sands was Chosen in
April. (B)
But Sir Thomas repenting, and opposing Sir Edwin, great Desturbances and
Factions are raised in said Company, that no Business could well go forward. (B)

May 26. Capt Dermer sails from Monahigan in an open Pinnace of 5 Tuns, along
the Coast S. Westerly, finds some ancient Plantations, not long since populous,
now utterly void; in other Places a Remnant, but not free of Sickness, viz. the
Plague, perceiving the Sores of some that had escaped: Arrives at his Savage's
native Country, finds all Dead, travels a day's Journey West to Nummastaquit,
sends a Messenger a day's Journey West to P^^anaokit, bordering on the Sea,
whence two Kings come to see Him (dp) At Nummastaquit, the Indians would have
killed Him had not Squanto entreated hard for Him (db) and here He redeems a
Frenchman, and afterward at Mastachusit, another cast away at the N. E. of
Cape Cod, three Years before: Returning, arrives at Monahigan, June 23; where
He finds the Ship ready to depart (dp) She had staid about six Weeks, and being
laden by 38 Men and Boys with Fish and Furrs, Returns (sm) By Capt. Ward, from
Virginia, Capt. Dermer hears of R^croft's Death ( pc. sm dp) whereupon, putting
most of his Provisions aboard said Ward ready bound thither, and leaving his
Indian at Sawa^quatock, He sails in his Pinnace for Virginia (dp) with 5 or 6
Men and the two Frenchmen (sm) Sir F Gorges seems to mistake in representing as
if D^rmer heard not of Rocroft's Death, till he arrived in Virginia. Capt.
Smith says, He goes with 5 or 6 Men and the two Frenchmen: But neither Dermer
nor G^rges have any such Passages.
Having passed 40 Leagues along the Coast He is cast ashore in a Broad Bay, but
g^es off again: At M^namock, the Southern Part of Cap^ Cod, He is unawares
taken Prisoner, but g^^ clear: Thence sails to Capaock and meets wit^ Epenew:
Th^nce steers along the Coast be^tween Long Isl^nd and the M^in; being the
first who pass^s through and finds it to be an Island 30 Leagues in Length,
before accounted Pa^ of the M^in: Thence sails along the Coast, arrives at Cape
Charles, Sept. 7, and next day, at the mouth of James River. (dp)

June 15. The King Renews the High Commission Court of S^otland in more ample
Form: And July 2, upon the King's Order, the Arch Bp of Glasgow cites before
the High Commission the Rev. Mr. Blyth and Forrester, to depose them from the
Ministry and confine them, for giving the Communion without Kneeling* Who Plead
the Acts of Parliament for the manner of Celebration and the Practice o^ the
Church this three score Years, and no Act of Parliament, nor General Assembly,
no not of Perth, forbidding the former Practice: yet they are suspended during
the King's Pleasure and confined. (cl)

Aug 18. ( cc Cluv^^us.
) or 28 N S (a. ri) F^rdinand King of Hungary and Boh^mia, Elected Emperor of
G^rmany: Aug 19 the States of Bohemia, Renounce King Ferdinand (cc. Cluv^^us.
) and Aug. 26 choose (...), Elector Pal^tine their King; the L^g^tes of Moravi^,
Sil^sia, and Lusatia, being present and concurring with them. (cc) October 2^ (or
30 N S) He is magnificently received at Pragu^: O^^. 25 (or Nov 4. N. S) is
there Crowned King of Bo^emia: And Oct 28 (or Nov. 7 N. S.) his Royal C^nsort,
There Crowned Queen. (a)

Sept 17 The King by Letters to the Provost, Bailiff's and Coun^il of
Edinburgh, wills them to change their Magistrates the 29th current, and allow
of none but those who will conform to the 5 Arti^les: upon which, the Provost,
Bailiff's and Treasurer are changed: Nov 23, In a Convention of Ministers
called to St. Andrews by the A Bishop, He communicates to them a Letter from
the King; wherein He commands the Bishops to Depose all that refuse to conform,
without Respect of Persons, and no ways regarding their multitude: And Dec. b a
Charge Proclaimed at Edinburgh for the Observation of Christmas (cl)

After long attendance, the Leyden Agents obtain a Patent granted and confirmed
under the Virginia Company's Seal: But the Patent being taken out in the name
of Mr. John Wincob, a Religious Gentleman (belonging to the Countess of
Lincoln) who intended to go with them; and Providence so ordering that He never
went; they never made use of his Patent, which cost them so much Charge and
Labor. However, the Patent being carried by one of their Messengers to Leyden,
for the People to consider, with several Proposals for their Transmigration,
made by Mr. Th^mas Weston of London, Merchant, and other Friends and Merchants
as should either go or adventure with them; they are requ^sted to prepare with
speed for the Voyage. (B)

1620
UPON receiving These, they first keep a day of S^lemn Prayer, Mr* Robins n
preaching a very suitableSermon from 1 Samuel xxiii.3, 4. strengthening them
against their Fears, and encouraging them in their Resolutions, and then
conclude how many and wh^ should Prepare to Go first: For all that were
willing, could not get ready quickly: The grea^ter Number bring to stay require
their PASTOR to tarry with them: Their ELDER Mr BREWSTER to go with the other:
Those who go first to be an abs^lute Church of themselves, as well as those
that stay; with this Proviso, that as any go over or return, they shall be
reputed as Members, without further Dismission or T^stimonial: And those who
tarry, to f^llow the rest as soon as they can. (B)

Mr. Weston coming to Leyden, the People agree with Him on Articles, both for
Shipping and Money to assist in their Trans^portation: Then send Mr. Carver and
Cush^man to England, to receive the Money, and provide for the Voyage; Mr.
Cushman at London, Mr. Carver at South Hampton: Those who are to go first,
Prepare with Speed, sell their Estates, put their Money into the common Stock,
to be disposed by their Managers for making general Provisions. There was also
one Mr Martin chosen in England, to join with Mr Carver and Cushman; He came
from Bill^rica in Essex: From which County came several others, as also from
Land n and other Places, to Go with them: And a Ship of 60 Tuns is bought and
sitted in Holland, both to help Transport them and to st^^ in the Country. (B)

March 1 The High Commission Court at E^in^burg^ suspend Mr. Porteous from his
Ministry till the next Assembly for not observing Holy Days, and not giving the
Communion according to the fiveArticles: And for the sameRea^sons Deprive Mr.
Scrimg^r from the Ministry and confine Him. March 28. The High Com^mission at
Gl^sgow, Depose and confine Mr. Levingstone and F^rguson, for not observing the
said Articles, and for declining the Judicature of the High Commission April
21. The High Commissi^^ at St. Andrew's Deprive Dr. Barclay from Preaching and
confine Mr. Me n s and Mr A^eskin, for not regarding the Articles. Ap^il 25.
Five Citizens of E^inburgh confined by the King's Order, without Citation,
Trial or Conviction, only to satisfy his Majesty f^r their accompanying the
Ministers before the High Commission, and assi^ting them in their Disobedience.
And May 10. Mr. Dunca^ Deprived for not conforming to the Articles ( cl)

This Year, there goes 6 or 7 sail from the West of England to NEW ENGLAND, to
Fish only (sm) But from England to Virginia 8 Ships with a thousand and 96
Passengers to Settle. ( ps)

This Spring, Capt Dermer Returns to NEW ENGLAND (sm) In his way, He meets with
certain Hollanders, who had a Trade in Hud^son's River, some Years; Discovers
many Goodly Rivers and exceeding pleasant Coasts and Islands, for 80 Leagues
East from Hudson's River to Cape Cod: But arriving at New England again ( pc)
whence he writes a Letter on June 30 (B) 1 st. He comes to N^uti^an, the^ to
Capawick; where (gr) with Squanto H^ goes ashore (B) and is suddenly set upon
(p^) by Epenow (gr) and other Savages; who giv^ Him 14 Wounds (pc gr) and slay
all his Me^ but one that kept the Boat: with whose Help the Captain (B) being a
brave, stout Gentle^man, and drawing his Sword (gr) by his Va^lour and
Dexterity (pc) frees Himself. But is forced to Return to Virginia for Cure:
where He falls ill and Dies of the Sickness of the Country (pc gr) Governo^r
Bradford says, the Captain gets a^board very sore wounded, and the Indians
would have c^t off his Head upon the C^ddy of his Boat, had not the Man rescued
Him with a Sword, and so they got away, and made shift to get into (...), where
he died (^) and Capt Smith writes as if he Died of his Wounds (s^.) B^t Gov
Bradford says, whether of his Wou^^s o^ (...) of the (...), or both, is
uncertain. (B)


May 25 (or June 4 N. S.) TheD^t^ in the Manuscript ^. (...) 14. N S. But the
Fig^re 1, being somewhat blur'd, and June 14. N S. being (...) and this Letter
placed before the follo^ing o^ (...) I conclude (...) should be ^une 4. N. S
Mr. Robinson writes to Mr. Carver, and complains of Mr^ Weston's neglect in
getting Shipping in England; for want of which they are in a pi^teous case at
Ley^en. And May 31 (or June 10 N S) S F, E W, W B and I A, write from Leyden to
Mr Carver and Cushman, that the coming of Mr. Nash and their Pilot is a great
Encouragement to them. (B)

June 10. Mr. Cushman in a Letter from London* to Mr. Carver at S uth Hampton,
says, tha^ Mr. Crabe a Minister had promised to G^* but is much opposed, and
like to fail: An^ in a Letter to the People at Leyden, that H had hired another
Pilot, one Mr. Clark wh^ went last Year to Virginia; that He ^ g t ing a Ship,
hopes He shall make all read^ at London in 14 days; and would have M^ R^ynolds
tarry in Holland, and bring the Shi^ t^ere to S^uth Hampton. Upon this a Ship
of 9 s^o^e Tuns is immediately hired at London: And the Ship in H ll^nd being
ready they spend a day in solemn Prayer: M^ Robinson Preaching from Ezra
viii.21. ( B

June. 19 A Proclamation at Edinburgh, of the K ^g's W^ll, that all in Scotland
observe the Holy D^ys* with Kneeling at the Lord's Tabl^ and other of the 5
Articles; that the Ministe^ who don't, be Punished with Deprivation,
Su^^p^nsion and Confinement, at the Discretion o^ the High Commission; that
every one who ob^serves not the Holy Days at Church, shall f^^ every Omission
pay 13 s. 4 d; that those wh^ don't communic^te Kneeling shall Pay, a^ Earl a
1^0 l. a Lord a 100 marks, a Lord 50 ^ others 20 l or less, at the Discretion
of the Judges; and whoever impugnes the 5 Articles* shall be pu^ish'd at the
Discretion of the Privy Council. (cl)

But Removing to NORTH AMERICA we must now leave the History of SCOTLAND, as
well as other Parts of Europe, and only hint at those Events in ENGLAND which
more immediately affect the BRITISH COLONI^S.

The Voyage of the English People a^ Leyden for VIRGINIA.
ABout July 21. (I suppose N.S.) The Eng^lish Voyagers at Leyden leave that
City where they had lived near 12 Years; being accompanied by most of their
Brethren t^ Delph-Haven, where their Ship lay ready* and sundry come from
Amsterdam, to see their shipped and take their leave; they spend that Night in
friendly, entertaining and christian Converse. And July 22 (I suppose N. S.^
Both Mr. Morton, and Dr. C. Mat^er, seem to mistake in saying* July 2.
The Wind being fair, they go aboard* theirFriends attending them: at their
Parting Mr. Robinson falling down on his Knees and they all with Him, He with
watery Cheeks commends them with most ^erven^ Prayer to God; and then with
mutual Em^braces and many Tears, they take their Leave, and with a prosperous
Gale, come to South H^mpton; where they find the bigge^ Ship from London, Mr.
Jones Master, wit^ the rest of the Company, who had bee^ waiting there with Mr
Cushman 7 days. 700 Pounds Sterling are laid out at South Hamp^ton, and they
carry about 17^0 Pounds Ven^ture with them: And Mr Weston comes thither from
London, to see 'em dispatched (B)

July 23. K. James gives a Warrant to his Solicito^ Sir Thomas Coventry, to
prepare a new Patent for the Incorporation of the Adventurers to the
Northern-Colony of Virginia, between 40 an^ 4^ Degrees. N. which Patent the King
signs on N^v 3, st^ling them the Council for the Affairs of NEW ENGLAND and
their Successors (gr)

July 27 Mr. Robinson writes to Mr. Carver and People, Letters, which they
receive at South-Hampton: And the Company being called together, their's is
read among them, to the Acceptance of all, and after Fruit of many. Thi^ Letter
is Publish^^ in M^urt's Relation, Mor^t^^'s Memo^ia^* and Neal's History of New
England.
Then they distribute their Company into the Ships, and with the Approbation of
the Masters, choose a Governor and 2 or 3 Assistants for each, to order the
People and Provisions (B)

Aug 5. They sail from South-Hampton; but reach not far before Mr. Reinolds
Master of the ^^sser Ship complained She was so leaky that He dare proceed no
farther: Upon which they both put in to Dartmouth, about Aug. 13. where they
search and mendHer to their great Charge and Loss of Time and a fair Wind: Though
had they staid at Sea but 3 or 4 Hours more, She had Sunk right down About Aug.
21. They set sail again; but having gone above a 100 Leagues beyond the Land's
End of England, Mr. Reinolds com^plain'd of her leaking again, that they must
either Return or Sink; for they c^u'd scarc^ free her by Pumping: Upon which
they Both put back to Plymouth; where finding no Defect, they judge her
Leakiness owing to her general weakness: They therefore agree to dismiss her,
and those who are wil^ling, to Return to London, though this was very grievous
and discouraging; Mr. Cushman and Family returning with them; the rest tak^^^
what Provision they could well stow in the larger Ship, resolve to proceedon
the Voyag^ alone. (B)

Sept. 6. They make another sad Parting, and the greater Ship lets s^il again:
But about (...) Seas over meets with cross Winds and many fierce St^rms, which
often force 'em to hull for diverse D^ys together, not being able to bare a
Knot of Sail; make her upper Works very leaky, and bow and wrack a main Beam in
the Mid ship; which puts them in such Fear, as the chief of the Company enters
into a serious Consultation with the Ship O^^ficers about returning: But a
Passenger having bro't a great Iron Screw from Holland, they with it raise the
Beam into its Place; and then committing themselves to the Di^vine Will,
Proceed. (B)

Nov. 6. Dies at Sea, Wm Butten, a Youth and Servant to Samu^l Fuller Governor
Bradford's Pocket Book, which contains a Register of Deaths etc. from Nov. 6.
1620. to the End of March 1621.
being the only Passenger who Dies on the Voyage. (B)

Nov. 9. At Break of Day Relation of their Proceedings P^blished by Mourt.
after long beating the Sea, they make the Land of CAPE-CO^ Whereupon, they
tack and stand to the Southward, the Wind and Weather being fair, to find some
Place about Hu^son's River for Settlement. But sailing this Course a^bout half
the day, they fall among roaring Shoals and Breakers, and are so entangled with
them as they find themselves in great H^z^rd, They are the s^m^ which Capt.
Gosnold, in 1602 called Point Care and Tu^k^r's Terror; but the French and
Dut^^ ^^ll Mal^^a^, by reason of Perillo^s Shoals and the Losses there (...). (
B)
and the Wind shrinking upon them at the same Time, they bare up for the Cape,
get out of those Dangers before Night; and the next Day, into the Cape Harbor,
where they ride in safety. (B)

Nov. 11. S^^u^day, being thus arrived, they first fall on their Knees and
Bless the God of Heaven, etc But their Design and Patent being for VIRGINIA,
and not New England, which belongs to another Jurisdiction, wherewith the
Virginia Company have no Concern; before they land, they this day combine into
a BO^Y-POLITICK by a SOLEMN CONTRACT, to which they set their Hands, as the
Basis of their Government in this new found Country; choose Mr JOHN CARVER a
Pious and well approved Gentleman, their Governor for the first Year: (B) And
then set ashore 15 or 16 Men well armed to fetch Wood and discover the Land;
who at Night return, but found neither House nor Person. (re)

Nov. 13. M^nday, The People go ashore to refresh themselves, and every day the
Whales Play round about them and the greatest store of F^wls they ever saw: But
the Earth here a company of Sand hills; and the Water so shallow nea^ the
Shore, they are forced to wa^e a Bow Shot or two to get to ^and; which being
freezing weather, a^^ecteth them with grievous Colds and Coughs, which after
proves the Death of many, and renders the Place unfit for Settlement. ( re)

Nov. 15. While the Shallop is sitting, Capt. Stan^dish, with 16 Men well
armed, set out on the Cape, to sea^ch for a convenient Place to Settle (B)
William Bradford, Stephen Hopkins an^ Edward Tilley are of the Number, adjoin'd
to the Captain for Council. (re) When they had marched a mile Southward they
se^ 5 or 6 Savages (B) whom they follow 10 miles (re) till Night, but could not
overtake them, and lodge in the Woods. The next Day, they head a great Creek
(B) and travel on to a Valley, wherein is a fine, clear Pond of Fresh water, a
Musket Shot wide and two long. Then they come to a Place of Graves; then to the
Remainder of an Old Fort or Pallizad^ which they conceive had been made by
Christians; (re) and then to a Harbor open^ing into two Creeks with an high
Cliff of Sand at the Entrance (B) the Western Creek being twice as large as the
Eastern (re) This seems to be what is since called Barnstab^^ Harbor.
Near which they meet with Heaps of Sand, dig into them, find several Baskets
full of Indian Corn, and taking some for which they purpose to give the Natives
full satisfaction, as soon as they could meet with any of 'em, Return (B) to
the Pond; where they make a Barricado and lodge this Night, being very Rainy:
And the next Day, wading in some Places up to the Knees, get back to the Ship
(re) to the great Joy of their Brethren. (B

Nov. 27 The Shall^p being (...), 24 of the^ Men, with Mr. Jones and 9 Sailors,
34 in all set forth on a more full Discovery of the afore^said Harbor: But the
weather growin^ rough and the winds cross, they are soon ob^lig'd to row for
the nearest Shore, and the^ wade above their Knees to Land. It blows snows and
freezes all this Day and Night; and here some received the Seeds of those
fa^tal Illnesses that quickly seized them. The next Day, they sail to their
designed Port; bu^ find it unfit for shipping, land between the 2 Creeks; and
marching 4 or 5 miles by the Greater are tired with traveling up and down the
steep Hills and Valleys, covered half a foot with Snow, and lodge under Pine
Trees The next Morning, return to the other Creek and thence to the Place of
their former Dig^ging, where they dig again, though the (...) be frozen a Foot
deep, and find more Corr and Beans, make up their Corn to 10 Bushels, which
they send with Mr. Jones and 15 o^ their Sick and weaker People to the Ship; 18
staying and lodging there this Night, next Day, they dig in several such like
Places, but find no more Corn nor any thing else but Graves; discover 2 Indian
Wigwams, but s^^ no Natives: And the Shallop returning, they get aboard at
Night; and the next Day, Dec. 1. Return to the Ship. (re) The Corn they found,
happily serves for their Planting on the Spring ensuing, or they would have
been in great Danger of Perishing: (B, re) For which they gave the Owners
entire content about 6 months after. (B)

Before the End of November (re) Sus^nna Wife of William White (B. Boston News
Letter.
was delivered o^ a Son, who is called Peregrine (re) being the first Born
since their arrival, Boston News Letter.
and I con^clude the first of the European Extract in New England. He Lives to
July 22. 1704 when He Dies at Ma^shfield. Boston News Letter.



Dec 4 Dies Edward Thompson, Servant of M^^ White (bp) the first that Dies
since their arri^val. Dec. 6. Dies Jasper, a Boy of Mr. Carver's: Dec. 7.
Dorothy, Wife to Mr. William Bradford: Dec. 8. James Chilton (bp)

Dec. 6. They again send out their Shallop, with 10 of their principal Men, (B)
viz Mr Car^ver, Bradford, Winslow, Cap. Standish, etc with 8 or 10 Seamen (re)
to circulate the Bay and find a better Place; though the weather is very cold and
the spray of the Sea freezes on them* that their Clothes look as if they were
glazed, (B) and feel like Coats of Iron. (re) T^is Night they get to the Bottom
of the Bay, se^ 10 or 12 Indians ashore, (B) buisy a cutting up a Grampus. (re)
By reason of the Flats they land with great Difficulty, make a Barricado* lodge
therein, and see the Smoke of the Indian Fires that Night (B) about 4 or 5
miles from them. (re)

Dec. 7. This Morning, they divide their Company some traveling on shore, (B)
eight (re) others coasting in the Shallop by great Flats of Sand (B) About 10
o'Clock, the shore People fin^ a great Burying Place: Part thereof incom^passed
with a large Pallizado, full of Grav^^ some Paled about, others having small
Pole^ turned and twisted over them: Without the Pallizado, were Graves also,
but not so costly Then they come to 4 or 5 deserted Wigwam^, but see no People
(re) Toward Night, they hasten out of the Woods to meet the Shallop, and
m^king a Signal for her to bare into a Creek, she comes in at high water to
their mu^tual Joy, having not seen each other since Morning: But found noPeople
nor any Place they liked: And at Night, make another Barricado, and lodge
therein (B)

Dec. 8. At 5 this Morning they rise; and after Prayer, the Day dawning, and
the Tide high enough to call them downto the Shallop; they suddenly hear a
great and strange Cry, one of their Company running toward them calling out
INDIANS! INDIANS! And therewith Arrows come flying about them. (B) Upon
discharging their Pieces, the Indians soon get away, the English following a
quarter of a mile shouting, return to their Shallop (B) having left 6 Men to
keep her (re) and not one of the Company wounded, though the Ar^rows flew close
on every side. Upon which they give God solemn Thanks: Then sail along the
Coast (B) about 15 L^agues (re) find no c^nvenient H^rbour, and hasten on to a
Port, which Mr. Coppin their Pilot assures them is a good one, which He had
been in, and they might reach before Night. But after some Hours sailing, it
begins to snow and rain: At Mid a^ternoon, the wind rising, the Sea grows very
rough, they brake their Rudder, it is as much as 2 Men can steer Her with a
couple of Oars: And the Storm increasing the Night approaching, and baring what
Sail they can to get in; they brake their Mast in; Pieces, their Sail falls
over board in a very grown Sea, and they are like to Founder sud^denly: Yet by
the mercy of Heaven, they re^cover themselves, and the Flood being with them
strike into the imagined Harbor: But the Pilot being deceived Cries out, Lord
be merciful^ my Eyes never saw this Place before! And He and the Mate would
have run Her ashore in a Cove full of Breakers before the Wind* Mr. Morton
says, This is between the Place sinc called the Gurnet's Nos^ and Sagaquab.
But a Steersman calling to the Rowers about with Her, or we are Cast away;
they get her about immediately: And Providence showing a fair Sound before
them, though it be very dark and rains hard, they get under the Lee of a small
Rise of Land; but are divided about going ashore, least they fall into the
midst* of Savages; some therefore keep the Boat* but others being so wet, cold
and seeble, can not bear it, but venture ashore, with great D^fficulty kindle a
Fire: and after Mid night* the Wind shifting to the N W. and freezin^ hard, the
Rest are glad to get to 'em, an^ here stay the Night. (B)

Dec 9. In the Morning they find the Place to be small Island, secure from
Indians. Mr Morton says, This is since called Clark's Island because Mr. Clark
the Mate of the Ship first steppe^ ashore th^r^on.
An^ve^ this being the last Day of the Week, they here dry their Stuff, fix
their Pieces, rest themselves, return God Thanks for their many Deliverances:
and here the next Day keep their Christian Sabbath. (B)

Dec. 11. Monday, they found the Harbor, find it fit for Shipping, march into
the Land, see divers^ Cornfields, and running Brooks, with a Place they judge
fit for Habitation, and return to the Ship with the Discovery, to their great
Comfort. (B)

Dec. 15. The Ship sails for this newfound Port, come ^ within 2 Leagues of it,
when a N. W. Mourt's Relation.
Wind springs up and forces her back: But the next Day, the Wind comes fair,
and she arrives in the desired Harbor (B) quickly after, the Wind chops about;
so that had they been hindered but Half an Hour, they would have been forced
back to the Cape again. (re)

Dec. 18. Monday, they land, with the Master of the Ship and 3 or 4 Sailors;
march along the Coast, 7 or 8 Miles, but see neither Wigwam, India^, nor
Navigable River, but only 4 or 5 Brooks of sweet fresh Water running into the
Sea, with choi^e Ground formerly possessed and planted: and at Night return to
the Ship: Next Day, they go again to discover; some on Land, others in the
Shallop, find a Creek into which they pass 3 Miles, and Return. (re)

Dec 20. This Morning, after calling to Heaven for Guidance, they go ashore
again, to Pitch on some Place for immediate Settlement. After viewing the
Country they conclude to settle on the Main, on a highGround, facing the Bay
where Corn had been Planted 3 or 4 Years before; a sweet Brook running under
the Hill with many delicate Springs. On a great Hill(...)* int^nd to fortify:
which will command all round, wh^nce they may see across the Bay to theCape. And
here being in Number 20, they ran devous this Evenings but aStorm rising, it
blows and rain hard all Night, continues so tempestuous for 2 Days tha^ they
cannot get aboard, and have nothing to shelter them (re^

Dec. 21. Dies Richard Britterige (bp) the first who Dies i^ t^^s Harbor.

Dec. 23. Saturday, as many as can, go ashore, cut and carry Tim^ber for a
common Building ( re)

Dec. 24. Lord's day, our People ashore are alarmed with the Cry of Savages,
expect an Assault, but continueQuiet. ( re) And this Day Dies Solomon Martin
(bp) the sixth and las^ who Dies this Month.

Dec. 25. Monday, they go ashore again, felling Timber, sawing, riving,
carrying ( re) Begin to erect the first Horse (B) about 20 Foot square ( re)
for their common Use, to receive them and their Goods: (B) and leaving 20 to
keep a Court of Guard, the Rest return aboard at Ev^n^ing: But in the Night and
next Day, another sore Storm of Wind and Rain. ( re)

Dec. 28. Thursday, they go to Work on the Hill, Reduce themselves to 19
Families, measure out their Lot^s, and draw for them. Many grow ill of grievous
Colds, from the great and many Hardships they had endured. Dec. 29 and 30, very
cold and stormy again: and they se^ great Smoaks of Fires made by the Indians
about 6 or ^ Miles off. ( re)

Dec. 31. Lord's Day, Though the Generality remain aboard the Ship almost a Mile
and Half off; yet this seems to be (...) first Day that any keep the Sabbath in
the Place of the^^ Building* at this Time we therefore fix the AE^^ of their
Settlement Here; to which they give the Name of PLYMOUTH, the first English
Town in all thisCountry, in a grateful Memory of the Christian Friends the^
found at Plymouth in England, as of the last Town the^ left in that their
Native Land. Here Governor Bradfo^^ ends hi^ first Book, containing 10 Chapters
in 53 Page Folio: And Here we end the first Part of our NEW ENGLAND Chronology.

THE New England CHRONOLOGY.

PART II.

Being a short Account of the Affairs of this Country, as Settled by the
several Colonies of the English Nation:

FROM Their Beginning, in the Settlement of the first at PLYMOUTH, by the Name
of PLIMOUTH-COLONY, Dec. 31. 1620.

TO The Settlement of the seventh and last, by the Combination of Forty one
Persons into a Form of Government on Piscataqua River, Oct 22. 1640; afterward
called the PROVINCE of NEW HAMPSHIRE.

THE New England Chronology.
PART II.
SECT. I.
From the Beginning of the Settlement of the first or PLYMOUTH COLONY at
Plymouth, under Gover^nor Carver, Dec. 31. 1620; To the Beginning of the
Settlement of the MASSACHUSETTS or second COLONY by the Arrival of Governor
Wi^throp and Company at Salem, June 12. 1630.

THROUGH a great variety of Obstacles and Hardships, this small and pious
People are at length arrived and seated on this strange and distant Shore: but
yet a Shore they are by an overruling Providence conducted to, beside their
own Design, though not without the secret Plots of others For (...) some
unknown Country further Southward about HUDSON'S RIVER was in their View when
they engaged in thi^ ^dventurous Voyage; Mr. Morton who published his Memorial
in 1670, tel^s us, He had then lately sure Intelligence, that (...) Dutch
intending to settle a Colony There of their own, privately hired the Master of
the Ship to contrive De^ays in England, then to steer them to these Northern
Coasts, and there under Pleas of Shoals and Winter, to discourage them from
venturing farther. Agreeable to this, we ^bserv'd in the Month of June this
Year, while the English Leydeners were preparing f^^ their Voyage; that as
Capt. Dermer Returned from Virginia to New England, He met certain Hollanders
sailing f^^ Hudson's River, where they had ^ad aTrade for se^eral Years


However, by their being guided Hither, they then unknowingly escaped the much
greater Danger of falling a^mong the Multitudes of Savages at that Time filling
the Countries about Hudson's River, and are landed in a Place of greater
Safety; where a general Pestilence had 2 or; Years before, exceedingly thin'd
the Natives and prepared the Way for this feeble Company.

Being thus beside their Intention bro't to the New England Coast, where their
Patent gave them no Right or Power, they were in a sort reduced to a State of
Nature: and some of the Strangers received at London, dropping some mutinous
Speeches as if there were now no Authority over them; this People therefore
before they landed wisely formed themselves into a BODY POLITIC under the
Crown of England, by the solemn CONTRACT hinted above, and which Governor
Bradford gives us in the following Terms. The same is Printed in Mourt's
Relation, Purchase, Morton, and Neal; though the 2 latter with some small
Variation from the other 3.


In the Name of GOD Amen: We whose Names are under written, the Loyal Subjects
of our dread Sovereign Lord King JAMES by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain,
France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.

Having undertaken for the Glory of GOD, and advancement of the Christian
Faith, and Honor of our King and Country, a Voyage to Plant the first Colony
in the Northern Parts of Virginia; Do by these Presents solemnly and mutually
in the Presence of GOD, and one of another, Covenant and Com^bine ourselves
together unto a Civil Body Politic, for our better Ordering and Preservation,
and Furtherance of the (...) aforesaid; and byVirtue hereof to enact,
constitute and frame such (...) and equal Laws, Ordinances, Acts, Constitutions
and Offices So Bradford, Mount and Purc^as; but Mor^on says Office^^
from Time to Time, as shall be though it most meet and convenient for the General
Good of the Colony; unto which we Promise all due Submission and Obedience: In
witness whereof we have ^^r^under subscribed our Names at Cape Cod, the 11th of
November, in the Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King JAMES of England,
France and Ireland the Eighteenth and of Scotland the Fifty-fourth, Anno
Domini, 1620. (B)

To this Instrument Mr. Morton sets the Subscribers in the following Order: But
their Names corrected, with their Titles and Families I take from the List at
the End of Governor Bradford's Folio Manuscript: Only this I observe, that out
of Modesty, He omits the Title of Mr. to his own Name, which He ascribes to
several others.

N. B. 1. Those with this Mark () bro't their Wives with them* Those with this
(*) for the Present left them either in Holland or England. 2. Some left behind
them some, and others all their Children, who afterward came over. 3. Those
Italica'd Deceased before the End of March. 4. The narrow Column contains the
Number in their several Families.
Names. No 1 Mr. John Carver ^ 2 William Bradford 2 3 Mr. Edward Winslow 5 4
Mr. William Brewster 6 5 Mr. Isaac Allerton 6 6 Capt. Miles Standish 2 ^ John
Alden 1 8 Mr. Samuel Fuller * 2 One of these was the Servant who died before
their Arrival (B)
9 Mr. Christopher Martin 4 10 Mr. William Mullins 5 11 Mr. William White 5
Besides the Son, Born in Cape Cod Harbor, named Per^g^ine (B)
12 Mr Richard Warren * 1 13 John Howland He was of Governor Carver's Family.
(B)
14 Mr. Stephen Hopkins 8 One of these was a Son Born at Sea, and therefore
named O^^nus (B)
15 Edward Tilly 4 16 John Tilly 3 17 Francis Cook * 2 18 Thomas Rogers 2 ^9
Thomas Tinker 3 ^0 John Ridgdale 2 21 Edward Fuller 3 22 John Turner 3 23
Francis Eaton 3 24 James Chilton 3 25 John Crackston Mr. Morton calls him
Craxton.
2 26 John Billington 4 27 Moses Fletcher Mr Morton seems to mistake in calling
him Joses
1 28 John Goodman 1 29 Degory Priest Mr. Morton calls Him Digery.
1 30 Thomas Williams 1 31 Gilbert Winslow 1 32 Edmund Margeson 1 33 Peter
Brown 1 34 Richard Britterige Mr. Morton calls Him Bitteridge.
1 35 George Soul He was of Governor Winflow's Family. (B)
36 Richard Clarke 1 37 Richard Gardener 1 38 John All^^ton 1 39 Thomas English
1 40 Edward Dorey Mr. Morton seems to mistake in calling Him Doten.
They were of Mr. Hopkins's Family (B)
41 Edward Leister They were of Mr. Hopkins's Family (B)
101
So there were just 101 who sailed from Plymouth in England, and just as many
arrived in Cape Cod Harbor. And ^his is the solitary Number, who for an
undefiled Conscience and the Love of pure Christianity, first left their Native
and pleasant Land, and encountered all the Toils and Hazard^ ^f the tumultuous
Ocean, in Search of some uncultivated Region in North Virginia; where they
might quietly enjoy their Religious Liberties, and transmit them to Posterity,
in Hopes that none would follow to disturb or vex them.

Some no^ed Writers, not with a sufficient accuracy studied in the Religious
History of those Times, have through great Mistake represented as if this
People were a Congregation of Brownists. But even Baylie Himself Baylie's
Disswasive from the Errors of the Times, Printed in 4 to, London, 1645.
that bi^ter Inveigher both against the Brownists and Independents* owns, That
Mr. ROBINSON their Pastor* was a Man o^ excellent Parts, and the most Learned,
polished and modest Spirit as ever separated from the Church of England; that
the Apologies He wrote were very handsome; tha^ by Dr. Ames and Mr. Parker, He
was bro't to a greater Moderation, than He at first expressed; that he ruined
the Rigid Separation, allowing the Lawfulness of communicating with the Church
of England in the Word and Prayer But Mr. Cotton, who was w^ll acquainted with
Eld^^ B^ewster and the first Members of the Church at Plimout^* tells us, That
by Prayer must not be understood the Com^mon Prayer Book, but of the Prayers
conceived by t^^ Preacher before and after Sermon. ( Way of Congr^^gational
C^ur^^es cleared, in Answer to Baylie, etc. Printed in 4 to London, 1648.)
t^o* not in the Sacraments and Discipline; that He wa^ a Principal Overthrower
o^ the Brownists, and becam^ the Author of Independency The like Account of M^
Robinson, H^rnius also gives u^. Hornii His^^ria Ecclesias^ica and Politica.
And how inconsistent i^ it then to call Him or his People Brownists, when he
wa^ known to be a principal Overthrower of them.

Agreably, Hornius, from my Lord Brook, seems to express Himself in this more
accurately than other Writers* by Dividing those who separated from the Church
of England into Two Sorts, viz. (1) The Rigid Separatists or Brownists. (2) The
Semi Separa^ists or Robinsonians; who after ^ while were called Independents,
and still retain the Name. And so distant were the Former in their Principles
and Temper from the Latter* that as the chief Seat of the Brownists was then at
Amsterdam* Governor Winslow a principal Member of Mr. Robinson's Church,
acquaints us, That the Brownists there would hardly hold Communion wi^h the
People at Leyden. Governor Winslow's Ground of Planting New England; at the End
of his Answer to Gorton, Printed in 4 t^ London, 1646.


The same Gentleman also tells us, That Mr. Robinso^ was always against
Separation from any of the Churche^ of CHRIST, holding Communion with the
Reformed Churches, both in Sco^land, France and the Netherlands; that his Study
was for Peace and Union, so far as might agree with Faith and a good
Conscience: But for the Government of the Church of England, as in the
Episcopal Way, the L^turgy and stinted Prayers, yea the Constitution of the
Church as National, and so the corrupt Communion of the Unworthy with the
Worthy Receivers of the Lord's Supper; these Things were never approved of Him,
but witnessed against to his Death, and by the Church under him: that the
Church of L^yden made no Schis^ or Separation from the Reformed C^urches, but
as Occasion offered, held Communion with them. For we, says Governor Winslow,
ever placed a large Difference between those, who ground their Practice on the
Word of GOD, though dif^ering from us in the Exposition or Understanding of it,
and those who hated such Reformers and Reformation, and went on in
Antichristian Opposition to it and Persecution of it, as the late Lord Bishops
did. Never the less Mr. Robinson allowed Hearing the Godly Minister^ of the
Church of England Preach and Pray in the Public Assemblies; yea allowed
'Private Communion By Private Communion, I suppose He means in Oppo^sition to
the mix d Communion in the P^blick Churches: i. e. He allowed all of the Church
of England w^o were known to be Pious, to have Communion in his Private Church:
For as Mr. Co^ton, writing of Mr. Robinson, says He separated not from any
Church, but from the ^orld.
with them and with all the Faithful in the Kingdom and elsewhere upon all
Occasions. None of which would the Br^wnists ever allow.

It Is true says Governor Winslow, we Profess and Desire to Practice a
Separation from the World and the Works of the World, which are the Works of
the Flesh, such as the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. v*19, -- 21; 1 Cor. vi. 9, --
11* and Ephesians. ii.11, 12. And as the C^urc^es of CHRIST ar^ all Saints by
Calling; so we desire to see the Grace o^ GOD shining forth, at least seemingly
(leaving secre Things to GOD) in all we admit into Church Fellowship and to
keep off such as openly wallow in the Mire o^ their Sins; that neither the Holy
Things of GOD nor the Communion of the Saints may be thereby leavened or
polluted. And if any joining to us when we lived a^ L^yden, or since we came to
N^w England, have with the Manifestation of their Faith and Profession of
Holiness, held forth there-withSeparation from the Church of England; I have
diverse times in the one Place heard Mr. Robinson our Pastor, and in the other
Mr. Brewster our Elder, stop them forthwith, showing them that we required no
such Thing at their Hands, but only to hold forth Faith in JESUS CHRIST,
Holiness in the Fear of GOD, and Submission to every Divine Appointment*
leaving the Church of England to themselves and to the LORD, to whom we ought
to Pray to Reform what was amiss among them.

Perhaps Hornius was the only Person, who gave this People the Title of
Robinsonians. But had He been duly acquainted with the Generous Principles
both of the People and their famous Pastor; He would have known that nothing
was more disagreable to them, than to be called by the Name of any mere Man
whatever; since they renounced all Attachment to any mere Humane Systems or
Expositions of the Scripture, and reserved an entire and ^erpetual Liberty of
searching the inspired Records and o^ ^orming both their Principles and
Practice from those Dis^coveries they should make therein, without imposing
them on others. This appears in their Original Covenant in 1602, ^s we observed
before. And agreeable to this, Governor Winslow tells us, that when the Plymouth
People Parted from their Renowned Pastor, with whom they had always lived in
the most entire Affection; He charged us before GOD and his Blessed Angels to
follow Him no further than He followed CHRIST: And if GOD should reveal any
thing ^o us by any other Instrument of his, to be as ready to receive it as
ever we were to receive any Truth by his Ministry: For he was very confident
the LORD had more Truth and Light ye^ to brake forth out of his HOLY WORD. He
took Occasion also miserably to bewail the State of the REFORMED CHURCHES, who
were come to a Period in Religion, and would go no further than the INSTRUMENTS
of their Reformation. As for Example, the LUTHERANS could not be drawn to go
beyond what LUTHER saw; for whatever Part of GOD's Word He had further revealed
to CALVIN they had rather Die than ^mbrace it: and so said He, you see the
CALVINISTS, they stick were He left them, A Misery much to be lamented: For
though they were precious, shining Lights in their Times; yet GOD had not
revealed his whole Will to them: And were they now alive, said He, they would
be as ready to ^mbrace further Light as that they had received. Here also He
put us in mind of our CHURCH COVENANT; whereby we engaged with GOD and one
another to receive whatever Light or Truth should be made known to us from his
WRITTEN WORD. But withal exhorted us to take heed what we receive for Truth;
and well to examine, compare and weigh it with other SCRIPTURES before we
receive it. For said He, It is not possible the Christian World should come so
lately out of such Antichristian Darkness, and that full Perfection of
Knowledge should brake forth at once, etc. -- Words ^lmost astonishing in that
Age of low and universal Bigotry which then prevailed in the English Nation:
wherein ^his truly Great and Learned Man seems to be almost the ^nly Divine,
who was capable of rising into a noble Freedom of Thinking and Practicing in
Religious Matters, and even of urging such an equa^ Liberty on his own People.
He labors to take them off from their Attachment to Him, that they might be
more entirely free to search and follow the SCRIPTURES.

As for Mr. Robinson's being the Author of Independency -- Mr. Cotton replies
That the NEW TESTAMENT was the Author of it; and 'twas received in the Times of
Purest, Primitive Antiquity, many Hundreds of Years before Mr. Robinson was
Born* And Governor Winslow -- that the Primitive Churches in the Apostolic Age
are the only Pattern which the Churches of CHRIST in NEW ENGLAND have in their
Eye; not following Luther, Calvin, Knox Ainsworth, Robinson, Ames, or any
other, further, tha^ they follow CHRIST and his Apostles.

But as Mr. Robinson and his Church, were of the same mind, and always lived in
great Harmony and Unity; I shall here give a SUMMARY of their main Principles
from their Published Writings.

I. They were in the Sentiment^ which since, the famou^ Mr. Chillingworth tells
us that after long Study He als^ came into* viz. That the INSPIRED SCRIPTURES
ONLY contain the ^rue Religion; and especially nothing is to be accounted the
Protestant Religion, respecting either Faith or Worship, but what is taught in
them: as also in the same Sentiments which the present celebrated Bishop Hoadly
and many other Great Men, have so nobly defended, as the Right of Humane
Nature, as the very Basis of the Reformation, and indeed of all sincere
Religion; viz. That every Man has a Right of Judging for Himself, of Trying
Doctrines by them, and of Worshipping according to his Apprehension of the
Meaning of them.

II. As to Faith and the Holy Sacraments -- they Believed the DOCTRINAL
Articles of the Church of England, as also of the Reformed Churches of
Scotland, Ireland, France, the Palatinate, Geneva, Switzerland, and the united
Provinces, to be agreeable to the Holy Oracles: Allowing all the Pious Members
of the Churches Communion with them; and Differing from them only in Matters
purely Ecclesiastical.

III. As to Ecclesiastical Matters -- they held the following Articles to be
agreeable to Scripture and Reason.

1. That no particular Church ought to consist of more Members than can
conveniently Watch over one another and usually meet and Worship in one
Congregati^n.

2. That every particular Church of CHRIST is only to consist of such as appear
to Believe in and Obey Him.

3. That any competent Number of such, when their Consciences oblige them, have
a Right to ^mbody into a Church for their mutual Edification.

4 That this Embodying is by some certain Contract or Covenant either Expr^ssed
or Implied; though it ought to be by ^he Former.

5. That being Embodied, they have a Right of Choosing all their Offi^ers.

6. that the Officers appointed by CHRIST for this Embodied Church are in some
Respects of three Sorts, in other^ but two, viz.

[1] Pastors or T^aching Elders -- who have the Power both of Overseeing,
Teaching, Administering the Sacraments and Ruling too: And being chiefly to give
themselves to Studying, Teaching and the spiritual Care of the Flock, are
therefore to be maintained.

[2] Mere RULING ELDERS -- who are to Help the Pastors in Overseeing and
Ruling; that their Offices be not Temporary, as among the Dutch and French
Churches* but continual: And being also qualified in some Degree to Teach, they
are to Teach only Occasionally, through* Necessity, or in their Pastor's Absence
or Illness; but being not to give themselves toStudy or Teaching* they have no
need of Maintenance.

That the Elders of Both Sorts form the Presbytery of Overseers and Rulers,
which should be in every par^icular Church: And are inScripture called
sometimes Presbyters or Elders, sometimes Bishops or Overseers, sometimes
Guides and sometime^ Rulers*

[3] DEACONS -- who are to take Care of the Poor and of the Churches Treasure;
to Distribute for the Support of the Pastor, the Supply of the Needy, the
Propagation of Religion, and to Minister at the Lord's Table, etc.

7. That these Officers being chosen and ordained, have (...) Lordly, Arbitrary
or imposing Power; but can only Rule and Minister with the Consent of the
Brethren; who ought no^ in Contempt to be called the Laity, but to be Trea^ed
a^ Men and Brethren in CHRIST, not as Slaves or Minors.

8. That no Churches or Church Officers whatever have any Power over any other
Church or Officers, to control or impose upon them: But are all Equal in their
Rights and Privileges, and ought to be Independent in the Exercise and
Enjoyment of them.

9. As to ^hurch-Administrations -- they held* that BAPTIS^ is a Seal of the
Covenant of Grace, and should be dispense^ on^y ^o visible Believers, with
their ^nadult Children; and ^his in P^imitive Purity, as in the Times of CHRIST
an^ his Apostles, without the Sign of the Cross or any other invented Ceremony:
That the LORD's SUPPER should be Received as it was at first even in CHRIST's
immediate Presence, in the Tab^e Posture: That the Elders should not be
Restrained fromPRAYING in Public as well asPrivate, according to the various
Occasions continually offering from the Word or Providence, and no set Form
should be imposed on any: That EXCOMMUN^CATION should be wholly Spiritual, a
mere Rejecting the Scandalous from the Communion of the Church in the Ho^y
Sacraments, and those other Spiritual Privileges which are peculiar to the
Faithful: An^ that the Church or its Officers have no Authority to inflict any
Penalties of a Temp^ral Nature.

10. and lastly, As for Holy Days -- They were very strict for the Observation
of the LORD's DAY, in a pious Memorial of the Incarnation, Birth, Death,
Resurrection, Ascen^ion and Benefits of CHRIST; as also solemn FASTINGS and
THANKSGIVINGS, as the State of Providence requires: But all other Times not
Prescribed in Scripture they utterly relinquished: And as in general, they
could not conceive any thing a Part of CHRIST's Religion which He has not
Required; they therefor renounced all Humane Right of Inventing, and much less
of Imp^sing it on others.

These were the main Principles of that Scriptural and Religious Liberty, for
which this People suffered in England, fled to Holland, traversed the Ocean,
and sought a dangerous Retreat in these remote and savage Deserts of
North America; that Here they might fully enjoy them, and leave them to their
last Posterity.

But Removing the Stage of our Chronology to the Weste^n Side of the Atlantic;
we may take a brief Survey both of the S^ate of Great Britain and the
Neighboring Countries they ^eft behind them and for which they were chiefly
concerned, ^s well as the State of North East America at the Time of their
Arrival.

In France and Navarr, the King begins to Pe^secute the Protestants and turn
them out of their Churches. In Lusatia* Bohemia, and Germany, the Imperial and
Spanish Forces are ^revailing and ruining the Reformed In^erest; even the
^rotestant E^ector of Saxony joining with them. And the King of England,
extremely fond of marching his only Son Prince Charles to the Popish Infanta,
refuses to support and even allow of a Public Fast for his own Daughter the
excellent Queen of Bohemia, the Darling of the British Puritans; indulges the
Papists throughout his Kingdoms, and at the same time allows no Rest for any of
the Reformed in them who mislike the Ceremonies or Diocesan Episcopacy. In
Sc^^land, the Presbyterian Church is wholly overthrown, her Ministers Deprived,
Confined, Banished: And in ENGLAND, Most of the Affairs in Church and State, as
Eachard tells us, are Transacted by the Countess of Buckingham, whom He calls a
fiery Romanist.

In so dark a Season on the European Shore, are this People bro't to the North
American, where the Prospect also looks almost as dismal and discouraging.

For besides the Natives, the nearest Plantation to them is a FRENCH one at
Port Royal Govornor Bradford, in a Manuscript Note in the Margi^ of Sir William
Alexander's Description of New England* etc. Printed in 4 to London, 1630,
says, that Biencour^ ^ived at Port Royal, when we came into the Country i^
1620. By w^i^h it seems as if by Con^ivance of the Court of England, a small
Planta^ion of the French (...) suffered to continue at Port Royal, after the
Reduction b^ Capt Argal in 1613.
who have another at Canada. And the only ENGLISH ones are at Virginia,
B^^mudas and Newfoundland; the nearest of these about 500 ^iles off, and every
one incapable of helping them Whreever they turn their Eyes, nothing but
Distress surrounds them. Harrass'd for their Scripture-Worship in their na^ive
Land, grieved for the Profanation of the Holy Sabbath and other Licenciousness
in Holland, fatigued with their boisterous Voyage, disappointed of their
expected Country, forced on this northern Shore both utterly unknown and in the
advance of Winte^; none but prejudiced Barbarians round about them, and without
any Prospect of Humane Succor: Without the Help or Favor of the Court of
England, without a Patent, without a Public Promise of their Religious
Liberties, worn out wi^^ Toil andSufferings, without convenient Shelter from
the rig rous Weather; and their Hardships bringing a General Si^kn^ss on them,
which reduces them to great Extremi^ies, bereaves them of their dearest
Friends, and leaves many of the Children Orphans. Within 5 Months Time, above
Half their Company are carried off; whom they account as Dying in this noble
Cause, whose Memories they consecrate to the dear Esteem of their Successors,
and bare all with a Christian Fortitude and Patience as extraordinary as their
Trials.

I have only now to remind the Reader, that utterly unsought, and then unknown
to them; on Nov. 3. about a Week before their arriving at Cape Cod, King James
Signs a PATENT for the Incorporation of the Adventurers to ^he Northern Colony
of Virginia, between 40 and 48 Degrees North; being the Duke of Lenox, the
Marquesses of Buck^^gham and Hamilton, the Earls of Arundel and Warwick, Sir F.
Gorges, with 34 others, and their Successors, styling them -- The Council
established at PLYMOUTH in the County of D^VON, for the Plan^ing, Ruling,
Ordering and Governing of NEW ENGLAND in AMERICA: From a Manuscript Copy of the
Charter it self in the Hands of the Honorable El^sha Cook, Esquire
which is the Great and CIVIL BASIS of all the Future Patents and Plantations
that divide this Country.

Notes for this I. Section. b, Beginning. m, Middle. e, End.
Printed Tracts.
re, Mourt's Relation. W, Winslow's Relation. ps, Purchas's Pilgrims. sm,
Smith's History. j. Johnson's History. gr, Sir F. Gorges mn, Morton's Memorial.
Manuscripts.
B, Gov. Bradford's History. bg -- his Register. Mcr. Massach. Col. Records. G,
Gookin of the Indian^. H, Hubbard's History. bc, Book of Charters. msl
Manuscript Le^ters.
[Additions of my own.]

SECTION I.
To the Settlement of the MASSACHUSETTS Colony, by the Arrival of Governor
Winthrop and Deputy Governor Dudley, with the Charter and Assistants, at Salem,
June 12. 1630.

Jan. 1. MONDAY, The People at Plymouth go betimes to Work (re) and the Year
Begins wi^h the Death of De^gory Priest. (bg)

Jan. 3. Some abroad see great Fires of Indians and go to their Corn Fields,
but discover none o^ the Savages; nor have seen any since we came to this
Harbor. (re)

Jan. 4. Capt. Standish, with 4 or 5 more, go to look for the Natives where
their Fires were made, find some o^ their Houses, though not lately inhabited,
but none of the Natives. (re)

Jan. 8. Francis Billington having the Week before, from the Top of a Tree on a
high Hill, discovered a Great Sea, as He ^ho't, goes this Day with one of the
Master's Mates, to view it, travel 3 Miles to a large Water divided into two
Lakes; the bigger 5 or 6 Miles in Compas^ with an Islet in it of a Cable's
Leng^h square. The other 3 Miles in Compass, and a Brook issu^ing from it: find
7 or 8 Houses, though not lately inhabited, ( re) and thi^ Day Dies Mr.
Christo^^pher Martin. (bg)

Jan. 9. We labor in Building our T^wn in 2 (...) of Houses for greater
Safety: Divide by Lot the Ground we build on: Agree that every Man shall build
his own House, that they may make more Haste than when they work in common. (re)

Jan. 12 At Noon, John Goodman and Peter Brown gathering Thatch abroad, and not
coming Home after their 2 Companions, put us in greatSorrow: Master Leaver with
3 or 4 more go to seek them, but can hear nothing of them: Next Day, thinking
the Indians had surpised them, we arm out 10 or 12 Men after them, who go
searching 7 or 8 Miles, but return without Discovery, to our great Discomfort.
( re)

Jan. 13. Having the major Part of our People ashore we Purpose there to Keep
the Public^ Worship to morrow (re)

Jan. 14. Lord's Day Morning at 6 a Clock, the Wind, being very high, we on
Ship board see our Rendevous in Flames: and because of the Loss of the 2 Men,
fear the Savages had fired it: nor can we come to help them for want of the
Tide till 7 a Clock: at Landing hear goodNews of the Return of our 2 Men, and
that the House was fired by a Spark flying into the Thatch, which instantly
burnt it up: The greatest Suff^rers are Governor Carver and Mr Bradford. The 2
Men were lost in the Woods on Friday Noon; ranged all the Afternoon in the wet
and cold: at Night it snowing, freezing, and being bitter Weather, they walked
under a Tree till Morning: then traveled by many Lakes and Brooks: In the
Afternoon, from a high Hill they discover the 2 Isle, in our Harbor; and at
Night getHome, faint with Travel and want of Food and Sleep* and almost
famished with Cold ( re)

Jan. 21. We K^ep our Public Worship ashore. ( r^

Jan. 29 Dies Rose the Wife of C^pt Standish (b^

Jan. ^1. This Morning the People aboard the (...) see 2 Savages, [the first we
see at this Harbor,] but cannot speak with them. ( re)

N* B This Month, 8 of our Number Die. (bg)

Feb. 9. This Afternoon, our H use for our Sick Peo^ple is set a Fire by a
Spark lighting on the Roof. (re)

Feb. 16. One of our People a fowling by a Creek about a Mile and Half off, 12
Indians march by Him toward the Town: in the Woods H^ hears the Noise of many
more, lies close till they are passed by, then hastens home and gives the
Alarm: so the People abroad Re^turn, but see none: only Capt Standish and
Francis Cook, leaving their Tools in the Woods* and going for them, find the
Savages had took them away; and toward ^ight a great Fire a^bout the Place
where the Man saw them. ( re)

Feb. 17. This Morning, we first meet for appointing military Orders, choose
Miles Standish for our Captain, give Him Power accordingly: and while we are
consulting, 2 Savages present themselves on the Top of the Hill over against us
about aQuarter of a Mile off, making Signs for us to come to them: we send
Capt. Standish and Mr. Hopkins over the Brook toward them* one only with a
Musket, which He lays down in Sign of Peace and Parley: but the Indi^^s would
not stay their coming: a Noise of a great many more is heard behind the Hill,
but no more come in Sight. (re)

Feb. 21. Die Mr. William White, Mr. William Mul^lins* with 2 more. And the
25th Dies Mary, the Wife of Mr. Isaac Allerton. (bg)

N B. This Month, 17 of our Number Die. (bg)

This Spring, there g^ 10 or 12 Ships from the West of England to Fish on the [
North Eastern] Coasts of New England; who get well freighted with Fish and
Furr. (sm. ps)

About this time, the Indians get all the Pa^waws of the Country, for 3 Days
together, in a horrid and devilish Manner to curse and exe^crate us with their
Conjurations: which Assembly they hold in a da^k and dismal Swamp, as we are
afterward informed. (B)

Mar. 7. The Governor, with 5 more go to the Great Ponds; and we begin to sow
our GardenSeeds (re)

Mar. 16. This M^rning, a Savage boldly comes alone along the Houses strait to
the Randevous, surprises us with calling out* Welcome Englishmen! Welcome
Englishmen! having learned some bro^ken English among the Fishermen at
Monhig^gon: The first Indian we met with; his Nam^ SAMOSET; says he is a
Sagamore or Lord o^ Moratiggon, lying hence a Day's Sail with* great Wind, and
5 Days by Land, and has bee^ in these Parts 8 Months: we entertain Him, an^ He
informs us of the Country; that the Plac^ we are in is called PATUXET, that
about fou^ Years ago all the Inhabitants Died of an extra o^^^n^ry Plague, and
there is neither Man, Woman nor Child remaining: as indeed we fin^ none to
hinder our Possession, or lay claim to it. At Night we lodge and watch Him. (re)

Mar. 17 This M^rning, we send Samoset to the M^^s^ssoi^s, our next Neighbors,
whence He came* The Nausites near S. E. of us, being those b^ whom we were
first Encountered as before related, are much incensed against the English about
8 Months ago sl^w 3 Englishmen, and ^ more hardly escaped to M^nhiggon: they
were Sir F. Gorges Men, as our Savage tells us. Whether these were not Capt.
Dermer's Compan^ mentioned after June 30 last Year.
He also tells us of the Fight we had with the Nausites, and of our Tools
lately taken away* which we required Him to bring. This People are ill affected
to us because of Hunt, who car^ried away 20 from this Place we now inhabit, and
7 from the Nausites as before observed. He promises within a Night or two to
bring some of the Masassoits, with Beaver Skins to trade. (re)

Mar. 18. Samoset returns with 5 other Men, who bring our Tools wi^h some Skins
and make show of Friendship: but being the Lord's Day, we would not Trade, but
entertaining them, bid them come again and bring more, which they Promise
within a Night or two: but Samoset tarries with us. (re)

Mar. 21. This Morning, the Indians not coming, we send Samoset to enquire the
Reason. In his absence, 2 or 3 Savages present themselves on the Top of the
Hill against us, with a show of Daring us: But Capt. Standish and another with
their Muskets, going over, the Indians when their Arrows and make show of
Defiance; but as our Men advance, they run away. (re)

This Day, PHILIP III, K. of Spain Dies, AEt. 43 Petavius.
Ri^iolius; who s^y March 31. But ^ conclude they me^n N^w Styl^
and his Son PHILIP IV succeeds, AEt. 16 Ri^iolius; who s^y March 31. But ^
conclude they me^n N^w Styl^


Mar. 22. About Noon, Samoset returns with SQUAN^TO, the only Native of this
Place, one of the ^0 Hunt had carried to Spain, but got into Eng^land, lived in
Cornhill, London, with Mr. John Slanie, Merchant, and can speak a little
English, with 3 others: bring a few Skins and signify that theirGreatSagamore
MASASSOIT The Printed Accounts generally spel Him -- Massasoit, Governor
Bradfo^d writes Him -- Massasoyt and Massa^so^^t: But I find the ancient People
from their Fathers in Plymouth Colony pronounce his Name Ma-sas-so-it.
^he greatest King of the Indians ^ordering on us, is hard by, with his Brother
Quadequina and their Com^pany. After an Hour, the King comes to the Top of an
Hill over against us, with a Train of 60 Men. We send Squanto to Him, who
brings Word that we should send one to Parley with Him. We send Mr. Edward
Winslow to know his Mind, and signify that our Governor desires to see Him and
truck and confirm a Peace. Upon this the King leaves Mr. Winslow in ^he Custody
of Quadequina and comes over the Brook with a Train of 20 Men, leaving their
Bows and Arrows behind them. Capt. Standish and Master Williamson with 6
Musketeers mee^ Him at the Brook, where they salute each other, conduct Him to
a House wherein they place a green Rug and 3 or 4 Cushions: Then instantly
comes our Governor, with Drum, Trumpet, an^ Musketeers: After Salutations, the
Governor k^ssing his Hand* and the King kissing Him, they set down, the
Governor entertains Him with some Refreshments, and then they agree on a LEAGUE
of Friendship, as follows. (re)

1. That neit^er He nor His should injure any of ours.

2. That if they did, He should send the Offender, that we might Punish Him.

3 That if our Tools were taken away* He should Restore them: And if ours did
any Harm to any of his, we would do the like to them.

4 If any unjustly war'd against Him, we would aid Him: And if any war'd
against us, He should aid us.

5. He should certify his N^ighbour Consederates of this, that they might not
Wrong us, but be com^prized in the Conditions of Peace.

6. That when their Men come to us, they should leave their Bows and Arrows
behind them, as we should leave our Pieces when we come to them.

7. That doing thus, King JAMES would estee^ Him as his Friend and Ally.
Governor Brad^ord in 1645* observes, This League has lasted this 24 Years. To
which I may add, yea 30 Years longer, viz. to 16^5.


After this, the Governor conducts Him to the Brook, where they embrace and
part; we keeping 6 or 7 Hostages for our Messenger. But Quadequina coming with
his Troop, we ente^tain and convey Him back, receive our Messenger, and return
the Hostages (re)

Mar. 23. This Morning, diverse Indians coming over tell us* the King would
have some of us come and see Him: Capt. Standish and Mr. Isaac Al^lerton go
venturously to them, whom they welcome after their manner; and about No^n, (re)
they return to their Place called Sowams Sometimes called Sowams. and sometimes
Pacanoki^ which I suppose is afterward called Mount Hope; and since named
Bristol.
about 40 Miles off ( B) to the Westward. The King is a Portly Man, in his best
Years, grave of Coun^tenance, spare of Speech. And we cannot bu^ judge He is
willing to be at Peace with us* especially because He has a potent Adversar^
the Narragansetts, who are at War with Him, against whom He thinks we may be
some. Strength, our Pieces being terrible to them. But Sam set and Squanto
tarry. ( re)

This Day we meet on common Business, conclude our Military Orders, with some
Laws convenient for our present State; and choose (re) or rather confirm (B) Mr.
CARVER our Governor for the following Year. ( re. B)

Mar. 24. Dies Elizabeth, the Wife of Mr. Edward Winslow. (bg)

The first Offense since our Arrival is of John Billington (bg) who came on
board at London, (B) and is this Month convented before the whole Company for
his Contempt of the Captain's lawful Command withopprobrious Speech^es: for
which he is adjudged to have his Neck and Heels tied together: but upon
Humbling himself and craving Pardon, and it being the first Offense. He is
forgiven. (bg)

N. B This M^nth, 13 of our Number Die. (bg) And in Three Months part, Dies
Half ourCom^pany; the greatest Part in the Depth of Winter, wanting Houses and
other Comforts, being infected wi^h the Scurvy and other Diseases, which their
long Voyage and unaccommodate Condition brought upon them: so as there Di^
sometimes 2 or 3 a Day: of 100 Persons scarce 50 remain: the Living scarce able
to Bury the Dead: the Well not sufficient to tend the Sick: there being in
their time of greatest Distress but 6 or 7, who spare no Pains to help them: 2
of the 7 were Mr Brewster their Reverend Elder, and Mr. Standish their Captain.

The like Disease fell also among the Sailors; so as almost Half their Company
also Die before they sail. (B)

But the Spring advancing, it pleases GOD the Mortality begins to cease, and
the Sick and Lame recover; which puts new Life into the People, though they had
born their sad Affliction with as much Patience as any could do. (B)

Apr. 5. We dispatch the Ship with Capt. Jones; who this Day sails from New
Plymouth; and May 6 arrives in England (sm. ps)

After this we Plant 20 Acres of Indian Cor^ (re) wherein Squanto is a great
Help; showing us how to set, fish, dress and tend it, (B) of which we have a
good Increase: we likewise sow 6 Acres of Barley Governor Bradford calls them
Wheat and Pease; and says they came to no Good.
and Pease; our Barley indifferent Good, but our Pease Parched up with the Sun
(re)

While we are busy about our Seed, our Governor, Mr. CARVER comes out of the
Field very Sick, complains greatly of his Head, with in a few Hours his Senses
fail, so as He speaks no more, and in a few Days after Dies, to our great
Lament^tion and Heaviness. His Care and Pains were so great for the common
Good, as therewith it is though it He oppressed Himself and shortened his Days: of
whose Loss we cannot sufficiently complain: and His Wife deceases about 5 or 6
Weeks after. (B)

Soon after, we choose Mr. William Bradford our Governor, and Mr. Isaac Allerto^
his Assistant: who are by renewed Elections continued together sundry Years. (B)

May 12. The first Marriage in this Place (B) is of Mr. Edward Winslow to Mrs.
Susanna White, Widow of Mr. William White. (bg)

June 18 The second Offense is the first DUEL fought in New England, upon a
Challenge at single Combat with Sword and Dagger between Edward Doty and Edward
Leister, Servants of Mr. Hopkins: Both being wounded, the one in the Hand, the
other in the Thigh; they are adjudg'd by the whole Company to have their Head
and Feet tied together, and so to lie for 24 Hours, without Meat or Drink:
which is begun to be inflicted, but within an Hour, because of their great
Pains, at their own and their Master's humble Request, upon Promise ^f better
Carriage, they are Released by the Governor (bg)

July 2. We agree to send Mourt's Relation says, They set out June 10 But this
being Lord's Day, is very unlikely, and is also inconsistent with the rest of
the Journal: whereas July 2 is Monday, when Governor Bradford says we sent etc;
though, to comport with the Rest of the Journal, I conclude that on Monday July
2, they agreed to send, but set not out till the next Morning.
Mr. Edward Winslow and Mr. Steven Hopkins with Squanto to see our new Friend
MASASSOIT (B) at Pakan^kit, (re) to bestow some Gratuities on Him, bind Him
faster to us, view the Country, see how and where He lives, his Strength, etc.
( B. re)

[ Tuesday] At Nine this Morning, we set out, travel 15 Miles Westward to
Namasket by 3 in the Afternoon. The People entertain us with Joy, give us Bread
they call Maizum, and the Spawn of Shads, which they now have in great Plenty,
and we eat with Spoons. By Sun set we get 8 Miles further to a Ware, where we
find many of the Namascheucks, i. e. Namasket Men, a fishing, having caught
abundance of Bass; who welcome us also, and there we lodge. The Head of this
River is said to be not far from the Place of our abode: upon it are and have
been many TOWNS; the Ground very good on both Sides, for the most part cleared:
Thousands of Men have lived Here, who Died of the Great Plague (re) which
befell these Parts about 3 Years before our Arrival: the Living not being able
to Bury them, and their Skuls and Bones appear in many Places where their
Dwellings had been (B) Upon this River MASASSOIT lives: It goes into the Sea at
NARRAGANSETT BAY* where the Frenchmen use so much. Next Morning, we travel 6
Miles by the River to a known shoal Place: and it being low Water, put off our
Clothes and wade over: Thus far the Tide flows: We observe few Places on the
River but what had been inhabited (re) though now greatly wasted by the Plague
aforesaid. (B) And so we travel to Pacanokik, where Masassoit kindly welcomes
us (re) and gratefully receives our Presents, (B) assures us He will gladly
continue the Peace and Friendship, (re) tells us the Narragansetts live on the
other Side of that Great Bay, are a strong People and many in Number, live
compactly, and were not touched with that wasting Sickness: (B) desires us not
to let the French Trade with them: and there we Lodge. Next Day, being
Thursday, man o^ their Sa^hims or Petty Governors, come to visit us: we see
their Games for Skins and Knives, and there Lodge again. Friday Morning, before
Sun Rise we take our Leave: Masassoit retaining Squanto to procure Truck for
us, appoints To^kamahamon in his Place, whom we had found faithful before and
after upon all Occa^sions* That Night we reach to the Ware, and the next Night
Home. ( re)

July e. John Billington (B) a Boy (re) being lost in the Woods, the Governor
causes Him to be en^quired for among the Natives: at length Masassoit sends
wo^d He is at Nause^. He had wandered 5 Days, lived on Berries, then light of
an Indian Plantation, 20 Miles South of us called Manome^, and they conveyed
Him to the People who first assaulted us, (B) but the Go^vernor sends 10 Men
(re) in a Shallop (B. re) with Squanto, and T^ckamahamon, (re) to fetch Him (B.
re)

The first Day Mourt's Relation, and Purchase from it, places this on June 11.
But this Date being inconsistent with several Hints in the foregoing and
following Stories, I keep to Governor Bradford's original Manuscript, and Place
it between the end of July and the 13th of August.
the Shallop sails for the Harbor at Cummaquid, but Night coming on, we Anchor
in the midst of the Bay, where we are Dry at low Water. Next Morning, the
In^dians on the other Side of the Channel invite us to come and eat with them
as soon a^ ou^ Boat floats, six of us go ashore, leaving 4 o^ them Pledges in
the Boat: the rest bring us t^ their Sachem, whom they call Iyanough, Sometimes
called Iyanough of Cummaquid, and some^^imes Iya^ough of Ma^aki^st; which seems
to be the Country between Bar^st^bl^ and Yarmouth Harbo^^s.
^ Man not above 26 Years of Age, but personabl^ and courteous, who gives us
plentiful and variou Cheer After Dinner we take Boat ^or Nauset, Iyanough and
two of his Men with us. But the Day and Tide sailing, we cannot get in wit^ our
Shallop. Iyanough with his Men go ashoa^ and we send Squanto to tell Aspinet
the Sachem of Nauset, our Errand. After Sun set, Aspinet comes with a great
Train of a 100 with Him bringing the Boy; one bearing Him through the Water,
delivers Him to us. The Sachim make^ his Peace with us. We give Him a Knife*
and another to Him who first entertained the Boy. At this Place we hear the
Narragansetts had spoiled some of Masassoi^'s Men and taken Him, which strikes
us with some Fear; and setting ^ail, carry Iyanough to Cummaquid, and get Home
the next Day N^ght. (re) Those People also come and make their Peace, and we
give them full Satisfaction for the Corn we had formerly found in their
Country. (B)

H^bamack (B) a Pinese or chief Captain of Masassoit (W) also comes to dwell
among us and continues faithful as long as He lives. (B)

At our Return from Nauset, we find it true that Masassoit is put from his
Country by the Narragansetts, Governor Bradford says nothing of this, nor of
Ma^sassoit's being either seized or invaded by the Narra^gansetts.
and word is bro't us that Couba^tant (re) or Corbitant (B) The Relation
Published by Mourt* with Smith and Purchase from it, call Him Coubatant, but
Go^ernor Bradford plainly writes Him Corbitant; and Mort^^ follows Him
a petty S^chem under Masassoit, ever feared to be too conver^sant with the
Narragansetts, (re) and no Friend to the English (B) is at Namasket, seeking t^
draw the Hearts of Masassoit's Subjects from Him, speaks disdain^ully of us,
storms at the Peace between Nauset, Cumm^quid and Us, and at Squanto the Worker
of it, as also at Tokama^hamon and ^obbamak. However, Squanto and Hobbamak go
privately to see what is become of their King and lodge at Namasket, but are
discovered to Corbitant; who besets the House, ( re) threatens to kill Squanto
and H^bbamak for being Friends to us, (B) seizes Squanto and holds a Knife at
his Breast, (re) offers to sta^ H^bamak, but being a stout Man, clears Him
self, (B) concludes Squanto killed* ( re) and flie^ to our Governor with the
Information. ( B)

Aug. 13. At this the Governor assembles our Compa^ny, (B. re) and taking
Council, it is conceived not fit to be borne; for if we should suffer our
Friends and Messengers thus to be wronged, we shall have none to cleave to us,
or give usIntelligence, or do us any Service, but would next fall upon us, etc.
(B) We therefore resolve to send 10 Men to Morrow with Hobamak (re) t^ seize
our Foes in the Night; if Squanto b^ killed, to cut off Corbitant's Head; but
hu^^ only those who had a Hand in the Murder, (B^ and retain Nepeof another
Sachim in the Con^federacy, till we hear of Masassoit. (re)

Aug. 14. Capt. Standish with 14 Men and Hobama^ set out ( B) in a rainy Day,
loose their Way i^ the Night, wet, weary and much discouraged But finding it
again, beset Corbitant's House a Midnight (re) where three Indians are sorel^
Wounded in trying to brake away, but find Him gone, (B) and Tokamahamon and
Squanto safe (re) Corbitan^ having only threatened Squanto'^ Li^^ and made an
offer to stab Him. ( B)

N^xt Morning we march into the midst of the Town, (re) Hobamak telling the
Indians wha^ we only intended, they bring the best Food they have, (B) and we
Breakfast at Squanto'^ House: Whither all whose Hearts are uprigh^ to us come;
but Corbitant's Faction fled away We declare that if Masassoit does not Return
in safety from Narragansett; or if Corbi^a^^ should make any Insurrection
against Him, o^ off^r Violence to Squanto, Hobamak, or any of Masassoit's
Subjects; we would revenge i^ to the utter overthrow of Him and His. Wit^ many
Friends attending us, we get Home a^ Night, (re) bringing with us the 3 Wounder
Savages, whom we Cure and send Home. ( B)

After this we have many Gratulations from diverse Sachems* and much firmer
Peace. Ye^ those of the Isle of Capawak send to secure ou^ Friendship: and
Corbi^an^ Himself uses the Mediation of Masassoit to be Reconciled. (B) Yea
CANONICUS chief Sachem of the Narra^g^nsetts, sends a Messenger to treat of
Peace. ( re)

Sept ^. Sir William Alexander (gr) of Scotland, (ps) afterward Earl of
Sterling, having prevailed on King JAMES to send to Sir F. Gorges to assign Him
Part of the N^w England Territory; ( gr) Sir F. being entrusted with the
Affairs of this Country, advising with some of the Company, yields that Sir
William should have a Patent of the North East^rn Part of New England, to be
held of the Crown of Scotland and called NEW SCOTLAND. (ps) Whereupon
presently, ( gr) viz.

Sept. 10. K. JAMES gives Sir Wm. Alexander a Patent for NOVA SCOTIA; Bounding
the same from Cape Sables to the Bay of St. Mary, thence N. to the River St.
Croix* thence N* to Canada River, so down the River to Gachep^, thence S. E. to
Cape Briton Islands and Cape Briton, thence ^ound to Cape Sables again; with
all Seas and Isl^nds within six Leagues of the Western, Northern and Eastern
Parts, and within 40 Leagues to the Southward of Cape Briton, and Cap^ Sables;
to be called NOVA SCOTIA, etc. (ps) Taken from the LATIN PAT^NT in Purchase.


Sept. 13 Nine Sachems subscribe an Instrument of Submission to K. JAMES, viz
O^quamehud, Caw^nacome, Obbatinnua, Nattawahunt, Caunbatant, I suppose the s^m^
wi^h Corbi^ant.
C^ikkatabak, Quadaquina, Huttamoiden, and Apannow. (mn) Yea Masassoit in
Writing under his H^nd to Capt. Standish has owned the King of England to be
his Master: Both He and man^ other Kings under Him, as of Pame^, Nawset,
Cumm^quid, Namasket, with dive^se ot^e^s wh^ dwell about the Bays of Pa^uxet
and M^ssa^chuset^: and all this by friendly Usage, Love and Peace, just and
honest Carriage, good Counsel. etc (re)

Though we are told the Massachusetts often threaten us, yet the Company think
good t^ send among them, (re) to Discover the Bay, (B) see the Country* make
Peace, (re) and trade with the Natives: (B) The Governor chooses 10 Men with
Squa^^o and 2 other Savages to go in the Shallop. (re)

Sept. 18. [Being Tuesday] at Midnight, the Tide serving* we set sail* Next
Day, get into the Bottom of the Massachusetts Bay, about tw^^ty Leagues North
^^om Plymouth, and Anchor. N^xt Morning, we land under a Cliff* The S^^chem of
this Place i^ Obbatinewat, I su^^ose the same as Obbatinua, who subscribed
(...) Submission to King JAM^S on Sept. 13. last.
and though He lives in the Bottom of this Bay, yet is subject to Masassoit; uses
us kindly, and tell^ us He dare not now remain in any settled Place for Fear of
the Tarratines (re) who live to the Eastward, are wont to come at Harvest and
^ake away their Corn, and many times kill them; (B)) and that the Squaw Sachem
or Massachuset^^ Queen, is an Enemy to Him. He submit^ to the King of England,
upon our Promising to be hi^ Safe Guard against his Enemies. We cross the Ba^*
which is very large, and seems to have 50 Island^. Next Morning, all but two,
go ashoa^* ma^ch 3 Miles into the Country, where Co^^ had been newly gathered.
A Mile hence their late King Nan^pasheme^ had lived: his House was built on a
lar^e Scaffold 6 Foot high an^ on the Top of a H^^l. Not far hence in a Bottom
we come to a Fort He had built; the Pal^liz^does 30 or 40Foot high; a Trench
about it Breast high; but one Way in, over a Bridge* In the midst of the
Pallizado stands the Frame of a House, where He lies Buried. A Mile hence we
come to such another, but on the Top of a Hill, where He was killed. The
Natives at first fly from us, but are at length induced to meet us Here, and
entertain us in the best manner they can. Having traded with us, and the Day
near spent, we return to the Shallop. Wit^in this Bay, the Savages say, are 2
Rivers, one of which we saw, having a fair Entrance: Better Harbor for
Shipping cannot be than Here: most of the Islands have been inhabited, being
cleared from End to End; but their Inhabitants all Dead or Removed. Having a
light Moon, we set sail at Evening: and before next Day Noon get Home (re) with
a considerable Qu^ntity of Bever, and a good Report of the Place, wishing we
had been seated There. (B)

All the Summer no Want: while some were Trading, others were Fishing Cod,
Bass, etc We now gather in our Harvest: and as Cold Weather advances, come
inStore of Water^Fowl, wherewith this Place abounds; though afterward^ they by
Degrees decrease; as also abundance of Wild Turkies with Venison, etc. Fit ou^
H^uses against Winter, are in Health and have all Things in Plent^. (B)

Nov 9. Arrives a Ship at Cape C^d, (B re) and the 10th ( B) the Indians bring
us Word of her b^^ing near, but think her a Frenchman: upon (...) making ^or
our Bay, the Governor orders a Pie^ to be fired* to call Home such as are
abroad a^ Wo^k* ^mith places this on Nov. 11; but Nov. 11 being L^r^'s Day, we
discover hi^ Mis^^ke.
and we get ready for Defense: (...) unexpectedly find her a Friend (re) of 55
Ton^ (sm ps) called the Fortune, in which comes Mr. Cushm^n (B) with 35 Pers^n^
(B. W) to live i^ the Plantation, which not a little rej^ices u^ But both Ship
and Pas^engers poorly furnish'^ with Provisions; so that we are forced to s^ar^
Her some ^o carry Her home, which threaten* a Famine among us, unless we have a
timely Supply. She sailed from London the Biginning of July, (B) could not
clear the Chanel til the End of Aug (sm. ps) and bring^ a Letter for Mr Carver,
from Mr. Wes^on, Da^ed, London July 6* wherein H^ writes -- We (i. e. the
Adventurers) ^ave procured you a CHARTER, the best we could* better than your
former, and with less Limitation (B) She finds all our People she left in April
in Health, except 6 who Died, and stays a Mo^th ere she sails for England. (sm
ps)

Dec. 11. We have built 7 Dwelling Houses; 4 (...) the Use of the Plantation,
and have made Pro^vision for diverse others. Both Masass^it, the greatest King
of the Natives and all the Prince^ and People round us have made Peace with u^
Seven of them at once sent their Messengers (...) this End. And as we cannot
but account it a^ ext^a^rd^nary Bl^ssing of GOD in Directing ou^ Course for
these Parts, we obtained ^h^ H^nou^ to receive Allo^ance of our P^ss ssing and
En^joying thereof under the Au^hori^^ of the PRAE^SIDENT and COUNCIL for the
Affairs of NEW ENGLAN^. (re)

Dec. 13. The Sh^p sails (sm. ps) viz. the Fortune (B) Gov. Brad^ord says, we
Dispatched Her in 14 Days B^t Smith and Pur^ha^ saying she ^taid a Month, and
M* E. W Dating his Letter by this Ship on Dec. 11* w^ may s^ppose Go^ B^^d^ord
meant 14 Days from (...) b^ing unl^den. Smi^^ and Pur^has say she was laden
wit^ ^ Hogsheads of Be^er Skins, Wainseot, W^lnut: an^ Pu^^^as says, some
Saxaf^as.
lad^n with 2 Hogsheads o^ Bever and, other Skins, and good Clapboar^s as full
as she can hold; the Freight estimated near 500 Pounds. Mr Cushman returning in
her, as the Adventu^^ers had ^ppointed, for their better Information But in her
Voyage (B) as she draws near ^he English Coast, is se^zed by the French,
carried to France, (B) into the Isle Deu, (sm ps) kep^ there (B) 14 ( s^ ps) or
15 Days, robbed of all she had worth taking: then the People and Ship released,
get to London, (B) Feb. 14. ( sm ps) or 17. (B)

Upon her Departure, the Governor and his Ass^^tant dispose the late Comers
into several ^^milies, find their Provisions will now scarce h^ld out 6 M^nths
at Half Allowance, and there^^^re put them to it, which they bare pa^ientl^ (B)

1622.
SOON after the Ship's Departure* that Great People of the Narragansetts, (B.
W.) said to be many Thousands strong, (W) ^an raise above 5000 Fighting Men,
(G) notwithstanding their desired and obtained Peace with us in the foregoing
Summer, begin to breath forth many Threats against us; so that it is the common
Talk of all the Indians round us, of their Pre^parations to come against us. At
length Canonicus their chief Sachem (W)* in a braving manner sends us a Bundle
of Arrows tied with a Snake Skin, which Squanto tells us i^ a Challenge and
Threatening. Whereupon our Gov. with Advice of others, sends them an Answer,
That if they had rather War than Peace, they might Begin when they would; we
had done them no Wrong, nor do we fear them, nor should they find us
unprovided. By another Messenger we send back the Snake-Skin charged with
Powder and Bullets: But they refuse to receive it, and Return it to us. (B. W)
Since the Death of so many Indians they though it to Lord it over the Rest,
conceive we are a Bar in their Way, and see Ma^assoi^ already take Shelter
under our Wings. ( B)

This makes us more carefully to look to our selves, and agree to enclose our
Dwellings with strong Pales, Flankers, Gates, etc. ( B. W)

Feb. We Impale our Town, taking in the Top of the Hill under which our Town is
seated* make 4 Bulwa^ks or Jetties* whence we can defend the whole Town, in 3
whereof are Gates ( W) which are locked every N^ght; a Watch and Ward kept in
the Day. (B) The Gov^rnor and Captain Divide the Company (...) 4 Squad^ons (B.
W) with Commande^s (W) ^very one its Quarter assigned, to repair to in any
Alarm: And if ^here ^e a Cry of Fire, a Company is ap^pointed ^or a Guard with
Muskets, while othe^s Qu n^n it, to prevent Treache^y. (B W)

This Spring th^re Go from ^he West o^ Eng^land to the [ N^^th E^ste^n] Coasts
of New Engl^nd. 35 S^ips to (...) (sm. ps)

Mar b By this Time our Town is imp^led, inclos^^ng a Garden for every Family.
(B)

Mar. e (B) We Prepare for a second Voy^ge to the M ss^chusetts: But Hobamak
tells us, that from some Rumors, He ^ears they are joined with the
N^rragans^tti, and may betra^ us i^ we are not careful, and has also a Jealousy
of Squan^o from some private Whisperings between Him and other I^^ians. However
we resolve to pro^ceed. ( B. W) And

Apr. b. We send our Shallop ( B. W) with Captain S^andish (W) and 10 of our
chi^f Men, with Hobamak and Squanto. (B) But they had no sooner turned the
Gurnet or Poin^ of the Harbor, (W) then a Native of Squanto's Family, comes
runwith his Face wounded and the Blood fresh upon i^, calling to the People
abroad to make haste H^me; Declaring that the N^rragansetts with Cor^itant and
He though it Ma^^ssoit, were coming ( B) to Assault us in the Captain's Absence;
that He had received the Wound in his Face for speaking for us, and that He had
Escap^d by Flight, (W) looking frequently back as if they were just behind Him.
Upon thi^ the Governor orders all to Arms, and a Warning Piece or two to be
fired to call back theShallop. At which she returns and we Watch all Night, but
nothing is seen. Hobamak is confident for his Master and thinks all is false.
Yet the Gover^nor causes Him to send his Wife privately ( B) to Pacanokik (W)
to see how Things are, pre^tending other Occasions, who finds all in Quiet (B)
Upon this we discover it to be Squanto Policy to set us against Masassoit, that
He being removed out of the Way, Squanto might succeed as principal King of all
these Parts of the Country. (W) After which the Shallop proceeds to the
Massachusetts, has good Trade and return in Safety. (B)

May. Our Provision being spent ( B) a Famine begins to Pinch us, and we look
hard for Supply, but none arrives (B)

May e. We spy a Boat at Sea, which we take to be a Frenchman, but proves a
Shallop from a Ship (B. W) called the Sparrow* (W) which Mr. Weston (B. W) and
Beachamp (B) set out a Fishing at Dama^rin's Cove, 40 Leagues to the Eastward,
(B. W) where this Year are 30 Sail of Ships a Fishing. (W) She brings a Letter
to Mr. Carver from Mr. Weston, of Ian. 17 (B) with 7 Passengers on his Account,
but no Victuals (B. W) nor Hope of any: nor have we ever any afterward: and by
his Letter find He has quite deserted us, and is going to settle a Plantation
of his own. (B)

The Boat brings ^s a kind Letter from Mr. John Huddleston (B) or Huds^on, (mn)
a Capt. of a Ship, Fishing at the Eastward, whose Name we never heard before,
to inform us of a Massacre o^ 400 English by the Indians in Virginia, whence He
came. This ^assacre was on March 22 last, ( sm ps^ being F^i^^y, (...)) and
Smith and Purchase reckon up 347 Eng^l^^h People slain.
By this Boat the Governor return^ a grateful Answer: and with them sends Mr.
Winslow in a Boat of ours to get Provisions o^ the Fishing Ships: whom Capt.
Huddleston re^ceives kindly, and not only spares what He can^ but writes to
others to do the like. By which means He gets as much Bread as amounts to a
Quarter of a Pound a Person a Day till Harvest, and returns in Safety. The
Governor causing their Portion to be daily given them, or some had starved. And
by this Voyage we not only get a present Supply, but also learn the Way to
those Parts for our future Benefit. (B)

At Mr. Winslow's Return, He finds the Colony much weaker than He left it. The
Want of Bread had abated the Strength and Flesh of some, had swelled others;
and had they not been where are diverse sorts of Shel-Fish, they must have
Perished. These Extreamities be fell us in May and June: and in the Time of
these Straits, and indeed before Mr. Winslow went to Monhiggon, the Indians
began to cast forth many insulting Speeches, Glorying in our Weakness, and
giving out how easy it would be ere long to cut us off, which occasions us to
erect a Fort on the Hill above us. (W)

June e. or July b. Come into our Harbor 2 Ships of Mr. Weston's, the Charity
(W) of 100 Tons, (sm. ps) and Swan (W) of ^0, (sm. ps) with his Lette^ of Apr.
10. (B) and 50 or 60 Men, sent at his own Charge, (W) to settle a Plantation
for Him in the Massach^^^tts Bay, for which he had procured a Patent, Smith and
Purchase say there were 60 Passengers: Gov. Bradford says -about 60 s^out Men.
But Morton mistakes in calling the Swan the Spar^ow: Smith and Purchase mistake
in saying they come to Supply the Plantation* wherea^ they come from Mr. Weston
to B^gin another* And as the Manuscript Letter tells us, They came upon
noReligiousDesign, as did the Planters of Plymouth. (msl) so they were far from
being Puritans.
they sailed from London about the last of April, (sm. ps) the Charity the
bigger Ship leaves them, having many P^ss^n^gers to carry to Virginia. (W) We
allow this People Housing: and many being Sick, they have the best Means our
Place affords ( B) Mr. Weston in a Letter owns, that Many of them are Rude and
Profane Fellows: Mr Cushman in another writes. They are no M^n for us, and I
fear they will hardly Deal so well with the Savages as they should; I Pray yo^
therefore signify to Squanto, that they are a destinct Body from us, and we
have nothing to do with them, nor must be blamed for their Faults, much less
can warrant their Fidelity: And Mr. John Pierce in another writes -- As for Mr.
Weston's Company, they are so b^se in Condition for the most part, as in all
Appearance not fit for an honest Man's Company; I wish they Prov^ otherwise. (B)


By Mr. Weston's Ship comes a Letter from Mr. John Pierce, in whose Name the
Plymouth Patent is taken; signifying that whom the Governor admits into the
Association, He will approve ( B)

July 16 Our Number is about 100 Persons, all in Health* (ps) [i. e Free from
Sickness, tho'not from Weakness.] near 60 Acres of Ground well Planted with
Corn, besides Gardens replenishe^ with us^ful Fruits* ( sm. ps)

This Summer we Build a Timber Fort, both strong and comely, with flat Rool and
Battle^ments; on which Ordnance are mounted, a Watch kept, and it also serves
as a Place of Public Worship. (B)

Mr Weston's People stay Here the most part of the Summer, (B) while some seek
out a Place for them. They exceedingly waste and steal our Corn, and ^et
secretly revile us. At length their Coaste^s Return, having sound in the
Mas^sachusetts Bay a Place they judge fit for Settlement, named Wichaguscusset
(W) or Wesagusquasset, (mn) or Wessagusset (mst) since called Weymouth: Whither
upon their Ship [i. e. the Charity] ^eturning from Virginia, (B) the Body of
them go, leaving their Sick and Lame with us (W) till they had built some
Housing, (B) whom our Surgeon by Go^'s Help recovers Gratis, and they
afterward fetch Home (W) nor have we any Recompense for their Curtesy, nor
desired it. They prove an unrul^ Comp^ny, have no goodGovernment over them by
Disorder will soon fall to Want if Mr Weston com^ not quickly among them (B)
Nor had they been long from us ere the Indians fill ou^ E^rs with Clamours
against them for Stealing their Corn and other Abuses. (W)

Our Crop proving scanty, partly through Weakness for want of Food to tend it,
partly through ot^^r B^siness, and partly b^ much being stolen; a F^^in must
ensue next Year unless p^evented: (^) But

Aug* ^. (^) B^ an unexpected Providenc^ ( B) come into our Harbor 2 Ships;
v^z. the Sparro^* Mr. Weston's, who having made her Voyage of F^^h (W) g^es to
Virginia (W B) where both she and her^^^h are sold. ( B) The ^her called the
Disco^very* (W) ^apt. Jones, Commander, (B W) in he^ Way from Virginia
Hom^w^rd, being set out by some Merchants to Discover the Shoals a^bout Cape
Cod* and Harbors between this and Virginia. Of her we buy Knives and Beads
which are now good Trade, though at Cent pe^ Cent or more* and yet Pay away Coat
Bever a^ 3 s. a Pound (which a few Years after yield^ 20 s.) By which means we
are fited to Trade, both for Corn and Bever. (B)

In this Ship comes Mr. John Porey, who had been Secretary in Virginia, and is
going Home in Her: who after his Departure s^nds the Go^vernor a Letter of
Thanks, Dated August 28* wherein He highly commends Mr. Ainsworth's and
R^binson's Works: And after his Return to England, does this poor P^antation
much Credit among those of no mean Rank. (B) Mr. Winslow and Mr. Hubbard seem
to mistake in thinking Capt. Jones was now bound for Virginia: and Mr. Morton,
in thinking Mr. Porey was going Home in Mr. Weston's Ship, wherein his Men came
[viz. -- The Charity, which Mr. Winslow says sailed for England at the end of
S^pt or b. of October.] unless Mr. Por^y went in the C^a^ity from Plymouth to
W^ssagusset, and there wrote his Letter of Aug. 28: and then both Mr Winslow
and Mr. Morton may be Right, but Governor Bradford mistaken in thinking He was
going Home in I^ne^.


Sept e. or October. b. Mr. Weston's bigge^t Ship, the Charity Returns to
England, leaving his Peo^ple s^fficiently victualed: The l^^ser viz. the Swan
remains with his Plantation for their further Help (W)

Sho^tly after Harvest, Mr Weston's People at the Massachusetts, having by
Disorder, much wasted their Provisions, begin to perceive a Want app^oaching;
and hearing we had bought Commodities and designed to trade for Corn, they
wr^te to the Governor to join with us, offer their small Ship for the Service,
and Pray to let them have some of our Commodities: which the Gove^n^r
condescends to; designing to go r^und Cap^ Cod, to the Southward, where Store
of Corn may be obtained. ( B) But are often cr^ss^d in our Purposes. As first,
Mr. Richard Green, Brother-in-law to Mr Weston, who from Him had the Charge of
his Colony, Dies suddenly at Plymouth (W) Then Capt. Standish (B W) with
Squanto for Guide, ( B) Twice sets ^orth with them, but is driven back by
violent Winds* This seems to be about the latter End of October* for which Gov.
Brad^ord seems to mist^ke in writing the latter End of September; when He ^^ys,
't^as aft^r Ha^^vest [i. e. Indian Harvest] that Mr. W^ste^'s People b^^gan to
perceive a Wan^ appro^ching* and wro^e to (...) G^vern^r of Plymouth, to join
in Trading for Corn, and^.
The second Time the Captain falling i^l of a Fever, (W)

Nov. The Governor goes with them: but seeing no Passage through the Shoals of
Cape Cod, puts into a Harbor at M^namoyk. That Evening the G^vernor with
Squanto and others go ashore t^ the Indian H^uses, stay all Night, trade with
the Natives, get 8 Hog^heads of Corn and Bean^ (W) Here Squanto falls Sick of a
Fever, bleed^ing much at the Nose, which the Indians recko^ a fatal Sympton,
and Here in a few Days Dies desiring the Governor to Pray that he might g^ to
the English Man's GOD in Heaven, bequeth^ing his Things to ^undry of his
English Friend^ as Remembrance^ of his Love; of whom we have a great Los^. (B)
Thence sail to the Mas^sachusetts, find a great Sickness among the Na^tives,
not unlike the Plague, if not the same; must give as much for a Quart of Corn
as we used for a Bever Skin: The Savages renew their Complaints to our Governor
against those English: Thence sails to Nauset, buys 8 o^ 10 Hogsheads of Corn
and Beans, as also at Matta^chiest: Gov. Bradford says, they get 26 or 28
Hogsheads of Corn and Beans in all, for both Plantations.
but our Shallop being cast away* we cannot get our Corn aboard: our Governor
causes it to b^ stack'd and covered; and charging the Indians with it, He
procures a Guide* sets out a Foot, being 50 Miles, receiving all Respect from
the Natives by the Way, weary and with galled Feet comes Home: 3 Days after,
the Ship comes also; and the Corn being Divided, Mr. Weston's People return to
their Plantation. (W)

1623.
Jan. CApt. Standish being Recovered, takes ano^ther Shallop, sails to N^uset,
finds the Corn left there in Safety, mends the other Shallop, gets the Corn
aboard the Ship: but it being very Cold and Stormy, is obliged to cu^ the
Shallops from the Stern of the S^ip, and loose them: but the Storm being over,
finds them. While we lodge ashore, an Indian Steals some Trifl^s ou^ of the
Shallop as she lay in a Creek: which when the Capt missed, He t^kes some of his
Company, goes to the Sachem, r^quires the Goods, or would Revenge it on them
before He left them. On the Morrow* the S^chem comes to our Rendevous with many
Men, Sa^lutes the Cap^ain, licking his Hand and bowing down, delivers the
Good^, says He had bea^e^ the Stealer, was very sorry for the Fact, orders the
Women to make and bring us Bread* and is glad to be Reconciled: So we come Home
and divide the Corn as before. (W)

After this the Governor with another Compa^ny goes to Namasket, buys Corn
there: Wh^r^ a Great Sickness rising among the Natives, ou^ People fetch it
Home. (W)

The Governor also, with Hobamak and others go to Manomet, a Town near 20 Miles
South o^ Plymouth. stands on a fresh River running into a Bay This is called
Manomet Bay: though these new Comer^ seem ^o mistake it for Narraganset Bay,
which is nea^ 20 Leagues to the W^stward.
toward Narragansett, which cannon be less than 60 Miles from thence: 'Twill
bar^ a Boat of 8 or 10 Tons to this Place: hithe^ the Dutch or French or both
used to come: I is from Hence to the Bay of Cape Cod about ^ Miles, out of
which Bay the Sea flows into ^ Creek about 6 Miles almost directly toward the
Town: The Heads of this Creek and River are not far distant. This Creek runs
out Easterly into Cape Cod Bay at Scusset Harbor: and this River runs out
Westerly into Monomet Bay: the Distance over Land from Bay to Bay is but 6
Mil^s. the Creek and River nearly meet in a low Ground: and this is the Place
through which there ha^ been a Talk of making a Canal, this 40 Years; which would
be a vast Advantage ^o all these Countries, by saving the long and dangerous
Navigation round the Cape and through the Shoals adjoining.
The Sachem of this Place is Caunacum, who (W) Sept. 13. last ( mn) with many
others owned themselves Subjects of King JAMES, and now uses the Governor very
kindly* the Governor lodging Here in a bitter Night* buys Co^n, but leaves it
in the Sachem's Custo^dy (W)

Feb. Having not much Corn left, Capt. Standish goes again with 6 Men in the
Shallop to Mat^tachiest, meeting with the like Extreme Wea^ther, being froze in
the Harbor the first Night, gets a good Quantity of Corn of the Natives: Through
Extremity is forced to lodge in their Houses, which they much press with a
Design to KILL Him, as after appeared: For now begins a CONSPIRACY among the
Indians to destroy the English, though to us unknown; but the Captain or^ering
his Men to keep awake by Turns, is saved. Here also, an Indian Steals some
Trifles, which the Capt. no sooner perceived, but though He had no more than 6
Men with Him, yet draws them from the Boat, besets the Sachim's House, where
most of the People were, and threatens to fall upon them without Delay, if they
would not forthwith restore them: signifying that as He would not offer the
least Injury, so He would not receive any, without due Satisfaction: Hereupon
the Sachem finds out the Party, makes Him return the Goods; and this Act so
daunts their Courage, that they dare not attempt any thing against the Captain;
but to appease his Anger, bring Corn afresh to Trade; so as He lades his
Shal^lop and comes Home in safety. (W)

Feb. e. An Indian comes from John Sanders, the Overseer of Mr. Weston's Men at
the Massachusetts (W) with a Letter, showing the great Wants they were fallen
into (B) that having spent all their Bread and Corn (W) would have borrowed a
Hogshead of the Natives, but they would lend Him none: He desired Advice
whether He might take it by Force, to support his Men till He returns (B) from
Monhiggon; where is a Plantation of Sir F. Gorges, and whither He is going to
buy Bread of the Ships that come There a Fishing. (W) But the Governor with
others dispatch the Messenger with Letters to diswade Him by all means from
such a Violence: (B.W) exhorting them to make a shift as we, who have so little
Corn left, that we are forced to live on Ground-nuts, Clams, Muscles, etc. Upon
receiving our Letters, Mr. Sanders alters his Purpose, comes first to Plymouth:
where notwithstanding our Necessities, we spare Him some Corn to carry Him to
Monhiggon. (W) And Feb. e. He goes thither with a Shallop, without knowing any
thing of the Indian CONSPIRACY before He sails. (W)

This Spring go from England to the [ Nort^ Eastern] Coasts of New England,
about 40 Ships to Fish; who make a far better Voyage tha^ ever. (sm)

Mar. b. The Captain having refreshed Himself, taken a Shallop and goes to
Manomet for the Corr the Gov. had bought. It seems as if the Captain went into
Scussit Harb^^^ which goes up W^stward tow^rds Manomet.
Being with 2 of hi^ Men far from the Boat at Caunacum's House 2 Natives come
in from the Massachusetts, the chief of whom is Wituwamet, a notable,
insult^ing Indian; who had forme^ly embrew'd hi^ Hands in the Blood both of
French and English* derides our Weakness and boasts his Valor: He came, as
appears afterward, to engage Cau^nacum in the Conspiracy: the Weather being
cold, they would persuade the Captain to send to the Boat for the Rest of his
Company; but He refusing* they help carry the Corn* There Smith says, Sca^ a
lusty Savage, etc. But Smith takin^ his History from this of Winslow's, I
suspect the (...) mistook Scar for There in Smith's written Abridgme^^
a lusty Savage of Paomet, had un^dertaken to kill Him in the Rendevouz before
they part; upon which they intend to fall on the others: But the Night being
exceeding Cold, the Captain could not rest without turn^ing his Sides to the
Fire continually: whereby the Indian missed his Opportunity. The next Day would
fain persuade the Captain to go to Paomet, where He had much Corn, and the
Capt. put forth with Him: but the Wind forcing them back, they come to
Plymouth. (W)

Mar. While the Captain was at Manomet, New^ comes to Plymouth that Masassoit
is like to Die, and that a Dutch Ship is driven ashore before his House so high
that she could not be got off till the Tides increase. Upon which the Gov.
sends Mr. Edward Winslow and Mr. John Hambden, a Gentleman of London, with
Hobamak to visit and help him, and speak with the Dutch. The first Night we
lodge at Namasket: Next Day at One, com^ to a Ferry in Corbitant's Country, and
3 Mile further to Mattapuyst his Dwelling Place, though He be no Friend to us,
but find Him gone to Pakanokik about 5 or 6 Mi^es off: Late within Night we get
thither, whence the Dutch had departed about 2 in the Afternoon* find Masassoit
extreme low, his Sight gone, his Teeth six'd, having swallowed nothing for 2
Days, but using means He surprisingly revives: we stay and help Him 2 Nights
and 2 Days: at the End of the latter, taking out Leave He expresses his great
Thankfulness: we come and lodge with Corbitant at Matta^uyst, who wonders that
we being but 2 should be so venturous. Next Day, on our Journey, H^bamak tells
us, That at his coming away, Masassoit privately charged Him to tell Mr.
Winslow* there was a Plot of the Massachusuks against Weston's People; and
least we should revenge it, against us also; that the Indians of Pa^met,
Nauset, Mattachiest, Succonet, Whither this was Succonest, since named
Falmouth; or Seconet, since named Little-Compton, seems uncertain.
the Isle of Capawak, Manomet and Agaway^om are joined with them; and advises
us by al^ means as we value our Lives and the Lives of our Countrymen, to kill
the Conspirators at Massachusetts and the Plot would cease; and without Delay,
or 'twou'd be too late. That Night we lodge at Namasket, the next Day ge^ Home:
where we find Capt. Standish had sailed this Day for the Massachusetts, but
contrary Winds had driven Him back, and the Paome^ Indian still soliciting the
Captain to go with Him. At the same time, Wissapinewat another Sachem, Brother
to Obtakiest, Sachem of the Massachusetts, Reveals the same thing (W)

Mar. 23. Being a Yearly Court Day, the Governor communicates his Intelligence
to the whole Company, and asks their Advice: who leave it to the Governor, with
his Assistant and the Captain to Do as they think most meet Upon this they
order the Captain to take as many Men as He thinks sufficient, to go forth with
and fall on the Conspirators, but forbear till he makes sure of Wituwamet the
bloody Savage before spoken of* The Captain takes but eight least He should
raise a Jealousy. (W)

The next Day comes 1 of Weston's Men (W) through the Woods to Plymouth, though he
knew not a Step of the Way, but indeed had lost the Path, which was a happy
Mistake; for being Pursued (B) the Indian (W) thereby missed Him ( B) but by
little, and went to Manomet, (W) the Man makes a pitiful Narration of their
weak and dangerous State, with the Insults of the Indians over them* and that
to give the Savages content, since Sanders went to Monhiggon, the^ had Hanged
One who had stole their Corn (W) though He was Bed rid, (Hudibrass) and yet they
were not satisfied: Some Died with Cold and Hunger: one in gathering Shel-fish,
was so weak that he stuck in the Mud and was found Dead in the Place: the Rest
were ready to starve, and He dare stay no longer. (W) His Name was Phineas Prat
(mn) and is living in 16^7 ( H)


The next Day, the Captain sails and arrives There, is suspected, insulted and
threatened by the Savages: But at length watching an Op^portunity, having
Wituwamet and P^ksuot, a notable Pinese (i. e. Counselor and Warrior) with
another Man, and a Brother of Wituwamet, with as many of his own Men together,
He falls upon and after a violent Struggle slays the 3 former with their own
Knives, orders the last to be Hanged, goes to another Place, Kills another,
Fights and makes the Rest to Fly, and Mr. Weston's Men Kill 2 more. But the
Captain releases the Indian Women, would not take their Beaver Coats, nor
suffer the least Discurtesy to be offered them. (W)

Upon this, Mr. Weston's People resolve to leave their Plantation. The Captain
tells them for his own Part He dare live Here with fewe^ Men than they: Yet
since they were other wise minded, according to his Orders (W) of^fers to bring
them to Plymouth, where they should fare as well as we till Mr. Weston or some
Supply comes to them: or if they better liked any other Course, He would help
them as well as He could. Upon this they desireHim to let them have Corn, and
they would go with their small Ship (B) to Monhiggon (W) where they may hear
from Mr. Weston, or have some Sup^ply from Him, seeing the Time of Year is come
for the Fishing Ships to be There: or other wise, would work with the Fishermen
for their Living and get their Passage to England. So they ship what they have,
(B) He lets them have all the Corn He can spare, scarce keeping enough to last
Him Home, sees them under sail well out of the Massachusetts Bay, (B. W) not
taking of them the Worth of a Penny* (B) with some few of their Company who
desire it, He Returns to Plymouth: bringing the Head of Wituwamet, which He
sets up on the Fort (W)

Thus this Plantation is broken up in a Year: and this is the End of those who
being all able Men, had boasted of their Strength and what they would bring to
pass, in comparison of the People at Plymouth, who had many Women, Children,
and weak Ones with them (B)

While Capt. Standish was gone, the Savage who went to Monamet, returning
through our Town was secured till the Captain came back: then confessed the
Plot and says that Obtakies^ was drawn to it by the Importunity of his People;
is now sent to inform Him of the Grounds of our Proceeding, and require Him to
send us the 3 Englishmen among them. After some time Obtakiest persuades an
Indian Woman to come and tell the Governor, He was sorry they were killed
before He heard from us, or He wou'^ have sent them, and desires Peace. (W)

But this Action so amazes the Natives, tha^ they forsake their Houses, run to
an fro, liv^ in Swamps, etc; which brings on them sundry Diseases, whereof many
Die: as Caunacum, Sa^chem of Monamet; Aspinet, Sachem of Nawset* Iyanough,
Sachem of Matachiest; and many others are still daily Dying among them. From
one of those Places a Boat is sent to the Governor with Presents to work their
Peace: but not far from Plymouth is cast away, when 3 are drowned, and one
escaping dare not come to us. (W)

Apr. b. No Supply being heard of nor knowing when to expect any, we consider
how to raise a better Crop, and not languish still in Misery We range all the
Youth under some Family, agree that every Family Plant for their own Particular
and Trust to themselves for Food (B) but at Harvest bring in a competent
Portion for the maintenance of Public Officers, Fisher^men, etc. (W) and in
all other things go on in the General Way as before: for this End assign every
Family a Parcel of Land in Proportion to their Number, though make no Division
for In^heritance: which has very good Success, makes all industrious, gives
Content: Even the Women and Children now go into the Field to Work, and much
more Corn is Planted than ever. (B)


Capt. John Mason (H) who had been Governor of Newfoundland, (gr) Sir F. Gorges,
and several other Gentlemen of Shrewsbury, Bristol, Dor^ch^ster, Plymouth,
Exeter and other Places in the West of England, having obtained Patents of the
New England Council for several Parts of this Country. (H) They, this Spring
(W) send over Mr. David Thompson (H) or Tompson a Scotchman (W) with Mr. Edward
Hilton and his Brother Wm. Hilton, with others, to Begin a Settlement: ( H) and
Mr. Tompson now Begins One, 25 Leagues North East from Plymouth, nea^ Smith's
Isles, at a Place called Pascatoquack. (W) the Place first seized is called the
Little Har^bour, on the West Side of Pascataqua River and near the Mouth, where
the first House is built called Mason Hall. But the Hilton's set up their
Stages higher up the River at [ Cochecho] since named Dover. (H)

This Year [and I conclude this Spring] there are also some scattering
Beginnings made at Monhiggon, and some other Places by sundry others. (B) But
about Pascataqua River, there seem not many other Buildings erected till after
1631. ( H)

Shortly after Mr. Weston's People went to the Eastward, HE comes There Himself
with some of the Fishermen, under another Name and Disguise of a Blacksmith;
where He hears the Ruin of his Plantation: and getting a Shallop, with a Man or
two comes on to see how things are: but in a Storm is cast away in the Bottom
of the Bay between Pascataquak and Merri^mak River, And so says Mr. Morton: Mr.
Hubbard therefore seems to mistake in writing Ipswich Bay.
and hardly escapes with his Life Afterward He falls into the Hands of the
Indians, who pillage Him of all He saved from the Sea, and strip Him of all his
Clothes to his Shirt. At length He gets to Pascataquak* borrows a Suit of
Clothes, finds means to come to Plymouth, and desires to borrow some Bever of
us. Notwithstanding our Straits, yet in Consideration of hisNecessity, we
letHim have 170 odd P^unds of Bever, wi^h which He goes to the Eastward, stays
his small Ship and some of his Men, buys Provision and fits Himself; which is
the Foundation of his future Courses: and yet never Repaid us any thing save
Reproaches, and becomes our Enemy on all Oc^casions (B)

Apr. m. We Begin to set our Corn, the setting Season being good till the
latter End of May* (W) But by the time our Corn is Planted, our Victuals are
spent: not knowing at Night where to have a Bit in the Morning, and have
neither Bread nor Corn for 3 or 4 Months to^gether: yet bare our Wantswith
Cheerfulness and rest on Providence. ( B)

Having but one Boat left, we divide the Men into several Companies, 6 or 7 in
each: who take their Turns to go out with a Net and fish, and return not till
they get some, though they be 5 or 6 Days out; knowing there is nothing at Home,
and to return empty would be a great Discouragement When they stay long or get
but little, the Rest go* a digging Shell fish: and thus we live the Summer;
only sending 1 or 2 to range the Woods for Deer, they now and then get one,
which we divide among the Company: and in the Winter are helped with F^wl and
Ground-nuts. (B)

At length we receive Letters from the Ad^venturers in Eng^and of Dec. 22 and
Apr. 9 last, wh^rein they say, I^ r^j^iceth us much to hear those good Reports
that diverse have bro't home of you: and give an Account, that last Fall (B)
October. 16 (ps) a Ship the Parragon, sailed from London with Passengers ( B) 37
( sm) or r ^her 67 (ps) for New Plymouth: being fitted ^ut by Mr. John Pierce,
in whose Name our first ^atent was taken, his Name being only used in Trust:
but when He saw we were Here hopefully s^ated, and by the Success GOD gave us
had obtai^ed Favor with the Council for New England, He gets another Patent of
a larger Extent, meaning to keep it to Himself, allow us only what He pleased,
hold us as his Tenants and sue to his Courts as chief Lord: But meeting with
tempestuous Storms (B) in the Downs (mn) the Ship is so bruised and leaky that
in 14 Days she Returned ( B) to London (mn) was forced to be put into the Dock,
100 Pounds laid out to mend Her, and lay 6 or 7 Weeks to Dec. 22, before she
sailed a second time: but being half way over, met ^ith extreme tempestuous
Weather about the middle of Feb which held 14 Days, beat ^ff the Round-House
with all her upper Works, obliged them to cut her Mast and ^^turn to
Portsmouth; having 109 Souls aboard, with Mr. Pierce Himself. Upon which great
and repeated Loss and Disappointment, He is prevailed upon for 500 Pounds to
resign his Patent to the Company By this Company seems to be meant the
Adventurers to Plymouth Colony.
which cost Him but 50 Pounds: and the Goods with Charge of Passengers in this
Ship cost the Company 640 Pounds: for which they were forced to hire another
Ship, viz. the Ann of 140 Ton to Transport them, viz 60 Pass^ngers with 60 Tons
of Goods; hoping to sail* by the end of April. (B)

June e. Arrives a Ship with Capt. Francis West who has a Commission to be
Admiral of New Eng^land, to restrain such Ships as come to Fish an^ Trade
without License from the New England Coun^il, for which they should Pay a round
Sum of Money: tell us they spoke with a Ship at Sea and were aboard her, having
sundry Pas^sedgers, bound for this Plantation, but lost her Mast in a Storm
which quickly followed, won^der she is not arrived and fear some Miscarriage
which fills us with Trouble. But Mr. West finding the Fishermen stubborn
Fellows and to^ strong for Him, sails for Virginia; and their Owners
complaining to the Parliament, procur^ an Order that Fishing should be Free. (
B)

July m. Notwithstanding our great Pains and Hopes of a large Crop, GOD seems
to blast them an^ threaten sorer F^min^ by a Great Drought an^ Heat from the
t^ird Week in May to the mid^dle of this Mon^h Mr. M^rton mistaking Governor
Bradford, wrongly placed this Droug^t in the preceding Year: and Mr. Hubbard
follows Mr. Morton's mistake.
so as the Corn wither^ (B) both the Blad^ and Stalk, as if 'twere ut^terly
Dead: Now are our Hopes overthrow^ and we discouraged, our Joy, being turned
into Mourning: and to add to our sorrowful State our Hearing the Supply sent us
in Compan^ with anothe Ship 300 Leagues at Sea, and now in three Months see
nothing of Her, only Signs of a Wreck on the Coast, which we can judge no other
than She: The most courageous are now discouraged. Upon this the Public
Authority (W) sets apart a solemn Day of Humiliation and Prayer to seek the
LORD in this Distress who was pleased to give speedy Answer, to ou^ own and the
Indians Admiration: For though i^ the former Part of the Day, it was very clea^
and hot, without a Cloud or sign of Rain; yet toward Evening ( B* W) before
the Exercise is over, the Clouds gather and next Morning distill suc^ soft (W)
and gentle ( B) Showers (B. W) as give cause of Joy and Praise to GOD: they
come without any Thunder, Wind, or Violence, and by Degrees and that Abundance
(B) conti^nuing 14 Days with seasonable Weather (W) as the Earth is thoroughly
soaked, and the decayed Corn and other Fruits so revived, as is wonderful to
see, the Indians are astonished to behold, and gives a joyful Prospect of a
fruit^ful Harvest. (^) At the same time, Capt. Stan^dish, who had been sent by
the Governor to buy Provisions, returns with some, accompanied with Mr. David
Tompson abovesaid. (W)

Now also we hear of the third Repulse Neither Governor Bradford nor Mr. Morton
give any Hint of this third Repulse.
our Supply had, of their safe though dangerous Return to England, and of their
Preparing to to come to us. Upon all which, another Day is set apart for solemn
and Public Thanks^giving. (W)

^uly e. (W) Aug (B) comes in the expected Ship the Ann Mr. Wm. Pierce Master:
Governor Bradford and from HimMr. Morton, mentioning Capt. West's sailing for
Virginia, say, the Ann came in about 14 Days after: and Smith tells us the two
Ships came in either the next Morning or not long after the Thanks^i^in^.
and about a Week or 10 Days after (B) Aug. b. (W) arrives the Pinnace (B)
named the James, Mr. Bridges Master ( mn) which they had left in fowl Weather,
a fine new Vessel of 44 Tuns which the Company had built to stay in the
Country: they bring about 60 Persons for the General (B) being all in Health
but one who soon Recovers, (W) some being very useful and beome good Members of
the Body (B) of whom the Principal are Mr Timothy Hatherly and Mr. George
Morton, who came in the Ann; and Mr. John Ienny, who come in the James (mn)
Some were the Wives and Children of such who came before: and some others are
so bad we are forced to be at the Charge to send them Home next Year (B)

By this Ship R. C [i. e. doubtless Mr Cus^^man their Agent] writes, Some few
of your old Friends are come: they come dropping to you; and by Degrees I hope
ere long you shall enjoy them all, etc (B)

From the General, subscribed by 13 we have also a Letter wherein they say* --
Let^ it not be grievous to you, that you have been Instruments to brake the Ice
for others who come after with l^ss Difficulty: the Honor shall be yours to
the World's End: we bare you always in our Breasts and our hearty Affection is
toward you all, as are the Hearts of Hundreds more which never saw your Faces,
who doubtless Pray your Safety as their own. (B)

When these Passengers see our poor and low Condition ashore, they are much
dismayed and full of sadness: only our old Friends rejoice to see us and that
it is no worse, and now hope we shall enjoy better Days together. The best Dish
we could present them with, is a Lobster, or Piece of Fish, without Bread, or
any thing else but a Cup of fair Sp^ing Water: and the long continuance of this
Diet with our Labors abroad has somewhat abated the Freshness of our
Complexion; but GOD gives us Health, etc. ( B)

Aug. 14. The fourth Marriage is of Gov. Bradford to Mrs. Alice Southworth,
Widow. (bg)

Sept. 10. (W) The Pinnace (B) being fitted for Trade and Discovery to the
Southward of Cape Cod, is now ready to sail Smith says, under Capt. Altom; but
either Smith or the Printer perhaps mistook the Name for Ald^n.
: and this Day, the Ann, having been hired by the Company, sails for London (W)
being laden with Clap boards, and all the Beaver and other Furts we have: with
whom we send Mr. Winslow, to in^form how Things are and procure what we want.
(B)


[Here Ends Mr. WINSLOW's Narrative: and there with also PURCHAS's Account of
NEW ENGLAND. And from this Time forward I shall chiefly confine my self to the
MANUSCRIPTS.]

Now our Harvest comes; instead of Famin^ we have Plenty, and the Face of
Things is changed to the Joy of our Hearts: nor has there been any General Want
of Food among us since to this Day. ( B) Gov Bradford's History reaches to the
end of 1646


Sept. m Capt. Robert Gorges Son of Sir Ferdinand with Mr. Morell (B) an
Episcopal Miinister ( msl) and sundry Passengers and Families arrive in the
Massachusetts Bay, to Begin a Blantation There Sir F. Gorges says, His Son
arrived at the Massachu^setts-Bay about the the beginning of Aug. and Mr.
Hub^bard says in the end of Aug. But these seem unlikely; inasmuch as Mr.
Winslow sailing from Plymouth on Sept. 10, for London, and There Printing an
Account of N. E. to the very Day of his sailing, has not the least Hint of
Capt. Gorges Arrival.
Pitches on the same Place Mr Weston's People had forsaken; has a Commis^sion
from the Council for New England (B) to be their Lieutenant General (gr) or
General Go^vernor of the Country; and they appoint for his Council and
Assistance, Capt. West the aforesaid Admiral, Christopher Levit, Esquire and the
Go^vernor of Plymouth for the Time being, giving Him Authority to choose others
as He should find fit; with full Power to Him and his As^sistants, or any 3 of
them, whereof Himself t^ be one, to Do what they should think good (...) all
Cases, Capital, Criminal, Civil, etc. H gave us notice of His Arrival by
Letter: an^ before we could visit Him sails for the Eastwar^ with the Ship He
came in: but a Storm rising the y bare into our Harbor, are kindly
enter^tained and stay 14 Days. Mean while Mr Weston, having recovered his Ship,
and coming in Here, Capt Gorges calls Him to Account for some Abuses laid to
his Charge: with great Difficulty Governor Bradford makes Peace between them.
Shortly after, Gov. Gorg^s goes to the Mass^chus^tts by Land, being thankful
for his kind Entertainment. His Ship staying Here, fits for Virginia having
some Passengers to deliver There. ( B)

The Pinnace being sent about the Cape to Trade with the Narragansetts, gets
some Corn and Beaver: yet makes but a poor Voyage; the Dutch having used to
furnis^ them with Cloth and better Commodities; whereas she had only Beads and
Knives, which are not There much esteemed. ( B)

Nov. 5 ( mn) Some of the Seamen roystering in a House and making a Great Fire
in very cold Weather, it brakes out of the Chimney into the Thatch, consumes
the House with 3 or 4 more and all the Goods and Provisions in them ( B) Smith
says there were 7 Houses Burnt: But perhaps by mistake He may account therewith
the 2 Burnt in 1621; and Mr. Hubbard seems to mistake in writing as if the
Common House were Burnt, whereas the Fire was only right over against it, and
greatly endangered it*
to the value of 500 l. (sm) the Dwelling where it begun being right against
the House which contained (...) common Store and Provision, was like to ^e
consumed, which would have overthrown our Plantation: But through GOD's Mercy
by the great Care and Diligence of the Governor and others about Him, is saved.
Some would have had the Goods thrown out; which if they had, much would have
been stolen by the rude People of the 2 Ships, who were almost all ashore. But
a trusty Company was placed within, as well as others who with wet Clothes and
other Means kept off the Fire without: For we suspected malicious Dealing if
not plain Treachery: For when the Tumult was greatest, was heard a Voice,
though from whom unknown -- Look well about you, for all are not Friends that
are near you. And whenthe Vehemence of theFire was over, Smoke was seen to rise
within a Shed adjoining to the Store House, which was wattled up withBoughs, in
the withered Leaves whereof a Fire was kindled; which some running to quench,
found a Firebrand of an Ell long, lying under the Wall on the Inside, which
must be laid there by some Hand* in the Judgment of all who saw it. But GOD
kept us in the Danger whatever was intended (B)

Capt. Gorges Ship sailing for Virginia, sundry of those whom the Company had
sent over Returned in Her: Some because of the Fire, which had burnt both their
Houses and Provisions (B) one of whom was Mr. Hatherly (mn) and other^ out of
Discontent and Dislike of the Country. (B)

1624.
Toward the Spring, after Capt. Gorges and Mr. Weston had been to the
Eastward, Mr. Weston comes again to Plymouth, then sails for Virginia. He
afterward Dies of the Sickness at Bristol in England, in the Time of the Civil
War. ( B)
And Capt. Gorges not finding the state of Things to answer his Quality, with
some who depended on Him, Returns to England: some of his People go to
Virginia; and some f^w remain, who are helped with Supplies from Hence. But Mr.
Morrell stays about a Y^ar after the Governor, and then takes shipping Here and
returns. At his going away, told some of our People, He had a Power of
Superintendency over the Churches Here, but never showed it. And thu^ the
second Plantation at the Massachusetts Ended. (B)

This Spring there go about 50 English Ships, to Fish on the Coasts of New
England. (sm)

[ This Spring] within a Year after Mr. David Tompson had began a Plantation at
Pascataqua, He removes to the Massachusetts Bay and possesses a fruitful Island
and very desirable Neck of Land, which is after confirmed to Him by the
General Court of the Massachusetts Colony. (H)

About this Year [and I conclude this Spring] the Fame of the Plantation at New
Plim^uth being spread in all the Western Parts of England; the Rev* Mr White
(H) a famous Puritan Minister Echard's History of England.
of Dorchester, excites several Gentlemen There to make way for another
Settlement in New England: who now on a common Stock, send over sundry Persons
to Begin a Plantation at Cape Ann: employ Mr John Tilly their Overseer of
Planting; and Mr. Thoma^ Gardener, of the Fishery for the pre^sent Year. (H)

This Y^ar [and I suppose this Spring] Mr. Henry Jacob who had set up an
Independent Church in England in 1616, with the Consent of his Church goes to
Virginia: where soon after He Dies: But upon his Departure, his Congregation
choose Mr. Lathrop their Pastor. Neal's History of the Puritans.
[I conclude He is the same Mr. John Lathrop, who about 10 Years after comes to
Situate in Plymouth Colony]

The Time of our Electing Officers for this Year arriving, the Governor desires
the People, both to change the Persons and add more Assi^tants to the Governor
for Council and Help: showing the Necessity of it; that if 'twere a Benefit or
Honor, it is fit others should be Partakers; or if a Burden, it is but equal
others should help to bare it; and that this is the End of Yearly Elections.
(B. mn) Yet they choose the same Governor, viz. Mr. Bradford: (H) But whereas
there was but 1 Assistant, they now choose 5 and give the Governor a double
V^ice (B. mn)

Mar. b We send our Pinnace to the Eastward a fishing: but arriving safe in a
Harbor near Damarin's Cove, where Ships used to ride, some Ships being There
already arrived from England; soon after, an extraordinary Storm drove Her
against the Rocks, broke and sunk Her There: the Master and 1 Man drowned; the
others saved; but all their Provisions, Salt and Lading lost Shortly after, (B)
viz in

Mar. (mn) Mr. Winslow (B) our Agent, ( mn) comes over in the Ship Charity and
brings a pretty good Supply of Clothing, etc. the Ship comes a Fishing, a
Thing fatal to this Plantation He also brings a Bull and 3 Heisers, the first
Cattle of this kind in the Land: but therewith a sad Account of a strong
Faction among the Adventurers against us, and especially against the Coming of
Mr. Robinson and the Rest from Leyden. (B)

By Mr. Winslow we have several Letters (1) from Mr. Robinson to the Governor,
dated Ley^den, Dec. 19 [I suppose New Style; but in ours, Dec 9] 1623: wherein
he writes with great Concern and Tenderness about our Killing the Savage
Conspirators at the Massachusetts; says, O how happy a thing had it been that
you had converted some before you had killed any! etc It is to be hoped that
Squanto was converted.
(2) From the same toMr. Brewster, Dated Leyden Dec. 20 [I suppose New Style;
but in ours, Dec. 10] 1623. whereinHe writes of the deferring of their desired
Transportation, through the Opposition of some of the Adventurers: 5 o^ 6 being
absolutely bent for Them above all others; 5 or 6 are their professed
Adversaries; the rest more indifferent, yet influenced by the latter, who above
all others are unwilling that HE should be Transported, etc. (3) From R. C. [I
conclude Mr. Cushman at London, dated Ian. 24 1623, 4; wherein He writes, they
send a CA^PENTER to build 2 Ketches, a Lighter and 6 or 7 Shallops; a SALT-MAN
to make Salt; and ^ PREACHER, though not the most eminent, for whose Going (says
He) Mr. Winslow and I gave way to give Content to some at London: the Ship to
be laden as soon as you can and sent to Bilboa: to send Mr. Winslow again: We
have taken a PATENT for CAPE ANN, etc. ( B)

This Spring the People requesting the Gov. to have some Land for Continuance,
and not by Yearly Lot as before; He gives every Person an Acre to Them and
Theirs, as near the Town as can be; and no more till the 7 Years expire, that
we may keep close together for greater Defense and Safety. (B)

The Ship is soon discharged and sent to Cape-Ann a fishing, and some of our
Planters to help build her Stages to their own Hindrance: but through the
Drunkenness of the Master which the Adventurers sent, made a poor Voyage; and
would have been worse, had we not kept one a Trading There who got some Skins
for the Company. ( B)

The Fishing Masters sending us Word, that if we would be at the Cost, they
would help to weigh our Pinnace near Damarin's Cove, and their Carpenter should
mend Her; We there^fore sent: and with several Tun of Cask fastened to Her at
low Water, they buoy her up, hale her ashore, mend her; and our People bring
her to us again. (B)

June 17. Born at Plymouth to Governor Bradford, his Son William; who
afterward becomes Deputy Governor of the Colony. From the said Deputy
Governo^'s Original Table Book written with a black Lead Pencil.


This Month, Dies Mr. George Morton, a gra^cious Servant of GOD, an unfeigned
Lover and Promoter of the common Good and Growth of thi^ Plantation and
faithful in what ever Pub^lick Employment He was entrusted with. (mn)

The SHIP CARPENTER sent us is an honest and very industrious Man, quickly
builds us 2 very good and strong Shallops* with a great and strong Lighter, and
had he^n Timber for 2 Ketches; but this is spoilt; for in the Hot Season of the
Year, He falls into a Fever and Dies to our great Loss and Sorrow. (B)

But the SALT-MAN is an ignorant, foolish and selfwill'd Man; who chooses a Spot
for his Salt-Works, will have 8 or 10 Men to help Him, is confident the Ground
is Good, makes a Carpenter rear a great Frame of a House for the Salt and other
like Uses; but finds Himself deceived in the Bottom; will then have a Lighter
to carry Clay, etc. yet all in vain: He could do nothing but boil Salt in Pans.
The next Year, is sent to Cape Ann; and there the Pans are set up by the
Fishery: but before the Summer is out, He burns the House and spoils the Pans:
and there is an End of this Chargeable Business. ( B)

The MINISTER is Mr. John Lyford, whom a Faction of the Adventurers send, to
hinder Mr. Robinson. At his Arrival appears exceeding complaisant and humble,
sheds many Tears, blesses GOD that had brought Him to see our Faces, etc: we
give Him the best Entertainment we can; at his Desire Receive Him into our
Church, when He blesses GOD for this Opportunity and Freedom to enjoy his
Ordinance^ in Purity among his People, etc; we make Him larger Allowance than
any other; and as the Governor used in weighty Matters to consult with Elder
Brewster with the Assistants, so now He calls Mr Lyford to Council also. But
Mr. Lyford soon joins with Mr. John Oldham a private Instrument of the Factious
Part of the Adventurers in England, whom we had also called to Council in our
chief Affairs without Distrust: yet they fall a Plotting both against our
Church and Government, and endeavor to overthrow them. ( B)

^uly. This Date I compute from the Article of August 22 following.
At length, the Ship ( B) wherein Lyford came (mn) setting sail toward
Evening; the Governor takes a Shallop, goes out with Her a League or 2 to Sea,
calls for Lyford's and Oldham's Letters, opens them, and finds their Treachery:
Mr. Wm. Pierce now Master of the Ship, who was aware of their Actions, readily
helping. The Governor returns in the Night, brings some of their Letters back,
but keeps them private, till Lyford and his few Accom^plices which the Factious
Part of the Adventurers sent, judging their Party strong enough, rise up,
oppose the Government and Church, draw a Company apart, set up for themselves,
and He would minister the Sacrament to them by his Episcopal Calling, etc. (B)

Upon this the Governor calls a Court, sum^mons the whole Company to appear,
charges Lyford and Oldham with Plotting and Writing against us; which they
Deny. The Gov^rnor then produces their own Letters: they are confounded and
convicted: Oldham being outrageous would have raised a Mutiny; but his Party
leaves Him: and the Court Expell^ them the Colony: OLDHAM -- presently, though
his Wife and Family have Leave to stay the Winter, or till he can make
Provision to re^move them comfortably* He goes and settles at Natasco (B) i. e.
Nantasket (mn. H) [at the Entrance of the Massachusetts-Bay] where the Plymouth
People had before set up a Building to accommodate their Trade with the
Massachusetts: and there Mr. Roger Conant and some others with their Families
retire and stay a Year and some few Months. (H) LYFORD has Leave to stay six
Months; owns his Fault before the Court, that all He had written is False, and
the Sentence far less than He deserves; afterward confesses the same to the
Church with many Tears, begs Forgiveness, and is restored to his Teaching. (B)

Aug. 5. The ninth Marriage at New Plymouth is of Mr. Thomas Prince with Mrs.
Patience Brewster, (bg) [He is afterward Governor: and by thi^ only Hint I
find He was now in the Country.]

Aug. 22. Notwithstanding Lyford's Protestations and the Kindness shown him; He
in a Month or 2 Relapses; and thisDay, writes by the Pinnace another Letter to
the Adventure^s against us; but the Party entrusted gives it to the Governor.
(B) [This Pinnace seems to sail for London and Mr. Winslow in Her.]

This Year comes some Addition to the few Inhabitants of Wessagusset, from
Weymouth in England: who are another sort of People than the Former ( msl) [and
on whose Account I conclude the Town is since called Weymouth] They have the
Rev. Mr. Barnard their first Non^ conformist Minister, whoDies among them: But
whether He comes before or after 1630, or when H^ Dies is ye^ unknown (msl) nor
do I any where find the least Him of Him, but in the Manuscript Letter, taken
from some of the oldest People at W^ymouth.


At New Plymouth, there are now about 180 Persons; some Cattle and Goats, but
many Swine and Poultry; 32 Dwelling Houses: the Town is impaled about half a
Mile in Compass: on a High Mount in the Town, they have a Fort well built with
Wood, Lime and Stone, and a fair Watch Tower. The Place it seems is Healthful:
for in the 3 last Years, notwithstanding their great Want of most Necessaries,
there has not one Died of the first Planters: And this Year, they have
freighted a Ship of 180 Tuns, etc. (sm)

The General Stock already employed by the Adventurers to Plymouth, is about
seven thousand Pounds. ( sm)

At Cape Ann there is a Plantation beginning by the Dorchester Men, which they
hold of those of New Plymouth; who also by them have set up a Fishing Work (sm)


[ And Here SMITH Ends his Account of NEW ENGLAND]

1625.
THis Winter Mr. White with the Dorchester Adventurers, hearing of some
Religious Persons lately removed from New Plymouth to Nantasket fromDislike of
their rigid Principles, among whom was Mr. Roger Conant, a pious, sober and
p^udent Gentleman; they choose Mr. Conant to manage their Affairs at Cape Ann,
both of Planting and Fishing: and Mr. White engages Mr. Humphry their Treasurer
to signify to Him the same by Writing. They also invite Mr Lyford to be
Minister to the Plantation, and Mr Oldham to manage their Trade with the
Natives. (H)

Mar. 27. Lord's Day, King JAMES I, of Great Britain Dies Howes Continuation of
Stow's Annals.
[ AEt. 59: havingReigned over Eng^land 22 Years and over Scotland above 57]
and his only Son CHARLES I, AEt. 25 succeeds Howes Continuation of Stow's
Annals.
i^ whose Reign the Reformation degenerates, and the Prelates load us with more
Popish In^novations, and bind the Burdens more straightly on us. Mr. Benj
Hubbard's Sermo Secularis.


This Year, (mn) comes over Capt Wollaston, with three or 4 more of some
Eminence Deputy Governor Dudley says there came 30 with Capt. Wollaston; in his
Letter to the Countess of Lincoln, of March 28. 1631, Printed in 8 vo at
Boston, 1696.
and a great many Servants, Provisions, etc. to Begin a Plantation. They Pitch
on a Place in the Massachusetts Bay, (B) since named Brain^trey (mn) on the
Northerly mountainous Part thereof (msl) which they call Mount Wollaston: among
whom is one (B) Thomas (mn) Morton: who had been a kind of petty Fogger at
Fur^nival's Inn. (B)

This Spring, at our Election Court, Oldham, though forbid to Return without
Leave; yet openly comes, and in so furious a manner reviles us* that even his
Company are ashamed of his Outrage. Upon which we appoint Him to Pass through a
Guard of Soldiers and every one with a Musket to give Him a Blow on his hinder
Part, is then conveyed to the Water Side, where a Boat is ready to carry Him
away. ( B)

While this is doing Mr. Winslow and Mr. Wm Pierce land from England, and bid
them spare neither Him nor Lyford: for they had pla^'d the villians with us;
and their Friends in England had the like Bickerings with ours There about
Lyford's calumnious Letters, etc* after many Meetings and much Clamor against
our Ag^nts for accusing Him; the Controversy was referred to a further Meeting
of most of the Adventurers to hear and decide the Mat^ter Mr. Lyford's Party
chose Mr. White a Councellor at Law; the other chose the Rev* Mr. H^oker,
Moderator; and many Friends on bothSides coming in, there was a great Assembly:
In which Mr. Winslow made so surprising a Discovery of Lyford's Carriage when
Mini^ster in Ireland, for which He had been forced to leave that Kingdom, and
coming to England was unhappily lit on an^ ^^nt to N^w Plimout^ as struck all
his Friends (...), made 'em ashamed to defend Him: and the Moderators Declared,
that as his Carriage with us gave us cause enough to do as we did; so this new
Discovery renders Him unmeet to bare the Ministry more. (B) (...) this it seems
as if the Rev. Mr. White and the Dorchester Gentlemen, had been imposed upon
with respect to Lyford and Oldham, and had sent Invitations to them before this
Discovery. And as by many Passages in Mr. Hubbard, it appears He had never seen
Gov. Bradford's History; for want thereof he is sometimes in the Dark about the
Affairs of Plymouth, and especially those which relate to Lyford and Oldham, as
also to Mr. Robinson.


Hence therefore Lyford with some of his Friends, go after Oldham to Natasco,
(B) where receiving the Invitation of the Dorchester Gen^tlemen, Mr. Lyford
removes with Mr Conant to Cape Ann: but Mr. Oldham chooses to stay a^ Nantasket
and Trade for Himself. (H)

But upon this Decision, the Company of Ad^venturers to Plymouth brake in
Pieces; two Thirds of them deserting us: yea some of Ly^ford's and Oldham's
Friends set out a Ship ^ fishing (B) under one Mr. Hewes, (H) and getting the
start of ours, they take our Stage and other Provisions made for Fishing at
Cape Ann the Year before to our great Charge, and refuse to restore it without
Fighting: Upon which we let them keep it, and our Governor sends some Planters
to help the Fishermen build another. (B) Mr. Hubbard tells us, that Capt.
Standish, who had been bred a Soldier in the Netherlands, arriving at Cape Ann,
Demands the Stage in a peremptory Manner. And the others refusing, the Dispute
grows hot, the Captain seems resolved to attack them and recover hisRight by
Force of Arms: but thePrudence of Mr. Conant and the Interposition Mr. Wm
Pierce who lay just by, prevents it; the Ship's Crew promising to help build
another, ends the Controversy.


Yet some of the Adventurers still cleaving to us, they by Mr. Winslow write on
Dec. 18. 1624* as follows -- We cannot forget you, nor our Friendship and
Fellowship we have had some Years -- our hearty Affections toward you
(un^known by Face) have been no less than to our nearest F iends, yea to our
own selves. -- As there has been a Faction among us [at London] more than 2
Years; so now there is an utter Breach and Sequestration. -- The Company's
DEBTS are not less than 1400 l. and we hope you will do your best to free them.
-- We are still persuaded, you are the People that must make a Plantation in
those remote Places when all others fail. We have sent some Cattle, Clothes,
Hoes, Shoes Leather, etc; but in another Nature than formerly, having committed
them to the Charge of Mr. Allerton and Win^low, to sell as our Factors, etc.
The Goods are ordered to be sold at 70 per Cent Advance -- a thing though it
unreasonable and a great Oppression. The Cattle are the best Commodity. (B)

They send also 2 Ships a Fishing upon their own Account: the one is the
Pinnace which had been sunk and weighed as before; the other a large Ship,
which makes a great Voyage of good dry Fish, that would fetch 1800 l. at
Bil^boa or St. Sebastian's, whither her Owners had ordered Her: but there being
a Rumor of a War with France, the Master, timorous, ^ails to Plymouth and
Portsmouth, whereby He l^oses the Opportunity to their great Detriment. The
lesser Ship is filled with goodly Cor fish took on the Bank, with 800 Weight of
Beaver, besides other Furr from our Plantation. The^ go joyfully together
Homeward* the bigger Ship towing the less^r all the way till they are sho^ deep
into the English Channel, almost within sight of Plymouth: when a Tu^ks Man of
War takes the lesser and carries Her ^ff to Sally, where the Master and Men are
made Slaves, and many of the Beaver Skins sold for four Pence a pi^ce, (B)

In the bigger Ship, Capt. Standish goes ou^ Agent, It seems most likely that
Capt. Standish first went in the smaller Ship with the Furr, which at first was
the only Ship bound for England; but after the Master of the greater Ship
determined for England too, that the Captain got into Her, and so escaped the
Slavery.
both to the remaining Adventur^ers for more Goods, and to the New England
Council to oblige the others to come to a Com^position: but arrived there in a
bad Time, the State being full of Trouble and the Plague very hot in London;
there Die such Multitudes Weekly, that Trade is dead, little Money stiring, and
no Business can be done. However, He engages several of the Council to Promise
their Helpfulness to our Plantation: but our remaining Adventurers are so much
weakened by their Loss of the Fish, and of the Ship the Turks had taken, they
can do but little. (B)

Mean while GOD gives us Peace and H^alth with contented Minds, and so succeeds
our Labors that we have Co^n sufficient and some to spare, with other
Provisions: nor had we ever any Supply [from England] but what we first bro't
with us. After Harvest, we send a Boat Load of Corn 40 or 50 Leagues to the
Eastward up Kennebeck River; it being one of those 2 Shallops our Carpenter
built the Year before, for we have no larger Vessel. We had laid a Deck over
her Mid ship to keep the Corn dry: but the Men were forced to stand in all
Weathers without any Shelter, and the Time of Year begins to grow tempestuous:
but GOD preserves and prospers them; for they bring home 700 Weight of Beaver
besides other Furr, having little or nothing but our Corn to Purchase them.
This Voyage was made by Mr. Winslow and some old Standards; for Seamen we have
none. (B)

Some time this Fall I gather this from Mr. Hubbard, who says that Mr* Conant
and Lyford with their F^milies and those few who followed them, ^arried at
Nantasket a Year and some few Months, till the Door was opened for their Remove
to Cape Ann.
Mr. Lyford's Peo^ple at Nantasket remove to Cape Ann, a Place more convenient
for the Fishery; and there stay about a Year But Mr. Conant finding a more
commodious Place for Plantation a little to W^stward, on the other Side of a
Creek called Naumkeak; secretly conceives in his, Mind, that in after times, as
is since fallen out it may prove a Receptacle for such in England as on the
Account of Religion would be willing to settle in these Parts of the World; and
gives an Intimation of it to hisFriends in England. (H)

Dec. 23 From Dec. 22. 1624. to this Day, there Die of the Plague in London and
Westminster, 41, 313. (Howes)

^626.
UPON a Year's Experience, the Dorchester Adventurers being disappointed of
their Expectations, throw up their Business* But the Rev. Mr. White, a chief
Founder under GOD, of the Massachusetts-Colony, being grieved so good a Work
should fall to the Ground, writes to Mr. Conant, not to desert the Business;
and Promises that if Mr. Conant with 3 others whom He knew to be honest and
prudent Men, viz. John Woodberry, John Balch, and Peter Palfreys, would stay at
Naumkeak, He would procure them a Patent, and send them Men, Provisions, and
whatever they write for to trade with the Natives. (H)

This Spring a French Ship is cast away at Sagadehock: wherein are many Biscay
Rugs and other Commodities, which fall into the Hands of the People at
M^nhiggen and other Fishermen at Damarin's Cove. (B)

About a Year after we had sent Oldham away; as He is sailing for Virginia,
being in extreme Danger; He makes a free and large Confession of the Wrongs He
had done the Church and People at Plymouth; and as He had sought their Ruin,
the LORD might now destroy Him; bes^eching GOD to forgive Him, making Vows if
He be spared, to carry otherwise: and being spared He after carrie^ fairly to
us, owns the Hand of GOD to be with us, seems to have an honorable Respect for
us* and we give Him Liberty to come and converse with us when he pleases (B)

Apr. b. We hear of Capt. Standish arriving in ^ Fishing-Ship, send a Boat to
fetch Him, and welcome He is: had taken up for us 150 l. though at 50 per C^nt;
which his Expense deducted, He laid out in suitable Goods, and has prepare^ the
Way for our Composition with the Compa^ny. But the News He brings is sad in
many Regards; -- not only of the Losses mentioned, whereby some of our Friends
are disabled to help us, and others Dead of the Plague; but also that our Dear
Pastor Mr. ROBINSON is Dead, (B) about the 50th Year of his Age, (H) which
strikes us with great Sorrow. His and our Enemies had been continually
Plotting, how they might hinder his coming Hither; but the Lord ha^ appointed
him a better Place. (B)

Mr. Roger White in a Letter from Leyden of Apr. 28, [i. e. Apr. 18 our Style]
1625, to the Governor and Mr. Brewster, has the following Words -- It has
pleased the Lord to take out of this Vale of Tears, your and our Loving and
Faithful Pastor, Mr. ^obinson, -- He fell Sick Saturday Morning, Feb. 22. [i.
e. Feb. 12. our Style, 1624, 5] Next day Taught us Twice -- On the Week grew
Weaker every Day, feeling little or no Pain -- Sensible to the last -- Departed
this Life the first of March [i. e. Saturday, Feb. 19 ourStyle, 1624, 5] Had a
continual inward Ague -- All his Friends came freely to Him -- And if Prayers,
Tears or Means would have saved his Life, He had not gone Hence -- We still
hold close together in Peace-wishing that you and we were again together, etc*
(B)

Our other Friends at Leyden also write us many Letters full of Lamentations
for their heavy Loss: and though their Wills are good to come, yet see not ho^.
(B) Contrary to Mr. Baylie's Suggestion, Gov. Bradfor^ and Gov. Winslow tell
us, that Mr. ROBINSON and his People always lived in great Love and Harmony
among themselves, as also with the Dutch with whom they sojourned. And when I
was at Leyden in 1714, the most ancient People from their Parents told me, that
the City had such a Value for them, as to let them have one of their C^urches,
in the Chan^el whereof He lies Buried, which the English still enjoy: and that
as He was had in high Esteem both by the City and University, for his Learning,
Piety, Moderation and excellent Accomplishments; the Magistrates, Ministers,
Shollars, and mo^^ of the Gentry mourned his Death as a Public Loss, and
followed Him (...) the Grave. His Son ISAAC came over to Plymouth Colony, lived
to above 90 Years of Age: a venerable Man, whom I have often seen, and ha^ left
Male Posterity in the County of Ba^nslable.


Our Captain also brings us Notice of the Death of our ancient Friend Mr.
Cushman* who was our Right Hand with the Adventurers, and for diverse Years has
managed all our Business with the^, to our great Advantage. He had wrote to the
Governor a few Months before of the sore Sickness of Mr. James Sherley; who was
a chief Friend of the Plantation, and lay at the Point of Death, declaring his
Love and Helpfulness in all Things, and bemoaning our Loss if GOD should take
Him away, as being the Stay and Life of the Business; as also of his own
Purpose to come this Year and spend the rest of his Days with us. (B)

These Things could not but cast us into great Perplexity: yet being stripped of
all Humane Help and Hopes; when we are now at the lowest, the Lord so helps us,
as we are not only upheld, but begin to rise, and our Proceedings both honored
and imitated by others. (B)

Having now no Business but Trading and Planting, we set our selves to follow
them. The People finding Corn a Commodity, having Sold it at six Shillings a
Bushel, they use great Diligence in Planting: and the Trade being retained for
the general Good, the Governor and other Managers apply it to the best
Ad^vantag^. For, wanting proper Goods, and understanding the Plantation at
Monhiggon, belonging to some Merchants of Plymouth [in England] is to brake up,
and diverse Goods to be sold; the Governor with Mr. Winslow, take a Boat and
with some Hands go thither; Mr. David Thompson, who lives at Piscatoway, going
with us on the same Design, we agree to buy all their Goods and divide them
equally. Our Moiety comes to 400 l. we also buy a Parcel of Goats which we
destribute to our People for Corn to their great Content. We likewise buy the
French Goods aforesaid, which makes our Part arise to above 500 l: and which we
mostly Pay with the Beaver and Commodities we got last Winter, and what we had
gathered this Summer. (B)

After Harvest, with our Goods and Corn, we get such Store of Trade, as to
discharge some other Engagements, viz. the Money took up by C^pt. Standish,
with the Remains of former Debts, to get some Clothing for the People, and
have some Commodities beforehand. (B)

This Year [and I suppose in the Fall] we send Mr. Allerton to England, to
finish with the Adventurers, take up more Money, and buy us Goods. (B)

Sometime this Fall, Mr. Conant with the People who came to Cape Ann, Remove a
third time, viz. to Naumkeak aforesaid, on a pleasant and fruitful Neck of
Land, embraced on each Side with an Arm of the Sea, since named SALEM; answer
Mr. White that they will stay on his Terms ( H) and Mr. Lyford removes with
them. (B) Mr. Conant lives about Salem to 1680, when He deceases. ( H)


Captain Wollaston having continued at Mount Wallaston some Time, and finding
Things not answer his Expectation, He carries a great Part of the Servants to
Virginia, writes back to Mr. Rasdall one of his chief Partners to carry another
Part, and appoints Mr. Fitcher his Lieutenant till He or Rasdall returns. But
Rasdall being gone, Morton ex^cites the Rest to turn away Fitcher and set up
for themselves; forcing Fitcher to seek his Bread among his Neighbors, till he
can get ^ Pass to England* After this they fall to great Licentiousness and
Profaneness. (B) It is by Guess I here insert this Article. -- Because Mr.
Hubbard says, The Capt. spent much Labor, Cost and Time in Planting at Mount
Wallaston* (H) It seems most likely that He tried the Crop of (...) Summer: and
the Aut^mn is the usual Time for the N. E. Fishing Ships to go to Virginia.


Finding we run great Hazards in going such long Voyages in a little open Boat,
especially in the Winter Season, we consider how to get ^ small Pinnace. And
having no Ship-Builder, but an ingenious House Wright, who wrought with our
Ship Carpenter, deceased; at our Re^quest He tries his Skill, saws our bigger
Shallop across the middle, lengthens her five or six Foot, strengthens Her with
Timbers, builds Her up, decks and makes her a convenient Vessel. The next Year
we fit Her with Sails and Anchors, and She does us Service seven Years (B)

In the Beginning of Winter, a Ship with many Passengers bound to Virginia, the
Master Sick, loose themselves at Sea; have neither Beer, Wood, nor Water left:
In fear of starving Steer toward the Coast to find some Land: run over the
dangerous Shoals of Cape Cod in the Night, they know not how: come right before
a small obscure Harbor about the middle of Monamoyack Bay; at high Water,
touch the Bar; toward Night beat over it into the Harbor, and run on a Flat
within close to the Beach; where they save their Lives and Goods. Not knowing
where they are, as the Savages come toward them in Canoes, they stand on their
Guard: but some of the Indians asking if they are the Gov^ of Plimouth's Men,
and offering to bring them or their Letters, they are greatly revived: send a
Letter with 2 Men to the Governor, entreating Him to send them Pitch, Oakum,
Spikes, etc. to mend their Ship, with Corn to help them to Virginia. Those
being abroad a Trading, who were fit to send, the Governor goes himself in a
^oat with the Materials wrote for, and Com^modities proper to buy Corn of the
Natives. And it being no Season of the Year to go with out the Cape, He sails
to the Bottom of the Bay within, into a Creek called Naumskaket; whence it is
not much above 2 Miles across to the Bay where they are: has Indians to carry
the Things: is received with Joy: buys of the Natives as much Corn as they
want: leaves them thankful: returns to the Boat, goes into other adjacent
Harbors, buys and loads with Corn and comes Home. (B) Though Gov. Brad^ord,
and from Him Mr. Mort^^ place the ^hole Story under 162^; yet G^v (...) says,
This Part of it happened in the Begin^^^g of W^^ter 1626.


1627.
NOT many Days after the Governor came Home, the People at Monamoyack (...) Him
Word that their Ship being mended, ^ Great Storm drove her ashore and so
shattered her as to make her wholly unfit for Sea; beg Leave and Means to
transport themselves and Goods to us, and be with us till they find Passage to
Virginia. We readily help to transport* and shelter them and their Goods in our
Houses* The chief among them are Mr. Fells and Sils^y, who have many Servants.
Upon their coming to Plymouth and being somewhat settled, seeing the Winter
before them, and like to be the latter End of the Year before they can get to
Virginia; the Masters desire some Ground to employ their Servants, clear,
plant, and help bare their Charge: which being Granted, they raise a great deal
of Corn. (B)

[About mid March] we receive Messengers from the Governor of the Dutch
Plantation, with Letters written in Dutch and French, Dated from the Manhatas
in the Fort Amsterdam, March 9 1627, [i. e. New Style, which is Feb 27. 1626,
7] Signed Isaac de Rasier, Secretary. Mr. Morton saying that de Rasier, not
long after, comes to Plymouth; thence Mr. Hubbard mistakes in Thinking He comes
this Year: whereas it is plain from Gov. Bradford, that he comes not Hither till
the Year succeeding.
They had Traded in those Southern Parts diverse Years before we came; but Began
no Plantation There till 4 or 5 Years after our Coming. In their Letter, They
congratulate us and our prosperous and praise worthy Undertak^ings and
Government of our Colony, with the Praesentation of their Good Will and Service
to us, in all friendly Kindness and good N^ighbour^hood: Offer us any of their
Goods that may be serviceable to us, declare they shall take them^selves bound
to accommodate and help us with them, for any Wares we are pleased to deal for.
(B)

Mar. 19 We send the Dutch our obliging Answer, express our thankful Sense of
the Kindness^^ we received in their Native Country and ou^grate^ful Acceptance
of their offered Friendship (B)

This Spring, at the usual Season of the Ships Coming*, Mr. Allerton Returns:
having taken up for us 200 l at 30 per Cent, laid them out in suitable Goods*
and brings them to the great Content of the Plantation. With no small Trouble
and the Help of sundry faithful Friend^ who took much Pains, He made a
Composition with the Adventurers on October 26 last, which they Signed November
15; a Draught of which, He brings for our Acceptance: wherein we allow them
1800 l. Paying 200 at the Royal Exchange every Michaelmas, the first Payment to
be in 1628: in Consideration of which the Company sell us all their Shares,
Stocks, Merchandises, Lands and Chattels: which is well approved and agreed to
by the whole Plantation; though they scarce know how to raise the Payment,
discharge their other Engagements, and supply their yearly Wants; seeing they
are forced to take up Moneys or Goods at such high Interests: yet they
undertake it; and 7 or 8 of the chief become jointly Bound in behalf of the
rest to make said Payments: wherein we run a great Venture, as our Condition
is, having many other heavy Burdens upon us, and all Things in an uncertain
State among us. (B)

Upon this, to make all Easy, we take every Head of a Family, with every young
Man of Age and Prudence, both of the first Comers and those who have since
arrived, into Partnership with us; agree the Trade shall be managed as before,
to Pay the D^bts; that every single Freeman shall have a single Share, and
every Father of a Family also Leave to Purchase a Share for Himself, one for
his Wife, one for every Child living with Him; and every one shall Pay his Part
toward the Debts according to the Shares He holds; which gives Content to all.
We accordingly Divide one Cow and two Goats by Lot to every six Shares; and
Swine, though more in Number, in the same Proportion: to every Share 20 Acres of
tillable Land by Lot, besides the single Acres (B) with the Gardens and
Homesteds (mn) they had before; the most abutting on the Water Side, five in
Breadth and four in Depth: but no Meadows laid out till many Years after,
because being strait of Meadow, it might hinder Additions to us; though at every
Season, all are ordered where to mow, in Proportion to their Number of Cattle.
(B)

Morton and Company at M Wallaston, having got some Goods and acquired much by
trading with the Natives; they spend the same in Rioting and Drunkenness;
drinking 10 l. worth of Wine and Spirits in a Morning: set up a May Pole, get
the Indian Women to drink and dance about it, with worser Practices; as in the
Feasts of Flora, or like the mad Bacha^nalians; and change the Name to Merry^
Mount, as if this Jollity were to last for ever. (B) By Gues^ I also place this
Here; -- because of the Goods they had gotten of the European Ships, and the
May Pole now erected* which I suppose is the only one ever set up in New
England.


[May and June] I Place this in May and June; because in the Article of July
following, this Pinnace is said to be lately Built at MONAMET.
For greater Convenience of Trade, to discharge our Engagements and main^tain
our selves, we build a small Pinnace at Monamet, a Place on the Sea, 20 Miles
to the South: to which by another Creek on this Side, we transport our Goods by
Water within four or five Miles, and then carry them over Land to the Vessel;
thereby avoid our compassing Cape Cod with those dangerous Shoals, and make our
Voyage to the Southward, with far less Time and H^zzard. For the Safety of our
Vessel and Goods, we There also build a House, and keep some Servants; who
Plant Corn, rear Swine, and are always ready to go out with the Bark: which
takes good Effect, and turns to Advantage (B)

June 27. Howes.
Continuation of Baker's Chronicle.
Rushworth.
Wednesday Howes.
the Duke of Buckingham Howes.
Continuation of Baker's Chronicle.
Rushworth.
with 100 Ships Howes.
Rushworth.
sails from Portsm^uth [in England] for the Isle of Rhee on the Coast of
France, and Begins the WAR with that Kingdom Continuation of Baker's Chronicle.
Rushworth.


July. But besides the Discharge of our heavy Engagements, our great Concern is
to help over our Friends at LEYDEN; who so much desire to come to us, as we
desire their Company. The Governor therefore, with Mr. Edward Winslow, Th^mas
Prince, Miles Standish, Wm. Brewster, John Alden, John Howland, and Isaac
Allerton, now run a great Venture; and hire the Trade of the Colony for 6
Years, to begin the last of next September: and for this with the Shallop
^all'd the Bass Boat, and Pinnace lately built at Monamet, with the Stock in
the Storehouse; we this Month, undertake to Pay the 1800 l. with all other
Debts of the Plantation amounting to 600 more; bring over for them 50 l a Year
in Hoes and Shoes, sell them for Corn at 6 s. a Bushel; and at the End of the
Term return the Trade to the Colony. (B)

The latter End of the Summer, the Virginia People at Plymouth, sell us their
Corn, go Thither in a couple of Barks; and afterward, se^veral of them express
their Thankfulness to us. (B) And [now it seems] Mr Lysord sails with some of
his People also to Virginia, (H) and there shortly Dies. (B)

With the Return of the Ships we send Mr^ Allerton again to England. (1) To
conclude our Bargain with the Company and deliver our nine Bonds for the Paying
the 200 l. at every Michaelmas for 9 Years. (2) To carry our Beaver and pay
some of our late E^gagements; for our excessive Interest still keeps us low.
(3) To get a Patent for a fit Trading Place on Kennebeck River; especially
since the Planters at Pascatoway and other Places Eastward of 'em, as also the
Fishing Ships envy our Trading There, and threaten to get a Patent to exclude
us; though we first discovered and began the same, and bro't it to so good an
Issue. (4) To deal with some of our special Friends in London to join with the
said eight Undertakers, both for the Discharge of the Colony's Debts, and the
help^ing our Friends from L^yden. (B)

Nov. 6. Mr. Allerton concludes our Bargain with the Company at London delivers
our Bonds and receives their Deed. (B)

Dec 27. Mr. Sherley from London writes to the Plmouth People, as follows* --
The sole Cause why the greater Part of the Adventurers ma^lign me was, that I
^ould not side with them against you and the coming over of the LEYDEN PEOPLE
-- and assuredly unless the LORD he mer^ciful to us and the whole Land in
Gener^l, our Condition is far worse than yours: wherefore if the LORD should
send Persecution Here, which is much to be feared, and should put into our
Minds to fly for Refuge; I know no Place safer than to come to you etc. (B)

About this Year, ^ome Friends being toge^ther in Lincolnshire, fall into
Discourse about New England and the Planting of the Gospel there: and after
some Deliberation, we [says D^puty Governor Dudley] impart o^r Reasons by
Letters and M^ssages to some in Lon^don and the West Country: where it is at
length so ripened as to Procure a Patent [for the MASSACHUSETTS COLONY] Deputy
Governor Dud^^y's aforesaid Letter to the Countess of L^ncoln


1628.
MR. Allerton having settled all Things in a hopeful way, Returns in the first
of the Spring with our Supply for Trade. The Pishermen with whom He comes, used
to set forth in Winter, and be Here betimes. He has Paid the first 200 l. of
our 1800 to the Adventurers; as also all our Debts to others, except Mr
Sherley, Beachamp and Andrews, to whom we now owe but 400 and odd Pounds:
informs that our said three Friends and some others will join us in our six
Y^ars Bargain, and will send to Leyden for a Number to come next Year. brings a
competent Supply of Goods; with a PATENT for KENNEBECK, but so strait an^ ill
bounded, as we are forced* to get renew'^ and enlarged next Year, as also THAT
we have at HOME to our great Charge. He likewise brings us one Mr. Rodgers, a
young Man, for Minister. (B)

Mar. 19 The Council for New England sell to Sir H^nry Roswell, Sir John Young,
Knights, Thomas Southcoat, John Humphry, John Endicot and Simon Whetcomb, Gent.
Manuscript Book of Charters in the Hands of the Hon. Thomas Hutchinson, Esquire
about Dorches^ter in England (H) their Heirs and Associates that Part of New
England between Merrimack Riv^r and Charles River in the Bottom of the
Massachusetts Bay; and 3 Mile to the South o^ every Part of Charles River and
of the Souther^ most Part of said B^y; and 3 Miles to the North of every Part
of said Merrimack River; and in Length within the Breadth aforesaid from the
Atlanti^k Ocean to the South S^a, etc. Manuscript Book of Charters in the Hands
of the Hon. Thomas Hutchinson, Esquire


After some time, Mr. White brings the Dorchester Grantees into Acquaintance
with several other Religious Persons in and about London, who are first
Associated to them, then buy their Right in the Patent By the Massachusetts
Colony Charter and Records, it seems the three former wholly sold their Rights;
the t^r^e latter retaining theirs in eq^^l Par^nership with the s^id Associates.
and consult about settling some Plantation in the Massachusetts Bay on the
Account of RELIGION; where Nonconformists may Transport themselves and enjoy
the Liberty of their own Persuasion in Matters of Worship and Church
Discipline. Soon after, the Company choose Mr. (H) MATTHEW (Mcr) CRADOCK,
Governor, Mr. (H) THOMAS (Mcr) GOFF, Dep. Governor, with other Assistants (H)

The New Plymouth People having obtained their Patent for Kennebeck, now erect
a House up the River, in a convenient Place for Trade: and furnish it both
Winter and Summer, with Corn and other Commodities, such as the Fishermen had
traded with; as Coats, Shirts, Rugs, Blankets, Biscuit* Pease, Prunes, etc: what
we could not get from England, we buy of the Fishing Ships; and so carry on the
Business as well as we can. (B)

This Year [and I conclude this Spring] the Dutch send to us again from their
Plantation, both kind Letters and div^rse Commodities; as Sugar, Linen,
Stuffs, etc: come with their Bark to our House at Manomet: their Secretary
Rasier comes with Trumpeters, etc; but not being able to travel to us by Land,
desires us to send a Boat within side [the Ca^e] to fetch Him: so we send a
Boat to Manonscusset, and bring him with the chief of his Company to Plymouth
After a few Days Entertainment, He returns to his Bark: some of us go with Him,
and buy sundry Goods. After which Beginning, they often send to the same Place;
and we trade together diverse Years, sell much Tobacco for Linens, Stuffs, etc;
which proves a great Benefit to us, till the Virginians find out their Colony
(B)

But that which in Time turns most to our Advantage is, their now acquainting
and enter^ing us in the Trade of WAMPAM: telling us how vendible it is at their
Fort Orania, and persuading we shall find it so at Kennebeck Upon this we buy
about 50 l. worth. At first it sticks, and it is 2 Years before we can put it
off; till the Inland Indian: come to know it, and then we can scarce procure
enough for many Years together. By which and other Provisions we quite cut off
the Trade both from the Fishermen and straggling Planters And strange it is to
see the great Alteration it in a few Years makes among the Savages: For the
Massachusetts and others in these Parts had scarce any; it being only made and
kept among the Pequots and Narragansetts, who grew Rich and Potent by it;
whereas the Rest who use it not are poor and beggarly. (B)

Hitherto the Natives of these Parts have no other Arms but Bows and Arrows,
nor many Years after. But the Indians in the Eastern Parts, having Commerce
with the French* first haveGuns of them, and at length they make it a common
Trade. In Time our English Fisher^men follow their Example: but upon Com^plaint
against them, the KING by a strict Pro^clamation forbid the same, and commanded
that no sort of Arms or Munition be traded with them. (B) By KING seems to be
meant K. James: And the Massachusetts Colony Records of July 28, 1629, as also
Mr. Hubbard say, this Proclamation was issued in 1622.


June 20. Capt JOHN ENDICOT, with his Wife and Company. This Day sails in the
Ship Abigail, Henry Gauden, Master, from Weymouth in England, for Nahumkeak in
New England, (Mcr) The Bills of Lading being Signed on June 20 (Mcr) I Place
their Sailing Here. But from the odd Way of reckoning the 4th of March next, to
be in 1628; Dep. Governor Dudl^y, Mr. Hubbard and others wrongly place Mr.
Endicot's Voyage, after the Grant of the Royal Charter, whereas He came above 8
Months before. And Dep Governor Dudley says, We sent Him and some with Him, to
Begin a Plantation; and to s^r^ngthen such as He should find Here, which we
send Thither from Dorchester and some Places adjoining.
being sent by the Massachusetts Patentees at London, to carry on the
Plantation There, make Way for the settling a Colony, and be their Agent to
order all Affairs, ^ill the Patentees th^mselves come over. (H)

Sept 13. Mr. Endicot writes of his safe Arrival at N^umkeak, to Mr. Matthew
Cradock one of the Massachusetts Company in London, which Mr. CRA^OCK receives
on Feb. 13 following. Mr. Crado^k's Original Letter among the Mcr compared with
the Copies of Letters in the first Book of Record^ of the County of Suffolk.
With Mr. Endicot come Mr. Got, Brackenbury, Davenport, Capt. Trask and
others: who go on comfortably in Preparing for the NewColony. (H)

Among those who arrive at Naumkeak, are Ralph Sprague, with his Brethren
Richard and William; who with 3 or 4 more, by Governor Endicot's Consent,
undertake a Journey, and travel the Woods above 12 Miles Westward. light on a
Neck of Land called Mishawum, between Mistick and Charles Rivers, full of
Indians, named Aberginians. Their old Sachem being Dead, his Eldest Son called
by the English JOHN SAGAMORE is Chief; a Man of a gentle and good Disposition:
by whose free Consent they settle Here; where they find but one English House,
thatched and pallizado'd, possessed by Thomas Walford a Smith. Town of
Charlestown Records; wrote by Mr. Increase Nowell, afterward Town Clerk of
Charlestown and Secretary of the Massachusetts Colony.


That worthy Gentleman Mr. Endicot, coming over for the Government of the
Massachusetts Governor Bradford and Mr. Morton seem to mistake in saying, He
came with a Patent under the Broad Seal for the Government of the Massachusetts.
visits the People at Merry Mount causes the May Pole to be cut down, rebukes
them for their Profaneness, admonishes them to look there be better Walking,
and the Name i^ changed to Mount Dagon. (B)

But Morton and Company, to maintain their Riot, hearing what Gain the French
and Fishermen made by selling Guns, with Powder and Shot to the Natives; He
begins the same Trade in these Parts, teaches how to use them, employ^ the
Indians in Hunting and Fowling for Him; wherein they become more active than
any English, by their swiftness of Foot, nimblenes^ of Body, quicksightedness,
continual Exercise. and knowing the Haunts of all sorts of Game. And finding
the Execution Guns will do and the Benefit thereby, become mad after them and
give any Price for 'em. Morton sells them all He can spare, and sends to
England for many more. The neighboring English who live scattered in diverse
Places and have no Strength in any, meeting the Indians in the Woods thus
armed, are in great Terror: and those in remoter Places see the Mischief will
quickly spread if not forthwith prevented. Besides, they see they should not
keep their Servants: for Morton receives any, how vile soever; and they with
the discontented will flock to Him, if this Nest continues: and the other
English will be in more Fear of this debauched and wicked Crew than of the
Savages themselves. The chief of the straggling Plantations therefore, from
Pascatoway, Naumkeak, Winisimet, Wesaguscusset, Natasco and other Places, meet,
and agree to solicit those of Plymouth, who are of greater Strength than all,
to join and stop this growing Mischief, by suppressing Morton and Company
before they grow to a further Head. Those of Plymouth receiving their
Messengers and Letters, are willing to afford our Help^ However, first send a
Messenger with Letters to advise Him in a friendly Way to forbear those
Courses. But he scorns their Advice, asks Who has to do with Him; declares He
will tradePieces with the Indians in Despite of all, etc. We send a second
time, to be better advised; for theCountry can not bare the Injury; it is
against their common Safety, and the King's Proclamation. He say^, The King's
Proclama^tion is no Law, has no Penalty but his Displea^sure, that the King is
Dead and his Displeasure with him; and threatens, if any come to molest Him,
let them look to themselves, He Will prepare for 'em. Upon this, they see no Way
but Force: and therefore obtain of the Plymouth Governor to send Capt. Standish
with some Aid to take Him. The Captain coming, Morton arms his Consorts, heats
them with Liquor, bars his Doors, sets his Powder and Bullets on the Table
ready^ The Captain summons Him to yield: but has only Scoffs, etc. At length
Morton fearing we should do some Violence to the House, He and some of his Crew
come out to shoot the Captain: At which the Captain steps up to Him, puts by
his Piece, takes Him, enters the House, disperses the worst of the Company,
leaves the more modest There, brings Morton to Plymouth: where he is kept till
a Ship going from the Isle of Shoals to England, He is sent in Her to the New
England Council, with a Messenger and Letters to inform against Him, etc: yet
they do nothing to Him, not so much as rebuke Him, and he returns next Year. (B)

This Year [and I suppose this Fall] we send Mr. Allerton our Agent again to
London; to get our Kenebeck Patent enlarged and rectified, as also This at Home
enlarged, and help our Friends from Leyden (B)

This Year, Dies Mr. Richard Warren; a useful Instrument, and bare a deep Share
in the Difficulties attending the first Settlement of New Plymouth. (mn)

This Year, the Massachusetts Patentees at London send several Servants to
Naumkeak: but for want of wholesome Diet and convenient Lodgings, many Die of
Scurvys and other Distempers. (H) Upon which Mr. Endicot hearing w^ at Plymouth
have a very skilful Doctor, viz Mr. Fuller (B) Deacon of Mr. Ro^binson's
Church, skilled in the Diseases of the Country which the People at Naumkeak are
filled with, (H) sends to our Governor for Him, who forthwith sends Him to
their Assistance. (B) Gov. Bradford, and Mr. Morton from Him, seem to mistake
in blending the s^veral Sicknesses at Naumkeak of 1628 and 29 together; and
writing a^ if Dr. Fuller went first Thither to help in the Sickness introduced
by the Ships in 29: whereas by Gov. Endicot'^ Letter of May 11, 1629, it
appears that Dr Full^r had been t^en to help them; which was abo^e a Month
before the Ships Arrival There in 29.


1629.
Feb. 16. MR. Cradock, at London, in his Letter to Capt. Endicot at Naumkeak
says, We are thoro'ly informed of the safe Arrival of your self, your Wife and
the rest of your good Company in our Plantation, by your Letters of Sept. 13,
which came to hand the 13th I^^stant -- Our Company are much enlarged since
your Departure -- There Is 1 Ship bought for the Company, of 100 Tuns, and two
more hired of 200; 1 of 19, the other of 20 Ordnance: in which Ships are like
to be sent between 2 and 300 Persons to reside There, and about a 100 Head of
Cattle -- I wrote you by Mr. Allert^^ of New Plymouth in November -- It is
resolved to send 2 Ministers at least with the Ships now to be sent -- Those we
s^nd shall be by Ap^probation of Mr. White of Dorchester and Mr* Davenport -- I
account our Ships will be ready to sail Hence by the 20th of next Month. (cl)

The Massachusetts Company, for promoting their great Design, first consider
where to find 2 or 3 able Ministers to send: not doubting but if they meet with
such, they shall have a considerable Number of Religious People to go with
them; especially if there be grounded Hopes of an Orderly Government, to
Protect the People and promote the Cause of RELIGION among them, as well as
their civil Rights and Liberties. For which they with one Consent agree to
Petition the King to Confirm their afor^said Grant to themselves and Associates
by a ROYAL CHARTER, (H) Mr. White an honest Councellor at Law, and Mr. Richard
B^lling^ham furthering the same. (j)

Mar. 2. Monday, at a Meeting of the Massachusetts Company in London, Present
the Governor, Dep, Mr. Wright, Vassal, Harwood, Coulson, Adams, Nowell,
Whetcomb, Perry and Huson, This is the first Account of Na^es s^t down at their
Meetings, in the Mcr. (...) Governor i^ doubt^ess m^an^ Mr. Cradock; and by
Dep. G^^ernor, Mr. G^ff: who seem to be chose to those Office^ by Vi^tue of
their Pa^tent from the New England C^^^cil.
when Mr Coney propounding in behalf of the Boston Men that 10 of them may
subscribe 10 l. a Man in the joint Stock, and with their Ships to adventure 250
l. more on their own Account, and providable Men to send for managing the
Business it is condescended to (M^r)

Mar. 4 At the Petition of the Massachusetts Company, K. CHARLES by CHARTER
confirms their Patent of the MASSACHUSETTS COLONY to them, i. e. to the
aforesaid Sir Henry Rosewell, Sir John Young, Thomas Southcot, John Hum^frey,
John Endicot, Simon Whetcomb, and their Associates, viz. Sir Richard
Saltonstal* Knight. Isaac Johnson, Samuel Aldersey, John Ven, MAT^THEW CRADOCK,
George Harwood, Increase Nowell, Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham, Nathaniel
Wright, Samuel Vassal, Theophilus Eaton, THOMAS GOFF, Thomas Adams, John Brow^,
Samuel Brown, Thomas Hutchins. Wm^ Vassal, Wm. Pynchon and George Foxcroft,
their Heirs and Assigns for ever: that they and all who shall be made free of
their Company, be for ever a Body Corporate and Politic, by the Name of the
Governor and Company of the MAS^SACHUSETTS BAY in NEW ENGLAND, and have
perpetual Succession: that there shall be for ever a Governor, Deputy Governor,
and 18 As^sistants chosen out of the Freemen of said Com^pany: that MATTHEW
CRADOCK be the first and present Governor; THOMAS GOFF 1st Dep. Governor; and
the 18 Printed in Italica, be the first Assistants: that on the last Wednesday
in Easter Term yearl^, the Governor, Dep. Governor, and all other Officers,
shall be in the General Court held that Day, newly chosen by the greater Part
of the Company: that they may have 4 General Courts a Year, viz. the last
Wed^nesday in Hillary, Easter, Trinity and Michael (...) Terms for ever; which
may admit Free m^n, remove and choose Officers, order Lands* and m^ke Laws not
repugnant to the Laws of England: that the Governor and Company and their
Successors and Assigns may carry Peo^ple who are willing out of any of the
King's Dominions Thither, transport Goods, have all the Privileges of natural
Subjects in all the King's Dominions: that their chief Commanders, Governors,
other Officers, and others under them, may by Force of Arms encounter all who
shall attempt any Detriment or Annoyance to them, and take their Persons,
Ships, Armor, Goods, etc: But that Fishing shall be Free, etc. (bc) The
Chronologies at the End of Mr. Danforth's Almanac Printed at Camb^idge, N^w
England, 1649: of Mr. I^ss^y's at London, 1651; and of Mr. Foster's at Boston,
New England, 16^6; all greatly mistaken, in representing this Charter to be
granted by Parliament.


Mar. 9 At a Meeting of the Massachusetts Company in London, John Washborn
entertained Secretary for one whole Year; and directed to call on all such as
have Charge of Provision for the Ships now bound to New England, that they may
be dispatched by the 25th of this Month at furthest. (M^r)

Mar. 10 At a Meeting of the Massachusetts Com^pany in London; Mr. Thomas
Graves of Grave^ send, Gent, agrees to go to New England, and serve the
Company, as a Person skilful in Mines of Iron, Lead, Copper, mineral Salt and
Allom, Fortification of all So^ts, Surveying, etc. (Mcr)

Mar. 16. Estimate of Charges for 100 Passengers and their Provisions at 15 l.
a Man 1500 l. Freight of the Ship Talbot 5 Months at 80 l. 400 Her Victuals and
Wages for 32 Men at 70 l. 350 Lyon's Whelp set to Sea 500 20 Cows and Bulls at
4 l. 80 l. 610 10 Mares and Horses at 6 l. 60 610 Charges of them 470 610 (
Mcr) 3360 l.
Mar. 23. Governor CRADOCK sworn in Chancery (H) Dep. Governor GOFF and eleven
Assistants sworn, as also Mr. George Harwood sworn Treasurer. Mr. Hubbard
mistakes (1) in thinking Mr Cradock now chos^n Governor, (2) in omitting Mr.
Nowell among the 11 Assistants sworn, and (3) in writing that Mr. Harwood is
sworn Treasurer on April 6.
At a Meeting of the Massachusetts Company this Day at London, Mr. Nowell
giving Intimation by Letters from Mr. Johnson, that Mr. HIGGINSON of Leicester,
an able (Mcr) and eminent (H) Minister (Mcr) Silenced for Nonconformity, would
be likely (H) to go to our Pl^ntation: who being approved for a Rev. Grave
Minister, fit for our Occasion; it is agreed to entreat Mr. Humfrey to ride
presently to Leicester: and if Mr. Higginson can conveniently go this present
Voyage, to deal with Him, first if his Remove may be without Scandal to that
People, and approved by some of the best affected among them, with the
Approbation of [the Rev. and Fam^us] Mr* Hilder sha^ of Ashley, de la Zouch.
(Mcr) Mr John Davenport first time mentioned as Present a^ this Meeting: He is
also at the Meetings of March 30* April 8, Aug. 28 and 29, Oct 15, 19 and 20,
Nov. 25, and Dec. 15 following: In that of Oct. 20, He is styled Clerk, and of
Dec. 15, Minister (Mcr) By which I con^clude He is the same who afterward
comes over and becomes the famous Minister both of New Haven and of Boston in
NEW ENGLAND.


Mr. Higginson being addressed both by Mr. Humfrey and White, He looks upon it
as a Call from GOD: and in a few Weeks, is with his Family, ready to take
hisFlight into this Savage Desert. (H)

Apr. 8. At another Meeting of the Massachusetts Company in London; Mr. FRANC^S
Mr. Hubbard happens by mistake to call him John.
HIGGIN^SON, Mr. SAMUEL SKELETON, (Mcr) another Nonconformist Minister of
Lincolnshire, (H) and Mr. FRANCIS BRIGHT entertained by said Company as
Ministers for the Plantation, to labor both among the English and Indians: Mr.
Hig^ginson having 8 Children, is to have 10 l. a Year more than the others: Mr.
RALPH SMITH a Minister, is also to be accommodated in his Passage thither. (Mcr)

Apr. 16. Sixty Women and Maids, 26 Children, and 300 Men with Victuals, Arms,
Apparel, Tools, 140 Head of Cattle, etc, in the Lord Treasurer's Warrant [to go
to New England] (Mcr) Dep. Governor Dudley therefore seems too short in saying
about 300 People, with some Cows, Goats and Horse^. ( dd)


Apr. 17. The said Company's Committee Date their Letter at Gravesend to Mr.
Endicot; whereit they say, -- For that the Propagating of the Gospel is the
thing we profess above all, i^ settling this Plantation, we have been careful
to make plentiful Provision of Godly Ministers viz. Mr. SKELETON, in the George
Bonaventure* Mr. HIGGINSON, in the Talbot; and in the Lyon's Whelp, Mr. BRIGHT,
trained up under Mr. Davenport: And as the Ministers have declared themselves
to us to be of one Iudg^ment, and to be fully agreed in the manne^ how to
exercise their Ministry; we have good Hopes of their Love and unanimous
Agree^ment, etc Suffolk County Records.
By this it appears, Mr BRIGHT was a Puritan; and Mr. Hubbard seems mistaken in
supposing Him a Confor^mist, unless He means in the same Sense as were many
Puritans in those Days; who by particular Favor omitted the more offensive
Ceremonies and Parts in the Common Prayer; while for the Unity and Peace of the
Church, and in Hopes of ^ farther Reformation, they used the other.


Apr. 21. The Georg^ now rides at the Hope; the Talbot and Lyon's Whelp at
Blackwall Suffolk County Records.


Apr. 30. Mr. Hubbard mistakes April 10 for April 30.
At a General Court of the Massachu^setts Company in London. There are 3 Ships
now to go to NEW ENGLAND -- And the Compan^ order that 13 in their Plantation
shall have the sole Ordering of the Affairs and Government There, by the Name
of the Governor and Council of LONDON'S PLANTATION in the MASSACHUSETTS BAY in
NEW ENGLAND: Elect Mr. ENDICOT Governor, and Mr. Higginson, Skeleton, Bright,
John and Samuel Brown, Thomas Graves and Samuel Sharp to be of the Council: the
said Governor and Council may choose 3 others; the Planters choose 2 more: of
which 1^ Counselors, the Governor and major Part may choose a Deputy Governor
and Secretary: that they all continue a Year, or till this Court appoint
others: that the Governor or in his Absence the Deputy may call Courts at
Discretion; and therein, the greater Number whereof the Governor or Deputy to
be always one, have Power to make Laws not repugnant to the Laws of England.
Order Copies of this Act be sent by the first Conveyance (Mcr) and a Commission
is accordingly sent to Mr. Endicot, etc. (H)

(...) 4 The George Bonaventure sails from the Isle of Whight: May 11, sail
from Thence the Lyon's Whelp and Talbot (scr) Being all 3 full of Godly
Passengers (cm) with the 4 Ministers, for the Massachusetts: (Mcr. H) the
Planters in the Lyon's Whelp go from Somerset and Dorset (csr) and within a
Month (cm) are 3 more Ships to follow. (Mcr)

(...) 10. Lord's Day; PEACE between GREAT BRITAIN and FRANCE Proclaimed at
London (hs) Po^^ter mistakes in saying March 20: and Salmon in saving May 20.


(...) Cotton Mather's Life of Mr. Higginson.
Dr. Fuller of Plimou^^ being well versed in the Discipline of Mr. Robinson's
Church, and acquain^ing Mr. Endicot therewith; on

May 11. Governor Endicot writes a most grateful and Christian Letter to Gov.
Bradford; wherein He says -- I acknowledge my self much bound to you for your
kind Love and Care in sending Mr. Fuller among us: and rejoice much that I am
by Him satisfied touching your Judgments of the outward Form of GOD'S WORSHIP.
It is as far as I can yet gather no other th^n is warranted by the Evidence of
Truth: and the same which I have professed and maintained ever since the LORD
in mercy revealed Himself unto m^: being far from the common Report that has
been spread of you touching that Particular: but G^D's Children must not look
for less here below, etc (B) Mr. Hubbard mistakes in thinking this Letter wrote
to obtain the Doctor's Help; when it plainly appears a Letter of Thanks for his
Help received.
And as this is the Beginning of their Acquaintance and closing in the Truth
and Ways of GOD, (B) it is the Foundation of the future Christian Love and
Correspondence which are ever after maintained between the 2 Govern^rs and
their respective Colonies. (H)

May 13. At a General Court of the Massachusetts C^mpany in London, Mr. CRADOCK
(M^r) a prudent and wealthy Citizen (H) chosen Governor; M^. G^FF, Deputy; Mr.
HARWOOK, Treasurer; Mr. WM BURGESS, Secretary, for the Year en^suing: and the
same Assistants; only Mr. En^dic^t and Mr. John Brown being out of the Land,
Mr. John Pocock and Mr. Chr. Coulson are chose in their Room. (Mcr) Mr. Hubbard
styles This the second Court of Election; when by the Royal Charter, it is the
first: though by Virtue of the former Patent from the New England Council, i^
seems the Company had chosen a Gov. etc the Y^ar before*


May 21. At a Court of Assistan^s of the Massachu^setts Company in London: For
the present Ac^commodation of the People lately gone to the London Plantation
in NEW ENGLAND* order^ed that the Governor, Dep. and Council There, allot Half
an Acre within the Plat of the Town^ and 200 Acres more to every 50 l.
Adventure^ in the common Stock, and so in Proportion: that for every Servant or
others they carry, the Master shall have 50 Acres more to Himself* and those
who are not Adventurers in the com^mon Stock, shall have 50 Acres for
themselves or more, as the Governor and Council There thin^ necessary. (Mcr)
Mr. Hubbard mistakes in placing this on May 13


May 25 Mr. Sherley writes from London to Governo^ Bradford -- Here are now
many of your an^ our Friends from Leyden coming over -- A good Part of that End
obtained, which was aimed at (by us) and has been so strongly opposed by some
of our former Adventurers -- With them we have also sent some Servants in the
Talbo^ that went Hence lately: but these come in the May Flower. (B)

June 3. The Committee of the Massachusetts Company at London, write from
Gravesend, to Gov. Endicot and say -- We now send 3 Ships; the May-Flower, Four
Sisters, and Pilgrim. -- The Charge of their Freight, Men and Victuals stand us
in 2400 l, etc. (scr) and they sail from England before Mr. Allerton can get
ready to come away (B)

June 24 Mr. Higginson (cm) and [either the same Day, or] some time this Month
(mn) the other Ministers with the People in the 3 first Ships, arrive a^
Naumkeak, which they now name SALEM, from that in Psalm. lxxvi. 2. (H)

Mr. Graves, with some of the Company's Servants under his Care, and some
others, remove to Misha^um; to which with Gov. Endicot's Consent, they give the
Name of CHARLESTOWN. Mr. Graves lays out the Town in two Acre Lots to each
Inhabitant: and [after] builds the Great House for such of the Company a^ are
shortly to come over; which becomes the House of Public Worship. (tcr) The
Charlestown Records Here mistake in placing thi^ in 1628; for Mr. Graves comes
not over till Iun^ 1629 ( Mcr) And as by Dep. Governor Dudley's Letter, there
was a great Mortality among the Engilsh at the M^ssac^usetts Colony, in the
Winter 1629, 30; so by Capt Clap's Acco^nt, there was but one House and some
few English at Charl^stown in June succeeding.


Of the 4 Ministers, Salem needing but 2; (H) Mr. Smith goes with his Family to
some strag^gling People at Natasco: (B) but Mr. Bright disagreeing in Judgment
with the other two, removes to Charlestown: where he stays above a Year. (H)

Some Plymouth People putting in with a Boat ^t Natasco, find Mr. Smith in a
poor House that would not keep him dry: He desires them to carry Him to
Plymouth: and seeing Him to be a grave Man, and understanding he had been a
Minister, they bring Him Hither; where we kindly entertain Him, send for his
Goods and Servants, desire Him to exercise his Gifts among us; afterward choose
Him into the Ministry; wherein He remains for sundry Years. (B)

^uly 20 Governor Endicot at Salem sets apart this Day for solemn Prayer with
Fasting, and the Trial and Choice of a Pastor and Teacher: the Forenoon they
spend in Pra^er and Teaching: the Afternoon, about their Trial and Election:
choosing Mr Skeleton Pastor, Mr Higginson Teacher: and they accepting: Mr.
Higginson, with 3 or 4 more of the gravest Members of the Church lay their
Hands on Mr. Skeleton with solemn Prayer: then Mr. Skeleton, etc the like upon
Mr. Higginson: and Thursday Aug 6, is appointed another Da^ of Prayer and
Fasting, for the Choice of Elders and Deacons, and Ordaining them. (B) This
Article is no where ^ound, but in a Letter from Mr. Charles Got, Dated, Salem,
July 30* 1629, and preserved in Gov. Bradford: and it bring wrote between July
20 and Aug. 6, must be an undoubted Record of past Matter of Fact on July 20.


^uly 28. Tuesday, at ^ General Court of the Massa^chusetts Company at London;
Governor Cradock reads certain Proposals conceived by Himself; viz That for the
Advancement of the Plantation, the inducing Persons of Worth and Quality to
transplant themselves and Families Thither, and other weighty Reasons
mentioned; To Trans^ferr the Government to Those who shall inhabit There, and
not continue the same subordinate to the Company Here This occasions some
Debate: but Defer the Consideration and Conclusion to the next General Meeting:
and agree to carry the Matter secret, that it be not divulged (Mcr)

The Religious People at Salem, designing to settle in a Church State, as near
as they can to the Rules of the Gospel, apprehend it needful for the 30 who
Begin the Church, to enter solemnly into COVENANT one with another in the
Presence of GOD, to walk together before Him according to his Holy Word, and
then Or^dain their Ministers to the several Offices to which they had been
chosen. Mr Higginson being desired, draws up a Confession of Faith and Church
Covenant according to Scripture: thirty Copies are written, one delivered to
every Member: and the Church at Plymouth invited to the Solemnity, (mn. H) that
the Church at Salem may have the Approbation and Concurrence if not Direction
and Assistance of the other. (H)

Aug. 6 (B. mn) Mr. Hubbard mistakes the 9th for the 6th of Aug.
Being Thursday (B) the ap^pointed Day being come, after the Prayers and
Sermons of the two Ministers; in the End of the Day ( mn) the said Confession
and Covenant being read in 'the Public Assembly, are solemnly consented to:
and they immediately proceed to Ordain their Ministers; (mn. H) as also Mr.
Houghton a Ruling Elder; being separated to their several Offices by the
Imposition of the Hands of some of the Brethren appointed by the Church
thereto; As Mr. Sk^lton and Higginson had been Minister^ Ord^ined by Bishops in
the Church of England; t^is Ordination was only to the Care of this Particular
Flock, founded on their free Election. But as there seem^ to be a repeated
Imposition of Hands; the Former on July 2^, may only signify their previous
Separation ^or their solemn Charge; and this Latter of Aug. 6, th^i^ actual
In^estiture therein
(msl) Gov Bradford and others, as Messengers from the Church of Pli^mouth,
being by cross Wind^ hindered from being present in the former Part of the
Service; come time enough to give them the Right Hand of Fellowship, wishing
all Prosperity to these hop^ful Beginnings. (mn. H)

But two of the Passengers observing the Mi^nisters used not the Common Prayer
nor Cere^monies, but professed to exercise Discipline upon s^andalous Persons,
and that some scandalous Ones were d^nied Admission into the Church; begin to
raise some Trouble, to gather a separate Company and read Common Prayer. Upon
which the Governor convents the 2 Ringleaders before Him: and finding their
Speeches and Practices tend to Mutiny and Faction; send those two back to
England at the Return of the Ships the same Year, and the Disturbance c^a^es
(mn)

^^g. 28. At a General Court of the Massachusetts Company at London; ordered
that Mr. Wright, E^t^n, Adams, Spurstow, with others they think fit, consider
Arguments against Removing the chief Government of the Company to NEW ENGLAND;
and that Sir R. Saltonstall, Mr. Johnson, Capt. V^n, with others they think
fit, prepare Arguments for the Removal; that both Sides meet to morrow Morning
at 7, con^fer and weigh their Arguments, and at 9, make Report to the whole
Company. (M^r)

Aug. 29. The said Committee's Meeting and mak^ing Report; the Generality of
the Company VOTE, That the Patent and Government of the Plan^tation be
Transferred to NEW ENGLAN^. (Mcr)

Aug. -- Thirty five of our Friends with their Fami^lies from Leyden arrive at
New Plymouth. They were shipp^d at London in May with the Ship^ that came to
Salem: which bring over many Pious People to Begin the Churches There and in
the Massachusetts Bay. So their being th^s long kept back is now recompensed by
Heaven with a double Blessing: in that we not only enjoy them beyond our late
Expectation, when all Hope seemed to be cut off; but with them many more Godly
Friends and Christian Bre^thren, as the Beginning of a larger Harvest to
CHRIST, in the Increase of his People and Churches in these Parts of the Earth,
to the Admiration of many and almost Wonder of the World. (B)

The Charge of our Leyd^n Friend^ is reckoned on the severa^ Familie^: s^m^ 50
l. so^^ 40 l some 30 l as their Number and Exp^nces we^e: which our Undertakers
Pay for Gratis; besid^s giving them Houses, preparing them Grounds to Plan^ on,
and maintain them with Corn etc above 13 or 14 M^nths before they have a
Harvest of their own Production. (B)

An infectious Sickness grew at Sea among the Salem Passengers, which spread
among those ashore, whereof many Died; some of the Scurvy, others of an
infectious Fever; which continued some time among them; while the Leyden
People through the Goodness of GOD escaped it. (B)

Mr. Allerton returns without accomplishing the Enlargement and Confirmation of
our Plymouth Patent But gives great and just Offense this Y^ar, in bringing
over Morton, using Him as hi^ Scribe, till caused to pack Him away: upon which
He goes to his old Nest at Merry Mount. (B)

This Year [and I suppose this Fall] w^ send Mr. Allerton again for England, to
conclude our Patent, etc. and Mr Rodgers, the Minister which Mr. Allerton
brought over last Year, proving crazed in his Brain, we are forced to b^ (...)
further Charge to send Him back this Year, and loose all the Cost expended in
bringing Him over; which was not small, in Provision, Apparel, Beding, etc (B)

(...). 19 At a General Court of the Massachusetts Company at London; Letters
read from Capt Endicot, and others -- by the Lyon's Whelp and Talbot, now come
^aden from NEW ENGLAND. (Mcr)

(...) 29 Tu^sday, at a General Court of the Massac^usetts Company in London --
Desire the Governor to buy the Ship Eagle of 400 Tuns, for the Safety, Honor
and Benefit of the Plantation. (Mcr)

October. 15. Thur^day, at a G^neral Court of the Mas^sachusetts Company in
London -- Agree tha^ the Charge of Ministers and Building conveni^ent Churches
Thus Houses of Public Worship are also called Churches in the Record of Feb.
10 succeeding. ( Mcr)
be born, Half by the joint Stock for 7 Years, and Half by the Planters. (Mcr)
Mr. Dudley and Winthrop the first time mentioned at this Meeting: ( Mcr) and
Mr. Dudley says, that Mr. Winthrop of Suffolk, well known for his Piety,
Liber^lity, Wisdom and Gravity, coming in to us, we come to such Resolution as
to sail from England in Apr. 1630. ( dd)


October. 19. Monday, at a Meeting at the Dep Gov'* House -- Agree, that at the
General C^urt t^^morrow, the Governor and Assistants be chosen for the
Government [of the Massachusetts Colony] in NEW ENGLAND. (Mcr) Mr Davenport,
Mr. White the Preacher, Mr. White the Couns^llor, Mr. Winthrop, Dudley, etc.
present ^t this Meeting ( Mcr)


October. 20. Tuesday, at a General Court of the Massachusetts Company at London,
choose a Committe^ for the Planters, another for the Adventurers, to draw up
Articles betw^^n them; and Mr. White of Dorchester with Mr. Davenport to be
Umpires between them. Mr. White and Davenport are Present, and (...) Cl^rk^ in
the List of Members ( Mcr)
And the Governor representing, the special Occasion of summon^ing this Court,
was for the Election of a New Governor, Deputy, and Assistants* the Government
being to be Transfered to NEW ENGLAND; the Court having received extraordinary
great Commendation of Mr. JOHN WINTHROP, both (...) his integrity and
Sufficiency, as being One very well fitted for the Place; with a full Consent
choose Him Governor for the ensuing Year, to Begin this Day* who is pleased to
accept thereof: with the like full Consent choose Mr. HUMPHREY Dep. Governor:
and for Assistants, Sir R. Saltons^all, Mr Johnson, Dudley, End^c^t, Nowel, W*
V^ssal, Pinchon, Samuel Sharp* Edward R^ssi^er, Thom^^ Sharp, John R^vell,
Cradock, G^ff, Alders^y V^nn, Wright, E^ton, Adams. Mr Harwood still Treasurer,
(Mcr) [and by the same kind of Writing I sup^pose Mr. Burgess Secretar^]

Nov. ^0. Friday, at a Court of Assistants of the Mas^sachusetts Company in
London -- Mr. Cradock informing of 1200 l. still owing for Marine^s Wag^s and
Freight on the Ships, Talbot, May-Flower, and Four Sisters; order it to be Paid
before other Debts. (Mcr) [By which it seems that ^ll those Ships are now
returned to England].

Nov. 25. Wednesday, at a General Court of the Massachus^tts Company at London
-- Read a Letter of Sept. 5, from Governor Endicot and others in NEW ENGLAND.
Mr. White moving, that the Business may be proceeded in with the first
Intention, which was chiefly the Glory of GOD; and to this Purpose that their
Meeting may be sanct^fi^d by the Prayers of some faithful Ministers resident in
London, whose Advice would be likewise requisite on many Occasions; the Court
admits into the Freedom of this Company, Mr. Io. Archer and Mr. Philip Nigh,
Ministers in London: who being present, kindly accept thereof. Mr White also
recommends to them, Mr. Nathaniel Ward of Standon. (Mcr)

Dec. 1. The General Court of the Massachusett^ Company in London, choose 10
Undertakers; who with much Entreaty accept the Charge of the sole Management of
the Joint Stock for 7 Years; Mr. Aldersey to be their Treasurer: and order them
to Provide a sufficient Number of Ships of good Force for Transporting
Passengers, at 5 l. a Person and Goods at 4 l a Tun, ^o be ready to sail from
London by the 1 st of March: that sucking Children shall not be reckoned; those
under 4 Years old, 3 for 1 Person; under 8, 2 for one; under 12, 3 for 2: that
a Ship of 200 Tun shall not carry above 120 Passengers com^l^a^* and others in
like Proportion: that for Goods Homeward, the Freight shall be; for Furr, 3 l a
Tun; for other Commodities, 40 s a Tun* for Assurance, 5 l. per Cent: that the
Undertakers furnish the Plantation with all Commodities they send for, at 25
per Cent above all Charges: but the Planters are free to dispose their Half
Part of the Furr, and to fetch or send for any Commo^dities as they please, so
as they Trade not with Interlopers. (Mcr)


This Year, the Inhabitants on PISCATAQUA RIVER enter into a Combination for
the Erect^ing a Government among themselves. (msl) (...) being uncertain from
what (...) rather adhere to their Combina^^^^^ (...)


1630.
J^n. 13. THE Council for NEW ENGLAND, in consideration that WILLIAM BRADFORD
and his Associates have for these nine Years lived in NEW ENGLAND; and have
there Pl^nted a Town called NEW PLYMOUTH at their own Charges; and now seeing
by the special Providence of GOD and their extraor^dinary Care and Industry,
they have increased their Plantations to near 300 People, and are on all
Occasions able to relieve any new Planters o^ others of his Majesty's Subjects
who may fall on that Coast; therefore seal a PATENT to the said William
Bradford, his Heirs, Associates and Assigns of all that Part of NEW ENGLAND
between Cohasset Rivulet toward the North, and Narraganset^ River toward the
South, the Western Ocean toward the East, and between a straight Line directly
extending up into the main Land toward the West from the Mouth of Narragansett
River to the utmost Bounds of a Country in NEW ENGLAND called Pacanokit alias
S^wamset Westward, and another like straight Line extending directly from the
Mouth of Cohasset River toward the West so far into the main Land Westward as
the utmost Limits of the said Pacanokit or Sawamset extend: as also all that
Part of NEW ENGLAND between the u^m st Limits of Capersecont or Comascecont
which (...) to the River K^nn^beck, and the Falls of Negumk^, with the said
River it self and the space of (...) Miles on each Side between the Bounds
abovesaid: with all Prerogatives, Rights, R^yalties, Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Franchises* Liberties and Immunities, and also marine, L^^^rties, with the
^^cheats and Casualties thereof (the Admiralty Jurisdiction excepted) with all
the Interest, Right, etc. which the saidCouncil have or ought to have thereto,
with Liberty to Trade with the Natives and Fish on the Seas adjoining: and it
shall be lawful for them to INCORPORATE themselves or the People there
inhabiting, by some fit Name or Title; with Liberty to them and their
Successors to make Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions, not contrary to the
Laws of England for their better Government, and put the same in Ex^cution by
such Officers as He and they shall authorize and depute; and for their Safety
and Defense, to encounter by Force of Arms by all Means by Land and Sea, Seize
and make Priz^ of all who attempt to inhabit or trade with the Savages within
the Limits of their Plantations or attempt Invasion, Detriment or Annoyance to
their said Plantations, etc (bc) Mr. Hubbard says that in 1629 [i. ^. according
to the odd Account, but in the Julian Year, 1630] the Plymouth People obtain
another PAT^NT by the Earl of Warwi^^ and Sir F. Gorges Act; and a GRANT from
the King for the Confirmation thereof, to make them a Corporation in as ample
Manner as the Massachusetts. (H) Now This is the Patent; but the King's Grant
miscarries. Deput^ Go^^rnor Du^l^y also mist^kes in t^inking the Plymouth
People had ob^^ined succes^i^e Pa^en^^ from King (...) and C^arles; their
Pat^^ts being only from the Council for NEW (...).


Feb. 10 Wedn^sday, at a General Court of the Massa^chusetts Company at London
-- Forasmuch as the Furtherance of the Plantation will require a great and
continual Charge that cannot be defrayed out of the Joint Stock, which is
order'^ for the Maintenance of Trade; it is propounded that another common
Stock be raised from such as bare good Affection to the Colony and the
Propag^tion thereof; to be employed in De^f^^^ment of Public Charges, as
maintaining M^nist^rs, transporting poor Families, Building Churches and
F^^tifi^ations, and all other Public and nec^ssa^y Occasions of the Colony:
or^d^^'d that 20^ Acres of Land b^ allotted for every 50 P^un^s, and s^
proportionably for what Sums shall come in for this Purpose: and Mr^ H^rwoo^
chosen Treasurer for this Account. Mr^ R^ger Ludlow now also chosen and sworn
Assi^tant, in the R^om of Mr S. Sharp, who by reason of Absence had not taken
the Oath (Mcr) This is their (...) Court in England (Mcr)


^. e. Here is [i. e in England] a Fleet of 14 Sail furnished with Men, Women,
Children, all Necess^ries, Men of Handicrafts; and others of good Condition,
Wealth and Quality, to make a firm Plantation in NEW ENGLAND, between 42 and
48, North Latitude: but stay at South Hampton and thereabouts till May, to take
^60 Kine with other live Cattle, etc. (hs) Dep Governor (...), that ^ Ship
sailed in Feb [which I (...) from Brist^l tha^ another sailed in (...) which I
conc^ude is Capt. Squ^l. from Plimout^ that 4 (...), 8 in May, 1 in June* and 1
in (...) Private (...) in all ( dd) (...) seem to be meant by Howes.


The latter End of 1629 The latter End of 1629 according to the odd way of
Reckoning is the Beginning of 16^^ in the Julian Year: And by Capt. Clap's
Account; thi^ Transaction seems but just before their New England Voyage, and
preparatory to it.
a Congregational Church (msl) is by a Pious P^opl^ Capt. Rog^r Clap's Memoir^
in Manuscript.
Gath^red (msl) in the New H^spital at Plymouth in Engl^nd: when they keep a
Day of solemn Prayer and Fasting; that worthy Man of GOD, the Rev. Mr White of
Dorch^ster being present Preaches in the Fore Part of the D^y; and in the After
Part the People solemnly choose and call those Godly Ministers the Rev. Mr. John
Warham a famous Preacher at E^^^er, and the Rev. Mr. John Maverick a Minister
who lived 40 Miles from Exeter, to be their Offi^ers: who expressing their
Acceptance (crc) are at the sam^ time ordained their Ministers. (msl) These had
also been o^dained Ministers by Bishops in the Church of En^land: and they are
now only s^p^rated to the s^ecial C^re of thi^ People.


This Winter Die in the Massachusetts Col^ny above 80 English (dd) and among
the rest, Mr. Houghton a Ruling Elder of the Church of Salem: But Mr. Samu^l
Sharp chosen Ruling El^er There, serves in the Office till about 1657, 8. (msl)
He was a Person of Note in the first Settlement (msl) and I conclude is the
same who was chos^n Assistant. Apr. 20. and Oct. 20. 1629. But whether chosen
Ruling Elder at the same Time with Mr. Houghton, or after his Decease seems
uncertain.


Mar. 8 Mr. Sherley at L^ndon, writes to Gov Bradford, etc. Those who came in
May, and these now sent, must some while be chargeable both to you and us. This
is another Company o^ our Leyden Friends, who are shipped in the Beginning of
March, and arrive [in NEW ENG^LAND] the latter End of May: and the Charg of
this last Company comes to above 550 l: i. e. of transporting them from Holland
to Eng^land, their lying There, with Clothing and Passage Hither; besides the
fetching them from Salem and the Bay* where they and their Goods are landed:
all which the New Plymouth Undertakers Pay Gratis; besides the providing them
Housing, preparing them Ground, and maintaining them with Food for 16 or 18
(...), before they have a Harvest of their own; which comes to near as much
more -- A rare Exam^ple of Brotherly Love and Christian Care in performing
their Promises to their Brethren, even beyond their Power. (B)

Mar. 18. At a Meeting of the Massachusetts Assistants at South H^mpton --
Present the Governor, Si^ R Saltonstall* Mr. Johnson, Dudley, Humfrey* No^rell,
Pin^hon, G ff; they choose Sir Brian^ Ianson, Wm Coddington and Simon
Bradstreet' G^ntlemen, to be Assistants in the Room of Mr E^ton and G ff of
Lond^n, and Mr Wright, all Merchants: and Sir Brian is accordingly swor^ this
Day. (M^r) Mr. Hubbard is mistaken in supposing these not chosen till March 23.


Mar 19. Mr. Sherley [at Bristol] (...) to Governor Bradford, etc. That Mr
Allerton got G^anted from the Earl of Warwick and Sir F. Gorges, all that Mr.
Winslow desired in his Letters and more: then sued to the KING to Confirm their
Grant and make you a Corporation, and s^ enable you to make and execute Laws in
such ample manner as the Massachusetts: which the King Granted, referring the
Lord K^eper t^ order the Solicitor to draw it up: the Lord Keeper furthered it
all He could and so the Solicitor: But as Festus said to Paul, With no small
Sum I obtained this Freedom; many Riddles must be resolved, and many Locks must
be opened with the Silver, nay the Golden Key: For when it came to the Lord
Treasurer for his Warrant to Free the Custom for 7 Years inward and 21 outward,
He refused, but referred it to the Council Table: and there Mr Allerton
attended Day by Day when they sat but could not get his Petition Read: and
be^cause of Mr Pierce's staying at Bristol with all the Passengers, He was
forced to leave the Prosecution of it to a Solicitor: but 'twill be needful He
should return by the first Ship from NEW ENGLAND. N B. The Clause about the
Customs was not tho'^ of by the Colony, nor much regarded, but unhappily put in
by Mr. Allerton and Sherley's Device: I suppose they took the Hint from the
like Advantage given in the Massachusetts Colony Charter.
or the Charter without all Question had been then finished, having passed the
King's Hand: but by that means this Opportunity being Lost, it was never
accomplished, but above 500 l. vainly and lavishly cast away about it. (B)

Mar. 19 Mr. Sherley and Hatherly at Bristol, write to the Plymouth
Unde^tak^rs, That they two with Mr Andrews and Beauchamp of London, have taken
a PATENT for PENOBSCUT, to carry on a Trade with the Natives There; that they
employed Mr. Edward Ashley a young Man to manage it, and furnished Him with
large Provisions; that Mr. Wm Pierce is joined with them, because of Landing
Ashley and his Goods There, and will bend his Course accordingly; with 4 or 5
stout Fellows, one of them a Carpenter, with a new Boat and Boards to make
another; and moving us to join them. (B)

Mr. Allerton accordingly returns (this Spring) to NEW ENGLAND: and as soon as
Ashley lands at Penobscut, about 80 Leagues (North East) of Plymouth, Ashley
writes, and after comes to be supplied with Wampampeag and Corn against Winter:
so with much Regret we join, and give 'em Supplies to our great Prejudice: but
with Ashley we consort Thomas Willet, a discreet* honest young Man come from
Leyden, in whom we can confide. (B) Dep. Governor Dudley telling of a S^ip that
sailed from England for NEW ENGLAND in F^b 1629, 30. It seems to be this Capt.
Wm. Pierce with Mr. Allerton, Ashley, etc* But Gov* Bradford beginning 16^0 on
the 25 of March, draws all thisAccount of the Charter, Allerton, Ashley, etc.
into 1629.


(...) 20. The Rev. Mr. Warham and Maverick with many Godly Families and People
under their Care (crc) from Devonshire, Dorse^shire and Somerse^shire (msl)
with M^. R ssiter and Ludlow, two Assistants of the Massachusetts Company (crc.
H) and Mr. Roger Clap, AE^ 21 [afterwards Capt. of the Castle in Boston
Harbour] this Day sail from Plymouth in England (crc) in the Mary and John (H)
a Ship of 400 Tuns, one Squeb Master* for the Massachusetts (crc)

Mar 23 Mr. Coddington, Bradstreet and T Sharp, formerly chosen Assistan^s of
the Massachusetts Colony, now take their Oath [ ^t South Hampton] And this Day,
at a Court of Assistants on Board the Ar^ella; P^esen^, Gov. Winthr^p, Sir R.
Saltons^all. Mr Io^nson, Dudl^y, Coddington, T. Sharp, W Vassal, and
Bradstreet; Mr. Humfrey being to stay behind, is discharged of his Deput^ship,
and in his Place Mr. DUDLEY chosen Deputy Governor. (Mcr) This is the last
Record of the Massachusetts Company in England.


Mar. 29. M^nday, the 4 Principal Ships; viz the Arb^lla of 350 Tuns, 28 Guns,
52 Seamen. Io^^son says this was the Eagle, now named Arbella in Honor of the
Lady Arbella, Wife to that piousGentleman Isaac Iohns^^, Esquire and the
Massachusetts Colony Records say, she was of 400 Tuns.
the Talbot, the Ambrose, and the Jewel, now riding at Cowes, and ready to
sail; Mr. Crad^^k this Morning being aboard the Arbella, advises them to sail;
the Rest viz. the May Flower, the Whale, the William and Francis* the Trial,
the Charles, the Success and the Hopewell, being at Hampton not yet Ready; and
takes Leave of his Friends: At 10 they weigh (H) [and g^t to Y^rm uth in the
Isle of Wight]

Apr. ^. G^v. Win^hrop, Dep. Gov. Dudley, Sir R. (...), I Iohns^n, W.
Coddington, Charles Fines, E^quires, with the Rev. Mr Ge^rge Phillips, on board
the Arbella at Yarmouth, sign an Hum^ble R^q^est of His M^jesty's L^yal
Subjects the Gove^nor and Company late gone for NEW ENGLAND to the R^st of
their Brethren in and of the CHURCH of ENGLAN^; for the Obtaining of their
Prayers, and the Removal of Suspicions and Misconstructions of their
Intentions: Printed in 4^^ London, 16^0.

This is commonly said to be drawn up by that Learn^d, Holy, Rev and Famous Mr
White of D rchester, (H) [and having signed this, they set sail aga^^] But
having been told at the Isle of Wight, that 10 Ships at Dunkirk [which then
belonged to Spain] with Brass Guns, the least of which had 30, were waiting for
us; we on

Apr. 10 Discover several sail of Ships baring toward us, and provide to Fight
'em: Johnson writes but of 4 Men of War of Dunkirk who were said to lie in wait
for their sailing; and but of 4 S^ips that now appeared to pursue 'em. But as
Hubbard writes of 10 Ships at Dunkirk; so by his Account there seem to be 7 now
bearing toward them*
but drawing nearer, find them to be the rest of our Fleet, with whom we clear
the Channel on the 12th of April: It seems strange that Dep. Governor Dudley
should not only be wholly silent in this Article, but also write of no more
than 4 S^^ps sailing in April, and of the next 8 in May: But in Mr. Johnson and
Hu^bard we have two Witnesses.
and the Arbella being Admiral, steer our Course for the Massachusetts, (H) but
make a very troublesome and costly Voyage: For as they had been Wind bound long
in Eng^land; so after they had set sail, are hindered with cross Winds, and so
scattered with Mists and Tempests that few of them arrive together (dd)

About April and May, is a Great Conspiracy of the Indians in all Parts from
the N^rra^gansetts round about to the Eastward, to cut off the English; which
John Sagamore, who always loved us, revealed to the Inh^bitants of Charlestown.
Their Design was ch^^fly laid against Plymouth, not regarding our Paucity at
the M^ssachusetts: to be effect^d under Color of having some Sport at Plymouth
which the Gov refusing them, they told him. If th y might not come with Leave,
they w^u'd without: upon this He sends their Flat bottomed Boat which is all
they have to Salem for Shot and Powder. At this time the People of Charl^stown
agree to make a small Fort with Pall^zid^^s and Flank^ers on the Top of the
Town Hill, which is performed at the Dir^ction of Mr. Graves, by all Hands,
viz. of Men, Women and Children, who labor in digging and building till the
Wo^k is done. But the People at Sal^m shoot^ing off their Great Guns to clear
them, the Report so terrifies the Indians, that they disperse and run away:
their Design breaks up: and though they come flattering afterward and call
themselves our good Friends; yet this Plot obliges us to be in continual Arms.
(c^r) This Account is no where found but in Charlestown Records: and though they
place this History in April and May 1629; yet inasmuch as Mr. Graves comes not
thither till July 1629, I therefore place it in the April and May succeeding.


[May, Latter End] the Lion, Wm. Pierce, Master, arrives in Salem Harbor,
though none of the Fleet expected. (H) I Place his Arrival at this Time (1)
Because Mr. Hubbard says He arrived in Salem-Harbour some Days before June 12.
(2) Because this seems to be the same Ship mentioned under March 8 last, which
Gov. Bradford says arrives the latter End of May; and I suppose He had now
Landed Ashley at Penobscut.


May 29. Saturday, Prince CHARLES Born, (hs) [afterwards King Charles II.]

May 30. [ Lord's-Day] Mr. Warham, Maverick, Rossiter and Ludlow, arrive at
Nantasket. Captain Squeb [I suppose on Monday, etc.] puts Them and their Goods
on Shore at Nantasket Point, and leaves them to shift for themselves. But
getting a Boat of some old Planters, they lade Her with Goods, and some able
Men well armed go up to Charlestown; where we find some Wigwams, some few
English, and one House, with an old Planter who can speak Indian. We go up
Charles River till it grows narrow and shallow; There with much Labor land our
Goods, the Bank being steep. At Night we are told of 300 Indians hard by: but
our Planter going and desiring them not to come near us, they comply. Our Capt.
is Mr. Southcot a brave Low Country Soldier, but we not above 10 in Number. In
the Morning, some of the Natives stand at a Distance looking at us, but come
not near till they had been a while in view: and then one of 'em holding out a
Bass toward us, we send a Man with a Biscuit and change 'em. After which they
supply us with Bass, giving a Bass for a Biscuit, and are very friendly. And by
our Diligence we get up a Shelter to save our Goods. But are not there many
Days before we have Order to come away from this Place, which is after called
Watertown, to Matapan, because there is a Neck fit to keep our Cattle on; so we
remove to Matapan (crc) Begin the Town, name it Dorchester, (msl) and Here the
Natives are also kind to us. (crc) By this Means Dorchester becomes the first
settled Church and Town in the County of Suffolk: and in all Military Musters
or Civil Assemblies where Dignity is regarded, used to have the Precedence (
msl) and by this it appears that Johnson and others are mistaken, who place the
beginning of Dorchester Church and Town in 1631. But the Manuscript Letter is
mistaken in supposing that this People removed to Matapan in the beginning of
June.


June 12. Johnson mistakes in saying July 12, instead of June 12 and several
Manuscript Letters mistake July for June.
Saturday, at 2 in the Morning, the Arbella, Admiral of the NEW ENGLAND Fleet,
finding her Port near, shoots off 2 Pieces of Ordnance: and descrying the Lion,
Wm. Pierce Master, who had arrived there some Days before, sends the Skiff
aboard; stands in toward the Harbor: and some Shallops coming, by their Help
she passes through the narrow Strait between Baker's Island and another Little
Island, and comes to an Anchor a little way within said Island. Mr. Pierce
comes presently to us, but returns to fetch Mr. Endicot, who with Mr. Skeleton
and Capt. Levit, come aboard us about two a Clock. And with them, this
Afternoon, the Governor with those Assistants on board the Admiral, and some
other Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, go ashore to their Friends at Salem: many of
the other People also landing on the Eastern Side of the Harbor, regale
themselves with Strawberries, wherewith the Woods are every where in these
times replenished. (H)

Next Morning, MASCONOMO, the Sagamore or Lord Proprietor of that Side of the
Country toward Cape Ann, with one of his Men, comes on board the Admiral to
bid Him welcome, stays all Day: and in the Afternoon arrives the Jewel. (H)

^une 14. [Monday] Morning, the Admiral weighs, is warped into the inner
Harbor: and this Afternoon, most of the Passengers go ashore. (H) But find the
Colony in an unexpected and sad Condition: above 80 of 'em being Dead the
Winter before; many of those alive, Weak and Sick; all the Corn among 'em
hardly sufficient to feed 'em a Fortnight: so that the Remains of 180 Servants
we had sent over the two Years before, coming to us for Victuals, we find
ourselves unable to feed 'em, by Reason that those we trusted to ship their
Provisions sailed and le^^ them behind: whereupon Necessity forced us to give
them all Liberty to our extreme Loss, who had cost us 16 or 20 l. a Person,
furnishing and sending over. (dd)

Jun^ 17. Thursday, the Governor with the chief of the Gentlemen travel to the
Massachusetts, to find out a Place for Settlement: but return on Saturday;
taking Nantasket in their Way; where they met the Mary and John, the Ship that
sailed from the West Country, and brought Mr. Rossiter and Ludlow with other
Passengers; who missing Salem, needed the Help of the Governor and other
Assistants, to make up the Difference between the Master and other Gentle^men,
which was composed on this Occasion (H)

The Ambrose arrives at Salem before the Go^vernor and Company returned from
the Mas^sachusetts. (H)

July 1. Arrive the May Flower and Whale in the Harbor of Charlestown: the
Passengers all in Heal^h; but most of their Cattle Dead. July 2, comes in the
Talbot: which had been sore vi^sited with the Small Pox, whereof 14 Died at
Sea. In one of these Ships came Mr. Henry Win^throp, the Governor's second Son,
a sprightly and hopeful young Gen^leman; who was unhappily drowned in a small
Creek on July 2 the very next Day after his Landing, to the no small Grief of
his Friends and the rest of the Company. (H)

July 3. Arrive the William and Francis: July 5. the Trial and the Charles: and
July 6, the Success. So as now the WHOLE Fleet being safely come to Port; they
on

July 8 [ Thursday] keep a PUBLIC DAY OF THANKSGIVING through all their
Plantations, to Praise Almighty GOD for all his Goodness and wonderful Works
toward them. (H)

[By this it seems as if the Hopewell also were now arrived, though not
mentioned; or at least that She arrived before July 11 by the following Passage
in Mr. Hubbard -- ] There were no less than 10 or 11 Ships employed to
trans^port the Governor and Company with other Planters at this Time to NEW
ENGLAND: some of 'em Ships of good Burden, that carried over about 200
Passengers a Piece: who all by the good Providence of GOD arrive at their
desired Port before the 11th of July, 1630. (H)

[By the 10 or 11 Ships Mr. Hubbard must mean only Those which came from South
Hamp^ton and that arrived at the Massachusetts before July 11: and if the
Hopewell was not then arr^v'd, there were 10; but if She was -- there were 11.]

These Ships are filled with Passengers of all Occupations, skilled in all
kinds of Faculties needful for Planting a new Colony. Some set forth from the
West of England: but the greatest Number come from about London; though South
H^mpton was the Place of Rendevouz where they took Ship. The 3 bigest bro't
over the Patentees and Persons of greatest Quality; with Governor WINTHROP that
famous Pattern of Piety, Wisdom, Justice and Liberality; which advanced Him so
often to the Place of Govern^ment by the annual Choice of the People; and
Deputy Governor DUDLEY, a Gentleman, who by reason of his Experience, and
Travels abroad, as his other natural and acquired Abilities, qua^lified Him
next above others for the chief Place of Government. (H)

With these in the same Fleet there came several other Gentlemen of Note and
Quality; (H) as Sir R. Saltonstall, Mr. Ludlow, Rossiter, Nowel, T. Sharp,
Pynchon, S. Bradstreet, [whom I find at the first Court in Charlestown, Aug.
23.] as also Mr. Johnson and Coddington [whom with Mr. Endicot I find at the
second Court There. Sept. 7.] (Mcr) Mr. Hubbard also mentions Mr. W. Vassal:
But though one of the Patentees and Assistants this Year, yet neither in all the
Lists of the Courts nor any where els^ in the Massachusetts Colony Records, can
I find hi^ Name mentioned after their Departure from England.
with other Gentlemen of the Civil Order. As also some eminent and noted
MINISTERS: as Mr. [JOHN] WILSON, who had formerly been a Minister of one of the
Parish Churches in Sudbury in the County of Suffolk; Mr. GEORGE PHILLIPS, who
had been Minister of Bocks^ed in Essex; with [the aforesaid] Mr. JOHN MAVERICK
and Mr [JOHN WARHAM, who had been Ministers in the West Country. (H) These were
they who first came to set up Christian Churches in this Heathen Wilderness,
and to lay the Foundation of this renowned Colony.

SECT. II.
From the Beginning of the Settlement of the MASSACHUSETTS or second Colony, to
the Settlement of the seventh and last, by the Combination of Forty-one Persons
into a Form of Government, on Piscataqua River, October. 22 1640, afterward
called the PROVINCE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.

BEING now arrived from England with another Colony of Pious People and on the
known Account of Religion only; for the Information of the present Age as well
as Posterity, we must here observe, They were of a Denomination somewhat
different in those early Times from them of Plymouth: Those of Pli^mouth being
then called Separatists; these of the Massachus^tts, with the following
Colonies issuing from them, -- Puritans. The former having about 28 Years
before, separated from the Church of England; as what, on the Account of the
^mpure Mixture of unscriptural Inventions in Religious Worship, as well as the
Admission of the scandalous to the Sacrament^ of Baptism and the Lord's Supper,
with the ^lmost entire Refusal of Discipline, they could not therefore in
Conscience join with: but the latter were till now professed Members of the
Church of England.

But that the Reader may more clearly see the Difference then between them,
with the Occasional Causes of their Transmigrations; we must retrace them to
their Origin in England, and take a summary View of their gradual Progress to
this memorable Period. And though I might spare much Labor by citing only out of
Dr. E. Calamy, Mr. Pierce, Benn^t, Neal, etc; yet to avoid Exception, I rathe^
chiefly use those noted Church of England Writers, Fox, Cambden, Fuller,
Burnet, Strype and Eachard: which I have taken no small Pains in searching and
comparing.

On June 9. 1536, Fuller's Printer wrongly places this indeed under 1535: But
Keeble and Burnet assure us it was in 1536.
as Fuller says, Begins the first Reformed Convocation of the Clergy in
England; in which the Lord Cromwell prime Secretary, sets in State above all
the Bishops, as the King's Vicar, or Vicegerent General in all Spiritual
Matters: and Bp. Burnet tells us, That by King Henry's Order, He declares, It
was the King's Pleasure that the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church should be
Reformed by the Rules of SCRIPTURE, and that not^ing was to be maintained which
did not rest upon that Authority.

Now this is the Grand Principle of Puritanism: Upon this, as the Scriptures
were more searched and known, the Re^formation gradually went on to the Death
of K. Edward VI and had the Governors of the Church adhered strictly to this
one Principle, kept close to the Scriptures and reformed the Worship as well as
the Doctrine by them, i. e. purged out of the Church whatever they themselves
acknowledge is not prescribed in Scripture; the whole Church had then been
Puritan, and had never driven such Multitudes from her Communion.

Fuller also tells us, that Mr. JOHN ROGERS and Mr. JOHN HOOPER were the Heads
of those Reformers called Puritans. Mr. Eachard, that highflying Writer, calls
Mr. ROGERS A learned Man and Prebendary of St. Paul's London. Bp. Burnet calls
Mr. HOOPER A pious, zealous and learned Man, first Bishop of Gloucester and then
of Worcester. Fuller says, He was bred at Oxford, well skilled in Latin, Greek
and Hebrew. And K Edward in his Letter to Cranmer of Aug. 5. 1550, writes, We
by the Advice of our Council have chosen our right well beloved and well worthy
Mr. JOHN HOOPER, Professor of Divinity, to be our BP. of Gloucester; as well for
his great Knowledge, deep Judgment and long Study, both in the Scriptures and
profane Learning, a^ also for his good Discretion, ready Utterance and honest
Life for that kind of Vocation. The Letter is entire in Fox and Fuller.
These two led the Van of the Martyrs under Queen Mary I; Mr Rogers being the
first who Died at the Stake, and Mr Hooper the first Bishop Burnt in her Reign,
if not the first Bishop that was ever Burnt in the World. And from Fuller and
Burnet we learn that in 1550, under the Reign of Edward VI, we must Begin the
ERA of the English Puritans: and not in 1554, among the Exiles at Franc^ort;
and much less lower down in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, as Eachard and others
place it; who seem to write as if they had not a very exact Acquaintance with
the Religious History of England.

For Bishop Burnet tells us. -- That on April 1. 1550, Ridley was made Bishop
of London, orders Altars to be pulled down and turned to Communion Tables; and
that this Change was universally made in England this Year: that on July 3
ensuing, King Edward appointed HOOPER to be Bishop of Gloucester; who refuses on
these two Accounts, (1) The last 6 Words in the Oath of Supremacy -- so Help me
God, all Saints and the holy Evangels; which all the Bishops had sworn by
before. (2) The Popish Habits [such as Rocher, Chimere, Square C^p, etc ( Fox
and Fuller] still requi^'d by Law. Upon this Hooper is cited before the King in
Council, who sees so much of the Reasonableness of his Objections, that (1) He
strikes those six Words out of the Oath with his own Hand. (2) The Law
threatening a Praemunire, He writes a Warrant to Arch Bp. Cranmer to consecra^e
Him without the Habits: that Cranmer was willing to yield: that Cox the King's
Praeceptor, writes to Bullinger, 'I think all Things in the Church ought to be
pure and simple, removed at the greatest Distance from the Pomps and Elements
of this World; but in this our Church what can I do in so low a Station? That
the famous Professors of Divinity, Bucer in Cambridge, and Martyr in Oxford
being consulted, express their Dislike of the Habits, and wish them removed by
Law, though till then advise to use them* that Ridley was very earnest Hooper
should be made a s^op; and that both Ridley and Goodrick Bishop of Ely wish the
Habits abolished; but think the breaking through the Law, so bad a Praecedent and
may have such ill Consequences, they cannot consent: that Hooper declaring
Himself for another Way of Ordination is committed to the Fleet [Prison] Ian.
27, but is at length prevailed upon and consecrated in March ensuing; upon
Allowance of Liberty to lay by the Habits on common Occasions, though to ware
them when He Preached in Public. And the Treatise of the Troubles at
Francford, Printed in 1575, says, This was to the common Grief of all Godly
Minds.

Burnet also says, that 'In 1551, the Common Prayer Book was a second time
revised and corrected; and in 1552, authorized by Parliament: But Pointer and
Eachard, that therein was neither Confession nor Absolution: Dr. Layton, that
it thus expressly spoke concerning the Ceremonies -- As for Kneeling, the Sign
of the Cross, the lifting up of the Hand, smiting of the Breast, and Gestures
of the like Nature; It shall be left free for every one to do as He list: And
Dr. E. Calamy, That in the Days of King Edward VI, the Liturgy was for the most
part used, and what was Matter of Scruple omitted, without Molestation; nor
could be find any Subscription ^equired to the Book of Common Prayer, the
Articles of Religion, or any Thing else.

Thus the Puritans continued, and both They and the Reformation grew in the
Church till the Decease of K. Edward VI, on June 6. 1553: by which time Arch
Bishop Cranmer, Bp. Ridley, Bp. Latinier, Dr. Tailor, Mr. Philpot, Bradford,
and other glorious Martyrs, as Mr. Neal from Fox and Hey^lin observe^, came
into the sameSentiments with Hooper about the Popish Habits; and the four first
treated them with great ^^ntempt at their Degr^dations. Nor were they Puritan
only in respect to the Popish Habits, but also in removin^ Crosses Copes and
Altars, as well as Images and Pictures out of C^urches, and setting
CommunionTables in convenientPlace. See Slow and Burnet.


But Queen Mary I succeeding, soon reduced the Church to Popery, and Burnt to
Death those most eminent and zealous Reformers. Then Fox and Burnet tell us,
Ridley in Prison wrote to Hooper, That He was entirely knit to Him, though in
some Circumstances of Religion, they had formerly jarr'd a little: It was
Hooper's Wisdom and his own Sim^plicity that had made the Difference* And Fox
informs us, That when they came to be Degraded, they were forced to be clothed
with the Popish Habits in order to be stripped, as a Token of their being
Deprived of their Offices: that thenRIDLEY did vehemently inveigh against all
thatFoolish Apparel, calling the Apparel foolish and abominable, yea too fond
for a Vice in a Play: that when they were put on TAILOR, He walked up and down
and said to Bonner -- How say you my Lord, am not I a goodly Fool? -- If I were
in Cheap [Side] should I not have Boys enough to laugh at these apish Toys and
toying Trumpery? -- That CRANMER said, at his Clothing and Stripping, All this
needed not; I had my self done with this Gear long ago: And Neal from Fox in
Latin, which I have not seen, says That LATIMER at his Degradation also derided
the Garments; for when they pulled off his Surplice -- Now, says He, I can make
no more Holy Water.

And then the Treatise of the Troubles at Francfort tells us, That Mr. Wm.
Whittingham and other [famous Puritans] with their Company flying the Kingdom;
they on June 27. 1554, enter Francfort in Germany, being the first Eng^l^shmen
that There arrived to remain. July 8, They appli^ed to the Magistrates for a
Church wherein they might have GOD's Word truly Preached and the Sacraments
sincerely [i. e. purely] ministered in their natural Tongue. July 14, They
obtained their Request: and then [forming themselves into an Independent
Church] consult what Order of Service to use: and the English Order being
perused, they by general Consent conclude, that the answering aloud after the
Minister should not be used, that the Litany, Surplice and many other Things be
omitted, that in the Sacraments also sundry Things be omitted, as Superstitious
and Superfluous: And having chosen their Mi^nisters and Deacons, they enter
their Church on [Lordsday] July 29: and thus continue, till [Wednesday] March
13 following, when Dr. Cox and others with Him come to Francfort out of
England, and begin to break their Order: On the Lord's Day following, one of
his Company without the Consent and Knowledge of the Congregation, getting up
suddenly into the Pulpit reads the Litany, and Dr. Cox with his Company answer
aloud after the Minister, contrary to the Church's Determination: and being
admonished by the Seniors of the Congregation, He with the rest who came with
Him answer, They would do as they had done in England, etc. Treatise of the
Troubles at Francfort.


Upon this, there rises a grievous Controversy about the Ceremonies, which
broke the Church to pieces, and drove many of the Puritans* viz Fox [the
Martyrologist] with some to Basil, and Knox [the famous Scotch Reformer] with
Mr Christoph^r Goodman, W^ittingham and others to Geneva; where they form 2
other Churches. In the mean while, Cox with those who are for the Common Prayer
and Ceremonies, staying at Francfort, form a second [Independent] Church, and
choose Mr. David Whit^ea^, Bishop or Superintendant; to whom at length they
agree to give the Title of Pastor, with 2 Ministers, 4 Seniors or Elders and 2
Deacons: the Pastor to Praeside in Preaching, ministering the Sacraments,
Example of good Life, in Exhorting, Admonishing, Rebuking, and as the chief
Mouth of the Church to declare all Orders taken by Him and the Elders; the 2
Ministers to assist the Pastor in Preaching and Administering the Sacraments;
the Elders to assist the Pastor in O^ersight and Discipline; and the Deacons,
to care for the Poor, visit the Sick, and if required to assist in Catechizing.
Treatise of the Troubles at Francfort.


Other Exiles out of England, set up another [Independent] Church at Embden in
East Friesland, whereof Bishop Scory was the Superintendent. Fuller.
Others form another [Independent] Church at Wes^l in Westphalia, to which Bp
Coverdale Preaches: but he being called away; they remove to Arrow in
Switzerland, under theConduct of Mr. Thomas Leaver: I call 'em all Independent
Churches: For though their Historians give them not this Title, yet they were
plainly such in Reality.
Others settle at Zurich, Strasburgh, Worms, Manheim, and Do^sburgh (tf) But
whether at all these Places -- in a Church State, seems uncertain.

But I must now surprise the Reader with some Observations of matter of Fact
which have been overlooked by our Historians both Conformists and
Nonconformists; and which have opened clearly to me upon my nicely Examining
the aforesaid Authors and comparing them together.

For in the Francfort Tract I find That on further Consultation, even the
second Church There, under theConduct of Mr. Whithead, A. Nowel and others, in
a little while became also Puritan, agreed on a pure Scheme of Discipline; and
though they kept the Form and Order of Ministration of the Sacraments and Common
Prayer as set forth in King EDWARD'S last Book, yet they left out certain Rites
and Ceremonies in it: That toward the End of Q Mary 's Reign, the Grudge
between those and those of the first Church who removed to Geneva, seemed to be
almost quite forgotten: That (...) before and after Queen Elizabeth 's
Accession, mutual Letter^ of Christian Love passed between them -- That in one
before, those of the said second Church Promised to forget all Displeasures
before conceived; and in another, of Ian. 3, 1558, 9, six Weeks after her
Accession, they proceed to say -- We trust that true Religion shall be
Restored, and that we shall not be burdened with unprofitable Ceremonies --
And if any shall be obtruded that shall be offensive; at our Meeting with you [
i. e. you of Geneva] in England, which we trust will be shortly, we will
brotherly join with you to be (...) for the Reformation and Abolishing of the
same. (tf) And by comparing this Tract with Strype, I find that soon Returning
to England, they were as good as their Word.

For Strype informs us, that Queen Elizabeth ascending the Throne on Nov. 17*
1558, her first Parliament meets on Ian. 23* 1558. 9, her first Convocation of
the Clergy on the next Day, and they both hold to May following: that the
Convocation being entirely Papists, vote for Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice
of the Mass, with the Pope's Suprema^y; and yet the Parliament passed the Acts
of the Queen's Supremacy and of Uniformity, which last restored King Edward's
Li^turgy with some Alterations, before one Protestant was made a Bishop, and
while all the Bishops in Parliament were Roman Catholics: That in May, 1559,
all the Bishops except Kitchen of Land^ff, refusing the Oath of Supremacy, are
in a short time after expuls'd their Bishoprics: And that the Act of
Uniformity taking place on June 24, the Queen's Commissioners soon after,
visited the Kingdom to administer the Oath and see the Order for Uniformity
observed; when several of the Popish Clergy refus^^g, were deprived, and so
made Way for Protestants to take their Places. Then, Neal informs us, that
those famous Puritans, Mr. Whithead was offered the Arch Bishopric of
Canterbury; Bishop Coverdale to be restored, and Mr. Kno^, Sampson and others
were offered Bishoprics; but refused on the Account of the Popish Habits and
Ceremonies. And Strype, -- That on Dec 17, was Matthew Parker Queen Elizabeth's
first Protestant Bishop, Consecrated: and that by April 19, 1562, were
Consecrated 22 Bishops more: of which says Neal, that Grindal, Parkburst,
Sandys, Pilkington and others, accepted their Bishoprics with Trembling, in
Hope^ to obtain an Amendment in the Constitution: and from Burnet, Pierce and
Strype, See Burnet, Vol. III, and Strype, Vol. I, under 1559 and 1560.
that both Arch Bishop Parker, with the Bishops, Horn, Jewel, Grindal,
Pilkington, Gu^st and San^ys, 'were at first against the Habits, and cites
their Writings. And Strype expressly says -- The first Bishops made by Queen
Elizabeth, as Cox, Grindal, Horn, Sandys, Jewel, Parkh^rst, Bentham, upon their
Return, la^our'd all they could against receiving into the Church the
Papistical Habits, and that all the Ceremonies should be clean laid aside; but
they could not obtain it from the Queen and Parliament.

Strype also says, That on Ian. 12. 1562, 3, Q. Elizabeth's first Protestant
Convocation met, In Burnet and Strype we find that Mr. Alexander Nowel, that
famous Puritan and Dean of St. Paul's, London, was chosen and approved
PROLOCUTOR of the Lower House: But Burnet mistakes Ian. 13 for Ian. 12.
which agreed on the 39 Articles: but the Beginning of the 20 th Article being
this, That the Church ^^th Power to Decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority
in Controversies of Faith; Fuller tells us, That both the English and Latin
Articles set forth in 1571, when they were first ratified by Act of Parliament,
in Arch Bishop Parker's Time, are without this Passage; and this Published Book
being just before the Act confirming it, must be the Book confirmed, and not
the private Manuscript attested only by a Public Notary. And yet the Act of
Parliament confirms not all the Articles, but those which only concern the
Con^ession o^ the true Christian Faith and the Doctrine of the Sacraments: the
very Words of the Act in K^eble.
He also says this Passage appears in the Editions of 1593 in Whitgift's Time,
of 1605 in Bancroft's Time, and of 1612 in the Beginning of Abbot's Time; though
Dr. Mocket, Chaplain to Arch Bishop Abbot, left it out of his Latin Translation
of 1617: And Fuller leaves the Matter undecided. Yet Strype says, the Clause
appears i^ two Copies Printed in 1563; but these were in Latin, and there is
nothing of it in the Original Manuscript itself subscribed by the Convocation,
and now in Bennet College Library: by which he seems to decide the Matter and
make it a Forgery.

Having finished the Articles of Faith, Strype says, the Convocation proceeded
to the Reformation of Ceremonies in the Public Liturgy: That Bishop Sandys
advised (1) That Private Baptism may be taken out of the Common Prayer, which
has respect to Women, who by the Word of God, cannot be Minis^^^s of the
S^craments. (2) That the Collect for Crossing the Inf^^t at Baptism may be
blotted out as Needless and very Superstitious: And that 33 Though Strype says
33, He gives the Na^es of but 32
of the Lower House Signed a Request, (1) That Playing withOrgans may be
removed. (2) That none but Ministers may be allowed to baptize, and may leave
off the Sign of the Cross in Baptism. (3) That Kneeling at the Communion may be
left indifferent to the Discretion of the Ordinary (4) That the Use of Copes
and Surplices may be taken away, and that Ministers use a comely Side Garment,
as they commonly do in Preaching. (5) That Ministers be not compelled to wear
suc^ Gowns and Caps, as the Enemies of Christ's Gospels have chose to be the
special Array of their Priesthood. (6) That in the 33 d Article i. e. K.
Edward's 33d, but Q Eliza^^th'^ 34^^*
the Clause about Traditions and Ceremonies may be left out, and* (7) That all
Saints Holy Days, as tending to Superstition, b^ clearly abrogated. And to
these subscribed

Deans.
1 Dodd^ Gregory, Dean of Exeter. 2 Ellis or Else John, Dean of Hereford. f 3
Nowel Alexander, Dean of St. Paul's London, Prol ocutor. f 4 Now^l Lawrence,
Dean of Litchfield. 5 ^ampson Thomas, Dean of Christ's Church, Oxford. 1 D^y or
Day William, ^rovost of Eaton College.
Arch Deacons.
z 1 Bem^nt Robert, Arch Deacon of Huntingdon. f 2 Crol^y Robert, Arch Deacon
of Hereford. ^ 3 Heton [or Eaton] Guido, Arch Deacon of Gloucester. 4 Kemp
David, Arch Deacon of St. Albans. z 5 L^ver Thomas, Arch Deacon of Cov^ntrey. 6
Longland John, Arch Deacon of Bucks. f 7 Mullins John, Arch Deacon of London. 8
Prat John, A rch Deacon of St. David's. g ^ Pullan John, Arch Deacon of
Colchester. ^ ^^ Rogers Richard, Arch Deacon of St. (...). ^ ^^ Spencer Thomas,
Arch Deacon of (...)* f 12 Watts Thomas, A^ch Deacon of Middle (...)
Proctors [or (...)
1 Avis Robert, Proctor of the Chu^^^ of (...). 2 Bonner W, Proctor of the
Clergy of Somerset. 3 Calfhil James, Proctor of the Church of Oxford. 4 Hill or
Hills John, Proctor of the Clergy of Oxford. 5 Nevyns^n Steven, Proctor of the
Clergy of Canterbury 6 Reeve Richard, P. of theDean and Chap. of Westminster. ^
7 Renyger Michael, P. of theDean and Chap. of Winchester. 8 Roberts Thomas,
Proctor of the Clergy of Norwich. 9 Savage G^orge, Proctor of the Clergy of
Gloucester. f 10 Saul Arthur, Proctor of the Dea^ and Chap. of Gloucester. 11
Tr^mayn Richard, Proctor of the Clergy of Exeter. 12 Walker John, Proctor of
the Clergy of Suffolk. 13 Wiburn Percival, Proctor of the Church of Rochester.
f 14 Wilson or Wylson Tho. P. of the Church of Worcester.
Strype and Burnet also tell us, That on Feb. 13, the six following Articles
were bro't into the Lower House, the Determination whereof depended on a narrow
Scrutiny. (1) That allSundays and principalFeasts of Christ ^e kept Holy Days,
and all other Holy Days, abrogated. (2) That the Minister in common Prayer turn
his Face to the People and distinctly read the Service. (3) That in Baptism,
the Ceremony of making the Cross on the Child's Forhead may be omitted, as
tending to Superstition. (4) That at the Communion Kneeling may be left to the
Discretion of the Ordin^ry. (5) That it be sufficient in Time of saying Divine
Service and ministering the Sacraments, to use a Surplice, and none to say
Divine Service, or minister the Sacraments but in a comely Garment. (6) That
the Use of Organs ^e removed.

That upon this arose a great Contest: and when they came to Vote, Those who
were against the Articles carried it, though with great Difficulty; there being
43 for them and 35 against them: yet the 43 producing but 13 Proxies, and the
35 producing 24 Proxies; the latter carried it but by a single Proxy [of a
Person absent who had no Opportunity of being enlightened by the Consultation:
A Proxy is a Power of Voting for an absent Person.
The 4 in the List above in Roman Character, happening then to be abs^nt; the
43 Approvers were the 28 There P^^nted in Ita^^c^, with these 15 below. --

f. 1. Pedder John, Dean of Worcester. 1. Bradbridg William, Chancellor of
Chichester. 1. Lancaster Tho. Treasurer of Sarum. 1. Tod William, Arch Deacon
of Bedford. 2. Weston Ed. Arch Deacon of Lewis. f. 3. Wisdom Robert, Arch
Deacon of Eli. f. 1. Besely Richard, Proctor of the Clergy of Cant. 2. Bower
Gualter, Proctor of the Clergy of Somers^^. 3. Coccrel Ra. Proctor of Sur^e^.
4. Ebden John, Proctor of Winchester. 5. Godwin Tho. Proctor of the Clergy of
Lincoln. 6. Proctor James, [Proctor] of the Clergy of Sussex. f. 7. Soreby Tho.
Proctor of the Clergy of Chichester. 1. Becon Thomas, [I suppose of Canterbury]
2. Burton, [uncertain]
TH^S^ were some of the Principal Fathers of the EnglishLow Church and
Puritans: and in thisCompany I observe, (1) There were 6 Deans, 1 Provost, 1
Chancellor, 1 Treasurer, 15 Arch Dea^cons, 21 Proctors, and 2 uncertain. (2) I
find but 1 of the English Church of Geneva, marked g. (3) There were 12 of the
second Church at Francfo^t, marked f; 3 of Zurich, marked z; and 2 of
Strasburgh, marked s; which 17 were all for K. Edward's Book in Germany, (tf)
but yet for removing the Ceremonies and promoting a further Reformation. Hence
see how much those Writers are mistaken who pouring out their Spleen against
Geneva, though it they were only or chiefly the Exiles returning Thence, who were
for a further Reformation than Q. Elizabeth's first Parliament Began while
there was not one Protestant Bishop in it (4) Of many of those in the Lists
above who were for Removing the Ceremonies, Strype gives great Characters for
Learning, Piety and Usefulness.

Of the 35 OPPOSERS, I observe, (1) There were but 4 Deans, 14 Arch Deacons, 10
Proctors, and 7 uncertain. (2) I find not one of the Church of Geneva, nor of
the 1st or 2d Church of Francfort, nor of Strasburgh, nor Zurich, (3) Of the
most of the Opposers, Strype gives indifferent or no Characters. (4) He informs
us, That two of the Deans viz. Per^ and Turnbull, and 2 Arch Deacons, viz.
White and Cotterel had complied with the Popish Religion, were in Place and
Dignity under Q. Mary, and even adhered to Popery till June 24. 1559, when they
were obliged to leave it or loose their Places: That another, i. e. Bridgwater,
afterward went over Sea, carried several young Men with Him, and turned
Papist: that Pern was Q. Mary's Chaplain, and had been named by her to the
Pope, to be Bishop of Sarum a little before her Death: that White is mentioned
in a Letter of Bishop Grindal's, wrote to the Secretary soon after the Synod,
as a Great Papist; but yet in the Convo^cation, and was afterward reproved by
a Popish Writer as dissembling in Religion against his Conscience: that
Bridgwater produced 1 Proxy and Cotterel 3 [And these were they who helped to
stop the Reformation and retain the Popish Ceremonies as a perpetual Fountain
of Offense, Contention and Division to this very Day.] Yea Sampson and Hum^f^^y
in Burnet, write, That many Things were agreed to in this Convocation that
would have tended to the great Good of the Church, but were Suppressed, etc.

Strype also tells us, That besides these Conforming Papists, there were diverse
others in Convocation of the sam^ Character; [which he seems to have known and
yet con^cealed. However by comparing Cambden, Burnet, Stryp^ and Eachard, I
think I have found 'em.]

^or from the Rise of the English Reformation, there appe^r^d two Sorts of
People who divided the Church through the successive Changes in theReigns of
Henry VIII, Edward VI, Q. Mary I, and Q. Elizabeth. (1) Those both Protestants
and Papists, who were so CONSCIENTIOUS in their several Religions, as both to
quit their Places, and either fly o^ suffer, when the Public Alteration turned
against them (2) Both Protestants and Papists IN DISGUISE, who rather than
suffer or loose their Places, openly submitted to the Public Changes while
they inwardly retained their form^^ Principles.

Of the FORMER Sort, the more Conscientious Papists refusing* the Oath of
Supremacy, lost their Preferments though no many; and some of them in Henry
VIII's Time theirLives* ^ho' none at the Stake. Of the more Conscientious
Protestants; many were burnt in the Reigns both of Henry VIII and Mary I; many
concealed themselves in the Kingdom; and others fled as we observed before; but
returning at Q. Elizabeth's Accession, were advanced in the Church; by
Disputing, Preaching, good Life and Writing, greatly helped her Reformation,
and would have thoroughly reformed Her, but were for ever hindered by the Queen
and Others.

As to the LATTER Sort; Eachard says, upon Henry VIII'sBe^ginning
theReformation All the Bishops, Abbots and Priors in England, except Fisher Bp.
of Rochester, were so far satisfied, or so u^willing to leave their Preferments
that they resolved to Comply with the Changes the King was resolved to make;
and that the Convocation, the Universities and the inferior Clergy, Renounced
the Pope's and owned the King's Suprem^cy. Burnet tells us, that in the farther
Reformation of Edward VI, He could not find one Head of a College in either
University turned out: for though they generally loved the old Superstition, yet
they loved their Places much better: and indeed the whole Clergy did so readily
conform to every Change, that it was not easy to find Colors for turning out
BONNER and GARDENER. Upon Q. Mary's Accession, Burnet says, All who adhe^'d t^
the Reformation were sure to be excluded all Favor; and that the reformed
Bishops of St. David's, Exeter, and Gloucester, [Who were Farrar, Coverdale and
Hooper] with Tailor, Philpot, Bradford, Crome, Sanders, Rogers and Lawrence, in
their Paper of May 1554, Declare, that the Universities were their open Enemies
and condemned their Cause, contrary to the Word of GOD and the Determinations
they had made in K. Edward's Time. Fuller says, that On October. 1^. the
Convocation meeting, there were found but 6 therein who opposed the Reduction
of Popery -- and that all the Bishops but 13 returned to it. Arch Bishop
Parker, in Burnet and Eachard, says, That of the 16000 Clergymen then in the
Nation, about 12000 were turned out for being Married By Dr. Tanner's Account
in Burnet, There were not above 3000 for that Cause ejected. [4000 then, or
more of K. Edward's Clergy seem to keep their Places in Q. Mary's Reign, and
the Vacancies of Others must needs be filled with the most zealous Papists.]

Upon Q. Elizabeth's being Proclaimed in London, Eachard says, The Joy of the
City was such as gave the melan^cholly Priests just Cause to fear a new
Revolution in Religious Affairs -- That the Priests were forced to vent their
Griefs in private Corners -- And the Queen had Reason to expect the Clergy and
those employed in the late Reign would oppose the Change. From Strype, we learn
that her first Convocation meeting Ian. 24. 1558, 9, both Vote for Popery and
beseech Her not to change it. May 20. 1559, Cox in Burnet writes, That the
Clergy stand as stiff as a Rock, and not one of them is yet come over [i. e.
from Popery to the reformed Religion.] May 22, Jewel in Burnet writes --
Besides those who had been always our Enemies, the Deserters who left us in the
former Reign are now our most bitter Enemies, and the Universities are
universally corrupted. June 24. Q. Elizabeth 's Act of Uniformity takes place;
when the English Common Prayer Book is to be used through the Kingdom, upon Pain
of Loss of Benefices and Promotions: the like Loss are they also subject to who
Refuse the Oath of the Queen 's Supremacy. Ke^ble.


And now! -- the sudden Change! For Stryp^ informs us That soon after this, the
Queen's Commissioners go through the Kingdom to administer the Oath and see the
Act of Uniformity observed: And then Eachard from Cambden and Burn^t, tells us,
The Oath of Supremacy was offered to the Popish Bishops and all other
Ecclesiastical Persons: that as many as refused the Oath, were turned out of
all their Preferments: and that of the 9400 Benefices then named in England, 14
Bishops, Cambden numbers but 14 Bishops, and yet gives the Names of 15.
6 Abbots, 12 Deans, 12 Arch Deacon^, 15 Heads of Colleges, 50 Prebendaries,
and 80 Rectors of Parishes [but 189 in all] was the whole Number that were
Deprived; Or as Bp Burnet expresse^ it, Left their Benefices on the Account of
Religion. Strype says, That D'Ews Journal reckons but 177, who left their
Livings; but that a Volumn in the Cotton Library reckon^ 13 Deans and 14 Arch
Deacons; and so 192 in all: And that a Book supposed to be Cardinal Allen's,
reckons 12 Deans, 14 Arch Deacons, above 60 Canons, above 100 Priests, and 20
Doctors.

Now there being about 14 Roman Catholic Arch Deacons Deprived in 1559, and 15
Protestant Arch Deacons about three Years after in the List above, of those who
were for Removing the Ceremo^^es and carrying the Reformation further; of whom
10 at least had been famous Exiles; It seems that most of the (...) Arch
Deacons in the Convocation with others among the ^^^ctors in Proportion, who
stiffly adhered to the Ceremo^^^^ ^ere of the Popish Clergy Cox had written of,
who stood like Rocks till June 24 or May 20, 1559, and then came over to save
their Places

To this Account, Mr. Cambden adds -- Most of the Popish Priests though it it more
behooveful for themselves and their Religion to swear Obedience to their
Prince, renouncing the Pope's Authority, were it for nothing else but that they
might shut the Protestants out of their Churches, and with all be able to
relieve the Wants of those of their own Side who were thrust out: and this they
though it to be pious Wisdom and in a manner meritorious. Burnet adds, The Popish
Clergy, when they saw no Appear^ance of any new Change, did generally comply
with the L^ws then made; but in so untoward a Manner that they made it very
visible that what they did was against their Heart and Conscience: So compliant
were the Papists generally: and indeed the Bishops after this time had the same
Apprehension of the D^nger into which Religion was bro't by the Juglings of the
greatest Part of the Clergy, who retained their Affections to the old
Superstition which those in K. Edward's Time had. And Eachard adds, 'Twas
strongly believed that the greatest Part complied against their Consciences and
would have been ready for another Turn if the Queen had Died while that Race of
Incumbents lived, and the next Successor had been of another Religion

But every knowing Reader may likewise add, That as This is indeed agreeable to
the common Practice of Mankind in Public Changes of Religion, as well as the
known Characters of that Race of Ministers who kept their Places in those
Religious Revolutions: so if Preferments kept the Lovers of the Popish
Superstition in the Church; for the same Reason these Preferments would
successively d^aw in their Relatives, Friends and others of the ^^me Principles
and Spirit, who would be as averse as (...) to any (...) Reformation. And if we
allow but 800 ^^^rgymen (...) England, which is but Half Arch Bishop (...)
Number; then 39 to 1 of those stiff Roman Catholics, (...) that time conformed
^o keep their Places. And These, with their Successors* were the Highflying.
Party in the Church of England, stiff Adherers to the old Popish Ceremonies,
Opposers of a thorough Reformation, and Haters of those who labored for it. It
is therefore rather a Wonder that so many Reformers got into the Convocation of
1562, 3; and that so many joined with them in the Purity of Doctrine, as
expressed in the Original of the 39 Articles.

But, as Fuller tells us, Though none of these Articles were ratified by
Parliament till 9 Years after; yet the Bishops conceiving themselves empowered
by their Canons, begin to show their Authority in urging the Clergy to
subscribe to the Liturgy, Ceremonies and Discipline; and such as refuse are
branded with the Name of PURITANS. And from this Time forward, the Church
divided into these two Parties, (1) The CONFORMI^TANS, who were for Retaining
the unscriptural Ceremonies. (2) The PURITANS, who were for Rejecting them and
carrying the Reformation toPerfection, conforming Her entirely to SCRIPTURE
RULE, and reducing Her to the Apostolical Purity in Discipline and Wo^sh^p, as
well as Doctrine. Of the Co^formitans, there were these two Subdivisions, (1)
The High-Flyers were for retaining them as Things they though it venerable for
Antiquity, though not bro't into the Church in the Apostles Times, but after she
declined from her primitive Simplicity; as also on the Account of their
imagined Decency, they judged them expedient to be added to the Christian
Institution (2) Others were more Low and moderate, as being of the same Opinion
and Desire with the Puritans; but were for retaining them at present for
Prudential Reasons only; partly to gain the Papists, of whom there were then
great Numbers in the Kingdom, and partly in Submission to the Queen, who
appeared fond and zealous for Pomp and Ceremony in Religious Matters; but were
in Hopes of removing them afterward: as appears from Bp. Jewel, Bp. Horn and
Bp Grindal's Latin Letters in Strype and Burnet. The Puritans therefore found
themselves embarrassed not only with the High-flying Party in that and the
following Reigns; but even the QUEEN herself and her Successors JAMES I. and
CHARLES I. were their continual Prosecutors.

As to Q ELIZABE^^ Cambden tells us, That to seve^ Protestants she (...);
others into her Privy Council, who were of Q. (...) Council before and of the
same Religion with Her: That she had no contemptuous [i. e. she had a high]
Opinion of the Cross, of the Virgin Mary and the Saints [i. e. the Saints
canonized by Popes and worshi^ed by Papists] and would not suffer others to
speak unreverently of them. Jewel in Burnet on April 10. 1559, laments, The
want of Zeal in promoting the Reformation, that the Queen had softened the Mass
much, but there were many Things amiss left in it; and that she could not be
prevailed upon to put the Crucifix out of her Chapel. And Eachard says, She
loved Magnificence in Religion, which made her inclinable to some former
Ornaments, Burnet had called them some old RITES her Father had Retained:
[which were C^ucifix^s. Lights, etc.] But Eachard gives them the finer Name of
Ornaments.
and even Images in Churches. Yea she grew so superstitious, that when she was
above 60 Years old and her decaying Nature required; yet she would not eat a
B^t of Flesh for the 40 Days of Lent, as being against the Canons, without a
solemn License from her own Arch-Bp. Whitgift, [who depended wholly on Her for
the Power to grant it] nor would she be easy with one General License, but must
have it renewed every Year for several Years before she Died: as we learn from
Fuller. At first indeed she indulged the Puritans who were known to be her
steady Friends: But on Ian. 25. 1564, 5, she began to grow severe upon 'em, and
Arch Bishop Parker, with some other Bishops followed her Directions; yea when
she and her Council flag'd, the Arch Bishop stirred them up to give Him further
Power to vex them.

The Puritans seemed at first for retaining Episcopacy in the Diocesan Form in
General: For they accepted of Prebendships, Arch Deaconries, Deaneries,
Bishoprics, and Grindal of Arch-bishopricks: though they knew these were not of
Divine Appointment; yet they seemed to judge 'em as Prudential Methods for
preserving Order; and so intervoven with the national Constitution, they could
not well be sundred But they insisted the Hierarchy ought to be Reformed: that
the Spiritual Courts, the Com^issary Courts, the Courts of Faculties, etc
invented in the Times of Popery, and managed according to the Canon Laws, which
are the Decr^^s of Popes, almost infi^nite in Number, all with their Processes
in Latin, and exceeding intricate; who for Money give out Licenses and
Dispen^sations even from the said Laws themselves, and change the Penances of
Crimes for Money, etc. that these Offenses t^ pious People be removed: That
Nonresidence of Ministers i^ their Parishes, with their Pluralities of
Benefices, be disallow^ed; and that the Godly Discipline in the Primitive
Church s^ often wished for in the Common Prayer, might be revived, and
exercised not according to the Popes Decrees, but according to the Scriptures
only: That Ecclesiastical Censures be merely Spiritual, and for none butCrimes
condemned in Scripture: That the Power of Choosing Parish Ministers before they
be Presented by the Patrons to the Bishop^ for Ordination, be restored to the
Parochial Churches; and that their Ministers and Church Wardens be allowed to
admonish and suspend immoralMembers from their Communion.

If now the ^^scriptural Parts of the Common Prayer had been removed, or the
Ceremonies left indifferent, the Popish Habits changed for more comely
Garments, the Pope's Decrees, with the Inquisition Oath called Ex Officio,
abolished, By the Oath Ex Officio, the Swearers were obliged on Oath before the
Ecclesiastical Courts, to answer every Question proposed, both against
themselves and others, or go to Prison.
and the Hierarchy thus reformed; the General Frame of Diocesan Episcopacy had
no doubt remained untouched, and almost all the People of England had continued
in it without Uneasiness. But the Qu^^n with some of the superior C^^rgy
opposing such a Reformation, they employ their Power to crush the Puritans; by
requiring their Ministers Subscription to the Habits, the Ceremonies in the
Common Prayer, all the 39 Articles and the Queen's Injunctions; though the
Parliament had yet appointed no Subscription.

Upon this, as Strype relates, Those 2 eminent Men of Oxford and Heads of the
chief Colleges, Dr. Sampson Dean of Christ's Church, with Dr. Humfrey,
President of Magdalen College and Regius Professor of Divinity, appear at the
Head of the Puritans. In March, 1564, 5, Dr. Sampson is Deprived* and about 30
[ Neal from Strype's Life of Parker, says 37*] Ministers in London alone, are
Suspended, and some of them Deprived. And thus the Severities on the Puritans
begin: wherein some of the Ministers were Suspended; some Deprived; some are
Fined; some Imprisoned; yea in 1566, Sampson and Humfrey in Burnet write, that
Many of the People are put in Prison, because they would not provide Godfathers
and Godmothers for Baptizing their Children. But while the Puritan Ministers
are Deprived, the Papists comply and triumph: and an Author who Strype supposes
was Sir T. Smith, or Secretary Cecil, says, that In 1569 and before, Papists
were frequent in Church, in Court, i^ Place; that Popish Priests still enjoy
the great Ecclesiast^^cal Livings, without Recantation or Pen^ance; yea in
Simoniacal Heaps Cathedral Churches are stuffed with them; the very Spies and
Promoters of Q. Mary's Time are cherished, etc. Yea Strype informs us, That
notwithstanding the repeated Risings of the Papists against the Queen in 1569
and 70, defacing and taring Bibles, etc; she on June 15. 1570 Declared in the
Star Chamber, that she would not have any of their Consciences unnecessarily
si^ted, to know what Affection they had to the old Religion

However, the more the Puritans suffer, the more the People search the
SCRIPTURE, to which Appeals are made in these Religious Matters: and the more
they grow acquainted with this inspired Rule of Worship; the more they discover
of the Popish Superstitions, the more abhor them, the more prefer the Divine
Institutions, the more pure they desire the Worship of the Church to be: And
Strype inform^ us* That the Puritans grew both in City and Country, and not
only among the lower Sort, but also in the Universities: that in December 1565,
the Fellows and Scholars in St John's College in Cambridge, with the Allowance
of Dr. Longworth the Master, to the Number of near 300, threw off the Surplice
with one Consent: that in Trinity College, all but 3, by Mr. Cartwright's
[Influence] and many in other Colleges were ready to follow their Example. And
from Fuller and Strype we learn, That the House of Commons in the Parliaments
of 1566, 1571, 1572, 1575, 1580, 1585, and 1587 labored earnestly for a
further Reformation; but the Queen would never allow it.

The only Act that established the Articles in that and the ^wo following
Reigns was made in 1571; and yet this Act takes so much Care of the Puritans,
as to require no more of Ministers, then to Declare their Assent before the
Bishop of the Diocese to all the Articles of Religion which ONLY concern the
Confession of the true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments
comprised in the Book imprinted entitled Articles, etc, and to subscribe the
same. Yet now, Fuller says, The Bishops urge Subscription to the 39 Articles
more severely than before: And Strype, that by Force of this Act many Ministers
were deprived in this and the following Years. The Puritan Ministers were
indeed as ready as any to subscribe according to the s^id Act; i. e. To all the
Articles of Religion which ONLY concern the Confession of the true Christian
Faith and the Doctrine of the Sacraments: which are commonly called the
Doctrinal Articles. Yet under Color of this Act, the Bishops Deprive them for
not subscribing to all the other without Exception.

But the Queen and Bishops growing more severe on the Puritans, it only
alienates them more from the Hierarchy, as well as the Ceremonies, and turns
their Minds to the Presbyterian D scipline. And though many of their Clergy were
Deprived and Silenced; yet many others, by theFavour of several Great Men in
Court and Council, Such as the Earl of Leicester, Sir Francis Knollis,
Secretary Walsingham and others. (See Strype and Fuller.)
stay in their Places upon using the less offensive Parts of the Liturgy,
without Subscription. And now Bancroft and Cowell tell us, A Bp Bancroft, in
his Dangerous Positions; and William Cowell, D. D. a Writer against the
Puritans, in his Examination etc. Printed 4 to, London, in 1604.
that On Nov. 20. 1572, this Puritan Part of the Clergy began to Erect a
Presbytery at Wandsworth in Surrey: which Fuller says, Was the first Born of
all Presbyteries in England, and names 16 of the Clergy belonging to it; that
May 8. 1582, there was a Synod of three score Ministers [i. e. Church
Ministers] of Cambridgshire, Suffolk and Norfolk, at Cockfield in Suffolk; and
the Summer following another in Cambridge at the Commencement; that April 10.
1588, was another of the Warwickshire Classis at Coventry; that by Sept. 1.
1590, the Presbyterian Discipline so grew in the Church, that their Classes
spread into diverse other Parts of the Kingdom, and had their Assemblies at
London, Cambridge, Oxford, Northampton, Kittery, Warwick, Rutland, Leicester,
Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, and other Places; but in 1591, the High Commission and
Star Chamber Courts dissolved them: that in the Spring of 1603* there were 750
Ministers [i e. Church Ministers] in 25 of the 40 Counties of England, and 12
of Wales, who Petitioned King James I, to remove the Ceremonies, the Public
Reading the Books of Apochrypha, Non-Residence, Pluralities, and the Popish
Canons. And Rushworth tells us that in 1626, the Country was so overspread with
Puritans, that Williams Bp. of Lincoln would not meddle against them, and said
He was sure they would carry all at last.

Yet all this while, there were but few SEPARATIONS from the Church
established. Nor would the Law allow them in England till K. William's Time.
Upon the first Depriving the London-Ministers in the Spring of 1566, Neal and
the Register say, their Churches were shut up and their People scattered. Bp
Grindal on Aug. 27. 1566, writes, that many of the more learned Ministers
seemed to be about leaving their Ministry: and many of the People consulted of
making a Secession from us and of gathering in private Assemblies; but the
greater Part is come to a better Mind. I rather more precisely follow Grindal's
Latin, than Burnet's more loose Translation.
Yet as the Register tells us, In the Spring of 1567, an Hundred of them
absenting from the Parish Churches, gathered together many times and made
Assemblies, using Prayers, Preaching, and ministering Sacraments after the
Geneva-manner: but on June 20, many are seized, and put in Prison; next Day
bro't before theBp of London and other of the Queen'sCommissioners': and Neal
from Strype's Life of Grindal, says that Bolton with 23 other Men and 7 Women,
were for this sent to Bridewell and kept there a Year: which seems to brake up
their Assembly: and This I suppose was the same separate Church Mr. A^^sworth
mentions, whereof Mr. FITS was Pastor and Bolton one of the Elders, in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. In his Counterpoyson, or Reply to Sprint,
Barnard and Crawshaw. Printed Quarto 1608.
Yet Fuller observes, Though the Queen proceeded severely against them, their
Party daily increased.

The next Separation made was by ROBERT BROWN, who as Fuller says, was bred at
Corpus Christi College in Cambridge, began to Preach at Norwich in the
beginning of 1581, against Bishops, and Ordination of Ministers as well as
Ecclesiast call Courts and Ceremonies: And Neal, that sometime after, He denied
the Established Church to be a tru^ Church and her Ministers true Ministers,
renounced Communion with her not only in Ceremonies and Sacraments, but even in
Hearing the Word and Public Prayer* and gathered a separate Church of his own
Principles; but were quickly forced to fly and settle at Middleburgh in
Zealand: and from him the Seperatists were at first called Brownists; till Mr.
Robinson reduced them to milder Principles and Tempers

But the Bishops violentMeasures, [as Neal observes] instead of reconciling the
Puritans to the established Church, drove them further off, and carried many
into a total Separation from Her. For in 1592, a Company set up another Church
at London; choosing Mr. Francis Johnson Pastor, and Mr. Greenwood Teacher: who
with 54 of their Church were soon seized by the Bishop's Officers and sent to
several Goals: where some were loaded with Irons, some shut up in Dungeons,
some beat with Cudgels, some both Men and Women Perished, Mr. Greenwood and
Barrow executed: Others kept in close Prison for 4 or 5 Years; and then being
banished, [as we learn from Bailey,] Mr. Johnson with some of his People set up
their Church at Amsterdam: where he was succeeded by the learned Ainsworth; and
He by Mr. Cann, the Author of a valuable Margin to our English Bible. In 1596,
they Publish their Confession of Faith, with the Grounds of their Separation;
Reprinted with their Apology in 4to. 1604

But their Sufferings and Writings soon increased their Numbers; and more of
the warmer Puritans embraced their Doctrines, left the Public Churches, and
met in Private Houses for a Purer Worship. But then they lost the name of
Puritans, and received that of the Separatists: the far greater part of the
Puritans remaining still in the Church; writing with Zeal against the
Separation; and as Sprint, on their behalf in 1608, expresses it: -- A
Separation we deny not from the Corruptions of the Church wherein we live; in
Judgment, Profession, Practice -- for which so many of Both Parts [or Par^ies
i. e. of Puritans and Separatists] have suffered and do suffer so many T^^^igs:
But the Difference i^, We [i. e. the Puritan^] suffer for separating i^ the
Ch^^ch; You, [i. e. the Sepa^ratists] out of the Church etc.

By comparing their ancient Writings, I find the Sepa^ratists and Puritans
agreed in these two Particulars (1) in their Belief of the same Doctrinal
Articles of the Church of England. (^) in their Offense with her unscriptura^
Parts of Worship, unscriptural Canons and Courts of Disci^pline, and
unsc^iptural Power of Bishops. But in this they chiefly differed --

That whereas the People in every Parochial Congregation through the Kingdom,
containing all Sorts of Persons both R^lig ous and Pro^ane, make up a Parochial
Church under one Presbyter* and greatNumbers of these Parochial Churche^ make
up a Diocesan Church under one Diocesan Bishop; and several of these Diocesan
Churches make up a Provincial Church under one Arch Bishop; and the two
Provincial Churches in the Kingdom, viz. of York and Canterbury make up a
Na^ional Church under one Primate, viz. the A. Bishop of the latter; in which
National Church there were about Forty different Sorts of Officers, as among
the Papists: The Separatists held that neither of these Churches were such sort
of Churches, not their Officers such sort of Officers as CHRIST has instituted,
neither for Matter, Form, nor Power: The Matter of Right, Christian Churches
being only visible Saints separate from the Rest of the World, or as the 19th
Article of the Church of England has it, a Congregation of Faith^ul Men, or
Faithful Christians; the Form being a voluntary Consociation of such faithful
Christians, not forced by Humane Sanctions; and their Powers being confined to
the mere Laws of CHRIST, both in Worship, Government, and Discipline. From such
un^scriptural Churches, they therefore judged themselves obliged to separate:
and set up such sort of Churches and Church Officers, Discipline, and Worship
ONLY as they found in the Apostles Days. And then the Church of England Order,
Discipline and Worship being not according to CHRIST's Pure Appointment, but
polluted with Humane Mixtures which she refused to leave; the Separatists at
first went further, and rigidly renounced Communion both with Her and her
Officers, us Popish and Antichristian, and even with those who held Communion
with Her. But as for their Censoriousness, I cannot find but the Church of
England Writers against them were as censorious and ^igid in those Times as
Theirs.

But the Puritans allowed the Faithful Christians of the several Parishes to be
true Christian Churches, and their qualified Ministers to be true Christian
Ministers: that neither their being restrained by Humane Laws in the Exercise
of the Powers and Privileges CHRIST had given them; nor their having by such
Laws, both corrupt Members, Canons and Ways of Worship imposed upon them,
neither destroyed their Rights nor Christian Character: and that since a
Separation was not allowed by the then reigning Powers, and their setting up
Purer Churches within the Kingdom was no^ practicable; they therefore judged
they ought to remain in the Church Established, groaning under their Burdens,
and laboring for her Reformation.

Mr. Robinson at first indeed went off among the more rigid Separatists in
1602: but as Bailey informs us, by conversing in Holland with Dr. Ames and Mr.
Parker, He grew more moderate; as we observed before; yet insisting that the
unscriptural Ceremonies, Canons, and mixed Communion in the Church of England,
were sufficient Grounds of Separating from Her, and of erecting Churches on the
Scripture-Bottom; without Denying Communion to her Pious Members when they
desired it of Him.

But how strenuously so ever the Puritans opposed the Separation; yet He was so
well acquainted with them, that in his Answer to Mr. Barnard in 1610. He says,
-- I doub^ not but Mr. Barnard and a Thousand more Ministers in the Land, were
they secure of the Magistrates Sword, and might they go on with his good
License; would wholly Shake off their Canonical Obedience to their Ordi^ari^s*
neglect their Citations and Censures, and refuse to Sue in their Courts: Could
they but obtain License from the Magistrate to use the Liberty they are
persuaded CHRIST has given them; they would (...) ^^^ke (...) the Prelates
Yoke, and draw no longer (...) ^he sam^ in spiritual Communion with all the
(...) in the Land but would brake those Bonds of Iniq^i^^ etc Go^ (...) also
tre^ting of the Afflic^ion^ o^ M^ (...) P^^ple in Holland and of the Grounds of
their Removing to America, says -- It was though it that if a better and easier
Place of Living could be had, it would draw many and take away those
Discouragements: yea their Pastor would often say, that many of those who ^^th
wrote and preached now against them, if they were in a Place where they might
have Liberty, and live comfortably; would do as they did.

But a farther Account of the Rise, Sufferings, Principle^ and Progress, both
of the Puritans and Separatists, I must refer to the Authors beforementioned;
especially Mr. N^AL's elaborate and valuable History of the Puritans in 2
Octavos: which was a Branch of English History the Nation wanted, and which
ought to be read by every Lover of Religious Liberty.

I shall only observe, that Arch Bishop PARKER Dying in May 1575; GRINDAL
succeeded Him, who grew more moderate, and the Church enjoyed some Quiet: For
which ^ach^veral calls Him -- That false Son of the Church and perfidious
Prelate. But he deceasing in July, 1583, WHITGIFT is made Arch Bishop of
Canterbury: who, as we learn from Fuller, Strype and the Register, persecutes
the Puritans and Separatists with unr^lenting Rigor to his Death in February
1603, 4: as does also his Successo^ BANCROFT to his -- in Nov. 1610. And then
ABBOT (...) set in his Place; though he shows no Mercy to those of the
Separation; yet seeing the Puritans more strictly adhere to the Doctrinal
Articles than the rest of the Church, grows more indulgent to them till October
1627; when K. CHARLES I. Se^questers him from his Jurisdiction and transfers it
to Bishop LAUD and others; as we read in Eachard. Who says, LAUD was an
aspiring and fiery Man, a Lover of Pomp and Ceremony, an active Opposer of
Antiarminianism, a mortal Opposer of Puritans; that his Heart was entirely set
upon the Advancement and Grandeur of the Church [i. e. not the Laical, but
Clerical Part; or as Eachard in another Place more clearly calls it -- the
Advancement of the Clergy's Grandeur] which the Arch Bishop brought to that
Hight, as it showed rather a Rivalship than Resemblance of the Church of ROME:
In which He had the hearty Concurrence of the King; and grew in such Favor
with Him, as to be made Bishop of London in 1628, Arch Bishop of Canterbury in
1633, and to Govern without a Rival in Church and State. Fuller says He was
over severe in his Censures; in the Star Chamber wa^ always observed to concur
with the severer side; and that it was most apparent He endeavored a
Reconciliation between ROME and ENGLAND. And theContinuation of Baker's
Chronicle viz. That Edition of Baker's Chronicle, Printed in 1660.
, -- That He was a buisy Man, over-violent in his Proceedings, and never ceased
to Persecute the PURITANS.

Of these English Puritans were the greater Part of the Settlers of the
MASSACHUSETTS Colony. They had been chiefly Born and Brought up in the National
Church, and had hitherto lived in Communion with Her. As their Ministers had
been Ordained by her Bishops, they had Officia^ed in her Parochial Churches,
and till now had made no Secession from them: though with Multitudes of others,
laboring under grievous Impositions, conflicting with many Difficulties, and
looking earnestly for better Times; till the High-flying Bishops both increased
the Ceremonies, and grew so rigorous in imposing them, as to allow no Worship
in the Church without them: yea so severely prosec^te those who could not in
Conscience use them, as to let them live no longer in their Native Land in
Quiet. Finding therefore the Impositions growing, loosing all fur^ther Hopes of
Reformation and Indulgence There; and NEW ENGLAND opening Her Arms to embrace
them: they judged they now ought to improve the Offer^* and rather choose a
hideous Wilderness Three Thousand Miles across the Ocean; that Here being Free
from all Restraint, they might set up Churches in their Worship, Matter, Form
and Discipline, entirely after the New Testament Model; enjoy these great and
christian LIBERTIES without Disturbance, and transmit them as what they
accounted the Dearest Legacy to their perpetual Successors.

SECT. II.
THE Situation of Sal^m pleasing us not [for the Capital Town] we consult
about some other: to this Purpose some are sent to the Bay to search up the
Rivers for a convenient Place; who returning, report they have sound a good one
upon Mistick River: But others seconding these, find another we like better, 3
Leagues up Charles River: I suppose this was at the Place whence the Dorchester
People were ordered to remove.
Whereupon we unship ourGoods into other Vessels, and in

July With much Cost and Labor, bring them to CHARLESTOWN, on the North side
the Mouth of Charles River (dd)

July Arrive at CHARLSTOWN, Gov. Winthrop, Dep. Gov. Dudley, Sir Richard
Saltonstall, Mr. Johnson, Ludlow, Nowell, Pynchen, and Bradstreet, with the
Massachusetts Colony CHARTER; as also Mr* Wilson and Phillips Ministers, with
about Fifteen Hundred People By Mr. Wilson's Yearly Allowance out of the
Public Treasury Beginning on July 10, ( Mcr) It seems as if on that Day, the
Fleet arrived at Charlstown: and Johnson, saying that July 12, or thereabouts
[this People] first set foot on this Western End of the World; where arriving
in Safety, Men Women and Children. On the North side of Charles River they
Landed near Noddel's Island. By this Western End of the World, He may mean at
Charlstown: But if He meant at Salem, He should have said June 12.
brought over in 12 Ships from England (tcr) By these Twelve Ships seem to be
meant (1) The Mary and John. (2) Arbella. (3) Jewel (4) Ambrose. (5) May
flower. (6) Whale. (7) Talbot (8) William and Francis. (9) Trial. (10) Charles.
(11) Su^cess. (12) Hopewell. ^or the Lion brought other People for Plymouth, or
came on the Penobscut Business. But the Charlstown Records unaccountably
mistake in placing all this History in 1629.
But many o^ our People being Sick of Fevers and the Scurvy, we are thereby
unable to carry up our Ordnance and Baggage so far ( dd) the Governor and
several Patentees dwell in the Great H^use last Year built by Mr. Graves, and
the rest of their Ser^vants: the Multitude set up Cottages, Booths and Tents
about the Town-Hill (tcr) and their Meeting Place is abroad under a Tree, where
Mr. Wilson and Phillips Preach etc. ( crc)

[The State of the Neighboring Places on the MASSACHUSETTS BAY at their
Arrival.]

On Noddel's Island lives Mr. Samuel Maverick; a Man of a very loving and
courteous Behavior, very ready to entertain Strangers: On this Island with the
Help of Mr. David Thompson, He had built a small Fort with four Great Guns to
Protect him from the Indians* About a Mile distant upon the River runs a small
Creek which takes it'sName from Mr. Edward Gibbons, who dwelt there for some
Years after, and became Major General. On the South side of Charles River
Mouth, on a Point of Land called Blaxton's Point lives Mr. Blaxton (j) where He
only has a Cottage ( tcr) the Neck of Land from which the Point runs being in
Indian named SHAWMUT, afterward BOSTON ( tcr) To the S. E. thereof near
Thompson's Island, live some few Planters more. Whether he means the few People
at Mount Wollaston, Weymouth and Nantasket, seems uncertain.
These were the first Planters of those Parts, having some small Trade with the
Natives for Bever Skins; which moved them to make their abode in those Places,
and are found of some Help to the New Colony ( j)

But having had a long Passage; some of the Ships 17, some 18 Weeks* a coming,
many People arrive Sick of the Scurvy, which in^creases for want of Houses and
by reason of wet Lodging in their Cottages (tcr) having no fresh Food to
cherish them ( j) And though the People are very pitiful and loving: yet the
Sickness with other Distempers so prevails, that the Well are not able to tend
them: Upon which many Die and are Buried about the Hill (tcr) yet 'twas
admirable to see with what christian Courage many carry it amidst these
Calamities. ( j)

July ^5* Lord's Day, after the Evening Exercise, Mr. Johnson at Salem,
receives a Letter from Gov. Winth^^p at Charlstown, representing the Hand of
G^D upon them in the prevailing Sickness, whereby diverse are taken away:
signi^fying they had concluded He is to be sought in Righteousness: to this
End, the next Friday is set apart to humble themselves before Him and seek Him
in his Ordinances: that then such Godly Persons among them as know each other,
may Publicly at the End of their Ex^ercise make known their Desire and
practice the same by solemnly entering into Covenant with Him to walk in his
Ways: that since they live in three distinct Places, each having Men of Ability
with them, there to observe the Days, and become three distinct Bodies: I
suppose th^se three Places are Charlestown, Dorcheste^ and Sal^m
not then intending rashly to proceed to the choice of Officers, or admitting
others to their Society but a few well known: Promising after to receive in
such by Confession of Faith, as shall ap^pear to be fitly qualified: they
earnestly in^treat the Church of Plymouth to set apart the same Day for the
same Ends; beseeching the Lord as to withdraw his Hand of Correction, so to
direct and establish them in his Ways. (B) July 30. Friday, the Day of solemn
PRAYER and FASTING kept at Charlestown: when Gov Winthrop, Dep. Gov. Dudley,
Mr. Johnson, and the Rev. Mr Wilson, first enter into Church Covenant, and l^y
the Foundation of the CHURCHES both of Charlestown (B) [and after^wards of
Boston]

Aug. 1. Lord's Day five more join to the Church at Charlestown (B) which by
the Order in Boston Church Records, are Mr. Nowell, T Sharp, Bradstreet,
[Assistants] Mr Wm. Gager [Surgeon] and Mr Wm C^lborn [afterwards a Ruling
Elder^ (cbr) who with others quickly added, chus^ Mr. Wilson for their Pastor:
the greater Num^ber at this Time intending no other than to settle Here, where
the Governor orders his House to be cut and framed. But the Weather being hot,
many sick and others faint upon their long Voyage, People grew uneasy for want
of Water: For though this Neck abounds with good Water, yet they only found a
brackish Spring by the Water side in the Sand on the W. side of the N W. Field
(tcr) which was not to be come at but when the Tide was down ( j) and could not
supply half the Necessities of that Multitude: at which time the Death of so
many was thought to be owing to the Want of good Water. (tcr)

This made several go aboard upon Discovery ( tcr) Some go over to Shawmut on
the South side of the River. (j) Some go without Charlestown-Neck and travel up
into the Main till they came to a Place well watered: whether Sir R*
Saltonstall with Mr. Phillips and several Others went and settled a Plantation,
and called it WATERTOWN. In the mean time, Mr. Blackston of Shawmut coming over
informs the Gov of an excellent Spring There* withal inviting and soliciting
him Thither (tcr) [Upon which it seems that Mr. Johnson with several others
soon Remove and Begin to Settle on that side of the River.]

Aug. 2 One of Plymouth writes from Charlstown to his Friend at Plymouth -- The
sad News Here is, that many are Sick and many are Dead: the LORD in Mercy look
upon them: Some are entered into Church Covenant -- and others it is like will
add themselves to them daily: the LORD increase them both in Number and
Holiness -- Here is a Gentleman one Mr. Cottington a Boston Man; who told me
that Mr. COTTON's Charge at Hampton was, That they should take Advice of them
at PLYMOUTH* and should do nothing to offend them: I suppose this should be
Coddington; and by Boston I conclude He meant Boston in England; for Boston in
New England seems not yet to be named. And as by this only Passage of a L^tter
in Gov. Bradford's Mss History we find that the Rev. and famous Mr Cotton went
from Boston in Lincol^sh^re to take his Leave of his departin^ Friends at
South-Hampton; so by this we find he had better Ideas of the Plymouth People
than had been re^presented by their Enemies: and perhaps the Letter^ from Mr.
Endicot and others of Sal^m, might have give^ that Great and Learned Man with
others in England a different and more agreeable Apprehension of (...).
Here are diverse honest Christians desirous to see us; some out of Love they
bare us and the good Persuasion they have of us; others to see whether we be so
ill as they have heard* We have a Name of Holiness and Love to GOD and his
Saints; the LORD make us more and more answerable, that it may be more than
aName etc (B)

Aug. 20 Arrives in Charlestown-Harbour another Ship, called TheGift: who though
12 Weeks atSea, yet lost but one Passenger (H) and Dep Gov Dudley says, that
all the 17 Ships mentioned in Sec. I. Note 79, arrived safe in New England for
the increase of the Plantation here, this Year, 1630.

It having been reported in England, that there were now Provisions enough
Here, diverse Ships came not so well supplied as otherwise they would; and there
being miserable Damage of our Provisions at Sea; and yet some imprudently
selling much of the Remainder to the Indians for Bever; we fall into great and
threatening Straits for want of Food. Upon which the Governor and other
Gentlemen hire and dispatch away Mr. William Pierce with his Ship (tcr) the
Lion of Bristol (dd) of about 200 Tons, for Ireland, to Buy more ( tcr) and
come back with allSpeed; with whom goes Mr^ Revil, one of the five Undertakers
here; Mr Vas^sal, one of the Assistants, with his Family, and Mr. Bright the
Minister sent hither the Year before. (dd)

The M^rtality increasing many Died week^ly, yea almost daily: among whom were
Mrs Pynchon, Mrs Coddington, Mrs* Phillips* and Mrs Alcock a Sister of Mr.
Ho^ke^ (...) so that the Sh^p^ being now on their Return, some for England,
some for I^eland, there was not much less than an Hundred, some think many
more, partly ou^ of dislike of our Government, which restrained and punished
their Excesses, and partly through Fear of Famine, not seeing other means than by
their Labor to ^eed themselves, returned back: and glad were we so to be rid
of them. Others also afterward hearing of Men of their own Disposition at
Pascataway, went from us t^ them: whereby though our numbers were lessen^ed, yet
we accounted ourselves nothing weak^ned by their Removal (dd)

Aug. 23. The first Court of Assistants held at Charles^town (Mcr) on board the
Arb^lla* (j) Present Governor Win^^rop, Deputy Governor Dud^l^y, Sir R.
Sal^onstall, Mr. Ludlow, R^siter Nowell, T. Sharp, Pynchon, and Bradstreet:
wherein the first thing Propounded is, How the Ministers shall be maintained!
Mr. Wilson and Phillips only Proposed: and Ordered that Houses be Built for
them with convenient speed at the Public Charge. Sir. R. Saltonstall undertook
to see it done at his Plantation for Mr. Phillips; and the Governor at the
other Plantation for Mr. Wilson: Mr. Phillips to have Thirty Pounds a Year,
beginning at the first of September next; Mr. Wilson to have Twenty Pounds a
Year till his Wife come over, beginning at July 10 last; all this at the common
Charge, those of Mattapan and Salem ex^cepted. Ordered that Morton of Mount
Wollaston be sent for Presently: and that Carpenters, Joiners, Bricklayers,
Sawyers and Thatchers, take no more than two Shillings a Day, under Pain (...)
Shillings to Giver and Taker. (Mcr) and Mr. Bradstr^et chosen Secretary. (j)
Johnson says, Mr. WINTHROP was then chose Governor, and Mr. DUDLEY Deputy
Governor for the Rem^inder of the Year [which seems unlikely, having be^n chose
before in England.]


Aug. 27. F^yday, the first Ordination of an Elder in the Massachusetts Bay,
viz Mr. Wilson (sd 47) who is [now] made Pastor [or Teaching Elder] of the
Church at Charlestown (tcr) and whose Extent now reaches on both sides the
River. (j)

Aug. e. About this Time, (dd) Dies at Salem, and is soon after interred There,
the Lady ARBELLA, Wife of Mr. JOHNSON: who came from a Paradise of Delight and
Plenty she enjoyed in the Family of a noble Earldom into this Wilderness of
Straits; and now left her worthy Consort overwhelmed in Grief and Tears. ( H)

Sept. ^. Dies of a Fever, Mr. Gager, a skilful Surgeon, a right Godly Man, and
one of the Deacons of our Church at Charlestown: as also the Rev. Mr Higginson
of a Consumption ( dd) the first Teacher of the Church a^ Salem (H) a zealous
and profitable Preacher (dd) AEtat. 43 (cm) Mr. Morton says He Died about the
same time of the Year after his Ordination, in August: Dr C Mather says, in
August, and Mr. Hubbard on Aug. 6. But Dep. Governor Dudley writing about the
same Time; I choose to mention it in the same manner.


Sept. 7. The second Court of Assistants held at Charlestown: Present Governor
Winthrop, Deputy Governor Dudley, Sir R. Saltonstall, Mr. Johnson, Endicot,
Sharp, Nowell, Coddington, Ludlow, Rossiter, Pynchon, Bradstreet: Ordered that
Thomas Morton of Mount Wolaston shall presently be set in the Bilbowes, and
after sent Prisoner to England by the Ship called the Gift now returning
thither; that all his Goods shall be seized to Defray the Charge of his
Transportation, Payment of his Debts and to give satisfaction to the Indians
for a Canoe he took unjustly from them; and that hisHouse be Burnt down to the
Ground in sight of the Indians for their satisfaction for many wrongs he has
done them. Ordered that no Person shall Plant in any Place within the Limits of
this Patent without leave from the Governor and Assistants or major part of
them: that a Warrant shall presently be sent to Aggawam, to command those who
arePlanted There forth^with to come away; and that Trimoun^^in be called
BOSTON; Mattapan DORCHEST^R; and the Town upon Charles River WATER^TON. (Mcr)

Thus this remarkable PENINSULA, about two Miles in Length and one in Breadth,
in those times, appearing at High Water in the Form of two Islands who is Indian
Name was Shawmut; but I suppose on the account of three contiguous Hills
appearing in a range to those at Charlestown, by the English called at first
T^imountain, and now receives the Name of BOSTON. Which Deputy Governor Dudley
says, they had before intended to call the Place they first resolved on: and
Mr. Hubbard, that they gave this Name on the account of Mr. COTTON, [the then
famous Puritan Minister of Boston in England; for whom they had the highest
Reverence, and of whose coming over they were doubtless in some hopeful
Prospect] And from the late Judge Sewall in comparison with the Charlestown
Records, I learn, that this Town was settled under the Conduct of Mr. JOHNSON;
whom Mr. Hubbard calls, a worthy Gentleman of Note for Piety and Wisdom; and
the Rev. Mr. Danforth of Roxbury, styles him -- a right Nathaniel, eminent for
Piety and Virtue; and in another Place, a Gentleman of singular Piety and
Sincerity. In his Chronological Articles at the End of his Almanacks, Printed
in 1647 and 1649.


To this Town, the major Part of the Church in a little time Removes from
Charlestown; and so (...) increases, as that One Hundred fifty and one ^re
admitted by Oct. 14 1632, when they peaceably Divide into two Churches (tcr. c
br.)

Thus out of small BeginningsGreat Things have been produced by HIS HAND that
made all things, and gives Being to all things that are* and as one small
Candle may light a Thousand; so the Light Here Gov. Bradford adding this
immediately after the Article of Aug: 2. It seems uncertain whether by Here He
meant the Plymouth or Boston-Church: though I am apt to think the Latter.
kindled has shone to many, yea in some sort to our whole Nation: Let the
Glorious Name of JEHOVAH have all the Praise. (B)

But this Composure growing beyond my Expectation, and the Bookseller informing
me that if I now proceed to the End of this Second Section, as intended, it
will make the First Volume too unsizeable; I must ask the Reader to excuse my
referring the Rest to the Second Volume, and cl^sing this with the ADDITION of
some Passages Omitt^d in the Introduction, and the First Section of the II
Part. ADDITIONS to the Introduction.
Page Line ^ 7 NExt to V. the Roman EMPERORS (...) VI. the MONARCHS of the
Eastern ^mpire. last Next to Spring -- add --, till the Entrance of the IVth
Period; and then we Begin with the Julian Year, viz. the 1st of January. marg
Insert -- So the Chaldeans, Persians, Armenians, most other Eastern Nations,
and the ancient Astronomers who placed Aries the 1st of the Sign^ at the Vernal
Equinox; as also Virgil, Eusebius* Ambros^, Cyril, Austin, Bid, Melanchton,
Calvin, Scaliger, Lydiat, Bucholzer, Bunting, Coddoman, Kepler, Krechz^m,
M^rcer, Alsted, Spondan, Capellus, E. Simpson, Langius (see Lydiat, Alsted,
Strauchius) and so Dupin. 3 18 To Scaliger -- add. To Calvis^us -- add --
Bunting, Langius, Behmius, Frankenberger, To Alsted -- add -- Drake, 33 To
Rivetus -- add -- Langius, Ricciolius, Dupin, 34 To Ainsworth -- add --
Rawleigh, Drake, 35 To Allen -- add -- Marsham, In the 1st Line of the Margin
-- Insert --. Scali^ger says, It is so certain* that none has hitherto doubted
it. (De Emend Temp* Lib V) 5 11 Next to 96. ^ -- Insert -- 108 b Sodom etc.
Destroyed. 6 21 To Baylly -- add -- Strauchius, 8 5 To (...) at Years -- add
--, and (...) Additional (...) Spring of the Year to Aug. 27. 13 marg To Con^as
-- add -- Ieconias, 23 28 To Winter Solstice -- add -- [*] And in the Margin --
insert -- [*] Danet says -- at the New Mood 8 Days after: and Carry says -- on
the Day the Sun entered the 8th of Capricorn, which by theAncients was held to
be the Point of the Winter Solstice; and at 7 in the afternoon that Day, there
happened a New Moon at Rome. 39 27 To Tiber -- add -- [*] In the end of the
Margin -- Insert ]*] Here Calvisius says, the Caesarean INDICTION of 15 Years
begins, observed by the Greeks; but the Roman on Ian. 1. following, observed by
the Latins. But Petavius and Strauchius thus destinguish -- the Caesarian
begins Sept. 24; the Constantinopolitan, on Sept. 1; and the Pontifical or
Roman on Ian. 1. following. 43 2 To Western Empire -- add --, in 476. 51 19 To
Western Empire -- add --, in 800. 74 10 To 400) -- add -- (hl. st) Feb. 14 (
st) 89 2 To ( hl) -- add -- [*] 18 Insert -- 1534. Ian. 15, Parliament of
England meets: Enacts, that no Canons shall be made or put in Execution by the
Convocation of the Clergy, which shall be repugnant to theCustoms, Laws or
Statutes of the Realm, or to theKing's Prerogative, nor without his assent:
that none be Presented to the Pope or See of Rome for the Office of any Arch Bp
or Bp in the King's Dominions, nor send thither for any thing requisite for an
Arch Bp or Bp: and that noDispensations shall be sued for, nor Impositions Paid
to the Pope (k) 36 In the Margin -- Insert -- [*] The Act of Parliament omitted
in Keeble, but printed in Burnet, says Eight score thousand Pounds: So that
Stow is mistaken. 91 10 Before William Tindal -- Insert -- Oct. 7. ( fl) 95 3
To ( sl -- add -- or Feb. 28. ( Burnet) 96 30 To Oct. 25 -- add -- 31 To (c --
add -- Strada) In the Margin: after the note [28] -- add -- P^ti^ in taken in
saying Nov. 25. 97 17 To ( bc) -- add -- April, 98 7 To May 10. -- add -- (
^ls) or 11 ( pt) 20 To D -- add -- AEt. 43 ( p) To Francis II -- add -- AEt* 17
(p) After the Article of Dec. 17* -- add -- This Y, 3 Learned Preachers and 30
more Burnt in Spain for being Protestants: and had not the Inquisition put a
stop to these Reformers, the Protestant Religion had run through Spain like
Wildfire: People of all Degrees being won^derfully disposed There at this time
to embrace it ( Burnet) 100 1^ To ( hls) -- add --. 30 To July 24 -- add -- (
hls) or 25 ( bc) In the Margin, between note ^2 and 33 -- add -- * Buchanan and
Cambden say, Duke of Rot^say. After note 33 -- add July 24, the Resignation
signed; July, 25. entered on Record in the Council Book ( Burnet) 101 30 To
Dec. 13 -- add --. In the Margin -- Insert -- Speed says. Nov. 15. citing
Hackluyt in the Margin: which I have not now by me. 103 20 To 1587 -- add --
Wednesday. 30 To July 22 -- add -- [*] In the Margin after note [41] -- add --
[*] Spread says Aug. 1. and that not many Days after, He Died: But it is likely
Speed took this account from Petavius, or some French writer^; without reducing
Aug 1. N. S. to July 22. O. S. 104 After Line 14 -- Insert -- 1599. April 25.
OLIVER CROMWELL Born a^ Huntingdon; afterwardsLord Protector, etc. (His Life by
I. S) 1600. Nov. 19 Born to K JAM^S VI of Sc^tland. Prince CHARLES; afterward
K CHARL^S I etc ( Pointer, Salmon, Hu^ner and Anderson)

ADDITIONS to Part I. Sect. I.
14 3 To emp^oy'd by -- add -- the Earl of South Ha^pton and 1^ 23 To Given --
add -- [*] In the Margin -- Insert -- [*] Dr. Layt^n say^, that from June 25,
16^4. to Nov. 5. 1605, there were 400 Ministers Ejected, Silenced or Suspende^
by Virtue of these Canon^. 2^ 24 To 2 Ships -- add -- ( pc) 2 Natives, viz.
Sketwarroes and Dehamda (gr) 2^ To settle -- add -- ( sm) on a Westerly
Peninsula (pg) 29 To (sm) -- add -- [which I suppose is since called small
Point] and build a Fortifica^ion, which they named St. George's Fort (pg) In
the Margin, after note [11] -- add -- pg, Purchas's Pilgrimage. 23 3 To Mr. --
add -- [ Clifton and] 8 To Holland -- add -- ( B) with their Rev. Pastor Mr.
Clifton (cpr) In the Margin, after note [12] -- add -- ( cpr) Church of
Plymouth Records. 26 27 To therefore -- add -- with Mr. Robinson, 2^ 3 To (B)
[^4] -- add -- But the Rev. Mr. Clifton stays at Amsterdam, and There Dies (
^pr) 49 In the Margin, at the End of note [2^] -- add -- Mr. Wi^slow signifies
the same in his Brief Narration of the Grounds of the first Planting of
NEW ENGLAND; at the End of his Reply to Gorton, Printed 410 London. 1646. 6^ 1
To a Ship of 60 -- add -- ( Smith and Purchase say ^0) ^1 22 To Sail again --
add -- ( B) with about 120 Persons (sm ps) Aug. 22 ( sm) 23 ( ps) leave the
Coast of England (sm.ps) 24 To England -- add -- ( B) the next Day (sm ps) 72 1
To them; -- add. 6 To ^ail again -- add In the Margin, at ^he Beginning --
Insert --. Smit^ and Purchase say, they There discharge 20 of their Pass^ng^rs
Smith and Purchase say, with 100 Persons, besides ^ad^rs 80 l^st To the last
word -- add -- But by this we see Sir R. Baker greatly mistaken, as to the
Beginning of this Colony, by Placing it in 1624.

The End of the First Volume.

