A brief Narrative of the Case and Trial of John Peter Zenger, Printer of the
New York weekly Journal.
AS There was but one Printer in the Province of New York, that printed a
public News Paper, I was in Hopes, if I undertook to publish another, I might
make it worth my while; and I soon found my Hopes were not groundless: My first
Paper was printed, Nov. 5 th, 1733. and I continued printing and publishing of
them, I thought to the Satisfaction of every Body, till the January following;
when the Chief Justice was pleased to animadvert upon the Doctrine of Libels,
in a long Charge given in that Term to the Grand Jury, and afterward on the
third Tuesday of October, 1734. was again pleased to charge the Grand Jury in
the following Words.

Gentlemen; I shall conclude with reading a Paragraph or two out of the same
Book, concerning Libels; they are arrived to that Height, that they call loudly
for your Animadversion; it is high Time to put a Stop to them; for at the rate
Things are now carried on, when all Order and Government is endeavored to be
trampled on; Reflections are cast upon Persons of all Degrees, must not these
Things end in Sedition, if not timely prevented? Lenity, you have seen will not
avail, it becomes you then to enquire after the Offenders, that we may in a due
Course of Law be enabled to punish them. If you, Gentlemen, do not interpose,
consider whether the ill Consequences that may arise from any Disturbances of
the public Peace, may not in part, lie at your Door?

Hawkins, in his Chapter of Libels, considers three Points, 1st. What shall be
said to be a Libel. 2dly. Who are liable to be punished for it. 3dly. In what
Manner they are to be punished. Under the 1st. he says,. 7. Nor can there be
any Doubt, but that a Writing which defames a private Person only, is as much a
Libel as that which defames Persons entrusted in a public Capacity, in as much
as it manifestly tends to create ill Blood, and to cause a Disturbance of the
public Pea^^; however, it is certain, that it is a very high Aggravation of a
Libel, that it tends to scandalize the Government, by reflecting on those who
are entrusted with the Administration of public Affairs, which does not only
endanger the public Peace, as all other Libels do, by stirring up the Parties
immediately concerned in it* to Acts of Revenge, but also has a direct Tendency
to breed in the People a Dislike of their Governors, and incline them to
Faction and Sedition. As to the 2d. Point he says. 10. It is certain, not only
he who composes or procures another to compose it* but also that he who
publishes* or procures another to publish it are in Danger of being punished
for it; and it is said not to be material whether he who d^s^^r^s;es a Libel, ^
easy than to publish the most virulent Papers with the greatest Security if the
concealing the Purport of them from an illiterate Publisher, would make him
safe in the dispersing them: Also, it has been said, that if he who has either
read a Libel himself, or has heard it read by another, do afterward
maliciously read or report any Part of it in the Presence of others, or lend or
show it to another, he is guilty of an unlawful Publication of it. Also, it
has been holden, that the Copying of a Libel shall be a conclusive Evidence of
the Publication of it, unless the Party can prove, that he delivered it to a
Magistrate to examine it, in which Case the Act subsequent is said to explain
the Intention precedent. But it seems to be the better Opinion, that he who
first writes a Libel, dictated by another, is thereby guilty of Making of it,
and consequently punishable for the bare Writing; for it was no Libel till it
was reduced to Writing.

These, Gentlemen, are some of the Offenses which are to make Part of your
Enquiries; and if any other should arise in the Course of your Proceedings, in
which you are at a Loss, or conceive any Doubts, upon your Application here, We
will assist and direct you.

The Grand Jury not endicting me as was expected, the Gentlemen of the Council
proceeded to take my Journals into Consideration, and sent the following
Message to the general Assembly.

Die Jovis, 3 ho. P. M. 17 th of October, 1734.
A Message from the Council by Philip Cortlandt, in these Words, to wit.

That Board having had several of Zenger's New York weekly Journals, laid
before them, and other scurrilous Papers, tending to alienate the Affections of
the People of this Province from His Majesty's Government, to raise Seditions
and Tumults among the People of this Province, and to fill their Minds with a
Contempt of His Majesty's Government: And considering the pernicious
Consequences that may attend such growing Evils, if not speedily and
effectually put a Stop to. And conceiving that the most likely Method to put a
Stop to such bold and seditious Practices, to maintain the Dignity of His
Majesty's Government, and to preserve the Peace thereof, would be by a
Conferrence between a Committee of this Board, and a Committee of the Assembly;
it is therefore ordered. That the Gentlemen of this Board, NOW ASSEMBLED, or
any seven of them, be a Committee, to join a Committee of the House of
Representatives, in order to confer together, and to examine and enquire into
the said Papers, and the Authors and Writers thereof.

Which Message being read.

Ordered, That the Members of this House, or any fourteen of them, do meet a
Committee of the Council, at the Time and Place therein mentioned.

Die Veneris, 9 ho. A. M. 18 October, 1734.
Mr. Garretson from the Committee of this House reported, That they last Night
met the Committee of the Council, on the subject Matter of their Message of
yesterday to this House; and that after several Preliminaries between the said
Committees, the Gentlemen of the Council reduced to Writing, what they
requested of this House, and delivered the same to the Chairman, who delivered
it in at the Table, and being read, is in the Words following.

At a Committee of the Council held the 17 th of October, 1734
PRESENT.
Mr. Clarke. Mr. Harison. Dr. Colden. Mr. Livingston. Mr. Kennedy, Mr. Chief
Justice. Mr. Cortland. Mr. Lane. Mr. Horsmanden.
Gentlemen; The Matters we request your Concurrence in, are, That Zenger's
Pape^^, No. 7.47.48.49. which were read, and which we now deliver, be burnt by
the Hands of the common Hangman, as containing in them many Things derogatory
of the Dignity of His Majesty's Government, reflecting upon the Legislature,
upon the most considerable Persons, in the most Distinguished Stations in the
Province, and tending to raise Seditions and Tumults among the People thereof.

That you concur with us in the Addressing the Governor, to issue His
Proclamation, with a Promise of Reward for the Discovery of the Authors or
Writers of these Seditious Libels.

That you concur with us in an Order for Prosecuting the Printer thereof.

That you concur with us in an Order to the Magistrates, to exert themselves in
the Execution of their Offices, in order to preserve the public Peace of the
Province.

By Order of the Committee. Fred. Morris, Cl. Con.

Mr. Garretson delivered likewise to the House the several Papers referred to
in the said Request.

Ordered, That the said Papers be lodged with the Clerk of this House, and that
the Consideration thereof, and the said Request, be referred till Tuesday next.

Die Martis, 9 ho. A. M. 22 October, 1734.
The House according to Order proceeded to take into Consideration the Request
of a Committee of Council, delivered to a Committee of this House, on the 16 th
Instant, as likewise of the several Papers therein referred to. And after
several Debates upon the subject Matters, it was ORDERED THAT THE SAID PAPERS
AND REQUEST LIE ON THE TABLE.

The Council finding the General Assembly would not do any Thing about it, they
sent the following Message to the House.

Die Sabbati, 9 ho. A. M. 2 November, 1734.
A Message from the Council by Mr. Livingston, desiring this House to return by
him to that Board, the several seditious Journals of Zenger's No. 7.47.48.49.
which were delivered by a Committee of that Board to a Committee of this House,
the 17 th of October last, together with the Proposals of the Committee of that
Board, delivered therewith to a Committee of this House; and then withdrew.

On Tuesday the 5 th of November, 1734. the Quarter Sessions for the City of
New York began, when the Sheriff delivered to the Court AN ORDER, which was
read in these Words.

At a Council held at Fort George, in New York, the 2 d of November, 1734.
PRESENT, His Excellency William Cosby, Capt. General and Governor in Chief,
etc.
Mr. Clark. Mr. Harison. NB. Doctor Colden was that Day at Esopus, 90 Miles
from New York, though mentioned as (...)
Dr. Colden. Mr. Livingston. Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Chief Justice. Mr. Cortland. Mr.
Lane. Mr. Horsmanden.
Whereas by an Order of this Board, of this Day, some of John Peter Zenger's
Journals, entitled, The New York weekly Journal, containing the freshest
Advices, foreign and domestic, No. 7.47.48.49. were ordered to be burnt by the
Hands of the common Hangman, or Whipper, near the Pillory in this City, on
Wednesday the 6th Instant, between the Hours of Eleven and Twelve in the
Forenoon, as containing in them many Things tending to Sedition and Faction, to
bring His Majesty's Government into Contempt, and to disturb the Peace thereof,
and containing in them likewise, not only Reflections upon His Excellency the
Governor in particular, the Legislature in general, but also upon the most
considerable Persons in the most distinguished Stations in this Province. It is
therefore ordered, That the Mayor, and Magistrates of this City, do attend at
the Burning of the several Papers or Journals aforesaid, Numbered as above
mentioned.

Fred. Morris, D. Cl. Con.
To Robert Lurting, Esquire Mayor of the City of New York, and the Rest of the
Magistrates for the said City and County.
Upon reading of which ORDER, the Court forbad the Entering thereof in their
Books at that Time, and many of them declared, that if it should be entered,
they would have their Protest entered against it.

On Wednesday the 6 th of November, the Sherriff of New York moved the Court of
Quarter Sessions, to comply with the said Order, upon which one of the Aldermen
offered a protest, which was read by the Clerk, and approved of by all the
Aldermen, either expressly or by not objecting to it, and is as follows.

Whereas an ORDER has been served on this Court, in these Words.

[ The Order as above incerted.]

And whereas this Court conceives, they are only to be commanded by the King's
Mandatory Writs, authorized by Law, to which they conceive they have the Right
of showing Cause why they don't obey them, if they believe them improper to be
obeyed, or by ORDERS, which have some known Laws to authorize them; and whereas
this Court conceives THIS ORDER to be no Mandatory Writ warranted by Law, nor
knows of no Law that authorizes the making the Order aforesaid; so they think
themselves under no Obligation to obey it: Which Obedience, they think, would
be in them, an opening a Door for arbitrary Commands, which, when once opened,
they know not what Dangerous Consequences may attend it. Wherefore this Court
conceives it self bound in Duty (for the Preservation of the Rights of this
Corporation, and as much as they ^^n, the Liberty of the Press, and the People
of the Province, since an Assembly of the Province, and several Grand Juries,
have refused to meddle with the Papers, when applied to by the Council) to
protest against the ORDER aforesaid and to forbid all the Members of this
Corporation, to pay any Obedience to it, until it be shown to this Court, that
the same is Authorized by some known Law, which they neither know nor believe
that it is.

Upon reading of which, it was required of the Honorable Francis Harison,
Recorder of this Corporation, and one of the Members of the Council, (present
at making said Order) to show by what Law or Authority the said ORDER was made;
upon which he spoke in Support of it, and cited the Case of Doctor Sacheverel's
Sermon, which was by the House of Lords ordered to be burnt by the Hands of the
Hangman, and that the Mayor and Aldermen of London should attend the doing of
it, To which one of the Aldermen answered to this Purpose; That he conceived
the Case was no ways parallel, because Doctor Sacheverel, and his Sermon, were
impeached by the House of Commons of England, which is the Grand Jury of the
Nation, and Representative of the whole People of England: That this their
Impeachment they prosecuted before the House of Lords, the greatest Court of
Justice of Britain and which beyond Memory of Man, has had Cognizance of Things
of that Nature, that there Sacheverel had a fair Hearing in Defense of himself
and of his Sermon. And after that fair Hearing, he and his Sermon were justly,
fairly and legally condemened; that he had read the Case of Dr. Sacheverel, and
thought he could charge his Memory, that the Judgment of the House of Lords in
that Case was, That the Mayor and Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, only should
attend the Burning of the Sermon, and not the Aldermen; and farther he
remembered, that the Order upon that Judgment, was only directed to the Sheriffs
of London, and not even to the Mayor, who did not attend the doing it; and
farther said, that would Mr. Recorder show, that the Governor and Council had
such Authority as the House of Lords, and that the Papers ordered to be burnt
were in like manner legally prosecuted and condemned, there the Case of Doctor
Sacheverel might be to the Purpose; but without showing that, it rather proved
that a Censure ought not to be pronounced, till a fair Trial by a Competent and
legal Authority were first had. Mr. Recorder was desired to produce the Books
from whence he cited his Authorities, that the Court might judge of them
themselves, and was told, that if he could produce sufficient Authorities to
warrant this ORDER, they would readily obey it, but otherwise not. Upon which
he said, he did not carry his Books about with him. To which it was answered,
he might send for them, or order a Constable to fetch them. Upon which he
arose, and at the lower End of the Table he mentioned, That Bishop Burnet's
Pastoral Letter, was ordered by the House of Lords, to be burnt by the High
Bailiff of Westminster; upon which he abruptly went away, without waiting for
an Answer or promising to bring his Books, and did not return sitting the Court.

After Mr. Recorder's Departure, it was moved that the Protest should be
entered; to which it was answered, That the Protest could not be entered
without entering also the ORDER, and it was not fit to take any Notice of IT,
and therefore it was proposed that no Notice should be taken in their Books of
either, which was unanimously agreed to by the Court.

The Sherriff then moved, that the Court would direct their Whipper to perform
the said ORDER; to which it was answered, That as he was the Officer of the
Corporation, they would give no such Order. Soon after which the Court
adjourned, and did not attend the Burning of the Papers. Afterward about Noon,
the Sheriff after reading the Numbers of the several Papers which were ordered
to be burnt, delivered them unto the Hands of his own Negroe, and ordered him
to put them into the Fire, which he did, at which Mr. Recorder, Jeremiah
Dunbar, Esquire and several of the Officers of the Carrison attended.

On the Lord's Day the 17 th of November, 1734. I was taken and imprisoned by
Virtue of a Warrant in these Words.

At a Council held at Fort George in New York, the 2 d Day of November, 1734.
PRESENT, His Excellency William Cosby, Captain General and Governor in Chief,
etc.
Mr. Clarke. Mr. Harison. Mr. Livingston. Mr. Kennedy. Chief Justice. Mr.
Cortlandt. Mr. Lane. Mr. Horsmanden.
It is ordered that the Sheriff for the City of New York, do forthwith take and
apprehend John Peter Zenger, for printing and publishing several Seditious
Libels, dispersed throughout his Journals or News Papers, entitled, The
New York Weekly Journal, containing the freshest Advices, foreign and
domestic; as having in them many Things, tending to raise Factions and
Tumults, among the People of this Province, inflaming their Minds with Contempt
of His Majesty's Government, and greatly disturbing the Peace thereof, and upon
his taking the said John Peter Zenger, to commit him to the Prison or common
Goal of the said City and County.

Fred. Morris, D. Cl. Con.

And being by Virtue of that Warrant so imprisoned in the Goal, I was for
several Days denied the use of Pen, Ink and Paper, and the Liberty of Speech
with any Persons. -- Upon my Commitment, some Friends soon got a Habeas Corpus,
to bring me before the Chief Justice, in order to my Discharge or being bailed;
on the Return whereof, on Wednesday the 20 th of November, my Council delivered
Exceptions to the Return, and the Chief Justice ordered them to be argued
publicly at the City-Hall, on the Saturday following.

On Saturday the 23 d. of November, the said Exceptions came to be argued, by
James Alexander and William Smith, of Council for me, and by Mr. Attorney
General and Mr. Warrrel, of Council against me, in Presence of some Hundreds of
the Inhabitants; where my Council (saving the Benefit of Exception to the
illegality of the Warrant) insisted that I might be admitted to reasonable
Bail. And to show that it was my Right to be so, they offered Magna Charta, The
Petition of Right, 3 Car. The Habeas Corpus Act of 31 Car. 2. which directs the
Sum in which Bail is to be taken, to be, according to the Quality of the
Prisoner, and Nature of the Offense. Also 2 d Hawkins, Cap. 15. 5. in these
Words, But Justices must take Care, that under Pretense of demanding sufficient
Security, they do not make so excessive a Demand, as in Effect amounts to a
Denial of Bail; for this is looked on as a great Grievance, and is complained of
as such, by 1 W. and M. Sess. 2d. by which it is declared, That excessive Bail
ought not to be required. It was also shown, that the seven Bishops, who in
King James the II d's Time, were charged with the like Crime that I stood
charged with, were admitted to Bail on their own Recognizances, the Archbishop
in 200 l. and each of the other six in a 100 l. apiece only. Sundry other
Authorities and Arguments were produced and insisted on by my Council, to prove
my Right to be admitted to moderate Bail, and to such Bail as was in my Power
to give; and sundry Parts of History they produced, to show how much the
requiring excessive Bail had been resented by Parliament. And in order to
Enable the Court to judge what Surety was in my Power to Give, I made
Affidavit, That (my Debts paid) I was not worth Forty Pounds, (the Tools of my
Trade and wearing Apparel excepted.)

Some warm Expressions (to say no worse of them) were dropped on this Occasion,
sufficiently known and resented by the Auditory, which for my Part I desire may
be buried in Oblivion: Upon the whole it was Ordered that I might be admitted
to Bail, my self in 400. l. with two Sureties, each in 200 l. and that I should
be remanded till I Gave it. And as this was Ten Times more, than was in my
Power to counter-secure any Person in giving Bail for me, I conceived I could
not ask any to become my Bail on these Terms; and therefore I returned to Goal,
where I lay until Tuesday the 28 th of January, 1734,5, being the last Day of
that Term; and the Grand Jury having found nothing against me, I Expected to
have been discharged from my Imprisonment: But my Hopes proved vain; for the
Attorney General then charged me by Information, for Printing and publishing
Parts, of my Journals No. 13. and 23. as being false, scandalous, malicious,
and seditious.

To this Information my Council appeared, and offered Exceptions, leaving a
Blank for inserting the Judges Commissions, which the Court were of opinion not
to receive till those Blanks were filled up. In the succeeding Vacation the
Judges gave Copies of their Commissions; and on Tuesday the 15 th of April
last, the first Day of the succeeding Term, my Council offered these
Exceptions; which were as follows.

The Attorney General, v. John Peter Zenger. On Information for a Misdemeanour.
Exceptions humbly offered by John Peter Zenger, to the Honorable James De
Lancey, Esquire to judge in this Cause.

The Defendant comes and prays Hearing of the Commission, by Virtue of which
the Honorable James De Lancey, Esquire claims the Power and Authority to judge in
this cause, and it is read to him in these Words;

GEORGE the second, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To Our trusty and well beloved James De
Lancey, Esquire We reposing special Trust and Confidence in your Integrity, Ability
and Learning, have assigned, constituted and appointed, and We do by these
Presents assign constitute and appoint you the said James De Lancey, to be
Chief Justice in and over Our Province of New York, in America, in the Room of
Lewis Morris, Esquire Giving and by these Presents granting unto you, full Power
and lawful Authority, to hear try and determine all Pleas whatsoever, civil,
criminal and mixed, according to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of Our Kingdom
of England, and the Laws and Usages of Our said Province of New York, not being
repugnant thereto, and Executions of all Judgments of the said Court to award,
and to make such Rules and Orders in the said Court, as may be found convenient
and useful, and as near as may be agreeable to the Rules and Orders of Our
Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer in England. To have hold
and enjoy the said Office or Place of Chief Justice in and over Our said
Province, with all and singular the Rights Privileges, Profits and Advantages,
Sallaries, Fees and Perquisites unto the said Place belonging, or in any Ways
appertaining, in as full and ample Manner as any Person heretofore Chief
Justice of Our said Province has held and enjoyed, or of Right ought to have
held and enjoyed the same, To you the said James De Lancey, Esquire for and DURING
OUR WILL AND PLEASURE. In Testimony whereof we have caused these Our Letters to
be made Patent, and the great Seal of Our Province of New York to be hereunto
affixed. Witness Our trusty and well beloved WILLIAM COSBY, Esquire Our Captain
General and Governor in Chief of Our Provinces of New York, New Jersey, and
the Territories thereon depending in America, Vice Admiral of the same, and
Colonel in Our Army, at Fort George in New York, the Twenty first Day of
August, in the seventh Year of Our Reign, Annoque Domini, 1733. Which being
read and heard, the said John Peter Zenger, by Protestation not confessing nor
submitting to the Power of any other Person to Judge in this Cause, does except
to the Power of the Honorable James De Lancey, Esquire aforesaid to judge in this
Cause, by Virtue of the Commission aforesaid, for these Reasons, viz.

1 st. For that the Authority of a Judge of the King's Bench, in that Part of
Great Britain called England, by which the Cognizance of this Cause is claimed,
is by the said Commission granted to the Honorable James De Lancey, Esquire
aforesaid, only during Pleasure; whereas that Authority (by a Statute in that
Case made and provided) ought to be granted during good Behavior.

2 d. For that by the said Commission, the Jurisdiction and Authority a Justice
of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, in that Part of Great Britain,
called England, is granted to the said James: De Lancey, Esquire which Jurisdiction
and Authority, cannot be granted to, and exercised by, any one of the Justices
of the King's Bench.

3 d. For that the Form of the said Commission, is not founded on nor warranted
by the Common Law, nor any Statute of England, nor of Great Britain, nor any
Act of Assembly of this Colony.

4 th. For that it appears by the Commission aforesaid, that the same is
granted under the Seal of this Colony, by His Excellency William Cosby, Esquire
Governor thereof; and it appears not, that the same was granted, neither was
the same granted, by and with the Advice and Consent of His Majesty's Council
of this Colony; without which Advice and Consent, His Excellency could not
grant the same.

Wherefore, and for many other Defects in the said Commission, this Defendant
humbly hopes, that the Honorable James De Lancey, Esquire will not take Cognizance
of this Cause, by Virtue of the Commission aforesaid.

Was signed, James Alexander. William Smith.


The Exceptions to the Commission of the Honorable Frederick Philipse, Esquire
were the same with the foregoing, including therein his Commission, which is in
these Words.

GEORGE the second, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
King Defender of the Faith, etc. To Our trusty and well beloved Frederick
Philipse, Esquire Greeting: Whereas it is Our Care, that Justice be duly
administered to Our Subjects within Our Province of New York, and Territories
thereon depending in America; and We reposing especial Confidence, in your
Integrity, Ability and Learning, have assigned, constituted and appointed, and
We do by these Presents assign, constitute and appoint you the said Frederick
Philipse, to be second Justice of Our Supreme Court of Judicature for Our
Province of New York, in the Room of James De Lancey, Esquire Giving and granting
unto you the said Frederick Philipse, full Power and Authority, with Our other
Justices of Our said Supreme Court, to hear, try and determine, all Pleas
whatsoever civil, criminal and mixed, according to the Laws, Statutes and
Customs of Our Kingdom of England, and the Laws and Usages of Our said Province
of New York, not being repugnant thereto, and Executions of all Judgments of
the said Court to award, and to act and do all Things, which any of Our
Justices of either Bench, or Baron of the Exchequer, in Our said Kingdom of
England, may or ought to do; and also to assist, in the making such Rules and
Orders in Our said Court, as shall be for the Good and Benefit of Our said
Province; and as near as conveniently may be, to the Rules and Orders of Our
said Courts in Our said Kingdom of England: To have, hold and enjoy, the said
Office or Place of second Justice of our said Province of New York, together
with all and singular the Rights, Privileges, Salarys, Fees, Perquisites,
Profits and Advantages thereto, now or at any Time heretofore belonging, or in
any wise of Right appertaining; unto you the said Frederick Philipse, for and
during Our Pleasure. In Testimony whereof, We have caused these our Letters to
be made Patent, and the Great Seal of Our said Province of New York to be
hereunto affixed. Witness Our trusty and well beloved WILLIAM COSBY, Esquire Our
Captain General and Governor in Chief, of Our Provinces of New York,
New Jersey, and Territories thereon depending in America, Vice Admiral of the
same, and Colonel in Our Army, etc. at Fort George in New York, the Twenty
first Day of August, in the Seventh Year of Our Reign, Annoque Domini, 1733.

Fred. Morris, D. Secry.

Tuesday the 15th of April, 1735.
Mr. Alexander offered the above Exceptions to the Court, and prayed that they
might be filed. Upon this the Chief Justice said to Mr. Alexander and Mr.
Smith, That they ought well to consider the Consequences of what they offered;
to which both answered, That they had well considered what they offered, and
all the Consequences. And Mr. Smith added, that he was so well satisfied of the
Right of the Subject to take an Exception to the Commission of a Judge, if he
thought such Commission illegal, -- that he durst venture his Life upon that
Point. As to the Validity of the Exceptions then offered, he said, he took that
to be a second Point; but was ready to argue them both, if their Honors were
pleased to hear him. To which the Chief Justice replied, That he would consider
the Exceptions in the Morning; and ordered the Clerk to bring them to him.

Wednesday, the 16th April, 1735.
The Chief Justice delivered one of the Exceptions to the Clerk, and Justice
Philipse the other, upon which Mr. Smith arose and asked the Judges, whether
their Honors would hear him upon these two Points. This first Point is largely
treated on, in the Arguments of Van Dam's Council, in support of their Plea to
the Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, printed here above a Year before that,
from Page 14 to 35, to which no Answer has as yet appeared; which Argument,
contains also some Part of the Arguments necessary to support the 2d. Point.
1 st. That the Subject has a Right to take such Exceptions, if they judged the
Commissions illegal. 2 dly. That the Exceptions tendered were legal and valid.
To which the Chief Justice said, That they would neither hear nor allow the
Exceptions; for (said he) you thought to have gained a great Deal of Applause
and Popularity by opposing this Court, as you did the Court of Exchequer; but
you have brought it to that Point, That either, We must go from the Bench, or
you from the Bar: Therefore We exclude you and Mr. Alexander from the Bar;
and delivered a Paper to the Clerk, and ordered it to be entered, which the
Clerk entered accordingly, and returned the Paper to the Chief Justice; after
which the Chief Justice ordered the Clerk to read publicly what he had
written; an attested Copy whereof follows.

At a Supreme Court of Judicature held for the Province of New York, at the
City Hall of the City of New York, on Wednesday, the 16 th Day of April, 1735.
PRESENT, The Honorable James De Lancey, Esquire Chief Justice. The Honorable
Frederick Philipse, Esquire Second Justice.


James Alexander, Esquire and William Smith, Attorneys of this Court, having
presumed (notwithstanding they were forewarned by the Court of their
DISPLEASURE if they should do it) to sign, and having actually signed, and put
into Court, Exceptions, in the Name of John Peter Zenger; thereby denying the
Legality of the Judges their Commissions; though in the usual Form, and the being
of this Supreme Court. It is therefore ordered, that for the said Contempt, the
said James Alexander, and William Smith, be excluded from any farther Practice
in this Court, and that their Names be struck out of the Roll of Attorneys of
this Court.

per Cur. James Line. Cl.

After the Order of the Court was read, Mr. Alexander asked whether it was the
Order of Mr. Justice Philipse as well as of the Chief Justice? To which both
answered, that it was their Order; upon which Mr. Alexander added, That it was
proper to ask that Question, That they might know how to have their Relief: He
farther observed to the Court, upon reading of the Order, That they were
mistaken in their Wording of it, because the Exceptions were only to their
Commissions, and not to the being of the Court, as is therein alleged; and
prayed that the Order might be altered accordingly. The Chief Justice said,
they conceived the Exceptions were against the Being of the Court. Both Mr.
Alexander and Mr. Smith denied that they were, and prayed the Chief Justice to
point to the Place that contained such Exception; and further added; That the
Court might well exist, though the Commissions of all the Judges were void; which
the Chief Justice confessed to be true: And therefore they prayed again that
the Order in that Point might be altered; but it was denied.

Then Mr. Alexander desired to know, whether they over raded or rejected the
Exceptions; the Chief Justice said, he did not understand the Difference; to
which said Alexander replied, that if he rejected the Exceptions, then they
could not appear upon the Proceedings, and in that Case the Defendant was
entitled to have them made Part of the Proceedings, by Bill of Exception: But
if they over ruled them, then by so doing, they only declared them not
sufficient, to hinder them from proceeding by virtue of those Commissions, and
the Exceptions would remain as Records of the Court, and ought to be entered on
the Record of the Cause as Part of the Proceedings. The Chief Justice said,
they must remain upon the File, to warrant what we have done; as to being Part
of the Record of the Proceedings in that Cause, he said, you may speak to that
Point to morrow.

Friday, April 18th, 1735.
Mr. Alexander signified to the Court, That on Wednesday last their Honors had
(...) The (...) Council for Zenger might speak to the Point, concerning the
Rejecting or Over ruling of Zenger's Exceptions on the Morrow: To which the
Chief Justice answered, That he said. You may get some Person to speak to that
Point on the Morrow, not meaning that the said Alexander should speak to it,
that being contrary to the Order, Both Mr. Alexander and Mr. Smith said, they
understood it otherwise.

They both also mentioned, that it was a Doubt, whether by the Words of the
Order they were debarred of their Practice as Council, as well as Attorneys,
whereas they practiced in both Capacities? To which the Chief Justice answered,
That the Order was plain. That James Alexander, Esquire and William Smith, were
debarred and excluded from their whole Practice at this Bar, and that the
Order was intended to bar their acting both as Council and as Attorneys, and
that it could not be construed otherwise, And it being asked Mr. Philipse,
Whether he understood the Order so; He answered, that he did.

Upon this Exclusion of my Council I petitioned the Court to order Council for
my Defense, who thereon oppointed John Chambers, Esquire who pleaded Not Guilty for
me to the Information. But as to the Point. Whether my Exceptions should be
part of the Record as was moved by my former Council, Mr. Chambers thought not
proper to speak to it; Mr. Chambers also moved, that a certain Day in the next
Term, might be appointed for my Trial, and for a Struck Jury; whereupon my
Trial was ordered to be on Monday the 4 th of August, and the Court would
consider till the first Day of next Term, whether I should have a Struck Jury
or not, and ordered that the Sheriff should in the mean Time, at my Charge,
return the Freeholders Book.

At a Supreme Court of Judicature held for the Province of New York, before The
Honorable James De Lancey, Esquire Chief Justice of the said Province; and The
Honorable Frederick Philpse, Esquire second Justice of the said Province.
On Tuesday the 29 th of July, 1735. the Court opened, and on Motion of Mr.
Chambers for a Struck Jury, pursuant to the Rule of the preceding Term, the
Court were of Opinion, that I was entitled to have a Struck Jury; and that
Evening at five of the Clock, some of my Friends attended the Clerk, for
striking the Jury; when to their Surprise, the Clerk instead of producing the
Freeholders Book, to Strike the Jury out of it in their Presence as usual, he
produced a List of 48 Persons, who, he said he had taken out of the Freeholders
Book; my Friends told him, that a great Number of these Persons were not
Freeholders that others were Persons holding Commissions and Offices at the
Governor's Pleasure, that others were of the late displaced Magistrates of
this City, who must be supposed to have Resentment against me, for what I had
printed concerning them; that others were the Governor's Baker, Tailor
Shoemaker, Candlemaker, Joiner, etc. that as to the few indifferent Men that
were upon that List, they, had Reason to believe (as they had heard) that Mr.
Attorney had a List of them, to strike them out; and therefore requested that
he would either bring the Freeholders Book, and choose out of it 48
unexceptionable Men in their Presence, as usual; or else, that he would hear
their Objections particularly to the List he offered, and that he would put
impartial Men in the Place of those against whom they could show just
Objections. Notwithstanding this, the Clerk refused to strike the Jury out of
the Freeholders Book, and refused to hear any Objections to the Persons on his
List, but told my Friends, if any Objections they had to any Persons, they
might strike those Persons out; to which they answered, there would not remain
a Jury, if they struck out all the exceptionable Men, and according to the
Custom, they had only a Right to strike out 12.

But finding no Arguments could prevail with the Clerk to hear their Objections
to his List, nor to strike the Jury as usual, Mr. Chambers told him, he must
apply to the Court, which the next Morning he did, and the Court upon his
Motion Ordered, That the 48 should be struck out of the Freeholders Book as
usual, in the presence of the Parties, and that the Clerk should hear
Objections to Persons proposed to be of the 48, and allow of such Exceptions as
were just. In Pursuance of that Order, a Jury was that Evening struck, to the
Satisfaction of both Parties, who my Friends and Council insisted on no
Objections but want of Freehold^^^; and though they did not insist, that Mr.
Attorney General (who was assisted by Mr. Blagge,) should show any particular
Cause, against any Persons he disliked, but acquiesced that any Person he
desliked should be out of the 48.

Before James De Lancey, Esquire Chief Justice of the Province of New York, and
Frederick Philipse, second Judge, came on my Trial, on the fourth Day of
August, 1735. upon an Information for printing and publishing two News Papers,
which were called Libells against our Governor and his Administration.

The Defendant John Peter Zenger being called appeared.

And the Sherrif returned his Venire for the Trial of the said Cause.

Mr. Chambers, of Council for the Defendant. I humbly move Your Honors that we
may have Justice done by the Sherrif, and that he may return the Names of the
Jurors in the same Order as they were struck.


Chief Justice. How is that? Are they not so returned?


Mr. Chapter No they are not: For some of the Names that were last set down in the
Panel, are now placed first.


Chapter J. Make out that, and you shall be righted.


Mr. Chapter I have the Copy of the Panel in my Hand, as the Jurors were struck,
and if the Clerk will produce the Original signed by Mr. Attorney and my self,
Your Honor will see our Complaint is just.


Chapter J. Clerk, is it so? Look upon that Copy; is it a true Copy of the Panel
as it was struck?


Clerk. Yes, I believe it is.


Chapter J. How came the Names of the Jurors to be misplaced in the Panel annexed
to the Venire?


Sherrif. I have returned the Jurors in the same Order in which the Clerk gave
them to me.


Chapter J. Let the Names of the Jurors be ranged in the Order they were struck,
agreeable to the Copy here in Court.


Which was done accordingly. And the Jury, whose Names were as follows, were
called and sworn.

Hermanus Rutgers, Stanly H^^^es, Edward Man, John Bell, Samuel Weaver, Andries
Marschalk, Egbert van Bors^m, Thomas Hunt, Form. Benjamin Hildreth, A^raham
Keteltas, John Goelet, Hercules Wendover.
Mr. Attorney General opened the Information, which was as follows.

Mr. Attorney. May it please Your Honors, and you Gentlemen of the Jury; the
Information now before the Court, and to which the Defendant Zenger has pleaded
Not Guilty, is an Information for printing and publishing a false, scandalous
and seditious Libel, in which his Excellency the Governor of this Province,
who is the King's immediate Representative here, is greatly and unjustly
scandalized, as a Person that has no Regard to Law nor Justice; with much more,
as will appear upon reading the Information. This of Libelling is what has
always been discouraged as a Thing that tends to create Differences among Men,
ill Blood among the People, and oftentimes great Bloodshed between the Party
Libelling and the Party Libelled. There can be no Doubt but you Gentlemen of
the Jury will have the same ill Opinion of such Practices, as the Judges have
always shown upon such Occasions: But I shall say no more at this Time, until
you hear the Information, which is as follows.


New York, Supreme Court. of the Term of January, in the Eighth Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord King GEORGE the second, etc. New York, ss.
BE it remembered, That Richard Bradly, Esquire Attorney General of Our Sovereign
Lord the King, for the Province of New York, who for Our said Lord the King in
this Part prosecutes, in his own proper Person comes here into the Court of Our
said Lord the King, and for our said Lord the King gives the Court here to
understand and be informed, That John Peter Zenger, late of the City of
New York. Printer, (being a seditious Person, and a frequent Printer and
Publisher of false News and seditious Libels, and wickedly and maliciously
devising the Government of Our said Lord the King of this His Majesty's
Province of New York, under the Administration of His Excellency William Cosby,
Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief of the said Province, to traduce,
scandalize and vilify, and His Excellency the said Governor, and the Ministers
and Officers of Our said Lord the King of and for the said Province to bring
into Suspicion and the ill Opinion of the Subjects of Our said Lord the King
residing within the said Province) the Twenty eighth Day of January, in the
seventh Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord George the second, by the Grace
of God of Great Britain, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
at the City of New York, did falsely, seditiously and scandalously print and
publish, and cause to be printed and published, a certain false, malicious,
seditious scandalous Libel, entitled, The New York Weekly Journal, containing
the freshest Advices foreign and domestic; in which Libel (of and concerning
His Excellency the said Governor, and the Ministers and Officers of Our said
Lord the King, of and for the said Province) among other Things therein
contained are these Words; Your Appearance in Print at last, gives a Pleasure
to many, though most wish you had come fairly into the open Field, and not
appeared behind Retrenchments made of the supposed Laws against Libelling, and
of what other Men have said and done before; these Retrenchments, Gentlemen,
may soon be shown to you and all Men to be weak, and to have neither Law not
Reason for their Foundation, so cannot long stand you in stead: Therefore, you
had much better as yet leave them, and come to what the People of this City and
Province (the City and Province of New York meaning) think are the Points in
Question (to wit) They (the People of the City and Province of New York
meaning) think as Matters now stand, that their LIBERTIES and PROPERTIES are
precarious, and that SLAVERY is like to be intailed on them and their
Posterity, if some past Things be not amended, and this they collect from many
past Proceedings. (Meaning many of the past Proceedings of His Ex-Ecellency the
said Governor, and of the Ministers and Officers of our said Lord the King, of
and for the said Province.) And said the Attorney Geneal of Our said Lord the
King, for Our said Lord the King, likewise gives the Court here to understand
and be informed, that the said John Peter Zenger afterward (to wit) the eighth
Day of April, in the seventh Year of the Reign of Our said Lord the King, at
the City of New York aforesaid, did falsely, seditiously and scandalously print
and publish, and cause to be printed and published, another false malicious
seditious and scandalous Libel, entitled, the New York Weekly Journal,
containing the freshest Advices foreign and domestic. In which Libel, (of and
concerning the Government of the said Province of New York, and of and
concerning His Excellency the said Governor, and the Ministers and Officers of
Our said Lord the King, of and for the said Province) among other Things
therein contained, are these Words One of our Neighbors (one of the
Inhabitants of New Jersey meaning) being in Company, observing the Strangers
(some of the Inhabitants of New York meaning) full of Complaints, endeavored
to persuade them to remove into Jersey; to which it was replied, that would be
leaping out of the Frying Pan into the Fire; for, says he, we both are under
the same Governor (His Excellency the said Governor meaning) and your
Assembly have shown with a Witness what is to be expected from them; one that
was then moving to Pensilvania, (meaning one that was then removing from
New York, with intent to reside at Pensilvania) to which Place it is reported
several considerable Men are removing (from New York meaning) expressed in
Terms very moving, much Concern for the Circumstances of New York (the bad
Circumstances of the Province and People of New York meaning) seemed to think
them very much owing to the Influence that same Men (whom he called Tools) had
in the Administration (meaning the Administration of Government of the said
Province of New York) said he was now going from them, and was not to be hurt
by any Measures they should take, but could not help having some Concern for
the Welfare of his Countrymen, and should be glad to hear that the Assembly
(meaning the General Assembly of the Province of New York) would exert
themselves as became them, by showing that they have the Interest of their
Country more at Heart, than the Gratification of any private View of any of
their Members, or being at all affected, by the Smiles or Frowns of a
Governor, (His Excellency the said Governor meaning) both which ought equally
to be despised, when the Interest of their Country is at stake. You, says he,
complain of the Lawyers, but I think the Law it self is at an End, WE (the
People of the Province of New York meaning) SEE MEN'S DEEDS DESTROYED, JUDGES
ARBITRARILY DISPLACED, NEW COURTS ERECTED WITHOUT CONSENT OF THE LEGISLATURE
(within the Province of New York meaning) BY WHICH IT SEEMS TO ME, TRIALS BY
JURIES ARE TAKEN AWAY WHEN A GOVERNOR PLEASES, (His Excellency the said
Governor meaning) MEN OF KNOWN ESTATES DENIED THEIR VOTES, CONTRARY TO THE
RECEIVED PRACTICE, THE BEST EXPOSITOR OF ANY LAW: Who is then in that Province
( meaning the Province of New York,) that call (can call meaning) any Thing his
own, or enjoy any Libery ( Liberty meaning) longer than those in the
Administration ( meaning the Administration of Government of the said Province
of New York) will condescend to let them do it, for which Reason I have left
it, (the Province of New York meaning) as I believe more will. To the great
Disturbance of the Peace of the said Province of New York, to the Great Scandal
of Our said Lord the King, of His Exceellency the said Governor, and of all
others concerned in the Administration of the Government of the said Province,
and against the Peace of Our So^^r^ign Lord the King His Crown and (...)
whereupon (...) the said Attorney General of Our said Lord the King, for Our
said Lord the King, prays the Advisement of the Court here, in the Premises,
and the due Process of the Law, against him the said John Peter Zenger, in this
Part to be done, to answer to Our said Lord the King of and in the Premises,
etc.

R. Bradley, Attorney General.

Mr. Chambers has not been pleased to favor me with his Notes, so I cannot,
for Fear of doing him Injustice, pretend to set down his Argument; But here Mr.
Chambers set forth very clearly the Nature of a Libel, the great Allowances
that ought to be made for what Men speak or write, That in all Libels there
must be some particular Persons so clearly pointed out, that no Doubt must
remain about who is meant; That he was in hopes Mr. Attorney would fall in his
Proof, as to this Point; and therefore desired that he would go on to examine
his Witnesses.

Then Mr. Hamilton, who at the Request of some of my Friends, was so kind as to
come from Philadelphia to assist me on the Trial, spoke.

Mr. Hamilton. May it please your Honor; I am concerned in this Cause on the
Part of Mr. Zenger the Defendant. The Information against my Client was sent
me, a few Days before I left Home, with some Instructions to let me know how
far I might rely upon the Truth of those Parts of the Papers set forth in the
Information, and which are said to be libellous. And though I am perfectly of the
Opinion with the Gentleman who has just now spoke, on the same Side with me, as
to the common Course of Proceedings, I mean in putting Mr. Attorney upon
proving, that my Client printed and published those Papers mentioned in the
Information; yet I cannot think it proper for me (without doing Violence to my
own Principles) to deny the Publication of a Complaint, which I think is the
Right of every freeborn Subject to make, when the Matters so published can be
supported with Truth; and therefore I Will save Mr. Attorney the Trouble of
Examining his Witnesses to that Point; and I do (for my Client) confess, that
he both printed and published the two News Papers set forth in the Information,
and I hope in so doing he has committed no Crime.


Mr. Attorney. Then if Your Honor pleases, since Mr. Hamilton has confessed
the Fact, I think our Witnesses may be discharged; we have no further Occasion
for them.


Mr. Hamilton. If you brought them here, only to prove the Printing and
Publishing of these News Papers, we have acknowledged that, and shall abide by
it.


Here my Journeyman and two Sons (with several others subpoena'd by Mr.
Attorney, to give Evidence against me) were discharged, and there was Silence
in the Court for some Time.

Mr. Chief Justice. Well Mr. Attorney, will you proceed?


Mr. Attorney. Indeed Sir, as Mr. Hamilton has confessed the Printing and
Publishing these Libels, I think the Jury must find a Verdict for the King; for
supposing they were true, the Law says that they are not the less libellous for
that; nay indeed the Law says, their being true is an Aggravation of the Crime.


Mr. Hamilton. Not so neither, Mr. Attorney, there are two Words to that
Bargain. I hope it is not our bare Printing and Publishing a Paper, that will
make it a Libel: You will have something more to do, before you make my Client
a Libeller; for the Words themselves must be libellous, that is, false,
scandalous, and seditious or else we are not guilty.


As Mr. Attorney has not been pleased to favor us with his Argument, which he
read, or with the Notes of it, we cannot take upon us to set down his Words,
but only to show the Book Cases he cited, and the general Scope of his
Argument, which he drew from those Authorities. He observed upon the
Excellency, as well as Use of Government, and the great Regard and Reverence,
which had been constantly paid to it, both under the Law and the Gospel. That
by Government we were protected in our Lives, Religion and Properties; and that
for these Reasons, great Care had always been taken to prevent every Thing that
might tend to scandalize Magistrates, and others concerned in the
Administration of the Government, especially the supreme Magistrate. And that
there were many Instances of very severe Judgments, and of Punishments
inflicted upon such, as had attempted to bring the Government into Contempt; by
publishing false and scurrilous Libels against it, or by speaking evil and
scandalous Words of Men in Authority; to the great Disturbance of the public
Peace. And to support this, he cited 5 Coke 121. (suppose it should be 125.)
Wood's Instit. 430. 2 Lilly 168. 1 Hawkins 73.11.6. From these Books he
insisted, that a Libel was a malicious Defamation of any Person, expressed
either in Printing or Writing, Signs or Pictures, to asperse the Reputation of
one that is alive, or the Memory of one that it dead; if he is a private Man,
the Libeller deserves a severe Punishment, but if it is against a Magistrate or
other public Person, it it a greater Offense; for this concerns not only the
Breach of the Peace, but the Scandal of the Government; for what greater
Scandal of Government can there be, than to have corrupt or wicked Magistrates
to be appointed by the King, to govern his Subjects under him? And a greater
Imputation to the State cannot be, than to suffer such corrupt Men to sit in
the sacred Seat of Justice, or to have any Meddling in, or concerning the
Administration of Justice: And from the same Books Mr. Attorney insisted, that
whether the Person defamed is a private Man or a Magistrate, whether living or
Dead, whether the Libel is true or false, or if the Party against whom it is
made is of good or evil Fame, it is nevertheless a Libel: For in a settled
State of Government, the Party grieved ought to complain for every Injury done
him, in the ordinary Course of the Law. And as to its Publication, the Law had
taken so great Care of Men's Reputations, that if one maliciously repeats it,
or sings it in the Presence of an other, or delivers the Libel or a Copy of it
over, to scandalize the Party, he is to be punished as a Publisher of a Libel.
He said it was likewise evident, that Libelling was an Offense against the Law
of God. Act. XXIII. 5. Then said Paul, I wist not Brethren, that he was the
High Priest: For it is written, thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of the
People. 2 Pet. X. 11. Despise Government, presumptuous are they, self willed,
they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, etc. He then insisted that it
was clear, both by the Law of God and Man, That it was a very great Offense to
speak evil of, or to revile those in Authority over us; and that Mr. Zenger had
offended in a most notorious and gross Manner, in scandalizing His Excellency
our Governor, who is the King's immediate Representative, and the supreme
Magistrate of this Province: For can there be any Thing more scandalous said of
a Governor than what is published in those Papers? Nay, not only the
Governor, but both the Council and Assembly are scandalizen, for there it is
plainly said, That as Matters now stand, their Liberties and Properties are
precarious, and that Slavery is like to be entailed on them and their
Posterity. And then again Mr. Zenger says, The Assembly ought to despise the
Smiles or Frowns of a Governor; That he thinks the Law is at an End; That we
see Men's Deeds destroyed, Judges arbitrarily displaced, new Courts erected,
without Consent of the Legislature; And That it seems Trials by Juries are
taken away when a Governor pleases; That none can call any Thing their own,
longer than those in the Administration will condescend to let them do it. --
And Mr. Attorney added, that he did not know what could be said in Defense of a
Man, that had so notoriously scandalized the Governor and principal
Magistrates and Officers of the Governments, by charging them with depriving
the People of their Rights and Liberties, and taking away Trials by Juries, and
in short, putting an End to the Law it self. -- If this was not a Libel, he
said, he did not know what was one. Such Persons as will take those Liberties
with Governors and Magistrates, he thought ought to suffer for stirring up
Sedition and Discontent among the People. And concluded by saying, that the
Government had been very much traduced and exposed by Mr. Zenger, before he was
taken Notice of; that at last it was the Opinion of the Governor and Council,
that he ought not to be suffered to go on, to disturb the Peace of the
Government; by publishing such Libels against the Governor, and the chief
Persons in the Government; And therefore they had directed this Prosecution, to
put a Stop to this scandalous and wicked Practice, of libelling and defaming
His Majesty's Government and disturbing his Majesty's Peace.

Mr. Chambers then sum'd up to the Jury, observing with great Strength of
Reason on Mr. Attorney's Defect of Proof, that the Papers in the Information
were False, Malicious or Seditious, which was incumbent on him to prove to the
Jury, and without which they could not on their Oaths say, That they were so,
as charged.

Mr. Hamilton. May it please Your Honor; I agree with Mr. Attorney, that
Government is a sacred Thing, but I differ very widely from him when he would
insinuate, that the just Complaints of a Number of Men, who suffer under a bad
Administration, is libelling that Administration. Had I believed that to be
Law, I should not have given the Court the Trouble of hearing any Thing that I
could say in this Cause. I own, when I read the Information, I had not the Art
to find our (without the Help of Mr. Attorney's Innuendo's) that the Governor
was the Person meant in every Period of that News Paper; and I was inclined to
believe, that they were wrote by some, who from an extraordinary Zeal for
Liberty, had misconstrued the Conduct of some Persons in Authority into Crimes;
and that Mr. Attorney out of his too great Zeal for Power, had exhibited this
Information, to correct the Indiscretion of my Client; and at the same Time, to
show his Superiors the great Concern he had, lest they should be treated with
any undue Freedom. But from what Mr. Attorney has just now said, to wit, That
this Prosecution was directed by the Governor and Council, and from the
Extraordinary Appearance of People of all Conditions which I observe in Court
upon this Occasion, I have Reason to think, that those in the Administration
have by this Prosecution something more in View, and that the People believe
they have a good deal more at stake, than I apprehended: And therefore, as it
is become my Duty, to be both plain and particular in this Cause, I beg Leave
to bespeak the Patience of the Court.

I was in hopes, as that terrible Court, where those dreadful Judgments were
given, and that Law established, which Mr. Attorney has produced for
Authorities to support this Cause, was long ago laid aside, as the most
dangerous Court to the Liberties of the People of England that ever was known
in that Kingdom; that Mr. Attorney knowing this, would not have attempted to
set up a Star Chamber here, nor to make their Judgments a Precedent to us: For
it is well known, that what would have been judged Treason in those Days for a
Man to speak, I think, has since not only been practiced as lawful, but the
contrary Doctrine has been held to be Law.

In Brewster's Case, for Printing, That the Subjects might defend their Rights
and Liberties by Arms, in case the King should go about to destroy them, he was
told by the Chief Justice that it was a great Mercy, he was not (...) against
for his Life; for that to say, the King could be resisted by Arms in any Case
whatsoever, was express Treason. And yet we see since that Time (...)
Sacheverell was sentenced in the highest Court in Great Britain, for saving,
That such a Resistance was not lawful. Besides, as Times have made very great
Changes in the Laws of England, so in my Opinion there is good Reason that
Places should do so too.

Is it not surprising to see a Subject, upon his receiving a Commission from
the King to be a Governor of a Colony in America, immediately imagining himself
to be vested with all the Prerogatives belonging to the sacred Person of his
Prince? And which is yet more astonishing, to see that a People can be so wild
as to allow of and acknowledge those Prerogatives and Exemptions, even to their
own Destruction? Is it so hard a Matter to distinguish between the Majesty of
our Sovereign, and the Power of a Governor of the Plantations? Is not this
making very free with our Prince, to apply that Regard, Obedience and
Allegiance to a Subject which is due only to Our Sovereign? And yet in all the
Cases which Mr. Attorney has cited, to show the Duty and Obedience we owe to
the Supreme Magistrate, it is the King that is there ^^ean and understood, though
Mr. Attorney is pleased to urge them as Authorities to prove the Heinousness of
Mr. Zenger's Offense against the Governor of New York. The several Plantations
are compared to so many large Corporations, and perhaps not improperly; and can
any one give an Instance, that the Mayor or H^^d of a Corporation, ever put in
a Claim to the sacred Rights of Majesty? Let us not (while we are pretending to
pay a great Regard to our Prince and His Peace) make bold to transfer that
Allegiance to a Subject, which we owe to our King only. What strange Doctrine
is it, to press every Thing for Law here which is so in England? I Believe we
should not think it a Favor, at present at least, to establish this Practice.
In England so great a Regard and Reverence is had to the Judges, c. 3 Inst. 140.
that if any Man strikes another in Westminster Hall, while the Judges are
sitting, he shall lose his Right Hand, and forfeit his Land and Goods, for so
doing. And though the Judges here claim all the Powers and Authorities within
this Government, that a Court of King's Bench has in England, yet I believe Mr.
Attorney will scarcely say, that such a Punishment could be legally inflicted
on a Man for committing such an Offense, in the Presence of the Judges sitting
in any Court within the Province of New York. The Reason is obvious; a Quarrel
or Riot in New York cannot possibly be attended with those dangerous
Consequences that it might in Westminster Hall; nor (I hope) will it be
alleged, that any Misbehaviour to a Governor in the Plantations will, or ought
to be, judged of or punished, as a like Undutifulness would be, to Our
Sovereign. From all which, I hope Mr. Atttorney will not think it proper to
apply his Law-Cases (to support the Cause of his Governor) which have only been
judged, where the King's Safety or Honor was concerned. It will not be denied
but that a Freeholder in the Province of New York has as good a Right to the
sole and separate Use of his Lands, as a Freeholder in England, who has a Right
to bring an Action of Trespass against his Neighbor, for suffering his Horse
or Cow to come and feed upon his Land, or eat his Corn, whether enclosed or not
inclused; and yet I believe it would be looked upon as a strange Attempt, for
one Man here, to bring an Action against another, whose Cattle and Horses feed
upon his Grounds not enclosed, or indeed for eating and treading down his Corn,
if that were not enclosed. Numberless are the Instances of this Kind that might
be given, to show, that what is good Law at one Time and in one Place, is not
so at another Time and in another Place; so that I think, the Law seems to
expect, that in these Parts of the World Men should take Care, by a good Fence,
to preserve their Property, from the Injury of unruly Beasts. And perhaps there
may be as good Reason why Men should take the same Care, to make an honest and
upright Conduct a Fence and Security against the Injury of unruly Tongues.


Mr. Attorney. I don't know what the Gentleman means, by comparing Cases of
Freeholders in England with Freeholders here. What has this Case to do with
Actions of Trespass, or Men's Fencing their Ground? The Case before the Court
is, whether Mr. Zenger is guilty of Libelling His Excellency the Governor of
New York, and indeed the whole Administration of the Government? Mr. Hamilton
has confessed the Printing and Publishing, and I think nothing is plainer, than
that the Words in the Information are scandalous, and tend to sedition, and to
disquiet the Minds of the People of this Province. And if such Papers are not
Libels, I think it may be said, there can be no such Thing as a Libel.


Mr. Hamilton. May it please Your Honor; I cannot agree with Mr. Attorney: For
though I freely acknowledge, that there are such Things as Libels, yet I must
insist at the same Time, that what my Client is charged with, is not a Libel;
and I observed just now, that Mr. Attorney in defining a Libel, made use of the
Words, scandalous, seditious, and tend to disquiet the People; but (whether
with Design or not I will not say) he omitted the Word false.


Mr. Attorney. I think I did not omit the Word false: But it has been said
already, that it may be a Libel, notwithstanding it may be true.


Mr. Hamilton. In this I must still differ with Mr. Attorney; for I depend upon
it, we are to be tried upon this Information now before the Court and Jury, and
to which we have pleaded Not Guilty, and by it we are charged with Printing and
publishing a certain false, malicious, seditious and scandalous Libel. This
Word false must have some Meaning, or else how came it there? I hope Mr.
Attorney will not say, he put it there by Chance, and I am of Opinion his
Information would not be good without it. But to show that it is the principal
Thing which, in my Opinion, makes a Libel, I put the Case, the Information had
been for printing and publishing a certain true Libel, would that be the same
Thing? Or could Mr. Attorney support such an Information by any Precedent in
the English Law? No, the Falsehood makes the Scandal, and both make the Libel.
And to show the Court that I am in good Earnest, and to save the Court's Time,
and Mr. Attorney's Trouble, I will agree, that if he can prove the Facts
charged upon us, to be false, I Will own them to be scandalous, seditious and a
Libel. So the Work seem now to be pretty much shortened, and Mr. Attorney has
now only to prove the Words false, in order to make us Guilty.


Mr. Attorney. We have nothing to prove; you have confessed the Printing and
Publishing; but if it was necessary (as I insist it it is not) how can we prove
a Negative? But I hope some Regard will be had to the Authorities that have
been produced, and that supposing all the Words to be true, yet that will not
help them, that Chief Justice Holt in his Charge to the Jury, in the Case of
Tutchin, made no Distinction, whether Tutchin's Papers were true or false; and
as Chief Justice Holt has made no Distinction in that Case, so none ought to be
made here; nor can it be shown in all that Case, there was any Question made
about their being false or true.


Mr. Hamilton. I did expect to hear, That a Negative cannot be proved; but
every Body knows there are many Exceptions to that general Rule: For if a Man
is charged with killing another, or stealing his Neighbor's Horse, if he is
innocent in the one Case, he may prove the Man said to be killed, to be really
alive; and the Horse said to be stolen, never to have been out of his Master's
Stable, etc. and this I think is proving a Negative. But we will save Mr.
Attorney the Trouble of proving a Negative, and take the Onus prob^^^^ upon our
selves, and prove those very Papers that are called Libels to be true.


Mr. Chapter Justice. You cannot be admitted, Mr. Hamilton, to give the Truth of a
Libel in Evidence. A Libel is not to be justified; for it is nevertheless a
Libel that it is true.


Mr. Hamilton. I am sorry the Court has so soon resolved upon that Piece of
Law; I expected first to have been heard to that Point. I have not in all my
Reading met with an Authority that says, we cannot be admitted to give the
Truth in Evidence, upon an Information for a Libel.


Mr. Chapter Justice. The Law is clear, That you cannot justify a Libel.


Mr. Hamilton. I own that, may if please Your Honor, to be so; but, with
Submission, I understand the Word, justify, there, to be a Justification by
Plea, as it is in the Case upon an Indictment for Murder, or an Assault and
Battery; there the Prisoner cannot justify, but plead Not Guilty: Yet it will
not be denied but he may, and always is admitted, to give the Truth of the
Fact, or any other Matter, in Evidence, which goes to his Acquital; as in
Murder, he may prove it was in Defense of his Life, his House, etc. and in
Assault and Battery, he may give in Evidence, that the other Party struck
first, and in both Cases he will be acquitted. And in this Sense I understand
the Word justify, when applied to the Case before the Court.


Mr. Chapter Justice. I Pray show that you can give the Truth of a Libel in
Evidence.


Mr. Hamilton. I am ready, both from what I understand to be the Authority, in
the Case, and from the Reason of the Thing, to show that we may lawfully do so.
But here I beg leave to observe, That Informations for Libels is a Child, if
not born, yet nursed up, and brought to full Maturity, in the Court of
Star Chamber.


Mr. Chapter Justice. Mr. Hamilton you will find your self mistaken; for in Coke's
Institutes you will find Informations for Libels, long before the Court of
Star Chamber.


Mr. Hamilton. I thank Your Honor; that is an Authority I did propose to speak
to by and by: But as you have mentioned it, I Will read that Authority now. I
think it is in 3 Co. Inst. under Title Libel; it is the Case of John de
Northampton for a Letter wrote to Robert de Ferrers, one of the King's privy
Council, Coke 3 l^st. 174.
concerning Sir William Scot, Chief Justice, and his Follows; but it does not
appear to have been upon Information; and I have good Grounds to say it was
upon Indictment, as was the Case of Adam de Ravensworth, just mentioned before
by Lord Coke under the same Title; and I think there cannot be a greater, at
least a plainer Authority for us, than the Judgment in the Case of John de
Northampton, which my Lord has set down at large. Et quia praedictus Johannes
cognovit dictam Litteram per se scriptam Roberto de Ferrers, qui est de
Concilio Regis, qua littera continet in se nullam veritatem, etc. Now Sir, by
this Judgment it appears the libelous Words were utterly false, and there the
Falsehood was the Crime, and is the Ground of that Judgment: And is not that
what we contend for? Do not we insist that the Falshod makes the Scandal, and
both make the Libel? And how shall it be known whether the Words are libelous,
that is, true or false, but by admitting us to prove them true, since Mr.
Attorney will not (...) prove them false? Besides, is it not against common
Sense, that a (...) should be punished in the same Degree for a true Libel (if
any such (...) be) as for a false one? I know it is said, That Truth makes a
(...) provoking, and therefore the Offense is the greater, and consequently the
Judgment should be the heavier. Well, suppose it were so, and let us agree for
once, That Truth is a greater Sin than Falsehood: Yet as the Offenses are not
equal, and as the Punishment is arbitrary, that is, according as the Judges in
their Discretion shall direct to be inflicted; is it not absolutely necessary
that they should know, whether the Libel is true or false, that they may by
that Means be able to proportion the Punishment? For, would it not be a sad
Case, if the Judges, for want of a due Information, should chance to give as
severe a Judgment against a Man for writing or publishing a Lie, as for writing
or publishing a Truth? And yet this (with submission) as monstrous and
ridiculous as it may seem to be, is the natural Consequence of Mr. Attorney's
Doctrine, That Truth makes a worse Libel than Falsehood, and must follow from
his not proving our Papers to be false, or not suffering us to prove them to be
true. But this is only reasoning upon the Case, and I will now proceed to show,
what in my Opinion will be sufficient to induce the Court, to allow us to prove
the Truth of the Words, which in the Information are called libellous. And
first, I think there cannot be a greater Authority for us, than the Judgment I
just now mentioned, in the Case of John de Northampton, and that was in early
Times, and before the Star Chamber came to its Fullness of Power and Wickedness.
In that Judgment, as I observed, the Falsehood of the Letter which was wrote, is
assigned as the very Ground of the Sentence. And agreeable to this it was urged
by Sir Robert Sawyer, State Trials, Vol. 4.
in the Trial of the Seven Bishops, That the Falsity, the Malice, and Sedition
of the Writing, were all Facts to be proved. But here it may be said, Sir
Robert was one of the Bishop's Council, and his Argument is not to be allowed
for Law: But I offer it only to show that we are not the first who have
insisted, that to make a Writing a Libel, it must be false. And if the Argument
of a Council must have no Weight, I hope there will be more Regard shown to the
Opinion of a Judge, and therefore I mention the Words of Justice Powel in the
same Trial, where he says (of the Petition of the Bishops, which was called a
Libel, and upon which they were prosecuted by Information) That to make it a
Libel, it must be false and malicious, and tend to Sedition; and declared, as
he saw no Falsehood or Malice in it, he was of Opinion, that it was no Libel.
Now I should think this Opinion alone, in the Case of the King, and in a Case
which that King had so much at Heart, and which to this Day has never been
contradicted, might be a sufficent Authority, to entitle us to the Liberty of
proving the Truth of the Papers, which in the Information are called false,
malicious, seditious and scandalous. If it be objected, that the Opinions of
the other three Judges were against him. I answer, That the Censures the
Judgments of these Men have undergone, and the Approbation Justice Powel's
Opinion, his Judgment and Conduct upon that Trial has met with, and the Honor
he gained to himself, for daring to speak Truth at such a Time, upon such an
Occasion, and in the Reign of such a King, is more than sufficient, in my
humble Opinion, to warrant our insisting on his Judgment, as a full Authority
to our Purpose, and it will lie upon Mr. Attorney to show, that this Opinion
has since that Time been denied to be Law, or that Justice Powel who delivered
it, has ever been condemned or blamed for it, in any Law-Book extant at this
Day, and this I will venture to say, Mr. Attorney cannot do. But to make this
Point yet more clear, if any Thing can be clearer, I will on our Part proceed
and show, that in the Case of Sir Samuel Barnardiston. His Council,
notwithstanding he stood before one of the greatest Monsters that ever presided
in an English Court (Judge Jefferies) insisted on the Want of Proof, to the
Malice and seditious Intent of the Author, of what was called a Libel. And in
the Case of Tutchin, which seems to be Mr. Attorney's chief Authority, that
Case is against him; for he was upon his Trial put upon showing the Truth of
his Papers, but did not, at least the Prisoner was asked, State Trials Vol. V.
549.
by the King's Council whether he would say they were true? And as he never
pretended, that they were true, the Chief Justice was not to say so. But the
Point will still be clearer on our Side from Fuller's Case, State Trials Vol.
V. 445.
For falsely and wickedly causing to be printed a false and scandalous Libel, in
which (amongst other Things) were contained these Words, Mr. Jones has also
made Oath, That he paid L. 5000. more by the late King's Order, to several
Persons in Places of Trust, that they might complete my Ruin, and invalidate me
forever. Nor is this all; for the same Mr. Jones will prove by undeniable
Witness and Demonstration, that he has distributed more than L. 180,000. in
Eight Years last past, by the French King's Order, to Persons in public Trust
in this Kingdom. Here you see is a scandalous and infamous Charge against the
late King; here is a Charge no less than High Treason, against the Men in
public Trust, for receiving Money of the French King, then in actual War with
the Crown of Great Britain; and yet the Court were far from bearing him down
with that Star Chamber Doctrine, to wit, That it was no matter, whether what he
said was true or false; no, on the contrary, Lord Chief Justice Holt asks
Fuller, Can you make it appear, they are true? Have you any Witnesses? You
might have had Subpoena's for your Witnesses against this Day. If you take upon
you to write such Things as you are charged with, it lies upon you to prove
them true, at your Peril. If you have any Witnesses, I will hear them. How came
you to write those Books which are not true? If you have any Witnesses, produce
them. If you can offer any Matter to prove what you have wrote, let us hear it.
Thus said, and thus did, that great Man Lord Chief Justice Holt, upon a Trial
of the like Kind with ours, and the Rule laid down by him in this Case is, That
he who will take upon him to write Things, it lies upon him to prove them at
his Peril. Now, Sir, we have acknowledged the Printing and Publishing of those
Papers, set forth in the Information, and (with the Leave of the Court)
agreeable to the Rule laid down by Chief Justice Holt, we are ready to prove
them to be true, at our Peril.


Mr. Chapter Justice. Let me see the Book.


Here the Court had the Case under Consideration, a considerable Time, and
every one was silent.

Mr. Chapter Just. Mr. Attorney, you have heard what Mr. Hamilton has said, and the
Cases he has cited, for having his Witnesses examined, to prove the Truth of
the several Facts contained in the Papers set forth in the Information, what do
you say to it?


Mr. Attorney. The Law in my Opinion is very clear; they cannot be admitted to
justify a Libel; for, by the Authorities I have already read to the Court, it
is not the less a Libel because it is true. I think I need not trouble the
Court with reading the Cases over again; the Thing seems to be very plain, and
I submit it to the Court.


Mr. Chapter Just. Mr. Hamilton, the Court is of Opinion, you ought not to be
permitted to prove the Facts in the Papers: These are the Words of the Book, It
is far from beings a Justification of a Libel, that the Contents thereof are
true, or that the Person upon whom it is made, had a bad Reputation, since the
greater Appearance there is of Truth in any malicious Invective, so much the
more provoking it is.


Mr. Hamilton. These are Star Chamber Cases, and I was in hopes, that Practice
had been dead with the Court.


Mr. Chapter Just. Mr. Hamilton, the Court have delivered their Opinion, and we
expect you will use us with good Manners; you are not to be permitted to argue
against the Opinion of the Court.


Mr. Hamilton. With Submission, I have seen the Practice in very great Courts,
and never heard it deemed unmannerly to --


Mr. Chapter Just. After the Court have declared their Opinion, it is not good
Manners to insist upon a Point, in which you are overruled.


Mr. Hamilton. I will say no more at this Time; the Court I see is against us
in this Point; and that I hope I may be allowed to say.


Mr. Chapter Just. Use the Court with good Manners, and you shall be allowed all
the Liberty you can reasonably desire.


Mr. Hamilton. I thank Your Honor. Then Gentlemen of the Jury, it is to you we
must now appeal, for Witnesses, to the Truth of the Facts we have offered, and
are denied the Liberty to prove; and let it not seem strange, that I apply my
self to you in this Manner, I am warranted so to do both by Law and Reason. The
Law supposes you to be summoned, out of the Neighborhood where the Fact is
alleged to be committed; and the Reason of your being taken out of the
Neighborhood is, because you are supposed to have the best Knowledge of the
Fact that is to be tried. And were you to find a Verdict against my Client, you
must take upon you to say, the Papers referred to in the Information, and which
we acknowledge we printed and published, are false, scandalous and seditious;
but of this I can have no Apprehension. You are Citizens of New York; you are
really what the Law supposes you to be, honest and lawful Men; and, according
to my Brief, the Facts which we offer to prove were not committed in a Corner;
they are notoriously known to be true; and therefore in your Justice lies our
Safety. And as we are denied the Liberty of giving Evidence, to prove the Truth
of what we have published, I will beg Leave to lay it down as a standing Rule
in such Cases, That the suppressing of Evidence ought always to be taken for
the strongest Evidence; and I hope it will have that Weight with you. But since
we are not admitted to examine our Witnesses, I will endeavor to shorten the
Dispute with Mr. Attorney, and to that End, I desire he would favor us with
some Standard Definition of a Libel, by which it may be certainly known,
whether a Writing be a Libel, yea or not.


Mr. Attorney. The Books, I think, have given a very full Definition of a
Libel; 1 Hawk. Chap. LXXIII.. 1. and seq.
they say it is in a strict Sense taken for a malicious Defamation, expressed
either in Printing or Writing, and tending either to blacken the Memory of one
who is dead, or the Reputation of one who is alive, and to expose him to
public Hatred, Contempt or Ridicule..? But it is said, That in a larger Sense
the Notion of a Libel may be applied to any Defamation whatsoever, expressed
either by Signs or Pictures, as by fixing up a Gallows against a Man's Door, or
by painting him in a shameful and ignominious Manner.. 3. And since the chief
Cause for which the Law so severely punishes all Offenses of this Nature, is
the direct Tendency of them to a Breach of Public Peace, by provoking the
Parties injured, their Friends and ^^milies to Acts of Revenge, which it would
be impossible to restrain by the severest (...), were there no Redress from
Public Justice for Injuries of this kind, which of all others are most
sensibly felt, and since the plain Meaning of such (...) pressed by Signs or
Pictures, is as obvious to common Sense, and (...) by every common Capacity,
and altogether as provoking (...) pressed by Writing or Printing, why should it
not be (...) from the same Ground it seems also clearly to follow. (...)
pressed in a scoffing and ironical Manner, makes a Writing as (...) that which
is expressed in direct Terms; as where a Writing, in a (...) reckoning up
several Acts of public Charity done by one, says You will (...) play the Jew,
nor the Hypocrite, and so goes on in a Strain of Ridicule to insinuate, that
what he did was owing to his Vainglory; or where a Writing pretending to
recommend to one the Characters of several great Men for his Imitation, instead
of taking Notice of what they are generally esteemed famous for, pitched on
such Qualities only which their Enemies charge them with the Want of, as by
proposing such a one to be imitated for his Courage, who is known to be a great
Statesman, but no Soldier, and another to be imitated for his Learning, who is
known to be a great General, but no Scholar, etc. which Kind of Writing is as
well understood to mean only to upbraid the Parties with the Want of these
Qualities, as if it had directly and expressly done so.


Mr. Hamilton. Ay, Mr. Attorney; but what certain Standard Rule have the Books
laid down, by which we can certainly know, whether the Words or the Signs are
malicious? Whether they are defamatory? Whether they tend to the Breach of the
Peace, and are a sufficient Ground to provoke a Man, his Family, or Friends to
Acts of Revenge, especially those of the ironical sort of Words? And what Rule
have you to know when I write ironically? I think it would be hard, when I say,
such a Man is a very worthy honest Gentleman, and of fine Understanding, that
therefore I meant he was a Knave or a Fool.


Mr. Attorney. I think the Books are very f^ll; it is said in 1 Hawk. p. 193.
just now read, That such Scandal as is expressed in a scoffing and ironical
Manner, makes a Writing as properly a Libel, as that which is expressed in
direct Terms; as where a Writing, in a taunting Manner says, reckoning up
several Acts of Charity done by one, says, you will not play the Jew or the
Hypocrite, and so goes on to insinuate, that what he did was owing to his
Vainglory, etc. Which Kind of Writing is as well understood to mean only to
upbraid the Parties with the Want of these Qulities, as if it had directly and
expressly done so. I think nothing can be plainer or more full than these Words.


Mr. Hamilton. I agree the Words are very plain, and I shall not scruple to
allow (when we are agreed that the Wordsare false and scandalous, and were
spoken in an ironical and scoffing Manner, etc.) that they are really
libellous; but here still occurs the Uncertainty, which makes the Difficulty to
know, what Words are scandalous and what not; for you say, they may be
scandalous, true or false; besides, how shall we know whether the Words were
spoke in a scoffing and ironical Manner, or (...)? Or how can you know, whether
the Man did not think as he w^^t^* For by your Rule, if he did, it is no Irony,
and consequently no Libel. But under Favor, Mr. Attorney, I think the same
Book, and the same S^c^^on will show us the only Rule by which all these Things
are to be known. The Words are these; which Kind of Writing is as well
UNDERSTOOD (...) only to upbraid the Parties with the Want of these Qualities,
as if they had (...) and expressly done so. Here it is plain, the Words are
scandalous, scoffing (...)* only as they are UNDERSTOOD. I know no Rule laid
dow^ (...) but this, I mean, as the Words are understood.


Mr. Chapter Just. Mr. Hamilton, do you (...) hard to know, when Words are
ironical, or spoke in a scoffing (...)?


Mr. Hamilton. I own it may be known; (...) I insist, the only Rule to know is,
as I do or can understand them; I have no other Rule to go by, but as I
understand them.


Mr. Chapter Just. That is certain. All Words are libellous or not, as they are
understood. Those who are to judge of the Words, must judge whether they are
scandalous or ironical, tend to the Breach of the Peace, or are seditious:
There can be no Doubt of it.


Mr. Hamilton. I thank Your Honor; I am glad to find the Court of this
Opinion. Then it follows that those twelve Men must understand the Words in the
Information to be scandalous, that is to say false; for I think it is not
pretended they are of the ironical Sort; and when they understand the Words to
be so, they will say we are guilty of Publishing a false Libel, and not
otherwise.


Mr. Chapter Just. No, Mr. Hamilton; the Jury may find that Zenger printed and
published those Papers, and leave it to the Court to judge whether they are
libellous; you know this is very common; it is in the Nature of a special
Verdict, where the Jury leave the Matter of Law to the Court.


Mr. Hamilton. I know, may it please Your Honor, the Jury may do so; but I do
likewise know, they may do otherwise. I know they have the Right beyond all
Dispute, to determine both the Law and the Fact, and where they do not doubt of
the Law, they ought to do so. This of leaving it to the Judgment of the Court,
whether the Words are libellous or not, in Effect renders Juries useless (to
say no worse) in many Cases; but this I shall have Occasion to speak to by and
by; and I will with the Court's Leave proceed to examine the Inconveniences
that must inevitably arise from the ^^^trines Mr. Attorney has laid down; and I
observe, in support of this Pro^^^^^on, he has frequently repeated the Words
taken from the Case of Libel. famosu^* in 5. Co. This is indeed the leading
Case, and to which almost all the other Cases upon the Subject of Libels do
refer; and I must insist upon saying, That according as this Case seems to be
understood by the (...) and Mr. Attorney, it is not Law at this Day: For though I
own it to be base and unworthy to scandalize any Man, yet I think it is even
vilanous to scandalize a Person of public Character, and I will go so far into
Mr. Attorney's Doctrine as to agree, that if the Faults, Mistakes, nay even the
Vices of such a Person be private and personal, and don't affect the Peace of
the Public, or the Liberty or Property of our Neighbor, it is unmanly and
unmannerly to expose them either by Word or Writing. But when a Ruler of a
People brings his personal Failings, but much more his Vices, into his
Administration, and the People find themselves affected by them, either in
their Liberties or Properties, that will alter the Case mightily, and all the
high Things that are said in Favor of Rulers, and of Dignities, and upon the
side of Power, will not be able to stop People's Mouths when they feel
themselves oppressed, I mean in a free Government. It is true in Times past it
was a Crime to speak Truth, and in that terrible Court of Star Chamber, many
worthy and brave Men suffered for so doing; and yet even in that Court, and in
those bad Times, a great and good Man durst say, what I hope will not be taken
amiss of me to say in this Place, to wit, The Practice of Informations for
Libels is a Sword in the Hands of a wicked King, and an arrand Coward, to cut
down and destroy the innocent; the one cannot; because of his high Station, and
the other dares not, because of his Want of Courage, revenge himself in another
Manner.


Mr. Attorney. Pray Mr. Hamilton, have a Care what you say, don't go too far
neither, I don't like those Liberties.


Mr. Hamilton. Sure, Mr. Attorney, you will not make any Applications; all Men
agree that we are governed by the best of Kings, and I cannot see the Meaning
of Mr. Attorney's Caution; my well known Principles, and the Sense I have of
the Blessings we enjoy under His present Majesty, makes it impossible for me to
err, and I hope, even to be suspected, in that Point of Duty to my King. May it
please Your Honor, I was saying, That notwithstanding all the Duty and
reverence claimed by Mr. Attorney to Men in Authority, they are not exempt from
observing the Rules of common Justice, either in their private or public
Capacities; the Laws of our Mother Country know no Exemption. It is true, Men
in Power are harder to be come at for Wrongs they do, either to a private
Person, or to the public; especially a Governor in the Plantations, where
they insist upon an Exemption from answering Complaints of any Kind in their
own Government. We are indeed told, and it is true they are obliged to answer a
Suit in the King's Courts at Westminster, for a Wrong done to any Person here:
But do we not know how impracticable this is to most Men among us, to leave
their Families (who depend upon their Labor and Care for their Livelihood) and
carry Evidences to Britain, and at a great, nay, a far greater Expense than
almost any of us are able to bear, only to prosecute a Governor for an Injury
done here. But when the Oppression is general there is no Remedy even that Way,
no, our Constitution has (blessed be God) given us an Opportunity, if not to
have such Wrongs redressed, yet by our Prudence and Resolution we may in a
great Measure prevent the committing of such Wrongs, by making a Governor
sensible that it is his interest to be just to those under his Care; for such
is the Sense that Men in General (I mean Freemen) have of common Justice, that
when they come to know, that a chief Magistrate abuses the Power with which he
is trusted, for the good of the People, and is attempting to turn that very
Power against the Innocent, whether of high or low degree, I say, Mankind in
general seldom fail to interpose, and as far as they can, prevent the
Destruction of their fellow Subjects. And has it not often been seen (and I
hope it will always be seen) that when the Representatives of a free People are
by just Representations or Remonstrances, made sensible of the Sufferings of
their Fellow Subjects, by the Abuse of Power in the Hands of a Governor, they
have declared (and loudly too) that they were not obliged by any Law to support
a Governor who goes about to destroy a Province or Colony, or their
Privileges, which by His Majesty he was appointed, and by the Law he is bound
to protect and encourage. But I pray it may be considered of what Use is this
mighty Privilege, if every Man that suffers must be silent? And if a Man must
be taken up as a Libeller, for telling his Sufferings to his Neighbor? I know
it may be answered, Have you not a Legislature? Have you not a House of
Representatives to whom you may complaint? And to this I answer, we have. But
what then? Is an Assembly to be troubled with every Injury done by a Governor?
Or are they to hear of nothing but what those in the Administration will please
to tell them? Or what Sort of a Trial must a Man have? And how is he to be
remedied; especially if the Case were, as I have known it to happen in America
in my Time; That a Governor who has Places (I will not Pensions, for I believe
they seldom give that to another which they can take to themselves) to bestow,
and can or will keep the same Assembly (after he has modeled them so as to get
a Majority of the House in his Interest) for near twice Seven Years together? I
pray, what Redress is to be expected for an honest Man, who makes his Complaint
against a Governor, to an Assembly who may properly enough be said, to be made
by the same Governor against whom the Complaint is made? The Thing answers it
self. No, it is natural, it is a Privilege, I will go farther, it is a Right
which all Freemen claim, and are entitled to complain when they are hurt; they
have a Right publicly to remonstrate the Abuses of Power, in the strongest
Terms, to put their Neighbors upon their Guard, against the Craft or open
Violence of Men in Authority, and to assert with Courage the Sense they have of
the Blessings of Liberty, the Value they put upon it, and their Resolution at
all Hazards to preserve it, as one of the greatest Blessings Heaven can bestow.
And when a House of Assembly composed of honest Freemen sees the general Bent
of the Peoples Inclinations, That is it which must and will (I Am sure it ought
to) weigh with a Legislature, in Spite of all the Craft, Carressing and
Cajoling, made use of by a Governor, to divert them from harkening to the
Voice of their Country. As we all very well understand the true Reason, why
Gentlemen take so much Pains and make such great Interest to be appointed
Governors, so is the Design of their Apointment not less manifest. We know his
Majesty's gracious Intentions to his Subjects; he desires no more than that his
People in the Plantations should be kept up to their Duty and Allegiance to the
Crown of Great Britain, that Peace may be preserved amongst them, and Justice
impartially administered; that we may be governed so as to render us useful to
our Mother Country, by encouraging us to make and raise such Commodities as may
be useful to Great Britain. But will any one say, that all or any of these good
Ends are to be effected, by a Governor's setting his People together by the
Ears, and by the Assistance of one Part of the People to plague and plunder the
other? The Commission which Governors bear, while they execute the Powers
given them, according to the Intent of the Royal Grantor, expressed in their
Commissions, requires and deserves very great Reverence and Submission; but
when a Governor departs from the Duty enjoined him by his Sovereign, and acts
as if he was less accountable than the Royal Hand that gave him all that Power
and Honor which he is possessed of; this sets People upon examining and
enquiring into the Power, Authority and Duty of such a Magistrate, and to
compare those with his Conduct, and just as far as they find he exceeds the
Bounds of his Authority, or falls short in doing impartial Justice to the
People under his Administration, so far they very often, in return, come short
in their Duty to such a Governor. For Power alone will not make a Man beloved,
and I have heard it observed. That the Man who was neither good nor wise before
his being made a Governor, never mended upon his Preferment, but has been
generally observed to be worse: For Men who are not endued with Wisdom and
Virtue, can only be kept in Bounds by the Law; and by how much the further they
think themselves out of the Reach of the Law, by so much the more wicked and
cruel Men are. I wish there were no Instances of the Kind at this Day. And
wherever this happens to be the Case of a Governor, unhappy are the People
under his Administration, and in the End he will find himself so too; for the
People will neither love him nor support him. I make no Doubt but there are
those here, who are zealously concerned for the Success of this Prosecution,
and yet I hope they are not many, and even some of those, I am persuaded (when
they consider what Lengths such Prosecutions may be carried, and how deeply the
Liberties of the People may be affected by such Means) will not all abide by
their present Sentiments; I say, Not All: For the Man who from an Intimacy and
Acquaintance with a Governor has conceived a personal Regard for him, the Man
who has felt none of the Strokes of his Power, the Man who believes that a
Governor has a Regard for him and confides in him, it is natural for such Men
to wish well to the Affairs of such a Governor; and as they may be Men of
Honor and Generosity, may, and no Doubt will, wish him Success, so far as the
Rights and Privileges of their Fellow Citizens are not affected. But as Men of
Honor, I can apprehend nothing from them; they will never exceed that Point.
There are others that are under stronger Obligations, and those are such, as
are in some Sort engaged in Support of a Governor's Cause, by their own or
their Relations Dependence on his Favor, for some Post or Preferment; such Men
have what is commonly called Duty and Gratitude, to influence their
Inclinations, and oblige them to go his Lengths. I know Men's Interests are
very near to them, and they will do much, rather than forgo the Favor of a
Governor, and a Livelihood at the same Time; but I can with very just Grounds
hope, even from those Men, whom I will suppose to be Men of Honor and
Conscience too, that when they, the Liberty of their Country is in Danger,
either by their Concurrence, or even by their Silence, they will like
Englishmen, and like themselves, freely make a Sacrifice of any Preferment or
Favor rather than be accessory to destroying the Liberties of their Country,
and entailing Slavery upon their Posterity. There are indeed another set of
Men, of whom I have no Hopes, I mean such, who lay aside all other
Considerations, and are ready to join with Power in any Shapes, and with any
Man or Sort of Men, by whose Means or Interest they may be assisted to gratify
their Malice and Envy against those whom they have been pleased to hate; and
that for no other Reason, but because they are Men of Abilities and Integrity,
or at least are possessed of some valuable Qualities far superior to their
own. But as Envy is the Sin of the Devil, and therefore very hard, if at all,
to be repented, of, I will believe there are but few of this detestable and
worthless Sort of Men, nor will their Opinions or Inclinations have any
Influence upon this Trial. But to proceed; I beg Leave to insist, That the
Right of complaining or remonstrating is natural; And the Restraint upon this
natural Right is the Law only, and that those Restraints can only extend to
what is false: For as it is Truth alone which can excuse or justify any Man for
complaining of a bad Administration, I as frankly agree, that nothing ought to
excuse a Man who raises a false Charge or Accusation, even against a private
Person, and that no manner of Allowance ought to be made to him, who does so
against a public Magistrate. Truth ought to govern the whole Affair of Libels,
and yet the Party accused runs Risque enough even then; for if he fails of
proving every Tittle of what he has wrote, and to the Satisfaction of the Court
and Jury too, he may find to his Cost, that when the Prosecution is set or Foot
by Men in Power, it seldom wants Friends to Favor it. And from thence (it is
said) has arisen the great Diversity of Opinions among Judges, about what Words
were or were not scandalous or libelious. I believe will be granted, that there
is not greater Uncertainty in any Part of the Law, than about Words of scandal;
it would be mispending of the Court's Time to mention the Cases; they may be
said to be numberless; and therefore the utmost Care ought to be taken in
following Precedents; and the Times when the Judgments were given, which are
quoted for Authorities in the Case of Libels, are much to be regarded. I think
it will be agreed, That ever since the Time of the Star Chamber, where the most
arbitrary and destructive Judgments and Opinions were given, that ever an
Englishman heard of, at lest in his own Country: I say, Prosecutions for Libels
since the Time of that arbitrary Court, and until the glorious Revolution, have
generally been set on Foot at the Instance of the Crown or its Ministers; and
it is no small Reproach to the Law, that these Prosecutions were too often and
too much countenanced by the Judges, who held their Places at Pleasure, (a
disagreeable Tenure to any Officer, but a dangerous one in the Case of a
Judge.) To say more to this Point may not be proper. And yet I cannot think it
unwarrantable, to show the unhappy Influence that a Sovereign has sometimes
had, not only upon Judges, but even upon Parliaments themselves.

It has already been shown, how the Judges differed in their Opinions about the
Nature of a Libel, in the Case of the seven Bishops. There you see three Judges
of one Opinion, that is, of a wrong Opinion, in the Judgment of the best Men in
England, and one Judge of a right Opinion. How unhappy might it have been for
all of us at this Day, if that Jury had understood the Words in that
Information as the Court did? Or if they had left it to the Court, to judge
whether the Petition of the Bishops was or was not a Libel? No they took upon
them, to their immortal Honor! to determine both Law and Fact, and to
understand the Petition of the Bishops to be no Libel, that is, to contain no
falsehood nor Sedition, and therefore found them Not Guilty. And remarkable is
the Case of Sir Samuel Barnardiston, who was fined 10,000 L. for Writing a
Letter, in which, it may be said, none saw any Scandal or Falsehood but the
Court and Jury; for that Judgment was afterward looked upon as a cruel and
detestable Judgment, and therefore was reversed by Parliament. Many more
Instances might be given of the Complaisance of Court-Judges, about those Times
and before; but I will mention only one Case more, and that is the Case of Sir
Edward Hales, who though a Roman Catholic, was by King James II. prefered to be
a Colonel of his Army, notwithstanding the Statute of 25 Cha. 2 d. Chap. 2. by
which it is provided, That every one that accepts of an Office, Civil or
Military, etc. shall take the Oaths, subscribe the Declaration, and take the
Sacrament, within three Months, etc. otherwise he is disabled to hold such
Office, and the Grant for the same to be null and void, and the Party to
forfeit 500 l. Sir Edward Hales did not take the Oaths or Sacrament, and was
prosecuted for the 500 l. for exercising the Office of a Colonel by the Space
of three Months, without conforming as in the Act is directed. Sir Edward
pleads. That the King by His Letters Patents did dispense with his taking the
Oaths and Sacrament, and subscribing the Declaration, and had pardoned the
forfeiture of 500 l. And whether the King's Dispensation was good, against the
said Act of Parliament? was the Question. I shall mention no more of this Case,
than to show how in the Reign of an arbitrary Prince, where Judges hold their
Seats at Pleasure, their Determinations have not always been such as to make
Precedents of, but the Contrary; and so it happened in this Case where it was
solemnly judged, That, notwithstanding this Act of Parliament, made in the
strongest Terms, for Preservation of the Protestant Religion, That yet the King
had, by his Royal Prerogative, a Power to dispense with that Law; and Sir
Edward Hales was acquitted by the Judges accordingly. So the King's Dispensing
Power, being by the Judges set up above the Act of Parliament, this Law, which
the People looked upon as their chief Security against Popery and Arbitrary
Power, was by this Judgment rendered altogether ineffectual. But this Judgment
is sufficiently exposed by Sir Edward Atkins, Sir Edw. Atkins's Enquiry into
the Power of Dispensing with paenal Statutes.
late one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas in his Enquiry into the
King's Power of dispensing with paenal Statutes; where it is shown, Who it was
that first invented Dispensations; how they came into England; what ill Use has
been made of them there; and all this principally owing to the Countenance
given them by the Judges. He says of the Dispensing Power, Postscript to the
Enquiry, page 51.
The Pope was the Inventor of it; our Kings have borrowed it from them; and the
Judges have from Time to Time nursed and dressed it up, and given it
Countenance; and it is still upon the Growth, and encroaching 'till it has
almost subverted all Law, and made the Regal Power absolute if not disolute.
This seems not only to show how far Judges have been influenced by Power, and
how little Cases of this Sort, where the Prerogative has been in Question in
former Reigns, are to be relied upon for Law: But I think it plainly shows too,
that a Man may use a greater Freedom with the Power of His Sovereign and the
Judges in Great Britain, than it seems he may with the Power of a Governor in
the Plantations, who is but a Fellow-Subject. Are these Words with which we are
charged, like these? Do Mr. Zenger's Papers contain any such Freedoms with his
Governor or His Council, as Sir Edward Atkins has taken, with the Regal Power
and the Judges in England? And yet I never heard of any Information brought
against him for these Freedoms.

If then upon the whole there is so great an Uncertainty among Judges (learned
and great Men) in Matters of this Kind; If Power has had so great an Influence
on Judges; how cautious ought we to be in determining by their Judgments,
especially in the Plantations, and in the Case of Libels? There is Heresy in
Law, as well as in Religion, and both have changed very much; and we well know
that it is not two Centuries ago that a Man would have been burnt as an
Heretic, for owning such Opinions in Matters of Religion as are publicly
wrote and printed at this Day. They were fallible Men, it seems, and we take
the Liberty not only to differ from them in religious Opinions, but to condemn
them and their Opinions too; and I must presume, that in taking these Freedoms
in thinking and speaking about Matters of Faith or Religion, we are in the
right: For, though it is said there are very great Liberties of this Kind taken
in NeweYork, yet I have heard of no Information prefered by Mr. Attorney for
any Offenses of this Sort. From which I think it is pretty clear, That in
New York a Man may make very free with his God, but he must take special Care
what he says of his Governor. It is agreed upon by all Men that this is a
Reign of Liberty, and while Men keep within the Bounds of Truth, I hope they
may with Safety both speak and write their Sentiments of the Conduct of Men in
Power, I men of that Part of their Conduct only, which affects the Liberty or
Property of the People under their Administration; were this to be denied, then
the next Step may make them Slaves: For what Notions can be entertained of
Slavery, beyond that of suffering the greatest Injuries and Oppressions,
without the Liberty of complaining; or if they do, to be destroyed, Body and
Estate, for so doing?

It is said and insisted on by Mr. Attorney, That Government is a sacred Thing;
That it is to be supported and reverenced; It is Government that protects our
Persons and Estates; That prevents Treasons, Murders, Robberies, Riots, and all
the Train of Evils that overturns Kingdoms and States, and ruins particular
Persons; and if those in the Administration especially the Supreme Magistrate
must have all their Conduct censured by private Men, Government cannot subsist.
This is called a Licentiousness not to be tolerated. It is said, That it
brings the Rulers of the People into Contempt, and their Authority not to be
regarded, and so in the End the Laws cannot be put in Execution. These I say,
and such as those, are the general Topics insisted upon by Men in Power, and
their Advocates. But I wish it might be considered at the same Time, How often
it has happened, that the Abuse of Power has been the primary Cause of these
Evils, and that it was the Injustice and Oppression of these great Men, which
has commonly brought them into Contempt with the People. The Craft and Art of
such Men is great, and who, that is the least acquainted with History or Law,
can be ignorant of the specious Pretenses, which have often been made use of by
Men in Power, to introduce arbitrary Rule, and destroy the Liberties of a free
People. I will give two Instances: and as they are Authorities not to be
denied, nor can be misunderstood, I presume they will be sufficient.

The first is the Statute of 3 l. of Hen. 7. Cap. 1. The Preamble of the
Statute will prove all, and more than I have alleged. It begins, The King Our
Sovereign Lord remembereth how by unlawful Maintenances, giving of Liveries,
Signs and Tokens, etc. untrue Demeanings of Sheriffs in making of Pannels, and
other untrue Returns, by taking of Money, by Injuries, by great Riots and
unlawful Assemblies; the Policy and good Rule of this Realm is almost subdued;
and for the not punishing these Inconveniences, and by Occasion of the
Premises, little or nothing may be found by Inquiry, etc. to the increase of
Murders, etc. and unsureties of all Men living, and Losses of their Lands and
Good^. Here is a fine and specious Pretense for introducing the Remedy, as it
is called, which is provided by this Act, that is; instead of being lawfully
accused by 24 good and lawful Men of the Neighborhood, and afterward tried by
12 like lawful Men, here is a Power given to the Lord Chancellor, Lord
Treasurer, the Keeper of the King's privy Seal, or two of them, calling to them
a Bishop, a temporal Lord, and other great Men mentioned in the Act, (who, it
is to be observed, were all to be Dependants on the Court) to receive
Information against any Person for any of the Misbehaviours recited in that
Act, and by their Discretion to examine, and to punish them according to their
demerit.

The second Statute I proposed to mention, is the 11 th of the same King, Chap.
3 d. the Preamble of which Act has the like fair Pretenses as the former; for
the King calling to his Remembrance the good Laws made against the receiving of
Liveries, etc. unlawful Extortions, Maintenances, Embracery, etc. unlawful
Games, etc. and many other great Enormitys, and Offenses committed against many
good Statutes, to the Displeasure of Almighty God, which, the Act says, could
not, nor yet can, be conveniently punished by the due Order of the Law, except
it were first found by 12 Men, etc. which, for the Causes aforesaid, will not
find nor yet present the Truth. And therefore the same Statute directs, that
the Justices of Assize, and Justices of the Peace, shall, upon Information for
the King before them made, have full Power, by their Discretion, to hear and
determine all such Offenses. Here are two Statutes that are allowed to have
given the deepest Wound to the Liberties of the People of England of any that I
remember to have been made, unless it may be said, that the Statute made in the
Time of Henry 8 th, by which his Proclamations were to have the Effect of Laws,
might in its Consequence be worse. And yet we see the plausible Pretenses found
out by the great Men to procure these Acts. And it may justly be said, That by
those Pretenses the People of England were cheated or awed into the Delivering
up their ancient and sacred Right of Trials by Grand and Petit Juries. I hope
to be excused for this Expression, seeing my Lord Coke calls it an unjust and
strange Act, 4. Inst.
that tended in its Execution to the great Displeasure of Almighty God, and the
utter Subversion of the common Law.

These, I think, make out what I alleged, and are flagrant Instances of the
Influence of Men in Power, even upon the Representatives of a whole Kingdom.
From all which I hope it will be agreed, that it is a Duty which all good Men
owe to their Country, to guard against the unhappy Influence of ill Men when
entrusted with Power, and especially against their Creatures and Dependants,
who, as they are generally more necessitous, are surely more covetous and
cruel. But it is worthy of Observation, that though the Spirit of Liberty was
born down and oppressed in England at that Time, yet it was not lost; for the
Parliament laid hold of the first Opportunity to free the Subject from the many
insufferable Oppressions and Outrages committed upon their Persons and Estates
by Color of these Acts, the last of which being deemed the most grievous, was
repealed in the first Year of Hen. 8 th. Though it is to be observed, that Hen. 7
th. and his Creatures reaped such great Advantages by the grievous Oppressions
and Exactions, grinding the Faces of the poor Subjects, as my Lord Coke says,
by Color of this Stature by information only, that a Repeal of this Act could
never be obtained during the Life of that Prince. The other Statute being the
favorite Law for Supporting arbitrary Power, was continued much longer. The
Execution of it was by the great Men of the Realm; and how they executed it,
the Sense of the Kingdom, expressed in the 17 th of Charles 1 st. (by which the
Court of Star Chamber, the Soil where Informations grew rankest) will best
declare. In that Statute Magna Charta, and the other Statutes made in the Time
of Edw. 3 l. which I think, are no less than five, are particularly enumerated
as Acts, by which the Liberties and Privileges of the People of England were
secured to them, against such oppressive Courts as the Star Chamber and others
of the like Jurisdiction. And the Reason assigned for their pulling down the
Star Chamber, is That the Proceedings, Censures and Decrees of the Court of
Star Chamber, even though the great Men of the Realm, nay and a Bishop too (holy
Man) were Judges, had by Experience been found to be an intolerable Burden to
the Subject, and the Means to introduce an arbitrary Power and Government. And
therefore that Court was taken away, with all the other Courts in that Statute
mentioned, having like Jurisdiction.

I don't mention this Statute, as if by the taking away the Court of Star
Chamber, the Remedy for many of the Abuses or Offenses censured there, was
likewise taken away; no, I only intend by it to show, that the People of
England saw clearly the Danger of trusting their Liberties and Properties to be
tried, even by the greatest Men in the Kingdom, without the Judgment of a Jury
of their Equals. They had felt the terrible effects of leaving it to the
Judgment of these great Men to say what was scandalous and seditious false or
ironical. And if the Parliament of England thought this Power of judging was
too great to be trusted with Men of the first Rank in the Kingdom, without the
Aid of a Jury, how sacred soever their Characters might be, and therefore
restored to the People their original Right of trial by Juries I hope to be
excused for insisting, that by the Judgment of a Parliament from whence no
Appeal lies, the Jury are the proper Judges, of what is false at least, if not
of what is scandalous and seditious. This is an Authority not to be denied, it
is as plain as it is great, and to say, that this Act indeed did restore to the
People Trials by Juries, which was not the Practice of the Star Chamber, but
that did not give the Jurors any new Authority, or any Right to try Matters of
Law, I say this Objection will not avail; for I must insist, that where Matter
of Law is complicated with Matter of Fact, the Jury have a Right to determine
both. As for Instance; upon Indictment for Murder, the Jury may, and almost
constantly do, take upon them to judge whether the Evidence will amount to
Murder or Manslaughter, and find accordingly; and I must say I cannot see, why
in our Case the Jury have not at least as good a Right to say, whether our News
Papers are a Libel or no Libel, as another Jury has to say, whether killing of
a Man is Murder or Manslaughter. The Right of the Jury, to find such a Verdict
as they in their Conscience do think is agreeable to their Evidence, is
supported by the Authority of Bushel's Case, in Vaghan's Reports, page 135.
beyond any Doubt. For, in the Argument of that Case, the Chief Justice who
delivered the Opinion of the Court, lays it down for Law, That in all General
Issues, as upon Non Cul. in Trespass, Non Tort. Null Disseizin in Assize,
Vaghan's Rep. p. ^^^
etc. though it is Matter of Law, whether the Defendant is a Trespasser, a
Disseizer, etc. in the particular Cases in Issue, yet the Jury find not (as in
a special Verdict) the Fact of every Case, leaving the Law to the Court; but
find for the Plaintiff or Defendant upon the Issue to be tried, wherein they
resolve both Law and Fact complicately. It appears by the same Case, that though
the discreet and lawful Assistance of the Judge, by Way of Advice, to the Jury,
may be useful; yet that Advice or Direction ought always to be upon
Supposition, page 144.
and not positive, and upon Coersion. The Reason given in the same Book is,
Because the Judge (as Judge) cannot know what the Evidence is which the Jury
have, that is, page 147.
he can only know the Evidence given in Court; but the Evidence which the Jury
have, may be of their own Knowledge, as they are returned of the Neighborhood.
They may also know from their own Knowledge, that what is sworn in Court is not
true; and they may know the Witnesses to be stigmatized, to which the Court may
be strangers. But what is to my Purpose, is, that suppose that the Court did
really know all the Evidence which the Jury know, yet in that Case it is
agreed, That the Judge and Jury may differ in the Result of their Evidence as
well at two Judges may, which often happens. And in page 148. the Judge
subjoins the Reason, why it is no Crime for a Jury to differ in Opinion from
the Court, where he says, That a Man cannot see with another's Eye, nor hear by
another's Ear; no more can a Man conclude or infer the Thing by another
Understanding or Reasoning. From all which (I insist) it is very plain, That
the Jury are by Law as Liberty (without any affront to the Judgment of the
Court) to find both the Law and the Fact, in our Case, as they did in the Case
I am speaking to, which I will beg Leave just to mention, and it was this. Mr.
Penn and Mead being Quakers, and having met in a peaceable Manner, after being
shut out of their Meeting House, preached in Grace Church Street in London, to
the People of their own Persuasion, and for this they were indicted; and it was
said, That they with other Persons, to the Number of 300. unlawfully and
tumultuously assembled, to the Disturbance of the Peace, etc. To which they
pleaded, Not Guilty. And the Petit Jury being sworn to try the Issue between
the King and the Prisoners, that is, whether they were Guilty, according to the
Form of the Indictment? Here there was no Dispute but they were assembled
together, to the Number mentioned in the Indictment; But, Whether that Meeting
together was riotously, tumultuously, and to the Disturbance of the Peace? was
the Question. And the Court told the Jury it was, and ordered the Jury to find
it so; For (said the Court) the Meeting was the Matter of Fact, and that is
confessed, and we tell you it is unlawful, for it is against the Statute; and
the Meeting being unlawful, it follows of Course that it was tumultuous, and to
the Disturbance of the Peace. But the Jury did not think fit to take the Courts
Word for it, for they could neither find Riot, Tumult, or any Thing tending to
the Breach of the Peace committed at that Meeting; and they acquitted Mr. Penn
and Mead. In doing of which they took upon them to judge both the Law and the
Fact, at which the Court (being themselves true Courtiers) were so much
offended, that they fined the Jury 40 Marks a piece, and committed them till
paid. But Mr. Bushel, who valued the Right of a Juryman and the Liberty of his
Country more than his own, refused to pay the Fine, and was resolved (though at a
great Expense and trouble too) to bring, and did bring, his Habeas Corpus, to
be relieved from his Fine and Imprisonment, and he was released accordingly;
and this being the Judgment in his Case, it is established for Law, That the
Judges, how great soever they be, have no Right to fine imprison or punish a
Jury, for not finding a Verdict according to the Direction of the Court. And
this I hope is sufficient to prove, That Jurymen are to see with their own
Eyes, to hear with their own Ears, and to make use of their own Consciences and
Understandings, in judging of the Lives, Liberties or Estates of their fellow
Subjects. And so I have done with this Point.

This is the second Information for Libelling of a Governor that I have known
in America. And the first, though it may look like a Romance, yet as it is true,
I will beg Leave to mention it. Governor Nicholson who happened to be offended
with one his Clergy, met him one Day upon the Road, and as was usual with him
(under the Protection of his Commission) used the poor Parson with the worst of
Language, threatened to cut off his Ears, slit his Nose, and at last to shoot
him through the Head. The Parson being a reverend Man, continued all this Time
uncovered in the Heat of the Sun, until he found an Opportunity to fly for it;
and coming to a Neighbors House felt himself very ill of a Fever, and
immediately writes for a Doctor; and that his Physician might the better judge
of his Distemper, he acquainted him with the Usage he had received; concluding,
that the Governor was certainly mad, for that no Man in his Senses would have
behaved in that manner. The Doctor unhappily shows the Parsons Letter; the
Governor came to hear of it; and so an Information was prefered against the
poor Man for saying he believed the Governor was mad; and it was laid in the
Information to be false, scandalous and wicked, and wrote with Intent to move
Sedition among the People, and bring His Excellency into Contempt. But by an
Order from the late Queen Anne, there was a Stop put to that Prosecution, with
sundry others set on foot by the same Governor, against Gentlemen of the
greatest Worth and Honor in that Government.

And may not I be allowed, after all this, to say, That by a little
Countenance, almost any Thing which a Man writes, may, with the Help of that
useful Term of Art, called an Innuendo, be construed to be a Libel, according
to Mr. Attorney's Definition of it, That whether the Words are spoke of a
Person of a public Character, or of a private Man, whether dead or Living,
good or bad, true or false all make Libel; for according to Mr. Attorney, after
a Man hears a Writing read, or reads and repeats it, or laughs at it, they are
all punishable. It is true, Mr. Attorney is so good as to allow, after the
Party knows it to be a Libel, but he is not so kind as to take the Man's Word
for it.


Here were several Cases put to show, That though what a Man writes of a
Governor was true, proper and necessary, yet according to the forgoing
Doctrine it might be construed to be a Libel: But Mr. Hamilton after the Trial
was over, being informed, That some of the Cases he had put had really happened
in this Government, he declared he had (...) of any such: and as he meant no
personal Reflections, he was sorry he had mentioned them, and therefore they
are omitted here.

Mr. Hamilton. If a Libel is understood in the large and unlimited Sense urged
by Mr. Attorney, there is scarce a Writing I know that may not be called a
Libel, or scarce any Person safe from being called to an Account as a Libeller:
For Moses, meek as he was, libelled Cain; and who is it that has not libelled
the Devil? For according to Mr. Attorney, it is no Justification to say one has
a bad Name. Echard has libelled our good King William: Burnet has libelled
among many others King Charles and King James; and Rapin has libelled them all.
How must a Man speak or write, or what must he hear, read, or sing? Or when
must he laugh, so as to be secure from being taken up as a Libeller? I
sincerely believe, that were some Persons to go through the Streets of New York
nowadays, and read a Part of the Bible, if it was not known to be such, Mr.
Attorney, with the Help of his Innuendo's, would easily turn it into a Libel.
As for Instance, Is. IX. 16. The Leaders of the People cause them to err, and
they that are led by them are destroyed. But should Mr. Attorney go about to
make this a Libel, he would read it thus; The Leaders of the People [innuendo,
the Governor and Council of New-York] cause them [innuendo, the People of this
Province] to err, and they [the People of this Province meaning] that are led
by them [the Governor and Council meaning] are destroyed [innuendo, are
deceived into the Loss of their Liberty] which is the worst Kind of
Destruction. Or if some Persons should publicly repeat, in a Manner not
pleasing to his Betters, the 10 th and 11 th Verses of the LVI. Chap. of the
same Book, there Mr. Attorney would have a large Field to display his Skill, in
the artful Application of his Innuendo's. The Words are, His Watchmen are all
blind, they are ignorant, etc. Yea, they are greedy Dogs, that can never have
enough. But to make them a Libel, there is according to Mr. Attorney's
Doctrine, no more wanting but the Aid of his Skill, in the right adapting his
Innuendo's. As for Instance; His Watchmen [innuendo, the Governor's Council
and Assembly] are blind, they are ignorant [innuendo, will not see the
dangerous Designs of His Excellency] Yea, they [the Governor and Council
meaning] are greedy Dogs, which can never have enough [innuendo, enough of
Riches and Power]. Such an Instance as this is seems only only fit to be
laughed at; but I may appeal to Mr. Attorney himself, whether these are not at
least equally proper to be applied to His Excellency and His Ministers, as some
of the Inferences and Innuendo's in his Information against my Client. Then if
Mr. Attorney is at Liberty to come into Court, and file an Information in the
Kings Name, without Leave, who is secure, whom he is pleased to prosecute as a
Libeller? And as the Crown Law is contended for in bad Times, there is no
Remedy for the greatest Oppression of this Sort, even tho the Party prosecuted
is acquitted with Honor. And give me Leave to say, as great Men as any in
Britain, have boldly asserted, That the Mode of Prosecuting by Information
(when a Grand Jury will not find Billa vera) is a national Grievance, and
greatly inconsistent with that Freedom, which the Subjects of England enjoy in
most other Cases. But if we are so unhappy as not to be able to ward off this
Stroke of Power directly, yet let us take Care not be cheated out of our
Liberties, by Forms and Appearances; let us always be sure that the Charge in
the Information is made out clearly even beyond a Doubt; for tho Matters in the
Information may be called Form upon Trial, yet they may be, and often have been
found to be Matters of Substance upon giving Judgment.

Gentlemen; The Danger is great, in Proportion to the Mischief that may happen,
through our too great Credulity. A proper Confidence in a Court is commendable;
but as the Verdict (what ever it is) will be yours, you ought to refer no Part
of your Duty to the Discretion of other Persons. If you should be of Opinion,
that there is no Falsehood in Mr. Zenger's Papers, you will, nay (pardon me for
the Expression) you ought to say so; because you don't know whether others (I
mean the Court) may be of that Opinion. It is your Right to do so, and there is
much depending upon your Resolution, as well as upon your Integrity.

The loss of liberty to a generous Mind, is worse than Death; and yet we know
there have been those in all Ages, who for the sake of Preferment, or some
imaginary Honor, have freely lent a helping Hand, to oppress, nay to destroy
their Country. This brings to my Mind that saying of the immortal Brutus, when
he looked upon the Creatures of Caesar, who were very great Men, but by no
Means good Men. You Romans said Brutus, if yet I may call you so, consider what
you are doing; remember that you are assisting Caesar to forge those very
Chains, which one Day he will make your selves wear. This is what every Man
(that values Freedom) ought to consider: He should act by Judgment and not by
Affection or Self-Interest; for, where those prevail, No Ties of either Country
or Kindred are regarded, as upon the other Hand, the Man, who loves his
Country, prefers it is Liberty to all other Considerations, well knowing that
without Liberty, Life is a Misery.

A famous Instance of this you will find in the History of another brave Roman
of the same Name, I mean Lucius Junius Brutus, whose story is well known and
therefore I shall mention no more of it, than only to show the Value he put
upon the Freedom of his Country. After this great Man, with his Fellow Citizens
whom he had engaged in the Cause, had banished Tarquin the Proud, the last King
of Rome, from a Throne which he ascended by inhuman Murders and possessed by
the most dreadful Tyranny and Proscriptions, and had by this Means, amassed
incredible Riches, even sufficient to bribe to his Interest, many of the young
Nobility of Rome, to assist him in recovering the Crown; but the Plot being
discovered, and principal Conspirators were apprehended, among whom were two of
the Sons of Junius Brutus. It was absolutely necessary that some should be made
Examples of, to deter others from attempting the restoring of Tarquin and
destroying the Liberty of Rome. And to effect this it was, that Lucius Junius
Brutus one of the Consuls of Rome, in the Presence of the Roman People, sat
Judge and condemned his own Sons, as Traitors to their Country: And to give the
last Proof of his exalted Virtue, and his Love of Liberty: He with a Firmness
of Mind, (only becoming so great a Man) caused their Heads to be struck off in
his own Presence; and when he observed that his rigid Virtue, occasioned a sort
of Horror among the People, it is observed he only said. My Fellow-Citizens, do
not think that this Proceeds from any Want of natural Affection: No, The Death
of the Sons of Brutus can affect Brutus only; but the Loss of Liberty will
affect my Country. Thus highly was Liberty esteemed in those Days that a Father
could sacrifice his Sons to save his Country, But why do I go to Heathen Rome,
to bring Instances of the Love of Liberty, the best Blood in Britain has been
shed in the Cause of Liberty; and the Freedom we enjoy at this Day, may be said
to be (in a great Measure) owing to the glorious Stand the famous Hamden, and
other of our Countrymen, made against the arbitrary Demands, and illegal
Impositions, of the Times in which they lived; Who rather than give up the
Rights of Englishmen, and submit to pay an illegal Tax of no more, I think,
than 3 Shillings, resolved to undergo, and for their Liberty of their Country
did undergo the greatest Extremities, in that arbitrary and terrible Court of
Star Chamber, to whose arbitrary Proceedings, (it being composed of the
principal Men of the Realm, and cal^ulated to support arbitrary Government) no
Bounds or Limits could be set, nor could any other Hand remove the Evil but a
Parliament.

Power may justly be compared to a great River, while kept within it is due
Bounds, is both Beautiful and Useful; but when it overflows, it is Banks, it is
then too impetuous to be stemmed, it bears down all before it, and brings
Destruction and Desolation wherever it comes. If then this is the Nature of
Power, let us at least do our Duty, and like wise Men (who value Freedom) use
our utmost Care to support Liberty, the only Bulwark against lawless Power,
which in all Ages has sacrificed to it is wild Lust and boundless Ambition, the
Blood of the best Men that ever lived.

I hope to be pardoned Sir for my Zeal upon this Occasion; it is an old and
wise Caution. That when our Neighbors House is on Fire, we ought to take Care
of our own. For though Blessed be God, I live in a Government where Liberty is
well understood, and freely enjoyed; yet Experience has shown us all (I Am sure
it has to me) that a bad Precedent in one Government, is soon set up for an
Authority in another; and therefore I cannot but think it mine, and every
Honest Man's Duty, that (while we pay all due Obedience to Men in Authority) we
ought at the same Time to be upon our Guard against Power, wherever we
apprehend that it may affect ourselves or our Fellow Subjects.

I am truly very unequal to such an Undertaking on many Accounts. And you see I
labor under the Weight of many Years, and am born down with great Infirmities
of Body; yet Old and Weak as I am, I should think it my Duty if required, to go
to the utmost Part of the Land, where my Service could be of any Use in
assisting to quench the Flame of Prosecutions upon Informations, set on Foot by
the Government, to deprive a People of the Right of Remonstrating, (and
complaining too) of the arbitrary Attempts of Men in Power. Men who injure and
oppress the People under their Administration provoke them to cry out and
complain; and then make that very Complaint the Foundation for new Oppressions
and Prosecutions. I wish I could say there were no Instances of this Kind. But
to conclude; the Question before the Court and you Gentlemen of the Jury, is
not of small nor private Concern, it is not the Cause of a poor Printer, nor of
New York alone, which you are now trying: No! It may in it is Consequence,
affect every Freeman that lives under a British Government on the main of
America, It is the best Cause. It is the Cause of Liberty, and I make no Doubt
but your upright Conduct, this Day, will not only entitle you to the Love and
Esteem of your Fellow-Citizens; but every Man who prefers Freedom to a Life of
slavery will bless and honor You, as Men who have baffled the Attempt of
Tyranny; and by an impartial and incorrupt Verdict, have laid a noble
Foundation for securing to ourselves, our Posterity, and our Neighbors, That,
to which Nature and the Laws of our Country have given us a Right, -- The
Liberty -- both of exposing and opposing arbitrary Power (in these Parts of the
World, at least) by speaking and writing Truth.


Here Mr. Attorney observed, that Mr. Hamilton had gone very much out of the
Way, and had made himself and the People very merry: But that he had been
citing Cases, not at all to the Purpose; he said, there was no such Cause as
Mr. Bushel's or Sir Edward Hales before the Court; and he could not find out
what the Court or Jury had to do with Dispensations, Riots or unlawful
Assemblies: All that the Jury had to consider of was Mrs. Zenger's Printing and
Publishing two scandalous Libels, which very highly reflected on his Excellency
and the principal Men concerned in the Administration of this Government, which
is confessed. That is, the Printing and Publishing of the Journals set forth in
the Information it confessed. And concluded that as Mr. Hamilton had confessed
the Printing and there could be no doubt but they were scandalous Papers,
highly reflecting upon his Excellency, and the principal Magistrates in the
Province. And therefore he made no Doubt but the Jury would find the Defendant
Guilty, and would refer to the Court for their Direction.

Mr. Chapter Just. Gentlemen of the Jury. The great Pains Mr. Hamilton has taken,
to show how little Regard Juries are to Pay to the Opinion of the Judges; and
his insisting so much upon the Conduct of some Judges in Trials of this kind;
is done no doubt, with a Design that you should take but very little Notice, of
what I might say upon this Occasion. I shall therefore only observe to you
that, as the Facts or Words in the Information are confessed: The only Thing
that can come in Question before you is, whether the Words as set forth in the
Information make a Lybel. And that is a Matter of Law, no Doubt, and which you
may leave to the Court. But I shall trouble you no further with any Thing more
of my own, but read to you the Words of a learned and upright Judge Chapter J. Holt
in Tutchin's Case
in a Case of the like Nature.

To say that corrupt Officers are appointed to administer Affairs, is certainly
a Reflection on the Government. If People should not be called to account for
possessing the People with an ill Opinion of the Government, no Government can
subsist, For it is very necessary for all Governments that the People should
have a good Opinion of it. And nothing can be worse to any Government, than to
endeavor to procure Animosities; as to the Management of it, this has been
always looked upon as a Crime, and no Government can be safe without it be
punished.

Now you are to consider, whether these Words I have read to you, do not tend
to beget an ill Opinion of the Administration of the Government? To tell us,
that those that are employed know nothing of the Matter, and those that do know
are not employed. Men are not adapted to Offices, but Offices, to Men out of a
particular Regard to their Interest, and not to their Fitness for the Places;
this is the Purport of these Papers.


Mr. Hamilton I humbly beg Your Honors Pardon: I am very much misapprehended,
if you suppose what I said was so designed.

Sir, you know; I made an Apology for the Freedom I found my self under a
Necessity of using upon this Occasion. I said, there was Nothing personal
designed; it arose from the Nature of our Defense.


The Jury withdrew and in a small Time returned and being asked by the Clerk
whether they were agreed of their Verdict, and whether John Peter Zenger was
guilty of Printing and Publishing the Libels in the Information mentioned? They
answered by Thomas Hunt, their Foreman, Not Guilty, Upon which there were three
Huzzas in the Hall which was crowded with People and the next Day I was
discharged from my Imprisonment.

APPENDIX.
City of New York. ss. AT a Common Council, held at the City-Hall of the said
City, on Tuesday the Sixteenth Day of September, Anno Dom. 1735.
PRESENT

Paul Richards Esquire Mayor. Gerardus Stuyvesant Esquire Deputy-Mayor. Daniel
Horsmanden, Esquire Recorder
ALDERMEN.
William Room Esquire Simon Johnson Esquire John Walter Esquire Christopher Fell Esquire
Stephen Bayard Esquire Johannes Burger Esquire
ASSISTANTS.
Mr. Johannes Waldron. Mr. Ede Myer. Mr. John Moore. Mr. John Fred. Mr. Charles
Le Roux. Evert Byvanck.
Ordered, That Andrew Hamilton, Esquire of Philadelphia, Barrister at Law, be
presented with the Freedom of this Corporation; and that Alderman Bayard,
Alderman Johnson, and Alderman Fell, be a Committee to bring in a Draught
thereof.

City of New York. ss. At a Common Council, held at the City-Hall of the said
City on Monday the twenty Ninth Day of September, being the Feast Day of St.
Michael the Archangel Anno Dom. 1735.
PRESENT.
Paul Richards, Esquire Mayor. Daniel Horsmanden, Esquire Recorder.
ALDERMEN.
William Room, Esquire Simon Johnson, Esquire John Walter Esquire Christopher Fell, Esquire
Stephen Bayard, Esquire Johannes Burger, Esquire
ASSISTANTS.
Mr. Johannes Waldron. Mr. John Fred. Mr. Charles Le Roux. Mr. Evert Byvank.
Mr. Henry Bogert.
Stephen Bayard, Simon Johnson and Christopher Fell, Esqrs. Alderman, to whom
it was referred to prepare the Draught of the Freedom of this Corporation, to
be presented to Andrew Hamilton Esquire make their Report thereon, in the Words
following (to wit) That they have prepared the Form of the Grant, to the said
Andrew Hamilton, Esquire of the Freedom of the City of New York, in these Words (to
wit).

City of New York. ss. PAUL RICHARDS Esquire the Recorder Aldermen and Assistants
of the City of New York, convened in Common Council, To all to whom these
Presents shall come Greeting. WHEREAS, Honor is the just Reward of Virtue, and
public Benefits demand a public Acknowledgment. We therefore, under a
grateful Sense of the remarkable Service, done to the Inhabitants of this City
and Colony, by Andrew Hamilton Esquire of Pennsilvania, Barrister at Law by his
Learned and generous Defense of the Rights of Mankind, and the Liberty of the
Press, in the Case of John Peter Zenger, lately tried on an Information
exhibited in the Supream-Court of this Colony, do by these Presents, bear to
the said Andrew Hamilton Esquire the public Thanks of the Freemen of this
Corporation for that signal Service, which he Cheerfully undertook under great
Indisposition of Body, and generously performed, refusing any Fee or Reward.
And in Testimony of our great Eeem for his Person, and Sense of his Merit, do
hereby present him with the Freedom of this Corporation. These are therefore to
Certify and Declare, that the said Andrew Hamilton Esquire is hereby admitted,
received and allowed a Freedom and Citizen of the said City: To Have, Hold,
Enjoy and Partake of all the Benefits Liberties, Privileges, Freedoms and
Immunities whatsoever granted or belonging to a Freeman and Citizen of the same
City. In Testimony, whereof the Common Council of the said City, in Common
Council assembled, have caused the Seal of the said City to be hereunto affixed
this Twenty Ninth Day of September. Anno Domini One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Thirty Five.

By Order of the Common Council William Sharpas. Clerk
And we do further Report, that sundry of the Members of this Corporation and
Gentlemen of this City have voluntarily Contributed sufficent for a Gold Box of
five Ounces, and a half for Enclosing the Seal of the said Freedom; Upon the
^^d of which, we are of Opinion should be engraved the Arms of the City of
New York: Witness Our Hands this Twenty Ninth day of September, 1735.

Stephen Bayard. Simon Johnson. Christopher Fell.




Which Report is approved by this Court, and Ordered, That the Freedom and Box
be forthwith made, pursuant to the said Report, and that Mr. Sharpas, the
Common Clerk of this City, do affix the Seal to the same Freedom, and enclose
it in the said Box.

Mr. Alderman Bayard going to Philadelphia and offering to be the Bearer of the
said Freedom to Mr. Hamilton, Ordered, That Mr. Sharpas deliver it to Alderman
Bayard for that Purpose; and that Alderman Bayard do deliver it to Mr.
Hamilton, with Assurances of the great Esteem, that this Corporation have for
his Person and Merit.

City of New York. ss. At a Common Council, held at the City-Hall of the said
City, on Wednesday the fifteenth Day of October, Anno Domini 1735
PRESENT.

Paul Richards, Esquire Mayor. Daniel Horsemanden, Esquire Recorder.
ALDERMEN.
John Walter, Esquire Simon Johnson, Esquire William Room, Esquire Johannes Burger, Esquire
ASSISTANTS.
Mr. Johannes Waldron, Mr. Abraham De Peyster, Mr. Gerrardus Beekman, Mr. Peter
Stoutenburgh. Mr. Henry Bogert.
Ordered, That the Freedom, granted by this Corporation, to Andrew Hamilton,
Esquire with the Report of the Committee, for preparing a Draught of the same and
the Order of this Court, thereon, may be printed.

William Sharpas.

Round on the Lid of the Box mentioned in the abovesaid Report and Order, there
is ingraved not only the Arms of the City of New York, but also this Motto in a
Garter; DEMERSAE LEGES-TIMEFACTA LIBERTAS-HAEC TANDEM EMERGUNT.

On the inner Side of the Lid of the Box showing it self at the same Time with
the Certificate of the Freedom; There is Engraven in a flying Garter, these
Words.

NON NUMMIS, -- VIRTUTE PARATUR. As an Incentive to public Virtue, on the
Front of the Rim of the said Box, there is engraven a Part of Tully's Wish; ITA
CUIQUE EVENIAT, UT DE REPUBLICA VERUIT

Which Freedom and Box was presented in the Manner that had been directed, and
gratefully accepted by the said Andrew Hamilton, Esquire

ERRATA.
Page 12. Lin. 8. for who read though. The same Page, Lin. 9. for Freeholders
read Freehold. The same Page, Lin. 11. for be out read be left out. Page 13.
Lin. penult. for said the read the said.

New York, Printed and sold by John Peter Zenger. MDCCXXXVI.


