Mr. Appleton's SERMON At the ORDINATION Of the Reverend Mr. John Sparhawk.
December 8. 1736.

Superior SKILL and WISDDOM necessary for WINNING SOULS, which is the grand
Design of the MINISTERIAL OFFICE, Illustrated in a SERMON Preached at the
ORDINATION Of the Reverend Mr. John Sparhawk, To the Pastoral Office over a
CHURCH of CHRIST in SALEM; on the eighth day of December, 1736.

By Nathanael Appleton, M. A. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Cambridge.

Together with the CHARGE given by the Reverend Mr. Holyoke: And the RIGHT HAND
OF FELLOWSHIP, by the Reverend Mr. Prescott.

Mat. x. 16. -- Be ye therefore wise as Serpents and harmless as Doves. 1 Cor.
9.22. -- I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some.
BOSTON: Printed and Sold by KNEELAND and GREEN, in Queenstreet, MDCCXXXVII.

Ministers must be Wise, if they would win Souls.
PROVERBS XI. 30. -- And be that wins Souls is Wise.
THE great Creator, and Former of all Things, was pleased at first to
distinguish his Goodness to Man beyond all other Creatures upon Earth, in
making and forming a Soul within him, endowed with such noble Powers and
Faculties as gave him a Rank among Beings but little lower than that of Angels;
in giving him Dominion over the Creatures of the lower World, and crowning him
with Glory and Honor; and that more especially by giving him that Knowledge,
Rectitude, and Purity of Nature, by which he came to be in the Image and after
the Likeness of GOD himself. -- Moreover GOD planted a Garden, and placed him
in it, where he might entertain himself in the most delightful Manner, regaling
every Sense with the most delicious Fruits of divine Bounty, and entertaining
his Soul with the most pleasing Contemplations upon the wonderful Works of GOD,
and the sweetest Intercourse and Communion with him. And to crown all there was
a Tree of Life, of which, if he had maintained his Innocence, he might have
eaten and lived forever.

But the Devil that subtle Serpent, envious of the Happiness of Man, and
desirous to betray him into the same Condemnation and Misery with himself, did,
by his cunning and false Suggestions, draw him into Sin, whereby he at once
undid himself, defaced the Image and forfeited the Favor of his GOD; was
turned out of Paradise, debarred the Tree of Life, and exposed to Death and Ruin
forever.

And this would have been the inevitable Fate of humane Nature, had not GOD of
his infinite Mercy interposed for our Salvation and Recovery, by providing and
sending One mighty to Save, and so coming upon new Terms in a gracious
Covenant, revealed and propounded to us in his Gospel.

And now although the Covenant that GOD has established with Men in the Blood of
his own Son, is full of Grace, and every thing in it may be looked upon as mere
Grace; yet alas! such Corruption, Stupidity, and Madness is there in the
Hearts of Men, since the primitive Apostasy, that there is nothing more
difficult than to persuade Men to forsake their Sins, which lead down to the
Chambers of Death and Destruction, and to comply with the most gracious and
reasonable Terms of Salvation.

The Devil (as it should seem) found no great Difficulty in seducing and
persuading our first Parents to sin: And so to destroy themselves at first, but
now it requires the utmost Skill and Wisdom to persuade Men to turn from their
evil Ways and live. And all of it will be insufficient unless GOD sets in with
his almighty Grace. I say unless GOD sets in with his Grace; for although it be
the Spirit of GOD that wins and gains a Soul over to himself, working in him
both to will and to do of his good pleasure, yet it is, at least for the most
Part, by setting in, concurring, and cooperating with the outward Means that
he has appointed for that End, such as his Word and Ordinances, especially the
Ministry thereof, by a certain Order of Men, that he has all along employed for
that Service. I mean the Ministers of the Gospel, whose great Business it is to
show Men the Way to Salvation, and to persuade them to come into it.

And although one would think this the easiest Thing in Nature, and that the
bare proposing the Thing to rational Creatures would be sufficient, yet daily
Experience sadly convinces of the contrary, and that there is no Affair that
Men are called to be concerned in, that requires greater Skill or Wisdom in the
Management of it; and this is what the wise Man intimates to us in my Text, And
be that wins Souls is Wise.

He that wins, or takes Souls with that Skill and Industry as a Fowler
takes a Bird, for so (as Expositors observe) the Word imports. But although it
be the same Word, yet here is the difference, both in the Design and in the
Event of the thing. The Fowler uses his Art to deceive the innocent Bird, to
decoy and draw her into a Snare, when she knows not that it is for her Life:
Whereas the winning, or taking Souls, is the using an innocent and honest Art
to undeceive Men, to persuade a guilty Soul out of the Snare of the Devil, and
a State of Sin and Death, into a State of Pardon, and Grace, and eternal Life;
and so if they are taken or caught, it is not with Guile or to their Hurt, to
their Death and Destruction, like the Bird, but to Salvation and Happiness
Accordingly a Soul thus taken is won, is gained, is saved. And now says the
Preacher he that thus takes, and wins, and gains Souls is Wise. That is either,

1 st. It is a Point of Wisdom to employ our Time and Strength in winning
Souls. It is a great and noble Design to win Souls, to gain and save precious
and immortal Souls. There is nothing in which Men can lay out their Time, their
Skill, and all their Powers to better Purpose, than in winning lost Souls,
rescuing them out of the Hands of Satan their grand Adversary, and in bringing
them over to Christ, and into the Way of Salvation and Happiness. It is the
best Work that Men can set themselves about; and consequently he is a wise Man,
that diligently, and in good earnest, lays himself out herein. Or,

2dly. If we read the Text as some do, viz. be that is wise wins Souls, then
by being wise we may understand, being spiritually wise, or truly religious,
and so make the Meaning of it to be, that he that is truly religious wins
Souls. And it is an undoubted Truth that a Man of eminent Piety and Religion,
does a great deal toward winning and persuading others over to the Love and
Practice of it. And thus some make the latter Part of the Verse to correspond
with the former; the Fruit of the Righteous is a Tree of Life: That is, the
Fruits of Righteousness, which the righteous Man produces in his Life and
Conversation, is like a Tree of Life to himself, as it nourishes and preserves
his spiritual, and secures his eternal Life: And it is a Tree of Life to
others, as it greatly contributes to the Support and Nourishment of a spiritual
Life in them, animating and encouraging them to the Imitation of them in all
the Fruits of Righteousness. And be that is wise wins Souls, that is, He
that is thus righteous or spiritually wise, wins upon others and gains them
over to the Love and Practice of the same things.

But then, 3dly. He that wins Souls is wise, may be understood thus; He that
wins Souls shows himself to be wise, for he must needs be wise that can win
and gain Souls; it requires a great deal of Wisdom to do it. They that would
win Souls need Wisdom to know how to deal with them, and there is nothing in
which their Wisdom appears more conspicuous.

And here, although I may take Notice of the two foregoing Senses of the Text
as they fall in my Way, yet, I shall, upon this Occasion, more especially
insist upon the last. Accordingly this is the Doctrine for our present
Meditation, viz.

DOCT. That it requires a great deal of Skill and Wisdom to win Souls.

And for the illustrating and confirming this Doctrine I shall endeavor to
show,

I. What we are to understand by winning Souls. II. That Souls must be won,
wrought upon, and gained over to Christ; and not compelled or forced against
their Wills. III. That although GOD, by his almighty Spirit, wins Souls, yet that
it is every Man's Duty to use his Endeavors to win one another over to Christ;
and that he commits it to some as their special and peculiar Business, even the
Ministers of the Gospel. IV. Sbew that this is an Affair that requires a great
deal of Wisdom and Skill in the Management of it.
I. I am to show what we are to understand by winning Souls; about which my
Text speaks, and which requires so much Wisdom to accomplish.

And here I would answer in one Word, That it is an effectual persuading Men to
forsake their Sins, and come over to the Faith, the Love, and the Practice of
Christianity.

Man by Sin had gone off from GOD, and gone over to the Side of the Devil and
of his own Lusts, to the Love and Trust, the Worship and Service of the
Creature, instead of the Creator of all Things. And by this we have lost and
destroyed ourselves. So that the winning of a Soul is the persuading the Man
out of this State of Sin and Misery, and persuading him over to GOD, and
Christ, and Holiness. It is a prevailing with Men to repent of all their Sins,
to renounce their beloved Lusts, to turn to GOD, to believe in Christ with all
their Hearts, to accept of him as their Prince and Savior, and to live as his
Grace teaches them, even up to the Principles and the Precepts of Christianity,
ordering their Conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

Now, I say, the winning of Souls is a persuading Men to this, and not forcing
them to it contrary to their Wills; it is a presenting Arguments proper to move
and persuade them to it. As the Bird that is taken (to which the Word refers)
is by the Skill and Cunning of the Fowler drawn and allured, and not forced to
the Snare; the Bird is not hunted and driven to the Place where it is taken,
but goes freely and of its own accord, the skilful Fowler having beforehand
laid the alluring Bait, which the Bird no sooner discovers but hastens to it.
Thus the winning of Souls is by presenting proper Arguments, and persuading
them in a rational Way to come to Christ, and submit unto his Gospel, not
deceiving them as the Fowler does the Bird, but rather by undeceiving them, not
to destroy but to save Men.

And when a Soul is thus effectually persuaded, then it is won, then it is
gained, then it is saved from its lost and perishing State, and brought into a
State of Grace, and Favor, and Life; a spiritual Life here, and in the Way to
eternal Life hereafter. And oh! happy, forever happy, the Soul that is thus won
and taken! Of such an one it may be said, he was dead but is alive, he was lost
and is found, Luke 15. 32.

II. I proceed now to show that Souls must be thuswon, and gained over to
Chirst, and not compelled or forced against their Wills.

We must remember they are Souls we are treati^n of, rational Souls,
intellectual Beings, free moral Agents; and consequently their being won so as
to come over to Christ, must be a rational and voluntary Act: for there is no
such thing as a Soul's being won and gained over to Christ but where there is a
free and full Consent of the Will, which is incompatible with Force or
Compulsion.

The Body indeed, or the outward Man, may be forced into the visible Kingdom of
Christ; that can be forced to be present in christian Assemblies, and at the
public Worship; and some, who are not for allowing to others the same Liberty
they would under the like Circumstances think reasonable for themselves; have
put external Force upon Men in Matters of Religion; but it has been, and I
believe it always will be found, to little Purpose to use any outward Force for
driving Men into the Kingdom of GOD.

Indeed our Savior bids his Servants go to the high Ways, and to the Hedges,
and compel them to come in that his House may he filled, Luke 14. 23. But what
Compulsion can we suppose Christ to mean here but a rational Compulsion,
informing the Understnding, directing the Judgment, persuading the Will, and
exciting the Affections of the Soul toward Christ and his Gospel? And GOD
himself is represented as drawing Men, and not forcing them to Christ. No Man
can come to me (says Christ) except the Father which has sent me draw him,
John 6.44. And how does he draw us unto Christ? Why, with the Cords of a Man,
and with the Bands of Love, Hos. 11.4. With Cords proper to draw Men, rational
Beings withal. And what are they but Arguments and Motives proper to work upon
our rational Nature, upon the intellectual and moral Faculties of the humane
Soul? In the Day of GOD's Power they are made willing, Psalm. 110.3. Although
the divine Power is exerted upon them, yet it is their own free Act and Deed;
they act as freely in their coming over to Christ, as in any Action whatsoever.

The Force of humane Laws, of common Custom, of worldly Prospects or Fears,
compel many Men to the external Profession of Christ and his Gospel, and so to
a visible Appearance on the Side of Religion; and they who look only at the
outward Appearance, may and ought charitably to judge they are won over to
Christ and his Kingdom; but He whose Prerogative it is to search the Heart and
try the Reins of the Children of Men, knows the contrary.

In short, Christ's Kingdom is a spiritual Kingdom, that is set up in the Souls
of Men; and if he don't reign in Men's Hearts, he will by no Means look upon
them as won over to him, nor can they be said to be gained or saved. And now
Christ don't force himself upon Men whether they will or no He knocks indeed at
the Doors of Men's Hearts by his Word, Ordinances, Providence, and by his
Spirit; and he calls and waits for Entrance: but he will have Men to open the
everlasting Doors of their Souls in order to his coming in. So that we must
freely open our Souls unto him, and heartily receive him, and then and not till
then, is the Soul won; for as to any external Compulsion, or Motives from any
external Views, it signifies nothing; the Soul may, notwithstanding all such
outward Appearance, be on the Devil's side, and in a lost and undone Estate.

III. I come new to show, That although GOD by his almighty Grace wins Souls
over to Christ, yet he makes it every Man's Duty to be using Endeavors to win
one another over to him; and this he commits to some as their special and
peculiar Business, viz. the Ministers of the Gospel.

Here I must briefly say these things.

1st. It is GOD by his almighty Spirit and Grace that wins Souls to Christ.
2dly. Notwithstanding this he expects that we should all be endeavoring to win
one another over to Christ. 3dly. He commits this to the Ministers of the
Gospel as their special and peculiar Business.
1st. It is GOD, by his almighty Spirit and Grace, that wins Souls over to
Christ.

That is, Whenever any are effectually persuaded to repent of their Sins, to
believe in Christ, and obey his Gospel, it must be ascribed to the Agency and
Influence of the divine Spirit. For although the Spirit of GOD don't work
forcibly or compulsively, so as to offer any Violence to our rational Nature,
or to any of our natural Powers and Faculties, yet he works powerfully and
effectually upon them, in a Way that we know not how; much less can we describe
it. For as the Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound
thereof, but cannot tell whence it comes, and whither it goes, so is every
one that is born of the Spirit, John 3.8. All we can say is, That some how or
other the Spirit works in and upon our Spirits, and wins us over to Christ in a
Way suited to our Nature, and although this Work goes on in such a natural Way
that we cannot discern it to be any thing but a rational Act of our own, yet
when we perceive the powerful Effect we may conclude the Spirit of GOD has been
at Work.

The Way of the divine Spirit is to convince Men of Sin, to bring their Sins so
to Remembrance, and to give them such a lively Sense hereof, as to excite
unfeigned Sorrow, and at length to produce a Repentance unto Salvation. He
opens also Men's Eyes, to behold the wondrous Things out of GOD's Law and
Gospel, to see the Glory of Christ, the amiableness of Religion, and the Beauty
of Holiness, whereby the Soul is persuaded to believe in Christ, and come into
the Love and Practice of Christianity, which is the same with the winning of
the Soul.

And now that this Work of Conversion, or winning the Soul to GOD, is by the
divine Agency and Influence, is abundantly evident from the Oracles of GOD,
there we find GOD assuming it as his Prerogative to give a new Heart, and to
put within us a right Spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 26. And the being Born again, which, is
the same thing, is expressly said to be not of Blood, nor of the Will of the
Flesh, nor of the Will of Men, but of GOD, John 1.13. And our coming to Christ
is expressly declared to be by the divine Influence, and that it cannot be
without it; No Man can come to me except the Father which has sent me draw
him, John 6.44. In a Word, although we are to work out our Salvation with Fear
and Trembling, yet it is GOD that works in us both to Will and to Do of his
good Pleasure, Phil. 2.12, 13. And such as are saved, it is by Grace, through
Faith, and that not of ourselves, but it is the Gift of GOD, Ephesians. 2.8.

2dly. Notwithstanding this, we should all be endeavoring to win one anther
over to Christ.

For although it be GOD that converts, and wins the Soul; yet he does it in and
by the Use of Means. And he makes great use of those who are converted, to gain
others also over to Christ: And he makes it the Duty of all, to be doing what
they can in this Matter, nay the very Principle wrought in the Soul that is
won, will prompt him unto it. He that is converted must endeavor to convert
and strengthen his Brethren.

All those Commandments in the Word of GOD, of instructing and counselling, of
exhorting and admonishing one another, are so many Injunctions upon us to be
doing what we can to persuade others over to Christ, for they all have a direct
Tendency that Way. In a Word, these two great Commandments of loving the Lord
our GOD with all our Heart, etc. and of loving our Neighbor as ourselves,
plainly oblige this. For how can we express our Concern for the Honor of GOD
and Christ, so much as by endeavoring to gain others over to Christ's Kingdom,
whereby they may with us glorify our Father which is in Heaven? And how can we
so fully show our Love to our Neighbor, as by endeavoring all we can to
convert him from the Error of his Ways, and thereby to save his Soul from Death?

3dly. GOD commits this Work of winning Souls to the Ministers of the Gospel,
as their special and peculiar Business.

Although it be the Duty of every Man, according to his Opportunities and
Abilities, to endeavor the Conversion and Salvation of others; yet as it is a
Business so difficult, and of such vast Importance to Men and so apt to be
neglected, when it is left indifferently to all, that GOD in great Wisdom and
Kindness to Men, has provided an Order of Men, that should devote themselves to
this Service; that should study to acomplish themselves for it, and then give
themselves wholly to it. I mean the Ministers of the Gospel, for this is the
grand Design of their Office, to win and gain Souls over to Christ.

To them is committed the Ministry of Reconciliation, that they might in
Christ's Name and Stead, entreat and beseech Men to be reconciled unto GOD, 2
Cor. 5.18, 20. Their Business is to show Men the Way to Salvation, and persuade
Men to come into it. They are sent to open Men's Eyes, to turn them from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto GOD, that they may receive
Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance among them that are sanctified, Acts 26.
18. They are the Souls of Men that are committed to the Care and Charge of
Ministers, and their Business is, to watch for Souls as those that must give an
Account, to watch all Opportunities to win and gain them, that so they may do
it with Joy and not with Grief, Heb. 13. 17. And we find that their Care must
be, not only to save their own Souls, but the Souls of them that hear them, 1 Timothy 4.16.

Moreover that this is the grand Business of Ministers, may be argued from
every Branch in the ministerial Office, for it has a plain direct Tendency to
this. Thus the preaching of the Gospel, which is a principal Part of the
Minister's Work, What is this for, but to beget Men, through the Gospel, unto
Christ? To open and confirm the great Doctrines of the Gospel, to explain the
great Duties of Christianity, and urge a Compliance with them, from the
Arguments and Motives which the Gospel affords; that so they might get into
Christ, and be saved from all Condemnation, and might obtain the Mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal Life.

Again, what is the Design of their baptising according to the Institution of
Christ, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, but
to set Christ's Mark upon them, to seal them with his Seal, to initiate them
into his Church and Covenant, to put them in the Way of his Grace, and so in
the way of Salvation? For although Baptism of it self don't save, as an outward
Ceremony or putting away of the filth of the Flesh; yet it will where there is
the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21.

Again, What is the Design of their administering the holy Sacrament of the
Supper, but that by such a lively Remembrance of Christ and of his dying Love,
our Souls may be filled with love and thankfulness unto him; may be led to
Repentance by such an Instance of amazing Love and Goodness, and may be
encouraged to believe in him and obey his Gospel, that so we may partake of the
saving Benefits of his Death? What is it for, but to encourage and strengthen
those holy Souls that have gone over to Christ, to nourish and refresh them in
Grace, Holiness and Comfort, unto eternal Life?

Finally, What is the design of all the faithful Reproofs, the public and
solemn Censures of the Church dispensed by the Ministers of Christ, but to
reduce and recover Backsliders and Revolters, to bring back straying and
perishing Souls to Christ? For when such Admonitions take place, and answer the
End, a Brother is gained, as our Savior says, Mat. 18. 15.

And now from these Hints, and many more that might be given, it is abundantly
evident, that the winning or gaining Souls is committed to Ministers, as their
special and peculiar business.

I proceed to the last Thing proposed, which I had chiefly in view, and shall
in large most upon, viz.

IV. That in winning Souls there requires a great deal of Skill and Wisdom.

And he that wins Souls is wise: It shows him to be a wise Man that wins
Souls, for it is a Business that requires a great deal of Skill and Wisdom in
the Management of it to any Purpose.

What I propose here is,

1st. To prove the Point, and make it evident that there is a great deal of
Skill and Wisdom requisite in winning Souls. 2 dly. To describe that Wisdom,
which will accomplish for, and that must be exercised in this important
Business.
1st. I am to prove the Point, and show that there is a great deal of Skill and
Wisdom requisite in winning Souls.

And the Truth of this will plainly appear only by considering, 1st. What it is
that the soul is to be won from. 2 dly. What it is to be won or gained over to.
And, 3 dly. What subtle and powerful Opposers we have to deal with in this
Matter.

1st. Let us consider, What it is that the Soul is to be won from; and this
will give us some View of the Difficulties of it, and so of the Wisdom needful
to accomplish it.

And now, in general, it is a winning Men over from their corrupt Nature, from
their beloved Lusts and from those evil Practices that they have been long
accustomed unto; it is a persuading Men to change the very Temper of their
Minds, and to alter the whole Course of Life. The winning a Soul is the
persuading a Man from those Apprehensions and Inclinations that are natural to
him since the Fall; it is a persuading him to renounce and abandon all his
spiritual, and fleshly, and worldly Lusts, such as Pride, Malice, Envy,
Discontent, Unbelief, Coveteousness, Sensuality, and the like, which are
natural to the unregenerate Soul, and so dear to him, that it seems as easy to
prevail with him to cut off a right Hand, or to pluck out a right Eye, as to
part with them. Moreover, he is persuaded to change his Course of Life, to
forsake the Pleasures of Sin, and the evil Ways that he has been long
accustomed unto; which seems as difficult for him to do as for the Ethiopean to
change his Skin, and the Leopard his Spot. He is persuaded to break off from
the Love and allowed Practice of any known Sin, to hate every evil and false
Way, and not suffer any one Sin to have the Dominion over him: He is persuaded
to depart from his own Iniquity, and to lay aside every Weight, and the Sin
that most easily besets him, And now, let any Man judge, Whether it will not
require very high Degrees of Wisdom and Skill, to persuade and win Men over to
all this.

2dly. Let us consider, What the Soul is won over to; which will be a further
Proof of the Point.

And, in general, It is to those Things, that are quite contrary to the carnal
and corrupt Apprehensions and Inclinations of Nature. He that wins a Soul,
persuades the Man that was wont to say unto GOD, Depart from me, for I desire
not the Knowledge of thy Ways Job 21.14. now to say, Whom have I in Heaven but
thee, and there is none on Earth that I desire besides thee, Psa. 73. 25. And
from answering like proud Pharaoh, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his
Voice? Exodus 5.2. He is persuaded to that gracious Language of Soul, Whatsoever
the Lord my GOD shall say unto me, that will I do, Deuteronomy 5.27. And from saying
with respect to Religion and religious Duties, Behold, What a Weariness is it?
And When will the Sabbath be over? To love GOD's Law, and to rejoice in the Way
of his Testimonies, as much as in all Riches; to delight in drawing near to
GOD, and esteeming a Day in his Courts better than a Thousand.

Furthermore, The winning of a Soul, is a persuading the Man to a Life of Faith
in a crucified Savior, Which to the Jews was a stumbling Block, and to the
Greeks Foolishness. And to venture his Soul, and the eternal Concerns thereof,
with Him, as one able to save to the uttermost. It is a persuading the Soul to
live no more by Sight and Sense, but by Faith; to be looking, not to Things
seen, which are temporal, but to Things unseen, and eternal; all which meets
with great Opposition from our Pride, Carrnality, and an evil Heart of Unbelief.

Again, The Soul that is won, is persuaded to deny himself, to take up his
Cross, and follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, Matthew. 16.24. and patiently
endure the utmost Hardships and Difficulties, that he may be called unto for
the sake of Christ, which carnal self Love, Ease, and Sloth, will very much
oppose.

Finally, He is persuaded to those Things, which corrupt Nature does directly
rise up against; such as forgiving Injuries, loving Enemies, etc. And now, What
short of the utmost Wisdom and Skill must it be, to persuade Men to this?

3dly. But then, let us consider, What subtle and powerful Opposers we have to
deal with in this Matter.

And here we don't wrestle against corrupt Nature, against Flesh and Blood
only, but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the
Darkness of this World, against spiritual Wickednesses in high Places, Ephesians.
6.12. The Devil, that old Serpent, with his Subtilty and Malice, stole Man away
from GOD at first, and he, with all his cursed Legions, is using all their
Skill and Policy, to prevent our returning to GOD again. And, Oh! the
innumerable Wiles, and subtle Devices of those ghostly Adversaries, to keep
their hold of us, and hinder us from returning to GOD, and to our Happiness;
which Ministers must be aware of, to obviate and answer, if they would win and
recover Souls out of their Hands. And what a Multitude of Ways, must the
natural Subtilty and long Experience of those malicious Spirits have found out,
to keep Men under strong Delusions, and prevent their harkening to the Voice of
the Charmer, although he charms never so wisely?

But then, Besides the subtle Insinuations of Satan, there are the continual
Inticements, and earnest Solicitations of Sinners, the bewitching Examples of
the Wicked, the aluring Baits of the World, such as the Riches, the Honors,
and the Pleasures of it: The Sophistry and Cunning of Infidels, the peculiar
Difficulties of some Men's Tempers, their Circumstances, their Employments,
their Education, and their Customs; which all conspire to oppose and hinder Men
from returning to GOD, and to their Happiness.

And now, When we lay all these Things together, and at the same Time consider,
how corrupt Nature is on the same Side, and prejudiced in favor of every
Argument or Pretense that Way, that has the least Degree of Plausibleness in
it, and we shall see that it needs even the Skill of Angels, to know how to
manage with Men, so as to win them over to Christ; and consequently, that the
wisest of Men must needs be sometimes posed and nonplus'd, so as not to know
what to do with Sinners, or what Methods to take to gain them, and if it was
not for the Supply of Wisdom and Grace, from the Fountain hereof, they would
easily be outwitted, and overmatched by those spiritual Wickednesses in high
Places.

II. I proceed now to give some Account of that Wisdom and skill, that is
necessary for the winning souls.

As for Wisdom in general, it consists in proposing some good End, and in
projecting; and pursuing the most proper Methods for accomplishing the same And
the higher the End proposed, and the more difficult to accomplish it, the more
Conspicuous is the Wisdom in attaining the End.

And now, As to the winning Souls, What nobler End can we propose? What can we
aim at better, than to gain Souls over to Christ, to rescue them out of the
Hands of Satan, and deliver them out of the dreadful Bondage they are in to Sin
and Death, and bring them into the glorious Liberties of the Sons of GOD? This
is the way to bring Glory to GOD and Christ, to save Souls, precious and
immortal Souls, from future everlasting Wrath and Misery, and bring them into a
State of eternal Life and Happiness. So that the Skill and Wisdom here to be
described, is that which consists in taking the best, and the most likely
Methods to win Souls.

And, Here I shall hint at several Points of Wisdom, which seems highly
convenient, if not absolutely necessary, for those whose Business it is to win
Souls, if they would carry it on to any good Purpose.

1st. It is highly requisite that such be well acquainted with the Religion
they are to win Souls over to; and well skilled in the Arguments, proper to be
made use of to persuade them to it.

This seems to be the Foundation of all the after Acts of Wisdom that Men are
to exercise in this Matter, and without this it is impossible to manage the
Affair with any Wisdom. It is highly requisite in order to our managing any
Affair after a proper Manner, that we undersand the Business we are going
about, or, ten to one, we shall commit some fatal Mistake.

So he that undertakes to win Souls, if he be wise, and would not miscarry in
his Designs, will take Care before hand to understand his Business, that is the
Nature and the Importance of it, and what is the most likely Way to manage it
to good Effect. He must understand the present wretched and miserable State of
Souls by reason of Sin, must be acquainted with the glorious Remedy that is
provided for poor perishing Souls, and what they must be brought over to, in
order to their being saved; and he must be furnished with those Arguments that
are most proper to work upon such sinful stupid Souls, most likely to awaken
them, and to persuade them out of their wretched State.

And as those Things are most surely and clearly revealed in the holy
Scriptures, so it must needs be a point of Wisdom for every one that is
designing this Business, to get well acquainted with them. They are given by
Inspiration of GOD, and are profitable, for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man of GOD may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, 2 Timothy 3.16. And no Work do
they so particularly furnish Men for, as this of winning Souls. They give us an
Account of the primitive Apostasy of Man, and of the deplorable State that we
are brought into by reason thereof: They reveal Jesus Christ, the glorious
Remedy provided for a perishing World; which Things the World would have
remained ignorant of to this very Day, if it had not been for those sacred
Writings: They show us the Path of Life: They lead us to Christ: They tell us
what we must believe, and what we must do to be saved. And they present the
most moving Arguments to win our Souls; Arguments to work upon our Judgments,
our Wills, our Affections, our Hopes, our Fears, and upon every Power of the
Soul. And so in short, they are able to make us wise unto Salvation, through
Faith that is in Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 3.15. So that it is absolutely necessary
to a Man's being qualified to win Souls, That he be well acquainted with the
holy Scriptures, and that not barely with the Words of Scripture, and to have
the Bible so in our Memories as to be able to say a great Part of it by Rote,
and quote Chapter and Verse: But such as undertake the Business of winning
Souls, should understand the true Sense and Meaning of the Scriptures in
general; I say in general, because it is not to be supposed, That Ministers
should be able to understand every Part of Scripture; for if one of the
Apostles could say, with respect to the Epistles of another, that there were in
them some Things hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16. it will be no Wonder if
there should be many Things in their Writings beyond us to understand: and it
shows a Want of Modesty, as well as Judgment, for any to pretend to a full
Understanding of every Part of Scripture, or to think it necessary that every
Part be understood by us; it is sufficient for us, that the necessary Points
are so clearly revealed, as that with diligent Study, comparing one Part of
Scripture with another, we may come to the Knowledge of them: And this every
Minister should labor after.

And, In order to this, some Acquaintance with the Languages that the
Scriptures were originally written in, and with the expository Notes of learned
Men upon the Scriptures, with ecclesiastical History, and many other Parts of
Learning, is very convenient, and needful to a Man's being an able Minister of
the new Testament, and a workman that need not to be ashamed.

Moreover, Such as would be well accomplished to win Souls, should be able to
distinguish between Truth and Error; between necessary and unnecessary Points;
between the weightier and the less weighty Matters of the Law and Gospel;
between Fundamentals and Circumstantials; between the Form and the Power of
Godliness.

It is necessary that such be able to open and confirm the great Doctrines of
the Gospel against Infidels, and for the Conviction of Gainsayers; to explain
the Duties of Christianity; and furnished with proper Arguments to press them
upon the Consciences of Men, silencing their Cavils, answering their Objections
and Excuses, removing Stones of stumbling, or Rocks of Offense, out of the Way.

Thus a Man that devotes himself to the Service of Christ and of Souls, must be
a ready Scribe, well instructed to the Kingdom of GOD, Matthew. 13.32. He must be
furnished with all the Weapons that the Gospel affords, which are not carnal,
but mighty through GOD, for the pulling down of strong Holds, casting down
Imaginations, and every high Thing that exalts itself against the Knowledge
of GOD, and bringing into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10.4, 5.

2 dly. It is highly proper that such be won over to Christ themselves, who are
employed in winning others over to him.

If this be not absolutely necessary, and if we should grant it possible for a
Man to be the Means of converting others by his Ministry, and yet he himself be
a Castaway; yet as to humane Appearance, and the natural Tendency of Things,
there is but little Probability that such an one would do much toward the
winning others over to Christ, that has never been won over to him himself.

How can that Man urge the great Arguments of the Gospel with Fervency and
Force, that has never been moved by them himself? Nay, with what Force can a
Man urge and persuade others to forsake their Sins, and believe in Christ, and
obey his Gospel, when he don't feel the Arguments to have any Effect upon his
own Soul?

But now, on the other Hand, How will such a Man urge this and the other Duty,
when he himself has felt the Force of those very Arguments that he uses with
others? Who can set forth the Excellency and Amiableness of Religion, like
those who have tasted the Pleasures of it, and that can testify from their own
Experience, that the Ways of Religion are ways of Pleasantness and the Paths
thereof Peace? Who so likely to pitch upon the best Arguments to persuade Men
to be religious, as they, who have found by Experience, what have been the most
forcible upon themselves?

And then again, Who so likely to be diligent and faithful in pursuing this
grand Design of the Ministry, even that of winning Souls, like those who are
won over to the Love and Service of Christ, and are filled accordingly with a
Zeal for his Honor, and with a compassionate Concern for the Souls of Men?
And, Oh! With how much greater Pleasure will such pursue the Business that will
be so much to the Glory of Christ and the Good of Souls, than one who cares
for none of these Things? In a Word, Who so likely to lay themselves out in
this Service, as they who have their very Hearts and Souls engaged in this
Matter? Which is the Case of every Minister that is himself thoroughly and
effectually won over to Christ.

3 dly. There is a great deal of Wisdom and Skill to be used in the direct
Application to the Souls of Men, in order to win and gain them over to Christ.

As these previous Accomplishments are very useful and necessary, so, if we
would win Souls, we must, in our Ministrations and Applications to them, manage
with particular Skill and Wisdom. And as there are public and general, and,
upon Occasion, private and personal Applications to be made to the Souls of
Men; so in both these, Ministers must manage with great Prudence, if they would
answer the End proposed. Here then,

1st. In their public Ministrations, they must manage with great Wisdom, if
they would win Souls.

Ministers must know how to behave themselves in the House of GOD, which is the
Church of the living GOD. All the Ministrations of GOD's House must be managed
so as to have a direct Tendency to this grand End of their Ministry.

Thus, As Ministers are employed to be the Mouth of the People to GOD in the
public Prayers; so these must be carried on in such a Manner as will best
Answer the End of that great Duty of Prayer. They must so order their Speech
and their Behavior in Prayer, as will be most likely to command the Attention,
excite the Reverence, and raise the Devotion of the People. They must wisely
accommodate their Confessions to the Sins, their Petitions and Intercessions to
the Wants, their Thanksgivings to the Mercies of the People; and should mention
nothing in Prayer but what the Assembly that hear may and ought to join with
them in.

And then, as to Preaching, which is a principal Part of the public Service,
there is great Wisdom requisite in the managing of it, so as that the Word
might prove a Savor of Life unto Life unto them that hear it. And now, as in
preaching, Ministers are to Teach, Exhort, and Rebuke; so in all these the
Preacher must manage with great Discretion.

1st. Ministers must TEACH the People with Wisdom.

Thus, In teaching the Doctrines and Duties of the Gospel, Ministers must take
care that they don't mistake the Doctrines and Commandments of Men, for the
Doctrines and Commandments of Men, for the Doctrines and Commandments of GOD
our Savior. And here, although Ministers may not shun to declare the whole
Counsel of GOD, so far as it is made known unto them; yet they must distinguish
and insist chiefly upon the most necessary and important Points of Christianity.

And, Here I would take the Opportunity to say, That as for the sublime
mysterious Doctrines of the Gospel, they should always be treated with great
Reverence and Caution; and in those Articles, if Ministers would be wise, they
wont pretend to be wise above what is written. But the deeper and darker the
Point is, the more closely must they adhere to the written Oracles of GOD; to
which they will do well (says the Apostle) to take heed, as unto a Light that
shines in a dark Place, 2 Pet. 1.19. And, I cannot but think this has been the
Fault on all Sides, that they have departed, some more and some less, from the
written Word, in their discoursing upon, and undertaking to explain the
Mysteries of the Gospel; and each Party has been more fond of supporting his
own particular Terms, and Manner of Expression, than to sit down contented with
the Doctrines, as the Holy Ghost has delivered them unto us; by which Means,
instead of winning Souls over to Christ, they only win them over to a
particular Party; which very Thing has divided the christian World into
innumerable Sects. Whereas, if Ministers, and other Christians, had, in all
their Discourses upon mysterious Points, laid aside humane Explications and
adhered to the Word, as a Lamp unto their Feet, and a Light their Paths, Psalm.
119.105. those unhappy Divisions might have been in a great Measure prevented.

The Essence of GOD, the Manner of the divine subsistence, the Decrees of GOD,
and the Manner of his Operation upon his Creatures, especially upon moral
Agents, are some of the deep Things of GOD, which the Spirit of GOD alone can
search out, 1 Cor. 2.10.

And therefore, The Minister that is so wise as to know himself, will have such
a modest humble Sense of his own Weakness and Ignorance about these Things, as
to take up contented with the Words of the Holy Ghost, believing that they set
these Things in the truest and best Light, and go so far as we are capable of
understanding, or, as is necessary for us to understand; and that most, if not
all, humane Attempts to explain those Points, have rather darkened than
enlightened them; being Words without Knowledge, which darken Counsel, Job. 38.2.

So, that if the Preacher be wise, when he speaks of those Things, he will
choose rather to speak of them in the Words which the Holy Ghost teaches,
comparing spiritual Things with spiritual; than in the Words which Man's Wisdom
teaches, agreeable to the Apostles own Practice, as he tells us, 1 Cor. 2.13.

But, to proceed, We are told, Eccl. 12.9. that because the Preacher was wise,
he still taught the People Knowledge: Or, as it is in the Margin of some
Bibles, the more wise the Preacher was, he still taught the People Knowledge.
So that he is the wise Preacher that endeavors to be Instructive in his
preaching. He is the Pastor after GOD's own Heart, that feeds the People with
Knowledge and Understanding, Jer. 3.15. that don't turn the People off with
unintelligible Terms, dark Phrases, and obscure Reasonings; but will, as the
Apostles says they did, use great Plainnss of Speech, 2 Cor. 3.12. I don't mean
by this, that Men should use bald Expressions, and homely Similitudes; but such
Expressions as will best serve to convey the clearest Ideas of the Point they
are discoursing, in the most agreeable Manner.

Lastly under this Head, The Preacher that is wise will endeavor to make full
Proof of h is Ministry. 2 Timothy 4.5. For, as it is when the Word is mixed with
Faith, that it becomes profitable to the Souls of Men; so it is highly proper
that the Preacher should present them with proper Arguments, as a Foundation
for their Faith, even such Proofs as the Nature of the Subject will afford, and
such as the People may percieve the Force of.

2dly. But then, As Ministers are to give Attendance to EXHORTATION, as well as
Doctrine, so there is a particular Skill and Wisdom requisite in managing this,
so as to win Souls.

This is that Part of preaching which is directed immediately to the
Consciences of Men, persuading and urging them to that Faith, and Love, and
Holiness, which will be Salvation unto them. And now here it is requisite that
Ministers should be skilled in all the Arts of Persuasion; and that they be
Master of all those Arguments that are apt to strike the Minds and Consciences
of Men; and of that Rhetoric too, which will strike the Passions; for as the
whole Soul is to be won, so there ought to be a moving Address to all the
Powers and Faculties, to every Passion and Affection the Soul.

The Preacher that was wise sought to find out acceptable Words, Eccl. 12.10
Words of Delight, as in the Margin: Words that delight and please the Soul,
which would wonderfully allure and attract it. And we all find by Experience,
that the Soul is charmed and captivated by the pungent and pathetick Strains of
the Preacher, that has wisely ordered his Speech for that Purpose.

He therefore, that is wise, will seek out such acceptable Words; which, by the
Way, teaches how far they are from managing this Matter with Wisdom, who,
instead of seeking out acceptable Words, seek out no Words at all beforehand,
but turn the People off with extemporaneous Discourses, and consequently with
those Words that come uppermost, and those delivered in a confused, hesitating,
and hobling Manner, which creates an Uneasiness rather than Pleasure in the
Hearers, and so will be very unlikely to win upon them.

3dly. As Ministers are to REBUKE, as well as Exhort, in their preaching; so it
requires as much Wisdom to manage it properly, and so (...) to answer the End
of winning Souls, as any Part of the Sermon.

Ministers are to cry aloud, and not to spare; to show to the House of Jacob
their Transgressions; and to Israel their Sins. But to do this in a Manner that
will answer the Design, requires peculiar Skill. The Minister must be faithful,
but not too severe, in public Reproofs. So plain, as that every one that is
guilty may easily apply it to himself; and yet not so particular as publicly
to expose Men's Characters, where the Crimes are private. He must duly expose
the Sirs and Vices of the People, setting them forth in the clearest Colors,
representing their evil Nature, and warning them of the fatal Consequences of
Sin: But yet, this must be done in a Way that will convince and soften, and
melt Men down into Repentance, rather than irritate, and so harden them in
their Sins. It must be managed so as will best serve to excite within Men a
just Sense and Hatred of their Sins; and at the same time, an higher Esteem and
Love for the wise Reprover. And, as an Ear Ring of Gold, and an Ornament of
fine Gold; so is a wise Repr^ver, upon an obedient Ear, Prove. 25.12. And thus
much for the Wisdom of the Preacher.

And as for the other Ministrations of GOD's House: I must but just hint at the
Wisdom that is requisite to the Management of these so as will best answer the
gracious Institutions of them.

Thus, as to the administering BAPTISM and the LORD'S SUPPER, Ministers must
instruct in the Nature and Design of these holy Ordinances; must give due
Invitation and Encouragement to Persons to attend upon them, and at the same
Time, warning them of the Danger of coming in a profane, careless, and
unworthy Manner; and they must wisely distinguish between the clean and the
unclean, the fit and the unfit Subjects of these Ordinances.

And then, In the Administration of these Ordinances, Ministers must behave
with that Gravity, with that Seriousness, and with that Devotion, as may serve
to excite and influence the Devotion of others, whereby the Design of these
sacred Institutions will best be answered. And here, in particular, as the
Design of the holy Supper is to give Men a lively Remembrance of the dying Love
of our dear Redeemer, so this sacred Festival should be so celebrated, and all
the Parts of the Institution so managed, as may serve to excite the most lively
and affecting Remembrance of Him.

And then, As to the CENSURES of the Church, dispensed by the Ministers of
Christ, (such as public Admonitions, Suspensions, and Excommunications) I
would say, that as this Authority was not given for Destruction, but for
Edification; so Ministers must endeavor to manage it in such a Manner as will
be most likely to answer this End, viz. That in such a Destruction of the
Flesh, the Spirit might be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor 5.5.
Furthermore, Although we must be faithful to our straying Brethren, yet we must
deal and let them see that we deal tenderly with them: Although we may nor
neglect them, yet we may not be too hasty or severe in our public Censures of
them. But we must exhort and rebuke with all long suffering. And there we must
take Care that nothing of this Nature be done by Partiality; and yet a
Difference is to be made, according to the Nature and Aggravations of the
Offense. Let there be no ecclesiastical Prosecutions through Strife, vain Glory,
or any private Pique or Revenge, but in lowliness of Mind, Phil. 2.3. In a
Word, Every Admonition and Censure of the Church, must be managed with such a
Spirit of Meekness, Love, and Tenderness, as may soften and melt the Offender
into Repentance. And thus much for the Wisdom requisite in the public
Ministrations of GOD's House.

I shall briefly Consider,

2dly. The Wisdom needful for Ministers in their private Application to Souls.

There is often times Occasion for Ministers to apply themselves privately and
personally to Men. Such as are under Convictions and Concern about their
spiritual State, will repair to their spiritual Guides for Counsel and Comfort:
And others that are stupid and careless about their Souls, it is no Ways
improper for Ministers to go to them; and doubtless pastoral Visits, if they be
managed wisely, may be of great Advantage. And since it is the Minister's
Business and Calling to win Souls, it seems very proper that what Time they can
spare from their Studies and public Labors, and other necessary Avocations,
they should devote to the Service of particular Souls.

But now here is a great deal of Wisdom necessary to manage such private
Conferences and Conversation to good Advantage. Here Ministers must consider
the particular Tempers, Circumstances, and Conditions of Men that they converse
with, applying Counsels, Comforts, Cautions, Warnings, and Reproofs, as they
see the Persons need, and that will be likely to do them good. We must consider
whether Men's Tempers be quick and hasty, proud and haughty; whether they be
humble and meek; whether they be self-conceited and spiritually proud; whether
they be dejected or discouraged; and must address ourselves to them
accordingly. Moreover we must consider what particular Sins they are addicted
to; and must faithfully, but in the most friendly Manner, warn and admonish
them thereof. We must find out the particular Difficulties and Objections in
their Way of coming to Christ, wisely adjusting our Counsels and Arguments to
the Circumstances and Capacities of Persons.

Moreover Ministers, if they would be wise, must watch for favorable
Opportunities to persuade Men over to Christ; such as times of Sickness and
Danger, times of Sorrow and Mourning; so also, when they have experienced
remarkable Preservations and Deliverances. In a Word, as there are favorable
Opportunities, happy Junctures, for speaking to Persons of their spiritual
Concerns, so Ministers should watch for them, and by no Means let them slip.
But I must hasten to another general Instance of Wisdom necessary in Ministers,
in order to their winning Souls, and that is,

3 dly. Their being very EXEMPLARY in their Lives and Conversations.

This is a main Point, without which, all the rest will signify little: For if
a Man prays and preaches, and discourses at all times, as it were, with the
Tongue of Angels, yet, to what Purpose will it all be, if he contradicts it by
his own Practice? And I know nothing that brings a greater Reproach upon
Religion, and that so effectually frustrates the grand Design of the Ministry,
as the corrupt Practices and unexemplary Behavior of those who have worn that
sacred Character. For how is it possible that a People should be persuaded and
wrought upon by the preaching of those whom they see are not at all wrought
upon by their own Arguments, and openly reject their own Counsels and Warnings?
And truly, what can look so absurd as to hear Ministers crying down this and
the other Sin on the Sabbath, and yet live in the allowed Practice of them, all
the Week after? How reproachful must it needs be to Ministers, and what a
Discredit to Religion, for them to teach one thing and practice the quite
contrary? Thou that Preachest a Man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou
that say a Man should not commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery? Thou
that abborrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? Romans 2 21 22.

Our blessed Lord wisely considered the great Advantage of a good Example; and
so exhibited a most perfect Pattern to the World in his own Life, and gives it
in express Charge to his Disciples, to let their Lights so shine before Men,
that others might see their good Works, and glorify their Father which is in
Heaven, Mat. 5.16. And agreeable to this the Apostle Charges his Son Timothy,
saying, Let no Man despite thy Youth, but be thou an Example to the Believers,
in word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity, 1 Timothy
4.12. Observe here the Way that the Apostle advises young Tim thy to take that
he might not be despised, was to be Exemplary in the Spirit and Temper of his
Mind, and in the whole Conduct and Behavior of himself; and there is no other
Way that will save Ministers from Contempt; nor any Way so likely for them to
win upon the Souls of others. What is there that will give such Force to their
exhortations, and that will recommend Religion to the Esteem the Love and
Practice of others, as to see all the Virtues and Graces of it exemplisied in
the Minister's own Life? When does Religion appear so amiable, as when we see
it drawn to the Life in a Man's Temper and Behavior?

Wisdom, that is Religion, makes a Man's Face to shine. And how glorious does a
Minister shine among a People, when his Life and Conversation is but a
Transcript of his Preaching? Verily it is not easy to conceive how such a Man
would win upon a People. Therefore this is a grand Point for Ministers to take
Care of in their first setting out, as the Way to save them from Contempt, to
honor their Character, and to adorn the Doctrine of GOD their Savior.

But here, with respect to a Minister's Conversation, there is Wisdom and
Prudence to be exercised: For as Ministers may not be light and vain in their
Conversation, so they must avoid the other Extreme of a m rose affected
Gravity; for this disassects People to Religion, as much as too great Levity.
Nor are Ministers to be superciliously brow-beating every thing in Company that
promotes an innocent and civil Mirth. On the other Hand, They must take heed
that they don't countenance, much less promote that which is filthy or profane.

Ministers may be pleasant in Company, as well as other Men, so long as they
observe proper Seasons, and keep within the Bounds of Civility and
Christianity. There is a Time to Laugh, as well as a Time to Mourn; and
Religion is not to be represented in such gloomy Colors, as to forbid every
Thing that excites a civil Mirth; for this would discourage, rather than allure
Men to Religion.

Furthermore, Ministers would do well to consider their Age and standing in the
World: And, as elder Ministers, according to the natural Tendency of Age,
should lay aside the Gaiety and Mirth that is natural to Youth; so young
Ministers, although they should be of a grave Behavior, yet should not pretend
to assume, in all Respects, the Gravity of old Age, least it should be
suspected to be mere Affectation, which would prevent its answering any good
End.

4 thly. Another Point of Wisdom necessary to the winning Souls, is DILIGENCE.

The Business of winning Souls requires a close and constant Application: And
he that deals with a slack Hand in this Matter, will do but little to the
Purpose. Ministers, whose Business it is to win Souls, should endeavor that no
one Soul committed to their Charge should perish through their Neglect. And
considering the great Number of Souls, the various Circumstances and Conditions
of them, and the vast variety of Means that must be used with them, the
Minister will find that he must be very industrious, or some of them will
suffer.

It becomes Ministers, as much as any Men in the World, to be so wise as to
redeem the Time; to watch and improve all Opportunities for doing Good to the
Souls of Men. If we consider the whole Circle of a Minister's Work, both in his
private Studies, his private Conferences, and in his public Administrations,
and it is impossible for him to be faithful unless he be diligent.

Ministers, young Ministers especially, must give diligent Attendance to
reading and study, that they may grow in Knowledge, and in all ministerial
Accomplishments, that their profiting may appear to all, and in all things They
should also be diligent to know the State of their Flocks, that they may be
able to give to every one their Portion in due Season: And should be laying
hold of every Opportunity of doing Good to them, by instructing them, by
inculcating their Duty upon them, by warning, counselling and comforting of
them, as there is Occasion.

In a Word, There must be Line upon Line, Line upon Line; Precept upon Precept,
Precept upon Precept; here a little, and there a little, dropping continually
from Ministers for the Good of Souls. And so, in short, their main Study must
be how to win Souls, This must take up their Thoughts when at home, or when
they are abroad, when they rise up and when they lay down, when they are riding
or walking by the Way; for as this is the Business they are devoted unto, so,
if they be wise they will make a Business of it, and give themselves wholly to
these Things, and willingly spend and be spent in this important Service.

5 thly, Another Instance of Wisdom in winning Souls is to be very prayerful.

For, considering there is so much Skill and Wisdom necessary to win Souls, and
that this comes forth from the Lord of Hosts that is wonderful in Counsel; and
considering further, that after all our Wisdom, it is GOD who by his Spirit and
Grace wins the Soul over to Christ; any Minister that is wise will see that he
has such a Dependence upon GOD, both for Assistance and Success in his
Ministry, that he wont pretend to go on in it, without earnest seeking to GOD
for Help and Grace to he vouchsased unto him, unto those that hear him.

When a Minister seriously considers the arduous and important Business that he
is engaging in, he will be ready to cry with the Apostle, 2 Cor 216 And who is
sufficent for these Things? and will humbly and earnestly cry unto GOD for
Wisdom and Grace that may be sufficient for him. He will take Encouragement
from those gracious Words, Jam. 1.5. If any of you lack WISDOM, let him ask of
GOD, who gives to all Men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given
him; and will accordingly cry after Wisdom, and lift up his Voice for
Understanding, that he may know how to go in and out before the People he is
set over in the Lord; how to manage their various Tempers, and deal with their
Souls so as to win and save them. He will pray for Direction and Assistance in
his Studies, and in every Sermon that he composes, that he may be led into
Truth, that he may be kept from Errors, and that such things may be dictated to
his Mind as shall be seasonable and profitable to the Souls of those that hear
him, and to his own Soul; and that he may be assisted and directed in all his
Administrations.

But then, being sensible also that his Learning, his Wisdom, and Skill, will
signify nothing, without the setting in of divine Grace upon the Souls of Men,
this is what he will be much in Prayer to God for, that the divine Spirit may
go forth with all the Means that he is using for the winning Souls;
acknowledging with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.7. That neither is he that planteth
any thing, neither be that waters, but God that gives the Increase.

So that Ministers if they would be wise must be Men of Prayer. And as the high
Priest of old was to bear the Names of the Children of Israel upon his Heart in
the Breast Plate of Judgment, when he went into the holy Place before the Lord,
( Exodus 28. 29.) so Ministers should bear their People upon their Hearts when
they appear before God in Prayers, and should be far from thinking it lost time
that is spent, in spreading the Cases of their People before GOD, commending
them to his Mercy and Grace. GOD is my Witness (says the Apostle) whom I serve
with my Spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that without CEASING I make Mention of
you ALWAYS in my PRAYERS, Romans 1.9.

But it is high Time that I proceed to the APPLICATION AND IMPROVEMENT of these
Things. And here, although the foregoing Heads would afford us many useful
Inferences, yet I shall only hint at a few which the present Occasion calls for.

I. Is it the special Business of Ministers to win Souls; How should this
recommend the Office, and those who are faithful in it, to the Esteem, Honor,
and Love of the People?

What Office is there more glorious and more endearing than this of winning
Souls? This was the great Errand Christ came into the World upon, even to seek
and save lost Souls. And as the Thought of this should endear Christ unto us,
so should it Gospel Ministers, who (under him) come upon the same Design. What
more high, noble, and generous Employment, than to show Men the Way to
Salvation, and persuade Men into it? And how welcome should such be to a
People, that come to save their Souls from Death, to gain them over to Christ
to Heaven and Happiness? Is not the Soul exceeding precious, of more Worth than
all the World? And is it not of infinitely greater Importance to every Man to
save his Soul than gain the World? How thankful then should we be, that Christ
has appointed an Order of Men for this very Purpose; and how should every one,
that is faithful in this Office, be welcome to our very Souls? And how
insensible are they of the preciousness of their own Souls, and of their lost
and perishing State, who undervalue the Ministry as a needless Office, and
despise Ministers?

Indeed as for such as disparage their Office by their unskilfulness,
unfaithfulness, and corrupt Practices; I have nothing to say for them. But I
would say, it is Pity the Ministry in general should be blamed, should be
undervalued, upon the Account of such.

And those holy Souls who have been won through the Ministry of the Word, will
honor and love those that have been the Instruments of their Conversion; yea,
and every faithful Minister of Christ, saying as in Romans 10. 15. How beautiful
are the Feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad Tidings of
good Things?

II. Is there a great deal of Wisdom requisite to the winning Souls? Hence this
Business ought to be committed only to wise Men.

For, to what Purpose will it be to commit the Care of Souls to such as are
unskilful in the Word of Righteousness, or that would be unfaithful in the
Work? These would disparage the Office, frustrate the Design of their holy
Calling, and so would deceive and destroy, rather than gain and save Men's
Souls.

And surely, Considering the Importance of the Businss, that it relates to
Men's Souls, the future and eternal Salvation of them, it must needs be highly
incumbent upon all that are concerned in choosing and putting Men into the
Ministry, to act with the greatest Care.

Here let me say, a People should be very careful in the Choice of one to whom
they commit the Care of their Souls, and of the Souls of their Children. They
should not proceed suddenly in such a weighty Affair; should get the best
Advice they can, and should be well satisfied of a Man's Wisdom and Skill in
the Art of winning Souls, before they make Choice of him. This Art of winning
Souls is the grand ministerial Gift, and should be earnestly coveted by a
People.

And then, As to those who have the Power of introducing and investing any with
that sacred Office, they ought not to lay Hands suddenly on any Man, but should
be well satisfied of his having a good Faculty at winning Souls; that he be
well furnished with Knowledge to direct and guide Men to Christ, and with
Arguments to persuade, and be able to use them in such a Manner as would
convince the Judgment, and move the Passions, conveying (like the Sun) Light
and Heat at the same Time; and that he be disposed to lay himself out, and
employ all his Skill for this grand Design.

The Apostle's Charge to Timothy, was to commit this Work to faithful Men, that
shoud be able to teach others, 2 Timothy 2.2. And who those faithful Men are, and
the particular Qualifications necessary for those that are to be brought into
the ministerial Office, we have laid down by the same Apostle as a Directory to
his Son Timothy, 1st Epistle 3d Chapter at the Beginning.

III. We learn what is the peculiar Accomplishment those should be seeking
after, that are devoted to the Work of the Ministry, namely, the Art of winning
Souls.

This is the Art that every Candidate for the Ministry should be learning, and
that every Minister should be perfecting himself in continually.

We should learn the Art of explaining Doctrines and Duties, and of urging
Faith and Practice, with the most moving Arguments. We must get acquainted with
the Structure of humane Nature, and with the several Ways of working upon the
various Powers and Faculties of our Constitution. We must learn how to
inlighten and convince the Understanding and Judgment, how to persuade the
Will, and strike the Passions, yea, and the Senses too. We must learn to know
Men, and what kind of Address will best suit them, and so must know how to
accommodate ourselves, and all our Instructions and Exhortations, to the
several Tempers and Capacities of Men. And lastly, We must learn the Art of
living well ourselves; whereby we shall represent Religion in the most amiable
Light, and recommend it most effectually to others.

And now, DEAR SIR,

Since this is the very Business you are entering upon and engaging in, even to
WIN SOULS to Christ, and save them from Death, and since this is the Time for
your public and solemn Introduction into this sacred Office, by Prayer, and
the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery, I must say a few things to you.

And first of all, I hope that you yourself are won and gained over to Christ.
For with what Face, or with what Prospect of Success, can any undertake to
persuade others over to Christ and to his Gospel, with such Arguments as he
himself has never felt the Force of?

I trust you are persuaded of the Truth, and convinced of the Reasonableness
of, and actually in love with, that Religion which you are to recommend to the
Faith, the Love, and Practice of others; and that you can set forth the
Excellencies of it from your own happy Experience: and with what Advantages
will you urge and persuade this People to be religious, if you can let them
know from your own Experience, that the Ways of Religion are Ways of
Pleasantness, and all her Paths Peace.

You are about to have a great Trust committed to you; even that which is more
valuable than any Thing in this lower World. Not the Estates of Men: for as our
Master did not, much less should his Ministers, undertake to be Judges, and
Dividers among the People: And therefore the less you meddle with these Things
the better. Nor are the Bodies of Men to be committed to your Care: they must
when diseased be left to the Physician, under GOD the great Physician of all.
But they are the Souls of Men, precious Souls, immortal Souls, one of which is
worth a World, that is to be committed to your Charge: And you are to watch for
them as one that must give an Account. They are to be committed to you as a
Worker together with GOD, to win them over to Christ, to deliver them out of
their lost and perishing State, and persuade them to be happy. A glorious Work
indeed! What an high and honorable Calling is this, to have to do with Men's
Souls, and be the Instrument of their Salvation? The Angels think it their
Honor to Minister unto them who shall be Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. In
what an humble and adoring Manner should you then say to GOD, who am I, and
what is my Fathers House that thou have brought me hither unto? 2 Samuel 7.18.

But then, Consider the Difficulty as well as Dignity of the Office; it is to
win Souls, corrupt and wicked Souls, from their corrupt and sinful State, and
from all the corrupt Practices they have been accustomed unto: and what more
difficult than to change Men's Natures, and turn them from their evil Customs?
Moreover; You may depend upon having the Devil with all his cursed Legions,
corrupt Nature with all its wicked and unreasonable Lusts, the Men of the World
with all their enticing Arts, the Things of the World and all the corrupt
Customs and Practices of it opposing you, with all their Subtilty and Power.
And how do you think you shall be able to rescue poor Souls out of the Hands of
so many subtle and powerful Adversaries as these? Surely the Thought of this
might well discourage you from the Undertaking, were it not for the Assurance
that HE, who is with you, is stronger than all those that be against you. But
oh! the Knowledge, the Skill, the Wisdom you will need continually to manage
with Success in the Affair! This Art of winning Souls is the most difficult to
be learnt of any, it requires more Understanding, and Prudence, and Patience,
and Meekness, and Humility, and Self-denial to manage it to good, Purpose, than
any other Calling. You must therefore be repairing continually to the Fountain
and Father of Lights; from whom every good Gift and every perfect Gift
descends. And although we trust you are in some good Measure qualified herefor;
yet let me tell you, it is an Art that you may be growing in as long as you
live; and as in other so in this divine Art, Observation and Experience will
give you great Advantage.

Wherefore now set yourself to the Business with all your Might, that you may
grow more and more perfect in this excellent Art, and may be instrumental in
winning and saving those Souls in your Flock that you see are perishing. And,
that you may discharge your Office faithfully, and in the most likely Manner to
be successful, let me leave two or three Words of Counsel with you.

1st. Always distinguish between winning, over to CHRIST, and to a particular
PARTY. Don't think that the bringing Men over to a particular Opinion, as to
some doctrinal or disciplinary Points; or to a particular Side in a
Controversy, and a Quarrel, is the winning them over to Christ: for Men's being
on the wrong or the right Side in controversial Points, don't determine which
Side they are on, with respect to Christ and the Salvation of their Souls.

2dly. Use no other Arts in persuading over to Christ than those that the
Gospel will bear you out in, which are fair and honest, just and true. Don't
speak wickedly for GOD, nor talk deceitfully for him, Job. 13.7. Take Pattern
by the Apostles, who say, We are not as many who corrupt the Word, or deal
deceitfully with the Word, but as of Sincerity, but as of GOD, ^ Cor. 2.17.
Seeing we have received this Ministry as we have obtained Mercy we faint not,
but have renounced the hidden Things of Dishonesty, not walking in Craftiness,
not handling the Word of GOD deceitfully, but by Manifestation of the Truth,
commending ourselves to every Man's Conscience, in the Sight of GOD, 2 Cor.
4.2. You may not use any flattering Dissimulations or Deceits, to win Men over
to Christ: This would be to Steal Men's Hearts (as Absalom did the Hearts of
the Men of Israel) rather than fairly win them. The Cause of Christ requires no
dissembling about it, and Honesty will always be found to be the best Policy.
Indeed it is frequently mentioned as an Argument to justify some kind of Guile
and Deceit in winning and persuading Men to Christ, that the Apostle Paul says
of the Corinthians, That he being crafty caught them with Guile, 2 Cor. 12.16.
But they mistake the Apostle, for he therein only tells them what evil Surmises
and Suggestions there were among them concerning him, and that it was their
Suggestion among themselves that he had caught them with Guile; that is they
insinuate, that although he did not Burden them by calling for any Money from
them, yet, that he was crafty, and set others to take Money of them for his
Use; but this he utterly denies in the two following Verses. So that this Text
don't give the least Countenance to the using any Guile or Deceit in winning
Souls; for the Apostle denies that ever he did so, and mentions it only as a
bare Surmise of others.

3dly, and lastly. See that you have an impartial Regard to the Souls of all
committed to your Charge. Don't let any Soul suffer through Cowardice or
Contempt. Don't neglect the Souls of the Rich and Great through fear of
offending; but remember that if they loose their Souls, their worldly Riches
will by no Means answer in Exchange for them: therefore in a friendly faithful
Manner, endeavor that they may not have all their good Things in this Life.
And don't let the Poor be despised and sink below your particular Watch and
Care; but remember that their Souls are equally precious with the Souls of
others, and endeavor that those who are poor in this Word may be rich in
Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom.

And now, What shall I say unto you, to put you upon the utmost Faithfulness
and Diligence in this Business? You know the Worth of Souls, you know the
inestimable Price that has been paid for their Ransom, and that such
corruptible Things as Silver and Gold could not redeem them. You know also that
if they perish through your Neglect, their Blood will be required at your Hand:
Whereas if you are but the Means of winning, converting, and saving them, what
a Joy and Crown of Rejoicing would they be to you? What a Comfort will they be
to you in this World? For if you win their Souls over to Christ, you will gain
a great Share of their Affections to yourself; so that you need not to be
concerned to secure the Affections and Kindnesses of your People, any other Way
than by winning them over to Christ; for such will think nothing too much to
do, according to their Ability, for the honorable and comfortable Support of
him that GOD has made the Instrument hereof.

But then, What a Glory will such Souls be to you hereafter? How will they love
and thank you, and how will they praise GOD and Christ for you, throughout
Eternity? Verily, Every such Soul shall be like so many Pearls and precious
Diamonds, set in that unfading Crown of Glory, which you shall receive when the
chief Shepherd shall appear: For they that be Wise shall shine as the
brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness as the
Stars forever and ever, Dan. 12.3.

I shall conclude with a brief Address to the Church and Congregation, at whose
Desire, and upon whose Account, we are met together at this Time. You have been
seeking and praying to the GOD of the Spirits of all Flesh, to set a Man over
the Congregation, that may go in before you, and go out before you in spiritual
Things. And now behold the MAN; The Man whom, we trust, the Lord has chosen
for you. He is coming among you (we trust) not to seek yours but you; not to
get your worldly Riches, but to gain your precious Souls. With what Esteem
then, and hearty Affection, should you receive him?

Surely, Since he comes to seek and win your Souls, you ought to open them unto
him, and let him into them, that is, into the Affections of them; yea, and into
the Circumstances of them, so far as is necessary for his working and winning
upon them.

I charitably hope that many of you, according to your Profession, are already
won over to Christ; and then his Business, as to you, will be to strengthen
your Faith, your Love, and Obedience to Christ, and cause you to grow in Grace,
and to abound more and more in the Fruits of Righteousness; even to build them
up in Faith, Holiness, and Comfort unto Salvation.

And as for those of you that are yet in your Sins, and have not as yet been
persuaded over to Christ, see that you be won by his Counsels and his good
Conversation in Christ. Don't harden your Hearts against the moving Arguments
that he shall offer unto you: For I beseech you, what is it that he will
endeavor to win you over to, but to Christ and Happiness? Will be persuade you
to any thing that will be for your Hurt, or that which will be for your
greatest Good; even for your Peace, Honor and Comfort here, and for your Glory
and Happiness hereafter? Wherefore don't let him have any Reason to complain
that he labors in vain, and spends his Strength for naught; take heed of every
thing that shall grieve him, or that shall discourage him in his Work.

He is young and tender, and ye had need do all ye can to strengthen his Hands
and encourage his Heart, by living in Love, and Peace with him, and one with
another. Beware of Discord among your selves, or with your Minister.

Let the sore Contentions that have been of late among you, and which have rent
you to pieces, be a perpetual Warning to you, to guard against the beginning of
Strife, and to leave off Contention before it be meddled with.

And here let me say, That although your Contentions have been so sharp as to put
you and your Brethren asunder, yet ye must by no Means loose all your Charity
and Affection for them. You must exercise a forgiving Spirit toward them, as
you hope that they would exercise the same toward you, and as you hope that
GOD will forgive you. For those Divisions there had need be great searchings of
Heart on all Sides, and every one ought to be jealous and fearful least he has
done amiss in those Days and Years of Temptation.

And here I would say for all, (because I don't intend to meddle with those
thorny Points) that the more humble and jealous you are of yourselves, the more
charitable, meek, and condescending toward your Neighbors, and the more
careful you are that no Injustice be done them, the more evident it will be
that you are won over to Christ, for this is the Spirit of Christ and of his
Gospel. Put on therefore, as the Elect of GOD, holy and beloved, Bowels of
Mercy, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering, forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another: If any Man has a Quarrel against any, even
as Christ forgave you, so also do ye; and above all things put on Charity,
which is the Bond of Perfectness; and let the Peace of GOD rule in your Hearts,
to the which also ye are called in one Body and be ye thankful, Col. 3.12, --
15. And now the GOD of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus,
that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good Work, to do his Will; working in you that which
is well pleasing in his Sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory forever and
ever,

AMEN.
ERRATUM: Page 21. Line 32. for Force read Face.

The CHARGE.
FORASMUCH as You, by the Providence of GOD, are called to the Work of the
Gospel Ministry, and have now declared your Readiness to receive it of the
Lord: We therefore, in the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and by Virtue of the
Authority derived from Him, do, with the ancient Rite of the Laying on of the
Hands of the Presbytery, constitute and ordain you a Minister of the Church of
Christ; Now hereby committing unto you, the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven;
namely, the whole Administration of the Gospel of Christ, as it consists in

Delivering the Doctrines of Christ, by the preaching the everlasting Gospel;

The Administration of the Sacraments of the New Testament;

The dispensing the holy Discipline of his Church;

And, Blessing with Authority in the Name of the Lord.

And we hereby also commit to you the pastoral Care of this particular Church
of Christ, who have now requested you to take upon yourself this honorable
Burden.

We therefore now Charge you, in the Presence of the Great GOD, and before our
Lord Jesus Christ, the great Head and only universal Pastor of the Church, That
you take heed unto the Ministry you have now received of the Lord, that you
fulfill it: that you may hereafter give up your (...) with Joy: That you be a
Man of Prayer as it becomes a Man of GOD; that you therefore pray without
Ceasing:

That you give yourself to Reading and Meditation:

That you take heed to instruct, and thereby to feed, this Flock of GOD, with
Food convenient for them; endeavoring (the great Shepherd assisting you) to
cause them to lie down in green 'Pastures, and lead them beside the still
Waters, that they may be fat and flourishing.

That you therefore preach the Word of GOD in Truth; that (your Doctrine being
exactly conformable to that of the holy Scriptures) you show Uncorruptness,
Gravity, Sincerity, that thereby you may build up this Church on the Foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner
Stone: That you therefore preach the Word instructively and plainly, that you
enforce it strongly, that you reprove wisely and cautiously, yet with Courage
and Authority, and sharply if need be, suffering no Man to despise you; that
you exhort with all long suffering and sweetness of Affection; and that and in
all, you study to approve yourself to GOD and to your own Conscience, a Workman
that needs not to be ashamed.

That you administer the Sacraments of the New Testament;

Baptism to visible Believers and their Seed;

The Lord's Supper to such as are of a regular Behavior in Life, and are able
(examining themselves) to discern the Lord's Body

That you dispense the Discipline of the Church of Christ with all Courage,
Discretion and Impartiality, fearing the Face of no Man, nor having any Man's
Person in Admiration because of Advantage.

Moreover, We Charge you that you teach and instruct this People by your
Example as well as by your Doctrine, that you always (setting before you our
Lord Jesus Christ as the great Pattern of your Life and Conversation) behave
yourself in all Sanctity of Manners; in all Things showing youself a Pattern of
Good Works, which cannot be condemned, that he that is of the contrary Part may
be ashamed, having no evil Thing to say of you. That you exercise yourself to
Piety and Devotion toward GOD, and Love and Charity toward these your
Brethren, thereby greatly recommending the Doctrines of our Lord and Savior
which you shall preach, that others seeing your good Works may glorify our
heavenly Father. And for your Encouragement to be watchful in all these Duties
of your Ministry, we declare unto you. That if you shall faithfully keep this
Charge, if you shall thus take heed to yourself and to your Doctrine, and to
the Flock over which the Holy Christ has now made you an Overseer, you shall
both save yourself and them that hear you. If you shall be thus wise, you shall
hereafter shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as a Star forever and
ever; for then when our Lord Jesus Christ shall appear, you shall also appear
with Him, attired with a beautiful and a glorious Crown, Whose Luster shall
never fade away.

The Right Hand of FELLOWSHIP.
AS the thrusting forth Laborers into His Harvest, is to be ascribed to the
Care, Grace, and Faithfulness of the Lord Jesus Christ, the sovereign Head of
the Church; so there is a wonderful Wisdom, Goodness and Condescension
discovered in the Order and Manner wherein this is done by Him: He having
vested his Churches with a gracious Liberty of choosing, from amongst those,
whom the Head of Influences, has raised up, qualified, and disposed to that
sacred Employment, such, as upon their sincere and ardent Addresses to Him for
Direction, and the Exercise of their own best Judgment and Discretion, they
shall think most likely to promote the great Ends of GOD's Glory, and the Good
of precious Souls, in the midst of them.

That the Churches of Christ are by Him vested with this Liberty, and indulged
this Privilege, is evident from their Usage in the primitive Times of
Christianity; and may be fairly argued even from the sacred Scriptures
themselves: and particularly from Acts 14. 23. which Text rendered in our
Translation, And when they had ordained them Elders in every City, is rendered
by Rev Beza, Quumque ipsis per suffragia cr^^ssent per singulas Ecclesias
Presbyteros i. e. When they had by the Susstages or Votes of the People created
them Elders in every Church. And that this Translation is just, has been
allowed and pleaded by many, the best Expositors, who have understood and well
considered the Import of the Word (...), used in the Text.

And however this Privilege or Liberty of electing their own Pastors, has on
occasion of the Abuse of it by the Churches themselves, or the assuming
Disposition of those who have had the Ascendency over them, or both, been taken
away from many of the Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ; the taking away
whereof is, by Rev. Calvin, styled Impia Ecclesiae spoliatio (an ungodly
robbing the Church) Yet the Churches of New England have hitherto enjoyed the
quiet Possesion of it. And may it please GOD to direct and enable them always
so to use the same, as that they may not, by a sinful Inconsideration,
Rashness, Partiality, and factious Behavior, provoke our compassionate
Redeemer to suffer them to be divested of it.

It is too notorious to be dissembled that in the Elections of Pastors in some
of our Churches and Congregations, there has been a lamentable Loose given to
Men's Humors, Lusts, and Passions; than which there can scarce be named a more
awful Evidence of the Decay of vital Piety, or a more pregnant Symptom of the
Withdrawings of the gracious Presence of Christ from His People. Yet,
nevertheless (and to GOD's Praise be it spoken!) we have had from time to time
many Instances, wherein, making the necessary Abatements for humane Frailty,
this Transaction has been proceeded to and managed in our Churches, with a
Seriousness and Order, agreeable to the Importance of the Matter, and becoming a
People so much indulged and highly favored of the Lord

And it is Matter of Rejoicing to us, that we have beheld so much of the Fruits
of the Spirit of Christ, in that Order, Peace, and Unanimity, with which you,
our honored and dear Brethren in Christ, have proceeded in your Choice of the
worthy Person now set over you in the Lord

And having seen you now renewedly signify your Desires of him for your Pastor,
and heard him, with an express Dependence upon Christ the glorious Head of
Influences, complying with your Desires herein, and devoting himself to the
evangelical Ministry; yea further, having seen him in a solemn Manner separated
or ordained to the pastoral Office, by Prayer and laying on of the Hands of the
Presbytery. -- There can remain no imaginable Ground, whereupon to withhold
from him, those Acknowledgments, Wishes Hopes and Promises, which have been
wont to be expressed by the Eldership, unto such as from time to time it has
pleased our ascended Lord to add unto their Number.

Which therefore, being thereto deputed, (though unworthy of a standing amongst
them) I shall now, in the Name of the Eldership, express, by giving you,
Reverend and Dear SIR, The Right Hand of our Fellowship; hereby testifying our
Gratitude to the great Head of the Church, our Lord Jesus Christ, for those
ministerial Gifts and Graces we perceive to be in you; Our sincere Wishes, that
they may continued, increased and multiplied upon you; and our Hopes, that you
will so employ them all, as to approve yourself a Workman that need not be
ashamed.

We would also hereby be understood to express our Satisfaction in your call to
the Gospel Ministry, and to own and assert the Validity and Fullness of your
Ordination to that sacred Office. And that thereupon we own you as a Bishop,
Elder, or Pastor, in the Church of Christ, specially in this Part of it, over
which, as we trust, the Holy Ghost has now made you an Overseer; and that with
hearty Love and Affection, we receive you into the Fellowship of our Ministry,
and as our Equal in Point of Office.

Assuring you, That, as GOD shall enable and need require, we shall readily
give you the Assistance of our Prayers and Advice from time to time, and shall
always rejoice to see the Work of the Lord prospering in your Hands.

And now, Reverend and Dear Brother, suffer me to observe to you, That we take
your thus receiving the Right Hand of our Fellowship, as expressive on your
Part of the same Acknowledgments, Wishes, Hopes and Promises, toward us. And
may it please GOD to help you and us, to bear in Mind these mutual and
endearing Engagements, for the strengthening our holy Fellowship, and not
suffer them to pass away as Words of Course or an empty Formality.

Verily, SIR, from our own Experience we can assure you, the Work you are
engaged in is a laborious and difficult Work: A Work wherein you must expect to
meet with great Opposition: A Work therefore in order to the due Discharge
whereof you must arm yourself with Patience and Resolution, always relying upon
Christ, in whom all fullness dwells, and remembering that you watch for Men's
Souls as one that must give an Account.

And may it please our glorious Redeemer, always to afford his promised
Presence with you, and to cause his Grace to be sufficient for you! May you be
wise to win Souls, and instrumental of turning many unto Righteousness, who may
be your Hope, your Joy and Crown of Rejoicing, in the Presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ at His Coming.

FINIS.

