Major Mason's Brief HISTORY OF THE Pequot War.

A Brief History OF THE Pequot War: Especially Of the memorable Taking of their
FORT at MISTICK in CONNECTICUT In 1637.

Written by Major John Mason,

A principal Actor therein, as then chief Captain and Commander of Connecticut
Forces.

With an Introduction and some Explanatory Notes By the Reverend Mr. THOMAS
PRINCE.

Psalm. xliv. 1 -- 3 We have heard with our Ears, O GOD, our Fathers have told
us, what Work Thou did in their Days, in the times of old: How Thou did
drive out the Heathen with thy Hand, and plantedst Them: how Thou did afflict
the People and cast them out. For they got not the Land in Possession by their
own Sword, neither did their own Arm save them: but thy right Hand, and thine
Arm, and the Light of thy Countenance, because Thou had a Favor unto them.
Psalm. cii. 18. This shall be written for the Generation to come: and the People
which shall be Created, shall Praise the LORD. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S.
KNEELAND and T. GREEN in Queen Street, 1736.

INTRODUCTION.
IN my Contemplations of the DIVINE PROVIDENCE toward the People of
New England, I have often though it what a special Favor it was, that there came
over with the first Settlers of Plymouth and Connecticut Colonies, which in
those Times were especially exposed to the superior Power of the Barbarians
round about them; Two brave Englishmen bred to Arms in the Dutch Netherlands,
viz. Capt. MILES STANDISH of Pli^outh, and Capt JOHN MASON of Connecticut:
Gentlemen of tried Valor, Military Skill and Conduct, great Activity, and warm
Zeal for that noble Cause of Pure Scriptural Religion, and Religious Liberty,
which were the chief original Design and Interest of the Fathers of these
Plantations; and who were acted with such eminent Degrees of Faith and Piety,
as excited them to the most daring Ent^rprizes in the Cause of GOD and of his
People,and went a great way to their wonderful Successes.

Like those inspired Heroes of whom we read the History in the Eleventh Chapter
to the HE^REWS -- By Faith, they not only rather chose to suffer Affliction
with the People of GOD than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season;
esteeming the Reproach of CHRIST greater Riches than the Treas^r^s of Egypt:
But by Faith they even fors^^k the ^^me, passed through the Sea, subdued
Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises, waxed valiant in Fight, and
turned to Flight the Armies of the Aliens.

The Judicious Reader that knows the New English History, cannon think these
Scripture Phrases or religious Turns unsuitable on this Occasion: For as these
Colonies were chiefly, if not entirely Settled by a Religious People, and for
those Religious Purposes; It is as impossible to write an impartial or true
History of them, as of the ancient Israelites, or the later Vaudois or
North-Britons, without observing that Religious Spirit and Intention which
evidently run through and animate their Historical Transactions.

Capt. STANDISH was of a lower Stature, but of such a daring and active Genius,
that even before the Arrival of the Massachusetts Colony,He spread a Terror
over all the Tribes of Indians round about him, from the Massachusetts to
Martha's Vineyard,and from Cape-CodHarbour to Narragansett. Capt. MASON was
Tall and Portly, but never the less full of Martial Bravery and Vigor; that He
soon became the equal Dread of the more numerous Nations from Narragansett to
Hudson's River. They were BOTH the Instrumental Saviors of this Country in the
most critical Conjunctures: And as we quietly enjoy the Fruits of their
extraordinary Diligence and Valor, both the present and future Generations
will for ever be obliged to revere their Memory.

Capt. MASON, the Writer of the following History, in which He was a principal
Actor, as Chief Commander of the Connecticut Forces, is said to have been a
Relative of Mr. John Mason the ancient Cla^mer of the Province of
New Hampshire: However, the Captain was one of the first who went up from the
Massachusetts about the Year 16^5 to lay the Foundation of CONNECTICUT COLONY:
He went from Dorchester, first settled at Windsor, and thence marched forth to
the Pequot War.

But it being above Threescore Years since the following Narrative was Written,
near an Hundred since the Events therein related, and the State of the New
England Colonies being long since greatly Changed; it seems needful for the
present Readers clearer Apprehension of these Matters, to Observe -- That in
the Year 1633,and 1634, several Englishmen arriving from England, at the
Massachusetts, went up in the Western Country to discover Connecticut River;
the next Year began to remove thither: and by the Beginning of 1637, Hartford,
Windsor and Weathersfield were Settled, besides a Fortification built at
Saybrook on the Mouth of the River.

At that Time there were especially three powerful and warlike Nations of
Indians in the South Western Parts of New England; which spread all the Country
from Aqu^thneck, since called Rhode Island,to Quinnepiack, since called
New-H^^ven; viz. the NARRAGANSETTS, PEQUOTS and MOHEGANS. The NARRAGANSETTS
reached from the Bay of the same Name, to Pa^catuck River, now the Boundary
between the Governments of Rhode Island and Connecticut: And their Head Sachem
was MIANTONIMO. The PEQUOTS reached from thence Westward to Connecticut River,
and over it, as far as Branford, if not Quinnepiack; their Head Sachem being
SASSACUS. And the MOHEGANS spread along from the Narragansetts through the Inland
Country, on the Back or Northerly Side of the Pequots, between them and the
Nipmucks; their Head Sachem being UNCAS.

The most terrible of all those Nations were then the PEQUOTS; who with their
depending Tribes soon entered on a Resolution to Destroy the English out of the
Country. In 1634, they killed Capt. Stone and all his Company, being seven
besides Himself, in and near his Bark on Connecticut River. In 1635, they
killed Capt. Oldham in his Bark at Block-Island; and at Long Island they killed
two more cast away there. In 1636, and the following Winter and March, they
killed six and took seven more at Connecticut River: Those they took alive they
tortured to Death in a most barbarous Manner. And on April 23. 1637, they
killed nine more and carried two young Women Captive at Weathersfield.

They had earnestly solicited the Narragansetts to engage in their Confederacy:
very politickly representing to them, That if they should help or suffer the
English to subdue the Pequots, they would thereby make Way for their own future
Ruin; and that they need not come to open Battle with the English; only Fire
our Houses, kill our Cattle,lie in Ambush and sh^^t us as we went about our
Business; so we should be quickly forced to leave this Country, and the Indians
not exposed to any great Hazard. Those truly politic Arguments were upon the
Point of prevailing on the Narragansetts: And had These with the Mohegans, to
whom the Pequots were nearly related, joined against us; they might then, in
the in^ant State of these Colonies, have easily accomplished their desparate
Resolutions.

But the Narragansetts being more afraid of the Pequots than of the English;
were willing they should weaken each other, not in the least imagining the
English could destroy them; at the same time an Agency from the Massachusetts
Colony to the Narragansetts, happily Preserved their staggering Friendship. And
as UNCAS the Great Sachim of the Moheags, upon the first coming of the English,
fell into an intimate Acquaintance with Capt. Mason, He from the Beginn^^g
entertained us in an amicable Manner: And though both by his Father and Mother He
derived from the Royal Blood of the Pequots, and had Married the Daughter of
TATOBAM their then late Sachim; yet such was his Affection for us, as he
faithfully adhered to us, ventured his Life in our Service, assisted at the
Taking their Fort, when about Seven Hundred of them were Destroyed, and
thereupon in subduing and driving out of the Country the remaining greater Part
of that fierce and dangerous Nation.

Soon after the War, Capt. Mason was by the Government of Connecticut, made the
Major General of all their Forces, and so continued to the Day of his Death:
The Rev. Mr. HOOKER of Hartford, being desired by the Government in their Name
to deliver the Staff into his Hand; We may imagine he did it with that superior
Piety, Spirit and Majesty, which were peculiar to him: Like an ancient Prophet
addressing himself to the Military Officer, delivering to him the Principal
Ensign of Martial Power, to Lead the Armies and Fight the Battles of the LORD
and of his People.

Major Mason having been trained up in the Netherland War under Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX; when the Struggle arose in England between K. Charles I and the
Parliament about the Royal Powers and the National Liberties; that Famous
General had such an Esteem for the Major's Conduct and Bravery, that He wrote
to the Major to come over and help Him. But the Major excusing himself,
continued in this Country as long as he lived, and had some of the greatest
Honors his Colony could yield him.

For besides his Office of Major General, the Colony in May 1660 chose him
their DEPUTY GOVERNOR; continued him in the same Post by annual Re-elections,
by virtue of their first Constitution to 1662 inclusively. The same Year K.
CHARLES II. comprehending the Colonies of Connecticut and New Haven in One
Government by the Name of CONNECTICUT COLONY; He in the Royal Charter, signed
April 23, appointed Major Mason their first Deputy Governor till the second
Thursday of October following: After which, the General Court being left to
ch^^e their Offic^rs, they continued to choose him their Deputy Governor every
Year to May 1670; when his Age and Bodily Infirmities advancing, he laid down
his Office and retired from Public Business.

After the Pequot War, he had removed from Windsor to Saybrook: But in 1659, he
removed thence to Norwich; where he Died in 1672, or 1673, in the 73d Year of
his Age: leaving three Sons, viz. Samuel, John and Daniel, to imitate their
Father's Example and inherit his Virtues.

I have only now to observe, that in The Relation of the Troubles which
happened to New England by the Indians from 1614 to 1675, Published by the then
Mr. INCREASE MATHER in 1677, I find a Copy of the following Narrative, but
without the Prefaces, had been communicated to him by Mr. John Allyn then the
Secretary of Connecticut Colony; which that Rev. Author took for Mr. Allyn's,
and calls it his. But we must inform the Reader, that the Narrative was
originally drawn by Major Mason. And as his Eldest Grandson Capt. John Mason
now of New London has put it into my Hands; I have been more than usually
careful in Correcting the Press according to the Original; as the most
authentic Account of the Pequot War, and as a standing Monument both of the
extraordinary Dangers and Courage of our pious Fathers and of the eminent
Appearance of HEAVEN to save them.

The other Actions of Major Mason must be referred to the General History of
this Country, when some Gentleman of greater Qualifications and Leisure than I
may claim, shall rise up among us, to undertake it. I shall give some Hints in
my Brief Chronology; which through numerous Hindrances, is now in such a
Forwardness, that near 200 Pages are Printed already; and in a little Time,
Life and Health allowed, I hope to present the Public with the first of the
two intended Volumns. In the mean while I cannot but Regret it, that such
considerable and ancient Towns as Saybrook, Fairfield, Stamford, Canterbury,
Groton in the County of Middlesex, Chelmsford, Billerica, W^burn, Dunstable and
Bristol,should afford no more than their bare Names in the Published Records of
this Country.

Thomas Prince.
Boston, Dec. 23. 1735. N. B. The only Word left out is my in Dedication, Page
^ where it should be Read -- My own Unfitness: the few Mispellings are only of
the English Words; which with the Mispointings, are easily De^e^ned and
Corrected.



TO The Honorable The General Court of Connecticut.
Honored Gentlemen,
YOU well know how often I have been requested by your selves to write
something in reference to the Subject of the ensuing Treatise (who have power
to Command) and how backward I have been, as being conscious to own unfitness;
accounting it not so proper, I being a Chief Actor therein my self. Yet
considering that little has been done to keep the Memory of such a special
Providence alive, though I could heartily have wished that some other who had
been less interested and better qualified might have undertaken the Task, for I
am not unacquainted with my own Weakness; yet I shall endeavor in plainness
and faithfulness impartially to declare the Matter, not taking the Crown from
the Head of one and putting it upon another. There are several who have Write
and also Printed at random on this Subject, greatly missing the Mark in many
Things as I con^eive. I shall not exempt my self from fra^lties, yet from
material Faults I presume you may pronounce it not Guilty, and do assure you
that if I should see or by any be convinced of an Error, I shall at once
confess and am^nd it.

I thought it my Duty in the Entrance to relate the first Grounds upon which
the English took up Arms against the Pequots; f^r the Beginning is the Moiety
of the Whole; and not to mention some Passages at Rovers, as others have done,
and not demonstrate the Cause. Judge of me as you please: I shall not climb
after Applause, nor do I much fear a Censure; there being many Testimonies to
what I shall say. It Is possible some may think no better can be expected in
these distracting Times; it being so hard to please a few, imp^ssible to please
all: I shall therefore c^ntent my self that I have attended my Rule: You may
please to improve some others who were Actors in the Service to give in their
Apprehensions, that so the severals being compared, you may enlarge or diminish
as you shall see meet. I desire my Name may be sparingly mentioned: My
principal Aim is that GOD may have his due Praise.

By your unworthy Servant, John Mason.

TO THE American Reader.
Judicious Reader,
ALTHOUGH it be too true indeed that the Press lab^urs under, and the World
does too much abound with pamphleting Papers; yet know that this Piece cannot
or at least ought not to be di^accepted by thee: For by the help of this thou
may look backward and interpret how GOD has been working, and that very
wonderfully for thy Safety and Comfort: And it being the LORD'S doing, it
should be mavelous in thine Eyes.

And when thou shall have viewed over this Paper, thou will say the Printers of
this Edition have done well to prevent the possible Imputation of Posterity; in
that they have consulted the exhibition at least to the American World, of the
remarkable Providence of GOD, which thou may at thy leisure read, consider
and affect thy self with, in the Sequel.

History most properly is a Declaration of Things that are done by those that
were present at the doing of them: Therefore this here presented t^ thee may in
that respect plead for liking and acceptance with thee: The Historiographer
being one of the principal Actors, by whom those English Engagements were under
GOD carried on and so successfully effected. And for a President for him in
this his Publication of his own, in Part Rei Belli^^, ^e has that great Man
at Arms the first of the noble Caesar's, being the Manager and ^^diter of his
martial Expl^^ts.

He has also that necessary Ingredient in an Historian; Ut nequid falsi dicere,
et nequid very non dicere audeat; That he will tell the Truth and will not say
a jot of Falsehood.

And Memorandum that those divine Over-rulings, their Recollection, as they
ought to be Quickeners of us up to a Theological Reformation, and Awak^n^rs of
us from a lethargilike Security, least the Lord should yet again make them more
afflicting Thorns in our Eyes and slashing Scourges in our Sides; so also they
may well be Pledges or Earnests to us of his future saving Mercies; and that if
we by our Declensions from him in his ways do not provoke him, he will not
forsake us, but have respect to us in our Dwellings, and lend us the desirable
Providence of his perpetual Salvation.

N. B. This Epistle to the AMERICAN READER appears to have been written by
another Hand than Major Mason's

TO THE Judicious Reader.
Gentlemen,
I Never had thought that this should have come to the Press, until of late: If
I had, I should have endeavored to have put a little more Varnish upon it: But
being over persuaded by some Friends. I thought it not altogether amiss to
present it to your courteous Disposition, hoping it might find your ^avourable
Entertainment and Acceptance, though rude and impolish'd. I wish it had fallen
into some better Hands that might have performed it to the Life: I shall only
draw the Curtain and open my little Casement, that so others of larger Hearts
and Abilities may let in a biger Light; that so at least some small Glimmering
may be left to Posterity what Difficulties and Obstructions their Forefathers
met with in their first settling these de^^rt Parts of America; how GOD was
pleased to prove them, and how by his wise Providence he ordered and disposed
all their Occasions and Affairs for them in regard to both their Civils and
Eccle^ia^^ic^^s.

This with some other Reasons have been Motives to excite me to the
enterprizing hereof; no Man that I know of having as yet undertaken to write a
general History or Relation; so that there is no Commemoration of Matters
respecting this War, how they began, how carried on, and continued nor what
Success they had* The Author Died before the Reverend Mr. William Hubbard and
Mr. Increase Mather Published their Accounts of the Pequot War.
They which think the mentioning of some Particulars is sufficient for the
understanding of the Ge^^ral, in my (...) ^^ray no less from the Truth, then if
by the sep^rated Parts of a living Man one should think by this Means he knew
all the Parts and Perfections of the Creature: But these separated Parts being
joined together having Form and Life, one might easily discern that he was
deceived.

If the Beginning be but obscure and the Ground uncertain, its Continuance can
hardly persuade to purchase Belief: Or if Truth be wanting in History, it
proves but a fruitless Discourse.

I shall therefore, GOD helping, endeavor not so much to stir up the
Affections of Men, as to declare in Truth and Plainness the Actions and Doings
of Men: I shall therefore set down Matters in order as they Began and were
carried on and Issued: that so I may not deceive the Reader in confounding of
Things, but the Discourse may be both Plain and Easy.

And although some may think they have Wrote in a high Style, and done some
notable Thing, yet in my Opinion they have not spoken truly in some
Particulars, and in general to little Purpose: For how can History find Credit,
if in the Beginning you do not deliver plainly and clearly from whence and how
you do come to the Relation which you presently intend to make of Actions?

As a Rule, although it has l^ss length and breadth, yet notwithstanding it
retains the Name if it has that ^^ich is proper to a Rul^. When the Bones are
separated from a living Creature it becomes unserviceabl^: So a History* if you
take away Order and Truth, the rest will prov^ (...) be but a vain Narration.

I shall not make a long Discourse, nor labor to hold the Reader in doubt,
using a multitude of Words, which is no (...) to find out the Truth; as if one
should seek for (...) the Current of Pra^ling* ^aving nothing but a (...)
worthy to hold the Reader in suspense: (Sed quo ^ado) In a word, the LO^^ was
as it were pleased to say unto us* The Land of Canaan will I give unto thee
though but few and Strangers in it: And when we went from one Nation to another,
yea from one Kingdom to another, ^e suffered no Man to do us Wrong, but
reproved Kings for our ^akes: And so through Mercy at length we were settled in
Peace, to the A^onishment of all that were round about us: unto whom be
ascribed all Glory and Praise for ever and ever.

Farewell John Mason.
Norwich in NEW ENGLAND, in America.
SOME Grounds of the War Against the Pequots.
ABOUT the Year 1632 one Capt. Stone Arrived in the Massachusett in a Ship from
Virginia; who shortly after was bound for Virginia again in a small Bark with
one Capt. Norton; who sailing into CONNECTICUT RIVER about two Leagues from the
Entrance cast Anchor; there coming to them several Indians belonging to that
Place whom the Pequots Tyrannized over, being a potent and warlike People, it
being their Custom so to deal with their neighbor Indians; Capt. Stone having
some occasion with the Dutch who lived at a trading House near twenty Leagues
up the River, procured some of those Indians to go as Pilots with two of his
Men to the Dutch: But being benighted before they could come to their desired
Port, put the Skiff in which they went, ashore, where the two Englishmen
falling asleep, were both Murdered by their Indian Guide^: There remaining with
the Bark about twelve of the aforesaid Indians; who had in all probability
formerly plotted their bloody Design; and waiting an opportunity when some of
the English were on Shore and Capt* Stone asleep in his Cabin, set upon them
and cruelly Murdered every one of them, plundered what they pleased and sunk
the Bark.

These Indians were not native Pequots, but had frequent recourse unto them, to
whom they tendered some of those Goods, which were accepted by the Chief Sachem
of the Pequots: Other of the said Goods were tendered to NYNIGRETT Sachem of
Nayanticke, who also received them.

The Council of the Massachusetts being informed of their Proceedings, sent to
speak with the Pequots, and had some Treaties with them. But being unsatisfied
therewith, sent forth Captain John Endicot Commander in Chief, with Capt.
Underhill, Captain Turner, and with them one hundred and twenty Men; who were
firstly designed on a Service against a People living on Block Island, who were
subject to the Narragansett Sachem; they having taken a Bark of one Mr. John
Oldham, Murdering him and all his Company: They were also to call the Pequots
to an Account about the Murder of Capt. Stone; who arriving at Pequot had some
Conference with them; but little effected; only one Indian slain and some
Wigwams burnt. After which, the Pequots grew enraged against the English who
inhabited CONECTICOT, being but a small Number, about two hundred and fifty,
who were there newly arrived; ^as also about twenty Men at SAYBROOK, under the
Command of Lieutenant Lion Gardner, who was there settled by several Lords and
Gentlemen in England. The Pequots falling violently upon them, slew diverse Men
at Saybrook; keeping almost a constant Siege upon the Place; so that the
English were constrained to keep within their pallizado Fort; being so hard
Beset and sometimes Assaulted, that Capt. John Mason was sent by Connecticut
Colony with twenty Men out of their small Numbers to secure the Place: But
after his coming, there did not one Pequot appear in view for one Month Space,
which was the time he there remained.

In the Interim certain Pequots about One Hundred going to a Place called
Weathersfield on Connecticut; having formerly confederated with the Indians of
that Place (as it was generally thought) lay in Ambush for the English; diverse
of them going into a large Field adjoining to the Town to their ^abour, were
there set upon by the Indians: Nine of the English were killed out right, with
some Hor^es, and two young Women taken Captives.

At their Return from Weathersfield, they came down the River of Connecticut
(Capt. Mason being then at Saybrook Fort) in three Canoes with about one
hundred Men, which River of necessity they must pass: We espying them,
concluded they had been acting some Mischief against us, made a Shot at them
with a Piece of Ordnance, which beat off the Beak Head of one of their Canoes,
wherein our two Captives were: it was at a very great distance: They then
hastened, drew their Canoes over a narrow Beach with all speed and so got away.

Upon which the English were somewhat dejected: But immediately upon this, a
Court was called and met in Hartford the First of May 1637, (...) 1. 1637 was
Monday.
who seriously considering their Condition, which did look very Sad, for those
Pequots were a great People, being strongly fortified, cruel, warlike,
munitioned, etc, and the English but an h^nd^ul in comparison: But their
outrageous Violence against (...) English, having Murdered about Thirty of
them, their great Pride and In^olency, constant pursuit in their malicious
Courses, with their engaging other Indians in their Quarrel against the
English, who had never offered them the least Wrong; who had in all likelihood
Espoused all the Indians in the Country in their Quarrel, had not GOD by more
than an ordinary Providence prevented: These Things being duly considered, with
the eminent Hazard and great Peril they were in; it pela^ed GOD so to stir up
the Hearts of all Men in general, and the Court in special, that they concluded
some Forces should forthwith be sent out against the Pequots; their Grounds
being Just, and necessity enforcing them to engage in an offensive and
defensive War: the Management of which War we are nextly to relate.

AN Epitome or brief History OF THE Pequot War.
IN the Beginning of May 1637 there were sent out by CONNECTICUT COLONY Ninety
Men under the Command of Capt. John Mason against the PEQUOTS, with ONKOS an
Indian Sachem living at Mohegan, Onkos, usually called Un^as, the Gre^^ Sachem
of the MOHEAGS.
who was newly revolted from the Pequots; being Shipped in one Pink, one
Pinnace, and one Shallop; who sailing down the River of Connecticut fell
several times a ground, the Water being very low: The Indians not being wonted
to such Things with their small Canoes, and also being impatient of Delays,
desired they might be set on Shore, promising that they would meet us at
Saybrook; which we granted: They hastening to their Quarters, fell upon Thirty
or forty of the Enemy near Saybrook Fort, and killed seven of them outright;
Mr. Increase Mather in his History of the Pequot War, says this was on May 15.
having only one of their's wounded, who was sent back to Connecticut in a
Skiff: Capt. John Underhill also coming with him, who informed us what was
performed by Onkos and his Men; which we looked at as a special Providence; for
before we were some what doubtful of his Fidelity: Capt. Underhill then offered
his Service with ^inteen Men to go with us, if Lieutenant Gardner would allow
of it, who was Chief Commander at Saybrook Fort; which was readily approved of
by Lieutenant Gardner and accepted by us: In lieu of them we sent back ^wenty
of our Soldiers to Connecticut.

Upon a Wednesday we arrived at Saybrook, where we lay Windbou^d until Friday;
often consulting how and in what manner we should proceed in our Enterprise,
being altogether ignorant of the Country. At length we concluded GOD assisting
us, for Narragansett, and so to March through their Country, which Bordered
upon the Enemy; where lived a great People, it being about fifteen Leagues
beyond Pequot: The Grounds and Reasons of our so Acting you shall presently
understand:

First, The Pequots our Enemies, kept a continual Guard upon the River Night
and Day.

Secondly, Their Numbers far exceeded ours; having sixteen Guns with Powder and
Shot, as we were informed by the two Captives foremention^d (where we declared
the Grounds of this War) who were taken by the Dutch and restored to us at
Saybrook; which indeed was a very friendly Office and not to be forgotton.

Thirdly, They were on Land, and being swift on Foot, might much impede our
Landing and possibly dishearten our Men; we being expected only by Land, there
being no other Place to go on Shore but in that River, nearer than Narragansett

Fourthly, B^ Narragansett we should come upon their Backs and possibly might
surpriz^ them unaware, at worst we should be on firm Land as well as they. All
which proved very successful as the Sequel may evidently demonstrate.

But yet for all this, our Counsel all of them except the Captain we^e at a
stand, and could not judge it meet to sail to Narragansett: And indeed there
was a very strong Ground for it; our Commission limiting (...) to land our Men
in Pequot River; we had also the same Order by a Letter of Instruction sent us
to Saybrook.

But Capt. Mason apprehending an exceeding great Hazard in so doing, for the
Reasons fore mentioned, as also some other which I shall forbear to trouble you
with, did therefore earnestly desire Mr. Stone that he would commend our
Condition to the LORD, that Night,to direct how in what manner we should demean
our selves in that Respect; He being our Chaplin and lying aboard our Pink, the
Captain on shore. In the Morning very early Mr. Stone came ashore to the
Captain's Chamber, and told him, he had done as he had desired, and was fully
satisfied to sail for Narragansett. Our Council was then called, and the
several Reasons alleged: In fine we all agreed with one accord to sail for
Narragansett, which the next Morning we put in Execution.

I declare not this to encourage any Soldiers to Act beyond their Commission,
or contrary to it; for in so doing they run a double Hazard. There was a great
Commander in Belgia who did the States great Service in taking a City; but by
going beyond his Commission lost his Life: His name was Grubb^nd^nk. But if a
War be Managed duly by Judgment and Discretion as is requisite, the Shows are
many times contrary to what they seem to pursue: Wherefore the more an
Enterprise is dissembled and kept secret, the more sacil to put in Execution;
as the Proverb, The farthest way about is sometimes the nearest way home. I
shall make bold to present this as my present Thoughts in this Case; In Matters
of War, those who are both able and faithful should be improved; and then bind
them not up into too narrow a Compass: For it is not possible for the wisest
and ablest Senator to foresee all Accidents and Occurrents that fall out in the
Management and Pursuit of a War: Nay although possibly he might be trained up
in Military Affairs; and truly much less can he have any great Knowledge who
h^th had but little Experience therein. What shall I say? GOD led his People
through many Difficulties and Turnings; yet by more than an ordinary Hand of
Providence he brought them to Canaan at last.

On Friday Morning, we set Sail for NARRAGANSETT-BAY, and on Saturday toward
Evening we arrived at our desired Port, there we kept the Sabbath.

On the Monday the Wind blew so hard at North-West that we could not go on
Shore; as also on the Tuesday until Sun set; at which time Capt. Mason landed
and Marched up to the Place of the Chief Sachem's Residence; who told the
SACHEM, That we had not an opportunity to acquaint him with our coming Armed in
his Country sooner; yet not doubting but it would be well accepted by him,
there being Love betwixt himself and us; well knowing also that the Pequots and
themselves were Enemies, and that he could not be un^^quainted with those
intolerable Wrongs and Injuries these Pequots had lately done unto the English;
and that we were now come, GOD assisting, to Avenge our selves upon them; and
that we did only desire free Passage through his Country. Who retu^ned us this
ANSWER, That he did accept of our coming, and did also approve of our Design;
only he thought our Numbers were too weak to deal with the Enemy, who were (as
he said) very great Captains and Men skilful in War. Thus he spoke somewhat
slighting of us.

On the Wednesday Morning, we Marched from thence to a Place called NAYANTICK,
it being about eighteen or twenty Miles distant, where another of those
Narragan^ett Sachems lived in a Fort; it being a Frontier to the Pequots. They
carried very proudly toward us; not permitting any of us to come into their
Fort.

We beholding their Carriage and the Falsehood of Indians, and fearing least
they might discover us to the Enemy, especially they having many times some of
their near Relations among their greatest Foes; we therefore caused a strong
Guard to be set about their Fort, giving Charge that no Indian should be
suffered to pass in or out: We also informed the Indians, that none of them
should stir out of the Fort upon peril of their Lives: so as they would not
suffer any of us to come into their Fort, so we would not suffer any of them to
go out of the Fort.

There we quartered that Night, the Indians not offering to stir out all the
while.

In the Morning, there came to us several of MYANTOMO He was usually called
Mia^tonimo the Great Sachem of the Narraganset Indians.
his Men, who told us, they were come to assist us in our Expedition, which
encouraged diverse Indians of that Place to Engage also; who suddenly gathering
into a Ring, one by one, making solemn Protestations how galliantly they would
demean themselves, and how many Men they would Kill.

On the Thursday about eight of the Clock in the Morning, we Marched thence
toward PEQUOT, with about five hundred Indians: But through the Heat of the
Weather and want of Provisions, some of our Men Fainted: And having Marched
about twelve Miles, we came to Pawcatuck-River, at a Ford where our Indians
told us the Pequots did usually Fish; there making an Alta, we stayed some
small time: The Narragansett Indians manifesting great Fear, in so much that
many of them returned, although they had frequently despised us, saying, That
we durst not look upon a PEQUOT, but themselves would perform great Things;
though we had often tol^ them that we came on purpose and were resolved, GOD
assisting, to see the PEQUOTS, and to Fight with them before we returned,
though we perished. I then enquired of ONKOS, what he thought the Indians would
do? Who said, The NARRAGANSETTS would all leave us, but as for HIMSELF He would
never leave us: and so it proved: For which Expressions and some other Speeches
of his, I shall never forget him. Indeed he was a great Friend, and did great
Service.

And after we had refreshed our selves with our mean Commons, we Marched about
three Miles, and came to a Field which had lately been planted with Indian
Corn: There we made another Alt, and called our Council, supposing we drew near
to the Enemy: And being informed by the Indians that the Enemy had two Forts
almost impregnable; but we were not at all Discouraged, but rather Animated, in
so much that we were resolved to Assault both their Forts at once. But
understanding that one of them was so remote that we could not come up with it
before Midnight, though we Marched hard; whereat we were much grieved, chiefly
because the greatest and bloodiest Sachem there resided, whose Name was
SASSACOUS: We were then constrained, being exceedingly spent in our March with
extreme Heat and want of Necessaries, to accept of the nearest.

We then Marching on in a silent Manner, the Indians that remained fell all
into the Rear, who formerly kept the Van; (being possessed with great Fear) we
continued our March till about one Hour in the Night: and coming to a little
Swamp between two Hills, there we pitched our little Camp; much wearied with
hard Travail, keeping great Silence, supposing we were very near the Fort as
our Indians informed us; which proved otherwise: The Rocks were our Pillows;
yet Rest was pleasant: The Night proved Comfortable, being clear and Moon
Light: We appointed our Guards and placed our Sentinels at some distance; who
heard the Enemy Singing at the Fort, who continued that Strain until Midnight,
with great Insulting and R^joycing, as we were afterward informed: They seeing
our Pinnaces sail by them some Days before, concluded we were afraid of them
and durst not come near them; the Burden of their Song tending to that purpose.

In the Morning, we awaking and seeing it very light, supposing it had been
day, and so we might have lost our Opportunity, having purposed to make our
Assault before Day; row^ed the Men with all expedition, and briefly commended
ourselves and Design to GOD, thinking immediately to go to the Assault; the
Indians showing us a Path, told us that it led directly to the Fort. We held on
our March about two Miles, wondering that we came not to the Fort, and fearing
we might be deluded: But seeing Corn newly planted at the Foot of a great Hill,
supposing the Fort was not far off, a Champion Country being round about us;
then making a stand, gave the Word for some of the Indians to come up: At
length ONKOS and one WEQUOSH appeared: We demanded of them, Where was the Fort?
They answered, On the Top of that Hill: Then we demanded, Where were the Rest
of the Indians? They answered, Behind, exceedingly afraid: We wished them to
tell the rest of their Fellows, That they should by no means Fly, but stand at
what distance they pleased, and see whether ENGLISH MEN would now Fight or not.
Then Captain Underhill came up, who Marched in the Rear; and commending our
selves to GOD divided our Men: There being two Entrances into the Fort,
intending to enter both at once: Captain Mason leading up to that on the North
East Side; who approaching within one Rod, heard a Dog bark and an Indian
crying Owanux! Owanux! which is Englishmen! Englishmen! We called up our Forces
with all expedition, gave Fire upon them through the Pallizado; the Indians
being in a dead indeed their last Sleep: Then we wheeling off fell upon the
main Entrance, which was blocked up with Bushes about Breast high, over which
the Captain passed, intending to make good the Entrance, encouraging, the rest
to follow. Lieutenant Seel^y endeavored to enter; but being somewhat cumbred,
stepped back and pulled out the Bushes and so entered, and with him about
sixteen Men; We had formerly concluded to destroy them by the Sword and ^ave
the Plunder.

Whereupon Captain Mason seeing no Indians, entered a Wigwam; where he was be^et
with many Indians, waiting all opportunities to lay Hands on him, but could not
preva^l. At length William H^ydo^ ^^pying the Breach in the Wigwam, supposing
some English might be there, entered; but in his Entrance ^ell over a dead
Indian; but speedily recovering himself, the Indians some fled, others crept
under their Beds: The Captain going out of the Wigwam saw many Indians in the
Lane or Street; he making toward them, they fl^d, were pur^ued to the End of
the Lane, where they were met by Edward Pattison, Thomas Barber, with some
others; where seven of them were Slain, as they said. The Captain f^cing about,
Marched a ^l^w Pace up the Lane he came down, perceiving himself very much out
of Breath; and coming to the other End near the Place where he first entered,
saw two Soldiers standing close to the Pallizado with their Swords pointed to
the Ground: The Captain told them that We should never kill them after that
manner: The Captain also said, WE MUST BURN THEM; and immediately stepping into
the Wigwam where he had been before, brought out a Firebrand, and putting it
into the Ma^ts with which they were covered, ^et the Wig^wams on Fire.
Lieutenant Thomas Bull and Nicholas Omsted beholding, came up; and when it was
thoroughly kindled, the Indians ran as Men most dreadfully Amazed.

And indeed such a dreadful Terror did the ALMIGHTY let fall upon their
Spirits, that they would fly from us and run into the very Flames, where many
of them perished. And when the Fort was thoroughly Fired, Command was given,
that all should fall off and surround the Fort; which was readily attended by
all; only one Arthur Smith being so wounded that he could not move out of the
Place, who was happily espied by Lieutenant Bull, and by him resc^^d.

The Fire was kindled on the North East Side to windward; which did swiftly
over run the Fort, to the extreme Amazement of the Enemy, and great Rejoicing
of our selves. Some of them climbing to the Top of the Palizado; others of them
running into the very Flames; many of them gathering to windward, lay pelting
at us with their Arrows; and we repayed them with our small Shot: Others of the
Stoutest issued forth, as we did guess, to the Number of Forty, who perished by
the Sword.

What I have formerly said, is according to my own Knowledge, there being
sufficient living Testimony to every Particular.

But in reference to Captain Underhill and his Parties acting in this Assault,
I can only intimate as we were informed by some of themselves immediately after
the Fight, Thus They Marching up to the Entrance on the South West Side, there
made some Pause; a valiant, resolute Gentleman, one Mr. HEDGE, stepping toward
the Gate, saying, If we may not Enter, wherefore came we hear; and immediately
end^avoured to Enter; but was opposed by a sturdy Indian which did impede his
Entrance: but the Indian being slain by himself and Se^jeant Davis, Mr. Hedge
Entered the Fort with some others; but the Fort being on Fire, the Smoke and
Flames were so violent that they were constrained to desert the Fort.

Thus were they now at their Wits End, who not many Hours before exalted
themselves in their great Pride, threatening and resolving the utter Ruin and
Destruction of all the English, ^xulting and Rejoicing with Songs and Dances:
But GOD was above them, who laughed his Enemies and the Enemies of his People
to Scorn, making them as a siery Oven: Thus were the Stout Hearted spoiled,
having slept their last Sleep, and none of their Men could find their Hands:
Thus did the LORD judge among the Heathen, filling the Place with dead Bodies!

And here we may see the just Judgment of GOD, in sending even the very Night
before this Assault, One hundred and fifty Men from their other Fort, to join
with them of that Place, who were designed as some of themselves reported to go
forth against the English, at that very Instant when this heavy Stroke came
upon them, where they perished with their Fellows. So that the Mischief they
intended to us, came upon their own Pate: They were taken in their own Share,
and we through Mercy escaped. And thus in little more than one Hour's space was
their impr^gnable Fort with themselves utterly Destroyed, to the Number of six
or seven Hundred, as some of themselves confessed. There were only seven taken
Captive and about seven escaped. The Place of the Fort being called MISTICK,
this Fight was called MISTICK-FIGHT: And Mr. Increase Mather, from a Manuscript
He met with, tells us; It was on Friday, May 26. 1637, a memorable Day!


Of the English, there were two Slain outright, and about twenty Wounded: Some
Fainted by reason of the sharpness of the Weather* it being a cool Morning* and
the want of such Comforts and Necessaries as were needful in such a Case;
especially our Chyrurgeon was much wanting, whom we left without Ba^ks in
Narragansett Bay, who had Order there to remain until the Night before our
intended Assault.

And thereupon grew many Difficulties: Our Provision and Munition near spent;
we in the Enemies Country, who did far exceed us in Number, being much inrag^d;
all our Indians, except ONROS, deserting us; our Pinnaces at a great distance
from us, and when they would come we were uncertain.

But as we were consulting what Course to take, it pleased GOD to discover our
Vessels to us before a fair Gale of Wind sailing into Pequot Harbor, to our
great Rejoicing.

We had no sooner discovered our Vessels, b^t immediately came up the Enemy
from the OTHER FORT; Three Hundred or more as we conceived. The Captain lead
out a File or two of Men to Skirmish with them, chiefly to try what Temper they
were of, who put them to a stand: we being much encouraged there at, presently
prepared to March toward our Vessels: Four or Five of our Men were so wounded
that they must be carried with the Arms of twenty more. We also being faint,
were constrained to put four to one Man, with the Arms of the rest that were
wounded to others; so that we had not above forty Men f^ee: at length we hired
several Indians, who eased us of that Burden in carrying of our wounded Men.
And Marching about one quarter of a Mile; the Enemy coming up to the Place
where the Fort was, and beholding what was done, stamped and tore the Hair from
their Heads: And after a little space, came mounting down the Hill upon us, in
a full career, as if they would over run us: But when they came within Shot,
the Rear faced about, giving Fire upon them: Some of them being Shot, made the
rest more wary: Yet they held on running to and fro, and shooting their Arrows
at Random. There was at the Foot of the Hill a small Brook, where we rested and
refreshed our selves, having by that time taught them a little more Manners
than to disturb us.

We then Marched on toward Pequot Harbor; and falling upon several Wigwams,
burnt them: The Enemy still following us in the Rear, which was to windward,
though to little purpose; yet some of them lay in Ambush behind Rocks and
Trees, often shooting at us, yet through Mercy touched not one of us: And as we
came to any Swamp or Thicket, we made some Shot to clear the Passage. Some of
them fell with our Shot; and probably more might, but for want of Munition: But
when any of them fell, our Indians would give a great Shout, and then would
they take so much Courage as to fetch their Heads. And thus we continued, until
we came within two Miles of Pequot Harbor; where the (...) gathered together
and left us: we Marching (...) the Top of an Hill adjoining to the Harbor,
with our Colors flying; having left our Drum at the Place of our Rendezvous
the Night before: We seeing our Vessels there Riding at Anchor, to our great
R^joycing, and came to the Waterside, we there sat down in Quiet.

Captain Patrick being Arrived there with our Vessels, who as we were informed
was sent with Forty Men by the Massachusetts Colony, upon some Service against
the Block I^^^nders: Who coming to the Shore in our Shallop with all his
Company, as he said, to Rescue us, supposing we were pursued, though there did
not appear any the least sign of such a Thing.

But we could not prevail with Him by any Means to put his Men ashore, that so
we might carry our Wounded Men a Board; although it was our own Boat in which
he was: We were very much Troubled; but knew not how to help our selves. At
length we were fetched a Board to the great R^joyc^ng of our Friends.

Shortly after our coming a Board, there fell out a great Contest between
Captain Underhill and Capt. Patrick: Captain Underhill claiming an Interest in
the Bark where Captain Patrick was, which indeed was Underhill's Right; the
Contest grew to a great Height. At length we propounded, that if Patrick would
Ride there with that Bark in Contention, and secure the Narragansett Indians,
(...) being also the Place of Rendezvous to those Vessels that were expected
from Massachuset, until we Transported our Wounded Men to Saybrook five Leagues
distant; then we would immediately return our Pink to convey the Narragansetts
home* The which Captain Patrick seemed very readily to accept.

Captain Underhill soon after set fall in one of our Barks for Saybrook: But
before he was out of Sight; Captain Patrick signified by Writing, that he could
not attend that Service, but he must wait for the Bay Vessels at Saybrook,
wishing us, having the Honor of that Service to complete it, by securing the
Narragansett Indians; which at first seemed very Difficult, if not Impossible:
For our Pink could not receive them, and to march by Land was very Dangerous;
it being near twenty Miles in the Enemies Country, our Numbers being much
weakened, we were then about twenty Men; the rest we had sent home for fear of
the Pequots Invasion. But absolutely necessitated to March by Land, we hasted
ashore, with our Indians and small Numbers. Captain Patrick seeing what we
intended, came ashore also with his Men; although in truth we did not desire or
delight in his Company, and so we plainly told him: However he would and did
March a long with us.

About the midway between that and Saybrook, we fell upon a People called
Nayanticks, belonging to the Pequots, who fled to a Swamp for Refuge: They
hearing or espying of us fled* We pursued them a while by the Track as long as
they kept together: (...) much spent with former Travel, and the Sabbath
drawing on, it being about Two or Three of the Clock on the Saturday in the
Afternoon; we leaving our Pursuit, hast^d toward Saybrook, about Sun set we
Arrived at Connecticut River Side; being nobly Entertained by Lieutenant
Gardner with many great Guns: But were forced there to Quarter that Night: On
the Morrow we were all fetched over to Saybrook, receiving many Courtesies from
Lieut. Gardner.

And when we had taken Order for the safe Conduct of the Narragansett Indians,
we repaired to the Place of our Abode: where we were Entertained with great
T^iumph and Rej^^cing and Praising GOD for his Goodness to us, in succeeding
our weak Endeavors, in Crowning us with Success, and restoring of us with so
little Loss. Thus was God seen in the Mount, Crushing his (...) Enemies and the
Enemies of his People: The^ (...) were (...) while a TERROR to all that were
round a^^ut them* who resolved to Destroy all the ENGLISH and to Ro^t their
very Name out of this Country, should by such weak Means, even SEVENTY SEVEN (
there being no more at the FORT) bring the Mischief they plotted, and the
Violence they offered and exercised, upon their own Heads in a Moment; burning
them up in the Fire of his Wrath, and dung^ng the Ground with their Flesh: It
was the LORD'S Doings, and it is mavelous in ^ur Eyes! It is HE that has
made hi^ Work wonderful, and therefore ought to be remembered.

Immediately the whole Body of P^quots repaired t^ that Fort where SASSACO^S
the Chief Sachem did reside; charging him that he was the only Cause of all the
Troubles that had befallen them; and therefore they would Destroy both him and
his: But by the Entreaty of their Counselors they spared his Life; and
consulting what Course to take, concluded there was no abiding any longer in
their Country, and so re^olved to fly into several Parts. The grea^^st Body of
them went toward MANHATANCE: I suppose this the same which is sometim^ called
Manhatan or Man^a^oes; which is since called New York.
And p^ssing over Conn^cticut, they met with three English Men in a Shallop
going for Saybrook, whom they ^lew: The English Fought very ^toutly, as
themselves conf^ssed, Wounding many of the Enemy.

About a Fortnight after our Return home, which was about one Month after the
Fight at MISTICK, there Arrived in PEQUOT RIVER several Vess^ls from the
MASSACHUSETTS, Captain Israel S^oughton being Commander in Chief; and with him
about One hundred and twenty Men; being sent by that Colony to pursue the War
against the P^quots: The Enemy being all fled before they came, exc^pt some ^ew
Straglers* who were surprised by the Mo^eags and others of the Indians, and by
them delivered to the Massachusetts Soldi^rs.

Connecticut Colony being informed hereof, sent fo^^hwith forty Men, Captain
Mason being Chief Commander; with some other (...), to meet those (...) ^he
Massachusetts, to consider what was necessary to be (...) respecting the
future: Who meeting with them (...) the Massachusetts in P^quot Harbor; after
some time of consultation, concluded to pursue those Pequots that were fled
toward Manhatance, and so forthwith Marched after them, discovering several
Places where they Rendezvoused and lodged not far distant from their several
Removes; making but little haste, by reason of their Children, and want of
Provision; being forced to dig for Clams, and to procure such other things as
the Wilderness afforded: Our Vessels failing along by the Shore. In about the
space of three Days we all Arrived at New Haven Har^^^r, then called
Quinnypiag. And seeing a great Smoke (...) the Woods not far distant, we
supposing some of the Pequots our Enemies might be there; we hastened ashore,
but quickly discovered them to be Connecticut Indians. Then we returned aboard
our Vessels, where we stayed some short time, having sent a Pequot Captive upon
di^covery, we named him Luz; who brought us Tidings of the Enemy, which proved
true; so faithful was he to us, though against his own Nation. Such was the
Terror of the English upon them; that a Moheage Indian named Jack Eatow going
ashore at that time, met with three Pequots, took two of them and brought them
aboard.

We then hastened our March toward the Place where the Enemy was: And coming
into a Corn Field, several of the English e^pyed some Indians, who fled from
them: They pursued them; and coming to the Top of an Hill, saw several Wigwams
just opposite, only a Swamp intervening, which was almost divided in two Parts.
Serj^ant Palmer hastening with about twelve Men who were under his Command to
surround the smaller Part of the Swamp, that so He might prevent the Indians
flying; Ensign Danport, It should be Davenport, who was afterward Captain of
the Castle in Boston Harbor.
Sergeant J^ffries etc, entering the Swamp, (...) to have gone to the Wigwams,
were there set upon by several Indians, who in all probability were d^ter^ed by
Se^^^ant Palmer. In this Skirmish the English flew but few* two or three of
themselves were Wounded: The rest of the English coming up, the Swamp was
surrounded.

Our Council being called, and the Question propounded, How we should proceed,
Captain Patrick advised that we should cut down the Swamp; there being many
Indian Hatchets taken, Captain Traske concurring with him; but was opposed by
others: Then we must pallizado the Swamp; which was also opposed: Then they
would have a Hedge made like those of Gotham; all which (...) judged by some
almost impossible, and to no purpose, and that for several Reasons, and
therefore strongly oppo^ed. But some others advised to force the Swamp having
time enough, it being about three of the Clock in the Afternoon: But that being
opposed, it was then propounded to draw up our Men close to the Swamp, which
would much have lessened the Circumference; and with all to fill up the open
Passages with Bushes, that so we might secure them until the Morning, and then
we might consider further about it. But neither of these would pass; so
different were our Apprehensions; which was very grievous to some of us, who
concluded the Indians would make an Escape in the Night, as easily they might
and did: We keeping ^t a great distance, what better could be expected? Yet
Captain Mason took Order that the Narrow in the Swamp should be cut through;
which did much shorten our Leaguer. It was resolutely performed by Sergeant
Davis.

We being loath to destroy Women and Children, as also the Indians belonging to
that Place; whereupon Mr. Tho. Stanton a Man well acquainted with Indian
Language and Manners, offered his Service to go into the Swamp and treat with
them: To which we were somewhat backward, by reason of some Hazard and Danger
he might be exposed unto: But his importunity prevailed: Who going to them, did
in a short time return to us, with ^ear Two Hundred old Men, Women and
Children; who delivered themselves to the Mercy of the English. And so Night
drawing on, we beleaguered them as strongly as we could. About half an Hour
before Day, the Indians that were in the Swamp attempted to break through
Captain Patrick's Quarters; but were beaten back several times; they making a
great Noise, as their Manner is at such Times, it ^ounded round about our
Leaguer: Whereupon Captain Mason sent Sergeant Stares to inquire into the
Cause, and also to assist if need required; Capt. Traske coming also in to
their Assistance: But the Tumult growing to a very great Height, we raised our
Siege; and Marching up to the Place, at a Turning of the Swamp the Indians were
forcing out upon us; but we sent them back by our small Shot.

We waiting a little for a second Attempt; the Indians ^n the mean time facing
about, pressed violently upon Captain Patrick, breaking through his Quarters,
and so escaped. They were about sixty or seventy as we were informed. We
afterward searched the Swamp, and sound but few Slain. The Captives we took
were about One Hundred and Eighty; whom we divided, intending to keep them as
Servants, but they could not endure that Yoke; few of them continuing any
considerable time with their Masters.

Thus did the LORD scatter his Enemies with his strong A^m! The Pequots now
became a Prey to all Indians. Happy were they that could bring in their Heads
to the English: Of which there came almost daily to Winsor, or Hartford But the
Pequots growing weary hereof, sent some of the Chief that survived to mediate
with the English; offering that If they might but enjoy their Lives, they would
become the English Vassals, to dispose of them as they pleased. Which was
granted them. Whereupon ONKOS and MYANTONIMO were sent for; who with the
Pequots met at Hartford. The Pequots being demanded, How many of them were then
living? Answered, about One Hundred and Eighty, or Two Hundred. There were then
given to ONKOS, Sachem of MONHEAG, Eighty; to MYANTONIMO, Sachem of
NARRAGANSETT, Eighty; and to NYNIGRETT, He was usually called NINNICRAFT.
Twenty, when he should satisfy for a Mare of Edward Po^roye's killed by his
Men. The Pequots were then bound by COVENANT, That none should inhabit their
native Country, nor should any of them be called PEQUOTS any more, but MOHEAGS
and NARRAGANSETTS for ever. Shortly after, about Forty of them went to Moheag;
others went to Long Island; the rest settled at Pawcatuck, a Place in Pequot
Country, contrary to their late Covenant and Agreement with the English.

Which Connecticut taking into Consideration, and well weighing the several
Inconveniences that might ensue; for the Prevention whereof, they sent out
forty Men under the Command of Captain John Mason, to supplant them, by burning
their Wigwams, and bringing away their Corn, except they would desert the
Place: ONKOS with about One Hundred of his Men in twenty Canoes, going also to
assist in the Service. As we sailed into Pawcatuck-Bay We met with three of
those Indians, whom we sent to inform the rest with the end of our coming, and
also that we desired to speak with some of them: They promised speedily to
return us an Answer, but never came to us more.

We run our Vessel up into a small River, and by reason of Flatts were forced
to land on the West Side; their Wigwams being on the East just opposite, where
we could see the Indians running up and down Jeering of us. But we meeting with
a narrow Place in the River between two Rocks, drew up our Indians Canoes, and
got suddenly over sooner than we were expected or desired; Marching immediately
up to their Wigwams; the Indians being all fled, except some old People that
could not.

We were so suddenly upon them that they had not time to convey away their
Goods: We viewed their Corn, whereof there was Plenty, it being their time of
Harvest: And coming down to the Water Side to our Pinnace with half of ONKOS' S
his Men, the rest being plundering the Wigwams; we looking toward a Hill not
far remote, we e^pyed about sixty Indians running toward us; we supposing they
were our absent Men, the Moheags that were with us not speaking one word, nor
moving toward them until the other came within thirty or forty Paces of them;
then they run and met them and ^ell on pell mell striking and cutting with
Bows, Hatchets, Knives, etc, after their feeble Manner: Indeed it did hardly
deserve the Name of Fighting. We then endeavored to get between them and the
Woods, that so we might prevent their flying; which they perceiving,
endeavored speedily to get off under the Beach: We made no Shot at them, nor
any hostile Attempt upon them. Only seven of them who were NYNIGRETT'S Men,
were taken. Some of them growing very outrageous, whom we intended to have made
shorter by the Head; and being about to put it in Execution; one Otash a Sachem
of Narragansett, Brother to MYANTONIMO stepping forth, told the Captain, They
were his Brother's Men, and that he was a Friend to the English, and if we
would spare their Lives we should have as many Murderers Heads in lieu of them
which should be delivered to the English. We considering that there was no
Blood shed as yet, and that it tended to Peace and Mercy, granted his Desire;
and so delivered them to ONKOS to secure them until his Engagement was
performed, because our Prison had been very much pestered with such Creatures.

We then drew our Bark into a Creek, the better to defend her; for there were
many Hundreds within five Miles waiting upon us. There we Quartered that Night:
In the Morning as soon as it was Light, there appeared in Arms at least Three
Hundred Indians on the other Side the Creek: Upon which we stood to our Arms;
which they perceiving, some of them fled, others crept behind the Rocks and
Trees, not one of them to be seen. We then called to them, saying, We desired
to speak with them, and that we would down our Arms for that end: Whereupon
they stood up: We then informed them, That the Pequots had violated their
Promise with the English, in that they were not there to inhabit, and that we
were sent to supplant them: They answered saying, The Pequots were good Men,
their Friends, and they would Fight for them, and protect them: At which we
were somewhat moved, and told them, It was not far to the Head of the Creek
where we would meet them, and then they might try what they could do in that
Respect.

They then replied, That they would not Fight with ENGLISH MEN, for they were
SPIRITS, but would Fight with ONKOS. We replied, That we thought it was too
^arly for them to Fight, but they might take their opportunity; we should be
burning Wigwams, and carrying Corn aboard all that Day. And presently beating
up our Drum, we Fired the Wigwams in their View: And as we Marched, there were
two Indians standing upon a Hill jeering and reviling of us: Mr. Thomas Stanton
our Interpreter, Marching at Liberty, desired to make a Shot at them; the
Captain demanding of the Indians, What they were? Who said, They were
Murderers: Then the said Stanton having leave, let fly, Shot one of them
through both his Thighs; which was to our Wonderment, it being at such a vast
distance.

We then loaded our Bark with Corn; and our Indians their Canoes: And thirty
more which we had taken with Kittles, Trays, Matts, and other Indian Luggage.
That Night we went all aboard, and set Sail homeward: It pleased GOD in a short
Time to bring us all in safety to the Place of our Abode; although we struck
and stuck upon a Rock. The Way and Manner how GOD dealt with us in our Delivery
was very Remarkable: The Story would be somewhat long to trouble you with at
this time; and therefore I shall forbear.

Thus we may see, How the Face of GOD is set against them that do Evil, to cut
off the Remembrance of them from the Earth. Our Tongue shall talk of thy
Righteousness all the Day long; for they are confounded, they are bro't ^o
Shame that sought our Hurt! Blessed be the LORD GOD of I^rael, who onl^ does
wondrous Things; and blessed be his holy Name for ever: Let the whole Earth be
^^lled with his Glory! That the LORD was pleased to smite our Enemies in the
hind^r ^^rts, and to give us their Land for an Inheritance (...) remembered us
in our low Estate, and redeemed (...) of our Enemies Hands: Let us therefore
praise the LORD for his Goodness and his wonderful Wo^^s to the Children of Men!

ADDITION.
I shall add a Word or two by way of COMENT.

OUR Commons were very short, there being a general scarcity throughout the
Colony of all sorts of Provision, it being upon our first Arrival at the Place.
We had but one Pint of strong Liquors among us in our whole March, but what the
Wilderness afforded; (the Bottle of Liquor being in my Hand) and when it was
empty, the very smelling to the Bottle would presently recover such as Fainted
away, which ha^pened by the extremity of the Hea^: And thus we Marched on in an
uncoath and unknown Path to the English, though much frequented by Indians. And
was not the Finger of GOD in all this? By his special Providence to lead us
along in the Way we should go: Nay though we knew not where their Forts were,
how f^r it was to them, nor the Way that led to them, but by what we had from
our Indian Guides; whom we could not cond^ie in, but looked at them as
uncertain: And yet notwithstanding all our Doubts, we should be brought on the
very fittest Season; nay and which is yet more, that we should be carried in
our March among a treacherous and per^idious People, yea in our allodgment so
near the Enemy, all Night in so populous a Country, and no^ the le^st Notice of
us; seems somewhat strange, and more than ordinary: Nay that we should come
to their very Doors: What shall I say? GOD was pleased to hide us in the Hollow
of his Hand: I still remember a Speech of Mr. HOOKER at our going aboard; THAT
THEY SHOULD BE BREAD FOR US. And thus when the LORD turned the Captivity of his
People, and turned the Wheel upon their-Enemies; we were like Men in a Dream;
then was our Mouth filled with Laughter, and our Tongues with Singing; thus we
may say the LORD has done great Things for us among the Heathen, whereof we
are glad. Praise ye the LORD!

I shall mention two or three special Providence that GOD was pleased to
vouch^a^e to Particular Men; viz. two Men, being one Man's Servants Namely,
John Dier and Thomas Styles, were both of them Shot in the Knots of their
Handkerchiefs, being about their Necks, and received no Hurt. Lieutenant Seeley
was Shot in the Eyebrew with a flat headed Arrow, the Point turning downwards:
I pulled it out my self. Lieutenant Bull had an Arrow Shot into a hard piece of
Cheese, having no other Defense: Which may verify the old Saying, A little
Armor would serve if a Man knew where to place it. Many such Providence
happened; some respecting my self; but since there is none that Witness to
them. I shall forbear to mention them.

The Year ensuing, the Colony being in ^^tream Want of Provision, many giving
twelve Shillings for (...) Bu^^el of IndianCorn; (...) of Connecticut ^mploying
Captain Mason, Mr. William is (...) and Deacon Stebbin, to try what Providence
would afford, for their Relief in this great Straight: Who notwithstanding ^ome
dis^ouragem^^t they met with from some English, went to a Place called
Po^om^uc^: Since called Deerfield.
where they procured so much Corn at rea^onable Rates, that the Indians brought
down to Hartford and Windsor, F^^TY CANOES laden with Corn at one time. Never
was the like known to this Day! So although the LORD was pleased to show his
People hard Things; yet did he execute Judgment for the Oppressed, and gave
Food to the Hungry. O let as meditate on (...) Great Works of GOD: Ascribing
all Blessing and Praise to (...) Name, for all his Great Goodness and
Salvation! Amen, (...).

FINIS.

