Mr. Barnard's DISCOURSES On the Great Concern of Parents; And The Important
Duty of Children. On April 7. 1737.

A Call to Parents, and Children.

OR, The Great Concern OF PARENTS; AND The Important Duty OF CHILDREN.

The first being the Subject of the public Exercises, on the Lord's Day; the
second delivered to a religious Society of Young Men, the Evening after; on
April 24. 1737.

By John Barnard, M. A. Pastor of a Church in Marblehead.

For, I know him, that he will command his Children, and his Household after
him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment.

Genesis XVIII.19. BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for DANIEL HENCHMAN, over against
the Brick Meeting House in Cornhill. 1737.

THE Great Concern OF PARENTS.
1 Chronicles. XXVIII.9. And thou, Solomon, my Son, know thou the God of thy Father,
and serve Him, with a perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind; for the Lord
searches all Hearts, and understands all the Imaginations of the Thoughts;
if thou seek Him, He will be found of thee; but if thou forsake Him, He will
cast thee off forever.


THESE are the Words of David, King of Israel, to his Son Solomon, who was to
succeed him in the Throne. David was now grown old, and full of Days, and ready
to give up the Ghost, and be gathered unto his Fathers; but, before he expires,
he assembles all Israel unto him, the Princes of their Tribes, and the Captains
of the Companies, etc. that is to say, their several Heads and Rulers, as the
representative Body of all Israel; and before them all, he declares what had
been the secret, settled Purpose, and Intention of his Heart, namely to build
an House to the Name of the Lord God of Israel: and though God had forbidden him
to build an House to His Name, because he had been a Man of War, and had shed
much Blood; (War and Blood being but ill Materials to build the House, the
Church of God with;) yet God had promised him, that one that should proceed out
of his Loins, should both sit upon his Throne, and build Him an House. This
Promise we find recorded in, II. Sam. VII.12, 13. where God, by Nathan the
Prophet, says to David, When thy Days are fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with
thy Fathers, I will set up thy Seed after thee, -- he shall build an House for
my Name, and I will establish the Throne of his Kingdom forever. At length God
confined this Promise to a particular Person of the Seed of David, and
foretells his Birth and Name; I. Chron. XXII.9. Behold a Son shall be born unto
thee, who shall be a Man of Rest, and I will give him Rest from all his Enemies
round about; for his Name shall be Solomon, and I will give Peace and Quietness
unto Israel in his Days; he shall build an House for My Name.

And now that God had so far made good His Promise, unto His Servant David, as
to give him a Son, called Solomon, and of all his Sons, of which he had many,
had chosen this his Son to sit upon the Throne of his Kingdom; David, before he
died, saw to the conferring of the royal Dignity upon this his Son, and ordered
Solomon to be proclaimed King. Accordingly he was so: and, probably, at this
general assembling of all the Heads of Israel, and upon the return of the
Nobles to David, with Solomon at the Head of them, from their triumphant
Circuit to proclaim him King, David now, before them all, lays his solemn and
dying Charge, both upon the People, and upon his Son.

First, he lays his solemn Charge upon the whole People, in their Heads and
Rulers, ver. 8. now therefore, in the Sight of all Israel, the Congregation of
the Lord, and in the Audience of our God, keep and seek for all the
Commandments of the Lord your God; that ye may possess this good Land, and
leave it for an Inheritance for your Children after you forever. As if he had
said, I do most solemnly charge you all, before God, and all this Congregation,
as ever you expect to be a prosperous People, and that God should make this
Land a good Land unto you, and continue you, and your Children in the quiet
Possession of it, that ye be exceeding careful to walk in God's Way, in
Obedience to all His Commands.

Secondly, he goes on more particularly to Charge his Son Solomon, in the Words
of my Text; saying, And thou, Solomon, my Son, know thou the God of thy Father,
and serve Him with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind; for the Lord searches
all Hearts, and understands all the Imaginations of the Thoughts; if thou
seek Him, He will be found of thee; but if thou forsake Him, He will cast thee
off forever. The two Things remarkable in the Words, on which I shall ground my
Discourse, and the Service before me this Day, are the Persons concerned, and
the great and important Business that was before them.

1. As for the Persons here concerned, you may observe, (1.) Who is the
Speaker, namely David, the King of Israel, and Father of Solomon. (2.) Who is
the Person spoken to, namely Solomon, the Son, and Successor, of David, who was
now but a young Man, most probably under Twenty Years of Age.

2. We have the great and important Business that was before them, or the
solemn Charge of the Father unto the Son, viz. to know, and serve the Lord, and
that with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind. So that here we have the great
concern of a pious Father, David, for his Son, Solomon, while he was yet but a
young Man, viz. that he should be established in the Knowledge, and Service, of
the true God: He did not think his royal State, and Grandeur, excused him from
a due concern of Mind, and a vigorous Endeavor, that his Son should live
religiously: which is expressive of what ought to be the Care of all Parents,
that their Children may become virtuous, and religious Children. And then as
David recommends this to his Son Solomon, above all other Things, as what he
ought to have a more special Regard to, it shows us what is, and ought to be,
the great, and important Concern, of all Young People. For we may observe that
David enforces this Charge with several very weighty Reasons; as, (1) because
the Lord searches all Hearts, and knows all the Imaginations of the
Thoughts. (2) God will be found of them that seek Him. (3) He will forever cast
off them that forsake Him. All of which shows that nothing can be of greater
Concernment unto Young People, than early to devote themselves unto God, and
His Service, and to be hearty, and diligent therein. From the Words, thus
briefly discanted on, I shall observe Two Doctrinal Propositions, the first to
be discoursed on publicly, this Day; the other to be more privately handled in
the Evening.

I. Doc. It should be the great Concern of Parents* that their Children may be
such as truly know, and serve God.

II. Doc. It should be the most important Concern of Young People, to know, and
serve, the Lord, with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind. The First of these
Heads I shall, by Divine Assistance, speak to you from, as the Subject of my
public Discourse this Day; namely,

I. Doc. It should be the great Concern of Parents, that their Children may be
such as truly know, and serve God. Under Parents may well be comprehended
Masters; and under Children may be understood Servants, as well as our natural
Offspring. And what I say ought to be the Concern of all Parents, will be the
Concern of every truly Religious Parent, and Master, that his Children, and
Servants, may be such as shall know, and serve the Lord.

You see how greatly David was concerned for this, above all Things, in his
dying Charge to his Son, Solomon, Thou, Solomon, my Son, know thou the God of
thy Father, and serve Him. David was himself a faithful Servant of God, and, as
King in Israel, he sought to bring all Israel to the sincere and hearty Service
of God; now therefore keep, and seek, for all the Commandments of the Lord your
God, that ye may possess this good Land. As to his own particular Family, you
see how concerned, and determined he was, that, if possible, it should consist
only of virtuous, and religious Persons; in Psalm CI. says he, ver. 4. a
froward Heart shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked Person; and ver.
6, 7. he that walks in a perfect Way, he shall serve me; he that works
Deceit, shall not dwell in my House; he that tells Lies shall not tarry in my
Sight. And you plainly see, when he comes to give his last, and most serious
Directions, and Charges, to his beloved Solomon, his Son, and Heir to his
Crown, they do not consist of a Collection of Arcana Imperii, Secrets of State,
and worldly Policy; or how to govern a People by dark Intreagues, deep Fetches,
and secret Maxims of Will and Pleasure; and by what Methods of griping,
squeesing, and oppression, to aggrandize himself; but his great Concern for him
was, that, with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind, he might know, and serve,
the God of his Father. This seemed to swallow up the whole Concern, and Care,
of his dying Father for him. Yea, he knew that this comprehended, and
superceded, all other Directions, that a wise and virtuous Man ought to
observe; and would be attended with all the comfortable, and happy,
Circumstances, that a Man of Thought could reasonably desire

Herein David's Example serves for an Instruction unto us, upon whom the Ends
of the World are come, to teach us, what we are to be chiefly concerned about,
even the well educating of the rising Generation, and the forming of them unto
Virtue, and Sobriety, to Religion, and Godliness, that we may leave a Godly
Seed behind us, when we have finished our Course. And as this was not thought
to be beneath the Care of King David, surely it will not be looked upon as
beneath any Parent to use his best Endeavors, that his Children may be well
instructed in the Knowledge, and Service, of the true God.

In the prosecuting this Subject, I shall only consider,

I. How Parents should express their very great Concern, that their Children
may know, and serve God: Or, what Methods Parents are to take, that their
Children may be such. And then,

II. I shall mention some Things as very good Reasons, why Parents should be
greatly concerned herein. These two Heads will be as so many Directions, and
Motives, unto all Parents, in this great Affair.

I. I am to consider, how Parents should express their very great Concern, that
their Children may know and serve the Lord; or, what Methods Parents are to
take, that their Children may be such as shall know, and serve God. And though it
be a certain Truth, that Parents cannot give Grace unto their Children, nor
does Virtue run in the Blood, yet there are several Things required of Parents,
as a likely and probable Means, to make their Children, and Servants, such as
truly serve God. And I shall comprehend what I have to offer under these
several Heads.

I. The bringing of them to the public Worship of God.

II. The upholding the Worship of God in their Families.

III. The religious instructing and teaching of them.

IV. The religious and prudent Government of them.

In these several Ways, and by these Means, Parents are to express their very
great Concern, and do their Part, that their Children may come to the
Knowledge, and Service of God. I shall therefore speak something to each of
these in their Order.

I. Parents are to be very careful to bring their Children to the Public
Worship of God, that they may know, and serve Him. For without a conscientious
Care to bring their Children to the Public Worship of God, it can hardly be
expected, that they will be at any great Pains themselves to teach them their
Duty; or if they should have some Disposition to teach them, it can scarce be
imagined, that the Children will be so well, and effectually taught, the
Knowledge, and Service of God, as they would be under the Instruction, and
Guidance of God's own Ordinance. The Public Worship of God is a Method of
God's own Appointment for all Persons to be taught the Knowledge of God, and
how to serve Him: therefore the Prophet says, Isa. 11.3. Many People shall go,
and say, come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of
the God of Jacob, and He will teach us His Ways, and we will walk in His Paths;
for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. Here, by the Public Worship of God, I intend two Things; namely,

1. The bringing of them unto the holy Baptism of the Lord, by which they are
firstly initiated into His Church, and in their infant State brought under a
public Dedication to His Service. And then,

2. As soon as they are capable of understanding any thing, to oblige them to a
constant, and devout, attendance upon all the public Ordinances of God.

1. Parents are to bring their Children in their Infancy unto the holy Baptism
of the Lord. By this sacred Rite of Baptism, the Children of God's People are
firstly initiated into His visible Church, are made visible Members of the Body
of Christ, and have a foederal Right, both to the Service of God, and the
Blessings of His Covenant annexed thereto. Thus God gave it in Charge unto
Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, to bring his Children under an early
Dedication unto God, and to give them up to the Lord, in their Infancy: and
accordingly appointed the Rite of Circumcision to be administered unto his
Children, at Eight Days old, as an Earnest and Pledge of their being the
Lord's, and by which they were made visible Members of the Church of God.
Therefore said God unto him, Genesis XVII.10, 12. This is my Covenant, which ye
shall keep between Me, and you, and thy Seed after thee; every Man-Child among
you shall be circumcised; -- he that is eight Days old among you shall be
circumcised. So that when God took Abraham into Covenant with Himself, He took
his Infant Seed with him into that holy Covenant. And, I think, it is
remarkable, that God never took any Person into Covenant with Himself, but at
the same Time He received his Seed with him into that Covenant: and the Rite of
Circumcision the Apostle styles, the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. Romans
IV.11. That is, a visible Evidence, and Confirmation of the Covenant of God
with His People; that He would be their God, and that they should be His
People. And though, since the Coming of Christ into the World, the visible Seal
of the Covenant is altered, and the Rite of Circumcision, which had a Typical
Reference to the Messiah to come, is abolished, with the other Jewish Rites and
Ceremonies, yet it has pleased God not to leave His People, in the Days of the
Gospel, without a visible Token of their special Relation to Him, but He has
appointed the Rite of Baptism, the more expressive, and the more easy and
gentle Sign, in the Room of Circumcision. Therefore you find Jesus Christ puts
it into the Commission which he gave to His Ministers after His Resurrection,
when He had received all Power in Heaven, and in Earth, Mat. XXVIII. to go, and
teach all Nations, baptizing them, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. And not only are the Children a Part of the all Nations,
but they were particularly a Part of the Nation of the Jews, who were included
in the Covenant of God; and we no where find our Blessed Lord, in the Days of
the Gospel, cutting them off from that Covenant; nor can it be imagined that
the Children of Believers, under the milder, and more gracious Dispensation of
Christianity, should be shut out of the Covenant, and entirely debarred the
Privileges they were admitted to, under the Mosaic. Therefore, we not only
read in the New Testament, of whole Households being baptized, which generally
consist of Children, as well as grown Persons; but the Apostle, calling upon
the Converts to be baptized, uses this Argument, Act. II.39. For the Promise is
unto you, and to your Children, and unto all that are afar off, (which intends
the Gentiles,) even as many as the Lord, our God, shall call: which most
plainly infers, that the Children, as well as the Parents, were to be baptized,
or else the Argument he makes Use of is of no Force, nor was there any Occasion
to mention Children in it.

So that it is the Duty of Parents to bring their infant Children, in the Days
of the Gospel, unto the Baptism of the Lord, that they may visibly become the
Children of God, and the Promise may belong unto them; that being thus early
devoted unto God, and His Service, they may be brought into the Way of the
Blessing, and have an assurance of an Opportunity of knowing, and serving God,
if they live unto Years of Understanding; and may be secure of the promised
Mercy of God if they die in their Infancy. As Israel of old, were obliged to
circumcise all their Males, so are Christians obliged to obtain Baptism for
their Children; and as God was angry with those that neglected the Rite of
Circumcision, so is He displeased with those Parents that neglect to bring
their Children to Baptism: and greatly faulty are those Parents who neglect
this first Duty unto their Children, and do not express their due Concern that
their Children should become the Servants of the most high God. But then,

2. As soon as Children are capable of understanding, their Parents should
oblige them unto a constant and devout attendance upon the Public Ordinances
of God. Since Faith comes by Hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, and it
pleased God by the Foolishness of preaching to save them that believe; as the
Apostle informs us; therefore it is the Duty of Parents to bring their
Children, where they may hear the Word of God explained to them, that they may
be led into the Meaning of it, and so come to the Knowledge of their Duty; and
this as soon as they are capable of receiving any Benefit by the Instruction
that is given them, and that they may early be accustomed to the religious
Acknowledgments of God. The House, and Ordinances, of God, are, unto the Souls,
as the Pool of Bethesda was unto the Diseased Bodies of Persons; an Angel at
certain Times descended, and troubled the Waters, and then, whosoever first
stepped into the Waters, was healed of whatsoever Disease he had upon him; so
God, by His Divine Power, to make those Ordinances the blessed Means of
conveying spiritual Good, unto the Souls of those that devoutly attend upon
them; both to heal them of their Ignorance, and of their Disorders, their
Blindness, and their Lameness; that is to give them the Knowledge of God, and
to dispose, and enable them to serve Him. In this House, and in these
Ordinances, God Himself is in a more peculiar Manner present, there He gives
forth His Word, and there He commands the Blessing to descend. He says, as,
Exodus XX.24. in all Places where I record my Name, I will come unto thee, and I
will bless thee.

If therefore you would have your Children in the Way of the Blessing, bring
them betimes into the Sanctuary of God, where He records His Name. I do not
mean, that Parents should bring their Children unto the Public Worship of God,
while they are only capable of giving Disturbance to it; but that as soon as
their Children begin to understand what is said, and know how to submit to
Restraints, they should inure them to attend upon the Duties of Public
Worship; and not suffer the frivolous Excuses, of their not being fine enough,
to hinder them from bringing them unto the House of God. Surely, you would not,
any of you, withold from them the Food of their Bodies, and suffer them to
starve, because their Clothes were not so good as others. And what Concern can
you have for the Spiritual and Eternal Welfare of the Souls of your Children,
if, because you imagine, in the Pride of your Hearts, their Clothes are not
good enough to be seen in, you withold from them the Food of their Souls? O,
let then the great Concern of Parents for their Children put them upon bringing
them early to the House of God. You know not how early a seasonable Word may
meet them, and impress their young Minds, and stick by them, and do them good
all their Days after. Let us then see your Children flocking, with you, unto
the House of God, as Doves unto the Windows, the Place of their Shelter and
Defense from the Birds of Prey. And while you oblige them to a constant
attendance upon the Public Worship of God, take Care also that your Children
behave with Seriousness and Reverence, and give Diligence to remember what they
hear in the House of God; and therefore demand of them an Account of what they
hear, that they may hear with greater Attention, and that their Memories may be
stored with Divine Truths. As the Children grow up into Years of more
Understanding, endeavor to acquaint them with the Vow of their Baptism, the
Nature and Use of it, and the Obligation they are under to take it upon
themselves, by a public Renewal of their Baptismal Covenant: and excite and
stir them up to approach to the holy Table of the Lord, that they, with you,
may feast upon the dear Memorials of the dying Love of Christ, and you may
rejoice together in the Service of God, and in the Hope of the Glory of God.
But I proceed to say,

II. Parents should be careful to uphold the Worship of God in their Families;
and in this Way express their concern that their Children may know and serve
the Lord. This is but a natural and most reasonable Service; Nature leads to
the Worship of the God we have our Dependence on, and in the very Instances in
which we depend upon Him; and what can be more rational? It may be this is a
very much neglected Duty at this Day, and may be one of the greatest Causes of
the decay of Religion, and the prevailing Disorders and Immoralities, that are
to be observed in the Behavior of so many. The Parents have not attained to so
much Religion themselves, as to worship God in their Families, and, by this
Means, their Children are brought up like Heathen, Pagan Children, who know
almost nothing of God, and are averse to His Service. How many graceless
Families are there, in which the Young People never heard any thing of the
religious Worship of God? And thus they are sadly taught to live without God in
the World. But I beseech you, as ever you would deserve the Name of Christians
It is a remarkable Passage of the excellent Archb. Tillotson, concerning Family
Religion, This is so necessary* (said he,) to keep alive and to maintain a
Sense of God and Religion in the Minds of Men, that where it is neglected I do
not see how any Family can in Reason be esteemed a Family of Christians, or
indeed to have any Religion at all.
, yea, as ever you would answer to the Relation of Parents in the Family, that,
from this Time forward, you would all of you make Conscience of upholding the
Worship of God in your Families.

This belongs to the Masters and Heads of Families, and, by the Way, to Masters
of Vessels also, whose Company are a Family; such should be very careful to
preserve the religious Acknowledgment of God in their several Families. How
else can they be concerned, as they ought to be, that their Children, and those
under them, should be such as know the Lord, and serve Him, with a perfect
Heart and a willing Mind, when they will not so much as serve Him themselves,
or let their young People see that they serve Him? Now in this religious
Worship of God in the Family, two Things are specially intended.

1. The diligent and devout Reading of the Word of God. And that because it is
the Sacred Scripture, the Word of God, that is peculiarly adapted to this End,
to acquaint us with the Knowledge of God, what an infinitely Great, and Wise,
and Good, and Holy a God He is; and to inform us in the Will of God, and so
direct and assist us in our serving of Him. Thus the holy Scriptures teach us
what God is, and what He requires of us, and are profitable for Doctrine,
Reproof, Correction, and Instruction in Righteousness; that we may be thereby
furnished unto all good Works; and are able to make us wise unto Salvation. II.
Tim. III.15, 16, 17.

If therefore Parents, and Masters of Families would have their Children, and
Servants, well informed, and directed, they must in no Day, in which they are
at Home with their Families, neglect the Reading of the Word of God among their
young Folks. And inasmuch as there are also other good Books, which serve to
explain Divine Truths, and open the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and of
Christ, and plainly and strongly enforce our Belief of the Articles, and
practice of the Duties of our holy Religion, and are great Helps to bring young
People to the Knowledge and Service of God; those also should be read in the
Family, and the Children and Servants should be obliged themselves to read them
at proper Seasons. But however, the Bible, that Book of Books, as containing
the only Canon of our Faith and Practice, should be daily and devoutly read, as
Part of the religious Worship of the Family.

2. Serious and earnest Prayer must be upheld by Parents in their Families.
This Duty of Family Prayer is so natural, and so necessary to the Life of
Christianity, and indeed of all true Religion, that I cannot see how any Man
can have the Face to pretend to be a Christian, that lives in the Neglect of
it. And what Concern, I beseech you, can that Parent or Master have for his
Children and Servants knowing and serving God, who so casts off the Fear of
God, as thus to restrain Prayer before Him? The Light of Nature taught the
Heathen to rear up their Family Altars, and the very Turks pray in their
Families, and shall not Christians! Are there not Family Wants to be supplied?
And are there no Family Protections and Deliverances to be desired? Do not
Families need Direction and Guidance, and the Divine Blessing in all their
Affairs? And who can so much as reasonably hope to obtain all this without so
much as asking and praying for it? It was said of David, I. Chron. XVI.43. So
David returned to bless his House; and the Apostle exhorts Masters, Col. IV.2.
to continue in Prayer. It is an evident Allusion to the continual Offering and
Sacrifice under the Law; that is, the Morning and Evening Sacrifice; and is as
if the Apostle had said, Ye Masters, be careful to maintain your daily Prayers,
Morning and Evening; call your Families and young People together, and pray
with them daily. Every Master of a Family should take the proper Season,
Evening and Morning, to offer up, with their Families, this their Sacrifice
unto God, and the lifting up of their Hands should be like the continual
Burnt-Offering. And I do most solemnly Charge you that are Parents, and Masters
of Families, as you will answer it to God another Day, that you do not dare to
live in the wilful Neglect of this plain and known Duty. To which I may add
your religious Worship of God in your Houses at your Meals. Is it not a
lamentable Thing, to see them that call themselves Christians take no more
Notice of God, when they seed upon His Bounty, than the very Swine do? This is
a most shameful and scandalous Neglect of God; and may well provoke Him to make
your Table to become a Snare unto you, and to turn the Blessings of your Food
into a Curse; and to make your Meat and Drink, instead of being wholesome and
nourishing to you, and a Means to lengthen out your Life, to be rather the
Means of conveying Diseases and Pains unto you, and of shortening your Days,
and hastening Death upon you. Therefore, as you would hope for Health and
Strength from your Food, never sit down together at Me^^, without unitedly
asking the Divine Blessing upon your Food, nor rise up from the Table, without
giving God Thanks for what you have received.

But I foresee several Objections, which unthoughtful and irreligious People
are prone to make Use of, as Excuses of their Neglect to worship God in their
Houses, and with their Family; which I must remove the Force of, and show you
that they are all but vain frivolous Excuses. As now,

Ob. 1. Some will pretend they want Time for this Duty; they are, they say, so
hurried in the World, and their Straights are so many, and their Wants so
great, that they can spare no Time, from the Business of the World, for the
Worship of God with their Families.

An. But how vain is this Excuse? if it were for no other Reason but this, That
God is the Lord of all our Time. Does not God give you all the Time you have
for your Business, and the Concerns of your Bodies? and what! shall not so
small a Portion of it, be daily devoted to Him, and employed in His Service, as
is requisite for Family Worship; which needs not to be long and tedious.

But besides; what is it that you spend all your Time about? Is it the Hurry
and Business of this World? Is it that you may provide for the Support and
Comfort of the Bodies of your Children, that they may not want Bread to eat,
and Raiment to put on? And say now, are the Concerns of this World to be so
much preferred to the Concerns of the eternal World, as not to allow you so
little a Pittance of Time for the Duties of Religion daily? Or can you think it
reasonable, that you should not be as careful to provide for the Souls of your
Children, as you say you are for their Bodies? Are the great and important
Affairs of your own Souls, and the Souls of your Children, to be neglected for
the sake of the really more trifling Affairs of the Body? Anon this World, and
the Enjoyments of it, will not be any ways profitable to you, nor yours; but
your serious Religion and Godliness will be every way, and forever profitable
unto you.

Nay more; what Business will go on the heavier for your Family Religion? It is
a true Saying, Prayer hinders no Business. Hinder it? No; it forwards it. It is
like Oil to the Wheels, which move the smoother, and the faster for it; as it
engages the Direction, Assistance, and Blessing of God upon all your Affairs.

But after all, (which abundantly shows the Vanity of the Pretense,) who is
there of you all that does not idly consume more Time, every Day you live, than
the religious Duties of the Family requires? Thou can not only find to Eat,
and Sleep; (and yet one would think that so small a Part of Time might well
enough be spared from Sleep, if you could find no other,) but you can find Time
every Day for idle Chat, and various Diversions, and it may be for hard
Drinking, and Gaming, and Tavern-haunting, and contriving and executing some
sinful Purpose or other. Never more then say, that thou have not Time to
worship God in thy Family.

Ob. 2. Another pleads in Excuse for his Neglect of Family Worship, I know not
how to pray before others; I would pray in my Family, but I am ashamed; I have
not Confidence to perform this Duty.

An. This also is a vain Excuse. For, who is there of you that is ashamed to
confess your real Wants, and ask the Help of any Friend, who you think is able
and willing to help you, especially in any important Affair? or, would you go
without his Help, rather than ask it before others, when you are sensible your
Condition is generally known to all about you? and therefore what just Reason
can you have for your being ashamed to ask the Help of God, confessing your
Wants to Him, in much greater and more necessary Concerns than what any earthly
Friend can help you in, though you are put upon doing of it before those that
know your Wants, and are Sharers with you in them?

Besides; are not those in your Family, whom you are to pray with, and before,
your greatest Intimates, and Dependants? as your Consort; your Children and
Servants. And are Men wont to be ashamed to use such a Liberty of Speech before
them as is needful? If indeed there should happen to be any Shimei, or
Rabshekah in the Family, one that reproaches the living God, and mocks and
reviles you, and your Offerings, it were better that you should turn such an
one out of your Doors, than that you should shut God out of your House; for
while you neglect to pray in your Family, you say unto the Almighty, depart
from us.

You would pray in your Family, but you are ashamed, you say; -- So then, you
acknowledge it to be your Duty, but you hope to be excused in the Neglect of
it, by something which you call Shame. But, is not what you call Shame, so far
from a virtuous Modesty, that it is really a vicious averseness in you to your
Duty? And can you suppose that your own sinful averseness to your Duty is a
good Excuse for your Neglect of it? Remember the Words of Christ, which seem
very much levelled against such as you are, Mark VIII.38. Whosoever shall be
ashamed of me, and of my Words, in this adulterous and sinful Generation, of
him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of the
Father, with the holy Angels. Be ashamed to pray Man! No; thou have infinitely
more Cause to be ashamed to live without Prayer in thy Family, because all the
while thou do so thou live in Sin.

Ob. 3. But says a Third, I cannot utter myself. I believe they do well to pray
in their Families that are able; but I am not gifted for it; and where God has
not given the Gift, He does not require the Exercise of it; so that I may well
be excused.

An. How do you know you are not gifted for this Duty, when you have never made
the Trial? But suppose that you cannot pray so elegantly, in such beautiful
Phrases, and smooth Words, and handsome Periods, or with such a flow of Thought,
as you think you observe in others; yet you may pray affectionately,
graciously, and therefore acceptably. God regards not the Oratory of Words
and Phrases, but that of the Heart, which consists in Sincerity and Truth;
the sincere hearty Desires of the Soul, breathed out with a suitable
Earnestness and Fervor; this makes Melody in the Ears of God, be the Words
ever so plain, and the Accents broken. Therefore the wise Man says, Prove. XV.8.
The Prayer of the Upright is His Delight. God takes Pleasure in the sincere
Prayers of His People, though they should be but what Hezekiah styled his, like
the Chattering of a Crane or Swallow.

It is very much to be feared, that when you say you cannot pray, you want
Words, and the like; the real secret Purpose of your Hearts is that you will
not. And I think, I may offer you this plain Conviction of it, namely; That if
the Civil Magistrate should set a Mulct of Five Pounds by the Week, for every
Master of a Family that neglected the religious Worship of God with his
Household, I suppose this would soon put the weakest of you all upon finding
Words to pray in. Or suppose you were to gain Five Pounds a Week, so long as
you upheld Family Worship; who is there of you that would neglect it any one
Day in the Week? Now this plainly shows that it is not want of Words, but want
of Will, that is the real Ground of this Neglect, whatever is pretended.

Besides you do not know how it may please God to assist you if you will but
make Conscience of attending your Duty. Go home and try to pray; you that have
hitherto neglected it in your Families, pray as you are able; and he that
opened the Ears of the Deaf, can loose the Tongue of the Stammerer, and give a
Door of utterance to you, beyond what you now imagine. Go then; and beg of God
to help you to pray; and make use of the best Helps you can to direct and
assist you in Prayer; especially, let the Lord's Prayer, that excellent
Platform, be your Directory; and endeavor to turn what you read, and what you
hear from the Word of God, into Prayer. Come; break the Ice* and the Difficulty
will be over. By the Use, Prayer will grow more familiar and easy unto you, and
you may gain the Gift of Prayer by accustoming of your self to Prayer. Say not
then, any longer, that you cannot pray, that you want Words, and are destitute
of the Gift of Prayer; you have gained the Gift of Speech by accustoming of
yourselves to try to speak, and so would you the Gift of Prayer in like Manner.
Let then every Parent, every Master of a Family, be persuaded to set upon the
Practice of Family Religion, and suffer not so important and necessary a Duty
to be neglected, upon any Pretenses whatever. As you would have your Families
to escape the Divine Fury, which God will pour out upon the Families that call
not upon His Name, and be made to prosper, as the House of Obed Edom where the
Ark of God was deposited; and as you would have your Children and Servants to
know and serve God in this World, and to enjoy Him forever hereafter, and you
yourselves enjoy inward and endless Peace in their Peace, O, be exceeding
careful, from henceforth to uphold the Worship of God in your Houses, and with
your Families. But I pass to say,

III. Parents should be very careful religiously to teach and instruct their
Children, that they may know, and serve the Lord. It is true, it should be the
Concern of Parents to have their Children instructed in Civility, and good
Manners, that it may not be said of them, they are better fed, than taught.
They should carefully teach them how to behave themselves, and especially to
carry it mannerly to all their Superiors, and respectfully to their Equals and
Inferiors; that they reverence the hoary Head, and rise up at the Presence of
the old Man; that they may not think they have a Right to carry it to their
Superiors, and the aged, as if they were their Equals, and treat them with an
unmannerly Speech and Behavior; as is too common with many.

Besides; Parents should take Care, that as their Children grow up, they are
instructed in some profitable Trade and Employment, for necessary Uses; that
they may not prove unprofitable Members of the Commonwealth, and, like the idle
Drone, live upon the Labor of others, while they bring nothing to the Hive.

But what I am now more specially concerned about is, the religious Instruction
of their Children; though indeed good Manners, and Civility, and useful
Employments would well enough fall under the Head of Religion, as being
required by it.

Under the Former Head I have considered Parents as Priests offering up
spiritual Sacrifices, in their Families, acceptable unto God by Jesus Christ:
And here I am to consider them as Prophets, whose Business it is to teach and
instruct their Families. So David did his Son Solomon, not only in this solemn
Charge in my Text, but at other Times in his Youth and Nonage; and therefore
Solomon says, Prove. IV.3, 4. I was my Father's Son, tender and only beloved in
the Sight of my Mother; He taught me also, and said unto me, let thine Heart
retain my Words, keep my Commandments and live. This Duty of Instruction
belongs, not only unto the Father of the Family, but to the Mother also, who
oftentimes has very much the Advantage of the Father, by being more at Home
with the Children, in their Infancy, and so has great Opportunities to
communicate Instruction to them. And that I may be a little distinct, I shall
speak to parental Instruction under these Heads.

1. The instilling the Principles and Rudiments of Religion into them.

2. The Catechizing of them.

3. The setting a good Example before them.

1. Parents should be concerned to teach and instruct their Children, by
instilling into them the Principles and Rudiments of Religion, and acquainting
them with the Knowledge of their Duty to God, and to their Fellow Creatures.
This is a Work that must be carefully heeded, and be begun betimes, that, if
possible, their young Minds may be prepossessed with Principles of Religion and
Virtue, before bad Practices fix their Disposition to Vice: so soon as there
are any appearances of the first Glimmerings of Reason and Understanding, while
they are scarce weaned from the Milk, and drawn from the Breast, when they but
begin to understand what is said to them, and to lisp out a few Words; Parents
should be ever now and then droping some sacred Truth into their young Breasts.
So God required of his People of old, Deuteronomy. XI.18, 19. Ye shall lay up these my
Words in your Heart, and Soul, -- and ye shall teach them your Children,
speaking of them when thou sit in thy House, and when thou walk by the
Way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. That is, they should
improve every Opportunity to teach them, setting before them Precept upon
Precept, and droping into them here a little, and there a little; that their
Minds may be stored with those Principles of Religion, which may be of Use and
Service to them all their Lives after. Thus they should acquaint them, that
there is a GOD, who made them, and all Creatures, to whom they owe the highest
Honor, and Reverence, and Obedience. They should get some proper Portions of
the sacred Scripture into their Memory, and, as soon as they can, learn them to
read the Word of God, that they may be acquainted with Divine Truths; that they
may know what a holy God, the Lord is, who hates all Sin and Wickedness; and
that He is a most powerful God, and is able to punish severely all their
Disobedience; and that He is a most good God, who will plentifully reward all
that love and serve Him. Show them what a miserable State and Condition they
are brought into, by the Fall of the first Adam, from whom they derive a
corrupt Nature, and are exposed unto the Anger of God. And acquaint them with
the wonderful Compassion and Love of God to them, in providing JESUS CHRIST,
the second Adam, to recover them from Misery, and bring them to Happiness.
Teach them, who this JESUS CHRIST is, even the only-begotten Son of God,
appearing in our Nature, that He might be a Savior for Sinners: and instill
into them, what Jesus Christ has done, and suffered, to save us from Wrath,
and bring us unto God. Endeavor to show them, what they must do to be saved by
Him, that they must love God, believe in Christ, and live a holy Life. Inform
their young Minds in all the great, and Master Duties, of Christianity,
consisting in Piety and Devotion unto God, in Justice and Charity unto Men, and
in Temperance and Sobriety in the Government of themselves. Thus teach them the
Way of God in Truth; and teach them to pray, and allow them Time to go alone,
and read the Word of God, and pray to Him; and cause them to learn the Creed,
the Ten Commandments, and the Lord's Prayer, that they may not be ignorant of
any of the Things, which they are to believe, or practice, or pray for. It Is
observed, that a continual droping make Impression upon a Stone; thus let
Parents be continually droping something of Religion upon their Children, and
Servants, (to which I must add their fervent Prayers for them,) that their
young Hearts may be suitably impressed thereby, that they may be well informed
in the Knowledge of God, and their Duty, and be, in some good Measure, disposed
for the Service of God.

2. Parents should also teach their Children by Catechizing of them. The
catechizing of Children has been, from old Times, looked upon as one of the
best Means of instructing of them, because it commands their Attention, and
treasures up in their Memory the great and fundamental Principles of
Christianity: it obliges them to regard what they are taught, because it
obliges them to give Answer unto the Questions that are put to them. And unless
Children are well instructed in their Catechism, which is a short Compendium of
the Principles of Religion, they will be in great Danger of being drawn away by
Seducers, and such as lay in wait to deceive; and so run into many Errors, and
Follies, which will prove pernicious to them: and the want of this is one great
Reason of the Ignorance of Persons, in the Doctrines, and Duties, of
Christianity, and why they profit so little under the public Preaching of the
Word. Therefore this Way of instructing of Children should be carefully
attended by Parents. See to it then that your Children learn their Catechism;
and not only oblige them to get it by Heart, or into their Memory, but
catechize them upon their Catechism; that is, put such pertinent short
Questions unto them, as, by their Answer to which, you may discover whether
they understand their Catechism, and the Principles of Religion, or no. Our
Savior said to His Disciples, Mat. XIII.51. have you understood all these
Things? So Parents should enquire of their Children what their Understanding
and Knowledge is in the Doctrines of the Gospel, and the Way of Salvation by
Jesus Christ.

Examine also their Experiences, as they grow up into more Years; enquire,
whether they have felt the Power of the Word of God upon their Hearts; what
Efficacy the Truths they have heard, and read, and learned, have upon their
Hearts, and Lives. Enquire, whether they do now believe the Truths of God;
whether they do indeed love God, and Christ, and Holiness, and hate all Sin.
Examine, what are their Thoughts of God, and the Way of Holiness; what
Apprehensions they have of Sin, and Wrath; and whether a Savior from Sin and
Wrath, is not greatly desired by them, and would, above all Things, be most
welcome to them.

And because Parents should be always jealous for their Children, lest, as the
Serpent beguiled Eve, through his Subtlety, so, their Minds should be corrupted,
and turned aside from the Ways of God, and Happiness, therefore they should
endeavor to find out what Temptations they are most liable unto, and show them
the Danger of them, and guard them against them. Examine also, their Life and
Walk; call them to an Account, and catechize them, ever now and then, about
their Conduct and Behavior, whether they make Conscience of reading the Word
of God, and whether they pray to God, Morning and Evening. Enquire into their
Company; what Company they mostly frequent, and associate themselves with;
that, through your Neglect, they may not be the Companions of Fools, but may walk
with the wise, and be like them. Parents will find a vast Advantage by their
thus catechizing of their Children, and that it will prove one of the best
Methods to increase their Knowledge and Virtue.

But,

3. Parents ought to teach their Children by their own virtuous, and religious
Example. So David taught his Son Solomon, and his other Children, and his
Servants, and says* Psalm. CI.2. I will behave myself wisely, in a perfect Way;
and will walk within my House with a perfect Heart. Example we say goes beyond
Precept; and no Example so forcible as that of a Parent; and therefore Parents
should be exceeding careful, to set a good Example of Religion, and Virtue
before their Children, and so powerfully allure and draw them to the practice
of their Duty; and never suffer them to see any bad Example in you, lest your
Authority in commanding, and the Force of your Instruction be utterly lost upon
them. It was a good Rule among the wiser Romans, Maxima Reverentia debetur
Pueris. The greatest Reverence is due to Children. That is, Parents should take
great Heed to what they say, and do, before them, because they will soon learn
to imitate you.

Never then, suffer your Children to see your Nakedness, by your allowing
yourselves in any sinful Folly before them. Never let them see you disguised
with indecent Passion, or with strong Drink; never suffer them to hear you tell
a Lie, or profanely Cursing and Swearing; never let them see you guilty of the
least Act of Fraud and Injustice in your Dealing. Alas! Vice will be naturally
enough learned; there will be no Need of encouraging of it by Example.

Nay; how can it be supposed that your Children should hearken to your
Instruction, when they see you live directly contrary to it yourselves?
Therefore if you would have your Children taught effectually to know and serve
God, not only say to them what they ought to do, but, be very careful to let
them see, that you endeavor, in all Things, to abound in the Service of God;
that you consciously avoid every sinful Thing, and shun the very Appearance of
Evil, and willingly neglect no one Duty. Then may you be able to say to them,
in the Strain of the Apostle, I. Cor. XI.1. Be ye Followers of me, as I am of
Christ. Set before your Children the Example of a sober, a righteous, a godly
Life and Conversation; and in all Things show yourselves a Pattern of good
Works, otherwise, you will find it very hard to persuade them to do that, which
they see you do not practice yourselves. Thus should Parents be very careful to
teach and instruct their Children.

IV. Parents should be very careful to uphold a religious, and prudent
Government of their Children, and Families. A Master of a Family is, and by the
Law of God, and Nature, ought to be, King in his House; the Rule and Government
thereof is laid upon him; and his great Care should be to rule his Household
well, that it may be a well ordered and governed Society. And here there are
these Things considerable in Parents Government of their Children.

1. To cultivate their Modesty. 2. To inure them to Diligence. 3. To subdue
their Wills and accustom them to Obedience. 4. To restrain them from Evil. 5.
To lay their solemn Charges upon them. 6. To reprove them. 7. To correct them.
To each of these briefly,

1. Parents should be very careful in the Government of their Children to
cultivate their Modesty. There is the Passion of Shame founded in our Nature,
even as of Love, Hope, Fear, and the like; and Modesty is but a regular
Exercise of this Passion of Shame, as a Guard upon us to prevent our doing any
thing which we know to be amiss. We see something of this Passion early
discovering itself in Children, even before they can speak. Now though a vicious
Bashfulness ought to be prudently corrected, yet Modesty ought by all Means to
be cultivated; because this will be one of the greatest Restraints upon
Children to withold them from the Fury of unbridled Appetites and Passions,
and, growing up with them, will be a very great Praeventive of what is mean,
and base, and sinful. Whereas when once a Child has cast off the Restraints of
Modesty, he will run wild; the Reins will be laid upon the Neck of his
Appetites and Passions, and there will be nothing, within himself, to hold him
in, which will render every thing within him the less forcible. Parents,
therefore, should be exceeding careful, not to extinguish, but, to cultivate,
and improve this natural Modesty in their Children, that they may be afraid to
offend, as one of the best natural Foundations for a regular and virtuous Life,
and a prudent Conduct in the World.

2. Parents should be careful to inure their Children to Diligence. It is a
great Mistake, and Fault, in the bringing up of Children to allow them the
greatest Part of their Time for Idleness, and to do nothing but Play, and beat
about the Streets. What can it be supposed such Children will be good for, when
they are grown up? Idleness is the Bane and Ruin of Children; it is the
unbending of their Spirits, the Rust of their Faculties. They that contract
idle and vicious Habits in their Youth, very difficultly get rid of them when
they are grown up, and are not likely to love Work, nor Virtue; being
indisposed, by a vicious Education, to both of them; therefore begin betimes to
accustom Children to Diligence in some Employment or other. While they are
unfit for any thing of hard Labor, keep them within Doors, at their Book, and
at some little Services they may be capable of; any Business, rather than let
them be idle. Of Idleness comes no good, but in all Labor there is some
Profit. Children may very soon begin to earn something, if they were wisely
employed by their Parents; and by being employed the Devil would be kept more
out of their Fingers, as the homely Proverb expresses it; that is, they would
find but little Time to contrive, and less to execute, any wicked Purposes,
which their Idleness would give them Leisure for. By inuring them to Diligence
in their Youth, Labor would become more familiar, and less burdensome, to
them, when they are grown up; and their Diligence would tend to make them
great, in Mind, and in Purse. Solomon therefore observes, Prove. X.4. The
diligent Hand makes rich, whereas he becomes poor, that deals with a slack
Hand: and, Prove. XXII.29. See thou a Man diligent in his Business, he shall
stand before Kings, he shall not stand before mean Men.

3. Parents should carefully subdue the Wills of their Children, and accustom
them to Obedience and Submission. There is great Prudence requisite in this,
and a constant steady Hand in holding in the Appetites of young People; and
perhaps, herein lies the Secret, and Strength of Government. Children will very
soon discover the Strength of their Appetite, and Violence of their Will, even
before they can speak; and if they are always cockered, and allowed to have
their Wills, for Fear, forsook, their Spirits should be broke, it is easy to
foresee, that there will be the utmost Danger of their breaking their Parents
Spirits, and Hearts too, and of their proving Pests in every Relation, when
they are grown up. It Is the Observation of the wise Man, Prove. XXIX.15. a Child
left to himself brings his Mother to Shame. But by having their Wills
subdued, and being accustomed unto Obedience, and Submission, they will know
how to behave themselves, when they are Men, in every Relation, and bear it
patiently that their Wills are not complied with in all Things. They should,
therefore, be very early made sensible, that they ought not, in Reason, to have
their Will, in such Things wherein it may be they strongly desire it; and they
should never, upon any Terms, be allowed to run away with their Will over their
Parents. For this will soon make them stubborn, and disobedient. Make them,
therefore, to know, that they owe Obedience and Submission, and that you always
expect to be obeyed by them, whenever you call them, whatever you order them,
or deny them, that is consistent with Reason, and the Will of God. Let them
know, that this is the first Commandment with Promise, as the Apostle speaks,
Ephesians. VI.1. Children obey your Parents; and that you are determined with
yourselves, and resolute, that they shall obey you.

4. Parents should carefully restrain their Children from every evil Way and
Work. It was articled against good old Eli, that his Children made themselves
vile, and he restrained them not. I. Sam. III.13. Childhood and Youth is
naturally full of Warmth and Heat, and the Appetites and Passions, are prone to
be very fierce and unruly, and hurry them away rashly into many Indecencies,
and Enormities; therefore Parents had need to be very watchful over their
Children, and keep a jealous Eye upon them, to observe and mark the workings of
their Inclination, that they may timely restrain them, and prevent their
turning aside into crooked and bye Paths. As they observe the Tendency of their
Nature to this or the other Vice, they should prudently lay their Restraints
upon them, to keep them from indulging their natural vicious Appetite and
Inclination. And this they should do, by, first, showing them the evil Nature,
and bad Consequences of their taking such or such vicious Courses: and then, by
letting of them know that they will forfeit their Favor and Affection, if they
allow themselves in them. They should also restrain them, by witholding from
them, as much as may be, the Opportunities of their running into bad Practices:
and therefore restrain them from bad Company, that they may not learn their
evil Manners, and do like them; and restrain them from gading, and wandering
abroad, with a lawless Liberty, at unseasonable Hours; and especially from
their stroleing about, and sporting themselves, on the Lord's Day Evening, as
the Manner of too many is, by which the Efficacy of the best of Days, and the
holy Services thereof, is very much lost upon them. For such Liberties will
naturally tend to corrupt them, and draw them into Mischief, whereas a
Restraint therefrom will very much keep them out of Harm's way, and prevent the
Occasion, and Temptation, and Opportunity, of many Sins.

5. Parents should be careful to lay their solemn Charges upon their Children.
So David did upon Solomon, in my Text, thou, Solomon, my Son, know thou the God
of thy Father; and God says of Abraham, Genesis XVIII.19. I know him, that he will
command his Children, and his Household after him, and they shall keep the Way
of the Lord. O! that it might be said so of all Parents, and Heads of Families,
that they will command their Children, and Households after them, to keep the
Way of the Lord, then might we hope to see God Himself adding the
Encouragement, that they shall be a virtuous, and a prosperous Generation. The
parental Charges are the Exhortations and Counsels and Warnings, backed with
the authoritative Injunctions of a Father; and one would be ready to think,
that the wholesome Counsels of a Father, strengthened by his Commands, should go
a great Way to influence the Children to their Duty. We exhorted and charged
every one of you, as a Father does his Children: said the Apostle, I. These.
II.11. Parents, therefore, should take a proper Opportunity, alone with their
young People, to exhort, and persuade them, to that which is virtuous, and
laudable, and add their weighty and solemn Charges upon their Children, to
observe, and do, according to their Instruction. Solomon says, Prove. IV.3, 4. I
was my Father's Son, he taught me also, and said unto me, let thine Heart
retain my Words, keep my Commandments and live. So let Parents command their
Children to love, and fear, and serve God, and carefully shun all the Paths of
the Destroyer; charge them, to embrace the offered Salvation of the Gospel, to
believe in Christ, that they may be accepted, through Him, to the everlasting
Mercy of God; charge them, to go alone, every Day, and pour out a Prayer unto
God, to pardon, and sanctify them, to preserve, and guide them, to make them
Blessings, and eternally save them; and that they do not dare to live without
Prayer, so much as one Day of their Lives: charge them, not to hearken to the
Enticements and Allurements of Sinners, nor suffer themselves to be drawn away
with the evil Example of the Wicked, lest they partake in their Punishment:
charge them, to commune with their own Hearts, to think, who made them, and
what was the End wherefore God gave a Being to them, what they are doing, how
they answer the End of their Make, where they are going, and what their present
Course will end in, and what will become of them: charge them, to think
seriously, of Death, and Judgment, of Heaven, and Hell, and of the boundless
Eternity that is before them. Oh! if they would but think closely of a vast
Eternity, for a few Moments every Day, the Thoughts hereof might be a Means of
their eternal Salvation.

6. Parents should be careful to reprove their Children. The wise Man says,
Prove. VI.23. The Reproofs of Instruction are the way of Life. Young People are
very prone to give themselves a Loose, and wander out of the Path of Life, and
take a Course that is very contrary to Religion and Virtue, and therefore their
Parents should carefully and prudently administer Reproofs unto them, that they
may, if possible, recover them from every ill Path, and turn them into the Way
of Life, that they may not die. There are few or no Families so happy, but the
Parents may observe, that their young Folks do, and say, what they ought not;
and when they observe such Things in them, they should be very sure in a proper
Time, and Manner, to reprove them for it; lest by their not bearing their
Testimony against their evil Practices, their Children and Servants, take
Encouragement, and grow bold and hardened therein. Where, indeed, a gentle
Reproof and Admonition will answer the End, as it may with some Tempers, for a
Reproof enters more into a wise Man, than an hundred Stripes into a Fool,
there it may be sufficient to reprove with all mildness; but where such gentle
Reproofs, upon Experience, are found to be insufficient, there Parents ought to
proceed to a more sharp Rebuke, that his Words may be strong and forcible, and
carry Weight and Authority with them, and let the Children see that you are in
Earnest, and mean to be heard. And especially, if the Faults which they are
guilty of are gross, the Reproof should be the more sharp and pungent, and set
home with the greater Force upon them, that they may feel the Reproofs of
Wisdom, and fear and do no more so wickedly. And lastly;

7. Parents should carefully and wisely correct their Children. It may be that
Admonitions and Reproofs, by Words, will not be sufficient to govern the young
People, (as with many Tempers they will not,) if so, then Parents ought to
proceed from Words to Blows, and lay the Reproof home upon them, that they may
feel the Smart of it; and not suffer any fond Indulgence to divert the needful
Correction. Prove. XIX.18. Chast^^ thy Son, while there is Hope, and let not thy
Soul spare for his crying. It is not enough in great and atrocious Crimes, such
as Lying, Stealing, Sabbath-breaking, Cursing and Swearing, and palpable
Disobedience, and contempt of parental Authority, to say, as old Eli, nay; my
Sons, it is not a good Report which I hear; why do you such things? But there
must be a proceeding unto Family Correction, and the Rod must teach to do
better. Prove. XXIX.15. The Rod and Reproof give Wisdom. If Reproof, by Words,
will do, there is then no need of the Rod; but if Words will not prevail with
them to mend their Manners, the Rod must then be made use of; for the Rod was
made for the Fool's Back, as the Whip for the Horse. Some Children are of such
a Make and Temper, that nothing but the Rod of Correction will cause their
Folly to depart from them. If therefore the Parent would have Joy in his Child
he must not withold Correction from him, when it is due. Prove. XXIX.17. Correct
thy Son, and he shall give thee Rest; yea, he shall give Delight unto thy Soul.
Nay; if thou have any Love unto thy Child, and would not harden thyself
against thy own Flesh, be careful to correct him, when he needs it, that thou
may preserve him, from the greatest of Miseries. Prove. XXIII.13, 14. Withold
not Correction from the Child; for if thou beatest him with the Rod, he shall
not die; thou shall beat him with the Rod, and shall deliver his Soul from
Hell. So that oftentimes the Correction of the Rod, and of Stripes, is
absolutely necessary, in the parental Government, and may be a Means of
delivering the Child from the Snares of Death, and the Path Way that leads
down to Hell. Thus should Parents uphold a religious and prudent Government of
their Children, and Families.

But then, in the Government of their Children, Parents should be careful to
observe these Two Rules.

1. Never to correct in a Passion. Parents ought never to strike in their Fury,
any more than a Judge to punish in his Wrath; lest the Correction be looked
upon but as the Effect of Passion, and not the necessary Penalty of any
violated Law, and so all the good Ends of it be lost. There can be nothing so
well done in a Passion, but what may be done much better out of it. First,
endeavor calmly to convince the Child that he has acted very foolishly, and
deserves to be corrected; and then, show him the Obligations you lie under to
God, and him, to correct him; and remember, in your Correction, that the Wrath
of Man works not the Righteousness of God; and always endeavor to preserve a
Calmness of Temper, when yet you must show your Displeasure at every Thing that
is vicious.

2. Be not over rigorous in your Government. Too flack Reins of Government will
weaken the Authority, and procure Contempt; and too straight and severe
Management will provoke to Mutiny and Rebellion. Temper therefore your Family
Government, with a suitable Degree of Mildness. The Apostolical Direction is, (
Ephesians. VI.4.) Fathers provoke not your Children to Wrath; but bring them up in
the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. Let our mildness procure their Love to
you, at the same Time that your steady Authority excites them to fear you; so
will you have the Command of the two main Springs of their Nature, and the more
easily bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. In short; don't
be always chiding, and finding Fault; nor perpetually, and cruelly correcting;
constant chiding is the Way never to mend; perpetual Correction hardens, and
does not reform.

I doubt not but that many Children are ruined for want of observing these two
plain Rules; their Parents never chide, nor correct, but in a Passion, and are
too rigorous and severe; and by this Means the Children are lost and undone, by
being hardened in their evil Ways; when a more steady, mild, yet close and taut
Government might have served them. For he that sees you love him, while you
correct him, will on likely to hear your Reproofs; while he, that thinks you
hate him, will disregard them all.

Thus I have showed how Parents are to manifest their Concern, that their
Children may know, and serve the Lord: by bringing them to the Public Worship
of God, by their own upholding the Worship of God in their Families, by a
religious Instruction of their Children and Servants, and by a religious and
prudent Government of them. And in all of these Parents should be careful to be
seasonable, pertinent, and authorative, in what they do; begin early with them,
adapt themselves, as they are able, to each particular Temper, and Disposition,
and Case; and be very careful in all to preserve their own Authority, and never
suffer a Child to get the Mastery of them.

But I must hasten to the Second Thing I proposed, namely,

II. To mention some Things as very good Reasons, why Parents should be greatly
concerned, that their Children may be such as shall truly know and serve the
Lord. And I shall Name a few Things, as Heads of Argument to enforce and press
this Duty very strongly upon all Parents; namely, that they owe it unto God, to
their Children, to the Public, and unto themselves.

I. This is what Parents owe unto God, to use utmost Care that their Children
may be taught the Knowledge and Service of the Lord.

For this is what God has positively required of them. How often does God
enjoin this Duty upon Parents, in the Old Testament? Thus God gives it in
Charge to them, by His Servant Moses, Deuteronomy. IV.9, 10. Take heed unto thyself,
and keep thy Soul diligently, lest thou forget the Things which thou have seen,
and lest they depart from thine Heart all the Days of thy Life; but teach thou
thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons; especially, the Day which thou stoodest before the
Lord thy God in Horeb, (that is, when the Law was given from Mount Sinai,) when
the Lord said unto me, gather me the People together, and I will make them hear
my Words, that they may learn to fear me, all the Days they shall be upon the
Earth, and that they may teach their Children. So again, we read, Deuteronomy. VI 6,
7. These Words which I command thee this Day shall be in thine Heart; and thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk to them when thou
sit in thine House, and when thou walk by the Way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. Thus also we are told, Psalm. LXXVIII.5, 6, 7. He
established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he
commanded our Fathers, that they should make them known unto their Children;
that the Generation to come might know them, even the Children which should be
born, who should arise and declare them unto their Children, that they might
set their Hope in God, and not forget the Works of God, but keep His
Commandments. And many Commands of like Import have we in the New Testament,
particularly that in Ephesians. VI.4. Parents provoke not your Children to Wrath,
but bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.

But besides all these, and many more, plain and positive Commands, the Honor
of God and His Interest calls for it. For, what is the Interest of God in the
World, but the Advancement of the Glory of His Name, a showing forth the Honor
of His Dominion and Power, His Holiness and Goodness, in a People formed to
serve Him? Thus the Interest and Honor of God is embarked in His Church, which
is His visible Kingdom in the World. And how shall this Interest of God be
promoted, if Parents are not careful to hand Religion down, in the Truth and
Purity of it, to their Posterity? If this Duty should be generally neglected, a
Generation, or two, will wear out the Name and Service of God, and so His
Church, and Kingdom, and Interest would be no more to be found in the World:
and therefore Parents should be careful to instruct their Children in the
Knowledge and Service of God, that Religion may be transmitted to Posterity,
and God may have a holy Seed to serve him, on Earth, when they are dead and
gone. And every truly Godly Parent will have an Eye to this End, and be
careful thus to promote the Interest of God; and it is the Duty of all Parents
so to do, because they are under all imaginable Obligations, by the Law of
Creation, and Preservation, and Benefaction, to do all they can to advance the
Honor of God in the World.

II. Parents owe it also unto their Children and Families, to be very careful
thus to teach them the Knowledge and Service of God. Because Parents owe it
unto their Children, to take all the Care they can of them, to promote their
Welfare. It Is inwrought into their very Nature to provide Food, and Raiment,
for them. The Sea Monster draws out her Breast unto her young ones; and the
Apostle tells us, I. Tim. V.8* if any provide not for his own, and specially
them of his own House, he has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel.
And what? O Parent! Do thou not owe it unto thy Child, to be concerned for
his Soul, as well as for his Body? Will thou not do all thou can to promote
his eternal Interest, as well as his temporal one? Nay; I beseech you, O
Parent, have not thou communicated unto him that sinful sinning Heart and
Nature, which brings thy Child, the Fruit of thy own Body, under the Wrath and
Curse of God? And will you not then be most deeply concerned how he may escape
this Curse, and may not be miserable forever? Will you not use your own best
Endeavors, that all the Disorders of his Nature may be rectified, and that he
may be made meet for the Heavenly Inheritance.

Yea; think, O Parent! have thou not taught thy Child to Sin? Has he not
learned many Vices of thee, through thy own Vitiousness, or thy Weakness, or
Inadvertency? And will you not then be concerned to do what you can to unlearn
him that which is Evil, and to teach him that which is Good, that thy Child may
be happy? Do not the Bonds of Nature and Religion oblige thee to procure the
Happiness of thy Children? Are not your Children a Part of yourselves? And can
you bear to think of their perishing forever in everlasting Burning? Look upon
the tender Lambs, and think; these, even these delightful and engaging
Offspring of thine own Bowels must, one Day, very probably, lie down in Hell,
surrounded with devouring Fire, and become a Prey to Devils, and that forever,
if you do not take a seasonable and prudent Care to prevent it! And will not
the Thoughts hereof startle thee, and make thine Heart to bleed within thee?
Art thou more cruel to thy Children than the Ostrich, and the wild Beasts of
the Wilderness?

If the Body of thy Child were sick, doubtless thou would be concerned to
recover its Health. Why, Man! The Soul of thy Child is sick, nigh unto Death:
and will thou do nothing to save the Soul of that poor little Thing? Should it
tumble into the Water, and be in Danger of drowning, would not thou, if thou
were near to it, put forth thy Hand to save it? Why, Man! the Soul of thy Child
is in infinite Danger of perishing in the Lake of Fire; and will thou not
bestir thyself to pluck it as a Brand out of the Burning? Have thou no Mercy?
no Pity and Compassion on the Fruit of the Womb, or the Child that thou have
begotten? Nay; art thou lost to all Justice and Equity? that thou will not do
thy Part to repair the Injury thou have done unto it? See then, how strong thy
Obligations are to do thy best, that thy Children, and Servants, may be such as
shall know and serve God, that they may be happy forever.

III. Parents owe it unto the Public, to teach their Children the Knowledge,
and Service of God. Have thou any Regard to the public Welfare of the World,
and the Place where thou live? then ought thou to be very careful that thy
Children may be well taught. As Families are generally made up of Children, and
young People, so by them the Town, and Nation, and Kingdom are increased and
supported: and since the Nation and People, we belong to, and the Town where we
dwell, are continued, and upheld by the rising Generation, in the several
particular Families, therefore the Welfare of the State, and Place of our
Abode, is very much dependent upon the regular Conduct, and Behavior of those
Children, when they are grown up to Years of Maturity and Manhood. If then they
are not well instructed, and formed, for Religion, and Virtue, how can it
otherwise be expected than that they should prove mere Burdens, and Plagues, in
the Places where they dwell? Their ungovernable Tempers, their immoral and
vicious Behavior, will throw all into Confusion, and prove hurtful to all
about them; either by direct Injuries done by them, or by the bad Example they
will set before others. For there is no such Cement of the Unity of a People as
true Religion, nor any such sure Foundation of their Prosperity as the Fear of
God; while lewd and immoral Practices bring Ruin upon a People. Prove. XIV.34.
Righteousness exalts a Nation; but Sin is a Reproach to any People If
therefore the Children that rise up are not taught the Knowledge and Service of
God, not only will they bring the Curse of God, upon the Place where they
dwell, as a Punishment for the Wickedness of its Inhabitants, but they will, in
a natural Way bring innumerable Mischiefs and Confusions upon themselves. For
what will there be to restrain a People, from every one doing what is right in
his own Eyes, when once a Sense of God and Religion is lost among them. Their
Passions will have a full run, and be continually stirring up, and fomenting
Strife and Divisions; their Lusts and Appetites will have no Restraint upon
them, and this will lead them to prey upon one another, in all the Ways of
Injustice, and Fraud, Oppression, and Rapine: and if ever such ill educated
Persons should come to Places of Honor and Preferment among a People, it would
be but so much the worse for that People, because of the greater Opportunity
such would have for the Indulgence of their Lusts and Passions. So that out of
Regard to the public Weal, which every one ought to have at Heart, Parents
should be greatly concerned, that their Children may be such as shall know, and
serve the Lord; that Temperance, and Justice, and brotherly Love, and all the
social Virtues may render the Welfare of that People, strong and lasting. This
will be the Way for your Children to be Blessings in the World. Hence is that
Advice of Solomon's, Prove. XXII.6. Train up a Child in the Way he should go;
and when he is old, he will not depart from it. He will walk in those Paths of
Virtue, when he is a Man; and so become a Blessing to the World in his Day.

IV. Parents ought thus to endeavor, that their Children may be such as shall
know and serve the Lord, out of Regard unto themselves. If, O Parent! thou have
no Regard to any one else, yet will thou have no Respect unto thyself, to thy
own Benefit and Advantage, to thy own Comfort and Happiness here, and
hereafter? Why then it ought to be thy great Care, to bring up thy Children
religiously, in the Service of God. For what Prospect can you have that your
Children, and Servants, will be dutiful, and obedient unto you, if they are not
in some Measure influenced thereunto by the Fear of God? If thou leavest thy
Children to themselves, thou can expect no other but that they will be a
Vexation, and Grief of Heart to thee. They will do such Things as shall be a
Burden to thee, as long as thou live. But if thy Children are well trained
up, in the Knowledge, and Service of God, then they will make thy Heart glad;
as he said, Prove. X.1. a wise Son makes a glad Father. It will be the Joy of
thy Soul to see him act prudently, wisely, virtuously; and to hear others
commending of him for a fine well-bred young Man. Whereas, says Solomon, in the
forecited Place, a foolish Son is the Heaviness of his Mother. His irregular
Life will be a Heaviness unto thee, much beyond that of following him to his
Grave, in his Infancy. And, it may be, he will by his unrestrained Folly and
Wickedness, expose thee to public Shame: as the same wise Man says, Prove.
XXIX.15. a Child left to himself, brings his Mother to Shame.

But besides all this Sorrow and Vexation and Shame, that a Child, left unto
himself, will bring thee unto; what do thou think will be thy Portion
hereafter, for thy Neglect of thy Children! God has committed your Children,
and your Servants also, unto your Care, that you may bring them up in His
Service; He does, as it were, say unto thee, here, take Care of the Soul of
this young Person, to teach and instruct it in My Will, in the Knowledge of Me,
and its Duty to Me; I charge you, at your Peril, that you lead it in a right
Way; if it perish at last, through your Default, I will require its Blood at your
Hands. O! what everlasting Shame, and Confusion of Face, will it involve you
in, to have the infinitely Great and Holy God saying unto you, in the Day of
Account, what is become of the poor Soul of that Child which I committed unto
your Care? Unnatural Wretch that thou art; thou have vilely neglected it, and
instead of promoting its Happiness, have but furthered its endless Misery! And
what a Sting will it be unto thee, in the Place of Torment? to have thy
perishing Children then cry out against thee for thy hard Heartedness! How will
it pierce thee to thy Soul? to hear them roar upon thee; O thou cruel Parent!
who have despised and neglected thy own Offspring! If you had done your Duty to
us, we should have escaped this Place of Torment, and have been happy forever!
Cursed be the Man that begat us, and the Paps that gave us Suck! It Is to you
that we must in a great Measure owe our everlasting undoing! Oh! what Horror
and Amazement, what inexpressible Anguish and Torment, of Soul, will this fill
you withal? and how will it add unto the Flames that will prey upon you! So
that by all the Ties of Nature, Interest, and Religion, Parents are obliged to
take Care to teach their Children to know and serve God.

Thus I have finished the First Doctrine, and leave the Second to be discoursed
on, this Evening, to a Number of young Men. And having been practical through the
whole of my treating on this Subject, all I shall add shall be,

An earnest Persuasion unto all Parents, from the Considerations I have
mentioned, and as I have directed and showed you how to use your best
Endeavors, that your Children may be among the happy Number of those that know
and serve the Lord. This will afford you inconceivable Satisfaction, and cause
Joy in Heaven itself; and for this they will bless God that ever they knew you;
this will yield you Comfort in a Dying Hour, and give you the Prospect of an
happy and endless meeting with them, in the Kingdom of God above; and enable
you to say, with a holy Transport of Soul, Behold me, and the Children which
God has graciously given to me! Wherefore come to Joshua's Resolution, with
which I now conclude, Ios. XXIV.15. As for me, and my House, we will serve the
Lord.

THE Important Duty OF CHILDREN.
I Chron. XXVIII.9. And thou, Solomon, my Son, know thou the God of thy Father,
and serve Him, with a perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind; for the Lord
searches all Hearts, and understands all the Imaginations of the Thoughts;
if thou seek Him, He will be found of thee; but if thou forsake Him, He will
cast thee off forever.


I Have, in Public to Day, discoursed some Things upon these Words, before
many of you that are here present, and have observed that they are the Words of
King David, to Solomon, his Son; and in them, we have the Father's great
Concern, that his Child may know and serve the Lord. From whence I have
discoursed on this Doctrine,

1. Doc. That it should be the great Concern of Parents, that their Children
may be such as shall know and serve the Lord.

But then, the Words are spoken unto Solomon, a Young Man, under Twenty Years
of Age, and show him what his great Concern should be, namely, to serve God,
with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind; and that because God knows the
Heart, and will accept such as so serve Him, and reject them that do it not.
From whence I have noted this as a Second Doctrine, viz.

2. Doc. That it should be the most important Concern of Young People, to know,
and serve, the Lord, with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind.

This Doctrine I reserved to be discoursed on, by the Help of God, this
Evening, unto you my Young People; and in the handling of it, I shall endeavor
to show you,

I. What is to be understood by knowing God.

II Wherein consists the Service of God.

III. That God is to be served with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind.

IV. And then I shall evidence this to be the most important Concern of Young
People; where I shall consider the Arguments made use of in the Text. I begin
with the first of these, viz.

I. What is to be understood by knowing God? Kknow thou the God of thy Father.
Now, the Knowledge of God may well be understood to comprehend these Three
Things in it.

1. That there is a God. 2. What this God is. And, 3. What this God requires
of us.
1. To know God, comprehends in it the Knowledge that there is a God. For if
the Mind is not first informed, and does not give Credit to the Information,
that verily there is a GOD, some supreme, and infinitely powerful, and wise
Agent, from whom all Things originate, there can be no Foundation for the
Knowledge of Him, nor for any Service to Him. This therefore is the first Thing
in the Knowledge of GOD, to have the Mind firmly impressed with the Belief of
the Being of GOD. Hence we are told, Heb. XI.6. He that comes unto God, must
believe that he is. This is the first Thing that Young People should get their
Minds well informed in the Belief of, that there is a GOD, a Supreme Being, who
is the first Cause, and the last End of all Things; That there is a GOD, who
gave Being unto all this World; That this GOD made us, and formed us, and
fashioned us, and furnished us with all our Powers, of Choice, and of Action.
Therefore the Preacher says, Eccl. XII.1. Remember thy Creator, in the Days of
thy Youth. So soon as you come to Years of Understanding, you should remember
that there is a GOD, who is thy Creator, and the Creator of all Things in
Heaven and in Earth. While your Minds are soft and tender you should receive
the Impressions of the Being of the great GOD upon them, that the Belief hereof
may have its due Influence upon you all your Life after. The Belief of a GOD,
of all Perfections, the Maker, and Ruler, of all Worlds, and to whom you must
be accountable, should be deeply rooted in your Minds; and serious Thoughts of
this GOD should be often present with you. And indeed, you can look no where
without seeing some plain Evidences and Proofs of the Being of a God. Young as
you are, you are capable of seeing GOD in all Things; for as the Psalmist said,
( Psalm. XIX.1.) The Heavens declare the Glory of God; and the Firmament shows
His handy Work. And so the Apostle ( Romans I.20.) says, The (...) Things of Him,
from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the
Things that are made; even His Eternal Power and Godhead. This is the first
Thing to know that there is a GOD.

2. The Knowledge of God includes in it, the Knowledge of what this God is. Not
that Youth are able fully to understand what sort of a Being the Lord is: For
so the most ripened Years cannot attain unto the Knowledge of God; because
there is no finding out of the Almighty unto Perfection. Yea, the very Angels
of Heaven cannot so know God. For no finite Mind can comprehend that which is
Infinite. But yet, so much of God may be known by us, as it has pleased God to
manifest of Himself unto us, as necessary to our serving of Him. And thus Young
People should be concerned to know God. As now,

They should know that the Lord is a great God. That this God has all Power in
His own Hands, and can do whatsoever He pleases. For what cannot He do that
made a World out of nothing? You are to know, as Job expresses it, Job XLII.2.
That God can do every thing, and that no Thought can be witholden from Him: and
therefore to know that this God can punish severely those that dare to offend
Him, and that He is able to protect, and reward, those that faithfully serve
Him.

Again; you are to know, that this God is an infinitely good God; whose
Goodness is seen in His giving Being to you, in His constant preserving of you,
and bountifully supplying of all your Wants. Thou art Good, and do Good;
said the Psalmist, Psalm. CXIX.68. Yea, God is good unto all, and His tender
Mercies are over all His Works. Psalm. CXLV.9. So soon as you arrive at the Use
of Reason, you should well acquaint yourselves with the Goodness of God unto
you, that you may be allured thereby unto all Fidelity in His Service. And need
you to look far to see the Instances of His Goodness to you? Or can you forget
the Author of your Lives, your constant Preserver, and Benefactor, from whom
you receive your All?

Again; you are to know that this God is a very Holy God; that He has no
Pleasure in Wickedness, neither shall Evil dwell with Him, but He perfectly
hates all Sin and Iniquity, and cannot by any Means approve of it. Hab. I.13.
Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and can not look upon Iniquity.
You should therefore early know, and bear it in Mind, not only, that God is
Himself at an infinite Distance from all moral Evil, but, that He hates all Sin
wheresoever He sees it; and because Sin is the abominable Thing which the Soul
of the Lord hates, therefore He hates all the Workers of Iniquity.

Again; you are to know that this God is every where present, and perfectly
knows all Things, all Persons, and all their Actions. So says God, by His
Prophet, Ier. XXIII.24. Can any hide himself, in secret Places, that I shall
not see him? says the Lord: do not I fill Heaven and Earth? says the Lord.
Young as you are, you are to know, and realize it, that God sees you wherever
you are; that He knows all your Actions, Words, and Thoughts, and you cannot
hide yourselves, nor what you do, or say, or think, from His View.

Finally; you are to know, that the Lord is a God of Truth, and that it is
impossible unto God to Lie, Heb. VI.18. You are to know, that God is true in
what He has spoken, and all His Sayings are faithful, and worthy of all
Acceptance, and God will be true to His Word, and accomplish the Thing that
has gone out of His Mouth, both in fulfiling His Threatening upon His Enemies,
and His Promises unto His Friends. These, and the other adorable Perfections
and Attributes of God, you are to have your Minds well informed in the
Knowledge of. But I may not enlarge.

3. To know God includes in it, the Knowledge of what God requires of us: or,
the Knowledge of the Mind and Will of God concerning us. This Knowledge of God
is attainable Two Ways;

First, by the Light of Nature. Something of God, and of His Mind and Will
concerning us, is to be seen by a due Exercise of our natural Reason and
Conscience. But this is such a very dim and obscure Knowledge of God, and of
His Mind and Will concerning us, which, after all our Pains, we can attain to
by the Light of Nature, that our best, and safest, Knowledge of God, and His
Mind, is,

Secondly, From His holy Word. For it has pleased God to make a full, and
clear, Revelation of Himself, and His Mind and Will unto the World, confirmed
by many Signs and Wonders, and diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost;
and therein He has showed to us, that He is, and what He is, and what does the
Lord our God require of us, so far as is necessary to be known by us. Now, it
concerns Young People to endeavor to know God as He has revealed Himself unto
them, to attend unto the Light of Nature, and to take heed unto the Word of
God, as a more sure Word of Prophecy, a Light that shines in a dark Place.
Therefore Young Persons should learn betimes to read the Word of God; and,
being capable of reading it, they should make Conscience of daily accustoming
themselves to read some Portion thereof; and meditate on that holy Word; that
they may be acquainted with the Mind and Will of God concerning them, and know
what they are to believe, and what to practice, in the Service of God. For if
they know not their Master's Will, how shall they be able to perform it? And
especially, according to the Gospel Revelation, they should endeavor to know
God in CHRIST; that is, to understand the great Doctrines of the Gospel
relating to the Person, Natures, and Offices, and Benefits of Jesus Christ; to
acquaint themselves with the wonderful Grace and Mercy of God in providing a
Savior, and sending His own Son into the World, to suffer and die for Sinners,
that He might bring us unto God: that they may be led by the Knowledge hereof
to the Faith of the Son of God, and to eternal Life through Him. This is to know
God; and this is the Knowledge which it cannot be good that the Soul should be
without.

II. The Second Thing I proposed to take Notice of under this Doctrine, is, to
show you, wherein consists the Service of God. Young People should be
concerned not only to know God, but to serve Him; and that they may be enabled
to serve Him, it is necessary for them to know what that Service is which is
expected from them. Here then we may enquire, what is intended by, and included
in, that Service which Young Persons, and which indeed, all Persons should
yield unto God? And this includes in it, in the general, a Compliance with
whatsoever the Lord our God requires of us, a doing what God has commanded us,
and a living up to the Rules which He has prescribed to us in His holy Word:
and so it includes in it our whole Duty. But to be a little more particular; it
includes in it, 1. The Duties of Piety. 2. The Duties of Sobriety. 3. The
Duties of Justice. And 4. The Duties of Charity.


1. The Service of God includes in it* all the Duties of Piety which are due
unto God Himself. These are Duties which Young Persons are concerned betimes to
engage in; it being one of the first Lessons they are to learn, to reverence
God. Thus,

They are to believe in God, and in His Son Jesus Christ. For this is the great
Command of the Gospel, and what God requires of every one that hears His Word,
to believe in Him, and to believe in Christ. So said our Savior, Ioh. XIV.1.
Ye believe in God, believe also in me: and Ioh. VI.29. This is the Work of God,
that ye believe on Him whom He has sent. This is so necessary a Part of our
Duty unto God, that without it no Man can serve God acceptably; for, without
Faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. XI.6. The Faith of the Divine Being,
and of His Son Jesus Christ, as the great Mediator, through whom alone we have
access to God, and acceptance with Him, being the Fundamental Principle of the
Christian Religion. You must therefore get a Principle of Faith in God, and
Faith in Christ, as the Son of God, and Savior of Sinners, into your Hearts,
as the grand Spring of all your spiritual and acceptable Service, without which
you can never find Favor with God: because, out of Christ, God is a consuming
Fire unto guilty Sinners, but in Christ He is a God reconciling a guilty World
unto Himself.

Repentance toward God, is another Duty of Piety which Young Persons should
carefully attend upon, that they may serve God. That is they should turn from
all Sin unto the living God. For all Sin is a carrying the Heart off from God
unto the Creature, unto Self, unto the World, and unto the Devil; and
Repentance is the Soul's renouncing these Usurpers, and refusing to be any
longer in Subjection unto foreign Lords, and returning to its Duty unto its
rightful Sovereign, and subjecting itself unto the living Jehovah. And inasmuch
as you were all born Sinners, being conceived in Sin, and shapen in Iniquity;
and have lived Sinners, having broken the holy Law of God many Times, within
the few Years you have been in the World; therefore you had need to come unto
Repentance: and this is what God in a peculiar Manner requires, now that the
Gospel has enlightened the World, and shown you the Evil of Sin, and the
dreadful Consequents of it, and a Savior from it. Act. XVII.30. The Times of
Ignorance God winked at, but now has commanded all Men, every where, to
repent. And because you owe your whole selves, and all your Time to the Service
of God, and none to Sin; and there is Danger lest by Continuance in Sin you
grow hardened therein; therefore you should now in your Youth forsake every
evil Way, and endeavor after an universal Conformity unto the Will of God.

Again; Young Persons ought to pray to God. This is another Duty of Piety,
which God requires of all Persons, and of Young ones, that they pray to Him;
that they be sensible of their entire Dependence upon Him for every good Thing,
both respecting their Bodies, and their Souls, for Time, and for Eternity; and
that in a Sense thereof they come humbly before Him, and pour out their Heart's
Desire unto Him, in all Things by Prayer and Supplication making known their
Requests unto Him; that they beg it of God to preserve them from Dangers, to
lead them in a right Way, to keep them from sinning, and bestow their daily
Bread upon them, and give them His Grace, and unite them unto His Son, and
finally bring them to Glory. Our Savior, therefore, spoke a Parable, to this
Intent, That Men ought always to pray, and not to faint: Luke XVIII.1. and
directs you, to enter into your Closet, and when you have shut the Door, to
pray to your Father which sees in secret. Mat. VI.6. And this will be a
comfortable Token for Good upon you, that God has begun His Work in you, when
it can be said of you, as of Saul, Act. IX.11. behold, he prays. But then
remember, in your Prayers, that you are to give Thanks unto God for all the
Instances of His Goodness, Bounty, and Mercy to you. And how lovely is the
Spectacle, in the Eyes of God, to see Young Persons thus going alone, and
earnestly presenting their Supplications and Acknowledgments to Him? This is a
grateful Sacrifice with which God is well pleased.

And finally; It Is a Work of Piety, which Young Persons are concerned in, to do
all they can for the Honor and Glory of God. The Apostle gives us this Rule,
I. Cor. X.30. Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
Glory of God. Young Persons should remember, that they, as well as all Things
else, were made for this great End, to glorify God; and therefore they should
endeavor the Advancement of this high and noble End all the Ways they are
capable of. All your natural, civil, and religious Actions should be performed
with a single Eye to the Glory of God. Be ready to do all you can for the
building up of the Church of God; and become yourselves living Stones in that
Temple of the Lord; and think not much to lay yourselves out, to spend, and be
spent, in the Service of God; and to improve of your worldly Interest in such
Works of Piety as may tend to the Glory of God. Thus are you to serve God in
the Duties of Piety.

2. The Service of God includes in it all the Duties of Sobriety. And thus
Young Persons are to serve God, by behaving themselves with Sobriety, in the
Government and Regulation of their Appetites and Passions, in the Temperance,
Chastity, and Purity of their Manners, and Behavior.

Thus Young Persons should be sober in their Temperance, and restraining their
inordinate Appetites and Desires after the World and the Things thereof. Exhort
young Men to be sober-minded, said the Apostle, Tit. II.6. They are to be sober
in their Meats and Drinks, and not allow themselves in Gluttony and
Drunkenness, nor in too great Curiosity about the Quality of them, but be
contented with what they have. They are to be temperate in their Apparel, and
not craving after every new and slanting Fashion, hastening, if possible, to be
one of the first in it, nor going to the Extent of it, which will be but an
Indication of a vain Mind: but preserve a due Mediocrity, and use the World,
(and the Things thereof,) so as not to abuse it, (nor them themselves with it,)
because the Fashion of this World passes away. I. Cor. VII.31.

Again; Young Persons should be sober in the Chastity and Purity of their
Manners; behaving themselves with Modesty, and Shamefacedness, carrying
themselves with all Circumspection and good Behavior before their Superiors,
rising up at the Face of the old Man, and giving that Honor and Reverence to
their Parents, natural, spiritual, and civil, and ready Obedience and
Submission to them, which the Word of God requires of them. They should be
careful also to remember and observe the Apostle's Rule, II. Tim. II.22. Flee
youthful Lusts. They should preserve themselves pure and chaste from all
unclean Lusts, and learn to possess their Vessels in Sanctification and Honor,
and be careful not to allow themselves in any lewd Talk, and evil
Communication, in any impure or immodest Words, or Actions, and, as much as may
be, drive impure Thoughts out of their Minds, and not suffer them to lodge
within them.

Again; Young Persons should be sober in the regular Government of their
Tongues. They should not suffer that unruly Member, the Tongue, to run at
large, but lay their seasonable and prudent Restraints upon it, and keep it
under the Bit. They should hate and abhor Lying, as a base and odious Vice,
proceeding from a meanness of Soul, and which render them abominable and
contemptible both in the Sight of God and Man. Ephesians. IV.15. wherefore, putting
away lying, speak every Man the Truth with his Neighbor. They should always be
careful to speak the Words of Truth and Soberness. And they should be careful
to banish all impious and profane Language from their Mouths; that their Mouths
may not be set against the Heavens, and belch out their Blasphemies against the
God that made them. They should be careful never to allow themselves to take
the Name of God in vain, by customary Oaths in Conversation, much less in their
solemn Testimony to any Thing; because this will be to dishonor God, and not
to serve Him; and God will not hold him guiltless that takes His Name in vain.
Exodus XX.7. They should also guard aginst all reproachful and injurious Talk,
all Whispering and evil Speaking; and take Care that they do not raise, or
spread false Reports of their Neighbors; nor should they suffer railing and
reviling Language, and bad Names, or Cursing, to proceed out of their Mouths.
And be not too talkative. "A young prating Fool is an uncomely Sight." Let your
Words therefore be few, sober, seasoned with Grace, that they may minister that
which is grateful to the Hearer.

Once more; Young Persons should be sober in the Government of their Passions,
lest they betray them into many Mischiefs. Youth is naturally hot, and is very
apt to be soon angry, and easily provoked, and suddenly kindle into a Flame. If
therefore you would be the Servants of God, you must carefully watch over your
Passions, and timely suppress them, when you first perceive them to begin to
stir and rise. Don't allow yourselves to be soon angry, nor suffer your Anger
to grow up into Rage and Fury; but if you have just cause to be angry, as
possibly sometimes you may, yet remember the Apostle's Rule, Ephesians. IV.26. be
angry, and sin not; which you cannot be, if your Anger be causeless, or exceed
due Bounds, in the Measure, or Duration of it; and therefore the Apostle adds,
let not the Sun go down upon your Wrath. Especially take heed never to harbor
Malice and Revenge in your Hearts. Beware of doing Evil unto others, because
you think they have done some ill Thing to you. Romans XII.19. Dearly beloved,
avenge not yourselves, but rather give Place to Wrath; for it is written,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. Learn to do Good for Evil, and
bless them that curse you, and pray for them that despitefully use and entreat
you, that you may be the Children of the highest. In such Instances as these
should Young Persons serve God in Sobriety.

3. The Service of God includes in it the Duties of Justice. For as God is a
righteous God, just and right is He, so He requires Justice and Righteousness
of all His Servants, and will not allow of any designed Unrighteousness in
them. Young Persons should therefore get early established in the Principles of
Justice, that they may ever do that which is equal and right, and observe that
Golden Rule of our Savior's, Mat. VII.12. All Things whatsoever ye would that
Men should do unto you, do you so unto them. Always think what you would look
upon as just and right, and fitting that other Persons should do unto you, were
they in your Circumstances, and do you be careful to do unto them accordingly.

Thus be strictly just, in your Care never to wrong any Man, by taking any
Thing from him, without his Knowledge, or against his Will. Are you Children?
Rob not your Parents. For if you take any Thing from them which they know not
of, or are not willing you should have, you are guilty of stealing from them;
and this is one of the highest Instances of Injustice. Are you Servants? Do not
wrong your Masters, or Mistresses, by purloining and pilfering, or wasting of
their Goods, or consuming their Time idly; this would be an Iniquity which you
would have Cause sadly to repent of. Young People, it is true, are ready to
think, that there is no great Harm in these Things; yet, know it, that God will
look upon all such Things as Breaches of His holy Commandment, and will call to
a sad Account, and severely punish therefore, if such Sins are not repented of.
Exhort Servants, said the Apostle, Tit. II.9, 10. to be obedient unto their own
Masters; -- not purloining but showing all good Fidelity. And is not the
robbing of your Neighbor's Orchard, or Garden, a stealing from them, as well
as the robbing of their Vessels, and Houses? Yes surely, God will esteem it so;
and therefore such Young Persons as would serve the Lord, must be very careful
to abstain from all such Acts of Injustice.

Again; Be strictly just, in your Diligence in your Business. The Apostle says,
Col. III.22. Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the Flesh,
not with Eye-Service, as pleasing Men, but in singleness of Heart, fearing God.
Be not Eye-Servants, that will attend your Business no longer than while your
Parents, or Masters, Eye is upon you; but be as diligent when they are absent,
as when they are present: otherwise you are unfaithful, and rob them of so much
of the Service which you might have done them. And so when you shall be
employed by others, remember faithfully to attend the Business you are employed
about; and do not idle away your Time, and spend and consume it, in vain Chat,
and Diversions, when you should be at Work; because this would be to cheat and
wrong them that employ you: but show all good Fidelity, that you may adorn the
Doctrine of God your Savior in all Things.

Again; Be just in all your Dealing, and Commerce. Let no Man go beyond, or
defraud his Brother, in any Matter; because the Lord is the avenger of all
such. I. These. IV.6. Always deal fair, and square, and above-board. Never
impose upon the Ignorance, and Credulity, of any one: Never make Use of double
Weights, and Measures: Never circumvent, overreach, and trick your Neighbor:
Never suffer your selves to make false Entries, and bring in wrong Accounts:
for all such unjust Dealing is Robbery.

Finally; Let there be Justice in your Words, as well as in your Actions. See
that your Words are true; and endeavor to make good all your Promises and
Engagements. Remember to make no rash Promises. See to it that the Thing you
promise be within your Power to perform, by the ordinary Providence of God, and
then, when once your Word is engaged* be exceeding careful to fulfill what you
have promised; that no Man may have just Cause to complain of you, that you are
not a Man of your Word; that you are unfaithful, and not to be depended on.

All of this is included in the Service of God; because God very peremptorily
requires this Justice, and Righteousness, and Truth, in all Men. And the
careful Observation hereof will be a comfortable Sign to you, that you are
indeed the Children and Servants of God. For says the Apostle, I. Ioh. II.29.
If ye know that He is righteous, ye know that every one that does Righteousness
is born of Him.

4. The Service of God includes in it the Duties of Charity. For God is Love,
and requires Love, and Charity of all His Servants. And therefore the Apostle
tells us, that all our Faith is nothing without Charity, I. Cor. XIII.2. and in
Col. III.14. above all these things put on Charity, which is the Bond of
Perfectness, And our Savior gave it as a sure Badge of His Disciples; Ioh.
XIII.35. By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love
one unto another. So that those that would serve God must live in the Exercise
of the Duties of Charity. And therefore those Young Persons who would make it
their Concern to serve God, must be careful of this, as well as of all other
Parts of their Duty.

Thus Young Persons should cultivate and improve their natural Disposition to
Pity and Compassion, and not allow themselves in any thing that will tend to
harden their Minds into Savageness and Cruelty: for this humane Affection of
Pity and Compassion will be of great Use to them, to restrain them from Acts of
Injustice, and Oppression, and very much dispose them to Kindness and
Benignity. Therefore says the Apostle, I. Pet. III.8. have Compassion on one
another, be pitiful, be courteous.

This Charity Young Persons should exercise in their inward Affection; in their
hearty Love and Good Will unto all their Fellow Creatures, in the general; but
especially unto all good Men, the Household of Faith, and those of the same
Family, and Society with them; that they may preserve the Unity of the Spirit
in the Bond of Peace, in the Family, in the Church, and in the State.

This Charity they should also be careful to express in their Actions; by a
kind, courteous, affable Carriage, and Behavior; being ready unto all good and
kind Offices to all about them; and as they are able, to help the indigent and
miserable, and to relieve the poor and distressed; and to assist one another in
all difficult Affairs; and to advise and counsel one another for their good.

And especially should this Charity be exercised to the Souls of others; by
counseling and admonishing one another in Love, by endeavors to strengthen and
encourage one another in the steady persevering Practice of all Religion and
Virtue, under all Discouragements, Temptations, and Trials.

Particularly is this Charity required and expected from you, of this Society,
who are very much formed upon this Bottom, that you may assist each other, by
your kind Watch, your faithful Advice, your wholesome Admonitions, and your
earnest Prayers with and for each other; that you may endear yourselves to one
another, and help one another forward in the Way to Zion, to your mutual
Edification, and Comfort.

Thus, in these hints, I have showed you what it is to serve God; and you see
it is comprehensive of your whole Duty unto God, to yourselves, and to your
Neighbor, and that in all the various Branches of your personal and relative
Duty; for so the Grace of God, which has appeared to us, bringing Salvation,
teaches us, that denying Ungodliness and worldly Lust, we should live soberly,
righteously, and Godly, in this present World. Tit. II.12.

III. The Third Thing I proposed to consider is, that God is to be served with
a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind. So says my Text, know thou the God of thy
Father, and serve Him, with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind. I will
consider each of these distinctly, though but briefly.

1. You are to serve God with a perfect Heart. That is, with an Heart sincerely
devoted unto the Service of God, an Heart free from all Guile and Hypocrisy. It
does not mean, that you should serve God with an unerring, sinless, Perfection
of Heart, according to the strict Demand of the Law; for so no Man can serve
God. For there is not a just Man upon Earth that does good, and sins not.
Prove. VII.20. Though you are to press after the greatest Seize in Grace and
Holiness, and not be contented with any low Measures and Degrees attained unto.

But it means an Evangelical Perfection of Heart, that is, an Heart that is
sincere, without any reigning and allowed Deceit and Guile. This is the
Character of the truly good Man, Ioh. I.47. Behold, an Israelite indeed, in
whom there is no Guile. And the Blessing belongs to such a Man, in whose Spirit
there is no Guile. Psalm. XXXII.2. This of a perfect Heart, or Sincerity, is the
very "Life and Soul of all other Graces and Virtues," without which they are
but vain Appearances, and empty Shadows, and have nothing solid, and
substantial in them; and notwithstanding all the goodly Show which any Man may
make, if he be destitute of Sincerity, he is after all but a fair Hypocrite,
whose outside indeed is gay and splendid, but within he is full of Rottenness
and Stench. And therefore Young Persons should take special Care, that in all
their Pretensions to the Service of God, they begin at the Heart, and see that
they are sincere in what they do, lest they be found at last to have unhappily
deluded themselves, and their Fellow Creatures to their undoing. For Sincerity
is the only Thing that will render you acceptable unto God, without which your
Sacrifices will be an Abomination unto the Lord, as being heartless and
corrupt: and if Men, (who are often and easily imposed upon,) should at length
discover your Hypocrisy, you will but become loathsome unto them; for all Men
abhor to be cheated by an Impostor. God demands it of you, Prove. XXIII.26. My
Son, give me thy Heart. This is what God chiefly aims at, without this
nothing will please Him; and for the sake of this He will be ready to overlook
many Imperfections.

And what is there that, without Sincerity, can establish and confirm you in
the Service of God, and make you Proof against the Temptations and Allurements
you will meet withal, to turn you aside from the Paths of Virtue? If there is
not Soundness and Integrity to preserve you, you will be more easily warped
from your Duty, and be prevailed with for the sake of some worldly Gain and
Advantage, or to gratify the Humor of some you may be in Friendship with, or
have some Dependence on, to give over the Service of God, and turn aside from
the holy Commandment. Therefore, above all Things, see to it that your Hearts
are right with God, and sound in His Statutes; then shall you have no Cause to
be ashamed, when, in Sincerity and Truth, you have respect unto all His
Commandments.

2. You are to serve God with a willing Mind. That is, with a Mind freely
engaging in the Service of God, so that it may be truly your own Choice. A
willing Mind is here opposed unto outward Constraint, and what a Man may be
compelled and forced to; as a perfect Heart is opposed to inward Hypocrisy and
Guile. And it imports, as if David had said to Solomon See Mr. Pool's Ann. on
the Place.
, if you only serve God to please me, and think, when I am dead and gone, to
give over this Service, this will be no real Benefit to you. God requires
Voluntariness in His Servants. Psalm. CX.3. Thy People shall be a willing People
in the Day of thy Power.

Thus Young People are to serve God willingly, freely, out of Choice, because
they choose to serve Him: knowing him to be the best of Masters, they are
therefore to renounce all others, and determine with themselves to serve Him
forever. Let not, then, the Service of God which you, my Children, engage in,
be only to please Men. As you may not serve God only to be seen of Men, but in
Sincerity; so neither are you to serve Him only because your Parents, or your
Masters, or your Friends, would have you to do so, but it must be with a
willing Mind. Your Parents, or Masters, or Friends, may first lead you into the
Thought of serving God, and show you how you are to serve Him, and charge you
to serve Him; but after all, your Service must be the Result of your own
Understanding and Choice, or it will not be a reasonable Service. You must
serve God because you are convinced that you ought to serve Him, and resolve to
serve Him: that is because God will have you to serve Him, and you are now
willing to have your Will resolved into the Divine Will; and are willing to be,
and do, what God would have you to be and do. So Joshua puts it to the Choice
of the People* to let them know what his own Choice was; Josh. XXIV.15. Choose
you whom you will serve; but as for me, and my House, we will serve the Lord.
He was determined with himself to serve God out of Choice, and he would have
all the People to be free and willing in the serving of Him also. And so should
you choose to serve God, as an act of your Will and Choice, moved by an
enlightened Understanding, and the regular working of your Affections; because
God is most worthy of your Service, and because you love God, and are loath to
offend Him. And when the Service of God becomes thus the Act of your Will and
Choice, you will then be likely to abide by it, and hold on therein unto the
End, and not suffer any thing to move you therefrom, but continue steadfast, and
immovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, till you come to the End
of your Faith, the Salvation of your Souls. This may suffice for the Third
Head; I pass to the last Thing I proposed, viz.

IV. To evidence this to be the most important Concern of Young People, thus to
know, and serve the Lord, with a perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind.

And here, as I said, I shall consider the Force of the Arguments made Use of
in the Text. Particularly,

1. God searches all Hearts, and understands the Imagination of the Thoughts.

2. If you seek Him, He will be found of you.

3. If you forsake Him, He will cast you off forever. They are Arguments of
great Weight, and one would think, should have a mighty Force upon the Mind, to
determine it for the Service of God. I may not now draw them out at their
Length, but only hint at Things.

1. God searches all Hearts, and understands all the Imaginations of the
Thoughts, and therefore it concerns Young People to serve Him, with a perfect
Heart, and with a willing Mind. The Omnipresence, and Omniscience of God is a
very good Reason, why all His rational Creatures should serve Him faithfully;
because He perfectly knows whether they serve Him or no, and He cannot be
imposed upon with an external Show and Pretense. The Lord is a God of
Knowledge, by Him Actions are weighed; His Understanding is infinite; and
therefore He is perfectly well acquainted, not only, with all your Actions, but
with the Thoughts and Intentions of your Hearts: and so He knows whom you
serve, whether God, or the Devil; and how you serve, whether sincerely and
willingly, or only in Pretense and by Constraint.

God knows all your Actions. Young People are very ready to imagine, that if
they are out of the Presence of any Man, that then no Eye sees them; and the
Thought of their being in secret, and hidden from humane Sight, is, oftentimes,
a very great Encouragement unto them to commit many Sins, which they would not
have the Face to allow themselves in, if any Man were present. But remember, O
Young Man, when you are tempted to Sin under the Pretense of Secrecy, that,
though Men do not see you, yet, the holy and flaming Eyes of God are upon you,
and God sees in the Darkness of the Night, as well as in the lightsome Day.
Psalm. CXXXIX.11.

And remember that God searches the innermost Parts of your Heart, and knows
every Imagination of your Thoughts; so that you cannot contrive, and purpose
any secret Wickedness in your Heart, nor harbor an unclean, or revengeful
Thought there, but God is acquainted with it. God says, Ier. XVII.10. I, the
Lord, search the Heart, I try the Reins; even to give unto every Man according
to the Fruit of his doings. And will you dare then to sin, in the Presence, and
under the Eye, of the Heart-searching God? O, serve Him in Sincerity; because
He sees and knows what you do; and you cannot deceive God, as you may a Man.

2. If you seek Him, He will be found of you, and therefore should you serve
God with a perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind. If you thus seek God, by
making Religion your great Concern, by endeavoring to know the Mind of God,
and sincerely and heartily to practice according to His Will, then God will be
found of you: that is, you shall obtain that Blessing from God, which He has
promised to bestow upon His faithful Servants. For that is to find God; to find
Favor with Him, and obtain the Blessing from Him, to find Him to be what He
has said He is, and to find Him to be unto you what He has said He will be. And
thus you will most certainly find Him, if you serve Him with a perfect Heart,
and a willing Mind; and the sooner you begin thus to seek and serve the Lord,
the sooner you will find Him; and by beginning early, you will have the longer
Time to serve Him in, and so much the greater will your Rewards be. How strong
a Reason and Motive should this be unto you, to serve God, with a perfect
Heart, and a willing Mind, seeing that this is the Way to the Blessing? Then
God will be found of you, as your God, your Friend, your Portion, and your All;
and you may then safely depend upon Him for the Blessings of this World, that
are needful for you. For Godliness has the Promise of the Life that now is. I.
Tim. IV.8. Then God will bless your Labor and Employment; for the Meek will He
guide in Judgment; the Meek will He teach his Way, and lead them in a plain
Path. Then God will be your Shepherd, and comfortably provide for you; for
there is no Want unto them that fear the Lord; they shall want nothing that
would be good for them. Then God will be your Shade at your Right Hand, to
preserve you in Times of Danger, and keep you from Evil, that it shall not
grieve you; or, to sanctify all afflictive Evils unto you, and make you real
Gainers by them. Then shall you find God the Fountain of Grace and Comfort unto
you, who will make His Grace sufficient for you, and strengthen you in your
Christian Course, that you may run therein and not be weary, and walk and not
faint; who will succor you and support you under Temptations, deliver you out
of them, and make your tried Faith; to be more precious than Gold; who will
speak Peace to your Souls; afford you Rejoicing in the Testimony of your
Consciences, the Witnessings of His Spirit, and fill you with all Joy in
believing.

Then shall you find God in another and better World; find Him to be better
unto you than your present Hopes, and most enlarged Desires. This God will be
your God forever; your Guide unto Death, and through it, and the unchangeable
Portion of your Souls. You shall then find Mercy with God, in the last and
great Day; for He has prepared Rewards in Heaven for His Servants that serve
Him; and when you leave this World, a World of Sin and Sorrow, He will fetch
you away unto Himself, to the World of Purity and Joy, to live in His more
immediate Presence, to serve Him in His heavenly Temple, and to be
everlastingly Happy in His Favor. And Oh! How abundantly will this recompense
you for all the Labor and Toil you have taken, all the Patience and
Self-denial you have exercised, in your most constant and unwearied Endeavors
to serve, and honor, and glorify, so great, and so good a God, as the Lord is.
O, let the Thoughts hereof strengthen your Hearts and Hands, and mightily
encourage you unto all Fidelity, and Perseverance, in His Service, now in your
Youth, and to the latest old Age.

3. But if you forsake Him, He will cast you off forever. If you will not serve
God with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind, but all your Religion is mere
show and Pretense, and your Hearts are estranged from God, while you draw nigh
unto Him with your Mouths; or if after you have listed yourselves in His
Service, and given up your Names to Him, you at length prove Deserters, and
turn away from His holy Commandment; know assured, that God will cast you off;
He will not own you for His Servants, nor bestow the least Reward upon you; but
will throw you out of His Family, reject you, and cast you out of His Favor,
and you shall have no Right to any Blessing from Him.

Nay; you shall have no Right to the Blessings of Earth. For no Man can have
any Right to his daily Bread, but by Virtue of the Covenant of God, which they
that forsake God have no Interest in; and therefore they can have no good
Grounds to hope for any Success in their Business, for any daily Provision for
them, or for Protection and Safety in Time of Danger.

However if you forsake God, and serve Sin, and walk in the Ways of your own
Heart, and in the Sight of your own Eyes, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures,
be it known unto you, that God will cast you off forever. That is, He will
everlastingly reject you, disown you, and say to you, as, Mat. VII.23. I
profess unto you, I never knew you; depart from Me, ye that work Iniquity. And
what is this? but the very Essence of Hell! the Consummation of the Misery of
the damned! To be forced to depart from God, the only Fountain of all Good!
This is the Perfection of Misery! Oh! therefore serve God now, with a perfect
Heart, and a willing Mind, that God may not reject you forever, and render your
Condition unhappy beyond Expression.

Thus I have endeavored to handle this Text and Doctrine in the most practical
Manner, fitting of it to your Capacity, and to your Condition, and have been
all along exhorting of you unto the Duties pointed at in it.

Use. And now suffer me, my Children, to close all with an earnest Address unto
you, that you would all of you look upon this, as it really is, your greatest,
and most important Concern, to know and serve the God of your Fathers, with a
perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind. You are making some outward Show and
Profession that you do so. For this End you are assembled together this
Evening, and this is the great Design of your stated Meetings on the Evening of
every Lord's Day, that you may acquaint yourselves more and more with the Mind
and Will of God, and that you may be directed and assisted in serving of Him,
in Obedience to His Will. And we rejoice that you thus begin to be concerned
for your Souls, and your own Salvation, that you are in any Measure willing to
know, and desirous to perform your Duty to God and your own Souls; and truly I
have no greater Joy, my Children, than to see you walking in the Truth. And Oh!
may this be the happy Result of your Meetings. May you find, from your own
Experience, that it is infinitely better for you thus to serve God, in the
Duties of Prayer, Reading, Catechizing, than to spend the Lord's Day Evening in
gading abroad, in Sport and Sin, and lose the Relish of the holy Things of the
House, and Day of God; as is the unreasonable and vicious Practice of too many
among us. Oh! may you find God, and be found of Him: may you find Him meeting
with you, and assisting of you in your Devotions, and commanding a Blessing to
rest upon you; may He fill you with Knowledge, and Understanding, and the fear
of the Lord, and furnish you abundantly with that Wisdom which is from above,
which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of
Mercy and good Fruits, without Partiality, without Hypocrisy; and make you
lovely and pleasant Spectacles unto Men, and Angels: and when you have served
God, and your Generation according to the Will of God, in this World, may you
be received to the blessed abode of Light, and Life, and Joy, to dwell in the
Presence of God, and of Christ, forever and ever.

And inasmuch as here is a great Assembly of Young People met together with
you, at this Time, and Place The great Concourse of Young People, as well as
many Elder ones, obliged us, to move from the private House, to the public
Meeting House, that there might be room to receive them.
, I would most earnestly call upon you all to serve the Lord now, in the Days
of your Youth.

And therefore,

Remember, that the Time of your Youth is the fittest Season to begin the great
Work of God, and of your own Souls in. Is it not the most reasonable and
fitting, that the great God, who made you, and on whom you depend for all,
should have the very Prime and Best of your Days and Strength? But besides it
is the most fit and proper Season for you to begin to serve God in; because it
is the Time of your Choice, as it is called, Eccl. XII.1. and you are not yet
fixed in the Ways of Sin, as you will be some Years hence, if you should go on
in a sinful Course of Life; when it will be more hard and difficult for you to
alter the corrupt Bent of the Mind. " Youth is the Age of Discipline; the
properest Season to receive Instruction, and most apt to learn; a young Tree is
easily bent, when it is very difficult to bend an old One. And it is most highly
reasonable to do that which must be done one Time or other, when it is easiest
to be done; when we may do it with the greatest Advantages, and are likely to
meet with the least and weakest Opposition. Such is the Time of Youth, and
therefore the fittest Season to enter upon the Service of God.

And remember, there is no Time so pleasing and acceptable as the Time of Youth
is. Though God will reject none that truly turn to Him, and sincerely list
themselves in His Service, in any Part of their Lives; they that have stood
idle until the Eleventh Hour, if they will then hearken to the Call of God, and
enter into his Vineyard, and faithfully labor in it, shall at Night receive
their Penny: Yet, who are so grateful and pleasing, and endeared unto God, as
those that begin to serve Him betimes? A Young David is beautiful in the Eyes
of his God; a Young Josiah seems to be the Care and Favorite of Heaven. God
required the first Fruits, and the first Born, under the Law, to be devoted to
Him, to sanctify, and procure a Blessing upon all the rest: and so the first of
your Days should be consecrated unto the Service of God, that you may enjoy His
Blessing in them all. Doubtless, the holy Angels of God behold, with Delight
and Joy, your early Dedication to God; and it will be very pleasing unto all
thinking Persons, to see Young People acting prudently, behaving with
Discretion and Sobriety, and living religiously; but it will be much more
pleasing unto God Himself. God will remember with Pleasure the Kindness of thy
Youth, the Love of thine Espousals, when thou early wentest after Him. No
Disciple so acceptable to our Blessed Lord, as John, the youngest of the
Disciples, who lay in the Bosom of Jesus, and whom he peculiarly loved.

And remember, That, for ought you can tell, the Time of your Youth may be the
only Time that ever you shall have to serve God in. If you should foolishly
think of deferring this great Work, of repenting of your Sins, and living a
Life of Faith, and Holiness, until old Age overtake you, you don't know but God
may cut you off betimes, while you are yet in your Youth, and send you down to
Hell; and what then will become of you! Oh! my Children! you cannot begin to
serve God too soon; you may defer too late; because you know not how soon Death
and Judgment may overtake you; and if Death and Judgment should overtake you,
before you have seriously given your selves up to God in Christ, and have
sincerely engaged in the Service of God, by a fixed Resolution, and honest
Endeavor, to mortify Sin, and lead a holy Life, it would have been better for
you that you never had been born.

But if, in your Youth, you serve God with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind,
and bring your Heart and Soul under a Consecration to God, and make it your
constant Endeavor to do the Things that are pleasing in His Sight, then let
Death come when it will, the Day of your Death will be better unto you than the
Day of your Birth; because the Day of your entering upon the Possession of
Eternal Life. (...) Let the Thoughts hereof awaken you now to serve the Lord,
while you are yet in your Youth, and have the properest, if not the only,
Opportunity therefore.

And, in a Word, remember you have been baptized, and were brought under the
most solemn Obligations, (the most of you,) in your very Infancy, to be the
Servants of the most high God. You have been devoted to God, by your Parents,
and you are false to God, and false to your Parents, and false to yourselves,
if you serve Him not. Therefore, thou my Son, (my Children,) know thou the God
of thy Father* and serve Him, with a perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind;
for the Lord searches all Hearts, and understands all the Imaginations of
the Thoughts; if thou seek Him, He will be found of thee; but if thou forsake
Him, He will cast thee off forever.

FINIS.

