It is of the LORD's Mercies that we are not consumed.

A SERMON Preached By Dr. Colman, AT THE Friday-Lecture in Brattle-Street,
March 4, 1736, 7. After a most merciful and wonderful Preservation of the Town
from being consumed by Fire, which broke out in Union-Street, about Four that
Morning.

Printed at the earnest Request of the preserved Nei'bourhood and others; to be
in their Houses some Memorial of the Divine Compassions, and a small Testimony
of their Thankfulness to GOD for the Deliverance granted them.

Amos vii. 4, 5, 6. The Lord God called to contend by Fire: Then said I, O Lord
God, Cease, I beseech Thee! -- The Lord repented for this; This also shall not
be, says the Lord. BOSTON: Printed by J. Draper, for J. Edwards and H. Foster,
in Cornhil. 1737.

THE Divine Compassions new every Morning.
Lamentations iii. 22, 23. It is of the LORD's Mercies that we are not
consumed, because His Compassions fail not; they are new every Morning.


WELL may every One of us, every Day we live, awake from our Sleep, and rise
from our Beds with these high and holy Words of humble Confession and
Acknowledgment, and of thankful joyful Praises to the GOD of our Lives, the
Numbers of whose daily and mighty Salvations we know not.

Day unto Day utters these Words to us, and Night unto Night shows them, " That
it is of the LORD's Mercies we are not consumed, because His Compassions fail
not. But there are the Days and Nights of our more sensible and singular
Preservations, like this present Day to the Families in this Neighborhood,
whose Dwellings in the Night past were in the greatest Danger of being
consumed; when such a Flame broke out in the midst of such a Thicket of
combustible Matter, as is scarce to be found again in the whole Town.

My Text considers us, 1. in our Sins, and speaks of God in his Justice as a
consuming Fire: It considers us also, 2. under the Wing of the Covenant of
God's Grace, and it speaks of the Mercies and Compassions of God, to his sinful
provoking People, as new every Morning.

We are here supposed every Day to do enough to provoke the consuming Anger of
our God; and this gives the Glory to His Mercies, in all their Constancy and
Multitude, notwithstanding our daily Forfeitures of them all, and Desert of
consuming Wrath.

The Church in my Context was in a manner, and in the very Letter consumed;
Judea, Jerusalem, the Temple of God, and his Synagogues through the Land, were
burnt with Fire; most of the Inhabitants had been slain with the Sword, and the
Residue, a small Remnant, were led into a doleful Captivity, to consume away
there for seventy Years. This it is that the Prophet Jeremiah is here lamenting
in the Name of the desolate Church; yet never the less, that there was a
Remnant or escaping, he acknowledges to be of the Lord's Mercies, and of his
unfailing Compassions.

He writes for our Warning and learning, on whom the Ends of the World are
come, and awfully admonishes us in the Name of the Lord, "That when the Day of
Mercy is past with Places and Persons, they will be consumed by the burning
Wrath of God; His Mercies will be clean gone, and his Compassions fail for
evermore. -- This Day of Mercy might have been past with us long since, and
that it is not so is because God's Compassions fail not.

Many more and various are the Reflections which the Text affords us, but I
will content my self with these three most plain and easy Observations.

1. The Lord our God is of great Mercies and Compassions. 2. His Compassions
fail not. 3. Hence it is that we are not consumed.

I. The Lord our God is of great Mercies and Compassions. These my Text
supposes, asserts and magnifies.

Mercy in God is his Goodness and Grace extended and exercised toward sinful
Creatures. Compassion in God speaks ad Hominem, to the Pity and Bowels of Human
Nature toward Consorts, Children, Relatives and Friends in Affliction. We know
well what a Mother's Bowels are, and a Father's Pity, and a Friend's Sympathy;
and by these it pleases God (in his great Condescension) to represent the
working of his Mercy toward his People. Psalm. ciii. 13. Like as a Father
pitieth his Children so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Jer. xxxi 20. I
earnestly remember him, my Bowels are troubled for him.

Compassion in Man causes a painful Commotion within him, being mixed of Grief
and Love; but the render Mercies of God are without the Infirmity of our Pity.

No wonder that the Scripture abounds in this most endearing Representation of
God to us; for if he will be a God to Sinners, He must be a God of Compassion.

It speaks all the Glories of the Name of God, proclaimed before Moses,
"merciful, gracious, longsuffering and abundant in Goodness. Psalm lxxxvi. 15.
But thou, O Lord, art a God full of Compassion and gracious, longsuffering and
plenteous in Mercy. And again, Psalm. cxlv. 8. The Lord is gracious and full of
Compassion, slow to Anger, and of great Mercy.

But there is no Expression more moving than that, Isai lxiii 15. The sounding
of thy Bowels, and of thy Mercy toward me: and that, Luke i. 78. The Bowels of
the Mercy of our God. The Bowels of a God are more tender than those of a
Father or Mother: Isai. xlix 15. Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she
should not have Compassion on the Son of her Womb? yea, they may forget, yet
will I not forget thee.

When the Apostle would raise us to the last Pitch of Brotherly Love and
Goodness, he bids us put on Bowels of Mercies; and when another Apostle is
naming the Love of God to us, he as vehemently forbids our shutting up Bowels
of Compassion from one another.

Such are the Divine Compassions: And if you ask, "Whence then is it that we
see so many Objects of Misery round about us, and that the Children of God
themselves are so often the Subjects of grievous Afflictions? the Answer is
easy,

1. They are of our Selves and our Sins; this is the Original and meritorious
Cause of them: We may not charge God with them, but must take the Blame and
Shame of them to our Selves. Lament. i. 18. The Lord is righteous, for we have
rebelled against him. Jer. ii. 19. Have thou not procured this unto thy Self?
thine own Wickedness shall correct thee, and thy Backslidings shall reprove
thee: Know therefore and see that it is an evil thing and bitter that thou have
forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my Fear is not in thee, says the Lord God
of Hosts.

2. God sends sore Afflictions on Sinners very often in great Mercy and in
tender Pity: to convince them of the Evil of their Sins, to bring them to
Repentance, and so to prepare them for the Favors of his Providence and the
Comforts of his Grace in this Life, and for his Everlasting Mercies in that to
come. Rev. iii. 19. Whom I love I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore and
repent. Heb. xii. 6. For whom the Lord loves he chastneth, as a Father his Son
in whom he delights. -- A loving Parent corrects his Son from a real and
strong Affection, and from true Compassion. A Father can be very angry with a
sinning Child, but upon his Humiliation and Repentance he tenders him again.
And so does our Heavenly Father: Jerem. xxxi. 18. I have surely heard Ephraim
bemoaning himself thus, "Thou have chastised me, etc: "Is he a dear Son, is he
a pleasant Child? for I do earnestly remember him still, I will surely have
Mercy on him, faith the Lord. Souls in the deepest Humiliation of Repentance,
should be in the strongest Exercise of Faith in the Divine Compassions. This is
in a lively manner represented in my Context, Ver. 28 -- 32. He sits alone
and keeps Silence, he puts his Mouth in the Dust, he is filled with
Reproach; for the Lord will not cast off for ever, but though he cause Grief yet
will be have Compassion, according to the Multitude of his Mercies; for he does
not willingly afflict or grieve the Children of Men.

II. I am now to go on, and say of these Divine Compassions and Mercies, that
they fail not: No, they are new every Morning: they continue and abide, keep
their Course and go their Round; returning on us as constantly as the Day and
as the Sun do. Every Day brings new Mercies; and they are like the Rays of
Light for Number and for Kind, bright and conspicuous, and in infinite endless
Successions. Or if you will take the Comparison from the living Springs and
Fountains of Water, which send forth their crystal Streams day and night for
our Supply and Refreshment; God is this Fountain of living Water; a Spring of
Water, whose Waters fail not, Isai. lviii. 11.

We read of the Blessed God, that He is rich in in Mercy, plenteous in Mercy,
abundant in Mercy, and that it is Everlasting: A Mercy that never fails must be
all this, can be nothing less.

As God is in Himself, such must his Mercies be. If He be the immense infinite
Being, eternal and unchangeable; how should his Compassions fail? any more than
Eternity and Infinity be exhausted. -- With what a Run of Repetition therefore,
and of Pleasure, does the Holy Ghost teach us to sing of a Mercy that never
fails? Psalm. cxxxvi. " For his Mercy endures for Ever! for his Mercy endures
for Ever! etc.

The Compassions of God may cease indeed toward particular Persons and Places,
and yet He remain the same Compassionate God: His Spirit will not always strive
with provoking Sinners; the Day of his Grace ends with many, and with some
sooner than with others: His Mercies cease for ever as to impenitent Sinners,
and are gone for evermore as to them that die so: But they can never fail at
all toward the proper and only Objects of them, or in that Course which the
Holiness and Wisdom of God has settled for the perpetual and everlasting
Display of them: The Immutability of God and the Promises of his Word make it
impossible. Isai. xxx. 18. Therefore will the Lord wait that he may be
gracious, and will be exalted in showing Mercy, for the Lord is a God of
Judgment, and blessed are all they that wait for him. As God's Righteousness is
like the great Mountains, high and conspicuous, fixed and immovable; so his
Compassions stand upon his Truth and Faithfulness: Isai. live. 10. The Mountains
shall depart, and the Hills be removed; but my Kindness shall not depart from
thee, nor the Covenant of my Peace be removed, faith the Lord that has Mercy
on thee.

We have highly deserved that the Compassions of God should have been at an
utter End, as to us, long ago; yet they have not failed even to us evil and
unthankful, unto this Day; no not in any or all of the Afflictions that have
come upon us for our Sins: Ezra ix. 13. Thou Lord hash punished us less than
our Iniquities have deserved. Psalm. lxxviii. 38. But He being full of
Compassion destroyed them not, yea many a time turned he his Anger away, and
did not stir up all his Wrath.

I come therefore to say,

III. Hence it is that we are not consumed; even of the Lord's Mercies, and
because they fail not:

Let us turn aside and see this great Sight, this Wonder of Grace! like that
which Moses had in Horeb; he saw a Bush on Fire, and it was not consumed! My
Text gives us the same Sight of God, as a consuming Fire, and of our Selves as
Chaff and Stubble before devouring Fire, and yet not consumed thereby. As the
Word of God, so a wicked World is full of these two things; the flaming Anger
of God against Sin, and yet a Multitude of Sinners not consumed thereby.

The Reason and Cause of this is to be sought, and can be only found in God
Himself: It is of the Lord's Mercies and his unfailing Compassions. Not for our
Repentance, or Righteousness, be it known to us, but for His own Name and Mercy
sake. " Not unto us, O Lord! must we say, Not unto us! but to Thy Name give
Glory; for thy Mercy and for thy Truths sake, Psalm. cxv. 1. As we must take our
Pleas in Prayer from God Himself, his own Perfections Word and Works; so we
must ascribe to the Glory of his Name and Attributes in our Adorations and
Thanksgivings.

First, We behold God here in his Justice and in his Judgments a consuming
Fire; and Sinners the Chaff and Stubble, ready to be consumed. Heb. xii. 29.
For the Lord our God is a consuming Fire. God is angry with the wicked every
Day. His holy Anger burns against the provoking Transgressors of his righteous
Law, and if it falls upon them they are consumed. We read of the Heat of his
Anger, and of its smoking against a Person or People. This is seen and felt in
his Judgments, of one Kind or of another. Exodus xxxii. 10. Let me alone, that
my Wrath may wax hot against them, that I may consume them. Isai. v. 24. As the
Fire devoureth the Stubble, and the Flame consumes the Chaff; so is the Anger
of the Lord kindled against his People.

God easily consumes a wicked People by pestilential Sicknesses, by Famine or
War; by Fires ashore and by Storms at Sea. He needs not call for his more
strange Works of Terror, Earthquakes and Inundations. He burns down our Bodies
as well as our Dwellings, when he pleases. The various Fevers that consume us
from our Dwellings, are but so many putrid noxious Fires within us, which God
kindles and quenches as he pleases. Psalm. xxxix. 10, 11. Remove thy Stroke away
from me, I am consumed by the Blow of thy Hand.

The Fire of God's Wrath is yet seven times hotter in the Souls and Consciences
of Sinners; and the Flame of it drinks up their Spirits. Hell Torments are
represented to us by a Worm that never dies, and by Fire unquenchable. This
Tophet is ordained of old, from the Day wherein the Angels fell it was
prepared; it is deep and large, the Pile thereof is Fire and much Wood; the
Breath of the Lord, like a Stream of Brimstone, does kindle it. This Lake of
Fire is the second Death. Souls are tormented in this Flame, and never
consumed. This is Vengeance to the uttermost, " the Vengeance of Eternal Fire:
-- Consume them in Wrath, consume them, that they may not be! But Oh! they can
never cease to be! the Smoke of their Torment arises for ever and ever! and so
continues their Weeping and Wailing and gnashing of Teeth unto Eternal Ages! --
Let us tremble at the Thought of this devouring Fire, these everlasting
Burnings! God has mercifully warned us to flee from this Wrath to come, and to
bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance. Wherefore let us turn again our Eyes,
and see

Secondly, GOD in his Mercies and Compassions sparing, preserving and saving
Sinners from being consumed by his Wrath. In the Riches of his Patience,
Forbearance, and Long-suffering, he waits on them to be gracious: He reveals
his saving Mercies to them, he offers it; shows 'em the Way of it, how it can
be glorified to them, and then tenderly invites and beseeches them to seek
after it and accept of it. He calls on them by his Word, strives with them by
his Spirit, sends all his Servants his Ministers, rising up early and sending
them; allures them by the Mercies and Salvations of his Providence, and awakens
them by his Judgments: He calls on 'em to repent, gives them a Space for
Repentance, threatens 'em in their Impenitence, and yet in his Compassions
tries 'em again, with Line upon Line and Precept upon Precept. The Language of
all this we have in Isai. lxiii. 6, 7. For he said, surely they are my People,
Children that will not lie, so he was their Savior: In all their Affliction he
was afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved them: In his Love and in his
Pity he redeemed them; he hare them and carried them all the Days of old.

Thus it is of the Lord's Mercies that we are not consumed by temporal
Judgments, and cut off by the Blow of his Hand; and it is yet more of his
Mercies that our Souls are not roaring under that Fire of his Wrath, which
burns to the lowest Hell.

It is of his Sovereignty, who has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and has
Compassion because he will have Compassion: Romans ix. 15. And what if God
willing to show his Wrath and to make his Power known, endure with much
Long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction.

It is of his Unchangeableness and Faithfulness, as it follows on my Text,
"Great is his Faithfulness! and as He tells us of Himself, Mal iii. 16. " I am
the Lord, I change not; therefore the Sons of Jacob are not consumed.

But in short, It is owing to the Sacrifice of Christ for Sin, that the Mercies
of the Lord and his Compassions are so great and unfailing toward us, and new
every Day. All the Mercies of God come to us through our Lord Jesus; and for His
Sake it is that we are not consumed. The consuming Anger of God fell on Him,
who was able to bear it; and bore it for us, and bears it away from us. He was
made Sin for us, and bore the Weight of Divine Wrath in his holy Soul; made his
Soul an Offering, to satisfy and appease the incensed Justice of God; and it is
the Water and Blood from his pierced Side that quenches the burning Wrath of
God, which preys upon unbelieving and impenitent Sinners for ever and ever. The
Reprieve and Respite of our forfeited Lives from instant Death, and even the
daily Preservation of our Dwellings from consuming Flames, is from the
sprinkling of the Blood of this our sacrificed Lord and Passover on our Houses
and Families. Christians should thus see and adore their Savior, in all the
common Mercies of their Lives from Day to Day. God grants us Life and Favor
for Christ's sake: " He redeemeth our Life from Destruction, and crowns us with
Lovingkindness and tender Mercies.

And now to lead You into some Application and suitable Improvement of the
present Truth;

I. Let the great Mercies and Compassions of our God endear his blessed Name to
us, and command our thankful Love and joyful Praises. God is Love! how glorious
an Object of Admiration and Adoration does He appear to us in this Idea! How
great is his Goodness, how great is his Beauty! So when the Lord was pleased to
make all his Glory to pass before Moses, He proclaimed his Name, "The Lord God,
gracious and merciful, longsuffering and abundant in Mercy! and Moses made
haste, and bowed his Head to the Earth, and worshipped.

II. Let us desire to be like the blessed God in this his Glory; to be merciful
and compassionate to Those that are in Misery, in Want and Indigence, as God is
to us. This is the Rule and Law that Christ has given us, Luke vi. 36. Be ye
therefore merciful, a your Father is also merciful. In this let us be Followers
of God as dear Children and walk in Love. The merciful God cannot bear
unmercifulness in us. Mat xviii. 33. Ought not thou to have Compassion on
thy Fellow Servants, even as I pitied thee? The Argument of the Apostle John
carries strong Conviction in it, 1 John iii. 17. Whosoever has this World's Goods,
and sees his Brother have Need, and shuts up his Bowels of Compassion from
him; how dwells the Love of God in him? This is pure Religion from the Days
of Job, but carried to a greater Height by the Gospel of Christ. He was a Type
of Christ as well in the Days of his Prosperity as Adversity. "Did I not weep
for him that was in Trouble? said he; Was not my Soul grieved for the Poor? "If
I withheld them from their Desire, or caused the Eyes of the Widow to fail! if
I have eaten my Morsel alone, and the Fatherless has not eaten thereof? if I
have seen any perish for want of Clothing, or the Poor without Covering!

But Christ commends his Love to us, in that while we were Enemies he died
for us. In this David was his royal Type, Psalm. xxxv. 11, 12. False Witnesses
did rise up, they laid to my Charge things that I knew not; they rewarded me
Evil for Good to the spoiling of my Soul; But as for me, when they were sick my
Clothing was Sackcloth, etc. Such a Law well became the Mouth of Christ, "I
say unto you, Love your Enemies. He has given the Illustrious Example, in his
Compassions on us.

III. Let us admire God in his Eternity and Unchangeableness; because his
Compassions fail not, but are new every Morning.

The Incommunicable Attributes of God give infinite Glory to his other
Perfections. They are all eternal and immutable. These highest Glories of the
Godhead exalt Him above all Blessing and Praise. It is High, and we cannot
attain unto it.

1. Here is everlasting Consolation to the People of God. They have the eternal
Truth and Power of an Unchangeable God to trust in. Read how the Prophet mildly
rebukes their Fears, and tenderly reproaches the Weakness of their Faith, when
they were ready to stagger at the Promise in the Day of Trial and Affliction:
Isai. xl. 27, -- 31. Why say thou, O Jacob, and speak O Israel, My Way is
hid from the Lord, and my Judgment is passed over from my God? Have thou not
known, have thou not heard, that the Everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of
the Ends of the Earth, faints not, neither is weary? there is no searching of
his Understanding. He gives Power to the faint, and to them that have no Might
be increases Strength: Even the Youths shall faint and be weary, and the young
Men shall utterly fail; but they that wait on the Lord shall renew their
Strength; they shall mount up with Wings as Eagles; they shall run and not be
weary, they shall walk and not faint.

2. Let us see to it that we be interested in and are the Objects of the Divine
Compassions. Else what signifies it to us that they can never fail toward the
proper Objects of them. Unless we repent of our Sins, and believe in Christ,
and submit to Him as our Lord and Savior, and obey the Gospel, we do not put
our Selves in the Way of his sure and everlasting Mercies: Nay we are sure to
be at last consumed by the Fire of God's Wrath. This is the sad Case of the
finally impenitent and ungodly, that the Compassions of God do not at all
belong to them; but while Compassion is glorified for Ever on the Vessels of
Mercy, Wrath lies on them to all Eternity.

3. Let us learn to be constant and fixed in a merciful Spirit. This shall be
some Feature and Image of the unchangeably good God, stamped on us. I will not
say we must be unchangeably good, but as much so as we can. We must hold fast
that which is good, and continue in well doing. It is he that endures to the
End, that is saved. If we forgive it must be until seventy times seven, and if
we give, it must be to seven and to eight. As Objects and Opportunities return,
and as Ability continues, so we must do good to all Men, especially to the
Household of Faith.

4. As God's Compassions fail not to us, so never let our Devotion, Gratitude
and Obedience fail toward Him. True Charity, be it the Love of God or of our
Nei'bour, never fails: 1 Cor. xiii. 8. That lives in Death, when Faith comes
to an End; it goes with the Soul into Heaven and is there made perfect. It is
the Principle of lively Devotion and Obedience, and new every Morning: An
immortal Seed and has eternal Life in it. It is the fulfilling of the Law, in a
Course of universal delightful Obedience. It rejoiceth and works
Righteousness; rejoices in the Lord always, and lifts up the Heart and Feet in
God's Ways. -- Great indeed should be our Faithfulness in the Covenant of God,
because his Compassions and Covenant-Faithfulness toward us does not fail. As
these are new to us every day, so they should cause us to renew our Strength;
to walk before him and be perfecting Holiness in his Fear. Let it be our Care
not to fail God's righteous Expectations from us. 1 Cor. xv. ult. Wherefore my
beloved Brethren; be ye steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the Work of
the Lord; for as much as ye know that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord.

IV. Is it of the Lord's Mercies that we are not consumed? We learn

1. The great Evil in Sin. It is a consuming thing to us. It consumes our
Bodies, our Families, our worldly Substance and Comforts; and it consumes our
Souls, their Powers, Pleasures and eternal Life.

Death bodily and spiritual is the Wages of Sin. It is a Consumption on the
Body while we live in it, by various Maladies and Pains, which bring on its
consuming away in the Grave from our Dwellings, Psalm. xlix. 14. This sorrowful
Note is repeated, Psalm xc. For we are consumed by thy Anger, and by thy Wrath
we are troubled: Thou have set our Iniquities before thee, our secret Sins in
the Light of thy Countenance; For all our Days are passed away in thy Wrath.

But spiritual and eternal Death consumes the Soul. It is dead while it lives,
and the second Death has power over it. It is buried in Earth here, and in the
bottomless Pit of Corruption for ever. It goes to the Generation of the
miserable, unclean and accursed Spirits in Darkness, never to see Light. -- Our
Days here are consumed in Vanity and our Years in Trouble, by our Sins, those
unfruitful Works of Darkness; but how a miserable Eternity will consume away,
or a Soul in the Flames of Hell which consume it not, no Mind can now conceive
nor Words express.

2. The Anger of God is a dreadful thing, and He is terrible in his Justice to
impenitent Sinners. We should fear before the Holy One always, as they did at
Horeb: When they saw the burning Mountain and heard the roaring Thunders, they
said ' this great Fire will consume us. Deuteronomy. v. 25. Even Moses himself said, "
I exceedingly fear and quake. Who knows the Power of God's Anger? infinitely
beyond all our Fears is his Wrath. Destruction from God should be a Terror to
the Wicked, for they are liable to be consumed every Moment. "God judges the
righteous, but he is angry with the wicked every Day: if he turn not he will
whet his Sword, he has bent his Bow and made it ready; he has prepared for him
the Instruments of Death. "God is jealous and the Lord revengeth, he reserveth
Wrath for his Enemies: He is slow to Anger and great in Power, and will not at
all acquit the Wicked: the Hills melt and the Earth is burnt up at his
Presence: Who can stand before his Indignation? and who can abide in the
Fierceness of his Anger? Yet is the Lord good, a strong Hold in the Day of
Trouble, and he knows them that trust in him,

3. See what we owe to Christ, of whose Merits and Righteousness it is that we
are not consumed; or that the holy God can have Mercy and Compassion on us. The
naked Eye of Nature sees the abundant Mercies of God in a World of Sin, but it
is only in the Glass of the Gospel that it can make any true Observation
thereof. No Idea of absolute Goodness reaches the Case of the Divine
Compassions toward us. The Angels of Heaven therefore look down intently on the
Mercy Seat, and admire the great Propitiation for Sin in the Death of Christ.
We must look up, and lift up our Hearts with our Eyes to the Lamb slain in the
Midst of the Throne of God, and say -- " God who is rich in Mercy, for his
great Love wherewith he loved us, who were by Nature Children of Wrath and dead
in Sins, to show the exceeding Riches of his Grace, in his Kindness toward us
through Jesus Christ! Ephesians. ii. 4, 7. Words cannot be put together, to reach this
amazing Grace.

4. Is it of the Lord's Mercies that we are not consumed? it loudly and
earnestly calls upon us to repent of our Sins, and should be a powerful
Constraint of Grace upon us. The sparing Mercies and the consuming Judgments of
God, his threatened Wrath and his Bowels of Compassion, have one Voice to us,
and should have the same Effect on us.

And I. May the Judgments of God not consume us, but refine us; purge away our
dross and refine us as Silver. This is the Mercy of God meant and shown to his
chosen People, the called by his Grace; and the Evangelical Prophes abounds in
this Account of the Mind and Will of God in the Judgments of his Providence
Isaiah i. 25, 26. xxvii. 9. xlviii. 10.
: " I will turn my Hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy Dross, and take
away all thy Tin: Zion shall be redeemed with Judgment and her Converts with
Righteousness; and thou shall be called the City of Righteousness, the faithful
City. "By this shall the Iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the Fruit
to take away his Sin "For my Name sake will I defer my Anger, and for my Praise
will I refrain from thee, that I cut thee not off: Behold I have refined thee
but not with Silver, "not in so vehement a Fire as Silver is refined, I have
chosen thee in the Furnace of Affliction: For my own sake, even for my own,
will I do it O the dear Love and Mercy in such sanctified Afflictons! it is
enough to make us zealous in repenting when God afflicts us. And so

2. The Mercies and Bounties of Providence; and all the Salvations of it from
Day to Day, should have the like saving Effect on us; and all the Goodness of
God should lead us to Repentance. Romans ii. 4. Those memorable and awful Words
should come with Power on our Hearts; " Or despisest thou the Riches of this
Goodness, Forbearance and Longsuffering? and after thy Hardness and impenitent
Heart treasurest up Wrath against the Day of Wrath.

In the Day of Sodom, the Angels those Ministers of Vengeance on the wicked
City, hastened Lot early in the Morning, saying, Arise, lest thou be consumed!
and while he lingered they laid hold on his Hand, the Lord being merciful to
him, and bro't him out and his Family with him, and bid them again escape to
the Mountain, lest they should be consumed.

So Mercy would always rejoice over us in the midst of Judgment, and save us
from the Flames of Hell, that Lake of Fire and Brimstone, whereof the polluted
Cities of the Plain were set forth for an Example, suffering the Vengeance of
eternal Fire, Jude v. 7.

O the Mercy to Sinners when the common Mercies, or the singular Salvations of
Providence, prove saving to them! This is indeed to the Praise of the Glory of
Divine Grace! Here is Goodness carried to the highest Pitch! so it would bring
forth after its Kind! as a Corn of Wheat sown in the Earth, to yield sixty or
an hundredfold.

God would have every Mercy of our Lives work thus. The Well of Water at your
Door, he would have rise and spring up unto eternal Life; become Water of Life
to us even now in our Way to Heaven. Every Gift of Providence, and all the
Salvations of it are in the Hand of Christ, and He would have them minister to
our Eternal Salvation.

O blessed Provinces, whatever they are for Kind, that are holily improved, and
in the End prove Means of our Sanctification! How are such Bounties of
Providence the Fruits and Evidences of the Love of God in Christ Jesus to our
Souls! and how are such Afflictions made joyous in the Islue, however grievous
they may be for the present! Wise and happy they that sow beside all Waters,
and make Advantage of every Wind and of all Weather: They are certainly under a
Divine Conduct and Blessing, and all Things shall work together unto the Glory
of God from them, and unto their Everlasting Blessedness in Him. Amen.

FINIS.

