A TREATY OF FRIENDSHIP HELD WITH THE CHIEFS OF THE SIX NATIONS, AT
PHILADELPHIA, IN SEPTEMBER and OCTOBER, 1736.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, at the New Printing-Office near
the Market. M,DCC,XXXVII.

A TREATY of FRIENDSHIP, etc.
September, 1736.
THE Chiefs of the Six Nations having been expected at Philadelphia these four
Years past, to confirm the Treaty made with some of them, who came down in the
Year 1732, Conrad Wyser our Interpreter, about the Beginning of this Month,
advised from Tulpyhokin, that he had certain Intelligence from some Indians
sent before him, that there was a large Number of those People with their
Chiefs, arrived at Shamokin on Sasquehannah; upon which he was directed to
repair thither to attend them, and supply them with Necessaries in their
Journey hither.

On the Twenty-seventh of this Month, about a Hundred or more of them came with
Conrad to the President's House, at Stenton, being near the Road, where
suitable Entertainment was provided for them; and the next Day the Honorable
the Proprietor, and some of the Council, with other Gentlemen coming thither
from Philadelphia; after Dinner

A Council was held at Stenton, September 28. 1736.

PRESENT, The Honorable THOMAS PENN, Esquire Proprietary. JAMES LOGAN, Esquire
President. Samuel Preston, Esqr Clement Plumsted, Esqr Ralph Assheton, Esqr
Thomas Griffitts, Esqr


And the following Indian Chiefs, to wit. Of the TSANANDOWANS or SINEKAS.
Kanickhungo, Speaker. Togachshaholoo, Sagoyatundachquai, Askotax,
Hetaquantegechty, Speaker.
ONANDAGOES.
Kahiskerowane (Brother to their former great Chief Conossoorah at Albany)
Tagunhuntee, Kaxhaayn, Kuchdachary, Saweegatee-o.
CAYOOGES.
Saguchsauyunt, Sunaretchy, Kanawatoe, Teeouchtseegherochgoo.
ONEIDAS.
Saristagod, Takashwangarorasor Shekallamy.
TUSKARORES.
Sawnutaga, Tyeroi.


Of the CANYINGOES or MOHOCKS none came.

By the Interpreter's Advice, they were first spoke to in their own Way, with
three small Strings of Wampum in Hand, one of which was delivered on each of
the following Articles.

Our Friends and Brethren,

I. You are come a great way, and have doubtless suffered many Hardships in so
long a Journey; but now you are with your Brethren and true Friends, who have
long been in Friendship and Alliance with your Nations; you must therefore put
away all Grief and Uneasiness, and brighten your Eyes, that we may see and be
cheerful with each other.

II. We desire that as we are now met as Brethren and Friends, you will open
your Hearts, as we shall open our Hearts, that we may speak with Freedom and
Openness to each other.

III. You are come to us as your true Friends, we receive you with Gladness,
you shall shelter yourselves under our Covering, and be entertained by us as
ourselves, for you are our Brethren.

The Indians hereupon expressed their Satisfaction with Sounds peculiar to
themselves on such Occasions; and then their Speaker with three like Strings in
his Hand, repeated all those three several Articles more at large, returning
their Thanks for each, delivering a String as each Article was spoke to, and
giving Assurances of their Freedom and Openness, and desiring that we would use
the same; but on the 3d they said, They could not receive and treat us as we
did them, they are now with us, they give themselves up to us, and depend on
our Protection.

Then with five more very short Strings in his Hand, the Speaker proceeded to
say on the first, That they had received on the Road a Message from as
delivered by Conrad Wyser, welcoming them into the Country. On the 2d, That
they had at the same time received from us an Account of our late Governor's
Death, but that this would not occasion any Alteration, because W. PENN'S own
Son is here, and also James Logan, with the Council. On the 3d They returned
their Thanks, and with the other two confirmed the whole.

They said, They were now come, after a full Consultation with all their Chiefs
at their great Fire or Place of Counsel, to return an Answer to the Treaty,
that some of them had held with us four Years since, at Philadelphia: That they
intended to stay with their Friend James Logan two Nights to rest themselves,
and then proceed to the Fire kept for them at Philadelphia; where after two
Nights more, they would at that Fire give their full Answer.

They were told, We were willing to keep them here in the Country the longer,
because many People in Philadelphia had been sickly, and now the Small Pox are
there, a Disease that has often proved fatal to the Indians; that it would be a
great Trouble to us to see any of them taken with that Distemper, after they
had traveled so far to visit us; for we are very desirous they should all
return safe, and as healthy as they came to us: That it is proper they should
give their Answer at Philadelphia, in the same public Manner we had last
treated with them; but it is advisable they should spend no more of their time
in the Town, than will be absolutely necessary, for many Inconveniences may
attend it.

They appeared concerned at this, thanked us, and said they would go together
by themselves to advise on it.

September 29.
The Gentlemen of the Council having gone home last night to Philadelphia, and
only the Proprietor staying, Mr Preston with some others came again to day; and
the Indian Chiefs after they had consulted this Morning amongst themselves,
meeting the Proprietor, etc. in Council, said,

That they were much obliged to us for the Care we took of them; we showed by
it our true Friendship for them. That as they are now with us, they put
themselves wholly under our Direction, and though Philadelphia is the Place where
their Fire is kept for them, yet it may upon Occasion be brought out hither;
and they are free either to proceed to Philadelphia to treat at the Fire there,
or to stay here, as we shall think fit to order it.

They were told, As the last Treaty with them was held in Public at
Philadelphia, it would be necessary they should there give their Answer; That
we were not wholly against their going to Town, but thought ourselves obliged
to acquaint them with the Danger; yet that this is not at present so great that
it should wholly prevent their going. The Distemper is as yet but young and
just begun in the Place; that it is only in the Heart or near the Middle of the
Town; that they will be accommodated at the Edge or Out-Skirts of the Town,
where if they take Care, they may for a few Days be in but very little or no
Danger.

They then resolved to set out for Philadelphia the next Day; and accordingly
having been entertained at Stenton three Nights, they went to Town on the last
of September; and having rested the first of October, on the second Day they
met as follows.

At a Council held in the Great Meeting House at Philadelphia, the 2d Day of
October 1736.
PRESENT, The Honorable THOMASPENN, Esquire Proprietary, JAMES LOGAN, Esquire
President. Samuel Preston, Esqr Anthony Palmer, Esqr Clement Plumsted, Esqr
Thomas Lawrence, Esqr Ralph Assheton, Esqrs Thomas Griffitts, Esqr Charles
Read. Esqr


Present also The MAYOR and Recorder of the City, With diverse Gentlemen, and a
very large Audience that filled the House and its Galleries.

The Indian Chiefs being come and seated,

The President, before proceeding to hear them, thought proper to inform the
Audience, that in August 1732, a great Treaty having been held in this Place
with several Chiefs of the Six Nations, they had made report thereof on their
Return to their Great Council, where the several Propositions that had been
made to them on the Part of this Government, had been fully considered; and
that these Chiefs now present, of whom there never at any time before had been
so great a Number met in this Province, were now come to return their Answer.

The Indians being made acquainted with what the President had said, were told,
that we were ready to hear them.

Whereupon Kanickhungo their Speaker, addressing himself to their Brother ONAS
(which signifies PENN) to their Brother JAMES LOGAN, and the Gentlemen of the
Council, spoke as follows by Conrad Wyser the Interpreter;

BRETHREN,

WE are now come down from the Towns of our several Nations, to give our Answer
to the great Treaty, which we and you held together, at this Place, about four
Years since: This Answer has been agreed and concluded upon by our great
Council, who have carefully considered all that passed between you and us, and
expressed their great Satisfaction in the friendly and good Dispositions of you
our Brethren, toward all the Indians of the Six Nations; and as you received
us kindly, and at that Treaty undertook to provide and keep for us a Fire in
this great City, we are now come to warm ourselves thereat, and we desire and
hope it will ever continue bright and burning to the End of the World.

Hereupon be laid down a large Belt of white Wampum of eleven Rows, with four
black St. George's Crosses in it; and proceeding, said

BRETHREN,

SOON after our Brother ONAS, who is now here, came into this Country, he and
we treated together; he opened and cleared the Road between this Place and our
Nations, which was very much to our good Liking, and it gave us great Pleasure.
We now desire that this Road, for the mutual Accommodation and Convenience of
you and us who Travel therein to see each other, may be kept clear and open,
free from all Stops or Encumbrances, and if, since the time that we last
cleared it with you, any Tree has fallen across it, or if it is any way stopped
up, of which however we know nothing, we are now willing to open and clear the
same from every Interruption; and it is our hearty Desire that it may so
continue, while the Earth endures.

Hereupon he presented a Bundle of Skins in the Hair, and went on;

BRETHREN,

ONE of the chief Articles of our late Treaty together, was the brightning of
the Chain of Friendship between us, and the preserving it free from all Rust
and Spots; and that this Chain was not only between this Government and us, but
between all the English Governments and all the Indians. We now assure you our
Brethren, that it is our earnest Desire this Chain should continue, and be
strengthened between all the English and all our Nations, and likewise the
Delawares, Canays, and the Indians living on Sasquehannah, and all the other
Indians who now are in League and Friendship with the Six Nations; in Behalf of
all whom, and as a lasting Confirmation of this great Article, to endure until
this Earth passes away and is no more seen, we now deliver you this Beaver
Coat.

Here he laid down a large Beaver Coat.

The Proprietor gave them Thanks in Behalf of this Government for what they had
spoke touching these three important Articles of the Fire, Road and Chain of
Friendship, and told them their Discourse thereon was very satisfactory.

The Speaker proceeded and said;

BRETHREN,

TO conclude all that we have now said, it is our Desire that we and you should
be as of one Heart, one Mind, and one Body, thus becoming one People,
entertaining a mutual Love and Regard for each other, to be preserved firm and
entire, not only between you and us, but between your Children, and our
Children, to all succeeding Generations.

We who are now here, are old Men, who have the Direction of Affairs in our own
Nations; and as we are old, it may be thought that the Memory of these things
may be lost with us, who have not, like you, the Art of preserving it by
committing all Transactions to Writing: We nevertheless have Methods of
transmitting from Father to Son, an Account of all these Things, whereby you
will find the Remembrance of them is faithfully preserved, and our succeeding
Generations are made acquainted with what has passed, that it may not be forgot
as long as the Earth remains.

They were told, That it was very agreeable to us to know that they took such
effectual Care in this Point.

Then proceeding he said;

BRETHREN,

;WE desire that this brightning of the Chain, and establishing a strong and
firm League of Friendship, may be understood by you, as we understand it to be,
not only between the Chiefs of our Nations, and the Chiefs or Principal Men of
this Government, but likewise between all our People, and all your People, and
between you and all our Warriors who go abroad and sometimes pass near this
Government, to all of whom we have given the strictest Charge to behave
themselves agreeable to the Friendship which is established between you and us,
that so we all may continue to be one People for ever.

At the last Treaty you advised us to strengthen ourselves by entering into firm
Leagues of Friendship and Alliance with several other Nations of Indians around
us; this Advice was truly good, and we thank our Brethren for it; we have
accordingly treated with these Six following Nations, to wit, the
Onichkaryagoes, Sissaghces, Tioumitihagas, Attawanten's, Twechtwese, and
Oachtamaghs, and have engaged them so heartily in our Interest, that they
acknowledge us for their Elder Brethren, and have promised to join with us as
one People, and to act altogether in Concert with us.

You likewise then advised us to call home all those of our Nations who are at
Canada, or live amongst the French, lest if any Occasion of Difference should
arise, they might then be prevented from returning. We esteem this likewise as
sound good Advice, and we thank our Brethren for it; the French were formerly
our cruel Enemies, and we are taking such Measures as we hope will be effectual
to bring back our People, if any new Breach should happen.

The Speaker said,

To confirm all that we have now said, we would be glad if we had a large
Present of Skins to deliver, in Return to the considerable one in Goods which
we had of you; but we must own to you that we are at present but very ill
provided and poor, and have only a very small Quantity of Skins, which
nevertheless we hope our Brethren will accept.

Here he laid down two small Bundles of Skins.

We have now nothing more to say in Public; but having other Matters to treat
on with the Proprietor, we will enter upon them at another time.

They were told, That the Proprietor, President and Council thanked them very
kindly in Behalf of this Government, for all they had now said; that they had
returned full and distinct Answers to all the Chief Articles or Propositions
made at the last great Treaty in 1732, they had spoke to each of them like
honest Men and true Brethren; and as they had consulted together before they
delivered their Answer, so now the Council would meet and consider together of
all that had passed at present.

Which being interpreted to them, they expressed their Satisfaction by a Sound
peculiar to them, in which they all joined, and then withdrew.

At a Council held at Philadelphia, October 4, 1736.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES LOGAN, Esquire President. Anthony Palmer, Esqr
Clement Plumsted, Esqr Thomas Lawrence, Esqr Ralph Assheton, Esqr Thomas
Griffitts, Esqr Charles Read. Esqr


The President representing to the Board the Necessity of dispatching the
Indians of the Six Nations, who being very numerous remain here at a great
Charge, proposed that the Consideration of the Value of the Present to be given
them, should be now proceeded upon; and accordingly the Board entering upon the
same, and observing that for these many Years there has not been so great an
Appearance here of Chiefs of these Nations as at this time, and that they have
returned very full and distinct Answers to every Article of the Treaty with
them in 1732, are of Opinion, that proper Goods for them to the Value of about
Two Hundred Pounds, should be provided and given them; and that to Conrad
Weyser, the Interpreter, who is extremly useful on all such Occasions, and on
the present one has been very serviceable, there be given Twenty Pounds.

At a Council held at Philadelphia, October 12. 1736.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES LOGAN, Esquire President. Samuel Preston, Esqr
Clement Plumsted, Esqr Thomas Lawrence, Esqrs Samuel Hasell, Esqrs Thomas
Griffitts, Esqrs Charles Read. Esqr


The President informed the Board, that agreeable to the Minute of the 4th,
Care had been taken to provide Goods for the Indians: But next Day, after
Council, consulting with Conrad Weyser, the Interpreter, he had advised that
the Delivery of the Present should be delayed till the Indians had finished
with the Proprietary, with whom they were then to treat about the Purchase of
Lands; that most of last Week being spent therein, the Indians had Yesterday
ended with the Proprietary, having signed Releases to him for all the Lands
lying between the Mouth of Sasquehannah, and Kekachtaninius Hills, and that it
now remained to conclude on the Quantity and Quality of the several Goods to be
given them; and on the Substance of what should be proper to be spoke to them;
The Board are of Opinion, that considering the large Quantity of Goods which
they have had from the Proprietor on the Purchase, it may not at this time be
necessary to give them, in Behalf of this Government, so great a Present as the
Value ordered by the aforesaid Minute; but that it may very well be
considerably reduced; and accordingly, it is Ordered, that it be reduced to
between Sixty and Seventy Pounds.

The President likewise acquainting the Board, that the Indians, at a Meeting
with the Proprietor and him, had taken Notice that Conrad Weyser, and
Shekallamy, were by the Treaty of 1732, appointed as fit and proper Persons to
go between the Six Nations, and this Government, and to be employed in all
Transactions with one another, whose Bodies the Indians said were to be equally
divided between them and us, we to have one half, and they the other; that they
had found Conrad faithful and honest, that he is a true good Man, and had spoke
their Words, and our Words, and not his own; and the Indians having presented
him with a dressed Skin to make him Shoes, and two Deer Skins, to keep him warm,
they said, as they had thus taken Care of our Friend, they must recommend
their's (Shekallamy) to our Notice; and the Board judging it necessary that a
particular Notice should be taken of him, acccordingly, it is, Ordered, That
Six Pounds be laid out for him in such things as he may most want.

It was then recommended to the President, and he undertook, to prepare a
Draught of what might be proper to be said to these Indians at giving the
Present from this Government, and to lay the same before the Board to morrow
Morning, at Ten a Clock, to which time the Council adjourned.

At a Council held at Philadelphia, October 13th, 1736.
PRESENT, The Honorable THOMAS PENN, Esquire Proprietary, JAMES LOGAN, Esquire
President. Samuel Preston, Esqr Clement Plumsted, Esqr Thomas Lawrence, Esqr
Ralph Assheton, Esqr Samuel Hasell, Esqr Thomas Griffitts. Esqr


The President laid before the Board a draught of a concluding Speech to the
Indians, which being read and approved, they were sent for, who being come and
seated, the said Speech was delivered to them by the Interpreter as follows.

OUR BRETHREN,

FOUR Years since at a great Treaty held here with your Chiefs, we confirmed
all our former Treaties with you, we brightned the Chain, kindled our Fire to
be kept always burning here for you, opened and cleared the Path between your
Country and Ours, and made ourselves and you one Body and one People.

The Chiefs of all your Nations, being met at your great Fire or Council in the
Country of the Onondagoes, having heard of and considered that Treaty, were so
well pleased with it, that it was agreed, as you have told us, that you, who
are the principal of all your Chiefs, should come down and visit us, and more
fully and absolutely confirm that Treaty, which you accordingly did a few Days
since at our great House in Town, in the presence and hearing of some Thousands
of our People, and it was done not only in Behalf of us ourselves and
yourselves, but for our Children and Children's Children, to all Generations,
as long as the Sun, Moon, and Earth, endure.

Thus this Treaty, by which we are to become as one People, and one Body, is in
the strongest Terms confirmed, never to be changed, but to;be kept in
everlasting Remembrance.

But, besides what we have already concluded, we shall now for the further
brightning the same Chain, and that no Spot or Blemish may be fixed on it, speak
to some Particulars for your more full Satisfaction.

It has been agreed between us, that we should suffer no Injury to be done to
one of your People more than to our own, nor without punishing the Offender in
the same manner as if it had been done to one of our People; and you also
engaged on your parts that you would give us the like Satisfaction for every
Injury done by your People to any of ours, and whatever should happen of this
kind, it should make no other Difference, than as if the Injury were done by
one English or White Man to another, and so in the Case of an Indian. Now since
you came hither, we have heard that a White Man one of our People, and one of
yours, being both in Liquor, quarrelled at Allegheny, that the Indian struck at
the White Man with a Knife, and the white Man gave the Indian some Blows on the
Head, of which he died in four or five Days after; that the White Man got out
of the way, and hid, and when he heard the Man was dead, he ran away to the
Southward of Virginia: Who was first in the Fault in this matter we know not,
but we have now issued a Proclamation for apprehending the White Man, and
proposed a Reward of Ten Pounds, to any one who will seize and deliver him to
some Magistrate or Officer, that he may be put in Prison and tried for his
Life; if then it appears that he wilfully killed the Man, he will be hanged by
our Law; if it was in Defense of his own Life, he is not to die for it, but
after he is tried we shall acquaint you how the matter appeared. The first
Account we had of it was in a Letter, which the Interpreter shall read and
acquaint you with it; but that Story being told only on one side, we do not
depend on it for the Truth; and thus we shall act in all such Cases, as
Brethren always ought whenever they unfortunately happen.

We are very sensible Rum is the principal occasion of these Disorders, and we
heartily wish any means could be possibly found to prevent the Abuse of it: You
have desired us in your Discourse with the Proprietor to recall all our Traders
from Ohio or Allegheny and the Branches of Sasquehannah; We desired at our
Treaty four Years ago that all our Indians, the Delawares, Shawanese, and
others, should be recalled from Ohio, for we knew not then but there might be
War with the French, and you know the Strength of a People consists in their
being drawn close together as into one Body, and not to be scattered; but we
know not what you mean by recalling our Traders; for you are sensible the
Indians cannot live without being supplied with our Goods: They must have
Powder and Lead to hunt, and Clothes to keep them warm; and if our People do
not carry them, others will, from Maryland, Virginia, Jerseys, or other Places;
and we are sure you do not desire that Indians should trade with those People
rather than with ours. The Traders of all Nations find the Indians are so
universally fond of Rum, that they will not deal without it: We have made many
Laws against carrying it; we have ordered the Indians to stave the Caggs of all
that is brought amongst them; but the Woods have not Streets like Philadelphia,
the Paths in them are endless, and they cannot be stopped, so that it will be
carried either from one Country or another; and on the other hand the Indians
are so very fond of the Liquor, even the best of them, that instead of taking
it from those who bring it, and staving it, they take and drink it, which is
both unjust in it self, and does more Mischief; for the Traders, if they kept
it, would hand it out by stealth in small Quantities, but the Indians when they
take it, drink it off by great Quantities; so that no Method we can find will
prevent the Indians having it, till they are so wise as to refrain it of
themselves; and, Why are they not so wise? they show very good strong Sense in
other things, and why cannot they act like us? All of us here, and all you see
of any Credit in the Place, can every Day have as much Rum of their own to
drink as they please, and yet scarce one of us will take a Dram, at least not
one Man will on any Account be drunk, no not if he were hired to it with great
Sums of Money.

And now to bind and confirm all these our Words, we have provided for you the
following Goods, which will be delivered to you to morrow at the President's
Lodgings, to wit.

One Hundred Pounds of Powder, One Hundred and Fifty Pounds of Lead, Twelve
Strowd Matchcoats, Twelve Kettles, Twelve Blankets, Twelve Duffels, Twenty five
Hatchets, One Hundred Knives, Thirty one Yards and of half Thicks, Two Hundred
Flints, One dozen Looking-Glasses, Three dozen Scissars. With some Tobacco,
Pipes, Rum, and Sugar.
The Council rising, and the President with the Proprietor staying, the Indians
entered into further Discourse, and said, They had received a Message with some
Wampum from the Governor of Maryland, informing them, he had received a Letter
from the King of England, ordering him to see that they should not be wronged
of their Lands; that he had understood this Government had wronged them, and if
they would send some of their People to him, he would take care they should be
righted, he would write to the great King, who would give such Orders as that
they should have Justice done them. Being asked how they received that Message,
they said, the Man who brought it was here now with them, they had the Wampum
and would show it to us; and they earnestly pressed that we would write to the
Governors of Maryland and Virginia to make them Satisfaction for the Lands
belonging to them (the Indians) which the People of those Governments were
possessed of, that had never been purchased of them; that all the Lands on
Sasquehannah and at Chanandowa were theirs, and they must be satisfied for
them; that they had agreed with us for the Lands they now released to us, but
they had never received any thing from the other Governments to the Southward,
for theirs.

They were told, That on their receiving the Present to morrow, they should be
answered on these Heads; and after being entertained by the Proprietor, they
withdrew.

October 14.
The Honorable the Proprietor, the President, with some of the Council met
this Forenoon, and the Indian Chiefs being come and seated.

Their Speaker, having some Parcels of Skins laid before him, rose; and by the
Interpreter said;

That they were now to speak to the Proprietor and our People for the last time
this Visit; that we had spoke to them last night, and recapitulated the Heads
of all that had been agreed between them and us, as the Fire, the Path, the
Chain; that we are now become one People; with every other Article that had
been mentioned between us: This they will remember on their Parts through all
Generations, and they desire that we may remember the same as long as the Earth
endures.

That having now brightened the Chain, and confirmed all the Articles necessary
for establishing perfect Friendship between them and us, and being thus become
one People, they must desire that we would be more reasonable in the Sale of
our Goods, which are much dearer (they say) from our Traders than from those of
New York; that the Powder sold by the Traders of New York, is generally found
to be mixed with black Dust, so that the Bullet falls often short of the Mark
through the Badness of the Powder; that if we would sell cheap, we might thereby
draw a great Trade to this Province, far beyond that of any others, which would
be to our Advantage.

And hereupon he laid down a Bundle of Skins, and said,

That amongst them there is never any Victuals sold, the Indians give to each
other freely what they can spare; but if they come amongst our People, they can
have none without paying; they admire we should take Money on this Score.

That having now finished, and preparing to return home, as several of them are
old Men, they request that we would help them on their Journey, by assisting
them with Horses and some Carriages for their Goods; that as we have many
Horses and Carriages, they desire we would spare them some for their Use, who
are our Brethren.

And hereupon he laid down two Bundles of Skins;

Then proceeding, he said,

That they must desire us to write to the Governors of Virginia and Maryland,
who are possessed of their Lands, without ever considering the Indians for
them, and request that we would take the Answers of those Governors, which next
Spring some of their Nations will come to receive at the Fire kept for them in
this Place; That they intend to apply to the great King on the other Side of
the Water, and let him know what they expect on this Head from his People.

That if Civility at Conestogoe, should attempt to make a Sale of any Lands to
us or any of our Neighbors, they must let us know, that he both no Power to do
so; and if he does any thing of the kind, they the Indians will utterly disown
him.

That last night we told them the Woods were very dark, and that it was
impossible to prevent Rum being carried to Allegheny; that if the Case be thus,
we had better hinder any Persons from going thither at all, and confine our
Traders to the River Sasquehannah and its Branches; for as several Indian
Warriors pass by Allegheny, where so much Rum is constantly to be had, they
cannot but be very apprehensive that some Mischief may happen; this
Consideration often troubles them.

In Answer to all which, the Indians were thus told by the Interpreter.

THAT as to all that had passed relating to the Chain, Road and Fire, we have
now firmly and fully established and confirmed all these Articles, to be kept
in perpetual Remembrance by them and us, and by our Children and their Children
to all Generations.

That as to the Deamess of Goods carried amongst them, the Government here has
no Concern in the Trade, it is entirely carried on by private People; those
that go amongst the Indians purchase the Goods they carry with them at the
easiest Rate, and we are told, that considering the Length of Way they carry
them, they are sold so cheap, that these Traders can be but small Gainers; but
the Prices of Goods are not under any Regulation, they get for them what they
can.

That all the white People, though they live together as Brethren, have each
nevertheless distinct Properties and Interests, and none of us can demand from
another Victuals or any thing of the Kind without Payment. One Man raises Corn
and sells it, another raises Horses and he sells them, and thus every Man lives
by his own Labor and Industry, and no one has a Right to take away from
another what he thus earns for himself; and all Victuals cost Money.

That proper Care will be taken, as has formerly been done, to supply them with
Horses and Carriages to make their Journey home as easy as possible.

That we would be glad to do them any Service with the Neighboring
Governments, but we do not clearly understand this Matter: As to what is said
of a Letter from the King of England, we do not believe there is any Truth in
that Report; we have indeed heard of a Letter sent up to Sasquehannah from the
Governor of Maryland; if he mentions any thing in it of Orders from the King of
England, they should send some Persons to that Government to enquire into the
Matter. As to the Claim they make on the Lands of Maryland and Virginia, we
know not how this is supported; the Lands on Sasquehannah, we believe, belong
to the Six Nations, by the Conquest of the Indians of that River; but how their
Pretentions are made good to the Lands to the Southward, we know not; and we
ought to be better informed before we can write on this Head.

That we cannot prevent our Traders from going where they may best dispose of
their Goods; we shall take the most proper Measures in our Power to hinder
their carrying Rum in such Quantities, and we hope the Indians will give strict
Charge to the Warriors to be cautious and prudent, that all Kind of Mischief
may be prevented.

The Indians appearing satisfied with what had been spoke to them, said they
had nothing further to offer. The Present was then delivered to them, which
they received with great Thankfulness, those of each Nation alternately by
themselves, and then all of them together, joining in their usual solemn Sound,
when they express their Satisfaction. Having afterward drank a friendly Glass,
and taking Leave of the Proprietor, President and Court they departed; and thus
the Treaty ended.

ROBERT CHARLES, Secr.


