Mr. Eliot's SERMON ON Giving CAESAR his Due.

At a General Assembly holden at Hartford, May 11th. 1738.
ORDERED by this Assembly, That Samuel Lynde. Esquire and Capt. David B^^^, return
the Thanks of this Assembly, to the Reverend Mr. Jared Eliot, for his SERMON
delivered before this Assembly on the 11th, Instant, and desire a Copy thereof
that it may be Printed.

George Wyllys Secr.

Give CAESAR his Due. OR, THE Obligation THAT SUBJECTS are under TO THEIR Civil
Rulers,

As was showed in a SERMON Preached before the General Assembly of the Colony
of Connecticut at Hartford, May the 11th, 1738. The Day for the ELECTION of the
Honorable the GOVERNOR, the Deputy Governor, and the Worshipful ASSISTANTS.

By Jared Eliot, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Killingworth

Prove. xxiv. 21. My son, Fear thou the LORD and the King: and meddle not with
them that are given to change.

N.LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. GREEN, Printer to the GOV. and COMPANY, 1738.

Give CAESAR his Due.
MATTHEW XXII. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Tell us therefore, What think Thou?
Is it lawful to give Tribute unto Caesar, or not?

But JESUS perceived their wickedness, and said. Why tempt ye Me, ye Hypocrites?

Show me the Tribute Money. And they brought unto Him a Penny.

And he says unto them, Whose is this image and superscription?

They say unto Him, Cesars. Then says he unto them, Render therefore unto
Caesar, the things which are Cesars: and unto GOD, the things that are GOD's.

When they had heard these words, they marvelled, and left him, and went their
way.


That clause of the 21st Ver. Render therefore unto Caesar, the things which are
Cesars.

THE Jewish Nation were very happy for a considerable time, under the
Government of the Asnomaean Family, commonly called the Maccabees. There was
(...) and Peace as home, Victors and Success abroad. There were feared and
regard'd by all round about them: They were in a (...) Alliance with the
Romans, and treated by them with great Respect.

Afterward, growing weak by (...) Divisions, they became a kind of Tributary
Kingdom to the Romans, under the (...) Family; and continued to sink till they
became a Roman Province, under Procurators and Governors, such as Florus,
Festus, Felix and others.

And having helped to fill up the measure of their Iniquities by Crucifying the
Lord of Life and Glory, their Division being still greatly inflamed, they were
involved in a Sea of troubles, till it terminated in their utter desolation,
both of Church and State.

This should be a Warning to all Governments, especially those who are under
the jealous Eye of such who are ready to observe, and improve every part of
their ill Conduct: It should be a Motive to keep' as the Apostle says) the
(...) of the spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3.

At the time of our Saviors Public appearance and ministry, the Jews were
crumbled and broken into many Parties and Factions: The Controversies were
maintained with eagerness and carried on with great best and animosity. But how
wide soever they were in their Opinions, how distant soever in their
Affections, Views and Designs, Yet the Rulers (though divided) could (...)
counsel together against the Lord, (...) Anointed, Psalm 2.2 Like Herod and
Pilate, who though their lines of Affection and Interest, were wide and distant,
Yet at length they could unite in this single point of Malice; they could agree
in their Opposition to Christ and his glorious Gospel.

Three of the principal contending Parties appear before Christ, tempting him,
pursuant to a determination they had come to, after a deep consultation among
themselves, Luk 20 20. And they watched him, and sent forth spies, which should
feign themselves just men, that they might take hold of his words; that so they
might deliver him unto the power and authority of the governor. Feign
themselves Just men, Men truly Religious, who came to him with cases of
Conscience: And to gain his confidence, they begin with Propositions most true
in themselves, but as designed by them, the vilest Tie chery and the grossest
Flattery; and for this Reason our Savior charges them with Hypocrisy Mat
22.16 We know that thou art true, and teach the way of God is truth, and
carest not for any man; for thou regardest not the person of man. Ver. 18. Why
tempt ye me, ye hypocrites? --

The Three Parties were the Herodians, the Sadduces, and the Lawyers; which
last were of the Scribes and Pharisees.

We shall take a short view of these Three Parties, and begin with the last
first; and so go back to the first, which will bring us to our Text; it being a
particular Answer to the Question proposed by the Herodians.

The term Lawyer is not to be understood as in the present use and acceptance
of the word. In the present use of the term, we understand those that Study and
Practice the Common Law, the Civil or Common Law. These were so called as being
Expositors of the Law of God given by Moses They rendered the Law void by those
Interpretations they put upon it: They pretended to great Zeal for the Law, and
for the Rights of the People; Asserting that they were of the seed of Abraham
and were free; nor ought they to be in Subjection to the Romans. Job 8 33
Infusing those Doctrines into the People, was the occasion of sundry
Insurrections and Tumults, led on by Thudas and Judas of Galilee: Of which we
have an account, Act. 5.36, 37.

From these sprang those, afterward called the Zealots, who did so much
mischief to their own Nation, and brought on ruin upon them. They pretended to
See Sir William Temple's Memoirs.
great Zeal for Religion and Concern for the Public Good. A great Writer
observes, That when a Religious and Civil Controversy comes to be twisted and
blended together, it makes a strong Ferment.

These propound a Question, Which was the chief, or the greatest Commandment?
Designing to entangle him in the Controversy that was subsisting among them,
Whether the Command about Sacrifices, or the Moral Law were the greatest? These
according to our Modern way of speaking, we may call the Country Party.

2. The other Party were the Sadducees, who denied the Resurrection We may
observe that each Party drew Arguments from their respective Principles, Each
taking an Arrow out of their own Quiver. The Lawyer came with a Question about
the Law; the Sadducees about the Resurrection; and the Herodians concerning
Tribute. They say, Ver. 24 Master, Moses said if a man die having no children,
his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother. In order
to perplex the case the more, and render the Question unanswerable, They
suppose a case of Seven Brethren having successively Married One Woman; the
case would have been the same if but Two had Married her. They ask, Whose wife
shall she be, for all had her? Ver. 29. Jesus answered and said, Ye do err, not
knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God. Ver. 30. In the resurrection they
neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but are as the angels of God. That
is, they are immortal, and therefore there is no need of Marriage to continue
the Species See Whitby in loc.
Not that raised Bodies shall be like Angels in every respect; but in this is
the likeness designed, and that is sufficient. Our Savior proceeds to a Proof
of the Doctrine of the Resurrection and future State, from one of the Books of
Moses, because the Sadducees disowned at the Scripture, except those Five Books
And doubtless they though it themselves safe enough: they did not expect any
Argument to prove this Point could be drawn from the Books of Moses: but they
found themselves much mistaken. His Proof is, That God had said, as in ver. 32
I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: He is not the
God of the dead, but of the living. This was an irresistible Argument to the
Jews; Luke 20.39 The Scribes replied, Master, thou have well said. That is, It
is a good Proof, of a sufficient Argument And the Sadducees with a^^ their
Craft and Confidence were put to silence

It is true, that the force of this Reasoning is not Equally plain to us as it
was to the Jews; but lies (...) a little. The Jews well understood that when
God promised to be a God to any, that he would be a Covenant God to them; that
He would be a Father to them and they should be his Sons. Deuteronomy 14.1. Ye are the
children of the Lord your God. Say unto Pharaoh, Let my son go, Hos 11 1 Rev 21
7. This Sonship imports the Redemption of the Body from corruption The Apostle
who well knew the ancient Doctrine and Faith of the Jews, makes this one part
of the privilege of Adoption, Rom 8 33. We wait, says he, for the adoption,
that is for the redemption of the body. God's being a God to any, not only
contains in it an assurance of the Redemption or Resurrection of the Body, but
it also contains a Promise of everlasting Rest and Glory. Heb 11.16. Wherefore
God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a
city. That is he will so fully answer all his Covenant Engagements, in raising
them from the Dead and making them Happy, that he will not need to be ashamed
as those are who are not so good as heir word As the Sadducees denied the
Resurrection of the Body and a Future State, this Argument confuted both their
Errors.

To set before you he full force of our Savior's Argument, requires more time
than this occasion will allow. I am not insensible that being so very long upon
it as I have may be (...) a Digression, but as it serves to Evidence the
Justice of the Remark (...) first hearers made. That never man spoke like him;
I hope it will be pardoned These Sadducees were of loose and libertine
Principles Act. 23 8. For the Sadducees say there is no resurrection, neither
angel nor spirit; but the Pharisees confess has. So that we may call this
Party, in our Modern way of speaking the Free-thinkers of that age.

3. In the last place we are to take a view of the Herodians. Some of the
ancient Fathers, Jerome, Tertullian, and others, suppose that this Party were so
called by the Jews, from Herod the Great, whom they believed was the Messiah,
because of his Wealth Power and Magnificence. He appeared, as they though it the
Messiah should do: But this seems to be without foundation. For though Herod did
many actions to gain the peoples Favor; As melting down his own Plate to buy
Corn for the People in a time of Famine. He Rebuilt the Temple with great
Expense. Yet the Nation had so settled an Aversion to him and his Government
that it was not possible for him, by any acts of generosity, to remove it. And
farther to show the ungroundedness of this Opinion, we are to consider, That
the Messiah was to spring from the House of David; but this Herod was not of
the Stock of Israel, nor of the Tribe of Judah or House of David, but an
Idumean or Edomite; and moreover before this time he was dead and his Party
before this time must have been dead too.

As Herod was Supported by the Romans, and made his Court to them, acknowledged
their Authority; and did not so much as make or alter his last Will without
their consent. These persons or this Party called Herodians, were such who
adhered to the Romans, supported Herod's Cause, and owned the propriety and
justice of paying Tribute to Caesar: Being thus in Herod's Interest, they were
called Herodians.

These were State Officers, Soldiers, Collectors, called Publicans; and on
that account so very odious to the Jews, that they ranned Publicans and Sinners
together: When they would Expose our Savior to the rage and contempt of the
People, they say, He is a friend of Publicans and Sinners.

When the Herodians proposed this Question, is was not because of any Scruple
they had of the lawfulness of paying Tribute; but it was with design to ensnare
him. If he should answer on the Affirmative, He would be exposed to the Rage of
the fiery Zealots: If on the Negative, He would be exposed to the Militia and
Officers of State. As the Sadducees, we called Free-thinkers; the Scribes and
Pharisees, the Country Party; these Herodians may be styled the Court Party.

When the Question was asked, Whether it was lawful to pay Tribute or not? He
says, Show me the Tribute Money, Whose Image or Superscription is this? They
say, Cesars. Render therefore, -- That is, for this Reason because You are his
Subjects, this Tribute Money bearing his Image, is a full Proof of it. Our
Savior from the Reason of the thing, and from a Maxim received among other
Nations, and by the Jews themselves, That to strike a Coin, set its Value, give
it a Currency, and if any do Adulterate, Diminish or Counterfeit this Coin,
become guilty of the Crime, Laesae Majestatis, and are exposed to Punishment
accordingly. It is an Argument of Sovereignty in the one, and Subjection in the
other; That Authority that does this is the higher Power It seems therefore
very Extraordinary, that so Exact a Reasoner as the Learned Grotius should say,
That our Savior never Resolved that Question, whether it was lawful to pay
Tribute to Caesar.

There are few that need to be told, that by Caesar is meant the Roman Emperor;
who took it from Julius Caesar, who first Reduced the Common Wealth into a
Monarchy, and assumd the Government: His Name became a (...) to succeeding
Emperors. It may be considered as comprehending any Form of Government and all
Subordinate Rulers 1 Pet 2 13, 14 Submit your selves to every ordinance of man
for the Lord's sake; Or unto governors as unto them that are sent by him, for
the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. The
Psalmist says, Go round about Zion, view her towers, mark her bulwarks.

Having considered our Text and Context, viewed the strength our Saviors
Reasoning, the clearness of his Proofs, and the force and consequence of his
Arguments, which are b^^^ond ^ll Example: (...) those that heard him were
astonished at his Doctrine.

Having this cl^a^d the way, the Doctrine or Proposition from the Words may be
this, DOCT. That it is our duty to Render to Caesar the things which are Cesars
Or, That we be very careful to answer the Obligations we are under to our Civil
Rulers.

Under this Doctrine we may Consider,

I. What these Obligations are, that we are under to Civil Rulers. II. Offer
some Reasons of the Doctrine. III. Make some Application, or draw some
Inferences from the whole.
I. What those Obligations are which we are under to our Civil Rulers? We may
see in part, Romans 13 7. In g^n Render to all their Dues.

1. Tribute is one of those things to be paid to whom it is due.

Tribute taken in the strict and proper sense, is that Payment which a
Conquered or Subjugated People are required to Advance, by those Powers to whom
they are in Subjection. When once a People are thus Reduced, it amounts to much
the same thing, whether it be by Conquer, or by Covenant, or Contract either
Implicit or Explicit, it becomes a Legal Government. This seems to be the case
of the Roman Government Exercised over the Jews. And hence it is that the
Apostle makes the paying Tribute incumbent upon them; and considers them
Obliged to it in point of Conscience: Herein they were to Obey, not for Wrath,
but Conscience. That is, Not merely from a principle of Fear, but from a
principle of Obedience. Romans 13 6. For this cause (i e, For Conscience sake)
pay you tribute also: For they are God's ministers, attending continually upon
this very thing. We may therefore consider Tribute in the large sense, as the
Apostle does, as a Tax raised for the Support of Government.

2. Another of those Obligations we are under to our Civil Rulers; is the
paying of Custom to whom Custom is due.

A wife Government sometimes gives Bounties for the Encouragement of this or
that Manufacture that may be for the good of the whole, though a People may
ignorantly find fault with it. So they may lay Duties upon certain Branches of
Trade; such as Impost and Excise. These Duties are laid, Either upon that which
is Superfluous or not necessary to Life, or upon that which by its great
Increase may become hurtful to the Common Wealth; not designed for a private
gain but a common good. This is what the Apostle lets us know we are bound to
Pay, as good Subjects to JESUS CHRIST, and as good Subjects to King GEORGE. And
therefore it seems wonderfully stranger that many who would be thought honest
Men and good Christians, will cheat the Public of this Due, and glory in this
their shame, Not only do this Evil themselves, but have pleasure in those that
do the same. When the Apostle has said in express terms, Custom to whom custom
is due.

3. Another of those Obligations we are under to our Civil Rulers is Fear. Fear
to whom fear, says the Apostle.

The word Fear, as it is used in the Scripture is of a very Extentive
improvement. As it is used with relation to GOD, it is put for the whole of
Religion. Hence he that fears the Lord and a goad man are the same. As it is
used with relation to men in Authority, it is used for Obedience. Mal. 1.6. If
I be a master, where is my fear? We may therefore consider Fear as used and
applied is this place to comprehend and to intend, that Obedience that is due
from Subjects to the Government under which they live. 1 Pet. 2 13. Submit your
selves to every ordinance of man, for the Lord's sake. The command is Extensive
and Universal: Yet all this our Obedience must be in the Lord. If the whole
Head should be sick and by that means Ordinances and Law should be made
inconsistent with or contrary to the Laws of God, or such as sap the
Foundations of the Commonwealth, and subvert the Government; which is an abuse
of Power and contrary to the appointment of God, who has set up the Ruler to be
a Minister to us for good: In such a case we have of right a judgment of
Discretion; and easily conclude as the Apostles did, when they received a
command to Preach no more in the Name of Jesus, They say, Whether we shall Obey
God or man, judge ye.

This Obeying every Ordinance of man, is to some an hard saying! They seek to
Relieve themselves two or three ways.

(1) They pretend to find out the true spirit and meaning of the Law, and take
care to give a sense agreeable to their Private Interest; and this they will
have so, though they make the Law speak Nonesense: They bend and distort the Law,
contrary to the plain genuine sense and meaning of it, and contrary to what
they themselves would do in that or in any other case, if it agreed with their
particular interest. One man gives it one meaning, and another a contrary; so
that it must have contrary meanings, or which is the same, no meaning at all.
These persons, like the Scribes and Pharisees of old, make void the Law by
their Exposition.

(2) Another way by which men Excuse themselves from a conscientious Obedience,
is to represent the Laws as inconvenient and inexpedient. When they have
painted it with these colors, they look upon themselves as free from all
Obligations. It is a fundamental principle in Government, That Sovereign
Authority must lodge somewhere. The Community have placed this in the
Legislature. Therefore particular persons have nothing to do to judge of the
Expediency of the Laws. It is out of our Province. Another Maxim of Government
is, That where there is absolute Liberty, there is no Government. Statutes are
a Restraint laid upon the Exercise of Natural Liberty by Sovereign Civil
Authority. Not that good Government is destructive of any such Liberty as is
good for the whole, but abundantly supports, secures and defends it: For that
which is good for the whole Body, is for the good of each particular Member.
The Law is so far from being inconsistent with Civil Liberty, that it is the
very Basis and Foundation of it. Although the Laws of Christ lay us under many
Restraints for our good, Yet, Jam. 1.25 is called, The perfect law of Liberty.
It is no Reflection upon Civil Government, that it restrains our natural
Liberty in some things, when it so well secures us in the whole. It is rather
an Argument of its Excellency and Perfection.

4. Another of those Obligations that we are under to our Civil Rulers, is to
pay them due Honor. Honor to whom honor is due. The term Honor in this
place, is not to be considered in so comprehensive a sense, as in the Fifth
Commandment the whole of that Duty we owe to the Magistrate and to our Natural
Parents. All that we are to render unto Caesar, it seems to contain in it,

(1) That Honor and Esteem we are to have for their Persons and personal
Abilities. This Debt can never be more justly challenged as due from any more
than from Us; For our Magistrates are not Imposed upon us, or introduced by
Bribery or Corruption; buy fairly and legally Chosen to such Offices as they
sustain. If we are wanting, in our Respect and Esteem, we condemn our owe
Choice and censure our own Conduct.

(2) We are to honor them not only for their personal Merit; but also for
their Office sake. They are Instruments in the hand of Providence, by whom the
World is Governed: They are God's Vice gerents, and therefore called Gods.
Psalm. 82.6. I have said, Ye are gods, and all of you a children of the most
high. If we are to pay Honor to whom honor is due, then those who fill the
Seats of Government, as being God's Representatives, may justly challenge it of
us.

(3) We honor them when we think well of their Administrations in Government.
We are always to make allowance for unforeseen Accidents, for Crooked things
that cannot be made straits, for Casualties and unavoidable Calamities; But
when men civil at every thing, censure and find fault with the Administration
in all that is done or left undone; make themselves and others (...), This is
the very Reverse of that temper here called for. Charity thinks no evil, it
(...) all things, believes all things. Men think to raise themselves a
Reputation, by finding fault with their ^et^ers. The dullest heads of all
Israel, were such State-dabblers; That they thought they could see that the
Public Affairs were not (...), and so Murmured against Moses and (...) and
paid dear for it in the End. Those that render honor to whom honor is due,
will entertain a good Opinion of the Public Management; will Consider that if
any Defects are found, Rulers are not Angels, but Men.

(4) We honor them not only in thinking well, but also in speaking well of
them too We are to give them their just Commendation, support their Character
and their Conduct, Speak to them and of them with Decency and Respect. But
instead of this, are there not those who neither fear God nor regard man Luke
18.2. Jude 8. Prove. 26, 18.
who speak evil of Dignities; who are sensul, not having the Spirit? They cast
arrows firebrarnds and death; and it is sport to them to do mischief. As this
is very wide from our duty, so it is dangerous too, and Exposes to the
Resentment of God and man. Curse not the king, no not in they thought; curse
not the rich in thy bedchamber, for a bird of the air shall carry the voice,
and that which has wings shall tell the matter, Eccl. 10.20. The Apostle
having met with ill usage and illegal treatment before the Sanhedrim, called
the chief Priest whited Wall; when he came to understand his Character, he
corrects himself, saying, I wist not that it was the high priest; for it is
written, Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people, Act 23.5 If
under such Treatment speaking Evil of Rulers is unwarrantable, what are we to
think of Murmurings and Revilings uttered against a gentle, just and mild
Administration?

5. And lastly. Another of those Obligations we are under to our Civil Rulers
is, that we should Pray for them, and Bless God for them. This is one of the
most plain, necessary and useful parts of our duty. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort,
that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions and giving of thanks
be made for all men: for kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: For this is good
and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. We are to observe the Apostle's
order, For Kings, and for all, etc. It is therefore our bounden duty, to Pray
for our Lawful and Rightful Sovereign Lord King GEORGE, that His Crown may long
flourish on His Head, that He may continue a Rich Blessing to His People; That
under Him our Peace may be Established as a River, and our Righteousness as the
waves of the Sea. That GOD would Bless the PRINCE and PRINCESS of Wales, the
DUKE, and the rest of the ROYAL FAMILY; and all that are in Places of Trust
both at Home and Abroad: That GOD would Bless This and the Neighboring
Governments and Governors; That Our Liberties and Privileges, of every Kind,
may be Secured, and Continued so long as the Sun and the Moon shall Endure.
That our Councils may be Directed; that GOD would Influence, Assist and Direct
our Rulers, that so we may under them lead Peaceable Lives in all Godliness and
Honesty.

We may see how our Interest and Duty are interwoven and joined together; While
we are answering this Obligation in Praying for our Rulers, we are at the same
time in the most Effectual and Successful manner promoting our own Interest:
Which serves (by the way) to show the Excellency of our most Holy Religion. As
for Instance, If we have a a spirit of Forgiveness, and do forgive them that
Offend us, we may with the greater assurance hope for the Forgiveness of our
own Sins, though they are many in Number and heinous in Nature So, If we have
bowels of Compassion for the Indigent and Needy, and with a Liberal hand supply
their Wants, we thereby lay up to our selves Treasures in heaven, and make to
our selves friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, and so when we fail, they
may receive us into everlasting Habitations. So, When we Pray for our Enemy,
and do other acts of Kindness for him, if all be lost on him, Yet it shall not
be lost to us; but it shall return into our own bosom. When we are Praying for
our Rulers, we are Praying down Blessings upon our selves. We should consider
the Importance and Advantage of this Duty.

There are sundry things we ought more specially to Pray for, as Qualifications
in Civil Rulers, as may make them a Public Blessing to us, that we under them
may lead peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty. As particularly,

(1) We should Pray that they may be men of Piety and Virtue. For although they
good man is not fit for Rule and Government, Yet they that Rule, should be such
as fear God, men of truth, and hating covetousness, Exodus 18.21. When Abraham
went to Sojourn with Abimelech, if it had been as he supposed, That the fear of
God was not in that place, his Conclusion was very just; and he had a great
deal of Reason to fear the Effects of Violence and Injustice from them. Where
the Rulers are wicked, Tyranny may be Expected as the natural Consequence of
it, Genesis 20.11. The unjust Judge is represented as one that neither feared God,
nor regarded man.

(2) Wisdom is another of those Governing Qualifications we should Pray for,
for our Rulers.

Wisdom may be considered as Divine, Natural, or Political Divine Wisdom is,
when a man is wise for his own Soul; and is furnished with that wisdom which is
from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle easy to be entreated,
full of mercy and good fruits. Natural Wisdom is that strength of Parts those
Powers and Abilities that men are furnished with. political Wisdom is that turn
of mind that renders men apt and fit to Conduct the Public Affairs. This is a
Wisdom profitable to direct both as to time and judgment. We should Pray that
our Rulers may be furnished with such Wisdom as Solomon Prayed for, Wisdom to
govern well, the thing pleased the Lord. King. 3.10, --

(3) Courage and a good Resolution is another of those Qualifications, we
should Pray that our Rulers may be furnished with. Joshua was often exhorted to
be of good Courage in the discharge of his Trust, not only as Captain General,
but also as Chief Magistrate. It is as needful for the high Seat of Justice, as
for the high Places of the Field The best Scheme of Government, the best
contrived Design is by the People many times, miss-understood, and the wise and
good Intention of the Ruler is mis-construed. So that to Enact and to Execute
good Laws, requires Courage and good Resolution. But besides the difficulties
that arise in the common course of Affairs, there are certain Seasons that do
especially bespeak Courage and requires good Resolution; when thin^s look with
a Threatening Aspect, when dark Clouds are drawn over us; when neither Sun, Moon
nor Stars are seen for many days, and no small Tempest is upon us; When God's
way is in the Whirlwind, and Clouds are the dust of his feet: For he commands
and raises the stormy Wind, and lifts up the Waves thereof; they mount up to
heaven, they go down again to the depths, their soul is melted because of
trouble; they reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their
wits and Act. 27.20. Nah. 1.3. Psalm. 107.26.
This is the state of the Cowardly, Fearful and Unbelieving, in a time of State
Convulsions. In a Stormy time, Skill and Courage are needful Qualifications for
those that fit at Helm.

(4) Prudence is another Qualification, we should Pray that our Rulers may be
furnished with. Prudence is a Virtue both hard to describe and to acquire, or
if destitute of it, to perform well in any considerable Station of life. We may
take a short view of it in its Effects and happy Fruits It is what helps to
discover our advantage and our danger when it is at a distance, and so to
improve the best Means to obtain the one and avoid the other. The prudent man
foreseeth the evil and hides himself, Prove. 22.3 Prudence teaches when to
speak, and when to keep silence. The prudent shall keep silence, for it is an
evil time, Amos 5.13. It not only teaches when to speak and when to keep
silence, but also how and in what manner to speak: For, Words fitly spoken, are
as apples of gold in pictures of silver, Prove 25.11. Prudence directs when to
use Corrosives, and when Lenitives; when to Reprove sharply, and when to give
smooth Words: For, as the north wind drives away rain, so does an angry
countenance a backbiting tongue, Prove. 25.23. A soft word is breaks the
bone. Rehoboams Old prudent Counselors, in a time of Popular Discontent,
advised him to give the People good Words; but he followed the advice of Rash,
Fair-brain'd and Unexperienced Counselors, who neither understood men nor
things and spoke Roughly to them; and thus by Imprudence lost Ten Tribes, the
bigger part of his Dominions. When the Mob was risen at Ephesus and in the
greatest Fury imaginable, so that nothing but noise and nonsense could be heard
for two Hours together, and although the raging of the Sea and the madness of the
People, are compared to each other, yet the Town Clerk, a prudent person, with
a few soft words turned away wrath and made all Quiet. Again, As it teaches
when to speak and how to speak, so it has as great an influence upon our
Actions. We are instructed by it what to do, and what to leave undone. All
things are lawful, but all things are not expedient. It suggests to us when to
go fast and when to go slow. There is a time to Plant, and a time to Pluck up;
a time to Embrace, and a time to refrain from Embracing. Doubtless by this the
Wise man designs to instruct us in the prudent Timing things, which is attended
with great Success. Prudence not only directs to the fit timing our Actions,
but prescribes the use of the most proper and fit Means for the compassing our
designs. Great Ships are turned about with a very small Helm. And our most
important Affairs are Effected many times by small Means In Prudence are a
great many nameless Excellencies. That which is a farther Evidence of its worth
and usefulness is this, That if a man have not great Parts nor great Learning,
yet if he be Prudent and Diligent, he shall stand before Princes, and not
before mean Men. Say of a man, That he is very Prudent, you at once give him an
Exalted Character Great Learning without Prudence is Pedantly: He is but as
sounding Brass and a tinkling Cymbal. If a man has great Parts and strong
Powers, but at the same time is Imprudent, it renders his Folly but the more
conspicious. Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a
stinking savor; so does a little folly in him that is in reputation for wisdom
and honor, Eccl 10 1. If a man have great Courage and Strength, yet if he has
no Prudence, he is like Sampson, strong and bold, but blind. In a word,
Prudence among Governing Qualifications, is like Charity among Spiritual Gifts,
of which the Apostle speaks thus, And though I have the gift of prophecy and
understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and though I have all faith, so
that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing, 1 Cor. 13.2.
What is Knowledge, what is Courage and Parts without Prudence? It is therefore
much to be desired. And as a means for the increase of this valuable
Qualification, there must be an acquintance with Humane Nature, its various
Passions, Affections, Views, Interests and Designs. We must also consider
Things as well as Men, and the great variety of Events that happen.

Having thus considered some of the principal Obligations we are under to our
Civil Ruler.

M. We come to the Second Particular under the Doctrine, and that is the
Reasons or Foundation of this Obligation.

1. Because it is of God's Ordination and Appointment that it should be so. God
has established Order and Government, and has Required our Subjection, and
Commanded us to Render unto Caesar the things which are Cesars. The Apostle
says, Romans 13 1, 2. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for
there is no power but of God; the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever
therefore that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God; and they
that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. As God has a right of
Dominion over us, and is a most Just and Righteous Governor, His Ordination
and Appointment is a sufficient Reason. When it may be truly said, That the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it, that is a sure Foundation for us to build on.
Though Government be of God's Ordination, yet he has not prescribed the
particular Forms of Government. For, as of Marriage it may be said, It is God's
Institution, yet the sorting the particular Pairs or respective Help-meets, is
left to Choice, to Prudence, to the guidance of Judgment, Affections and
Friends. So though God has appointed Government in general, yet has appointed
Government in general, yet has he left to us the erecting of such Forms as are
most agreeable to Laws of Nature, Society, and the differing Circumstances of
People.

2. We should render to Caesar the things which are Cesars, or answer our
Obligations to our Civil Rulers, because it is not only our Duty, but it is our
Interest too. And this will appear if we consider the Usefulness, nay the
Necessity of Government for the support of Communities. It is as needful to the
Body Politic, for its Subsistence and Comfort, as Breath is to the Nostrils of
the Natural Body. Without this the weak would become a Prey to the strong, the
ignorant and inadvertent would fall into the snare of the crafty. A girl might
be sold for wine, and the poor for a pair of shoes. Men would become as the
Fishes of the Sea, the less would be devoured by the greater. It is owing to
good Government, that Liberty and Property are secured. It is by this means
that a man's House is his Castle, and not by the strength of the Walls. It is by
this that every one sits under his Vine and his Fig Tree, and there is none
to make him afraid. From hence we may see how much those are mistaken, who
instead of being sensible of the benefit of Government and being thankful for
it, have ill-thoughts of it. They think it is only the contrivance of artful
and designing Men, who would make themselves great at the Expense of their poor
Neighbors; who would oppress the Poor, and grind the face of the Needy.
Whereas Government is designed to prevent Fraud, Violence and Injustice; and in
the hand of Divine Providence, is the Instrument of our Security; is designed
for a Terror to evildoers, and a Praise to them that do well.

That we may see how much it is our Interest to support Government, and answer
the Obligations we are under to our Civil Rulers, we may enter into a more
distinct Consideration of the Nature of Government We may therefore consider
Man, (1) As in a state of Nature, or being without any Government at all. (2)
We may consider him as under Patriarchal Government, or under the Rule of such
as were Heads of some great Families, Tribe or Clan. (3) We may consider him as
under Civil Government.

(I) We are in the first place to consider man as in a state of Nature. Some
have though it that none of mankind were ever in that State, because History
furnishes us with no Instances. But as a great See Lock on Government. [To our
purpose it is much the same, whether our Text designs Ishmael Personally, or
speaks of his Posterity Prophetically. The wild Arabs continue to this day in a
state of Nature, and are as miserable as such a State will render a People.]
Writer well observes that affords no Argument; because Government is before
Hystory and Records, and therefore Governments are ignorant of their own
Original, and can give no Account of themselves, when in a state of Nature, or
were without Government. Man in a state of Nature may be considered as acting
by himself, and for himself; as doing whatever he may best do for his own
Preservation or Advantage, As getting what he can Seize, and keeping what he
has got; as being under no Statutes or Social Laws. An exact account of such an
one we have (that is Ishmael) in Genesis 16.12. He is described as being a wild
man his hand being (...) every man, and every man's hand against (...) but then
he is described having left that wretched state of Life and entered into a
Social Life, and dwelling among his Brethren. Which agrees well enough with the
short way of Writing used by Moses, laying things near in the Text which was
far distant in Time. We have an account of a Clan of Thieves who lived in the
state of Nature, Job 33.3, 4, 5, 6. For want and famine they were solitary;
fleeing into the wilderness in former time desolate and wast. Who cut up
mallows by the bushes, and juniper-roots for their meat. They were driven forth
from among men, they cried after them as after a chief; to dwell in clefts of
the valleys, in caves of the earth and in the rocks. Among the bushes they
brayed, under the nettles they were gathered together. They were children of
fools, yea children of base men; they were viler than the earth. The next
Instance I shall give, is that of Nebuchadnezzar, who having abused his Power,
was driven out from among men, like an outlaw. Dan. 4.33. The same hour was
the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar, and he was driven from men, and did
eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs
were grown like eagles feathers, and his nails like birds claws. As this is a
state of life none can live so securely or comfortably in, nor any that knows
the advantage of Government or Regulated Society, can be contented with, the
very Representation of this case of state of life, may be an Argument with us
to answer our Obligations we are under to our Rulers.

(2) We are to consider man as under Patriarchal Government. This was the
earliest and first kind of Government; which arose from the natural right that
Parents had over their Children and Dependants. The Head of the Family had the
Legislative and Executive Power in his hands. He had the Military Power vested
in him; As we may see by Abraham, who Armed of his Trained Soldiers Three
Hundred and Eighteen for a sudden Expedition. The Head of the Tribe or
Patriarch was also Priest to the Family: As we may see by Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, who built Altars and offered, Burnt-sacrifice for themselves and People.
The same Order was observed among the Heathen, while under the same kind of
Government See Shuckfords Conect. Vol. II
Of which many Instances might be given. This kind of Government, in ordinary
fell to the Eldest Son. It seems very probable, That that part of Esau's
Birthright, as Chief Sacrificer, was what Jacob was so desirous to Purchase,
and Esau was so free to Sell. He seemed to be a carnal and careless person, and
so had no value for the Ecclesiastical Dignity that was to fall to him, and
therefore Sold it for a mess of Pottage. This Birthright was not the Covenant
Blessing; for Jacob obtained that by Deceit afterward. It is (...) ^firmation
of this Opinion, That when the Apostle speaks of it, he calls Esau Profane on
that account, Heb. 12.16. If it had been the Estate of Inheritance and had he
Sold it in that manner, he might be called Foolish, but not Profane. Those
Patriarchs had in their hands the Power of Life and Death, which continued for
a long time, and for some time after Civil Government was Erected. Numa the
Roman Lawgiver, after he had set up Civil Government, was not able to wrest
this branch of Power out of the hands of Heads of Families. In most Civil
Governments, the Eldest Son has had assigned to him, Either the Estate of
Inheritancce, or a considerable part of it, or at least a double Share to any
of the Younger descendants; and no good Reason having been as yet rendered for
this Preference of Primo geniture, and Children being by nature Equally near
and dear, it is probable, That it is by Custom immemorial, derived from the
times of Patriarchal Government. But to return from this digression. Though
mankind received great Advantages from this Government, yet as the Patriarchal
Government was Despotical, and the Governor, by Interest, Affection and
Prejudice, less fit to make a just Judgment, Civil Government is very much to
be preferred before it: And Consequently, As Civil Government has Obtained and
Gained ground, Patriarchal has sunk, and by degrees dwindled away, to what we
now call Family Government, which is much limited and restrained by the Civil.
We see this by what we find, Deuteronomy 21 18. Where a Rebellious Son was to be
brought by his Parents to the Elders that is to the Magistrates of the City,
who were to Punish him. Yet Family Government, as it is limited by the Civil
Government, is of mighty Advantage to mankind. This is the Nursery from whence
Plants are removed into the Common Wealth: If they are Unpruned, Uncultivated,
Crooked, Stunted, Knotty, Crabbed, As the Tree is, so will be the Fruit. Tram
up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from
it, Prove. 22 6.

(3) Man may be considered as under Civil Government. Civil Government is set
up by Force, Fraud, or by Compact; which is the most Ordinary and the most
Regular Government. When particular Persons or Families, are so multiplied,
that Divisions and Contests arise, they must separate, as Abraham and Lot did
on the like occasion; Or came into one Body, under some Regulation or Form of
Government, or live in a state of Hostility, destructive and ruinous. When they
thus Unite, this is what constitutes what we call Civil Government. Whether
this Union be from a principle of Fear See Rapin.
or Love of Society, or from both, has been a matter of Dispute. But that some
kind of Civil Government is for the good of mankind, beyond all Dispute For a
bad Government is better than no Government; and Tyranny is better than
Anarchy. If so, What a Blessing is it to be favored with a Legal
well-Constituted Government, such as that of the British Dominions? We should
be Thankful for it, Pray for its Continuance, and cheerfully Submit to it. If
it be so Constituted, and of such an happy Mixture, That as one observes See
Puffendorf Law of Nature, Nations.
There is not the like in the known World. It is a Limited Monarchy, where the
King is Vested with Royalty, Power, Majesty and Prerogatives, and yet without
Tyranny. There is the Nobility having great Weight, much Power, Grandeur,
Dignity, and very Illustrious, and yet according to the Constitution, without
Oppression. There are the People, or Commons, having a large share in the
Legislative Power, and yet without Anarchy or Confusion. Each Branch or
Constitutive Part of the Government, having full Power to do good, and all the
good that can possibly come within their compass; and are a Check and Restraint
upon Each other, where Prejudice, Error or corrupt Desire might divert them
from what is for the Pubick Good. Now such Restraint is so far from Reflecting
any Dishonor on the Government, that it is its Glory and Perfection. For in
truth, all Power but the (...) Good is Useless, Burdensome and Dangerous.
(...) Draught of this happy Constitution into Britain by the Saxons and Angles,
into France by the Franks, into Spain and Italy by the Goths, Vandals and other
Northern Nations: And it has been Refining, Polishing, Reforming and acquiting
Strength, for many Generations. While other Nations, who were Equally Blessed
with this Form of Government, by their supine Negligence, and the Power and
cunning Craftiness of them that ly in wait to Deceive, they have suffered these
Privileges to be lost. Indeed, There is still subsisting the Dyets in Germany,
the Cortes in Spain and the Parliaments in France, which are but faint Shadows
of that once glorious Substance they have lost and we by God's Mercy still
Enjoy. Notwithstanding our Advantages are so many, and our National Privileges
are so great, yet there are those who have such depraved Appetites, that their
Soul loatheth this Manna; who long for the Garlic, the Leeks, the Onions, and
Bondage of Egypt. As the Israelites, after they had been told the manner of a
King, yet said, Nay, but let us have a King: So these discontented ones say,
Nay, but let us have a Pretender! though Bondage and Slavery be the certain
Consequence of it. I know nothing will cure this Infatuation, unless they had
their wish, and so become Instructed like the men of Succoth, with the briers
and thorns of the wilderness.

To show the Obligations we are under to (...) Caesar has Due, by an Argument
taken from the Nature of Government in general, and British Government in
particular, to show therefore the Force of this Argument, as a proper Contract,
we may take a short view of Arbituary Despotick Power. All description falls
short of that just and elegant Representation of it, given by that wise and
inspired Prophet Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.11 -- This will be the manner of the king
that shall reign over you, He will take your sons and appoint them for himself,
for his chariots, and to be his horsemen, and some shall run before his
chariots. And he will appoint him captains over thoussands, and captains over
fifties, and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to
make his instruments of war, and instrument of his chariots. And he will take
your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to be bakers. And he
will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your olive-yards even the best
of them, and give them to his servants. And he will take the tenth of your
seed, and of your vineyards, and give to his officers, and to his servants. And
he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest
young men, and your asses, and put them to his work. He will take the tenth of
your sheep: and ye shall be his servants. And ye shall cry out in that day,
because of your king which ye shall have chosen you; and the LORD will not hear
you in that day.

It may (...) truly said, That God gave them a (...) in his wrath, and took him
away in his anger, Hos. 13.11. We may see how things went under David's
Administration; David being in want receives a seasonable Supply at the hand of
Ziba, Mephibosheth's Treacherous Steward: he comes with a Ly in his Mouth, and
a Gift in his Hand. The Gift blinds David's Eyes, and the Slander cankers his
Heart, without Proof, and without Examination he makes an hasty Decree, gives
Ziba his Master's whole Estate, and at one blow Disinherits a poor Cripple,
only Son to his dear Deceased Friend, and a most Loyal Subject, that either he,
or perhaps any King even had, and all in Favor so a Sly and Faithless Servant
Mephibosheth had been in a state of Mourning from the time of David's Flight
till his Return; whose Fidelity could procure no more than a setting aside of
this former Judgment, which was too flagrant a piece of Injustice to be
suffered: A new Order is issued out, That the Land should be divided between
the Master and the man.

This is not mentioned to derogate from this holy Man, or depreciate his
Character; but to show, the most able Head, the most pure Heart, the most
steady Hand of all Mankind, is not to be Trusted with Arbitraiy Despotick
Power. If this be the Fruit of the good Tree, what may we Expect from the Evil?
Arbitrary Government is like Jotham's Bramble, that undertook to Reign over the
Tree More (...) than Defend those that have Recourse to it for Shelter (...),
All persons who have true Sentiments of Liberty, must have terrible Ideas of
Arbitrary and Despotick Government For though the difference be very sensible
between Slavery and Liberty; Yet men's Notions in this matter are not so clear
as one might expect. For it is certain (as has been Observed) That to the
Constitution of every Government, Absolute Sovereignty must lodge somewhere. So
that according to his Maxim, Every Government must be Arbitrary and Despotick.
The difference seems to be here; Arbitrary Despotick Government, is, When this
Sovereign Power is directed by the Passions, Ignorance and Lust of them that
Rule. And a Legal Government, is, When this Arbitrary and Sovereign Power puts
it self under Restraints, and lays it self under Limitations, in all Instances
where they see it Either possible or probable, that the Exercise of this
Sovereign Power may prove or has proved Prejudicial and Mischievous to the
Subject: Even this is an Act of Sovereign Power. This is what we call a Legal
Limited and well Constituted Government. Under such a Government only there is
true Liberty.


But Blessed be GOD, this is not our case. We live under a Legal Government;
Our Lines are drawn for us in a pleasant Place, and we have a goodly Heritage
It is a Cornerstone in our Political Building, That no man's Life, Limb, Name
or Estate, shall be taken away but by his Peers and by the known Laws of the
Land.

The Respective Governments in the British Plantations, are but as little
Models of that Excellent and great Form at Home. We enjoy the same Liberties,
and Additional hereto We have liberty to choose from among our selves, of our
Fathers and Brethren, to Rule over us; and these to be Continued but just so
long as we think fit. We have neither Strangers or Children to Rule over us. We
have our Judges as at the first and our Rulers as at the beginning. Having
received strength from God, we continue in the Enjoyment of our Charter
Privileges unto this Day. Are not these Advantages great as Humane Prudence
could contrive, and even Extensive to the utmost bounds of a Rational wishes
The Psalmist Psalm. 74, 5, 6.
observes concerning the building of the Temple, That men were famous as they
had lifted up Axes on the thick trees. They stand Recorded to the latest
Posterity.

Should not then the Names of those Patriots who were Instruments to procure
our Charter for us, to be had in Everlasting Remembrance? The Psalmist fixes a
Brand or mark of Infamy on those who beat down the Carved works, with Axes and
Hammers. Then surely those that seek to break down this Political Structure,
can stand in no very advantageous Light. If there be any that from a principle
of Ignorance, from a desire of Novelty, from Ambition, from any or from all of
these; or from something that is worse shall seek th Overturning of our
Constitution, we may say Gen 49 6.
as Jacob did of the Treachery and Cruelty of his Sons, O my (...), Come not
thou in (...) Secret, unto their (...) be not thou united: Cursed be their
anger, for it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel. But we would hope
for better things, and for those things that make for Peace. For surely under
such Advantages, we ought to be an Obedient Thankful People, ready to render to
Caesar the things that are Cesars, and to GOD the things which are GOD's.

III. We now come in the third and last place, to make some Application and
Improvement of the whole.

1. In the first place I shall Address my self to the whole Honorable
Legislature. Honorable, Worshipful, and much Esteemed; What need soever there
may be of it, I shall make no Apology for my self, For having received his
Honor's Order to stand here this Day, I deem it as an Indication of the Divine
Will, which is my Warrant, and the Divine Assistance I depend upon as my
Strength and Hope. If any thing be insisted on which has Formerly been better
handled by others on the like Occasion, I do but stir up your pure minds by way
of Remembrance. Let the best Good and the true Interest of the Government be
Consulted, and constantly be Pursued Be pleased to consider, That Rulers are
made for the People, and not the People for the Magistrate. The Divine Precepts
about this matter, have much more in view the good of the Subject, than the
grandeur of the Ruler; who is to be a Minister to us for good, a Terror to
Evildoers, and a Praise to them that do well.

(1) Let such Laws be Enacted as may be for the Advantage of the whole, and a
due Execution of those already made. An Unexecuted Law, how excellent soever it
may be in the Contrivance, how great and good soever it be in the End and
Design of it, It is like the Sword of Goliath behind the Ephod. It may be
compared to that curious Imagery the Psalmist speaks of, Psalm 115.5. Eyes have
they, but they see not, Ears have they, but they hear not, Hands have they, but
they handle not. Unexecuted Laws have Ears, but yet deaf to every Complaint;
Eyes have they, but blind to every Fault; Hands have they, but handle not, they
have no hands to rectify what is amiss, to defend the Poor, or crush the proud
Oppressor. If Laws are too big or too little for Execution, Your Wisdom will
direct, whether it be not most for the Honor of Government if they were
Repealed. Let such as may be improved in the Executive part of Government, be
strong Rods for Government; they are so called, Ezekiel. 19.11, 14. and that with
a great deal of Propriety. The Rod is the Instrument of Correction and
Government. Folly is bound up in the heart of a child, but the rod of
correction will fetch it out: The rod is for the fools back. The Roman
Magistrates had Axes and Rods carried before them, as a significative Badge of
their Office. You have heard the duty of the Subject, To Render to Caesar the
things that are Cesars. All relative duties are mutual and reciprocal. You will
suffer us, nay, encourage us, to expect your Protection under good Laws, and
that you will Exert your whole Power for the Public Emolument.

(2) The present sunken and fluctuating state of the Medium, deserves your
Consideration. It is not my business or design to consider this matter
Politically, it being both out of my Province and beyond my Capacity. It is now
offered to View only as it affects our Morals. It tends to destroy the natural
notions of Right and Wrong, to deface the lines of Justice and break down the
boundaries fixed between Good and Evil Denomination and Value are confounded;
though widely different in themselves, are represented and treated as one and the
same thing. Let a man's demand for any Service be never so Exorbitant, he has a
Plea very handly for him, It is charged to the Discount. Another is paid
without any regard to the Discount, and if he complains he is told for his
Edification, very Mathematically, That a Shilling is a Shilling Which Justice
is like that Mercy, the Apostle speaks of, consisting only in empty wishes and
cheap good will, who say to the Naked and Hungry, Be ye fed and be ye clothed
If things go on at this Rate Extortion and Justice, Mercy and Cruelty, will
live among men in Name only, how wide soever they are in their Real Differences.

(3) Let the College be the Subject of your Care, that it may be a Fountain
whose Streams may make glad the City of our God. Under your kind Influence, let
the Churches have Rest and be Edified. Let its Ministers in their depressed
Circumstances be remembered. Let the Schools both English and Indian, be the
Subject of your constant Regard; That Fund already laid, is of such a Nature
and Extent, which if it be as wisely improved as it has been kindly granted,
will have those Effects, for which after Generations will rise up and call you
Blessed. In a word, Consider all Orders and Degrees of men Let judgment run
down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream, Amos. 5.24.

2. In the next place I shall apply my self to my Reverend Brethren in the
Ministry. We have heard of the Obligations of Subjects to Civil Rulers. As we
disclaim the Popish Doctrine, Of Ecclesiastical persons being Exempt from Civil
Jurisdiction, Let us be Examples of Obedience, and Teach it others. Let us
render to Caesar the things that are Cesars, and inculcate this on our Hearers
We have received special Commision to do so. The Apostle says, Tit. 3.1. Put
them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates;
to be ready to every good works. Let us endeavor to bring them into Subjection
to CHRIST, which will contribute to their being good Subjects to the
Government. They that will not have this Man to Rule over them, will not Submit
to Humane Authority. As the weapons of our Warfare are mighty for the pulling
down the strong balds of Sin and Satan, diligently apply them, that Dagon may
fall before the Ark; if his Adherents raise him up again, let our Endeavors be
such that he may fall, be broken in pieces; that nothing (...) remain. Let us
Teach men, that denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, they may live
Righteously, soberly and godly in this present world. The more Converts we make
to Righteousness, and the more there are who are Savingly brought home to
Christ, and bro't into Conformity to Him and Obedient to His Government, so
many we have that we may depend on who will Obey the Civil Magistrate, not for
wrath but for Conscience sake. If we so do, and serve the best Interests of
this world, by promoting Peace, Order, and good Government, and the best
Interest of a Coming World, in bringing many Sons to Glory, this we may rely
on, That When the Chief Shephered shall appear, we shall receive a Crown of
Glory that fades not away.

3. In the last place, I apply myself to the Body of the People. Is it our duty
to render to Caesar the things that are Cesars? Be persuaded to answer this
obligation.

(1) That you may endeavor after a strict Union among your selves. Preserve
the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Division and Disunion among a
People renders them more untractable, more difficult to govern, less able and
willing to answer their Obligations to the Civil Rulers. A great firmness of
mind and unanimity is particularly needful at this time, that the Hand of the
Government may be strengthened; That Opposers seeing your steadfastness and
Order, may be discouraged. But if one be for Paul, and another for Cephas, are
ye not carnal, and walk as men? A men unacquainted with your Duty and Interest,
We may be each of us useful to the Government. For, the head cannot say to the
feet, I have (...) of you. But if we are dis-jointed, divided among our serves,
dissolution, (...) weakness ensues upon it as a natural Consequence: For a
Kingdom or House divided against it self cannot stand. Let us be as Jerusalem,
that is compact and close united, and stand fast in the Liberty in which we are
free.

(2) That we may answer these Obligations that we are under to our Civil
Rulers, let us be Frugal, and Moderate in our Expenses. Let us not live beyond
our selves, not live above our Quality, or Ability. The Apostle says, Phil.
2.3 Let each esteem Other better than himself. But being partial to ourselves,
we Over rate our own Merit and weigh our Quality by a false Standard, and
therefore make a wrong Judgment of our selves. This Rule therefore is not so
serviceable to us. But one would think we should not be mistakens as to our
Ability. A very small portion of skill in Arithmetic being sufficient to
determine that matter. But here again we are liable to mistake. We know indeed
our present Ability, but we depend greatly on what we think may be Hereafter
Thus many run into Debt without measure, and without end, hoping they shall be
able to Pay next Year, when they have no visible means for a ground of their
hope; and thus go on till their Creditor and their Poverty come upon them like
an armed man, And thine adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge
deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily, I say unto
thee, thou shall by no means come thence, till thou have paid the uttermost
farthing, Mat, 5.25, 26 This fills our Streets and our Courts with complaints.
The gates of Hell do not afford a more destructive Engine for the ruin and
destruction of men Soul and Body, than this false and ungrounded hope of what
may be done Hereafter. That we have over lived the Extravagant Expense of
Strong Liquor; and our multiplied Debts, are flagrant Proofs and Evidences of
this sad Truth: This is an hindrance to our answering the Obligations we are
under to our Civil Rulers. For,

[1] It renders us less Able. What can be spared for the (...) of Government,
when men have (...) their Substance in a course of Idleness Riotous Living?
Where nothing (...) had the King (...) his Right.

[2] As it Renders menless able, so they are more Unwilling and less Disposed
to answer their Obligations to the Civil Rulers. Persons deeply Involved and
greatly in Debt, Especially those who have been under flourishing
Circumstances, on whose Tabernacle the Candle of the Lord has shined in times
past, these are prone to grow uneasy and disaffected to the Government As the
Children of Israel when at any time it went hard with them, and this from their
own fault, yet they would vent all upon their Rulers. They murmured against
Moses and Aaron. Men of broken fortunes, men who have made shipwreck of a good
Estate and a good Conscience, they are fit for any rash adventure. Being full
of discontenct and despair, adhere to any Party, and fall in which any
Interest, though it be never so contrary to the true interest of the Government.
Of such as these was David's ragged Regiment composed The text faith, Every one
that was in distress, every one that was in debt, and every one that was
discontented Such as these despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities, Jude
8.

(3) Be faithful and painful in your Respective Callings. Idleness renders us
both unable and indisposed to answer our obligations to our Rulers, and
therefore unable to hold up our faces with comfort and confidence But, seek
thou a man diligent in his business, he shall stand before kings; he shall not
stand before mean men, Pr. 22.29. To Conclude, Let us be a humble and a
thankful People. And since through the tender mercy of a gracious God, we have
this Anniversary Solemnity renewed upon us, let us improve it in the best
manner. Be excited to Fear GOD and Honor the King. Discharge all duties, both
Personal and Relative, in such manner,and persevere in an holy and religious
course to the end, As that when we come to the end of our life, we may enjoy
the end of our hope, even the salvation of our Souls, That our great Lord and
Master may pronounce and say to every one of us, Well done, good and faithful
servant, Enter into the Joy of your Lord.

FINIS.

