The Reasonableness of Nonconformity to the Church of England, in Point of
WORSHIP.

A Second Defense OF A SERMON, preached at Newark, June 2. 1736. Entitled, The
Vanity of human Institutions in the Worship of GOD.

Against the Exceptions of Mr. JOHN BEACH, in his Appeal to the Unprejudiced.

Done in the Form of a DIALOGUE, wherein Mr. Beach's Arguments are all
expressed in his own Words.

By Jonathan Dickinson, M. A.

Not every Separation, but only a causeless Separation from the external
Communion of any Church, is the Sin of Schism. -- Imposing upon Men, under Pain
of Excommunication, a Necessity of professing known Errors and practicing known
Corruptions, is a sufficient and necessary Cause of Separation. -- To leave the
Church, and to leave the external Communion of a Church, is not the same Thing.
-- This little Armor, rightly placed, will repel all those Batteries, which
you threaten shall be so furious.

CHILLINGWORTH. I know that the common Sense of most that are serious in
practical Christianity, is against your formal Ways of Worship, and against the
Course that you have taken in this Land: but the Spirit of Profaneness
complieth with you, and doteth on you, in all Places that ever I was acquainted
in. Bear with plain Truth: it is in a Cause of everlasting Consequence.

BAXTER Boston, NEW ENGLAND, Printed and Sold by Kneeland and Green, 1738.

TO Mr. John Beach.
SIR,
IT is not from a Disregard to your Person, nor a Neglect of your triumphant
Performance, that I have not before now acknowledged your Favor; but from
bodily Indispositions, which rendered me incapable of writing As soon as I was
favored with sufficient Health and Leisure, I have given you the following
View of the Impressions your Letter has made upon me; and offered you the
Reasons why I am not convinced by your Arguments. Though I have not taken Notice
of all that appears exceptionable in your Letter, I think I have answered
whatever immediately enters the Merits of the Cause -- I have for the most Part
purposely overlooked your Flouts and Flee^s, and lest you in the undisturbed
Possession of your Merriment; being rather too old and too dull to answer such
Kind of Arguments, and to find out the Force of S^eer and Banter. -- Whether
you are convinced by (...) Reasonings, or not, you must (I think) acknowledge
the Justice of the Method I (...) taken to answer yours; your Arguments being
always proposed in the very Words of your Book And if you had taken the same
Method in your Appeal, you would have been voted a juster Disputant; though you
might have lo^^ some Occasions of Triumph and Insult. I hop^ I may now expect
the Justice from you (if you think this worthy of your Animadversions) that you
directly answer the Arguments here offered: and not (as before) evade what you
don't incline to answer; and change the Question in Debate, for what you think
more favorable to your Cause. -- Be pleased to take in good Part these Reasons
of the steadfast (...) unshaken Principles of

Elisabeth Town, Feb. 1. 1737, 8. Your old Friend, and humble Servant, I.
Dickinson.

Some of the principal Heads in this Debate.
OF requiring as religious Observances and Terms of Communion, what God has not
required as such: and the Case particularly stated, with Respect to the Church
of England. Page 12. Whether the Impositions in the Church of England do not
fall under Christ's Censure, Mark. vii.7. In vain do they worship me, teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. p. 27. Of Will Worship. p. 52. Of
imposed Forms of Prayer. p. ^2* Of vain Repetitions in the Common Prayer. p.
72. Of reading the Apocrypha in the Church. p. 78. Of the Sign of the Cross in
Baptism. p. 81. Of Kneeling at the Lord's Table. p. 88. Of Godfathers and
Godmothers. p. 95. Of the Burial-Office. p. 101* Of the Absolution of the Sick.
p. 103. Of Holy Days. p. 112. Of the People's bearing a Vocal Part in Prayer.
p. 122. N. B. Mr. Beach's Presbyterian
Orders not derived from mere* Laymen. p. 1^1* The New England Ministry, a tr^^
and valid Ministry by Mr. Beach's own Concession. p. 121, 2. Mr. Dickinson's
charitable Sentiments, as to the Church of England, and Arminians. p. 126*
ERRATA.
Page 20. lin. 29 read this l 36. r. jection p. 30 l* 35. r Institutions. p 33.
l. 15. r. consisted. p 35. l. 26* r. Matthew. xxiii. l. 26. r. called Masters. l.
36. r. Way^ p 49 l. 29. r. tell me. p. 54. l. 15. r. of Willworship -- l. 20.
r. unlawful. p 58. l. 32. r. inquire. p. 59. l. 3^ r. you please. p. 74. l. 2.
r. are no p. 83. l. 6. r^ ma^^fully -- l. 29 r. T^ssera. p. 87. l. 20. r. de
pseudogr. ^ 89. l. 24. r. clearer. p. 94. l. 1. r. ori. p. 99. l. 1. r. (...)
the.

The Reasonableness of Nonconformity, to the Church of England, in Point of
Worship, ARGUED, In a Dialogue between D. and B.
D. SIR, having lately published my Exceptions against your Vindication, I have
taken the Liberty of waiting upon you in Order to a free Conference upon the
Subject debated between us, that I may obtain your Sentiments of my Defense.


B. SIR, I have had a Sight of the DEFENSE of your Complaints against the
Church of England -- And I have so great a Value for your Person, and so just a
Sense of my Obligations to you, that though I am in a poor State of Health, and
the Task you have set me, by multiplying your Complaints, will necessarily
prove lengthy; yet having, as you tell me, a special Call, and as my own
Conscience assures me, a good Cause, I shall cheerfully undertake it. (p. 1.)


D. The Affair before us is a religious D^bate, which therefore deserves to be
treated with Meekness and good Temper. Neither your Cause, not mine, will gain
any Thing by our violating the Laws of Decency and good Manners. And it
concerns us to remember in this Debate, that the Wrath of Man works not the
Righteousness of God.


B. I pray God to give me a deep Sense of his Presence, and the impartial
Account he will call me to for every injurious Expression; and that I may
remember, that by my Words I must be justified, or by my Words I must be
condemned. (p. 2.)


D. By this your solemn Address to God, I may expect Nothing but fair
Treatment, no wrathful Expressions, no unkind Reflections: For those Things you
must own would be injurious. And I hope, the Book you object against, has given
you no Occasion of any Heat of Spirit; for I am not sensible of any Acrimony of
Style, or any abusive Language contained in it. I Am sure I endeavored in that
whole Discourse (notwithstanding all the Provocation given me) to treat you
like a Christian, and like a Gentleman.


B. The greatest Trouble I am like to meet with, is the naming your manifold
Untruths, Misrepresentations and Slanders. For though you don't think it any
Sin in you to commit them; and the Eye cannot see itself; yet I fear you will
count it unpardonable Bitterness in me to tell you, that you have committed
them. (p. 2)


D. Hold, Sir; have you so soon forgot your solemn Address to God! Could one
have expected, after such serious and solemn Expressions, that your very next
Words should have contained so much Heat and Bitterness! Can you persuade your
(...), or persuade the World about you, that these are not injurious
Expressions? Is it no injury to represent me to be so hardened in Impiety, as
to think it no Sin to be guilty of manifold Untruths, Misrepresentations and
Slanders? I hope, I have not deserved such a Character from you, or from any
Man else; And therefore entreat you, to leave off these Invectives, which no
Way enter the Me^its of the Cause; and I think can be no way serviceable to
your Reputation.


B. Pray, Mr. D. free your self from this blind and bitter Zeal, (p. 3.) What
do you mean by publishing such a scurrilous Libel? (p. 6) You have so
accustomed your self to make Complaints against that Church that never hurt or
injured you, that you think you may say any Thing right or wrong, so it b^ by
way of Complaint. As to notorious Untruths, I wonder that your Conscience did
not say that you a^e now writing such, (p. 11.) Pray let me ask you, is there
any such Sin as Slandering in the World? if there is, how can you excuse your
Assertions, than which Nothing can be more false. (Ibid.) You are so delight^d
with this vile Slander, that you are never weary of repeating it. (p. 20) Let
me entreat you to be Sober one Moment, and tell me, is this Reasoning, or is it
Raving? -- I suspect that you are dreaming and talking in your Sleep. -- It is
a Sign that your Brain is disturbed. (p. 21.) Did you use any Prudence, I had
almost said Conscience, when you published one of the blackest Slanders that
Pen could write? (p 52*) I^ I may judge by what I have s^en, there is more
(...) and Arrogance in the little Finger of a certain ^^^tleman, than I ever
observed in all the Bishops I have ever seen. (p. 54) Certainly you was reduced
to the dol^ful Necessity of the Woman Mrs. JUNO: Flectere si nequeo Superos,
Acheronta movebo.
in the Poet, who being enraged at her Unsuccessfulness in her Attempts, took
up this Resolution, Since Heaven is deaf, and will no Pity show,
I Will try what Hell and the black Host can do. (p. 66.)


But pray remember, that we write in the Presence of God, and must answer for
every unjust Insinuation* -- And much more for the blackest Calumnies. (ibid.)
Do such shameless Slanders become a godly Divine ^p. 83) You go on ranting and
railing, when your Conscience told you that we don't differ one Hair's Breadth
about the Thing: (p. 75.) By this I am thoroughly convinced, that in your
complaining against the Church, you have only acted a Part; and hence must
think that you meant no more by the frightful Accusations in your Books, but
only to please some uneasy People at Newark. (p. 105)


D. I have met with frequent Complaints, in the Management of Controversy, of
Personal Injury and Abuse: but don't remember that ever I saw a Paral^el to
this. How astonishing is this Conduct of yours! Is it possible, that a Man
under such solemn Impressions of his Account at the Day of Judgment for every
injurious Expression, as you just now declared, should be guilty of all these
Injuries? Is it possible for you to represent me as applying to Hell and the
black Host for Assistance, and in the very same Breath call upon me to
remember, that we write in the Presence of God, and must answer for every
unjust Insinuation? -- Can you think that none of these are injurious
Expressions? Is it no Injury to point me out as a vile scurrilous Libeller,
Slanderer and Calumniator, chargeable with notorious Falsehood and Untruth, as
designedly worshipping the Devil, and as acting a Part against my own
Conscience etc.? What Cause have I given you to esteem me such a profligate and
abandoned Creature?


B. Perhaps you may think I have been too tart in some Expressions. But if you
consider that you are the Aggressor, and have without any known Cause,
published a Set of virulent Charges against the whole Church of England, and
all the Rulers of the Nation both civil and ecclesiastical, who have
established and do uphold it; you cannot but think a little Warmth and Zeal not
only pardonable, but even justifiable, in vindicating so vast a Body of abused
Persons. (p. 106.)


D. Were this Charge true; and were you appointed Patron or Advocate of this
vast Body of abused Persons, methinks you might have thought of some way to
vindicate them without Swords and Staves. A good Cause needs no such Methods of
Defense; and a bad Cause will gain nothing by them, but deserved Contempt* --
However, I must confess, I am surprised at this Imputation. I thought I had
offered all my Exceptions, against what we esteem exceptionable in your Church,
with as much Temper and Decency as possible. Be pleased to give me some
Instances of that Scurrility and Virulency, you so tragically complain of; and
I will retract every Thing of that Nature as publicly as you please.


B. You have condemned all the Christians upon Earth, excepting a small
Handful, as Hypocrites, and vain Worshippers, and hateful to God (p. 37.) You
say, our Worship is exactly like the Worshippers of Baal their crying half a
Day, O Baal, hear us, (p. 48) You has condemned all Repetitions in Prayer. (p.
49) You call the Cross at Baptism a cursed Instrument, the principal Badge of
Popery (p. 53) You tell ignorant People, that we are like the Papists in their
Adoration of their breaden God, whom they carry about the Streets, that all
People may fall down at the Sight of it, and worship it as God Almighty. (p.
66.) You represent our most serious Devotions as vain, hypocritical, like the
brutish Cries of the Worshippers of Baal, as horrid Profaneness and mocking of
God. (p. 103.) Your Book throughout represents the Way that I am leading Souls
in, as the certain Road to Hell, my Worship you say is vain, my Doctrine is
Arminianism, and my Discipline none at all: and is not this the broad Way to
Destruction? (p. 105.)


D. I find many more such like Charges in your Appeal to the unprejudiced. But
I cannot but esteem this as an Aggravation, instead of an Excuse, of your bitter
injurious Treatment. -- For it is most certain, that there are no such
Expressions in my Book; but your self is the Author of 'em all. You seem now to
have lost the deep Sense of God's Presence, and the impartial Account he will
call you to for every injurious Expression, which you so seriously desired to
keep the Impression of. Are these Representations no injurious Expressions? Or
am I so vile an Antagonist, as to be incapable of receiving Injuries, that you
are so forward to fasten any Sort of Charges upon me, that you are willing to
have me wear?


B. I am resolved to be so far from exaggerating, that I will silently pass
over many of your lesser Mistakes, when they don't affect the Cause, though I
am persuaded, that you would insult over your Adversary more than a little, if
you found him guilty of such Blunders as in p 85, where you reckon up the
several Steps Christ took to accomplish our Redemption. First you reckon his
Nativity, and secondly his Birth, by which it is evident, that you don't know,
that his Nativity and Birth are the same Thing. (p. 2.)


D. I could have pointed out to you several more such Mistakes of the Press in
that same Discourse, that would have given you like Cause of Triumph. But these
(it seems) you have overlooked; and found out but this single Blunder (as you
are pleased to call it) to make your self merry with. This however you are
willing to set in as a ludicrous a View as you can, for the Diversion of your
self and your Reader. And since you are in this pleasant Mood, will you be
pleased to accept of a Rowland for your Oliver, which shall be at your Service
upon the easy Condition of your answering a few Questions. And first,

What Reason had you, in your Vindication, to charge me with notorious Untruths
etc.?


B. I would not call it a Lie, because that is provoking. I dare not call it a
Mistake, for I could not believe so knowing a Gentleman as you could so mistake
(p. 10) If your strange Mistakes had been committed by some old Woman, one
^ould pass them by with a Smile; but in so knowing and judicious a Man as you
it is unaccountable. (p. 40.)


D. Is this the Character of one who don't know that Nativity and Birth are the
same Thing It seems then, that I am a very ignorant, knowing and judicious Man.
But what do you think of my objecting against the Repetitions in the Li^any?


B. As I knew a crazed Man, who often was confident that he saw Apparitions in
the Air, when (...) the Apparitions were not in the Air, but in (...) disturbed
Brain: so the vain Repetitions are not in the Common Prayer; but in your
Imagination. (p. 51.) Pray rub your Eyes, and get them open; for it is a Sign
that your Brain is disturbed. (p. 21.)


D. Why do you talk so angrily, what Hurt has my Book done you?


B. I sincerely love you; and hope to meet you in a more peaceable World (p.
106.) But when People hear such wise and sober Divines as you, talk and (...)
at such (...), they presently think t^^t our Liturgy is a kind of Conjuring (p.
104) Do such shameless Slanders become a godly Divine? (p. 83.)


D. Thus you have given me a finished Character; Wherein (I must say with Mr.
Chillingworth) you have discovered in your self the true Genius and Spirit of
Detraction. According to your Description of me ( O Rem ridiculam, Cato, et
j^c^sam!) I Am an ignorant, false, knowing, judicious, crazed, wise, sober,
wicked, godly Divine: One that prays to the black Host of Hell, and yet one
whom you sincerely hope to meet in Heaven. -- But passing over these personal
Matters, be pleased to proceed.


B. I next observe that you complain, that I did not take Notice of your
imputing Arminianism to us. The Charge you have laid thus The generality of the
Clergy of the Church are professedly Arminians. And the Doctrine of original
Sin* of our Justification by the imputed Righteousness of Christ, of the
Efficacy of the sovereign free Grace of God, etc are exploded and ridiculed by
some of the most eminent Clergy of the Church of England. This is your black
and horrid Charge, against the generality, yea the most eminent of our Clergy
etc. You have no Proof that the generality of our Clergy are Heretics, but
what is invisible, which is much like silent Thunder. (p. 7, 8.)


D. Then you take this to be a black and horrid Charge, and Arminianism to be
Heresy.


B. It is crafty enough in you, to tell People that the Ministers of the Church
are Arminians. For they kn^w no Difference between an Arminian and a Socinian;
but take them to be some strange Monsters, of whom they had best have a Care.
-- Ask these Men what an Arminian is, and one will tell you that an Arminian is
one that expects to be saved by his good Works; another will tell you that an
Arminian denies free Grace; a third will say, that an Arminian is one who
denies original Sin. And he may as well say, he is one who denies a God or
Jesus Christ. (p. 8, 9)


D. You must mean by this (if you have any Meaning) that Arminianism is
innocent enough; and that the Imputation of it to your Clergy can be for
Nothing but an Amusement to the Populace, and an imaginary Scarecrow. So that,
according to you, I am guilty of a black horrid Charge of orthodox Heresy. But
tell me plainly, do you profess your self an Arminian?


B. Though I am under no Necessity; yet to gratify your Importunity, I will tell
you what I have learned to believe, by the little Acquaintance I have had with
the Writings of our Clergy. As to original Sin, I believe all Mankind are made
Sinners by Adam 's Sin: Or the Wrath and Curse of God for Adam's Sin, is due to
every Child born into the World. -- And so as to all the other Articles, I am
sure that in a sound Sense, the generality of our Clergy believe and preach
them. (p. 6)


D. As to the other Articles debated between the Arminians and us, you don't
tell us what is the sound Sense in which you believe them, whether it be an
Arminian or a Calvinist Sense. But it seems, you fully believe all Adam's
Posterity Sinners, exposed to the Wrath and Curse of God, due to them for his
Sin.


B. The Goodness of God made it impossible, that Adam's Posterity should be
eternally lost, and condemned to the Pains and Flames of Hell, any otherwise
than through their own personal Guilt and Wickedness. (p. 7, 8.)


D. A new Paradox! The Wrath and Curse of God is due to every Child, born into
the World, for Adam's Sin: And yet it is impossible, that Adam's Posterity
should be the Subjects of God's Wrath and Curse, but for their own personal
Guilt and Wickedness. However, you give us this Evidence of your being no
Arminian, that you believe original Sin.


B. One Thing more I would observe: first you say, we are Arminians; and then
you say, we explode original Sin. Now both cannot be true, for Arminius taught
the Doctrine of original Sin. (p. 8.)


D. Then it seems you are no Arminian; but it is a black horrid Charge to call
you so, because you believe the same Doctrine that Arminius did. Methinks it
might have been as much to the Purpose, to have declared, that you believe the
same Doctrines that the Calvinists do.


B. We dare not say, that millions of Infants are tortured in Hell to all
eternity, for a Sin that was committed thousands of Years before they were
born. -- And are such as these the Doctrines, you say, are so dear to the
Presbyterians at Newark? If so, I am sorry for them with all my Heart. (p. 6,
7.)


D. What do you mean by imputing these Doctrines to us? I have lived as long
among the Presbyterians as you have, and I never heard any Thing like this once
taught among them. We do all of us leave the future State of Infants to the
Righteous Determination of that God whose tender Mercies are over all his
Works, without such positive and bold Conclusions as you are pleased to make.
What Reason have you to suppose we are got so far into the contrary Extreme
from Arminianism?


B. I am sure, I have heard you preach as rank Arminianism as ever I heard in
the Church. -- I am sure, you can as safely join with the Church, as with the
Dissenters; for the most eminent of their Teachers, to my Knowledge, are as
much Arminians as our Clergy. (p 9.)


D. Then as to us (it seems) we are at the greatest Extremes from Arminianism;
and yet rank Arminians. And as to your Clergy, it is a black and horrid Charge
to call 'em Arminians; because we are as much Arminians as they, that is, we
are both Arminians. Shall we now sum up your Evidence upon this Head?

It is a black and horrid Charge, to impute the innocent orthodox Heresy of
Arminianism to your Clergy. As for your self, you are no Arminian; for you
believe original Sin: and so did Arminius. You believe the Wrath and Curse of
God for Adam's Sin, due to every Child born into the World; and yet due to
none, but for their own personal Guilt and Wickedness. As for us, you insinuate
we are at the most dangerous Extremes from Arminianism; (...) yet rank
Arminians. Our Teachers are as much Arminians as your Clergy, whom you are
proving to be no Arminians -- This I take to be a fair and just Representation
of your Reasoning, and the Sum of all you have offered upon this Head. And who
can be so blind as to fail of Conviction from such Arguments as these? I cannot
but say, as one in a like Case, Nubila men's est Haec ubi regnant. -- As to the
black and horrid Charge, as you call it, You your self know and do not deny,
and the World is sufficiently instructed, that the generality of your Clergy
that have lately written upon those Subjects, are of the Arminian or
Remonstrant Persuasion, in the five Articles debated between us and them. And
what Justice there is in your imputing the same Opinions to me, and to the most
eminent of our Teachers; I leave to the Censure of those, most acquainted with
our Ministry. -- And thus I am prepared to attend to what you have further to
say.


B: You say, I made no reply to the Reasons you offered against requiring as a
religious Duty, what God has not required as such. But did I not show, that you
and not the Church were guilty of this? And that you have made a Business even
in this Sermon to contradict your Text; and teach for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men? (p. 9.)


D. That we may " come out of the Clouds," and not contend in the Dark, it will
be proper to state the Case something particularly; and then let the World
judge, who requires as a religious Duty, what God has not required as such; who
are chargeable with Impositions upon Men's Consciences, and with teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men, you or We.

The Church of England is established upon a Hierarchy, consisting of
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans, Prebendaries, Rectors, Curates etc.
to whom may be added a List of Lay-Officers, such as Chancellors, Commissaries,
Proctors, Apparitors etc. None of whom (as established in the Church of
England) do we find once mentioned in the Scriptures. The inferior Clergy must,
upon their Admission to Orders, swear to perform true and canonical Obedience
to the Bishop, and to his Successors; though required to call no Man Master, but
Christ. When ordained to the Ministry, and by the awful Bonds of that sacred
Character, obliged to preach the Gospel, to be instant in Season* and out of
Season, they are not allowed to preach without the Bishop's License. That an
unlicenced Minister is bound by his Office to preach the Gospel; but by this
Order of your Church forbid to preach, till he has paid for a Liberty to do his
Duty. You tell us, that Christ has committed the Government of his Church only
to the Bishops; and yet a considerable Part of the Church of England is exempt
from episcopal Jurisdiction. Of this Dr Whithy Upon Romans XIV 6.
complains, that the Exemptions settled by the papal Authority, do put many
Parts of this Church into a very disjointed State; while in some Places the
Laity, and in many others the Presbyters, exercise episcopal Jurisdiction,
independent on the Bishops, in Contradiction to their Principles. In these
Exemptions, it is certain, the Bishop has no Jurisdiction at all. And the Case
is not much better any where else: For though the spiritual Courts be held in the
Name of the Bishop; yet the Power of Excommunication and Absolution belongs to
mere Laymen, who proceed without the Bishop's Direction; and can legally
proceed most contrary to his Will. That although all Power of Discipline i^ held
to be vested in him; yet he can exercise none, but as these Laymen please.
Discipline (says one of your own Authors) is lost; and will not be permitted by
the State, which by virtue of Conge d'estires, Quare Impedits, Prohibitions
etc. have made themselves the sole and ultimate Judges, not only of all Bishops
and Churches; but of their Excommunications, and every Exercise of their
spiritual Jurisdiction. Case of the Regal. and Pontif. p. 166.


And what Sort of Discipline is exercised in these spiritual Courts in the
Bishop's Name, but merely civil Penalties? If the excommunicate Person does not
satisfy the Court in forty Days, there comes out a Writ against him, which
commits him to Prison, where he must lie, till he pays the Fees of the Court;
and makes such Submission as is enjoined him. This he cannot escape, but by a
good round Sum of Money, which commonly will answer the End And how agreeable
this is to the Discipline Christ has appointed in his Church, the World must
judge. But whether agreeable or not, every Minister of the Church of England,
is obliged to publish to his Congregation, the Sentence of Excommunication
pronounced by these Laymen, though upon never so trivial Occasions. They must act
by an implicit Faith; and submit to this, if never so contrary to their own
Judgments. Such is the boasted Government of your Episcopal Church.

And it is much the same Case, with Respect to the Admission of Ministers to
their special Charge. The People are not only deprived of their natural Right
of choosing their Minister; but the Bishop himself, it seems, cannot refuse the
Clergym^n recommended by the Patron, how insufficient soever for the Charge.
And even this Right of Patronage is often bought and sold. It Is common to buy
the Right of the next Presentation to a Living, for any Expectant, who will
have a legal Claim to it, as soon as it becomes void. He will enjoy the
Benefits of it, how unqualified soever. The Bishop cannot prevent it. And there
are some Ministers that have the Income of several Parishes, which they never
take any Pastoral Care of at all. It Is enough if they commit the Work to such a
Curate as they can hire cheapest, while they themselves live in Splendour upon
the rich Revenues; and never so much as reside in their Parish.

Each Minister of the Church of England is obliged to admit to the
Lord's Supper all Officers that hold Commissions in the State, be they never so
profane; or else he may incur great Damages, if sued for refusing such an one
that holy Ordinance. Nor has he Power to keep the most notorious Sinners from
the Sacrament above fourteen Days; unless he will be at the very great Charge
of putting them into the spiritual Court.

And as to the Bishop himself, whom you suppose to be the Source of all
Jurisdiction, he is merely the King's Creature; and created by his Writ of
Conge d'Es^ire. All the pretended Election of the Dean and Chapter is but a
Piece of Pageantry. And what else can we suppose their solemn Prayer to God for
the Direction of the Holy Ghost, in the Choice of a fit Person for their
Bishop, when there is one already appointed, which they dare do no other than
accept, how disagreeable soever to their Minds!

This is the State of the english Hierarchy, unto which every Minister of your
Church is obliged to declare his unfeigned Assent and Consent. And unto which I
shall be ready in like Manner to declare my Assent, when you can prove it
agreeable either to Scripture or Reason. But in the mean Time you must pardon
me, if I can neither envy or imitate your Change; nor believe this the best
constituted Church in the World.

You have already heard my Exceptions against your Liturgy, with the long Train
of Rites and Ceremonies, which you acknowledge to be of human Original, without
any Scriptural Institution or Warrant; all of which must be complied with to a
Punctilio, by every Conformist.

And what is worse than all the rest, is the Injunction of all these Things,
and their Imposition as Terms of Communion, without the least Allowance for
scrupulous Consciences. We must approve of all these Things, how unscriptural
and unreasonable soever they appear to us; or be refused the Fellowship of your
Church, and be excommunicated Whosoever shall affirm, that the Form of Worship
in your Church is corrupt superstitions or unlawful, or contains any Thing in
it that is contrary to the Scriptures, is excommunicated by your fourth Ca^on.
-- Whosoever shall affi^m, that any of your nine and thirty (...) are (...) any
Part superstitious or erroneous, or such as (...) not with a good Conscience
subcribe to, is (...) by your fifth Canon. -- Whosoev^^ (...) affirm, that the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England may not with good Conscience be
approved, used and subcribed to, are excommunicated by your sixth Canon. --
Whosoever shall affirm, that the Government of the Church of England, by Arch
Bishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons and the rest that bear Office in the
same, is repugnant to Word of God, is excommunicated by your seventh Canon. --
Whosoever shall pretend to Groan under the Burden of certain Grievances,
imposed upon them by the Church of England, are excommunicated by your tenth
Canon. -- Whosoever shall affirm or maintain, that there are within this Realm
other Meetings, Assemblies, or Congregations of the King's born Subjects, than
such as by the Laws of the Land are held and allowed, which may rightly
challenge to themselves the Name of true and lawful Churches, are
excommunicated by your eleventh Canon.

This then is the State of the Case We must believe, that your Arch Bishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Rectors, Curates etc, have Scripture-Warrant, or
be excommunicated. -- We must allow, that your spiritual Courts managed by
Lay-Chancellors, Commissaries, Proctors, Apparitors, etc. and the Discipline by
them exercised, are agreeable to the Word of God; and that you are right in
solemnly confessing the want of that godly Discipline that was in the primitive
Church, every first Day of Lent; or we must be excommunicated* -- We must
acknowledge, that your Bishops have all the Power of Jurisdiction and
Discipline; and ^et allow it to be right, that they have no Jurisdiction at all
in the Exemptions; and that all the Power of Discipline belongs to your
spiritual Lay-Courts. -- We must allow, that your Ministers are bound by their
Ordination Vows to preach the Gospel; and yet bound not to preach, till the
Bishop's License is obtained and paid for -- We must allow, that Ministers are
under the most solemn Bonds of Duty, to take Care of the Flocks committed to
their Charge; and yet that it is lawful for them to have a Plurality of
Parishes, from whom they receive rich Benefices, and never perform any pastoral
Duty to them. -- We must allow, that it is a Minister's Duty, to take solemn
Care not to prostitute the sacred Ordinance of the Lord's Supper to scandalous
Persons; and yet that he must administer this holy Ordinance to every one that
bea^s Commission in the State, whatever his moral Character be; and to all
Persons that are sixteen Years old For all these by your Constitution are
obliged to communicate at Easter, under Pain of being Cited into the spiritual
Courts. -- In a Word, we must believe, that all your Rites and Ceremonies are
agreeable to the Word of God, ^ho' our Consciences dictate the contrary If our
Consciences cannot stretch thus far, if they fall short in any Instance, we are
ipso Facto excommunicated by your Canons. -- And now, Sir, I would enquire of
you, whether these Things are not Impositions; whether in these* or at least in
some of these Things, you don't teach for Doctrines the Commandments of Men?
Come, "flinch not, dally not."


B. You have proposed and required (as much as in you lies,) That as a
religious Duty, which God never proposed or required. Yo^ have taught People,
that it is a religious Duty to abstain from a stinted imposed Prayer, when God
never required Men to avoid it* You have taught it as a religious Duty, to sit
at the Sacrament; not to use a good Prayer, which the Papists use; when God
never proposed or required these Things. You* and not the Church, I showed, are
guilty of this Crime, ^f requiring that as a religious Duty, which God has not
required as such. (p. 9, 10)


D I shall not spend Time to complain of the Injustice of this Representation;
but consider it as respecting my Opposition to, and Objections against the
Imposition of your Rites and Ceremonies; And in that View of the Case, I take
this to be the Sum of your Reasoning. -- We don't like all your Injunctions and
Impositions; and must therefore be guilty of teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men We find Fault with some Things in your Church, which you
say are not expressly forbid or declared to be sinful in the Scriptures; and
whoever do so, require as a religious Duty what God has not proposed or
required; and are thereby guilty of the Charge in the debated Text. -- But will
this Reasoning hold good? What if those Things that are not in express Terms
forbidden in the Scripture, should prove inconsistent with the general Rules of
the Word of God; and if this should be the Case with respect to the Subjects
debated between you and me (as it may possibly appear to be, before we have
done) Is our objecting against these Things, nevertheless, teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men? If so, we have nothing to do, but to act by
an implicit Faith, and to take Care not to contradict any human Impositions,
lest we teach for Doctrines the Commandments of Men* And if so, your Church is
in the highest Degree chargeable, in rejecting so many Popish Rites and
Institutions, which are no where expressly forbidden in the Scriptures.

If you answer to this, that the Impositions of the Church of Rome, which you
have rejected, are contrary to the general Rules in the Word of God; and those
in your Church, which we reject, are agreeable to the general Rules in the Word
of God; and therefore we are chargeable with this Guilt, but you not: We have
then your Word for it on one Side of the Question, that your Impositions are
agreeable to the Word of God, We have also the Papists Word for it on the other
Side, that their Impositions are agreeable to the Word of God; And we have the
fullest Evidence in our own Minds, that they are neither one nor the other
agreeable to his Word How then must we understand this Argument of yours, so as
to find out by it who are, and who are not guilty of this Charge? Are all they
guilty, that reject such human Injunctions, as the Imposers themselves say are
agreeable to the Word of God? If so, the Church of England should well consider
what they have been doing, in rejecting the Mass Book. If not so, your Argument
comes to Nothing; for we have but your bare Word in Favor of your Impositions.
-- But perhaps you will tell us, that they are guilty, who reject such
Impositions as are really in themselves agreeable to the Word of God, without
Respect to any Man's Word for or against them. But then, how must his appear?
who must determine it? If the Imposers may determine the Case, we have the
former Consequences brought upon us. If it belongs to others to determine it,
no man can be guilty, who follows his Judgment and Conscience in rejecting
human Impositions.

But what can you mean, by our requiring a Reection of those Impositions as a
religious Duty; saving only, that we refuse to put our Necks into the Yoke you
have wreathed for us, and give our Reasons why we do so, while we are content
that those who are otherwise minded, should enjoy their own Opinion, and our
Communion too in all sacred Ordinances? All we demand of them, is to give the
same Liberty. We teach no Commandments at all but the Commandments of God; and
it is our known and received Principle, that we are to obey no Commandments but
his, in Matters of Religion, of Conscience, and eternal Salvation: While, you
acknowledge, that the debated Rites and Ceremonies you impose, are merely of
human Original. So that the great Question between you and me is, Whether they
are guilty of teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, who teach that
there are no Commandments in religious Affairs binding upon Men's Consciences,
but the Commandments of God; or they who teach, that the Commandments of Men
are also binding upon our Consciences: That is, in other Words, they who teach
for Doctrines the Commandments of God, or they who teach for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men?

Speak out plainly; do you impose any Thing upon Men's Consciences, or not? If
you do, the Case is determined, you teach for Doctrines the Commandments of
Men. If you do not, show us where these Things are required in Scripture, that
you enjoin and impose upon us. Answer this consistently; and the Debate is
ended.


B. Where has God commanded you to receive the Lord's Supper at Noon? Where has
God commanded you to give the Sacrament in leavened Bread? Where has God
commanded you to stand up when you preach? Where has God commanded you to
preach by Notes, to sing in Meeter, which is of late Invention? Where has God
commanded you to sit upright at the Communion, to give a Name in Baptism; and a
hundred Things more which you do without any Scruple? Speak to the Point, are
these Things from Heaven (...) of Man? (p. 31.)


D. Were it granted, that all those Things are human Inventions in the Worship
of God; I^ there no Difference between the practicing and the imposing these
Things? Are not every Body allowed Communion in our Churches, with ful^ Liberty
to act according to their own Conscienc^ in all these Things, or any other of
the like Kin^ that you can imagine? If there be any Particular that they don't
approve, they are welcome (...) join in what they do approve. There never wa^
amongst us any Censure passed upon any Person, (...) these Accounts But on the
contrary, your (...) are charged with the Thunderbolts of Excomm^nication,
against every one that will not agree with you, in every Punctilio of your
Hierarchy an^ uninstituted Rites. There can be no Abatemen^ of a Ragg of a
Ceremony, either for the Peac^ of our Consciences, or the Peace of the Church
and Nation: That we are forced to forsake the Church of England, or the Peace
of our own Consciences; and it becomes absolutely necessary tha^ the Church be
divided, or Multitudes of the be^^ Christians in the Nation must live in a
Course o^ Sin against their own Light; and this without an^ other Necessity,
than the Imposers Pleasure. For you own the scrupled Rites to be all of the^
indifferent, even those very Rites, on Accoun^ of which so many excellent Men
in our Nation are not only refused all Priveleges in the Church but all Offices
in the State.

If I should yet suppose these Things to be hu^man Inventions in God's Worship,
they are all of them (sitting at the Lord's Supper only excepted) what both you
and we agree in; and what are no where contested in any of the protestant
Churches. And therefore if these Things had been enjoined as Terms of
Communion, wo^ld there be no Difference between enjoining those Things which no
Body scruples; and imposing such Things as are conscienciously scrupled, by
much the greatest Part of the Reformation?

And lastly, there are none of your Instances (excepting that of sitting at the
Lord's Supper, which I shall have Occasion hereafter to consider more
distinctly) that come up to the Case debated between you and me. I opposed
human Inventions in the Worship of God: you instance in mere Circumstances and
Append^ges of Worship, which I before allowed to be nec^ssarily left to human
Prudence. There can be no Action without some necessary Circumstances; and
where these are not provided for in Scripture, they are left absolutely
indifferent to our own Choice. Thus for Instance, Christ has commanded us to
attend the Lord's Supper; but has not directed whether it shall be observed at
Noon or at Night, whether with leaven or unleavened Bread. It is therefore a
necessary Circumstance, that there be some Time appointed, and some Sort of
Bread provided, which must be left to human Prudence. So likewise, he has
required Ministers to preach; but has not told us whether standing or sitting,
with Notes or without; and the Posture and Methods of Preparation are necessary
Circumstances, that are left to our own P^udence, to be determined in each
Society, agreeable to the general Rules, that all Things be done decently and
in Order And the same may be said of the other Instances mentioned by you.
These are all natural Circumstances, that necessarily belong to every religious
Duty; and they must of Necessity be determined, or the Duty cannot be attended.
The Decision therefore of these Circumstances is required by the Law of Nature,
which is the Law o^ God, since they are not decided by the written Word. -- But
by what Argument will it follow, that because necessary Circumstances and
Appendages of Worship are left to human Appointment, that therefore unnecessary
and scrupled Circumstances of Worship, may be appointed and imposed? Or that
because mere Circumstances of Worship are left to human Direction, that
therefore new Acts, Modes, or Forms of Worship may be invented and enjoined?
And that all your unscriptural Hierarchy, all your Methods of Discipline, all
your Pluralities and Nonresidencies, all your Patronages and Sales of Advowsons
or next Avoydances, and all your Rites and Ceremonies, must be approved as
necessary to be complied with, for the Sake of the human Authority that enjoin
them? I think, Sir, that there is a very great Difference in the Cases; and
therefore that all you have said is nothing to the Purpose, unless you can
prove, that we are as much bound to obey, with an implicit Faith, whatever
unscriptural Institutions you are pleased to impose upon us, as to observe the
Regulation of those natural and necessary Circumstances, without which a
religious Duty cannot be performed at all.


B. You more than insinuate, that we teach our People a blind Obedience to
their spiritual Guides; and an absolute Subjection to their Imp^sitions. But
pray let me ask you* Is there any such Sin a^ Slandering in the World? If there
is, how can you e^cuse these Assertions? -- We do indeed teach our People, that
when our Governors command us to do lawful Things, it is our Duty to obey, and
that in Obedience to God, than which Nothing is more plainly taught in
Scripture, and Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, 1. Sam. xx.23. But if our
Rulers command what God has forbidden, or forbid what God has commanded, we
must die rather than obey them; and every Man must judge for himself, whether
the Rulers Command be repugnant to God's, or not. (p. 11.)


D. You should first have proved (what we deny) that God has given a
legislative Power to your Church, in the Affairs of Religion and Conscience; or
authorized any Men upon Earth, to make Laws and Institutions in Matters of his
Worship, and in the Affairs of Conscience and Salvation. Though we are bound to
obey our lawful and rightful Rulers, in all those Things wherein God has given
them Power to command us; yet we are not bound to obey all them that call
themselves our Rulers, nor even our lawful Rulers themselves in those Things
wherein God has not given them Power to command us. Be pleased therefore to
show us, whence this Authority is derived; and to whom it belongs: Whether to
the Rulers of the Church of Rome, and to the Inquisition, or to the Rulers of
the Greek Churches, or to the Rulers of the reformed Churches abroad, of the
Church of Scotland, of the Church of England, or of the Churches of this
Country, or to all of these: If to all of these, how can you justify the
Reformation, in Disobedience to the Rulers in the Church of Rome? If to the
Rulers of the Church of England only, let them produce their Commission,
whereby they have this Power, exclusive of others; and we will obey (...). But
I think, you will allow, that if this Authority is given to the Rulers of any
Church, it is given to the Rulers of every Church. This Claim must be every
where equal And as the Authority of every Church is equal, so their Decrees
must be equally binding by virtue of that Authority. The Decrees of the Council
of Trent must be as Obligatory upon our Consciences, as the Canons of an
english Convocation.

Nor will it at all help the Case, to qualify this Assertion by limiting this
imaginary Power to lawful Things. For who must be Judge in the Case, whether
these Things are lawful, or not? If the Church of England may determine this
Case, and we must stand to her Determination, her Power is absolute, and we are
under an Obligation to blind Obedience and absolute Subjection. And if your
Church is Judge whether her Injunctions are lawful or not, the Church of Rome
is also Judge whether her Injunctions are Iawful or not: And those that live
under her Government, are by the same Reason bound to obey in whatever she
determine^ lawful.

But you tell us, every Man must judge for himself whether the Ruler's Command
be repugnant to God's, (...) not. Now do but stand by this Concession, and the
Debate is ended. We then do judge for our selves, that all this pretended Power
to command, in the Points under Debate, is contrary to God'^ Command. We do
judge for our selves, that Christ has given Power to no Man upon Earth, to make
any such Injunctions, to ordain any such Impositions, or to vex our Consciences
with any such Inventions of Men. We do judge for our selves, that Christ only
is King in his Church; that here we have but one Lawgiver, who is able to save
or destroy, Jam. iv.12. And so by your own Confession, we are under no
Obligation to Obedience in the debated Points. -- If you enquire, In what then
are we to obey them, who rule over us in the Lord? I answer, In their teaching
us whatsoever Christ has commanded; and in Nothing else. It Is Authority enough,
to represent Christ's Person in explaining his Will to us; and we are bound to
obey them when they can convince us, that what they teach is agreeable to his
Will; and no further. That our Obedience to them must always terminate in
Christ's Authority; and not in theirs. For we may call no Man Master, since one
is our Master, even Christ. Mat. xxiii.8, 10.

Thus I am prepared to hear you upon the main Question debated between us,
Whether the Injunctions and Impositions in the Church of England are not
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, contrary to Mark vii.7.


B. I am to prove, that the Thing reproved by our Savior was not barely the
enjoining that innocent Rite of washing Hands; but the teaching that this was a
Thing necessary to avoid that Defilement, that would render them displeasing
and unacceptable to God. (p. 12.)


D. It seems, the Question between us is a very slippery Thing, that gets
easily out of Hand, and indeed quite out of Sight. In my Sermon on this Text I
endeavored to show, that proposing and requiring as a religious Duty what God
has not proposed as such nor required of us, the enjoining Terms of Communion
which God has not enjoined, and the imposing any Terms of Communion by penal
Sanctions, is teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men In Opposition to
which, you in your Vindication assert, That to teach for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men, is no more nor less, than to teach that That is a divine
Law or Ordinance, which is really but an human Appointment; When Men father
those Practices on God which have only an human Original. -- That what our
blessed Savior means by teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, is to
teach that human Customs are divine Laws. p. 5, 7.

In my Defense, I endeavored to vindicate my own Sense of this Text, and to
refute yours. Your Sense of my Performance may be conjectured by this, that you
are pleased not only wholly to overlook all my Arguments; but entirely to change
the Question, and to put the Debate upon a new Foot.

How, I beseech you, came it the Matter for you to prove, that the Thing
reproved by our Savior was not barely enjoining that innocent Rite of washing
Hands; when that which was before asserted by you, and should now be defended,
was, that what our blessed Savior meant, was their belying God, adding to his
Law, and teaching that he has commanded what he has not commanded, or forbidden
that which he has no where forbidden, p. 7 Have you now given up that Case? Do
you acknowledge, that you had put the Contro^ersy upon a wrong Issue; and that
your Vindication is indefensible; that you have nothing to say in Proof of
these Assertions, Nothing in Answer to my Arguments against them?

Besides, you know that this is what I never opposed. It was not bare
Injunctions; but Church Injunctions, religious Injunctions; and the making
these Injunctions Terms of Communion* that I supposed to be condemned by our
blessed Savior, and to be teaching for Doctrines the Commandment; of Men. So
that all your Pains is quite Cost; and all your Reasoning a mere trifling
Impertinence.

You tell us* that the Thing reproved by our Savior was the teaching, that
this was a Thing necessary to avoid that Def^lement, that would ^^^der then
displeasing and unacceptable to God But what I pray is this to the Purpose? How
does this justify your Vindication, that had taught so very different a
Doctrine? Is it the same Thing to teach, that this is necessary as a Tradition
of the Elders, to avoid that Defilement that would render them displeasing to
God; and to teach that this was a divine Command?

And how does this acquit the Church of England from the same Charge here laid
against the Pharisees? Don't they also teach, that Conformity to their
Institutions is necessary to avoid that Defilement, that would render us
displeasing and unacceptable to God? And don't you your self also teach us the
same Thing? What mean these hideous Outcries of damning Schism, with which we
are attacked from every Quarter, for our Nonconformity to the Church's
Institutions? Is there no Defilement in Schism, that renders Men displeasing to
God? How came we all to be excommunicated by your Canons? Will your Church
excommunicate Men for such Things as have no Defilement in them, that renders
them displeasing to God? Don't you your self represent us as guilty of
Rebellion which is as the Sin of Witchcraft? And is there no Defilement in
Rebellion and Wi^chcraft, that renders Men displeasing to God? Be so kind as to
tell me, are we under any religious Obligation to observe your Church's
Impositions, or not?


B Primarily and of it self the Law of God only obliges the Conscience; because
God only has a direct Power over the Conscience; but ecclesiastical Laws in
directly and by Virtue of God's Law When therefore in such Cases we obey the
Commands of our Rulers, we don't so properly obey them as God. (p. 16.) When
these Circumstantials are once determined by human Authority, they cease to be
indifferent to Subjects, though they remain indifferent still in their own
Nature. (p. 19)


D. Well then, I hope we shall hear no more of these Things being indifferent,
since you own that they cease to be indifferent to Subjects, when once they are
determined by human Authority Are not all the contested Rites and Institutions
of your Church, determined by human Authority? And therefore, whatever they
were originally in their own Nature, do they not by this Conclusion of yours
cease to be indifferent now they are determined? I hope you will not pretend, that
they are indifferent and not indifferent at the same Time. -- I hope also you
will no longer pretend, that you place no Religion in these Things, since you
tell us, when in such Cases we obey the Commands of our Rulers, we don't so
properly obey them as God For all Religion consists in Nothing else but
Obedience to him.

And to apply this to the present Question. If these Things, being determined
by human Authority, are become necessary to Subjects, is there no Defilement in
the Neglect of necessary Duties, that will render us displeasing and
unacceptable to God? If these Institutions are to be observed in Obedience to
God, is there no Defilement in Disobedience to God, that will render us
displeasing and unacceptable to him? Thus you see; that all your Pains upon
this Subject might have been well spared, unless your Reasonings had been more
to the Purpose. -- It would be but a trifling Mispence of Time, to take any
Notice of your impertinent evading the Point in Debate; and your artful
changing the Question between us.

In a Word, turn which Way you will or can, this Charge will stick too close to
be shaken off. Whatever Church enjoin their own Instructions in religious
Affairs upon the Consciences of Men, are by your Concessions, chargeable (in
the same Respect that the Pharisees were) with teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men. If it were supposed, as was asserted in your Vindication,
that the Pharisees Guilt lay in teaching that human Customs are divine Laws p.
7.
Don't you your self teach the same Thing? when you tell us, that your
eccl^siastical Laws do oblige us indirectly* and by Virtue of God's Law; and
when in such Cases we obey our Rulers, we don't so properly obey them as God.
They taught, (you say) that their Observances were a divine Command. p. 6.
You teach, that your Institutions must be observed by Virtue of God's Law; and
that it is our Duty to obey, and that in Obedience to God. Appeal p. 11.
Now I entreat you to show me the D^fference between your Doctrine and theirs.
They require their Observances as Commands of God. Your require yours in
Obedience to God; and consequently because God has commanded them. How can they
be observed by Virtue of God's Law, if God's Law don't require it; or in other
Words, if God don't command it? Whether this Command be direct or indirect,
it is Nothing to the Purpose, as long as you require our Conformity to your own
Inventions, as much as the Pharisees did, in Obedience to God; and by Virtue of
his Law

If it be supposed, as you now assert, that the Pharisees Crime lay in
teaching, that this was a Thing necessary to avoid that Defilement, which would
render them unacceptable and displeasing to God; Don't you also teach the same
Thing, when you tell us, that when once these Circumstantials are determined by
human Authority, they cease to be indifferent to Subjects? That is, they become
necessary Duties. And I Am sure, it is a Defilement displeasing to God, to
neglect necessary Duties; unless our Obedience be indifferent and necessary at
the same Time.

If it be supposed, as you tell us in your Appeal p. 12. that the Pharisees
enjoined their Observance of these Things, without any Regard to human
Authority imposing or requiring it: Yet you your self do in Effect teach the
same Thing, when you tell us, that we don't so properly obey our Rulers in
these Observances, as God. That is, that the required Obedience is properly to
be performed, not to our Rulers, but immediately to God: or in other Words,
that we obey without Regard to human Authority; but properly with Regard to
God's Authority, imposing or requiring our Obedience: The very Thing you
condemn in the Pharisees. If this Imagination of yours, which you so strongly
assert without any Proof, or possibility of Proof, were therefore indeed the
Case of the Pharisees* I don't see how it will help you. I cannot understand
what Difference you can possibly make, between your Case and theirs; unless it
be proved, that it is more innocent in it self to impose all your Rites,
Ceremonies, and unscriptural Institutions upon the Consciences of Men, than for
the Pharisees to enjoin the washing of Hands before Meat.

If you object against all this, that the Pharisees esteemed it a moral Evil to
omit the washing of Hands, before Meat; I would enquire, whether you esteem it
a moral Evil, or not, to refuse Subjection to the Imposi^ions of the Church of
England? If so, if it be Rebellion which is as the Sin (...) Witchcraft, if it
be Disobedience to God, to refuse Subjection to these Things: The Sentence is
yet passed from your own Mouth; and by your Decree the Case is the same. But it
seems a moral Evil, we are under no moral Obligation to observe your
Injunctions; and are guilty of no Sin in rejecting them. Now try your Skill.
Fasten, if you can, any Fault upon the Pharisees in the Case before us, that
will not by the same Argument be chargeable upon any Church in the World, that
impose human Impositions in religious Affairs upon Men's Conscience.


B. Is it not undeniably evident, that the Pharisees taught People, that if
they did not wash their Hands before they eat, some of the Filth might mix with
their Food, and go down into their Heart or Soul, and pollute it; and so render
them detestable in the Sight of God. The Truth is, the Pharisees had made a
Religion which onsisted in their own superstitious Opinions and Conceits, about
washing Hands, Cups, Pots, brazen Vessels, and Tables, Mark vii.4. Those human
Inventions were taught for Doctrines, i. e. divine Ordinances p. 14.


D. I shall not spend Time to make any Reflections upon your Anatomy, nor to
compare it with your Divinity You would perhaps not take it kindly, if I should
enquire of you, what Passage you find for the Food into the Heart, or what Part
or Nook of the Soul the Pharisees supposed the Food went into for Concoction,
when it went down into the Heart or Soul, and polluted it. But that which I Am
to consider is, in what Respect the Doctrine of the Pharisees was more
superstitious than the Doctrines of any Church in the World, that enjoin and
impose their own Impositions upon Men's Consciences in the Worship of God. What
is Superstition* but a religious Injunction or Observance, that God has not
commanded or required? Now let this be applied to your Impositions. Has God
required Obedience to these, or has he not? If you tell us, he has required
Obedience to them, show us the Stature, and we submit. If he has not required
Obedience to them, they are supra Statutum* and it is Superstition to impose
them upon our Consciences

But the Pharisees (you say) taught these human Inventions for Doctrines, i e.
divine Ordinances. And pray don't you teach your human Inventions for Doctrines
too? Don't you teach us to observe them even in the Worship of God? And don't
you even teach, that they are divine Ordinances, when you require our
Observance of them in Obedience to God, and by Virtue of his Law?


B. Christ never condemned the Use of innocent and indifferent Rites, when they
were not taught as divine Ordinances. Nay though they in Authority did abuse
their Power, binding heavy Burdens and grievous to be born; yet said he to his
Disciples, the Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses's Chair, all therefore they
bid you observe, that observe and do. Mat. xxiii.1, 2. (p. 15.)


D. It Is most certain, that Christ did forbid the Use of this innocent and
indifferent Rite of washing Hands before Meat, when it was enjoined as a
religious Duty; though there be not a Word in all the Context (nor have you
pretended to bring the least Evidence but your own Assertion) that they taught
this to be a divine Ordinance. It Is plain from the Text: It Is plain from the
Words of the Prophet, from whom our Savior quoted this Text, that the bare
imposing their own Institutions as religious Duties, the bare teaching their
own Precepts as religious Observances, was the Thing condemned by our blessed
Savior. Their Fear toward me (says the Prophet) is taught by the Precepts of
Men, Isa. xxix.13 That is (says a famous Expositor upon the Place) they Worship
me, not in such a Way and Manner as I have commanded and perscribed: but
according to their own and other Men's Inventions. Not a Word in the Prophet,
not a Word in the Evangelist, of any Pretense that these Things were divine
Commands: This is the mere chimerical Imagination of Mr. Beach, and the Authors
he copies from. It Is true, they thought it a Defilement, not to observe the
Tradition of the Elders; and so does every Church practically declare, that
enjoin their own religious Appointments upon Men's Consciences. But how (I
beseech you) does that prove, that they taught these Precepts to be immediately
divine Ordinances?

Does Christ never condemn the Use of innocent and indifferent Rites, when they
are not taught as divine Ordinances? Yes, Sir, Christ ever condemns the Use of
any Rites (how indifferent soever) being imposed upon Men's Consciences, and
made the Matter of religious Worship. Matthew. xx.25, 26. The Princes of the
Gentiles exercise Dominion; and they that are great, exercise Authority upon
them: but it shall not be so with you. Matthew. xxii 10. Neither be ye called
Master, for one is your Master, even Christ. Matthew. xxviii.18, 20. All Power is
given to me in Heaven and in Earth: go ye therefore etc. teaching them to
observe all Things, whatsoever I have commanded you. Romans xi^.4, 10, 13, 15,
21. Who art thou that judge another Man's Servant? To his own Master he
stands or falls, But why do thou judge thy Brother, or why do thou set
at naught thy Brother? Let us not therefore judge one another any more; but
judge this rather, that no Man put a stumbling Block, or Occasion to fall, in
his Brother's Way^ But if thy Brother be grieved with thy Meat, now walk
thou not charitably Destroy not him with thy Meat, for whom Christ died. It is
good neither to eat Flesh, nor to drink Wine, or any Thing whereby thy Brother
stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak Gal. v.1, 12, 13. Stand fast
therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free; and be not
entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage. I would they were ev^n cut off which
trouble you. For, Brethren, ye have been called unto Liberty Col ii 8. Beware
lest any Man spoil you through Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Tradition
of Men after the Rudiments of the World; and not after Christ. Jam iv 12 Then
is one Lawgiver, who is able to save or destroy. Who art thou that judge
another? In these and many other Places of Scripture, does our Lord deny to all
the Men in the World, any Authority to impose upon Men's Consciences; and
condemns all such Impositions, whatever Pretenses to Indifferency may be made
by the Imposers.

It Is true, our blessed Savior did require his Disciples to hearken to the
Scribes and Pharisees Doctrine: but this must be understood to imply such
Doctrine only, as was agreeable to the Word of God. For in the following
Verses, he forbids his Disciples to imitate them; and forbids them to call
either the Pharisees or any Men else Masters; so that they were to observe what
they bid them do, with this Limitation, that they acknowledged no Master but
Christ, verse 10. And consequently they were not allowed to submit to any of
their own Inventions, Dictates, or Injunctions.


B Consider the monstrous Consequences that necessarily follow your Position,
that we must not submit to the most innocent or indifferent Rites when enjoined
by lawful Authority. If this be allowed of, then there can be no such Thing as
Obedience to Rulers. The Scripture is very full and express in requiring us to
submit to them that have the Rule over us, and obey them: but now there is no
Room for this Submission, if we will not allow them to interpose their
Authority, in such Things as are indifferent and innocent.


D. Here again you have entirely changed the Question between us; and have
therefore spent a great deal of Pains to no Purpose. The Question in Debate is,
Whether any Authority in the Church may impose any human Institutions in God's
Worship, and in religious Affairs, upon the Consciences of Men; and whether we
are under any Obligation to obey such Institutions, how innocent and
indifferent soever they may be in themselves, abstracted from the Consideration
of their religious Use, and human Original? This is the State of the Case
between us, as it was particularly considered in the Sermon you oppose* And the
Affirmative it* this Question is what you ought now to have proved, if you
would say any Thing to the Purpose: But it seems, you thought you could
harangue more plausibly upon another Subject. And therefore rather chose to
lose Subject in Debate, than to lo^^ (...) Opportunity of Insult and Triumph.
But let us consider the Case in a proper Light; and see whether any of these
monstrous Consequences that you speak of, will necessarily follow from my
Position.

You must remember, that the Extent of our Obedience either to natural or civil
Rulers* in Affairs that are under their Cognizance, is quite out of the
Question; and therefore all the fine Flourishes in your Appeal, serve for no
other Purpose, but to set off the Promptness of your fruitful Invention. And as
to ecclesiastical Rulers, 'twould not have been improper for you to have laid
the Foundation of your Insults, upon some Pretense o^ Proof, that there is such
Authority by Heaven committed to them, as I am impleading. For, as Mr.
Chillingworth observes, "Man cannot be obliged by Man, but to what either
formally or virtually he is obliged by God; for, all just Power is from God.

You charge it as my Position, that we must not submit to the most innocent and
indifferent Rite when enjoined by lawful Authority; and if you had added, when
the lawful Authority enjoin such Rite as a Part of the Worship of God, make it
a religious Duty, or impose it upon Men's Consciences, I own it to be my
Position. For in such Case, the lawful Authority go beyond their Power; and
invade the Prerogative of the great Head and King of the Church. Their
Injunctions are not therefore to be submitted to, out of any Regard to their
Authority imposing them upon us. I have said something to this already, that
will (I think) help to illustrate and confirm this Position. Let us now see
what Work it will make, to invert this Proposition; and assert the contrary for
Truth.

If you contradict what I delivered in my Sermon, and have endeavored to
defend, you must assert, That i^'s always our Duty to submit to those Rites and
Institutions, that are originally and of themselves innocent and indifferent,
when they are made religious Duties, brought into the Worship of God, made
Terms of Communion, and imposed upon our Consciences, by the lawful Authority
in the Church. Is this Doctrine true, or is it not? I think you must
acknowledge, that it is either true or false. If false, all human Institutions
in the Affairs of Religion, all Church-Impositions, all Terms of Communion
which Christ has not appointed* m^st fall to the Ground; and the Debate between
you and me is decided against you For how innocent and indifferent soever
origina^ly and in themselves, all your Hierarchy, all the Constitutions and
Institutions of your Church, and all your Rites and Ceremonies of human
Invention, may be imagined; yet their being made religious Duties, their being
brought into the Worship of God, and imposed upon our Consciences, expose them
as much as any others, to be rejected, if we are not always under Bonds of
Obedience to the Authority that impose such Things upon us. I must therefore
necessarily suppose, that you hold this Doctrine for true. Your Cause requires
that you should, and both your Books are a mere impertinent Evasion, if you do
not hold it for Truth. Let us then consider the Consequences, and see which
Position affords those that are most monstrous, yours or mine.

The wetting our Fingers in Water, is certainly in it self an innocent Action:
How then came the Church of England to scruple and leave off the Use of Holy
Water, when they entered the Church, since it was required by the lawful
Authority of the Church of Rome? And since Unction is a harmless Action, how
comes it about that the Church of England while it retains the Cross in
Baptism, has thrown out Chrism? The making the Sign of the Cross, you must
acknowledge in it self an innocent Action: Why then don't you, as formerly,
cros^ your selves upon all Occasions, in Conversation as well as in Worship,
and in one Part of Worship as well as in another? The bowing the Head, o^ the
Knee, is in it self an innocent indifferent Rite^ What Reason can there be to
scruple doing this before the Image of a Saint, and before a Crucifix, any more
than toward the Altar? Thus yo^ see how quick this Doctrine will lead us to
Rome. For you know that all these Things, and multitudes more of the like
Nature, are required by the lawful Authority in that Church. And I am afraid
that this Doctrine will even carry us further than Rome, if we receive it in
all it is necessary Consequences. What can be in it self more innocent, than
throwing a little Frankincense into the Fire? What then ai^'d the Crowd of
Martyn in the heathen Persecutions, to sacrifice their Lives to their own
Obstinacy, rather than burn a little of this fragrant Gum in an Idol's Temple,
when commanded by the supreme Authority in the State, and high Priest in that
Pagan Church; and even when they were allowed to reserve the inward Thought and
View to themselves? And it is more than an innocent Thing, to eat Victuals when
hungry: What hurt then canit be to eat well dressed Food, when one is hungry,
in an Idol's Temple, if it be required by lawful Authority? And yet the Apostle
Paul was so scrupulous, as to forbid it; and to call it a partaking of the
Table of Devils, 1. Cor. x.21 -- What say you to these Things? Do you scruple
any of them? Will Not you obey the Authority that requires these innocent and
indifferent Rites! Why, there is no Room at all for your Submission to
Authority, if you will not allow them to interpose in such Things as are
indifferent and innocent, as all these Things are originally and in themselves.

But perhaps you would further limit this Rule of our Obedience; and tell us,
that we are only to submit to those Rites and Institutions, that are in all
their Circumstances* after their Imposition, innocent and indifferent. But then
you ^our self have assured us, that there can be no such Case; and that the
Imposi^ion it self takes away their Indifferency* You have taught us, that when
once these Circumstantials are determined by human Authority, they cease to be
indifferent to Subjects; that is, they become necessary Duties. And therefore
you must by this Rule, be bound to observe all these Things I have newly
mentioned; or at least they must all be thus bound, that live under Popish and
Pagan Government.

Besides, for you to say, that the Things in Debate between you and me are
innocent and indifferent after they are imposed, would be a barefaced begging
the Question. The very Thing you opposed, and what you ought to have disproved,
was, that there are no human Institutions in religious Worship, no Impositions
upon Men's Consciences, innocent and indifferent after their Imposition, how
innocent and indifferent soever originally and of themselves. This was what I
endeavored to prove; and it was your Business to have answered my Arguments:
but this you have never attempted. It does not therefore make a very good
Appearance, for you now to take this for granted, without any Proof.

But if you were allowed this Limitation, it will not at all help your Cause. For
who must be Judges, whether these religious Injunctions are innocent and
indifferent, in all their Circumstances, after they are imposed? Must the
Imposers judge? If so, they will be sure to judge in their own Favor. The
Papists themselves will never plead Guilty. They'^l determine, that all their
Institutions are innocent and indifferent; and they that live under their
Government must notwithstanding this Limitation, submit to them all. But if we
must judge for ourselves, there are none of 'em innocent and indifferent when
once they are imposed; and so we are not bound to Obedience to any of 'em, to
one religious Injunction more than another. Here again I provoke you to try
your Skill; and see if you can by any Art avoid "the monstrous Consequences
that necessarily follow your Position."


B. Your Gloss upon this Text is one of the wildest and most extravagant
Fancies that ever was published in the World; That an innocent and lawful Thing
becomes unlawful, when once it is commanded by lawful Authority; when it is so
far from that, that then it becomes a Duty. (p. 17.)


D. Well, then it ceases to be indifferent as soon as it is commanded; for it
is not indifferent whether Duty be performed or not. If it by this Means
becomes a Duty, then there must be no Limitation to our Obedience in this Case.
All Things that are indifferent in themselves, lose their Indifferency as soon
as commanded. They become a Duty; and must be observed as soon as required and
enjoined by the lawful Authority in the Church of Rome, or any where else, as
well as when enjoined by the lawful Authority of the Church of England. But how
does this become a Duty? Is it by Virtue of the Authority that commands it? If
so, it is the Duty of all under the papal Government, to obey all their
Injunctions before considered For they are all innocent and indifferent in
themselves; are all commanded; and they have determined of 'em all, that they
are innocent after their Injunction. I hope you will not pretend to that Authority
in your Church, that you will allow no where else. If you pretend to found this
Duty of Obedience upon God's Authority, that requires Subjection to Rulers,
this also brings all the same Consequences upon you. For this Doctrine is just
as true at the Vatican, as at Lambeth; and you are as much bound to obey
Authority at Rome, as in England; as I have observed before.

To sum up all in a Word: We must allow Submission to all religious Injunctions
and Impositions upon Men's Consciences of human Invention, which the Imposers
are pleased to call innocent and indifferent; or we must deny a Submission to
all such Injunctions. They are all of 'em a Duty, or none of 'em a Duty. There
is no possible Medium. Distinguish here, if you can; and set such Limitations
to this Duty of ecclesiastical Obedience, in the Affairs of Religion and
Conscience, as will not either exempt us from any Obligation to Conformity to the
Church of England, or else oblige all that live in Popish Countries, to a
Conformity to the Church of Rome.


B. Well, since you have concluded that the Scriptures don't expressly forbid
saying Mass, I would have you rub your Forehead once more; and even face us
down, that it is as lawful to go to Mass as to go to Church. (p. 33.)


D. How often have I told you, though I acknowledge there is the greatest
Difference in the Nature of the Things imposed, in the Church of Rome, and in
the Church of England, that I could yet see no Difference at all in the
Authority to impose them. But since you still insist upon this Point, let us
consider the Case a little distinctly.

The Church of Rome has (without any Scripture Pattern or Precept) appointed
an Hierarchy, consisting of Archbishops, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Rectors,
Curates etc. which are also to be found in your Church. The Church of Rome has
also appointed a Number of Cardinals, Abbots, Monks, and in a Word a variety of
Orders, both regular and secular, which your Church has rejected. Now I would
enquire, what Authority that Church has to appoint the former of these Orders,
which she has not to appoint the latter, since both are human Institutions,
without any Foundation in Scripture. The Church of England have set up
spiritual Courts, consisting of Laymen, such as Chancellors, Commissaries,
Proctors, Apparators, etc. with Power to inflict pecuniary and corporal
Punishments, upon the Transgressors of their ecclesiastical Laws. The Church of
Rome have set up an Inquisition, to inflict corporal Punishment in like Cases.
I again enquire* what Authority the Church of England has, for the one of
these Courts, that the Church of Rome has not for the other? The Church of
England have a Prayer Book of human Invention, which they impose upon their
People, as the Medium of Devotion, and a Term of Communion. The Church of Rome
also has a Prayer Book of human Invention, which they likewise impose in the
same Manner. And I entreat you to tell me, what Authority you have to impose
your Liturgy, which they have not to impose their^* The Church of England use
the Sign of the Cross at Baptism: The Church of Rome use it in various other
Cases. And have not they the same Authority for their Use of the Sign of the
Cross, as you have for yours? The Church of England have a Book of Canons, by
which you excommunicate all Dissenters: The Church of Rome have Books of Canons
or Decretals, by which they excommunicate all Heretics. And han't they the
same Authority that you have, to excommunicate all that reject their
unscriptural Institutions? I might mention a great many other Instances of the
same Kind, to exemplify the Case. But do you your self think of what Instance
you please; and the same Consequences will follow. I am at an ^^ter Loss what
Answer you can give to this, if you will undertake to answer to the Purpose. If
you tell me, that the popish Impositions are in themselves sinful; and are
therefore to be rejected: I allow it to be true. But what Answer will you give
to such an Exception against your Impositions, if it should happen to be made?
What Answer can you give to the Objection that is constantly made, that all
these Impositions upon Men's Consciences are always in themselves sinful; that
the Church of Rome may not likewise make in Vindication of theirs? You esteem
yours agreeable to the Scripture, and they esteem theirs so. And whoever
conscienciously scruples either the one or the other, are of a contrary
Opinion. There can be therefore no dernier Resort in this Case, no Decision,
but Church Authority, which I think must be acknowledged equal both in Rome and
in England, which was the Thing to be proved. -- In a Word, there can be no
Reason given for (...) monopolizing this Church Authority to your selves. And
therefore you must approve of it in Rome, as well as in England; or acknowledge
that both are obli^ed to leave those Things indifferent, which Christ has left
so. And why is it not so done?


B. When you ask, why they did not leave those Things indifferent, you may as
well ask, why they took any Care about the Worship of God? And why they did not
leave every Man to his Fancy and wild Humor? (p. 19.)


D. Will Not this Argument sound as well from the Mouth of a Papist, as a
Prot^stant? Is there not as much Occasion to take Care of the Worship of God in
Rome, as an England? Are Men any more to be left to their Fancies and wild
Humors, in the one than the other Church? But how trifling is this Pretense,
wherever it is made? If they leave every Thing indifferent, which Christ has
left indifferent, there will be the same Care taken about the Worship of God,
which our blessed Lord himself has taken; and is not that sufficient Care o^
the Worship of God? They will in this Case leave no Man more to his Fancy and
wild Humor, than Christ himself has done. Consider therefore where this
Imputation will terminate.


B. I will also ask you the same Question. Suppose I should turn Dissenter
again, and have a Mind to join with you: Why will you not leave those Things
indifferent, which Christ has left indifferent? Why will you impose upon me
those Terms of Communion, which Christ has not imposed? Why will you oblige me
to receive the Sacrament at Noon, in leavened Bread, at the Hands of a Layman,
when you allow Christ never appointed these Things? Why will you impose upon me
a Prayer of your own Inv^ntion, when a well digested Form that I am acquainted
with before hand is to me much better and more edifying? Why will you oblige me
to pull off my Hat at the Lord's Table, when Christ allows us a friendly
Familiarity with him at his Table, and never commanded Men to put off their
Hats? And why must I conform to many other Ceremonies, which God has left
indifferent? Answer th^s Question honestly; and you will answer your own with
the same Breath. (p 19)


D. I have told you before, that it is impossible to perform any re^igious Duty,
without the necessary and nat^ral Circumstances, that belong to all our
Actions; and upon which they depend Now it can be no Imposition upon Men's
Consciences, no Infringement of their Freedom and Liberty, to perform the
Duties, which God has required of us, some Way or other; nor to determine which
of those necessary Circumstances are most agreeable to the Solemnity of the
Duty, or the State of our Churches. Thus much we are obliged to, by the Precept
which enjoins the Duty upon us; and by the very Law of Nature, which is the Law
of God. And whatever, more than this, you can find enjoined in our Churches, I
freely give up to you. For I acknowledge that Impositions are at least as bad
among us, as among you.

These Things being premised, let your Instances be considered You demand why I
oblige you to receive the Sacrament at Noon, in leavened Bread, at the Hands of
a Layman? To which I answer as before, that Christ has required us to observe
this Ordinance; but has not determined whether at Noon or at Night, whether in
leavened or unleavened Bread, whether it shall be handed about, after
Consecration, by the Minister or some other. And it is absolutely necessary,
that in each of these Cases it be done some Way or other; and here Wisdom is
profitable to direct. But if you scruple this Method of partaking of the
Ordinance; and can find a sufficient Number to join with you, I will administer
it to you at Evening, in unleavened Bread; and carry about the E^ements with my
own Hands after the Consecration, rather than wound your Conscience. And what
can you desire more?

But you demand again, Why will you impose upon me a Prayer of your own
Inv^^t^on etc? I answer, I think conceived Prayers grounded on di^ine
Institution* and crave the Liberty of acting in this important Duty according
to my own Conscience. And is this imposing upon you? Then you are imposed upon
by every one that don't think as you think, and practice as you practice.
Besides, this is agreeable to your own Practice, in making a Prayer of your own
before Sermon, allowed (you tell us) by your Canons. (p 41.) Whether you are
allowed this Liberty, I shall not divert at present to dispute (consult you
famous Bennet's Treatise of the Joint Use of Prayer, who is fully in the
Negative) but supposing it, I argue, How th^^ are you imposed upon by our
performing that Duty agreeable to your own Opinion and Practice; unless we will
also perform it in all the Method^ that you are pleased to invent and require?
-- But you say, a well invented Form is to you much better, and more edifying.
You are then welcome to use such a Form, and act according to your own
Persuasion; and may yet be treated by us as Brethren in all Respects. How
trifling is your Pretense of Imposition in this Case, on our Part?

You further demand, Why will you oblige me to pull off my Hat at the Lord's
Table? I answer, I don't know that ever any Body was obliged to this, or ever
needed any other Obligation, than the natural Laws of Decency; and the express
Declaration of the Apostle, that a Man ought not to cover his Head in public
Worship, 1 Cor. xi.7.

It is, I confess, Matter of Surprise to me, that you can so much as pretend to
find among us a Parallel to your Imposi^ions* when there are to many human
Inventions imposed upon Men's Consciences in your Church, which you cannot
pretend to be natural and necessary Circumstances; nor ^ounded on divine
Institution* as all those Things are (^^cording to our best J^dgment of Things)
which you except against And yet we are declared ipso Facto excommunicated by
your Canons, for not approving these Things.


B. You say, that our Canons do declare all that dissent from the Church ipso
Facto excommunicate: That is, such Persons excommunicate themselves. (p. 21.)


D. No, Sir, they don't excommunicate themselves. They would gladly have
remained Members of the Church of England, with Liberty of their Consciences in
these Points: But were excommunicated by a juridical Sentence of your
Convocation. Witness the Multitudes of Peritions that were made to this
Purpose; and one that was signed with a thousand Hands: And Witness the two
famous Conferences, that at the Savoy, and that in the first of William and
Mary.


B. Presbyterians, Independants, Baptists, Lutherans, and Calvinists are
allowed to come to our Communion; and Many such do actually come, and are
welcome. We don't impose upon People's Consciences such a tyrannical Yoke as
you do; and oblige 'em by a particular Covenant, to continue with your own
Church: But with us it is quite otherwise; any good Christian may come and
receive the Sacrament with us to Day, and to Morrow if he sees Cause he may
join with you. (p. 99, 100.)


D. What you mean by a particular Covenant to continue with our own Churches, I
don't know: and can consider it only as some News you are pleased to ^e me. And
I have only this Remark to make upon it, that if it be News concerning any
Thing that I am acquainted with, I must suppose it to refer to the late
Minister at New Town, before he was enlightened and b^ought into the best
constituted Church in the World; or else it must be suspicious News, that wants
Confirmation.

As to any good Christian's communicating indifferently with your Church and
with us, with the one to Day, and with the other to Morrow, which you say he
may do; I ask, may he do it by Authority of your Canons? which forbid
Schismatic^^ the Communion of your Church, and some that I hope are good
Christians bear that Character, in your Canons. Or may he do it with
Approbation o^ the most celebrated Defenders of your Church? Have they not
loudly condemned such a Practice, compared it to Adultery: and pronounced it as
con^trary to all Principles of Church Communion, as (...) Thing possibly can
be? These are the Words of Dr. Sherlock, in his Resolution of that Case,
Whether it be lawful to communicate with two distinct and separate Churches*
I doubt, very few of your Brethren will stand by (...) the Concession yo^ have
made.

But I would enquire, Upon what Terms Presbyterians, Independants, Baptists,
Lutherans, and Calvinists are allowed to come to your Communion? Can they have
their Children baptized in your Church, without the scrupled Institutions of
Sureties and the Sign of the Cross? Can they be admitted to the Lord's Table,
and be allowed the Posture that their Consciences tell them it is their Duty to
use? Can they be abated one Ragg o^ a Ceremony, for the Sake of their
Consciences, or for the Peace of the Church? Or may any of these be allowed to
be Members of the Church of England, without a complete Conformity to every of
your Injunctions, how unscri^tural and unreasonable soever they may appea^
(...) them? It seems we are greatly obliged to the Church of England, that they
will allow us to be the Boat, and they the Bank; that they will allow us to
approve and submit to all their Institutions, whether we think them Right or
Wrong.

Thus I have (I think) said enough to clear the Point in Debate; and given a
sufficient Answer to all that you have said in your Appeal, though I have not
^^rticularly considered some Things there offered, which do not so immediately
affect the present Controversy. And I am now ready to attend upon what you have
further to offer; and shall only premise, that if we are bound to Obedience to
these religious Injunctions, by Virtue of the supreme Civil Authority's
enjoining or establishing them, you would do well to clear it up to us, what
Establishment we are here in this Country boun^ to submit to. The Church of
Scotland is as (...) established as the Church of England; and by the same
Authority; and that Establishment as much extends to this Country as the other;
and consequently the Presbyterians in this Country act as agreeable to the
Determination of our Rulers, as you do. If such Determination binds our
Consciences here, you are bound in Conscience to be a Presbyterian, as well as
an Episco^alian As for the Authority of your Church (to ^peak in Mr.
Chillingworth's Language) That is ^o common Principle agreed upon between us,
and therefore from that you are not to dispute against ^s: We might press you
with our Judgment as ^ell and as justly as you do us with yours -- ^an any
Bishop of your Church claim Authority ^ver any in this Country but free
Consenters? Or ^an any Command of his be of Force to oblige such Ministers as
have never taken the Oath of Canonical Obedience? What human Law is our
Nonconformity to your Church a Breach of? Can we be said to disobey lawful
Authority in refusing your Ceremonies, when they were never enjoined on us? As
Mr. Baxter expostulated (Anno 1658) "What Is all this to such Counties as this
where I live, and most else in England, that know of no Bishop they have (and
they rejected none) nor does any come and command them Obedience? Must we be
unchristened, unchurch'd and damned, for not obeying, when we have none to
obey, nor none that calls for our Obedience?"


B Come we now to your Charge of Will Worship. Here you find a deal of Fault
with Dr Patrick's Defini^ion, and spend some Pages to prove, that Will Worship
is that Worship which is founded upon the Will of Man With all my Heart, Let us
be tried by your Definition, and I am sure we shall be justified For we have no
Worship but what i^ founded on the Will of God. But though it be an easy Thing to
vindicate the Church; yet I think it impossible to free such Seperatists as you
from the Folly of Will Worship. For you say as the Will-Worshippers in St.
Paul's Time, Touch not, taste not, handle not, -- that is, don't kneel in the
most solemn Acts of Worship, even when you receive the Body and Blood of the
Son of God; don't hear a Chapter out of the Apocrypha; don't submit to the
Bishops, though they be Christ's Ministers and the King's too. (p. 27, 28)


D. You allow, that Will Worship is that Worship which is founded upon the Will
of Man. Well, Let us then consider, whether you have no Worship but what is
foun^^^ upon the Will of God; and whether there be no Will Worship among you,
in the Apostles Sense of Will Worship, in that second Chapter to the Colossians.

I before observed to ^ou in my Defense, that the imposing of Meats, Drinks,
and holy Days were instanced in the 16th Verse of that Chapter; Voluntary
Humility in the 18th; The Rudiments of the World and human Ordinances in the
20th; forbidding to touch, taste, or handle, in the 21st; all the Commandments
of M^n in the 22d Verse; as being a Show of Wisdom in Will Worship, Verse 23.
But it seems this touched you too nearly, to admit an Answer; and you have
taken the safest Course, not to say a Word about it. But pray, Sir, allow me to
consider the Case. Have you no holy Days of human Appointment in your Church?
Have you no voluntary Humility, for Instance, in your making Kneeling at the
Lord's Supper a necessary Term of Communion, which Christ never appointed; but
gave us a contrary Example, when he himself instituted and celebrated that holy
Ordinance? Have you no human Ordinances? Don't you your self acknowledge, that
all your Rites and Ceremonies are merely of h^man Original? Don't your Church
forbid to touch taste or handle, when the appoints ninety five Days o^ Fasting
or Abstinence every Year? Have you no Commandments of Men, when your Canons
enjoin upon us the Observation of all these Things, upon Pain of
Excommunication? I cannot imagine how these Things were Will Worship among the
Colossians; and not Will Worship among you. Pray, Sir, be pleased to show us
any Difference between their Case and yours, if you possibly can. Show us how
the Nature of these Things came to be changed, when imposed by you, from what
it was when they were imposed upon them.

But it seems we are the Persons chargeable with Will Worship, because we say
Touch not, taste not, handle not; when we refuse Subjection to your
Institutions. I think what is said above makes it evident, that your
Impositions are according to the Determination of the Apostle in the Text under
Consideration, all of them Will Worship. And if your Arguings be just, it is a
just Conclusion, that it is Will Worship to refuse Will Worship. But before this
Conclusion be taken for granted, you should prove one of these three Things;
either that Will Worship is lawful in your Church; or that what was
Will Worship among the Colossians, is not so among you; or else that the
Imposition Will Worship by ecclesiastical Rulers takes away the Evil of it; and
makes it a Duty. One of these three Things must be proved; or else all your
fine Reasonings must fall to the Ground.


B The Crime of the old Will-Worshippers lay -- in teaching that that was
lawful in it self, which really was lawful; that some Things were sinful, which
God had no where forbidden, which is manifestly your C^se.(p. 29.)


D. I have already shown, that it consisted also in all Sorts of human
Inventions and Impositions in the Affairs of Religion and Conscience. But
suppose yours to be a full Account of the Matter, how (I pray you) is it
manifestly our Case? I cannot take your Word for it, that God has no where
forbidden a Subjection to such Institutions and Impositions as yours are. God
has required us to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free;
and not to be entangled again in a Yoke of Bondage, Gal v.1. Not to be brought
under the Power of any, even in Things in themselves lawful, 1 Cor. vi 12. Not
to give Place by Subjection, no not for an Hour, to those that would spy out
our Liberty, and bring us into Bondage, Gal. ii.4, 5. He has required us to
acknowledge no Master but Christ, Matthew. xxiii.8. as I have showed you before.
So that whatever Charges you are pleased to lay against us, we are acquitted by
a higher Judge.

But suppose we are weak Brethren, in these debated Points, and make wrong
Inferences from Scripture and the Nature of Things; This I must acknowledge
possible; for we are but fallible Men: How should we then be treated by you, if
this be the Case; or which is all one, if you imagine this to be the Case? The
Apostle answers this Question particularly. Take heed (says he) left by any
Means, this Liberty of yours prove a Stumbling Block to them that are weak.
Through thy Knowledge shall thy weak Brother Perish, for whom Christ dyed? When
ye so sin against the Brethren and wound their weak Consciences, ye sin against
Christ, 1 Cor. viii.9, 11, 12. Him that is weak in the Faith, receive you; but
not to doubtful Disputations. Who are thou that judge another Man's Servant,
to his own Master he stands or falls. For Meats destroy not the Work of
God. All Things indeed are pure; but it is Evil for that Man who eats with
Offense. Romans xiv.1, 4, 20.

Nay let us further suppose, that we are in a Mistake in our conscientious
Scruples of those Things, that are in themselves innocent and indifferent, and
no where forbidden in Scripture: Yet This is a Mistake which we sincerely
profess we cannot help. And will Christ reject us or our Services, for such a
Mistake? No, we may expect more Mercy from him in this Case, than we can find
from you. It Is certain, they who scrupled eating of Meat in the Apostles Times,
were causelessly scrupulous, by the Apostles own Decision of the Case. And yet
of such an one the Apostle tel^^ us, God has received him. He shall be holden
(...) for God is able to make him stand. He is one for wh^^ Christ dyed. Romans
xiv.3, 4, 15. Meat commend^^ us not to God; for neither if we eat are we the
bette^, neither if we eat not are we the worse. Whence he concluded, that he
would eat no Meat while the World stands, rather than make his Brother to
offend. 1 Cor. viii 5* 13 What then becomes of all your fine Flourishes in this
Case? Whose Decree must stand in this Cause, God's or yours?

To sum up all in a Word. The great Design of the Christian Institution is, to
bring us to Charity, Kindness, Compassion, and Benevolence toward one another,
as well as to Devotion toward God, and Dependence upon him. These Things are
accordingly insisted upon by the Author of our Religion, they are repeatedly
inculcated and enforced by the most solemn Motives, as being absolutely
necessary to our standing before our Judge in Peace, in the Day of his
Appearing and Kingdom. Whence it necessarily follows, that all those
Impositions upon Men's Consciences, which tend to embitter their Minds one
against another, to ensnare them to profess or practice contrary to their
Opinion, to cut them off from the Pleasures or Advantages of Society, to injure
their Estates, hurt their Reputations, or render their Lives painful or uneasy,
must be repugnant to our holy Religion, (which consists in Love Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, and Temperance, Gal.
v.22* 23) whatever Pretenses, and whatever Apologies may be made for these
Things. And since these are the necessary Consequences of the Imposition of
your unscriptural Hierarchy, with all your Rites and Ceremonies of human
Invention, of your spiritual Courts; and your Excommunication of all that
differ from you in these Things. I shall conclude with Mr. Addison, Sure when I
see such dreadful Consequences arising from a Principle, I would be as fully
convinced of the Truth of it, as of a mathematical Demonstration, before I
would venture to act upon it, or make it a Part of my Religion.


B. To be plain with you, It is a great piece of Impertinency, to talk so much
about the spiritual Courts in England, unless we knew more about them (p. 93)
As to us in this Country, we have nothing to do with Chancellors etc. (Vind. p.
45)


D. But, Sir, I hope they that live in the near View of these Ecclesiastical
Courts, may pretend to know something about 'em, and talk of 'em without being
charged with Impertinence. Now they tell us; "The Constitution and Pro^eedings
of these Courts are condemned by all Parties. It seems therefore a little
surprising, that nothing is done, either to regulate them, or put a Stop to
their exorbi^ant Power. The High-Church-Party complain, that Church Discipline
is left in the Hands of Lay-Chancellors, which ought to be managed by the
Clergy. And the Sense of the Whigs with regard to this Matter, is exp^essed in
the following Words of Bishop Burnet, in the Conclusion of the History of his
own Life and Times. "As for the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction (says he) it has
been the Burden of my Life, to see how it was administered. Ou^ Courts are
managed under the Rules of the Canon Law* dilatory and expensive: and as their
Constitution is bad, so the Business is small; and therefore all possible
Contrivances are used to make the most of those Causes that come before them;
so that they are universally DREADED and HATED. God grant, that a Time may
come, in which that noble Design, so near being perfected in King Edward VI
Days, of the Reformatio Legum ecclesiasticarum, may be revived and
established!" -- Take another Testimony from a Writer of your own Church, in a
Book called, The Church's Wish for the restoring of Discipline considered. Page
271, 272 he has these Passages; "The subordinate Officers in our Courts do at
present, as all the World see, but ill manage the Power of the Church,
converting it chiefly to their own Advantage, with little or no Regard to the
Ends of Religion; insomuch that the Strictness of Discipline is wholly abated;
the Exercise of that which is, is corrupted; the Proceeding against Offenders
partial and dilatory; and if any Penances are enjoined, it is with almost no
Respect to true Repentance, nor is much Consideration of that had in Relaxation
of Censures. So many Subterfuges and Evasions are also found in almost every
Case, that the good Rules of Discipline seldom take place." -- I hope you will
admit your own Witnesses to speak in this Case, who cannot but be sufficiently
informed.

And as to us of this Country, if the Church of England ever comes to be an
Establishment here, we must know more about these spiritual Courts to our Cost;
and find something to do with Chancellors etc. and feel all the Hardships of
these Impositions I complain of. I would therefore expostulate with those that
are so fond of a Change; and require of them, why they are in such Haste to put
their Necks into the Yoke? Since we have all the Substantials of divine Worship
that is found in the Church of England, without these burdensome Encumbrances;
why are they so earnest to bring a Yoke upon the Neck of the Disciples, that
neither our Fathers nor we were able to bear?


B. You may entertain what Scruples yot please; and yet the Doors of our Church
are open to receive you, and all the Dissenters in the Nation. Her Arms are
stretched out to embrace you all. (p. 19.)


D. True; If notwithstanding our Scruples, and against the Dictates of our
Consciences, we will conform to every Tittle of your Injunctions; but not
otherwise. Will you, can you abate for the Sake of our Scruples, any of these
Rites, that you your selves own to be indifferent and of human Original? Will
you allow any of our Congregations to belong to, and be Parts of your Church,
if we will comply (your selves being Judges) with every Thing, that Christ has
made necessary to the Communion of Saints, either in this or the eternal World?
Is there any Remedy for us; but that we must either Sin against our
Consciences; and condemn our selves in the Things we allow; or forsake your
Church? And yet you your selves own, that the Things for which this Necessity
is brought upon us, are indifferent and unnecessary, as I observed before.


B. You will not admit us to your Communion, unless we will submit to your Way
of Worship and Discipline. Nor can we admit you, unless you submit to our Way.
(p. 97.)


D. We will admit you to our Communion, whether you submit or no, to any Thing
which we don't think essentially necessary to be submitted to, and which we
don't think to be enjoined as necessary, by our great Lawgiver himself. For
Instance, if you think it your Duty to Kneel at the Lord's Supper, there is none
of our Churches would refuse you our Communion, (if otherwise qualified) with
the Liberty of your own Posture But we can have no such Liberty with you. This
is our special Grievance, that you impose those Things upon our Consciences,
which are not necessary in your own Opinion; and which are sinful in ours Only
take off the Yoke that you your selves acknowledge to be not necessary; and
there will be no more Complaint.

Let all unscriptural Impositions and superstitious Presumptions be discharged
out of your Church, and see if we don't readily embrace its Communion. We claim
but the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free: and this we have a Right to
insist upon, but you have no Right to deprive us of. Hear your own Master
Chillingworth, whose Gloss upon my Text, I hope, you will not pronounce a wild
and extravagant Fancy, as you have done mine. Our Savior (says he Relig. of
PROT. Chap. III. Sect. 47.
) tells the Scribes and Pharisees, That in vain they worshipped God, teaching
for Doctrines Men's Commandments, etc. Certainly, that which St Austin
complains of, as the general Fault of Christians of his Time, was parallel to
this: Tammultis Praesumptionibus sic plena sunt omnia, All Things or all
Places, are so full of so many Presumptions, and those exacted with such
Severity, nay with Tyranny, that he was more severely censured, who in the Time
of his OCTAVES touched the Earth with his naked Feet, than he which drowned and
buried his Soul in Drink; Certainly, if this be not to teach for Doctrines
Men's Commandments, I know not what is. And therefore these superstitious
Christians might be said to wo^ship God in vain, as well as the Scribes and
Pharisees. And yet great Variety of Superstitious of this kind, were then
already spread over the Church, being different in diverse Places. -- These are
the Things of which he (S^^ Austin) presently says after, The Church of God
placed between Chaff and Tares, tolerates many Things. Which was directly
against the Command of the Holy Spirit, given by St. Paul, To stand fast in
that Liberty wherewith Christ has made her free, and not to suffer her self to
be brought in Bondage to these Servile Burdens.

Thus I have considered all that immediately affects the Cause between you and
me in the general Debate; and must refer it to our Readers, whether I have not a
juster Occasion than you had, of your triumphant Conclusion. Thus I have
abundantly proved, that the Foundation of your Vindication and Appeal, is a
gross Mistake; and therefore all that you have built upon it must necessarily
sink with it. If it be as I think I have made it appear to be, an unjustifiable
Thing, to impose any humane Institutions in religious Affairs, and in the
Worship of God upon Men's Consciences, then the Imposition of all your Rites
and Ceremonies upon our Consciences, is unjustifiable, whether o^r particular
Exceptions against them are well grounded or not. That I think, whatever can be
said in Favor of them is already answered, in that they are all proved to be
unwarrantable Impositions. I shall however wait upon you further; and consider
what you have to say against our particular Exceptions. But having been thus
large in the (...) in general, I shall be (...) particular Cases.


B I come now to your particular Charges. 1. (...) say, stinted and imposed
Liturgies, are teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men; (...) that
because the Scripture has not imposed nor prescr^^^ed any; and say you, is not
this a good Reason? ^ answer, no by no Means. For then your extempor^ Prayers
are teaching for Doctrines the Comman^^ments of Men; for the Scripture no where
imposes (...) perscribes those extemporary Prayers, you impose (...) your
Congregation. (p. 33.)


D I have offered a Variety of Arguments (...) my Defense, by which I
endeavored particular^^ and largly to prove, that the Imposition of (...)
Prayer Book in the Church of England, is teaching (...) Doctrines the
Commandments of Men But you have tho'^ (it seems) that the easiest and safest
Way of answering that Book, is to take no Notice of the Arguments there
advanced. I shall therefore r^^fer my Reader thither for Satisfaction; and
(...) briefly remark a few Things upon what is now offered. And

1. The lawfulness of using Forms of Prayer comes not into the present
Question. For (as I had observed in the Sermon you are pleased to oppose) it is
not the Question, whether any Forms of Prayer are lawful, this is on all Hands
acknowledged Forms may be very useful to such ignorant Persons, as know not how
to Pray without them; And we make no Doubt but those of your Opinion may be
accepted of God, in a serious and devout Performance of the Duty of Prayer by a
Form. Let such therefore have the full Liberty of following their own
Inclinations and devout Affections, that either through Ignorance want, or that
by the Prejudice of Education or any other Means have the best Opinion of,
these (either real or ^^aginary) Helps to Devotion. But then, we should not
have those Things imposed upon us, ^^at don't want them, nor find them Helps to
our ^evotion. We would not by them be deprived of ^mproving the Gift of Prayer
which God has given (...); nor be forced to use Crutches, when we have ^he free
Use of our Limbs. This you know to be ^he Case; and therefore all the path^tick
Excla^ations, all the vehement Expostulations in your Appeal, about condemning
all the Christians in the World, are altogether impertinent, and unworthy of
particular Notice.

The Question between you and me is, whether ^he imposing any Forms of Prayer
upon the Con^ciences of Men, in the stated and constant Wor^hip of God; and
making them necessary Terms of Communion; and whether the imposing your
Prayer Book in particular in that Manner, be not ^eaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men? This being the Case in Debate. I shall Endeavor ^o prove

2. That such Impositions of any Forms of human Invention, in the stated and
constant public Worship of God; and that such Imposition of the Common Prayer
Book, is teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. And then shall take
some Notice of your Objections.

I had before observed to you, that the Imposition of these Forms was either by
the Commandment of God, or the Commandment of Men. If the ^ormer, show us the
Precept by which God has commanded it; and we submit. If the latter, the Case
is determined, and there needs no Dispute. It concerns you Sir, to answer this
Argument one Way or the other; and not to evade it. Here are Forms of Prayer
imposed by your Church. They are taught for Doctrines in your Church, in the
same Sense that the washing of Hands (...) by the Pharisees, in the debated
Text; and the^^ Doctrines are the Commandments of God, or the Commandments of
Men. Now speak plainly, which are they? If you will answer directly, I am much
mistaken if you don't contradict all you have sai^ in both your Books. If you
assume the former of these; and tell us, this is required by he Commands of
God, you at once destroy all your copious Reasons upon the indifferency of
these Things; and upon your placing no Religion in them, which is the
Foundation of your whole Structure. (...) you assume the latter; and allow,
that these are the Commandments of Men, you give us the Question, you teach for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men. I know no Way of a direct Answer to this
Argument, but to allow one of these two Things with their Consequences to be
true; or to prove that these Forms are enjoined, neither by the Commands of God
or Man, which is the height of Absurdity.


B. I answer that then your extemporary Prayers are teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men.


D. Well, were this supposed, what follows from it? Cannot you be chargeable
with a Fault, I pray, because your Neighbor is guilty of the same? If the
Accusation be never so just, still the Argument retains it is Force; and the
Answer is but an Evasion, that would be as pertinently urged in Favor of the
Mass Book, as of your Prayer Book. A Roman Catholic could with the same
Propriety, answer any Argument against their Mass Book in the same Manner. And
if this Retortion be true in your Mouth, it would be true in theirs. If it
defend the Common Prayer Book, it would with equal Force defend their whole
Liturgy, were it ten Times so bad as it is. So that notwithstanding all you
have said or can say, the Argument retains its full Force; and Mark vii.7. does
condemn this Part of your Impositions.

But let us consider the Case a little; and see whether this Answer ben't as
unjust, as it is impertinent. -- You your self will allow, that we are
commanded to pray in the public Worship of God, to pray with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit: that we are particularly directed as to the Manner
of performing this Duty. And you must allow, that there is no Precept, no
Warrant, no Example in the whole Bible, for Forms of Prayer, of merely human
Composure, to be used, much less to be imposed, in the public Worship of God.
Whence I argue, that the Command to pray, does either require us to pray with
or without imposed Forms of human Composure; or else leaves it to our Choice,
to do in that Case, as we think best. If with such Forms, show me either
Precept or Example in the whole Bible to warrant it; and I submit. But if no
such Thing can be found, it must be without such Forms: or else it must be left
to our own Choice, to act in that Affair as we think best. If you assume the
la^t^r of these, I enquire; whose Choice is this left? Who are to act in it as
they think best, the Imposers or the Body of the People? If the former, then we
are bound to the Use of the Mass Book in popish Countries, as well as to the
Prayer Book in England* And every Liturg^ in the World* let it be never so
corrupt and never so idolatrous, must be complied with. Bu^ i^ the People are
to choose, then every Body has full Liberty in this Case by divine Appointment;
an^ ought to be left at full Liberty, without any Church-Censure, without any
Inc^^^venience to his religious or civil Rights, with^^^ any unkind Treatment;
or any Injury to his (...) or sacred Communion, to his Honors, Reput^^^^on, or
any other valuable Interests whatsoever Which is the Thing I contend for. I
think (...) falls nothing short of mathematical Demonstration, that the
Scripture by enjoining the Duty (...) Prayer in the public Worship of God,
does r^quire us either to pray without a Form of hum^^ Composure, or leave it
to every one's Liberty, (...) act in that Affair as we think best. It cannot
subject us to all the Caprices, Irreligion, or Idolatry of every Person or
Society, that will compose (...) us, or impose upon us, what Forms they please.

Now take which Side of the Question you please; and it equally makes against
you. If the Scripture requires us to pray without Forms of human Composure, the
Case is decided, there is no more (...) be said. If the Scripture leaves this
Matter to every one's Choice, to act as he thinks best, Why do you contradict
the Scripture-Institution? Why don't you leave it as the Scripture has left it?
(...) is in vain for you to pretend, that it is just so i^ your Church as I say
it should be, as long as your Church-Canons stand in Force and excommunicate us
all upon this Account; and so long as we are denied all Membership in your
Church; and those of our Profession in England all Privileges in the State, for
our scrupling those Impositions.

But that this Affair may be yet set in a clearer Light, let us consider in
what Manner we are directed to perform the Duty of Prayer in Scripture; and see
whether these Directions are compatible with imposed Forms of human Composure.

We are directed, Ephesians. vi.1^. to pray with all Prayer and Supplication in the
Spirit. Now will your Prayer Book, or can any Form whatsoever, supply us with
Matter of Prayer for the various Exigences, Occasions and Circumstances of
Life, which we are called to? It Is plain, they cannot; and therefore it is to be
presumed they were not designed to be the Methods of performing this Duty;
which ought to be accommodated to all the Circumstances of a holy Providence
toward us. To exemplify this: we have lately had terrible Displays of the
divine Displeasure, by fearful Sights in the Heavens, accompanied with a
terrible Earthquake: and our People are generally stupid, and inconsiderate of
these Prognostics of our Lord's Appearing. How shall we humble ourselves under
the mighty Hand of God? How shall we give him the Glory of our Preservation?
How shall we supplicate a due Impression of these divine Terrors upon our
People? Will the Prayer Book supply us in this Case? It Is plain, it will not;
nor in any other uncommon Exigence or Change of Providence.

We are taught, Romans viii.16. Likewise the Spirit also helps our Infirmities,
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought etc. But how can this be
true, that we know not what we should pray for, if we pray by a Form; and are
always acquainted with the Matter of our Prayers? You pretend indeed, that what
the Spirit helps Man to, is not the Words of Prayer; but such Groanings that
cannot be uttered. But the Text assures us, that he helps in the Matter of
Prayer, as well as the other; and it is in vain here to dispute against the
Letter of the Text.

In a Word, we that use conceived Prayers in God's public Worship, have at
least this Advantage of you. We have Scripture-Patterns and Examples to warrant
our Conduct. We have the Examples of the whole Church under the legal
Dispensation. We have the Examples of Christ himself and his Apostles. And you
are not capable to bring one Example from Scripture, of one Form of human
Composition, being made the Matter of constant public Worship; or one
Direction to the Church, to compose or use, much less to impose, any Form of
Prayer for the constant public Worship of God. We shall therefore think our
selves safe in our Conduct, notwithstanding any Pretenses of greater Reverence
and Decency, or greater Affection and Devotion, in the Use of Forms than
without them, since we have not only our own Experience to plead against all
such Pretenses; but all the Instances of public Prayer in the whole Bible, to
vouch for us. Let such therefore, that complain of the Indecency and want of
Affection in the Use of conceived Prayers, consider where this Charge will
terminate; and whether they don't equally fix this Charge upon all the holy Men
of God, whose Prayers are recorded in the Bible, as upon us.


B. I observed in my Letter, that God himself had appointed Forms of Prayer A
Form for a City is Case of an uncertain Murder committed near it, Deuteronomy. xxi.7*
Forms for all the People to be used at the Temple, Deuteronomy. xxvi.5, 6, 7. So Verse
13, 14 (p. 40)


D. These Proofs you allege, are so impertinent, and the Answer to 'em in my
Defense so particular* that the Case may be safely left as it is, to the
Censure of the Reader. Let him but read the Texts, and judge between us,
whether they at all affect the present Controversy, whether they at all relate
to the constant and stated public Worship of God. -- But were it allowed, that
God himself had appointed Forms of Prayer, by what Argument does it appear,
that because God has done so, you may do so? How does this justify the
composing and imposing Forms of human Invention?


B. Christ has prescribed a Form for Christians; and commanded us, when we
pray, to say, Our Father etc (ibid)


D. What is that, or any other such Pretense, to your Prayer Book? How do you
prove, because Christ had Authority to prescribe a Form of Prayer, that
therefore you have the same Authority? If we may use a Form of Christ's
composing, must we therefore use one of your composing? Was the Lord's Prayer a
Form of human Invention, imposed upon the People? which is the only Case now
debated To what purpose then is it urged in this Case? I shall only add, that
passing by the Evidence that the Lord's Prayer was not given for a Form but a
Pattern of Prayer, both from the different Representation of that Prayer in
Matthew and Luke, (whereby it appears true to Demonstration, that it was not
designed for an exact stated Form, for constant necessary Use; or else that
there were two Forms prescribed and enjoined by our blessed Savior) as also
from the Practice of the Apostles, who did not use it in their constant public
Worship; and therefore did not understand it as a Form prescribed for such Use:
Passing this by (I say) it might be proper to enquire of you, if Christ did
prescribe this for a Form, why don't the Church of England use it? It Is certain
they never do What they pretend to use as such, does not agree with the Form
either in Matthew or Luke; in neither of whom do we find that Pe^ition, Forgive
us our Trespasses as we forgive (...) that trespass against us.


B. When the Age of Miracles returns again, I (...) gladly quit a Liturgy to
join in inspired Prayers. (p. 41.)


D. There is no need of miraculous Gifts, (...) perform the Duty of Prayer
acceptably to God, and profitably to our selves. Every Minister of the Gospel,
that is qualified to compose Sermon for the People, is qualified to compose
Prayers for himself and them; and is as much concerned i^ the latter, as in the
former Case, to adapt them (...) the Occasion.


B. When Miracles ceased, the Church of Christ used stated Forms etc; and so
has the Church of England ever since the Reformation, -- until some Jesuits
(...) Disguise set up the extempore Way, on Purpose to (...) away the People;
and make a Schism in the Church.


D. Pierce (in his Answer to Nichols) Robins^^ (in his Answer to Bennet) and
other of our learned Writers have fully proved, that there were no Liturgies or
set Forms used, much less imposed, in their public stated Prayers in the
primitive Church for several Ages. You would do well to read th^se Authors,
before you are too positive in a Case of this Kind.

As to your roman^ick Story of the Jesuits in Disguise, be pleased to produce
your Authority; and be pleased also, when you tell the Story of Cummins and
Heath, to add the famous Exploits of Garagantua, equally credible, and founded
upon as good Authority. (...) before you do either of them, you would do well
to read Dr. Collinges's Answer to Dr. S^ott's Case of Forms of Prayer, where
that Legend is set in a proper and clear Light, and the most palpable Marks of
Folly as well as Forgery discovered upon it. Or you may consult Withers's
Answer to Agate, where only two Circumstances of this wonderful Tale are
mentioned, which quite shake the Credibility of it, and make it appear with a
truly romantic Air.


B. Your second Charge against the Church is, that they have taken a great Part
of the Prayer Book, yea the whole Method and Form of it, out of the popish
Liturgy. (p. 42.) How foolish, how ridiculous is it, to argue against the Use
of this* or that good Thing or Prayer, because the Papists use it! As if it was
a Crime to hold any Thing in common with them. (p. 45.)


D. We cannot think the Common Prayer Book a good Thing as imposed upon us for
our constant public Worship, either as to its Form, which is so very confused
and immethodical; or as to its Matter, which is not only very defective, but
contains so many Things justly exceptionable. And I think the World has seen,
that it has not proved a very good Thing in it is Consequences; and in the sad
Confusion it has occasioned in our Nation. But then we don't argue against it
because the Papists have used it; but because it had no other Foundation but
papal Use. We cannot think very well of a Protestant Church's going to Rome to
learn to pray. This can be exemplified in no Protestant Church but yours; and
we see no Reason why it should be so in yours. It Is a hard Case, when there is
no Smith in Israel, but we are forced to go to the Philistines to sharpen our
Goads.

You give us your Word without any Proof, of a Liturgy constantly used for
public Worship, in Chrysostom's Times. But I cannot take your (...) in this
Case; because I think the contrary (...) be made most evident, as you may see
by reading the Authors I but now directed you to. And I have no present
Disposition to weary my self or you, by running into the Wilds of Antiquity in
this Pursuit, since the Argument is so little affected by it. As to all the
pretended Liturgies of the primitive Church, they have been abundantly proved
by learned Men to be spurious and of later Date.


B. Your third Charge is, the Tautologies in the Common Prayer, or Repetitions,
are teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. And you say, (...) use the
same Words twenty Times. To this I answered, when the People say twenty Times,
We beseech thee to hear us good Lord, it is in the Conclusion of twenty
different Prayers. (p. 46.)


D. Before I distinctly consider what you here offer, it will be proper to
state the Case between us; and to observe, that I have no where condemned all
Repetitions in Prayer, or at all blamed the occasional Reiteration of the same
Thing by a devout Soul enflamed with ardent Affection, especially in private
Devotions. Yet I cannot but think, that the Argument retains its full (...)
against your Liturgy, notwithstanding this Concession. Partly, because there
can be no Security, that the whole Assembly shall always be favored with such
a Degree of devout Affection, every Time the Litany is used, as shall make such
Repetitions a reasonable Service; and partly, beca^se there is no warmth of
Affection or Degree of Devo^i^n that can make it a reasonable Service, to
repeat one Petition so often as yours are repeated; nor are these numerous
Repetitions at all calculated to raise either our Affections or Devotion; but
to take off the Edge of both, by keeping the Mind so constantly intent to the
very same Thing, without any Variation.

You tell us, that when you repeat the same Petition twenty Times, it is in the
Conclusion of twenty different Prayers. But the same Answer may with equal
Justice be given to any Charge of vain Repetitions, that can possibly be
imagined. It may be alleged, that they are all different Prayers, upon the
same Grounds. The State of the Case is this: In one continued Service, the
People by Way of Response must say, Good Lord deliver us, eight Times; and, We
beseech thee to hear us good Lord, one and twenty Times successively, without
saying any Thing else. It Is true, that there are as many short Petitions
offered by the Minister, to which these Responses are made; but it is also as
true, that if all these Petitions were used by the Minister in one continued
Prayer, and good Lord deliver us, or we beseech thee to hear us good Lord, once
pronounced by the People, (if they must bear a vocal Part in your Prayers) it
would be full as pertinent; and I think, much more Devout. And what Reason can
possibly be given, why they must be thus often repeated? I may add, that this
same continued Service begins with eight distinct Repetitions of these Words,
Have Mercy upon us miserable Sinners, between the Minister and People, without
any other Petition intervening; or any Thing else to diversify this Address,
but the bare naming the glorious God in his several personal Relations. And the
same Service ends with the Repetition of these Words, Have Mercy upon us, seven
Times, and Hear us, four Times; though the former had been repeated eight Times,
and the latter above twenty Times before, in the same continued Prayer* That
there is no less than Forty eight Repetitions, in one short Prayer. And to all
this I may subjoin, that besides the several Instances of the like Kind in the
Liturgy, you always use what you call the Lord's Prayer (though as observed
before, it is a new Form of your own making) several Time in the same Service;
and upon some Occasions (...) Times in one Assembly; and when this happens,
there are fifty four Repetitions used in the same Time of public Worship. And
how in all this you can escape the Imputation of vain Repetitions, it concerns
you to inform us.

Our blessed Lord forbids us to use vain Repetitions as the Heathen do; for
they think they shall be heard for their much Speaking. And I demand again of
you, what is this much speaking of the same Thing for? Is it that you may be
heard of God on Account of it, or is it merely trifling? If the former, they
are vain Repetitions by the Sentence of Christ himself. If the latter, we have
no Cause to be fond of your Service. As for your Pretense of exciting People's
Devotion by this Means, the same Pretense may be always made, for the most vain
Repetitions in the World. It might be made by the Priests of Baal; and it is
actually made by the Papists, whom your Church condemns for vain Repetitions.
But it is impertinently made by all; for to what, I beseech you, can it excite
our Devotion, to say the same Thing over and over so very often, unless to make
us devoutly expect to be heard for our much speaking the same Thing?


B. You do as much r^flect on the Holy Ghost, as on the Church; for in the 136
th Psalm the same Words are repeated 26 or 27 Times. (p 46.)


D. Is ther^ no Difference between Praying and Singing? Are they not several
Parts of public Worship? And can it be thought just arguing, that because we
may use Repetitions in singing, therefore we may use Repetitions in Prayer, as
frequent, and in the same Manner? That because it is proper to have a Burden to
a Song (as the Case of the 136th Psalm) that therefore it is (...) to have a
Burden to a Prayer too?


B. Very fine, then according to you it is no Matter how many Tautologies or
Repetitions are used, if they are but sung. We may cry, as the Papists, a whole
Hour together, O Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, and all is well, if we do but sing it. (p.
47.)


D. Well, but will not the Repetitions in the 136th Psalm, at least as well
justify the Papist's Repetitions in singing, as your so numerous Repetitions in
praying? How can it be urged with more Propriety for you than for them? Pray,
Sir, show me the Difference. They have at least this Advantage of you, that
they imitate the Psalmist in making a Song of their Repetitions, which you do
not, unless in your Cathedral Worship As for your Charge of their crying Jesus,
Jesus, an Hour together, it is unjust; but were it true, what Reason can be
given for forty eight (if not fifty four) Repetitions, in the same Service;
that will not justify ever so many more?

But the worst of it is, that your Instance of the 136th Psalm don't come up to
your Case. For there is no Prayer at all in that Psalm. If it be allowed you,
that some of the Psalms are properly Prayers; yet that Psalm is not. Nor can
you find any Example of such numerous Repetitions in any Prayers in the Bible,
either in the Psalter or any where else. So that the whole of your Argument can
amount to no more than this, that because David did use many Repetitions in
making a Burden to a sacred Song, which was not a Prayer; therefore you may use
many more Repetitions than he did in your Prayers; and impose them upon us as
necessary Terms of Communion.


B. When you sing Psalm, V. My King, my God, to thee do I pray. Do you then
pray, or do you not? Answer directly, and use no Evasion.


D. What is this to the Purpose? When we sing Psalm. cxxxvi. where those
Repetitions are used, we do not pray; and therefore your urging this is but a
mere Evasion. It Is no Instance at all (...) such numerous Repetitions in
Prayer, which is the Thing complained of; and which you can nev^^ justify.


B. You acknowledge, Christ made the same Speec^ three Times in the Garden; and
repeated the same Words twice in one Breath on the Cross. My God, My God, and
that in Prayer. (p. 49)


D. That is, Christ prayed three Times in one Night to the same Purpose, with
considerable intervals between those Times of Prayer; and used the Name of God
twice in his Prayer on the Cross. But what follows from hence? What Is the
Conclusion of these Premises? Put this Argument into a Syllogism; and see if
you can bring out the Conclusion, therefore The Church of England does well in
using the same Petition above twenty Times successively: and in using forty
eight Repetitions in one short Prayer.


B. Well, if we may ever depend upon your Word, you will give up your Cause, if
we can show Scripture Examples, for using the same Petition twice in the same
Prayer: and what think you of Daniel's Prayer, Dan. ix.17. O our God hear the
Prayer of thy Servant, ver 18. O my God incline thine Ear and hear. ver 19. O
Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken. (p 49)


D. Pray, Sir, where have I given you any such Word? Have I ever said any Thing
like it? It seems you had now forgot the solemn Impressions you began wi^h,
that you must account for every injurious Expression. If I have said any such
Thing as you charge upon me, pray direct me where to find the Passage; but if
the Charge have no Foundation of Truth, but is wholly your own Invention, a
Retractation is due both to the World and to me. But though I never said or though it
any Thing like what you insinuate: yet I did and do think, that Daniel's
Fervor of Affection, breaking forth in the same Petition three or four Times
in one Prayer, will not justify your imposing such a great Number of Repetitions
upon all that you admit to your Communion, whether they have any such Fervor
of Affection, to lead them into Repetitions, or not.

I shall conclude this Head, by earnestly requesting you to tell us plainly
what vain Repetitions are, that it may be fairly put to the T^^al, whether the
Repetitions we complain of, will agree with your Definition of vain
Repetitions, or no^: and whether you can find any Criterion by which these
Repetitions can be distinguished from those among the Papists, which your
Church calls vain Repetitions.


B. The fourth Charge i^, that the Church of England offers the highest
Indignity to the Oracles of God, by omitting to read a great Part of them, in
Order (...) make Way for such fabulous Composures as are in the Apocrypha. Now
would not a Stranger, from th^^ Charge conclude, that the Dissenters in this
Country show a greater Regard for the holy Bible than Churchmen, by reading
more of it at their Meetings than (...) do at Church? And yet it is notorious,
that here in New England, not one in ten, if one in fifty, ever read ^ Chapter
in the House of God. (p 51)


D. I have not a Word to say in Favor of the neglectin^ that Part of public
Worship, whos^ever are chargeable with the Omission of such a plain and
posi^ive Institution of God. Our public Formula's all require it; and they
that live in the Omission of it, are only accountable for their Conduct


B All the New Testament, except the Revelation, is read in the Church in
Course three Times every Year. (ibid)


D I would gladly know the Reason why the Revelation is not read. Is it because
our blessed Lord Jesus Christ has pronounced concerning that Book. Blessed is
he that reads, and they that hear the Words of this Prophecy. Rev. i.3.


B In the Old Testament there are 929 Chapters, of which the bigger Part by far
are read in Course every Year. (ibid)


D Both these Paragraphs are only true where public Prayers are daily
attended, which is compara^ively but in few Places, either in England or in
this Country. Where daily pub^ick Prayers are attended, they are observed
instead of Family Prayer. And therefore the Comparison here should be, who read
most of the Bible, the Church of England in their daily public Prayers, or our
People in their daily Family Prayers; and then I Am sure the Comparison would
not turn out to our Disadvantage. But the Difficulty still remains. Why are the
other Parts of the Bible neglected; and the Apocrypha substituted in their
Stead? Are there any Genealogies, any Repetitions of History, any Books of
divine Inspiration, less worthy of the Church's Notice, than the wretched
Legend of Bell and the Dragon, the Lascivious Feats of Judith; and the
romantic Story of Tobit and his ^onjuring lying Angel? Must the Word of God
himself give Place to such intolerable Fables as these are? As there are many
good Things in the Apocrypha, so there are many good Things in the Alcoran; but
inasmuch as there are many very bad Things in both, they neither of them
deserve to be advanced to the highest Honor in the Christian Church. The false
Doctrines, as well as false and ridiculous Stories in the Apocrypha, render it
very unfit for a Substitute to the divine Oracles.


B. You ask, how you should know that we do not read the Apocrypha at the Word
of God? I answer, by the Church's declaring in the sixth Article, that it is not
to be read or applied to establish any Doctrine; but only for Example of Life
and Instruction o^ Manners. (p. 52.)


D. I hope, your Church would not have the Example of Judith* nor Tobit's
Angel, imitated by your People. He Doctrines (I know) are contrary to
lascivious, lying, and con^^^ing Examples. But let us consider the C^se
proposed. The Preface to the Common Prayer Book assures us, that nothing is
ordained to be read but the pure Word of God, the holy Scriptures; or that
which is agreeable to the same. In your Homilies, Baruch is sundry Times cited
as the Prophet Baruch; and his Writings are called the Word of God sent to the
Jews. Part. I. of the Hom against wilful Rebellion.
And the Book of Tobit is in these express Words attributed (...) the Holy
Ghost. Part II of Hom* of Alms-Deeds.
The same Lesson does the Holy Ghost also teach in sundry Places of the
Scripture, saying, Mercifulness and Almsgiving purges from all Sins etc. For
which is quoted Tobit 4. -- It follows, The wise Preacher the Son of Syrach
confirms the same. -- Ecclus. 5. And is not this to give tha^ Honor to these
fabulous Composures, that is only due to the Word of God? And don't you
practically say the same Thing, by leaving out so much of the inspired
Writings, to make Room for the Reading these Legends?


B. You would humbly enquire, whether the Lord's Day never happens on the three
last Days of September, or four first of October -- The very first Calendar in
the Book of Common Prayer, appoints Lessons chosen out of the old Testament,
for every Lord's Day in the Year. (ibid)


D. What then? Does not your Calendar appoint these Lessons out of the
Apocrypha to be read, the three last Days of September; and the four first Days
of October etc? And if these Days happen on the Lord's Day, you must read those
appointed Lessons on the Lord's Day, or go contrary to the Order for that Day.
If there be other Lessons appointed for the Lord's Day, these are (when that is
the Case) appointed also; and either both are to be read; or your Calendar is
inconsistent with it self. Choose which you please. It Is true, that the first
Calendar is distinguished by the general Direction of Lessons proper for
Sundays; and Lessons proper for Holy Days. But your larger Calendar, wherein
these Lessons out of the Apocrypha are appointed, has no such Direction or
Distinction.


B. I shall leave you to make your self Sport with what your Authors say is
ridiculous in the Apocrypha; and when you have satiated your self with that,
you will be prepared to strike in with the Deists, and ridicule such Stories in
the Holy Bible as Samson 's catching the Foxes, and Jonah living in the Whales
Belly. (p. 53.)


D. And is there indeed no Difference between these ridiculous Romances in the
Apocrypha; and the sacred Stories you refer to? Are the Histories of Samson's
Foxes, and Ionah's Whale, as liable to Contempt and Ridicule, as the conjuring
Tricks of Tobit and his lying Angel toward the Devil Asmodeus, the horrible
Forgeries of Judith, Susannah, Bell and the Dragon? Are the Deists to be
instructed, that the one is as liable to Banter as the other? Who (I pray,)
strikes in with the Deists, you, who give them such an Handle by this
surprising Insinuation, or I, that implead the substituting such Foolities and
Falsehoods, in the Place of the Word of God?


B. Come we now to the Cross at Baptism, which you call a cursed Instrument,
the principal ^adge of Popery. (p. 53)


D. I did indeed call the Cross whereon our Savior suffered, the cursed
Instrument of his extreme Sufferings; And the Sign of the Cross as used amongst
the Papists, the principal Badge of Popery. But you your self know, that I have
said nothing like what you here charge me with; nor any where in the Book you
oppose, called the Cross at Baptism a cursed Instrument etc. And it is a Pity
you so often forget, what you pretended in the beginning to impress upon your
Mind, that by your Words you must be justified; or by your Words you must be
condemned.


B Here if I understand you, you have given up that Point, of the Sign of the
Cross 's being a Sacrament. (ibid)


D. Indeed Sir, you misunderstand me. I have not given up that Point. The
Clause you find Fault with in my Sermon was this: Since it is confessed on all
Hands that the Cross as abused by the Church of Rome has been one of their
greatest Idols: shall the Church of England who abhor their Idolatry, give the
Honor of a Sacrament to a popish Idol. Now the only Q^estion is, whether the
Church of England does give the Honor of a Sacrament to the Sign of the Cross
or not. The Church's own Definition of a Sacrament is this: An outward and
v^sible Sign of an inward spiritual Grace, given unto us, ^^dain'd by Christ
himself as a Means whereby we receive the same, and a Pledge to assure us
thereof. The Church tells us in her Catachism, that there are two Parts in a
Sacrament, the outward visible Sign; and the inward spiritual Grace. The same
Church directs, that the Sign of the Cross shall be used in Baptism, in Token
that hereafter the Baptized Person shall not be ashamed to confess the Faith of
Christ crucified; and manfully to fight under his Banner, against Sin the World
and the Devil; and to continue Christ's faithful Soldier and Servant unto his
Life's End. Now you must own, that both the Parts of a Sacrament are attributed
to the Sign of the Cross. It is an outward visible Sign; and to confess the
Faith of Christ crucified, to manful fight und^^ his Banner, to continue his
faithful Soldier and Servant, do imply inward spiritual Grace. And what can be
wanting to a Sacrament, where there are all the Parts of it? Your Church tells
us, that there are but two Parts in a Sacrament; and ascribes both these Parts
to the Sign of the Cross. And are not all the Parts equal to the whole?


B. The Essence of a Sacrament lies in this, that the visible Sign is
appointed* as a Means whereby the invisible Grace is conveyed from God to Man;
and as a Pledge to assure us, that God will give it to us, upon our duly using
that outward Sign But the Sign of the Cross is not pretended to be a Pledge
from God to us to give us Assurance of any Thing he will do for us. (p. 55.)


D. But if the Church of England does not only pretend, but in express Words
determine, that this Sign is also a Pledge of Christ's Merits, will you then
own, that she gives it the Honor of a Sacrament? Be pleased then to read your
30th Canon, in the latin Edition; and there you will find it called Tessara et
Signum meritorum Christi. A Pledge and Sign of the Merits of Christ. I think
you will own that the latin Edition of your Canons, was the first and authentic
Edition.

If you still object, that this does not prove that this Sign is appointed as a
Means whereby the invisible Grace is conveyed from God to Man: Let us see
whether the Church of England has not her self determined that Cause also. Read
then the same Canon, where you will find, that Children were signed with this
Sign when they were christened, to dedicate them by that Badge to his Service,
whose Benefits bestowed upon them in Baptism, the Name of the Cross did
represent. I think it must be allowed, if this Sign dedicates Children to
Christ, and if it be a Badge of his Service; it is as much a Means to convey
Grace as Baptism it self; and by this Account of it, as much a Sacrament, the
divine Institution only excepted. It Is true, that the Sign of the Cross is not
a Sacrament instituted by Christ himself; nor was I so stupid as to object
against the Church of England, the appointing a new Sacrament instituted by
Christ himself. But what I objected was, that they have brought in by their own
Authority, and imposed upon us this Rite, without any Institution of Christ, to
which they ascribe the same Virtue and Properties, as to the Sacraments. And
for ought I can see to the contrary, I have fully justified my Objection. -- I
have shown that the Sign of the Cross* according to the Decrees of your Church,
every Way answers your own Definition of a Sacrament in all it is Nature and
Propertie^ It Is by your own Formula's determined to be a visible Sign of
invisible Grace, a Means to convey Grace* and a Pledge to assure us of it. And
have I not Reason then to complain, that the Honor of a Sacrament is given to
the Sign of the Cross? This Rite, of merely human Institution, that has been
prostituted to the most idolatrous Purposes in the Church of Rome, that has
been a dreadful S^^re to Multitudes of poor Souls, that has shed much precious
Blood, and is a stumbling Block to very many of the best People in the Nation,
is yet annexed to the Sacrament of Baptism, so that we must either submit to
this new Ordinance of your ^nventing and appointing, or go without the
Ordinance of Bap^ism in your Church. This is the State of the Case. And let the
World judge, whether there is not just Cause to object against the imposing
such Shackles upon Men's Consciences

What Reason can possibly be given, why this Sign should not be treated as the
brazen Serpent was by Hezekiah, and called Nehushtan? What Reason can there be,
why this Sign which has been so much polluted and abused to an idolatrous Use
in the Roman Church, should not be utterly abolished as God has required that
all the Remainders of Idolatry should be, Numb xxxiii.52. Deuteronomy. vii 5.25. And
xii.3 Isa xxx 2^? What Pretense can be made why this Ri^e, which has done so
much Harm and can do no good, should be made a Term of Communion in your
Church? Why should the cursed Instrument of our blessed Savior's extreme
Sufferings, be had in such Honor among you? What Plea can possibly be made for
the Sign of the Cross, that cannot with the same Justice be used for all the
popish Sacraments; and for all their Institutions and Impositions? Here Sir, I
provoke you to try your Skill, in making this Comparison. Offer what Argument
you will in Favor of this Us^ge; and I Am mistaken, if it cannot with the same
P^opriety be urged in Favor of any of theirs. If you urge, (as before) that
the Scripture requires of us, that we express our inward Sense of God and Duty
toward him, by such Actions as general Custom has made significant in like
C^ses; They will ^ell you, that general Custom has made it significant of their
inward Sense of God and D^ty toward him, to picture God the F^^her in the
Shape of an O^d Man, our blessed Savior in the Shape of a younger Man upon the
Cross; and the Holy Gho^^ in the Form of a Dove; to keep Images of Angel^ and
Saints in their Houses; and a hundred more such Abominations. If you urge, that
glorying (...) Christ's Sufferings is a Duty, they will tell you, th^^ they
have appointed five other Sacraments for th^^ Reason; they cross themselves
upon (...); they keep Crosses in their (...) and Churches; they perform all
their Ceremonies at high Mass for this very End: An^ have as much Warrant for
these Things from Scripture, as you have for your Cross in Baptism.


B. The plain English of your Reply is, that if the Scripture teaches aright,
we must picture God in the Shape of an old Man. (p. 58.)


D. No* Sir, this Consequence only follows upon Mr. Beach's Doctrine, that
general Custom is ou^ Rule. The Scripture teaches no such Thing, th^^ general
human Customs are to be the Rule or Pattern, by which we are to express our
Sense of God and Duty toward him. Nor do the Texts you cite in your
Vindication; or any other in the Bible, say one Word of our observing the Ri^es
you mention* because they are generally human Customs. If they are required by
those Texts, (as you say they be) they are required by God's Authority; and not
in Conformity to human Customs. In a Word, it general human Customs are a Rule
in this Case; I would enquire, whether all general Customs, or only some
general Customs? If all general Customs, then the pop^sh general Customs are as
much a Rule as any. If but some general Customs, show us what Sort of general
Customs they be, that we may know whether the Sign of the Cross come^ in^o the
Number. If you limi^ it to Customs grounded on scripture Institution, prove the
Cross to be such, and we will use it.


B. You challenge me to show that the Cross in Baptism was used in the three
first Centuries. I shall do it. The Apostolic Constitutions Lib. 3. C. 17.
says, in Baptism the Water represents Christ's Burial; and the Sign of the
Cross represents the Cross. Tertullian, who lived in the latter End of the
second Century, giving an Account of the Method of baptizing, says among other
Things, the Flesh is washed that the Soul may be cleansed, The Flesh is signed
that the Soul may be guarded. Again he says, The Devil apes God's Service, in
his Idol-Mysteries, he baptizes those that believe in him, he signs his
Soldiers in the Forehead etc.


D. The Apostolic Constitutions are very far short of Proof, that the Sign of
the Cross was used in Baptism in the three first Centuries; for they could not
be written earlier than the fifth Century, as Mr. Dalle (I Would psendographis
Apostol.) makes manifest. And your Quotation from Tertullian is as little to
the Purpose; for he had no View at all to the Use of this Sign in Baptism, in
the Words cited by you, but to the common and ordinary Use of the Sign of the
Cross; as appears from the very Passages you refer to, if the whole Discourse
be considered. And it also appears from his particular Account of the Manner of
administering this Ordinance at that Time. In which, though there be mention of
several Rites superstitious enough, such as trine Immersion, Imposition of
Hands, tasting of Milk and Honey, anointing with the blessed Unction etc. De
Baptismo. C. 6, 8.
Yet not a Word of the Sign of the Cross. In short, Tertullian tells us, that
in the Beginning of any Business, going out, coming in, dressing, washing,
eating, lighting Candles, going (...) Bed, sitting down, or whatever we do, we
sign (...) Foreheads with the Sign of the Cross. De Coron. C. 3.
And why don't you do as in Tertullian's Time? Why don't you use Milk and
Honey, Crism etc. at Baptism? Why don't you use the Sign of the Cross upon
every Occasion? If his Authority be good, it obliges you to the Practice of
these Things, which he certainly and plainly speaks of as used in his Time,
much more than to the Use of this Sign in Baptism, whereof I think there is no
mention in all his Writings.


B. Your next Charge is for Kneeling at the Communion.


D. The Debate between you and me principally turns upon this Question, Whether
it can be proved from the Evangelists, that Christ and his Disciples did
partake of this Ordinance sitting, in their ordinary Table-Posture? And does it
not appear from Luke xxii 14, 17. that they sat down to this holy Supper? and
from Ioh. xiii.2, 4. that Christ arose from Supper? Can you expect more express
Proof of any such Point, than there is of this, that they sat at this Ordinance?


B. You make the Apostles that Night to eat but one Supper; when it is plain
that they eat two, if not three distinct Suppers. -- It is as evident as Words
can make it, that after the first Supper or the Passover, Christ rose up and
washed his Disciples Feet; and after this sat down to Table again; and then
they eat what is called the Sop, of which Judas partook. Joh. xiii.26. After
all this Christ went to Prayer, and consecrated the Lord's Supper, from which
they are never said to rise up; and therefore according to you they never sat
down to it. (p. 62.)


D. If all this proves to be a Mistake, it is hopeful you will consider better for
the fut^re, before you are so very positive. I do indeed make the Apostles that
Night to eat but one Supper, and your groundless Imagination of two or three
Suppers, flows from a sufficient Ignorance of the Subject you are treating of.
We have no Account of their eating any Supper distinct from the Passover
Supper, Part of which our Lord consecrated as a Memorial of his Death, to be
kept in constant Use in the christian Church. "The Bread and Wine which our
Savior distributed at his last Passover, and appointed to signify and
represent his Body and Blood, were not without the Extent of the paschal
Supper; but within the Compass of it, and Rites belonging to it, only applied
by him now, to a new evangelical Use and Signification" That this may be set in
a cleared View, it may be proper to give you a few brief Hints, of the Manner
of their celebrating the Passover Solemnity.

The Passover Table was furnished with Provisions of several Sorts, viz.
Several Cups of Wine, bitter Herbs, unleavened Bread, and the Body of the
paschal Lamb toasted whole, to which they added a thick Sauce or Sop called
Charoseth. The chief Man of the Company, after they were sat down to the Table,
in the first (...) takes a Cup of Wine and blesses it, tastes lightly of it;
and gives it to the Company to divide among themselves: of this is the Account,
Luke xxii.17. Then he takes the bitter Herbs, and blesses them, dips them in
the Sauce or Sop before mentioned; and eats about the Quantity of an Olive, in
which all the rest of the Company imitate him; and this was the Sop of which
the Evangelists speak^, John xiii.26. Which instead of being a distinct Supper
from the Passover, was the first Thing they eat at the Passover. The
Institution whereof you find Exodus xii.28. After this he takes the Bread, which
was lightly cut, but not separated, break^ off a Piece of it, and lays the rest
by till the Lamb was eaten; and eating Part of the Piece which he brake off,
gives the remainder to the Company. Then he takes the second Cup of Wine; and
the rest imitate him in drinking of it. Then they cut up the paschal Lamb and
eat it, with the Bread that was laid by for that Purpose, Part of which Bread
our Savior consecrated as a Memorial of his Body; not after they were rise^
from the Passover as you suggest; but toward the Conclusion of it; and while
they were eating it, as is attested by the Evangelists, Matthew. xxvi.26. and
Mark xiv.22. All this done, they take the third Cup, called the Cup of Blessing
or Thanksgiving after Meat. And this third Cup after Supper, with which they
concluded that Solemnity, our Savior applied to a New spiritual Signification;
and thus graffed this Gospel-Festival of the Lord's Supper, upon the Jewish
Passover. They that would see this more largely represented, let 'em read
Gataker 's Harmony of the four Evangelists; Godwin 's Moses and Aaron, and
Lightfoot on the Passov^r.


There could be no Room for our Lord's rising up, washing his Disciples Feet,
and maintaining a long Discourse with them upon that Occasion, sitting down
again; and then administering the Lord's Supper. For it is certain from the
sacred Story, that this Ordinance was administered as they were eating, as
Matthew expresses it; and as they did eat, according to Mark; or while they
were eating, as the Original in both Places should be rendered. And there is no
Account that they ever rose up at all, till the whole Solemnity was over.

And if we look into the thirteenth Chapter of John, there is no such Thing
there as you pretend. Not a Word of our Savior's sitting down to any other
Supper, after washing his Disciples Feet; or any Thing that implies it: But
only his sitting down as usual, in his ordinary Conversation. In the first Part
of this Chapter, the Evangelist gives us the Narrative of our Lord's Conduct
after that sacred Feast was ended, and they were risen up from Supper, which
Narrative continues to the End of the 17 Verse. He then proceeds without any
Connection with what went before, to give us another (...) Time to the former;
(...) after it. The like to (...) in Scripture; and particularly in the very
Case before us, both Matthew and Mark relate the Story of Iudas's betraying
Christ, before the Celebration of the Lord's Supper, when it is certain it was
done afterward. Now this Prolepsis or Anticipation being allowed, there is a
good Agreement between St. John and the other Evangelists: But according to
your Representation of it, there is a plain and palpable Contradiction, which
must by no Means be supposed.

Your Mistake is founded upon the Supposition of an immediate Connection
between the 17th and 18th Verses of this Chapter. But be pleased to read them,
and see if they are at all united. If ye know these Things, happy are ye if ye
do them, I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen etc. Did not Christ
speak of all his Disciples, that they would be happy, if they did those Things
that he had commanded them? -- Could this be the Meaning of these Verses? No,
certainly it could not. Whence it is evident, that since the Sense cannot be
connected, the Verses ought not to be connected; and therefore, that all your
Reasoning from this Supposition comes to Nothing.

In a Word, certain it is that our Lord with his Disciples did sit down at the
Passover; and continued sitting at that Solemnity. How else did John lean on
Iesus's Bosom? It is also certain that while they were eating the Passover, our
Savior did consecrate the Elements in the Lord's Supper; and that he did rise
from the Table after Supper* and there is not the least Insinuation in all the
Evangelist^, that they ever rose at all during the Celebration of this
Ordinance. I must therefore (by your Leave) again conclude, that I despair of
ever seeing any Thing proved, by the most plain, positive, and intelligible
Expressions, if this don't prove that Christ and his Disciples did partake of
this Ordinance sitting in a Table-Posture.


B. ^ou and all learned Men know, that there is not a Word of their sitting in
the Original; but they are said to ly, that is on Couches. But however, sit, or
ly, or kneel, it is all one to you, if you can but amuse the common People (p.
61.)


D. The original Word in Luke, I grant, does sometimes, and indeed with
greatest Propriety, signify to ly backwards, in the Form that Rowers do when
they handle their Oars; and refers to the Table Posture of those Times, which
was sitting with their Feet behind them, leaning toward each other: But then
the original Word in Matthew. xxvi.20 and in Mark xiv.18. whatever you say to the
contrary, does properly signify sitting at Meat, in the same Posture as they
eat common Meals; and is again so used, Mark xvi.14. So that your Criticism and
triumphant Insult must both fall together.


B. Our Kneeling is more like that Table-Posture; than sitting upright. (p. 63)


D. A wonderful Assertion! An adoring Posture upon our Knees, is more like
sitting at Table a little leaning, than sitting upright at Table, is like it.
Was Kneeling ever used as a Table-Posture; or ever proposed in Scripture as a
proper Posture at any eucharistical Feast? Whereas on the contrary, sitting at
Table in such Feasts is approved by God himself, 1 Samuel xvi.11. Ezekiel. xliv.3.
And exemplified in the Case before us by our blessed Lord. And is not this
sufficient Warrant for our Conduct?

To sum up this Debate; Kneeling at the Sacrament was brought in by the
Papists, by Way of Adoration to the Elements, which they suppose
transubstantiated into the very Body and Blood of Christ: and as used by them,
is a most abominable Idolatry, to be abhorred by all good Men. And for my Part,
I had rather imitate the Pattern set me by the Lord Jesus Christ and his
Apostles, than write after so b^d a Copy; whatever Declaration can be made, of
retaining the Posture and rejecting the Idolatry. In th^^ doing, I Am sure I am
safe. And whatever Reflections you cast upon me, of symbolizing with the Pope,
with Socinians, or whatever else you please, must extend to the ^riginal
Example, and ultimately terminate there. This I think to be worthy of your
serious Consideration. To conclude, as kneeling toward any real or imaginary
Representation of God, or heavenly Things, does incur the G^ilt of Idolatry in
God's Account, even when the Worship does ultimately refer to God himself; I do
not therefore choose to kneel before the Elements, which are Representations of
our Lord Jesus Christ, lest I too much imitate Image Worship, and countenance
the Idolatry of the Papists; especially since Christ himself has given us a
contrary Example, and Kneeling is not an appointed Posture for Meditation and
ejaculatory Prayer, which are the special Duties to be attended at the Time of
receiving the Elements.


B. You had said, that Kneeling was brought in by the Papists. This I d^ny'd;
and proved from St Cyril and Justin Martyr -- that in their Time they used a
Posture of Adoration. (p. 65.)


D. You really proved Nothing from either of those Authors You did not so much
as cite a Word from them; nor pretend to prove any more, than that they stood
on the Lord's Day; and came bowing to the Lord's Table. And how that makes it
evident that Kneeling was not brought in by the Papists, I must leave to others
to determine. And I venture again to tell you, that if you will prove, that
Kneeling at the Sacrament was ever used in any Church, before the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation was brought in, I will acknowledge my Mistake as publicly
as you please

I am utterly unconcerned about your Merriment at that Saying of mine, that the
Author of this Feast is pleased to stoop to a friendly Familiarity with his
Guests; and is dealing with us as a great Monarch does by his mean Subjects,
whom he invites to a Feast: He is suffering us to sit down with the King at his
Table; and allowing us most near and intimate Communion with himself etc. Go
on, Sir, if you please; Sport your self and your Admirers with it as much as
you can. And I shall yet acknowledge and adore his Condescension, in this
glorious Instance of it.


B. Your next Charge is for admitting Sureties at Baptism; and here you say,
They promise what no^e but God can perform. They promise, that the Heart of the
Child shall be changed, the Nature sanctified, and the Affections and Passions
be under constant good Government. And are they God's! -- No* Mr Dictator,
there is Nothing like this in the Church In making the Covenant at Baptism, the
Sureties are only the Mouth of the Child. (p. 68.)


D. If I should allow, that Part of your Office does necessarily imply, that
the Questions are proposed to the Infants themselves, and answered by the
Surties as their Mouths; how then this can be justified from being a mere Piece
of Pageantry, I know not. For who gave the Surety Order and Authority to say in
the Child's Name, that he steadfastly believes all the Articles of the Creed,
that he desires to be baptized into this Faith, that he resolves to keep God's
holy Will and Commandments etc. How does the Surety know this? Nay does he not
know the direct contrary to all this? The Child being actually incapable of any
such Belief, Desire, or Resolution; that you must pardon me, if in this View of
the Case I can find no Means to reconcile this Office to Truth and Sense.


B. Children are capable of entering into Covenant with God, as appears by
Circumcision, and express Script^^^, Deuteronomy. xxix.11, 12. (p. 69)


D. True, they are capable of being dedicated to God; and thereby of being
brought into a Covenant Relation, Covenant-Pri^ileges; and
Covenant-Obligations. But all Talk of their personal Covenanting, is to me (I
confess) altogether unintelligible.


B Very pretty; and much like a sober Divine* And may not a Quaker say the same
to us all? Ho^ trifling, how lu^icrous is the Baptizing of Infants* Baptism is
a Seal of Faith and Repentance; (...) the poor Infant is so far from having
Faith and Repentance, that he knows not what they Mean. (p. 70)


D A Quaker may very justly make this Objection, upon your pretense of personal
and exp^icit Covenanting. And I confess* I know not what Answer can possibly be
given to such an Objection. But then upon our Grounds of proceeding in this
Case, there is no Room for a Quaker, or any Body else, to thro^ such Objections
in our Way. The Infant has ^^ undoubted Interest in the outward Privileges of
the Covenant, by Virtue of the Parent's Covenant-Right For the Promise is to
you and to your Children, Acts ii.39 -- Else were your Children unclean, but
now are they holy, 1 Cor. vii.14. The Parent also has an undoubted Claim to
dedicate his Children to Christ, and to suffer his little Children is come unto
him, since of such are the Kingdom of Heaven. And what Handle can the Quakers
or any others take from hence for such Reflections as you speak of? May not a
Parent put his Infant's Name into a Lease for Lands; and secure him the
Privileges of that Lease when he comes of Age? And is not the Infant when he
comes of Age, bound to fulfill the Conditions of the Lease, upon the Penalty of
forfeiting his Interest in it? And why he may not as consistently bring his
Children into the Privileges and Obligations of this Lease of spiritual
Blessings, in the same Manner, and under the same Penalty, let any Objector
give a Reason when he is able.


B. Again you say, How came the Proxies to get the Child baptized without his
Leave? Witty still! but a fatal Blow to Infant Baptism. (p. 71.)


D. I said no such Thing; but you are forced thus to turn my Words, to make 'em
suit your Purpose. I did say, and do still say, How came the Sureties to be the
Child's Proxies without his Leave, and to profess and promise in his Name what
he gave them no Power or Authority to promise for him? For though the Parent has
in himself a natural Authority, and is obliged by the Command of Christ, to
dedicate his Child to God in Baptism: Yet the Child has not given, nor is
capable of giving Authority to any Man, in his Name, to declare what his Faith
is, what his Desires, Purposes, and Resolutions are. This yet appears to me an
Affair most ludicrous and trifling.

I think, on a Review of the Case, you will find that you have gained Nothing by
forcing me upon a distinct Consideration of this Plea of yours; for it nothing
at all affects what I had before urged in this Case: I did justly complain,
that the Sureties promise what it is God's Prerogative to perform. For though they
do speak in the Name of the Child, yet the Church does understand it as their
own Vow on the Behalf of the Child, and expressly declares in the Catechism,
that THEY PROMISE and VOW three Things in it is Name, That it SHOULD renounce
the Devil and all his Works, That it SHOULD believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith, That it SHOULD keep God's holy Will and Commandments etc. And
the Case must be thus understood; or else (which is an Observation worth your
minding) there is no Promise at all for the Child's religious Education, either
by Parents or Sureties. The Sureties are obliged to this; or they are obliged
to Nothing at all, on the Child's Behalf. This is their Covenant; or they are
under no Covenant on Behalf of the Child: and consequently the Child has no
Covenant-Right at all, either from its Parents or Sureties; and therefore no
Claim at all to the Seal of the Covenant. Answer this consistently, if you can.
It yet therefore appears, that what the Sureties promise, is beyond human Power
to perform: And their speaking impertinently in the Name of the Child, will
never give them Ability to do it.


B. I said, Here, the Sureties make no Promise of any Thing they will do for
the Child, but only are his Mouth etc. To this, you knew, you could not reply:
therefore you honestly leave out (Here) which though a small Particle, yet
governs the whole Sentence. (p. 71.)


D. I have taken some Pains to consult, what Advantage it could have been to my
Cause to have left out that Word (if I had done so) that I might find out the
Occasion of this Accusation: But I cannot find out how that would any Way have
affected the Argument between us. However, be that as it will, the Accusation
is very surprising: For that Word stands as fair and open to View in my
Defense, as it does in your Vindication; but the Clause it belongs to is very
exactly cited. Be pleased, Sir, to put on your Spectacles; and look steadily
for the Word ( Here) you will certainly find it. ( Def. p. 64) I Have quoted it
once; nor do you under that Head use it oftener. So that it is Mr. Beach who
must take to himself all the Glory of the new Figure, and the Manful Triumph,
you speak of; and the Charge of dishonest Tricks, an Argument of a desperate
Cause, recoils on your self.

As to your Cavils against that harmless Passage in my Defense, That God has
never given, never promised Assistance to any Man, in changing the Hearts, and
sanctifying the Natures, and governing the Affections and Passions of others;
which, you in your Appeal say, is either a false and pernicious Doctrine, or
else a Piece of solid Nonsense: I am willing to leave it to our Readers,
without spending more Words about it. Let them judge, whether it be the same
Thing, to be assisted, IN DOING THE WORK OUR SELVES, or IN BEING ONLY
INSTRUMENTS in the Hands of the great Workman; as you say it is. Let them
judge, whether it be the same Thing for you to assist your Pen in dictating
this fine Discourse of yours, as to use it as an Instrument in your Hand to
communicate your Dictates to others. If they determine, as you do, in the
Affirmative, I depend upon their Decree in my Favor, that your Pen has been a
little too angry. -- Let them judge, whether St. Paul did any Way himself open
Men's Eyes and change their Hearts; or whether Christ was the sole Efficient,
and wrought this glorious Change by his own Almighty Power, only employing Paul
as an Instrument, and blessing the Means used for obtaining that End. If Paul
did not do the Work himself, he was not assisted in doing it; but was merely an
Instrument in the Hands of Christ. If he did do it himself, he did do it by
almighty Power; for it was an Almighty Work.

Upon the whole* you may observe, if you will look into Dr. Comber's Companion to
the Temple, which is generally allowed to be a genuine Exposition of the
Common Prayer Book, That (...) Sense of the Promise of Sureties, in the Office
of Baptism, is not very foreign from mine. He tells us, That Infants enter into
the baptismal Coven^n^ no other Way but by having some to ENGAGE that they
SHOULD stand to God's Terms. He tells us. The Sure^ies may very well PROMISE
that the Child SHALL believe these divine Truths, since they were all revealed
from Heaven etc. -- In expounding the Exhortation to Godfathers and Godmothers,
he puts them upon a Review of what they have done, and says, They have ENGAGED
FOR a Minor unto Almighty God; -- They are become SURETIES and BONDSMEN for
this Child unto the Majesty of Heaven; -- You have UNDERTAKEN (says he) that
this Child SHALL renounce the Devil, believe in God, and serve Him. [And the
Dr. in his Discourse on the Office of Confirmation, speaks as if Godfathers
obtained a DISCHARGE from the Bonds they have entered, and so receive a great
Benefit themselves, when they bring their Charge carefully prepared to the
Bishop for Confirmation] -- Indeed the Dr. justly observes, That i^ is not in
the Sureties Power to give the Child Grace: But then he seems to be of Opinion,
That they are beneficial to the Child, as performing those Things for the
Child, which are the necessary Conditions of obtaining the Grace of Baptism:
His Words are expressly these; "Infants may receive the good Things of Baptism
BY THE FAITH OF THOSE WHO REPRESENT THEM. He quotes that Saying of Rabanus
Maurus, -- It is manifest that as Children drew those Sins from others which
are remitted to them in Baptism, so also BY OTHERS they may believe unto
Salvation. -- So that (the Dr adds) we ought to believe, till the Child be
capable, the Faith of its SURETIES is so far accepted for it, as to entitle it
to all the Blessings of the Covenant; and it is an excellent Charity of the
Church to lend them Hands to receive such a Mercy* without which they must
remain under the Power of Death" -- I shall make no Reflections upon these
extraordinary Lines: but suppose 'em to exhibit the Sense of your Church upon
the Matter; For this Book of Dr. Comber's is very much read and recommended
among you as a most Authentic Commentary on the Church Service, and as such is
said to be put into the Hands of Students in the Universities at home very
generally. Nor has there ever been any public C^^sure passed upon these
remarkable Passages, that I know of. Whether you condemn this fine Divinity, or
not, we must wait to hear in your next.


B I come now to the Burial-Office. I granted, that this Office implies that we
have a Hope of the dead Person -- But then I said, That Expression, in sure and
certain Hope of the Resurrection etc. is only a Repetition of that Article of
the Creed, We believe there will be a Resurrection. (p. 73, 74)


D. If there be other Passages in the burial Office, that do imply a Hope of
the dead Person, how impertinent was it for you to single out this, and tell
us, that this referred only to the general Resurrection; since the Charge
might^ly against your Office in full Fo^ce, if that were granted you? But why
did you not answer the Evidence I offered you, that this very Expression does
imply a sure and certain Hope of the Salvation of the most profligate Sinner,
that dies a Member of the Church of England?

You must before God and the People declare at the Funeral of every one that
dies in your Communion, That it has pleased Almighty God of his great Mercy to
take to himself the Soul of our dear Brother here departed; and that you
therefore commit the Body to the Ground, Earth to Earth, Ashes to Ashes, Dust
to Dust, in sure and certain Hope of the Resurrection to eternal Life through
our Lord Jesus Christ. You must give hearty Thanks to God, for that it has
pleased him to deliver this our Brother (...) of the Miser^es of this sinful
World You must pray God to raise us from the Death of Sin to the Life of
Righteousness, that when we shall depart this Life we may rest in him [Christ]
as our Hope is this our Brother does* And what can be a stronger Declaration of
the greatest Evidence of such a Person's eternal Salvation, than this is? Has
God taken the Soul of the dead to himself? Do you heartily thank him for
delivering your Brother ou^ of the Miseries of this sinful World? Do you pray
for the same Salvation for your own Souls, which you hope him possessed of?
What Expressions can be thought of, that carry in them a greater Assurance of
the eternal Happiness of the deceased, than th^se do; however the other Clause
is understood?

But then (...) also manifest* that you declare a sure and certain Hope of the
Resurrection to eternal Life, of that very Body you commit to the Ground, Earth
to Earth, Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust Your Office does no more refer to the
general Resurrection in that Cla^se of i^, than to a general Body commit^ed to
the Ground, a general Earth to Earth etc if there be any Sense and Connection
in the Expressions.


B. Because the Office implies a Hope, therefore I say, we will not use it at
the Funerals of those, (...) whom we can have no rational Grounds to Hope. (p.
74.)


D. Have not you declared your unfeigned Assent and Consent to every Thing
contained in the Book of Common Prayer? Are not you sworn to canonical
Obedience; and don't that oblige you to use that Office? Or have you a
Dispensation in this Case? -- Certain it is, that your Prayer Book obliges you
to use this Office for all, but those that die unbaptized, or excommunicate, or
that lay violent Hands on themselves. No Degree or Kind of Impiety, though it
should be in the last Moments of a secure impenitent Sinner, will cut off any
Member of the Church of England from this imaginary Privilege, except he be a
Self-Murderer. And what Advantage, either to the dead or living, can possibly
follow from your thus adventuring to address even God himself with such
Declarations as these? What can have a greater Tendency to harden poor Sinners
in a sensual Life, than to hear the eternal Salvation of such as themselves so
positi^ely declared? Ought we not to have a greater Awe of the glorious Majesty
of the eternal God, than to declare in his immediate Presence, and to praise
him for, the Salvation of such as have given no Evidences of their Title to
that Salvation? If I had no other Objection against the Church of England, this
Office alone would keep me from Conforming to that Church.


B. You again charge us with pretending to be Gods, in taking upon us
absolutely to pardon Sins. -- And so you go on ranting and railing, when your
Conscience told you, that we don't differ one Hair's Breadth about the Thing;
but only you don't fancy the Word. You think it should not be, I absolve in the
Name of God: but would have it expressed thus, I declare God's Absolution. (p.
75.)


D. What a Bundle of Misrepresentation^ i^ here crowded together? Did I ever
charge you (...) pretending to be Gods? Or is this a just Insinuation, from my
arguing, that the pardoning of Sin ^ an incommunicable Branch of God's
Prerogative? Don't we differ one Hairs Breadth about the Thing, when you
endeavor to justify the Office, and I think I have fully proved that it is in
all Respects unjustifiable, in both those that use it, and those that desire to
have it used for them? Did I ever tell you, that I would have it expressed
thus, I decl^^^ God's Absolution? No, Sir, There is no more Foundation for all
this, than Mr. Beach's Apprehension, that this Way of representing the Case
would serve his Turn best. I am still of Opinion, that it is a great deal too
bold for any Man upon Earth (the Pope not excepted) to Authoritatively declare
God'^ Absolution or Pardon to any one, whatever Profession he may make; and it
is yet much bolder, to solemnly declare it in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that you absolve any Man from all his Sins. For
as you cannot know any Man's Heart, whether his Profession of Repentance be
sincere; and whether his Sins be pardoned: So God has given you no Authority to
pardon his Sins, if his Repentance were ever so sincere.

You declare to the sick Person, that by Christ's Authority committed to you,
you absolve him from all his Sins, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost Now I desire to know, where Christ has commi^ted to you
this Authority, to pardon Sins in his Name? Have you this Authority, or have
you not? If you have, I hope you will not condemn the Papists for claiming it: For
why may not they pretend to it as well as you? Nor will you blame People for
purchasing their Pardon of the Priest: for how can their Money be better
expended? But if you have not this Authority, all your Explications are
impertinent. -- You do in the most sacred and solemn Manner assert, that you
have this Authority committed to you by Christ; and you do in the Name of the
adorable Trinity pretend to exercise it, in absolving the sick Person from all
his Sins. And by what Explication is it possible to palliate this Pretense to
pardon Men's Sins; but by declaring to the World, that you say one Thing, and
mean another, even when you speak in the awful Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. If you pretend to mean a declarative and conditional Pardon; yet
you pronounce an absolute and unconditional Pardon, in as strong Terms as
easily can be invented. -- And by the Way, Has your Church ever given us any
such Explication of her Meaning, as you pretend to, or given you any Authority
to do it for her? Or indeed (if she had) would the plain natural Meaning of the
Words bear it?


B. Under the Law, the Priest 's Declaration concerning the Leper, or his
Judgment whether he was clean or unclean, was called a cleansing or polluting
him, and a making him clean or unclean; though strictly speaking, the Priest did
not make him leprous or not leprous, but only declared upon a just Examination
and View, whether he was so or not. So the Ministers of the Gospel have that
Authority committed unto them, to forgive or retain Sins, as the Priests under
the Law had to ^ure Lepers. (p. ^6)


D. Yes, Sir, when you have the like Capacity to judge, that Men's Sins are
p^rdoned, or not, as the Priests under the Law had to judge that the Leprosy
was cleansed or not: When your positive Declaration of Absolution is a Means
instituted by God himself for the obtaining a Pardon of Men's Sins, as the
Priests Declaration was for cleansing the Leprosy: And when you have Authority,
expressly given you by God himself, to make this Declaration in his Name, as the
Priests had under the Law; there may be some Parity i^ the Cases. But in the
mean Time, since all these Things are wanting on your Side, your pretended
Parallel is but a wild Impertinency. -- And whatever Comfort some Men may
pretend to take from human Absolution, I cannot think they are any nearer to
Heaven by these Means: Though many Sinners are in Danger of being thereby brought
into greater Security, hardened in Presumption, and deluded with false Hopes of
Happiness; while they hear the Priest solemnly declaring, That their Sins are
forgiven by God himself, and think with you that SUCH A DECLARATION, proceeding
from the Mouth of one of those who are constituted ministerial Judges of
particular Men's Repentance, is proper EVANGELICAL ABSOLUTION. -- A most
wonderful Piece of Divinity this! Upon which I must take Leave to return you
one of your own Remarks, and say, "This is either a false and pernicious
Doctrine, or else a Piece of solid Nonsense.


B. This (i. e. absolve in the Name of the Father* Son, and Holy Ghost) in
Effect you do every Time y^^ baptize a Person, or administer the Lord's Supper
(p. 75)


D. This I must leave with our Readers; for I am not able to see any Appearance
of Argument in it; and therefore cannot Answer it. I cannot see what Parity there
is between pardoning Sins, and administering the Ordinances of the Gospel.


B. When you authoritatively pronounce the Blessing upon your Congregation, you
are as much a God, as we are, when we pronounce God's Absolution. (p. 76.)


D. I suppose you mean, that there is no more Authority exercised or implied,
in absolving Men from all their Sins in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, than in pronouncing the Blessing: Or in other Words, that there is the
same Authority clai^'d in praying God to bless the Congregation, as in
pardoning their Sins. This also I must leave with our Readers: The bare stating
the Case seems to me sufficient. Only by the Way, I would p^opose a Query or
two. If pronouncing the Blessing, and pronouncing the Absolution, are
understood by your Church to be equally Authoritative, Why may not the Deacons
among you be allowed to use your Forms for the one, as well as the other? And
if the Priests Declaration of God's Pardon be proper Evangelical Absolution,
and such a good Foundation of Comfort, as you say it is, how unhappy are many
Episcopal Congregations in England, that have only a Deacon to officiate among
them, who is not empowered to pronounce the Absolution?

Now give me Leave to shut up this Dispute, by repeating to you the Sentiments
of Another, in ^he following Letter from an anonymous Hand London-Mag. Aug.
173^.
SIR,
AS you are a rational and consistent Protestant, it must have often roused
your Indignation to observe the Cheats put by Romish Priests upon the unwary
Souls of Men. Some of these the Scripture calls Sorcery; they are a Kind of
Spiritual Magic, or an Art of making Men religious, and of sending 'em to
Heaven without any real Holiness or Virtue at all.

But is there nothing of this same Sorcery practiced among us? As some of the
brightest Ornaments of our Church have not only acknowledged some Things in
it is Constitution and Forms would admit of Alteration, but have even wished and
labored for it; and as we are once a Year taught to lament the Want of godly
Discipline, and to pray that it may be restored; 'twill not, I hope, be thought
Presumption, if, with the Frankness of an Old Whig and a Free Briton, I observe
some Things in our Church, which carry too great Appearance of this Spiritual
Iuggle or Scorcery. Wh^ otherwise can we think of three of it is prescribe
Rites, Confirmation, Absolution, and the Burial of the Dead?

By the first of these, all Persons baptized, when come to competent Age, and
able to say the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments, and the
shorter Catechism, are to be brought to Confirmation: The Bishop having asked,
Whether they renew their solemn Promise and Vow (...) was made in their Name at
Baptism? upon their answering, We do, declares in the most solemn and public
Manner, even in an Address to God himself, that he has vouchsafed to regenerate
these his Servants by Water and the Holy Ghost, and to give them the
Forgiveness of all their Sins; and laying his Hands upon the Head of each
particular Person, he certif^s him by that Sign, of God's Favor and gracious
Goodness toward him.

Now this Bishop we are taught to look upon as the Ambassador of Jesus Christ,
and a Successor of the Apostles, who had Power to remit Sins: And when they
hear this venerable Person thus solemnly declaring that God has regenerated
and forgiven them; who can wonder, if they really believe themselves to be so,
and upon these Grounds indulge a confident Security as to the Favor of God,
and Happiness in a future World?

That the poor ignorant and unthinking Part of the People should be thus easily
deluded, is not so strange: But that such learned, wise and pious Men, as our
Rev. Bishops are, who know the Aptness of Mankind to deceive themselves by
false Hopes, and the infinite Folly and Danger of their so doing; that these
should thus contribute to lull them asleep, and without knowing their Hearts,
or a due Enquiry into their Lives, declare them in the Presence of God
regenerated and pardoned, is a Conduct truly surprising, and not easily to be
accounted for.

In the Absolution of sick Penitents, the sick Person being moved to make a
special Confession of his Sins, if he feel his Conscience troubled with any
weighty Matter, after such Confession the Priest shall absolve him (if be
humbly and heartily desire it) after this Sort: Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
left Power to his Church to absolve all Sinners who truly repent and believe in
him, of his great Mercy forgive thee thine Offenses; and by the Authority
committed to me, I absolve thee from all thy Sins, in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

What and where is that Church, to which Christ has left this Power? Is it the
Catholic and universal Church, or any national or provincial Church? Or, is it
every particular Society of worshipping Christians? In what Persons is it
lodged? with the whole Body of the People, who, according to
Scripture Language, and the Doctrine of our own Articles, are properly called
the Church; or with the Ministers or Clergy, who are never so called? In the
former Part, it is said to be left to the CHURCH; but in the latter the PRIEST
claims it as his Peculiar; to which, when his Claim shall have been fully
proved, his Character shall be confessed indelible and sacred, and Incense and
the Knee be offered him as the Representative of Christ upon Earth.

If Christ has given Power to any authoritatively to absolve those who are
truly penitent, he must also have given them Power to know who are truly
penitent, else it is a Power to do just nothing: For till they know them to be
truly penitent ( i. e. till they can search their Hearts) they cannot
authoritatively absolve them; and if they cannot do it till then, they cannot
do it at all.

Is a mere Conf^ssion of Sin all the Gospel demands, in order to it is
Forgiveness? Must it not be fors^^k and broken off as well as confessed? Are
not the most debauched, when Sickness seizes, and Death is thought to approach
them, wont to feel their Conscience troubled, readily to confess their Sin, to
express great Sorrow, to vow Amendment if spared? But when the Danger is blown
off, is it hardly ever seen that they return not to their Crimes with as mad a
Gust as before?

Another Absurdity in this dangerous and delusive Form (...) that though the
Confession be but special, the Absolution is general But, by what Logic? Or
from what Scripture, is this Inference drawn, that a Contrition for some Sins,
shall obtain Forigveness of all Sins?

Well -- but the sick Man dies -- he lived a vicious and debauched Life, was a
known Drunkard, Adulterer but when his last Sickness came, he trembled at the
Thought of Death -- sent for the Priest, confessed his Sin, and desired to be
absolved: The Priest by Authority committed to him in the most solemn Form of
Words, even in the, Name of the Father, etc. pronounces and declares him
absolved from all his Sins. The unhappy Person thus dead comes now to be
buried. Here the Priest, in the Face of a vast Crowd who knew the Man's wicked
Life, solemnly declares, That God has taken to himself the Soul of this our
dear Brother -- gives him hearty Thanks that it has pleased him to deliver
this our Brother out of the Miseries of this sinful World -- and prays, that
when we shall depart this Life we may rest in him (Christ) as our Hope is this
our Brother does. What can the attending Crowd think of all this? If they think
at all, it must be either.

First, that what the Priest has said is true, and may be depended on as the
Word of God, whose Ambassador he is supposed to be; and if so, Remission may,
be had in this World, and Salvation in the other, without breaking off my Sins:
I shall have Peace therefore, though I go on to add Drunkenness to Thirst; and
however vicious my Life be, may have hope in my Death that I shall rest in
Christ, as the Priest tells me, this our Brother does.

Secondly, If these Pretensions and Expressions be examined but by common
Sense, they appear to be all a solemn FARCE, a shocking and gross DELUSION; a
dangerous Encouragement to careless and immoral Living; subversive of good
Order and Virtue upon Earth; calculated to advance the Power of Priests, and to
stupify and enslave the Consciences of Men, There are Numbers of our wise
Clergy who groan under these unhappy Forms, and sincerely wish them removed:
Why in the Name of God, are they not removed? Or if this cannot be obtained,
why are they not more zealously and openly disavow'd? Our Church is daily
dishonored and weakened by these Practices. Infidelity gains on it here,
Popery there.





B. I proceed to the tenth Charge, which is against Holy Days. Here I observed,
you keep human Holy Days as well as we, and therefore I conclude you don't
think it a Sin -- But you say, Though we have no^ Authority to make Time holy,
yet we have Authority to set apart Time for holy Services. This Distinction is
learned enough in all Conscience! Pray let me into this Mystery, and show me
how you can set apart Time for holy Service; and yet not make that Time holy.
What Holiness is there in Time, but only it is being set apart from common to
holy Services? (p. 77, 80)


D. The clearing this Point will (I think) be a sufficient Answer to all your
Reasonings in your Appeal, from the imagined Parallel between our observing
Lecture-Days, occasional Fasts and Thanksgivings, and your observing all the
Holy Days appointed in your Calendar. I shall therefore something distinctly
consider the Case.

I did say, that though we have not Authority from God to make Time holy; yet we
have Authority to set apart Time for these holy Services (i. e. such Services
as he has appointed and has made it our Duty to attend) when his Providence
calls for it. Whatever religious Duties are performed by us in Obedience to
God's Command, must be done in Time; and consequently there must be some Time
set apart for their Observance, if they are attended at all: Whence it follows,
that he who requires us to perform those Duties, requires us also to set apart
Time for their Performance. The same Command (for Example) that requires
Ministers to preach in Season and out of Season, requires them to improve some
Time for the Discharge of that Duty; and therefore requires them to take some
other Time to preach to the People, besides the stated Seasons on the Lord's
Day. The same Commands that require occasional Fasts and Thanksgivings, require
also that we occasionally set apart some Time to observe these Fasts and
Thanksgivings, without which they cannot be observed at all. From which
Considerations it appears (as I showed you more largely in my Defense) That God
has required us to observe Lectures, occasional Fast-Days and
Thanksgiving-Days: And we have Authority from him to set apart Time for these
holy Services. Though he has given us no Authority at all to make Time holy; or
to consecrate any stated periodical Returns of Time, so that these holy
Services will be necessary on Account of the Time. Such a consecrating stated
periodical Returns of Time to special Services, is what I meant, and what the
Scripture always means, by making Time holy. Thus under the levitical
Dispensation, their Sabbaths were holy, their New Mons, their stated Feasts
and Fasts were holy, only on the Account of the Consecration of a stated Return
of Time for these holy Services. Upon the same Account also, the Church of
England calls her Feasts and Fasts holy Days; because of their Designation in
an annual Return, to the peculiar Purposes for which they are appointed. It Is
remarkable, that the occasional Fasts and T^^^^sgivings so frequently mentioned
in Scripture, are never called (...) Days: nor are such occasional Appointments
^^ called in the Church of England. And the Reas^^ is, because the Services are
not attended for the Sake of the Time: But the Time only observ^^ for the Sake
of the Services. Whereas on (...) Contrary, upon all the Times that are called
(...) Days, the Services must be observed on Accou^^ of the Return of the
consecrated Time, without any other special Call to their Observation. And is
there no Difference in these Cases? Is there ^^ Difference between attending
required Duties* necessarily taking some Time to attend them; and making Time
holy; or consecrating set Days every Year, for such Purposes as we are pleased
^^ appoint of our own Accords? I think there is a very great Difference in many
Respects, between your Holy Days, and our occasional Services; th^' ours as
well as yours require Time for their Observation.

1. Because in our occasional Services we assume no Authority to consecrate
Time at all: but (...) that Prerogative of Heaven, where it ought to be left,
in the Hands of God alone. We don't esteem any Return of Time more holy than
other; but that alone which God himself has made ^^* Whereas you on the
contrary consecrate stated Days in the Year, declare them to be holy, and
oblige People to observe 'em in their yearly Return. But by what Authority is
this done?

2. Because the Duties we perform on these Occasions, are such as GOD himself
has required, as I showed you before; whereas you consecrate Time for such
Services as are no where warranted, no where precedented or allowed in the
Scriptures. You cannot (for Instance) pretend, that the Observation of any
Saints-Days (much less, that the Observation of such a Number of 'em) is any
where warranted in Scripture; while, on the contrary, you your self allow, that
occasional Fasts and Thanksgivings are required by God himself.

3. Because we do not (as you do) impose a new Yoke on the Neck of Christ's
Disciples, instead of that which God himself has taken off. We don't observe
Days and Months and Times and Years, lest the Gospel should be in vain to us,
Gal. iv.10, 11. We don't revive the typical Dispensation of Holy Days, which
was a shadow of Things to come, but the Body is of Christ, Col. ii.17. We cannot
imagine any Reason, why we should value our selves upon our Liberty, by being
freed from the Jewish Yoke of Bondage (Gal. v.1) and yet impose a greater Yoke
upon our selves.

4 Because we don't (as you do) practically declare our selves unsatisfied with
the Provision Christ has made for the thankful Remembrance of all the Instances
of his redeeming Love, which he has in common bestowed upon Mankind. Christ has
appointed one Day in every Week to these Purposes; he thought that sufficient,
and we think so too; and cannot find any Warrant or Commission given to any Man,
to appoint any other. He has indeed required us, to perform religious Duties of
every Kind; and consequently to take Time to perform them. We must set apart
Time for special Services, such as Fasts and Thanksgivings, when his Providence
on one Occasion and another calls for them. But he himself has appointed Time
for the commemorating the common Benefits of his Redemption; and has given no
Man Authority or Commission to appoint any other stated Times on that Account.
Which may serve for Answer to page 88 th of your Appeal.

5. Because we dare not (as you do) take away the Liberty God has allowed our
People; and take up above half their Time in Feasts, Fasts, and Holidays of our
own instituting, which he has given them for their secular Employments.

6. Because we dare not go so far toward justifying the Papists in their
worshipping of Saints and Angels, as you seem to do, in setting apart the same
Days in a Year as they do, in (I know not what) Commemoration of those Saints
and Angels: Because the Scripture expressly calls the Papists Saint-Worship, the
Doctrine of Devils or Demons, 1 Timothy iii.1.

These, Sir, are some of the Differences between your Holy Days, and our
occasional Employment of Time in attendance upon special commanded Duties of
Religion. And these Differences will be most clear and apparent to every one,
that will give himself Liberty to think; notwithstanding all your sarcastical
Fleers, and notwithstanding all your attempts to make them every way parallel.


B. How could you make such a vile and (...) Representation, as though all were
to be excommunicated, that did not keep above half the Year as holy Time? (p.
83)


D. Your Church has appointed the Observation, besides 52 Sundays, of 29 other
Feast-Days, 52 Fridays, 12 Ember-Days, 3 Rogation-Days, 33 Days of Lent
exclusive of the Fridays, November 5th, January 30th, and May 29th. All of
which make up 184 Days. These the Church of England calls Holy Days,
Feast-Days, and Fast-Days, and has appointed special Services for 'em all;
besides a great Number of Saints-Days mentioned in the Calendar, for which
there is no special Service appointed. Now your sixth Canon excommunicates
every one that affirms, that he may not with any good Conscience approve and
use all your Rites and Ceremonies. Where then is the vile and horrid
Representation? Indeed, Sir, you would do well to consider a little better,
before you indulge Passion and give Vent to such very wrathful Expressions.


B No Man on any of these Days is obliged to forbear Labor, any more than on
your Lecture-Days. (p. 82.)


D. Are not these Feast-Days or Days of Thanksgiving, these Fast-Days or Days
of Abstinence, these Holy Days, appointed for every one alike in your
Prayer Book, without any Limitation? What then can you mean? Unless it be, that
it is in your Church's Opinion lawful to exact all your Labor, upon Days of
fasting and thanksgiving, as the Prophet complains of another Church in the
same Case, Isai. lviii.3.


B. You are mistaken when you say, that we have no higher nor better Example
than the Church of Rome. Origin says, that in his Time the Church observed the
Feast of holy Innocents. Tertullian speaks of the Birth Day of the Martyrs. (p.
83)


D. You don't tell us where to find these Quotations: but suppose 'em true,
what is it to the Days you observe? What other Example, than the Church of
Rome, can you find for the Observation of those Days kept in your Church?


B. Our holy Days are no more Jewish, no more a Sign of our renouncing
Christianity, no more a Yoke to our Shoulders, than your Holy Days. (p. 88.)


D. Is it no more Jewish, to keep Easter, Pentecost (...) that were originally
Jewish Holy Days, and are as much abrogated as any of the rest of their Days;
than (...) preach upon a Weekday, or keep a Day of (...) and Thanksgiving upon
special Occasions? Is it no more a Yoke upon our Shoulders, to Consecrate above
a hundred Days in a Year, than to set apart two or three Days for special
Service, as Occasion requires? From whom did you expect Credit to this strange
Assertion?


B. I come now to consider what you say of the Holy Days instituted Esth. ix.
-- There is not the least (...) God's commanding this Feast, nay the Holy Ghost
says ^^^presly, that the Jews ordained it, and took it upon th^^selves and
their Seed. (p 84)


D. If these Holy Days were religious (...), which yet the Text says nothing
of, they were appointed by Mordecai (Esth. ix.31.) the supposed (...) man of
the Book of Esther, who was, for ought we know to the contrary, as much
inspired in making this Appointment, as in penning the sacred Story. As for the
Iew^ appointing these Days, it manifestly means no more than their agreeing to
observe the Appointments of Mordecai; as appears from the Text now quoted,
compared with verse 20th of the same Chapter. So that all Argument from hence
must necessarily fall to the Ground. I will freely consent to the Observation
of any Holy Days in your Church, that you can prove to be appointed by an
inspired Writer of the sacred Scriptures of the New Testament.


B. Come we now to my second Instance, Joh. xxii.23. I said* Christ was no
Dissenter; but observed a human Holy Day, appointed long before by the
Maccabees. -- You say, it cannot be proved that Christ ever observed (...)
approved of that Feast. To which I reply -- He knew, it was the Time when
others presented themselves to keep the Feast at that Place. He at least gave
them Occasion to think that he owned the Feast. -- It Is certain our Lord would
have reproved the Observation of this human Holy Day, if it had been sinful.
(p. 85)


D. Suppose that the Feast of Dedication was appointed by the Maccabees; I yet
say, it cannot be proved, that our Lord Jesus Christ ever approved of it. All
that can be found in the Text, to build such a Supposition upon, is these
Words, -- And it was at Jerusalem the Feast of Dedication, and it was Winter;
and Jesus walked in the Temple in Solomon's Porch. This is all that is said
about it. All the Story in your Books, of Christ's coming many Miles to
celebrate this Feast, and the like, is merely your own Imagination. How do you
know, that our Lord had any more Regard to the Feast of Dedication, than to the
Winter, in his walking in Solomon's Porch? It is not easily understood, why the
Evangelist there mentions it is being Winter, unless to insinuate the Reason of
Christ's walking there. Accordingly Dr. Lightfoot so understands this Text. He
walked there because it was Winter, that he might get and keep himself warm.
Vol II. p. 5^8
-- But why did not our Lord reprove the Observation of this human Holy Day?
Pray, How do you know that he did not reprove it, that he did not walk in the
Porch for that End? But if he did not reprove it, it might be for this Reason;
because it was no Holy Day at all. There is nothing in the Text that gives us
any E^idence, that it was observed as a religious Feast; or that there was any
Body in the Temple at that Time in Observation of that Feast, or any Thing like
(...). In a Word, all that can be proved from Scripture, is the bare Mention of
the Feast of Dedication: all the rest is to be deduced by innuendo, which not
be taken from you for good Proof of any Thing, that you are inclined to impose
upon us*


B. Your next Complaint is against our Bishops. H^^e you tell us, what great
Feats you have done in your Writings against Episcopacy To which I answer, Let
another Man praise thee, and not thine own Mouth. (p. 89)


D. This is a very unjust Insinuation. I observed, that it was impossible in so
short a Compa^^ (...) fully consider that Subject; and therefore re^erred you
to what I had already written upon it, that yet remains unanswered. And I
venture to do so again. And if you had taken Pains to ^^ve read what I have
already published upon th^^ Argument, you would have found no Room (...) one
Word of what you have now advanced, (...) Favor of your darling Prelacy: You
would have found every Color of a Reason for the Necessity of a Prelacy in the
Church now insisted on by you, particularly answered and refuted: You would
have found the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters largely (and for what yet
appears, unanswerably) proved. And to what Purpose is it to answer the same
Thing over and over again? To what Purpose, to dispute with such an Adversary,
that will take no Notice of the Answers given to his Arguments; but advance the
same anew, as if they had not before been refuted?


B. But why should we amuse People with the Ta^^ of Presbyterian Ordination? My
first Commission, I am very certain, when traced a little Way back, (...)
derived from mere Laymen. (p. 92.)


D. I have taken some Pains to inquire into this Case; and have the following
Account of the Matter of Fact, from a Gentleman whose Fidelity and Capacity I
can depend upon. Whatever certainly Mr. Beach may pretend to in this Case, he
is manifestly under a great Mistake. For though it be allowed, that there were in
New England two or three Lay-Ordinations (and more I never heard of) yet they
don't at all affect the present Ministry, in that it cannot (I think) be proved,
that any now in the Ministry, derived their Commissions (as he expresses it)
from such, and only such, as were so ordained. As to himself, he was ordained
by Mr. Shove, and others of equal Authority; Mr. Shove was ordained by Mr. Webb
and others; Mr. Webb by Mr. Walker and others; Mr. Walker by Mr. Warham and
others; and Mr. Warham was episcopally ordained in England. Besides there is no
Doubt but that a Succession might be found for Mr. Beach, from Mr. Blackman and
Mr. Denton, who were both settled in New Haven Colony, and both before their
coming to America legal Ministers in England, the one at Hallifa^ in Yorkshire,
and the other in Leicestershire.


B. We cannot join with you, because you have not a regular Mission. (p. 98.)


D. Surprising! For that Gentleman gives me this further Account. I have been
well informed, that Mr Beach, since he embraced the episcopal Persuasion, has
solemnly declared in the Presence of sundry Ministers, who he designed should
be Witnesses for him, and who took a Certificate of that Declaration in his
Presence, which was approved by himself, That he did firmly believe, that the
Ministers of our Persuasion in New England are true Ministers of Jesus Christ,
and will be accepted of him accordingly. Now, Sir, turn to Page 105 th of your
Appeal; and think (...) you would like your own Reflections, if retorted upon
you.


B. You complain, because our People bear a vocal Part in the public Worship.
Here I cannot but observe, how easily you turned off all those unanswerable
Arguments for this Practice, that I gave you from Mr. Baxter. (p. 94)


D. Mr. Baxter is well known to have been on the Side of Nonconformity, both by
his Writings and Practice. He has written largely against many of these very
Things, that I am impleading. And with what Justice you so often drag him into
your Service, I cannot judge, without a Sight of the Books you refer to. Indeed
I place but little Confidence upon any Man's Authority in a Case of this Kind:
and Dr. Rule observes, "For Mr. Baxter's Authority, we lay little Weight on it;
he (...) his own singular Opinions, which neither Party do unanimously allow".
But neither you nor I are ^o proper Judges, whether the Arguments you bro't
from Mr. Baxter, or whatever other Arguments you were pleased to advance, are
fully answered, or (...). We have appealed to another Tribunal; and the World
must judge between us. -- I proved to you before from 1 Cor. xiv. that all
Worship must be in^elligibly performed. We must pray so that our Understandings
may not be unfruitful ver. 14. We must pray with the Spirit, and the
Understanding, ver. 15. We must pray so that he who occupies the Place of the
unlearned may say Amen at our giving of Thanks; and understand what we say,
ver^ 16. We must pray so that others may be edified, ver. 17. And can you
pretend that your Worship is intelligibly performed? When all speak together,
can any Body know what is said by others? Can a Stander-by say Amen at your
giving of Thanks, when he knows not a Word that is spoken? Can others be edified
by such Service, which they understand nothing of? How then will your Responses
agree with this Directory, which was purposely given to regulate our public
Worship?


B. You allow all the People to sing together, and why does not this make your
Worship unintelligible? -- The Psalms you sing, are Prayers as well as Praises;
and if all the People may sing them, it is certain all the People may say them,
for singing and saying are (...) two different Modes of speaking. (p. 94, 95)


D. How often must you be told, that Praying and Singing are two very different
Parts of public Worship, to be performed for different Purposes, and in a
different Manner, that there is no just arguing from the one to the other?
Singing does from it is very Nature imply an audible lifting up the Voice; and
they that do not sing with an audible Voice, don't sing at all. Whereas Praying
does not absolutely imply any more, than the lifting our Hearts and Desires to
God; and may be performed acceptably without any Voice at all. And the whole
Congregation may unite in Prayer, when there is but one Voice heard; but none
of the Congregation can join in Singing, without united Voices as well as
Affections* To which I may add, that public Singing is every where exemplified
in Scripture as being performed with the united Voices of the Congregation; but
we have not one Example of public Prayer thus performed. You have not a
Precept or an Example in the whole Bible for your Responses; or for the
People's bearing an audible vocal Part in the public Prayers.


B. The Scripture directs us to join our Voices, (...) only in Singing, but in
saying our Prayers and Praise. 2 Chronicles vii.3. All the Children of Israel bowed
themselves with their Faces to the Ground upon the Pavement, and worshipped,
and praised the Lord saying, For he is good, for his Mercy endures for ever.
So Acts iv.24 They all li^^ up their Voices with one Accord in Prayer. They did
not sing, but said, Lord thou art good etc. (p. 96.)


D. As to the first of these Texts, it is only (...) Instance of the People's
uniting their Voices in Singing: as appears from 1 Chronicles. xvi.41, 42. where we
find that Heman, Ieduthun and others were appointed to lead the Choir in
performing this very Service; which was to be performed not only with the
united Voices of the Congregation, but with Trumpets, and Cymbals, and musical
Instruments. And the very foregoing Chapter i^ a particular Account of a long
public Prayer pronounced by Solomon* wherein no other of the Congregation bare
any vocal Part at all. So that thi^ makes nothing to your Purpose.

The second of these Texts, as it is rendered in our Translation, does indeed
seem to favor your Cause. But if the Original be viewed, it will be found to
be as impertinently urged as the other was. In the Original it is, They lifted
up a Voice to God with one Heart. The Relative ( Their) which gives the wrong
Turn to our Thoughts, is not found in the Greek Text; nor has it any Claim to
stand in the English, but from the Authority of the Translators All that can be
proved from this Text is, that they were heartily united in their Address to
God: but there is not a Word of their using united Voices in their making that
Address; Nothing of there being more than one Voice used in it. Much less is
there any Thing of ALL lifting up their Voices, as you are pleased to represent
it, very different both from the Original and our Translation. -- Upon the
whole, I even challenge you to find any Thing in Scripture, like your Responses
in Prayer, or any such unintelligible Method of praying to God as is found
among you, when you all lift up your Voices together.


B. There is no Difficulty in this Matter. A Stranger, if he will but use a
Book, or stand near to one who does, may read, or hear intelligibly every
Sentence. (p. 95.)


D. The Apostle directs to the Performance of this Duty in such a Manner, that
he that Occupies the Room of the unlearned may say Amen, and understand what
you say; and be edified with your Prayers, 1. Cor xiv.16, 17. as I observed
before. But how can an unlearned Person that cannot read, be helped by your
Books to understand what you say, be edified by it, or say Amen to it. when the
united Voices of the Congregation make it a confused and an unintelligible
Sound? I think there is nothing more certain, than that your Practice in this
Case is directly opposite to this Directory of the Apostle, make what Apologies
you can in Favor of it.


B. Before I conclude, I must return you my hearty Thanks for your most
charitable Prayer for me in the Conclusion You pray that the Blessing of many
Souls ready to perish may come upon me, that these may be my Crown and
Rejoicing in the Day of the Lord Jesus. But how strangely inconsistent is this
with the rest of your Book, that throughout represents the Way that I am
leading Souls in, as the certain Road to Hell? My Worship you say is vain; my
Doctrine is Arminianism; and my Discipline none at all. (p. 105.)


D. Though I think I have proved, that all human Inventions and Impositions in
the Worship of God are vain Worship; yet I hope I have never said, that all the
Worship in the Church of England ^s vain Worship. I never denied, but that they
have such Worship among them, as is not of human Invention. -- And though I think
the Arminians very much mistaken in the five Points debated between them and
us; yet I never determined their Doctrines to be so subversive of the
Fundamentals of Christianity, as to render an Arminian incapable of Salvation.
But however, I may apply here what Mr. Chillingworth says concerning the Popish
Errors; "The holding these Errors, though it did not merit, might yet occasion
Damnation. -- "Though a godly Man might be saved with these Errors; yet by means
of them many are made vicious, and so damned: By them, I say, though not for
them. -- "Besides, though the Matter of an Error may be only something
profitable, not necessary, yet the Neglect of it may be a damnable Sin. --
"Lastly, the erring from some profitable, though lesser Truth, may dispose a Man
to Error in greater Matter^.

As I said before, so I again say, that there may (...) Party, that are Fellow
Members of the mystical Body of Christ, who should live in Love and Peace, and
not fall out by the Way; for they are Brethren. We agree in the Profession of
one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism; though we don't agree in one Ritual, and
one Form of Worship and Discipline. I cannot but think, that in the debated
Points you are much in the wrong: but I don't charge you with damnable
Heresies, or fundamental Errors. I dare not limit the Mercies of God to any
Party, since we are all liable to Mistake and Error, while clothed with
Mortality. I hope such a Spirit of Bigotry will yet be confined to it is ancient
Limits; and remain the Peculiarity of High-Church. Let them, if they please,
damn all the Protestant Churches, but themselves. Let them determine concerning
all who want their Form of Episcopacy, that they have no Ministry, no
Ordinances, nor ordinary Means of Salvation; and must at best be left to the
uncovenanted Mercies of God. -- But I, for my Part, will not only wish, but
hope well, as to all those of every Party, that appear to love our Lord Jesus
Christ in Sincerity; though I should think them mistaken in many Particulars. And
from this charitable Sentiment of you, Sir, I yet pray for a Blessing on your
Person and Labors; and hope to meet you, where there will be a happy Consort
and Agreement, in Anthems and Hallelujahs, to Him that sits on the Throne and
to the Lamb for ever and ever.


FINIS.

