Mr. Loring's Election SERMON, May 25 th. 1737.

The Duty of an Apostatizing People to remember from whence they are fallen,
and repent, and do their first Works.

A SERMON Preached before His EXCELLENCY Jonathan Belcher, Esquire The Honorable
His Majesty's COUNCIL, And the Honorable House of REPRESENTATIVES of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, May 25 th. 1737.

Being the Anniversary for the Election of His Majesty's COUNCIL for the
Province.

By Israel Loring, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Sudbury.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, Printer to the Honorable House of
REPRESENTATIVES. 1737.

In the House of Representatives. Jovis 26. Die Maij; A. D. 1737.
ORdered, That Francis Fallam, Esquire and Mr. Edward Sherman, return the Thanks of
the House to the Reverend Mr. Israel Loring of Sudbury, for his Sermon preached
yesterday before the Great and General Court or Assembly, (being the
Anniversary for the Election of Counselors or Assistants for the Year current)
and desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

J. Quincy, Speaker.

An Election SERMON.
Rev. 11. 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
the first Works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove the
Candlestick out of his Place, except thou repent.
IT is at the Call of the late honorable House of Representatives, that I
stand in this Desk to Day; and it is my Purpose (in a humble Dependence on
divine Assistance) from the Words which I have now read in this great Audience,
to discourse of the Degeneracies, that the People of this Land are fallen into,
and to urge all Orders of Men both civil and sacred, to endeavor a Reformation
of what is am^^^. I have not a Word to offer by Way of Apology, for this Design
and Intention of mine.

Some have chosen thus to do rather than to insist upon any Subject, that had a
direct Aspect on the Affairs of the Day, and the Duty of the Electors to have a
special Regard to the Qualities of Counselors in the Choice of 'em. And the
Reason (it seems) that has influenced them, was this, Because they looked upon
it as an Impropriety, and altogether in vain to speak of necessary Qualities,
when the Persons themselves are already fixed upon, and (in Effect) chosen
before this; and that perhaps without any Regard to their Qualities, only that
they are such as will be sure to answer that Party-Cause and Interest they are
designed for. But this is a Reason, that I utterly disclaim, in what I am going
about; and would hope quite other Things, and better Things, of the honorable
Persons, that are concerned in the Elections of this Day.

This Book wherein we find our Text, is so full of divine Majesty, that it
commands an awful Reverence in all gracious Hearts that read it. It was indicted
by Jesus Christ himself, the faithful and true Witness. John the beloved and
bosom Disciple, and last Apostle, was the Penman of it. Chap. i. Ver. I. The
Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his Servants
Things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it by his
angel unto his Servant John.

For the Time of his writing it, himself tells us, Chap. i.9. That it was while
he was in P atmos, for the Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ. This
was (if we may believe History, and we have nothing else to inform us) in the
Time of Domitian the Roman Emperor, about the ninety-fourth or ninety-fifth
Year after the Nativity of Christ.

The Things which John describes and writes are of two Sorts, as Christ himself
ranks them, Chap. i.19. viz. First, The Things that are. Secondly, The Things
that shall be hereafter.

The Things that are, have a Respect to the State of the seven Asian Churches,
signified by the seven Golden-Candlesticks, visionally represented unto the
beloved Apostle; for so our Lord himself expounds the Vision, Chapter i, 20. The
seven Candlesticks which thou saw, are the seven Churches.

Now the Things which concern these seven Churches, are laid down in seven
particular Epistles, directed primarily to the seven Angels of the seven
Churches. Secondarily, With and in them, to the seven Churches themselves.

Our Text lies in the first of the Epistles, inscribed unto the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, Chap. ii.I. I will not here waste my Time with any Discourse
concerning the Situation of the City of Ephesus, nor yet with a Resolution of
the Context by any analytical Exposition of the Epistle.

In the Words before us, our Lord Jesus Christ expresses himself highly
offended at the Church of Ephesus, for an Apostasy whereinto they were apace
degenerating. An Apostasy was the Thing complained of; and the Remedy
prescribed for the Cure of that Malady, and to which this Church was exhorted,
was Repentance. Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the
first Works.

This Repentance is pressed with a dreadful Commination, big with Woe and
Misery. The Judgment threatened, is no less than the Removal of the Candlestick
out of it is Place; which means our Lord's unchurching them, and saying unto
them, Loammi, you are not my People. What the Lord Jesus Christ in our Text
says to the Church of Ephesus is this, Repent, and by Repentance recover out of
thy Apostasy; or else I will dischurch thee, disown thee, destroy thee.

But then in this Threatening, this Promise is strongly implied, viz. that if
this Church did thus repent, their Church State should graciously be continued
unto them.

Accordingly, from the Words, these three Doctrines may be observed.

DOCT. 1. That it is the great Duty of apostatizing Churches to remember from
whence they are fallen, and repent, and do their first Works. Remember from
whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first Works.

DOCT. 2. That if declining Churches thus do, the Lord Jesus will graciously
continue their Church State unto them.

DOCT. 3. That unless apostatizing Churches do repent, they will provoke the
Lord Jesus to unchurch them, and destroy them. I will remove thy Candlestick
out of his Place, except thou repent.

To each of these in their Order.

DOCT. I. It is the great Duty of apostatizing Churches to remember from whence
they are fallen, and repent, and do their first Works.

This Doctrine may be spoken unto, under these two Heads or Propositions.

I. Churches have many times been guilty of Declensions and Apostacies.

II. When they become thus guilty, it is their great Duty to remember from
whence they are fallen, and repent, and do their first Works.

PROP. I. Churches have many times been guilty of Declensions and Apostacies.

So it was with the Church of Israel. How frequently do we find God complaining
of this, by the Mouth of his holy Prophets? They turned quickly out of the Way
which their Fathers walked in, obeying the Commandments of the Lord; but they
did not so. They were planted by God a noble Vine, wholly a right Seed; but
they turned into the degenerate Plant of a strange unto him, Jer. ii.21.

And as it was thus with the Church of God under the legal Dispensation, so it
has been with many christian Churches under the evangelical. During the Days of
the Apostles themselves, and notwithstanding their wise, diligent and careful
Inspection over the Churches planted by them; yet there were Declensions in
many of them. And in succeeding Ages, far greater Defections from the Gospel
befell the Churches of Christ, agreeable to what those holy Men of God foretold.

Apostacies and Declensions among Churches, have appeared several Ways.

I. Sometimes in Matters of Doctrine. They reject Knowledge, which is the first
Step to Piety, and without which the Mind cannot be good. They renounce and
forsake the Truths of the Gospel, which is the very Groundwork of Holiness.
And this they do two Ways.

1. By Ignorance. A knowing intelligent People in Continuance of Time, may
become ignorant at Children in Understanding! 'Twas thus with the People of
Israel, Hos. iv.I. There is no Knowledge of God in the Land. It speaks the
universal Ignorance that was among them. Babes may s;ucceed those, who by
Reason of Use, had their Senses exercised to discern between Good and Evil. And
this may proceed sometimes from suitable Means being withheld from a People.
Family Instruction is neglected, a due Care to catechize the rising Generation
in the Principles of Religion, is not maintained; neither are Schools of
Learning for their religious Education, cherished as they ought to be; and if
the Guides and Teachers of a People should prove unable, or unfaithful to teach
them the good Knowledge of the Lord, no wonder if they be ignorant.

Sometimes a People's Ignorance proceeds from their own Sloth and Negligence.
They will not improve the Means of Instruction, which they are favored with.
Neglect the Reading of God's holy Word; will not seek the Law at the Mouth of
their able and faithful Guides; are not careful to give their Attendance on
their public and private Instructions. Hence when for the Time they ought to
be Teachers, they have need that one should teach them again, the first
Principles of the Oracles of God; and are become such as have need of Milk, and
not of strong Meat.

2. By Errors. They fall from the Truth which they have heard and received, and
turn aside to lies. This in a sad Degree was the Case of the Church of Corinth.
It was planted by the Apostle Paul, who we may be sure, kept back nothing that
was profitable unto them. They were watered by Apollos, an eloquent Man and
mighty in the Scriptures, and therefore beyond Question fully instructed by
them in all the Principles of Religion; and yet many of them quickly fell into
that fundamental Error of denying the Resurrection of the Dead, I Cor. xv.

A yet more pregnant Instance of what we have now under Consideration, are the
Churches of Galatia. Planted they were by the Ministry of the same Aposle; and
though he declared unto them the whole Counsel of God, yet we may well think,
that in nothing did he labor more than to establish them in the Knowledge and
Belief of that grand Article of Christianity, The Justification of Sinners by
Faith in the Righteousness of Christ; for this was the principal Scope and
Design of his Ministry, in the whole Course of it. This Doctrine was embraced
with such Joy and Satisfaction, that they prized the Apostle as an Angel of
God, received him as Jesus Christ, and valued him above the Sight of their own
Eyes, Chap. iv.14, 15. And yet after all this, on a sudden, to his Surprise and
Amazement, they renounced the Doctrine of Justification by Faith only, to seek
after a Righteousness, as it were, by the Works of the Law. Gal. i.6, 7. I
marvel, that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the Grace of
Chris;t, unto another Gospel: Which is not another; but there be some that
trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ.

There are abundance of Temptations to Errors. There are Temptations from
without. Satan is the grand Seducer, and stands continually ready to act his
Part to the utmost, for the Delusion of Men. 2 Cor. iv.4. The God of this World
has blinded their Minds.

Moreover, There are heretical Teachers, that bend their Wits, and busy
themselves in wresting the Scriptures, and venting their dangerous Errors, to
the Destruction of themselves and many others. 2 Pet. ii.1. There shall be
false Teachers among you, who shall privily bring in damnable Heresies.

And there are many Temptations from within, as well as from without. The
uncured Enmity in the Minds of carnal Men to spiritual Things, betrays them
into erroneous Tenets; and so does the Pride of Reason, rendering them unwilling
to admit any Doctrines in Christianity, which are not level with it: Their vain
Affectation of appearing some great ones, and the Power and Prevalency of other
vile Lusts and Corruptions.

Many Errors have prevailed in the Church of God. Particularly, Arianism has so
done, and so has Pelagianism, and Popery, and Socinianism and Arminianism,
which last is, (as a learned Man observes Dr. Edwards in his Theol. Refor. Vol.
2. p. 491.
) the second Edition of Pelagianism, Pelagianism in Miniature, and a
compendious Draught of it.

2. Sometimes Churches are guilty of Apostasy in Point of Worship.

And this several Ways.

1. By corrupting the Worship of God.

And there are especially two Things, which corrupt it.

One is, an Admittance of Persons to that Worship of God, which they are unfit
for, and have no Right unto. There are two Sorts of Worship with which Men are
to glorify God: A natural and an instituted Worship. As for natural Worship
(such as hearing the Word and Prayer) it is every Man's immediate Duty to
attend upon it. But it is otherwise with instituted Worship. Men ought to be
prepared and made meet for it, before they attend it. When John saw the
Pharisees and Scribes come to his Baptism, he said unto them, O Generation of
Vipers, Who has warned you to flee from the Wrath to come? Bring forth
therefore Fruits meet for Repentance. 1 Cor. xi.28. But let a Man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. When holy
Things are given unto Dogs, the holy Inst^^^^ions of Christ to such as are
visibly unclean, this is to corrupt them. Ezekiel. xliv.7. Ye have brought into my
Sanctuary Strangers uncircumcised in Heart, and uncircumcised in Flesh, to be
in my Sanctuary to pollute it, even my House.

The other Thing that corrupts the Worship of God, is the adding to it, or
taking from it. To curtail the Worship of God, and diminish from it; must needs
deprave it. And so does the Addition of any humane Institutions to it. Men are
very prone to interweave their own Inventions and significant Ceremonies into,
and make them Parts of the Worship of God, thinking thereby to mend it: but as
this is an Invasion on his Sovereignty, and a great Reflection cast upon his
Wisdom and Faithfulness; so it mars his Worship, and spoils its Beauty, and
makes it to be to little or no Purpose. Matthew. xv.9. But in vain do they
worship me, teaching for Doctrines, the Commandments of Men.

2. By neglecting the Worship of God, or any Part of it.

And here particularly,

1. Sometimes secret Worship is neglecled. Many do not yield a due Observance
to that plain and express Injunction of our Lord, Matthew. vi.6. Enter into thy
Closet, and when thou have shut thy Door, pray to thy Father which is in
Secret. Nor do they walk as he walked, who was frequently engaged in the Duty
of secret Prayer. Of our blessed Savior we read, Matthew. xiv.23. He went apart
to pray: and when the Evening was come, he was alone. And Mark i.35. In the
Morning he departed into a solitary Place,. and there prayed. Perhaps something
of this is done by Fits and Starts; but they don't observe any set solemn
Times, Morning and Evening, for this great Duty. Or when it is thus attended,
yet it may be, many neglect that which is of the most personal and special
Concernment to their own Souls. Persons may pray in Secret, and yet not utter a
Word which is of most secret Concernment to themselves, and their own Souls;
but what may be expressed before a Family or Congregation. And thus one
principal End of secret Prayer is lost; viz. the Confession of secret Sins, and
petitioning for those personal Mercies and secret Blessings, which we cannot so
properly and conveniently ask before others.

2. Sometimes Family Worship and Duties are neglected. As the offering up the
morning and evening Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise; the Reading of God's Word
daily; and instructing the Family by catechizing, and other suitable and
profitable Means, as is required, Deuteronomy. vi.7. And this Neglect in some Families
may be total, in others partial. Family Duties may be wholly omitted in some
Families, and in others, but in Part performed. If there be Prayer on the
Lord's Day, yet little or none all the Week after. If in the Morning, yet none
in the Evening; or if in the Evening, yet none in the Morning; or if in the
Morning and Evening, yet the solemn Reading God's Word is not made a Part of
the daily FamilyWorship; or if these be attended, yet perhaps a careful
instructing of the Children of the Family is neglected, or not duly performed.

3. Sometimes the public Worship of God is disregarded. His Authority
enjoining it is slighted; the sacred Provisions of Sion are despised; and the
public Assemblies of God's People on the Lord's Days, as well as on Lecture
Days, are not attended, as should be. Some are so far from keeping God's
Sabbaths, and reverencing his Sanctuary, by a constant Attendance on the
Worship of it; that they are seldom there at all. Some are ready to content
themselves with going up to the House of God, on one Part of the Lord's Day
only. And others come very unseasonably, to the depriving themselves of some
Part of the public Worship; and the Distraction and drawing off the Minds of
others, from that Part of it, which is in Hand. Men, that they may indulge an
indolent Spirit, are very forward to frame Excuses, to stay away from the House
of God. Light Indispositions Body, small Difficulties of the Weather, and
Distance of the Way, which would be easily overlooked, to compass a worldly
Design, to obtain some worldly Advantage, will keep them at Home. So Men
forsake the Lord, and forget his holy Mountain.

3. By Formality in the Worship of God. A professing People are many Times
superficial in divine Worship. It is external, and not animated with spiritual
Frames, which are the Soul of it. They have with the Church of Sardis a Name to
live, but are dead. A Form of Godliness, but deny the Power thereof. They
celebrate Sabbaths, and yet have no spiritual Rest: Observe Fasts without godly
Sorrow and Brokenness of Heart for Sin; keep Thanksgivings, without a thankful
Heart, or holy Rejoicing in God. They draw near to God with their Mouth, and
with their Lips do honor him, while their Hearts are removed from him. They
put off God with external Services, but little regard to yield him a reasonable
one, i. e. directed by their Understandings, and accompanied with their
Affections. To Appearance they are devout in attending on Ordinances, yet
little or nothing of sincere Devotion in their Worship. Ezekiel. xxxiii.31. They
come to thee, as the People comes, and they sit before thee, as my People, and
they hear thy Words, but they will not do them; for with their Mouth they show
much Love, but their Heart goes after their Covetousness.

4. Sometimes Churches are guilty of Apostasy in Point of Discipline.

Here I might say,

I. Sometimes there is a great Neglect of FamilyDiscipline and Government among
a professing People. The Authority with which Heads of Families are vested by
God, is not maintained, nor exerted by them, as ought to be. Many christian
Householders don't practice as Abraham did, of whom God gives this Commendation,
Genesis xviii.19. I know him, that he will command his Children, and his Household
after him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment.
They are very remiss, in exercising a due Government over their Children and
Servants. Don't rule well their own Houses. Children are suffered to frequent
the Taverns, get into bad Company, to ramble up and down in the Evening, when
they should be at Home to attend Family Worship; in the dark and silent Night,
when they should be in their Beds. They are let alone, to run into Temptations
to Sin, and take bad Courses without Check or Control. They make themselves
vile, and their Parents restrain them not.

But then,

2. Sometimes Churches grow very careless in Church Discipline. The Power of
Discipline, which is Christ's own Expedient for the Preservation of Churches in
Purity, is not kept up as it should be, and as it has been. "The Snuffers of
the Sanctuary are not regularly and faithfully used; hence the Gold of the
Candlesticks becomes Dross apace". Churches can bear with those that are Evil.
They are not careful to purge out the old Leaven; and to make a Separation
between the Precious and the Vile, the Clean and Unclean. Persons don't in
brotherly Love, watch over one another Souls faithfully, and as they ought to
do. That in Lev. xix.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine Heart: Thou
shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him; has not
it is due Influence upon them. They are not careful to attend Christ's Rule and
Expedient laid down in Matthew. xviii. for the healing and removing private
Offenses. They too often vent their own Pride and Passions, and serve their own
Humors; instead of dealing with their offending Brother, in a humble, meek,
compassionate and tender Way for his Recovery.

5. A professing People are sometimes guilty of Degeneracy, in Respect of Life
and Conversation. Practical Religion runs low among them, they grow very
corrupt in their Morals. Temptations to Sin are multiplied, and Men give way to
'em, and are overcome by 'em, and evil Practices prevail among them. The Love
of many waxes cold, and Sin and Iniquity abounds. Pride, Contempt of, and
Disobedience to Superiors, Contention, Idleness, Intemperance, Uncleanness,
inordinate Passions, sinful Heats and Hatreds, Backbitings, Tale-bearing, Want
of Truth, Promise-breaking, inordinate Affection to the World, Injustice,
Oppression, and Strait-handedness as to public Concerns. Their Carriage is not
as becomes the Gospel. Their Behavior does not adorn, but brings a Reproach
upon the Profession, which they make, Isai. i.4. Ab sinful Nation, a People
laden with Iniquity, a Seed of Evildoers, Children that are Corrupters, they
have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy one of Israel unto Anger,
they are gone backward.

Thus Churches, or a professing People, many times become guilty of Declensions
and Apostacies. I come now to say,

2. That when Churches are thus guilty, it is their great Duty to remember from
whence they are fallen, and repent, and do their first Works.

And here,

1. They should remember from whence they are fallen. That is, in what Degree
their Purity and Piety was formerly, and compare it with what it is now. This
will help them to a clearer Discovery of their sad Declensions and Decays; and
may be serviceable to forward their Repentance. So the Lord's People of old,
comparing the Glory of the first Temple with that of the latter, and finding
this as nothing to that, they wept with a loud Voice. Compare Hagai ii.3. with
Ezra iii.12.

But,

2. They must repent of their Sins, by which they have apostatized from God.

Here I will briefly consider the Nature of this great Duty, to which declining
Churches are strongly obliged. Now Repentance includes in it,

1. A thorough Conviction of the Evil that there is in Sin against God.

Sin is contrary to the holy Law, Nature and Glory of God. By sinning Men make
void God's Law, cast off his Government, trample upon his Sovereignty, despise
his Wisdom, Goodness, Holiness, and Omniscience. When Men sin, they slight the
Promises of God, by which he would allure them to Obedience; and set at naught
his terrible Power and Justice, as if they might sin and yet secure themselves
from his Indignation. By Sin God's glorious Attributes are denied or contemned,
and he is greatly wronged. And it was this, that pierced and wounded our
Savior, yea, broke his Heart and fetched from him that bitter Exclamation when
upon the Cross, My God! My God! Why have thou forsaken me? Moreover, it is what
grieves the kind and good Spirit, Ephesians. iv.30. Now a Sight and Sense of the Evil
of Sin in these Respects, is firstly implied in Repentance. Whereas many are so
foolish, as to make a Mock at Sin, to think slightly about it; the true
Penitent has quite other Thoughts of it, and beholds it, as exceeding sinful.

2. True Repentance includes in it, godly Sorrow for Sin. 2 Cor. vii.10. Some
have grieved for Sin, and yet have had nothing of this godly Sorrow for Sin.
Their Grief proceeds from the Apprehension of the Wrath and Curse of God which
pursues them, and is ready to seize on them. This is a legal Sorrow, a grieving
for Sin as against a Man's self; because it has betrayed him to Death and
Damnation. In this Sense, Hypocrites, yea, Reprobates may sorrow and mourn for
Sin. Judas repented himself, saying, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the
innocent Blood, -- and went and hanged himself, Mat. xxvii.3, 4, 5. But godly
Sorrow is a saving Grace of the Spirit, and has Sin as a Wrong to God for the
Object of it. So the penitent Prodigal, when his Heart was truly broken within
him, he came to his Father, and says, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy
Sight, Luke xv.21. 'Twas the Wrong that he had done to the God of Heaven, that
troubled him. And this was that which sat so heavy upon David's mournful Soul,
Psalm li.4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this Evil in thy
Sight.

Again, Godly Sorrow is a mourning for Sin, as it has wounded our Savior,
Zech. xii.10. I will pour upon the House of David, and upon the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and they shall look upon me
whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one that mourns for
his only Son, and shall be in Bitterness for him, as one that is in Bitterness
for his Firstborn. The true Penitent, realizing the Death and Sufferings of
his Savior, and considering that it was his Sins, that were the procuring,
meritorious Cause of them; therefore does he lament and bewail them.

Once more, The true Penitent grieves for his Sins, because thereby he has
grieved the Spirit of God. The serious Consideration of the Benefits which he
has received from this kind and good Spirit, and of his unworthy and
disingenuous Carriage toward him, opens the Springs of his Sorrow, and melts
his Heart into the Current of evangelical Mourning for Sin.

3. Another Thing included in Repentance, is an Hatred of Sin. Natural Men love
their Sins, and roll them as a sweet Morsel under their Tongues: They are as
dear to them, as their right Hands, or right Eyes. But in Repentance, this Love
is turned into Hatred. Hence says David, Psalm cxix.104. I hate every false
Way. The true Penitent hates the Name, and abhors the Nature of Sin. Yea, he
loathes himself upon the Account of it. Job xlii.6. I abhor my self, and repent
in Dust and Ashes. Ezekiel. xxxvi.3I. Then shall ye remember your own evil Ways,
and your Doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own
Sight, for your Iniquities, and for your Abominations.

4. Another Thing included in Repentance, is Shame for Sin. Sin is a most
shameful Thing, whether we consider it in Relation to our selves, or in Respect
to God, against whom, and in whose sight it is committed. And yet such is the
Blindness of Men's Minds by Nature, that they glory in it. Phil. iii.19. But
the true Penitent sees the Baseness of the Thing; and the Disgrace and
Dishonor, Infamy and Reproach that he has brought upon himself thereby; and is
covered with Confusion at the Thoughts of it. Thus Ezra testified his
Repentance, Chap. ix.6. O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my Face to
thee, my God: For our Iniquities are increased over our Heads, and our Trespass
is grown up unto the Heavens. And so the Publican, Luke xviii.13. Who standing
afar off, would not lift up so much as his Eyes to Heaven, but smote upon his
Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a Sinner.

5. True Repentance is attended with a free and hearty Confession of Sin. Thus
practiced David, Psalm xxxviii.18. For I will declare mine Iniquity, I will be
sorry for my Sin. So Psalm li.3. For I acknowledge my Transgression, and my Sin
is ever before me. He that will not so much as confess his Sins to God, and own
that it would be a righteous Thing with him to inflict upon him the Punishment
which he deserves; can never be thought to repent of them, or share in his
Mercy. He that covers his Sins, shall not prosper: but whosoever confesses and
forsakes them, shall find Mercy.

6. and finally, That Repentance which the Gospel calls for, includes in it a
turning from, and forsaking of Sin. 1 Kings viii.35. If they turn from their
Sin, -- forgive the Sin of thy Servants. And where there is unfeigned and
thorough Repentance, there is a turning not only from some, but all Sins; Ezekiel.
xviii.30. Repent and turn your selves from all your Transgressions, so Iniquity
shall not be your Ruin, One Sin allowed of, or indulged, is inconsistent with
true Repentance. And this turning from Sin, must not be only for a Time, but
for ever. Hos. xiv.8. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols?

Thus I have described the Nature of that Repentance, which Churches when
backsliden from God, are called upon to practice.

3. They must do their first Works. They must as it were begin again, go back
step by step, till they come to the Place where they took the first false step.
Henry in loc.
They must endeavor to recover their primitive Purity of Doctrine, of Worship,
of Discipline, and Morals. They must revive their first Love to God and their
Brethren, and regain their former Zeal for good Works. And this may suffice for
the first Doctrine.

I proceed now to the second Doctrine, viz.

DOCT. II. That if declining Churches thus do, the Lord Jesus will graciously
continue their Church State unto them.

Their Candlestick then shall not be removed out of it is Place, nor will the
Lord remove his Gospel Ministers and Ordinances from them. It may be said of
Churches, as it is said of a Nation or Kingdom, in Jer. xviii.7, 8. At what
Instant the Lord speaks concerning them, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to
destroy them; if such Churches against whom he has pronounced turn from their
Evil, he will repent of the Evil, that he thought to do unto them. When
backsliding Churches return to God, he will return to them. Mal. iii.7. Even
from the Days of your Fathers, ye are gone away from mine Ordinances, and have
not kept them: return unto me, and I will return unto you. The Lord will
assuredly, be with his professing People, while they are with him. 2 Chronicles.
xv.2. Hear ye me Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin, the Lord is with you, while
ye be with him. And if all manner of Blessings are enwrapped in this blessed
Presence of God; then surely a People's sacred Immunities and Privileges.

While Churches continue golden Candlesticks, the Lord Jesus will be in the
midst of them, Rev. 5.i.13. And he will make it manifest that he is so, by the
Protection and Defense vouchsafed to them. Isai. xxvii.2, 3. In that Day sing
ye unto her, a Vineyard of red Wine. I the Lord do keep it, -- least any hurt
it, I will keep it Night and Day. Churches that are a Vineyard of red Wine,
yielding the best and choicest Grapes; such Churches are, and shall always be,
under the Wing of Christ's Protection. I the Lord that can do every thing, but
cannot lie nor deceive, I do keep it; least any hurt it. These Vineyards lie
much exposed to Injury; there are many that would hurt them, tread them down,
and lay them waste: But God their Savior will suffer no real Hurt or Damage to
be done 'em, but what he will bring good out of. He will keep them constantly
Night and Day, and not without Need; for their Enemies are restless, and
unwearied in their Attempts and Designs against them; and both Night and Day
seek an Opportunity to do them a Mischief.

While Churches continue Vineyards of red Wine, bringing forth Fruit to God; he
will not suffer persecuting Enemies to scatter them; nor Seducers and false
Teachers to mislead them. In a Word, The Gates of Hell, the Power and Policy of
Satan, and all his Agents and Instruments, shall not prevail against them.

Moreover, Christ will vouchsafe the Tokens of his Presence with such Churches,
in watering, as well as in defending them; I will water it every Moment. He
will supply them with all necessary Provisions; with his Ordinances, and the
gracious Influences of his Holy Spirit. The still and silent Dews of God's
Grace and Blessing, shall continually descend upon them, that they may bring
forth much Fruit.

I come now to the third Doctrine.

DOCT. III. That unless apostatizing Churches do repent, they will provoke the
Lord to unchurch them, and destroy them.

It Is true, the catholic Church cannot be lost. There is a Promise concerning
the Church in general, that it shall never fail. It is built upon a Rock, and
let the Gate^ of Hell do their worst, it shall stand, Matthew. xvi.I8. Christ
ever had, and ever will have a Church on Earth. We read concerning that City of
God, that she shall not be moved. And that the highest himself shall establish
her. And concerning this Mount Zion, that it abides for ever.

But then a particular Church may fail, and there is not one particular Church,
but what is liable to an utter Extirpation. Churches for their Sins and
Defections may be unchurched, and Candlesticks removed.

Many sad and deplorable Instances of this Nature may be produced.

So the golden Candlestick of the jewish Church, was removed. They were broken
off, because of Unbelief. The Jews had the offer of Christ made unto them; yea,
the first Offer, but they rejected it, and hereupon God rejected them, and the
Kingdom of God was taken from them, and in this woeful Condition, do they remain
to this Day.

Upon the Rejection of the Jews, the Gentiles were called in, and many Churches
gathered out of them. And many of these Churches, for their grievous Neglects
and Contempts of the Covenant of God, have been dischurched by him.

What Ephesus was threatened with in our Text, is fulfilled upon that, and the
other six Churches of the lesser Asia. The Candlesticks are removed out of
their Places.

Those once famous Churches that had a gracious and glorious Presence of the
Lord Jesus Christ in them, for he walked in the midst of those golden
Candlesticks; I say, these Churches have sinned away the Gospel, and the Glory
of a pure Church State is taken from them. The Christian Name, which yet they
wear, is in a Manner all of Christianity that is left among them. They are
woefully overwhelmed with Ignorance, Errors, Heresies, Superstitions and
Idolatry; and are now groaning under the Mohammedan Oppressions.

In other Parts of Asia, where the Gospel has been preached, and Churches
planted in the Days of the Apostles, they have lost the christian Religion.
Yea, the christian Name among some of 'em, is not now to be found. Thus
Darkness covers that Part of the Earth, and gross Darkness the People.

And now let us go into some other Quarters of the World, as the Jews were
ordered to Shiloh; and see what an angry God has done there, for the Wickedness
of his People.

Time was, when there were thousands of glorious Churches in Africa, and many
bright and shining Stars; among whom, Austin the renowned Bishop of Hippo, must
be accounted one of the first Magnitude; but now, the Shadow of Death stretches
it self over those once happy Regions of Light, and not a Church or Minister to
be seen there.

Look we now into Europe, and here in Rome it self, there was a Church beloved
of God, called to be Saints, whose Faith was spoken of throughout the whole
World, Rom i.7. But her Name is now, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF
THE EARTH, Rev. xvii.5. Since the glorious Reformation begun in these latter
Ages of the World, there have been famous Churches in the Kingdom of Poland and
Transylvania; but Socinianism made a Gap for Popery, and by these they were
ruined. To pass by the Desolations that have come upon the numerous christian
Churches that have been in Bohemia, Hungaria, and in the Valleys of Piemont;
let us come to France. The Time was, (as we are informed Vid. Judge Dudley's
Introduction to his Essay on the Merchandise of Slaves and Souls of M^n. Page 2.
) when the reformed could there count two thousand one hundred and fifty
Churches; in most of these two Ministers, in ^^me five; the Church of Orleans
had seven thousand Communicants; but their Bodies now lie dead in the Street of
the great City, etc. Rev. xi.7, 8. In the Year 1686, not a single Church left,
or a reformed Minister, to be seen in all that Kingdom. A Divine of great
Judgment and eminent Piety, observes, That the Error of Justification by Works
brings Judgments from God upon a People, that give it any Countenance, and
forsake the Truth. This (says he) is verified in the French Churches; they
receded from the first Reformers in the Doctrine of Justification; this is what
the most guilty of 'em will deny, but it was so evident, that the Papist took
Notice of it. -- The French Protestants did not zealously stick to the Doctrine
of Justification by Faith in the Righteousness of Christ, as it was transmitted
and conveyed down to them, by our Reformers; and what followed? A Decay of
Piety, and a Corruption of Manners, which provoked God to scatter and cast them
off See Mr. Richard Taylor's Scripture Doctrine of Justification.
.

Thus we see how it has fared with some other Churches. Now, like Errors and
Sins, if persisted in, and not repented of, will procure like confounding and
unchurching Dispensations toward other Churches, that yet through Grace enjoy
their Church State.

Having thus finished the Doctrines laid down, I now proceed to the

APPLICATION.

USE, I. Is it as we have heard, that Churches have many Times been guilty of
great Apostacies from God? Hence the Churches and professing People of this
Land, would do well from the Consideration of this sad Truth, to look into the
State of Religion among themselves, and strictly to examine whether they are
not in a declining Condition. These Churches, that have been famous for their
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Manners, are they yet so? Or have we not by
Degrees, turned into the degenerate Plant of a strange Vine unto God? Have we
not lost much of our first Love, and of our primitive Purity, Piety and holy
Strictness? If we compare our selves with our pious Ancestors, shall we not
find ourselves as much sunk below them, in point of true Worth and Excellency,
as Reboboam's brazen Shields were below Solomon's golden ones? Are we not
departing from the Faith once delivered to the Saints; and which was once
closely embraced, and highly prized, by these Churches? And is not Ignorance of
God, and the Things of God, with Errors, the Arminian especially, apace coming
in among us? What a holy Heat, what a flaming Love, was found in the Hearts of
the primitive Christians of this Land, to the House and Ordinances of God? And
how careful and diligent were they, in attending the public Assemblies of
God's People, on Lecture Days, as well as on the Lord's Days? But alas! Is not
the Love of many in this Regard waxen cold? And is it not the Manner of many,
to neglect the assembling of themselves together? How strict were they in
keeping of Sabbaths, not speaking their own Words? But is not the Rest of the
Sabbath now sadly disturbed? Don't many take a mighty Liberty in their
Discourse on the Lord's Day? Don't they discourse almost of any thing that they
discourse of on other Days? How careful were our dear Progenitors to offer up
the morning and evening Sacrifice in their Families, and of Reading the holy
Scriptures to 'em, and instructing them from orthodox Catechisms? But is not
Family Worship and Instruction fallen under great Decays among us, their
degenerate Offspring? And if we are so defective as to public and private
Worship, can we rationally think that secret Worship is better attended? The
first Planters of this Land, and Members of these Churches, were Men eminent
for vital, practical Religion: 'Twas God in his Ordinances, that they thirsted
and panted after: The Power of Godliness then went with the Form of it. But is
not our Religion, in a great degree degenerated into Rituality? Is it not in a
great Measure external, void of Life, Spirit and Power? Joshua's Resolution was
the Resolution of our pious Ancestors, As for me and my House, we will serve
the Lord. Great was their Care to maintain a wise and good Government over
their Children and Servants: 'Twas their study, that their Families might be
well ordered Families. But is not Family-Government now almost lost and gone?
Time was when Discipline in these Churches, was upheld in the Power of it; and
upon this account, they were beautiful as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible
as an Army with Banners. But alas! How is it fallen now, and how remiss are we
grown? The Lives and Morals of our Fathers were such, as became the Gospel.
They were a humble, loving, peaceable, industrious, chaste, temperate, sober
People; greatly mortified to the World, willing that their Neighbors should
thrive, as well as themselves, true in their Words, faithful in their Promises,
punctual in their Performances, honest and just in their Dealings etc. One Mr.
Firmin.
that lived in this Country, in the beginning of our Times, for seven Years
together, was able in the hearing of as an august Assembly as perhaps has been
known in the World, The House of Lords and Commons, with the Assembly of
Divines at Westminster.
to give this Testimony of them, That he never saw a Beggar, nor a Man overcome
with strong Drink, nor did he ever hear a profane Oath among them. But don't
immoral Practices greatly abound among us? and are they not a grievous blot and
stain to our Profession?

Thus by inquiring into the State of Religion among us now, and comparing it
with what it has been, we learn our own woeful Defections; and what reason we
have to say with the lamenting Church, Lam. iv.1. How is the Gold become Dim!
How is the most fine Gold changed!

2. Let us now be Exhorted to repent, and do our first Works.

And here,

1. Let us sincerely repent of our Declensions and Apostacies from God. From a
deep Sense, how injurious our Sins have been to a glorious God, and the great
Dishonor they have done to his sacred Name; let us bitterly lament them. And
have our Miscarriages wounded the Soul of our Savior, and broke his Heart? O
let the Thoughts hereof, wound and break our Souls within us. And let us grieve
at the Heart, for our Sins and Backslidings; because thereby we have grieved
the Holy Spirit of God. Let us confess our Sins to God, with all the
aggravating Circumstances of them; as being committed against so much Light,
Love, Means, Professions, Confessions and Covenant-Engagemens: and let us take
the Shame and Blame of them to our selves. Let us lie down in our Shame, and
Confusion let it cover us; because we have sinned against the Lord. Let us
remember our evil Ways and Doings, which have not been good; and loath our
selves in our own Sight for our Iniquities, and our Abominations. And let us
cease to do evil, and learn to do well.

But this brings me to the second Particular,

2. Let us do our first Works. And here,

1. Let us acquaint our selves with the Christian Doctrines, and be established
therein. We should with diligence and faithfulness improve the Advantages we
have, to grow up to some Maturity herein. Let us have our Senses exercised, to
discern both Truth and Error, reaching on to the Measure of the Stature of the
Fullness of Christ, in Knowledge. Especially, let us labor for a clear, thorough
Acquaintance with the more momentous and important Truths of the Gospel. And
let us be well grounded in these, and not let them slip. Every Truth is to be
preserved, but especially the more weighty and necessary. And we had need give
the more earnest heed, because our Lot is fallen in a Day of abounding Errors,
when the precious Doctrines, wherein are the vitals of Christianity, are
denied, yea, ridiculed and derided.

A very worthy Divine of the English Nation, in the Account which he gives of
the State of Religion, among English Protestant Dissenters; tells us, That as
to the Doctrines contained in the Scripture, they are almost struck out of the
List of Articles of Faith. Error may truly be said to come in like a Flood, and
to spread itself like a raging Torrent; we may cry out, The Floods have lifted
up their Waves. Most of the pernicious Errors which have formerly been bro't
into the Church, are eagerly embraced in our unhappy Times; the Enemies have
for some Years, been endeavoring to rob Christ and the Holy Spirit of the
glory of their supreme Divinity, and to reduce them to the rank of Creatures;
and now Men grow bolder in Error, they are forward to deny their Personality,
and to make them only Attributes, Powers, and Names of the Father. God's
Election of his People to Glory, is arraigned as unreasonable, and his
Sovereignty is, in the most saucy Manner opposed: The Fall of Man is entirely
forgot, and his original Corruption is eagerly denied: The Satisfaction of
Christ is blasphemed and exploded, and his Death is said to be what must,
according to the necessity of Nature, have fallen out: Justification by his
Righteousness, is a Point pursued with Rancour and Malice; and Sincerity, though
in an Error, is given out to be a sufficient Title to God's Favor: Preaching
Christ in his Person, Offices, and in the Merit of his Death, undergoes the
Persecution of cruel Mockings, and is spoken of by brainsick Novices only with
a Snear: The efficacious Grace of the Holy Spirit, and his sanctifying and
comforting Influences, are rudely blasphemed as Enthusiasm; and the Power of
Man to convert himself, and to answer all the Ends of his living in the World,
is eagerly contended for: -- The Perseverance of the Saints in Holiness, is
profanely bantered: The stupid and brutish Notion of the Soul's sleeping after
Death, is by some hotly maintained, and its Immateriality and Immortality
exploded by others. The Resurrection of the same Body, is represented as
impossible; and a general Judgment, nay, a particular Time of Men's appearing
before God to give an Account of what they have done in the Body, is now a
Subject of ridicule; and the Doctrine of the Wicked being reserved for eternal
Torments, is, by many, set by. See the Defense of some important Doctrines of
the Gospel, in Twenty six Sermons; most of which were preached in Lime Street
by several Ministers, in two Volumes. Particularly, Mr. Abraham Taylor's Sermon
on Rev. iii 1, 2, 3. Entitled, A humble and impartial Inquiry into the Causes
of the Decay of practical Religion.


And is this the doleful State of Religion, as to Matters of Belief among
Protestant Dissenters at Home? Then let us look to it, that it be not our
Condition here. The same reverend Person tells us, that Matters are not better
with them with respect to Practice, than they are with respect to Faith. And if
we with them, let go the Principles of Religion, with them also, shall we
forego the Practice of it. If we grow as corrupt in our Doctrines as they; we
shall grow as corrupt in our Lives and Conversations. If we make Shipwreck of
Faith, so we shall of a good Conscience. Let us then, be upon our Guard: Let us
heedfully watch against all Temptations of one kind and of another, to draw us
off from the Truth.

And let us especially see to this, that our Knowledge of divine Truths, be
spiritual and saving. A literal and doctrinal Knowledge of divine Truths, is no
Security against Apostasy from them. He that only has the Truths of the Gospel
floating on the surface of his Brains, may hold 'em to Day, and renounce them
toMorrow. But a saving Knowledge of Gospel Truths, is a good security against
Temptations, opposition or seduction from the Truth. Prove. xxiv.5. A wise Man
is strong, yea, a Man of Knowledge increases Strength. When Men come to see
the Truths of the Gospel, in their spiritual Nature and Glory; when they are
convinced of the Truth of them, and experience the Power and Efficacy of them
upon their own Souls; they will not easily and readily let them go. "No Man (as
a great Divine Dr. Owen.
well expresses it) who forsakes the Truth, ever saw the Glory of it, or had
experience of it is Power."

2. As to the Worship of God.

(1.) Let it be our great concern to preserve and maintain it, in it is Purity.
Let us look upon the Word of God, as a perfect Rule of Worship, as well as of
Faith; and keep severely to it, in this matter. Admitting nothing, that is
contradicted by it, nor detracting any Thing, that is prescribed therein. Man
may vainly think, to make God's Ordinances better, by some Additions and
Inventions of his own: But let us believe, that is it is better for us, to enjoy
them in their native Purity, Simplicity, and Spirituality. A pompous ceremonial
Worship it is true, is more apt to work upon, and affect the Senses; but a pure,
spiritual and divine Worship, such as Gospel Worship is, is more adapted to
reach the Soul. And then due Care should be taken by these Churches, that there
Members be, as the Members of the first Churches of the Gospel were, even,
Saints, faithful Brethren, and sanctified in Christ Jesus. Such as are found
and knowing in all the fundamental Doctrines of the christian Religion, without
Scandal in their Lives, and to a Judgment regulated by the Word of God, are
Persons of visible Godliness and Honesty, credibly professing cordial
Subjection to Christ. Since God is jealous of his Worship, so let us be.

(2.) Let us duly attend the Worship of God.

Secret Prayer, Let it be daily addressed to the glorious Hearer of Prayer.
This is a Duty which our Lord recommends unto us by his own Example, as well as
strictly requires of us. Morning and Evening did he engage in it. Let us
imitate our blessed Savior herein, and make a practice of secret Prayer to God
Morning and Evening, as long as we live. With what Face can we call our selves
Christians, if we neglect it?

Family Worship, Let that also be duly performed. Families are furnished with
many special Advantages and Opportunities for God's solemn Worship, which are
so many Talents, that they ought to improve for God, and in the worshipping of
him. God is the Founder and Institutor of our Families: and since they are of
him, and through him, they ought to be to him. Our Families are the Lord's, for
he made them; therefore should they be for his Use, employed in his Service, to
his Honor.

And here, Let us pray to God in our Families. Heads of Families should pray
with them and for them. We are bidden to pray with all Prayer, Ephesians. 6.18. with
Family Prayer, as well as secret and public. We are taught it, by the Example
of holy Man in Scripture. Abraham with his Household called on the Name of the
Lord. Wherever he pitched his Tent, there he built an Altar to the Lord. Genesis
xii.8, -- xiii.4, 18. Joshua said, As for me and my House, we will serve the
Lord. Prayer is so necessary a part of God's Service, that a Person cannot be
said in general to be devoted to God's Service without it. And of Cornelius it
is said, Act. x.2. That he feared God with all his House -- and prayed always.
He worshipped God with all his House, and maintained a constant course of
Prayer with them. The Jews were will not to Sacrifice to God, every Morning and
Evening, Numb. xxviii.3, 4. Christians that by Profession are a Royal
Priesthood, should offer the Sacrifice of Family Prayer and Praise, every
Morning and Evening. When the Apostle says to Masters of Families, Col. 4.2.
Continue in Prayer; it is probable (says One) he alludes to the continual
Burnt-Offering, that was offered Morning and Evening. O how reasonable, how
becoming is it, for Families in the Morning, to bless God for the Mercies of
the Night past, and to ask his needful Favors for the ensuing Day. And so in
the Evening, to bless God for the Mercies of the Day past, and to ask his
Protection and Favor to them, in the ensuing Night. And what Reason have those
Families, that neglect calling upon God, to fear, that he will pour out his
Fury on them?

Further, We should teach our Families the good Knowledge of the Lord. Deuteronomy.
xi.18, 19, 20. Therefore shall ye lay up these my Words in your Heart, and in
your Soul; and bind them for a Sign upon your Hand, that they may be as
Frontlets between your Eyes. And ye shall teach them your Children, speaking of
them when thou sit in thine House, and when thou walk by the Way, when
thou lie down, and when thou risest up. And thou shall write them upon the
DoorPosts of thine House, and upon thy Gates. Ephesians. vi.4. And ye Fathers, bring
up your Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. Parents and Heads
of Families, should read the Scriptures to their Families, in a serious and
solemn Manner. And they should Catechize their Children and Servants, obliging
them to learn their Catechism by Heart, and to keep it in remembrance: And
should endeavor to help them to understand it, as they become capable. Both
Parents would do well to engage in a diligent Instructing their Children.
Solomon's Father was his Tutor, Prove. iv.3, 4. And he never forgot the Lessons,
his Mother taught him, Prove. xxxi.1. Yet again, we that are Parents, should not
content our selves, with a bear teaching our Children, the great Truths of our
holy Religion; but should labor in it, that those Truths may be savingly
impressed upon their Hearts betimes. Wherefore we should solemnly command and
charge our Children to serve the Lord: Yea, seriously Expostulate with 'em
about it. David charges his Son Solomon, Know thou the God of thy Father, and
serve him with a perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind. And his excellent
Mother expostulates with him, Prove. xxxi.2, 3, 4, 5 What my Son? and what the
Son of my Womb? and what the Son of my Vows? etc.

Once more, Let the public Worship be carefully attended by us. The Charge is,
not to forsake the assembling of our selves together, Heb. x.28. Christ was
zealous for the public Worship of God, John ii.17. The Zeal of thine House
has eaten me up. As Christ was, so let us be, zealous for the public Worship
of God. It Is what glorifies God most; it is what he accepts best. The Lord
loves the Gates of Zion, more than all the Dwellings of Jacob. Let us then
give diligent Attendance at his House; Opportunities to hear the Word of God
there, and to enjoy his Ordinances on our own Days, should be embraced by us;
but especially should we frequent the Assemblies of God's People on the Lord's
Days; and not suffer small Matters to keep us from them. And let us make
Conscience of attending both the morning and evening Sacrifices of the Lord's
Day; and not content our selves with coming to the public Worship on one part
of the Day, and staying away the other, as the Manner of too many is. And let
us be advised to come seasonably. Many wrong their own Souls in not so doing.
There is no Part of God's Worship, but it concerns every one, and every one may
receive Benefit by it, if it be not their own Fault. And then they wrong the
Congregation. People's coming late, gives Occasion of drawing away the Minds of
others from the Worship of God, (as has been already observed) and so hinders
their Profit and Advantage.

And now to shut up this Head,

(3.) and lastly, Let us guard against Formality in the Worship of God, and
approve our selves such Worshipers, as he is seeking for, who worship him in
Spirit and in Truth. Let us not put off God with external Observances, and with
bodily Reverence and Attendance; this we must give him; but we must principally
regard, that our Service of him, be a spiritual Service. We must see to it,
that all Acts of outward Worship to God, be performed with a pure and sincere
Mind. Whatever we do in the Service of God, let us do it heartily as to the
Lord, with Understanding, feeling and true Devotion of Soul.

3. Let us be careful to maintain and uphold Government and Discipline.

Particularly,

(1.) In our Families. Every christian Family should be a Church in the House.
2 Cor. xvi.19. Col. iv.15. In which, as the Master should be a teaching
Prophet, and (a sacrificing) praying Priest; so likewise a ruling King, keeping
up Family-Government and Discipline therein. Heads of Families should rule well
their own Houses, 1 Timothy iii.4. should maintain a wise Government over their
Children and Servants; so carry it, that they may both love them and fear them.
They should countenance and encourage every thing, that is good and laudable in
their Children and Servants; and on the other hand, discountenance every thing
that is Evil in them. We must use our Authority to prevent Sin, to suppress it,
in our Families. We must restrain our Children from Sin, as much as is
possible. The Neglect of this brought sore Judgments on Eli's House, 1 Samuel
iii.13. We must indeed be careful not to provoke our Children to Wrath, lest
they be discouraged; and as to our Servants, we must forbear Threatening; yet we
must also with holy Zeal and Resolution, and the Meekness of Wisdom, keep good
Order in our Families, and set no wicked Thing before our Eyes, but witness
against it, reprove it, yea, if need be, correct for it, Prove. xiii.24 and
xxiii.13, 14.

2. Let us look to it, that the Government of Christ in his Church, be duly
upheld and exercised among us. Christ the King of the Church, has in his
governing Wisdom, appointed a suitable Government to be upheld therein. This
Government is spiritual, in Contradistinction to that which is civil and
worldly. And as the one is absolutely necessary to the well-being of the State;
so the other, is as absolutely necessary to the Well-being of the Church. Where
Church Discipline and Government is not supported and practiced, Confusion and
every evil Thing is like to follow. Know ye not that a little Leaven leaveneth
the whole Lump? Purge out therefore the old Leaven, 1 Cor. v.6, 7. When
Apostasy prevailed in the asiatick Churches, there (we are told) was the
original Wound. They did not brandish the Sword of Discipline, which is
Christ's own Expedient, for the Preservation of Churches in Purity; yea, this
was the fatal Neglect, which by Degrees proved ruinous to these once famous and
glorious Churches. Some learned Men have observed, that the Neglect of
Discipline in the Churches of Asia, brought in Corruption of Manners, and the
Corruption of Manners (through the just revenging Hand of God) was attended
with Corruption of Doctrine; and these together provoked the Lord, to lay these
Churches most desolate Dr. Increase Mather's Call to the rising Geeneration. P.
51.
. So it was with the once famous Churches of Bohemia, remissness in their
Discipline proved their Ruin. Discipline is Christ's Ordinance, both for the
Prevention of Apostasy in Churches, and to recover them when collapsed. Let us
carefully heed this Matter. Let us then not hear with them that are Evil, Rev.
ii.2. Let us look diligently, lest any Man fail of the Grace of God, lest any
Root of Bitterness springing up, trouble us, and many be defiled, Heb. xii.15.
Sin is of an infectious and contagious Nature; and if there be not a Separation
made between the Clean and the Unclean, (I mean such as are visibly so) it will
have a fatal Tendency. It is a celebrated Saying, and a true one; That
Church Discipline, is the Throne in which Christ reigns. Now we must keep
Christ upon the Thorn, by keeping up the Power of Discipline, would we have a
Reign of Righteousness and Holiness among us.

4. We must live a Life of Holiness, and new Obedience. We must follow
Holiness. We must serve the Lord without Fear, in Holiness and Righteousness
before him, all the Days of our Life. As he that has called us is holy, so
must we be holy in all Manner of Conversation. Whatsoever Things are true,
whatsoever Things are honest, whatsoever Things are just, whatsoever Things are
pure, whatsoever Things are lovely, whatsoever Things are of good Report; if
there be any Virtue, and if there be any Praise, let us think on those Things.
We must live as the Grace of God which brings Salvation teaches us; even
soberly, righteously and godly, in this present World.

Particularly, We must live soberly with Respect to our selves. We must not
think of our selves more highly than we ought to think, but must think soberly,
and must be humble. We must not love the World, neither the Things of the
World; but suppress all extravagant Desires after the Profits, Pleasures and
Honors of it. We must be meek, and we must be temperate; and walk honestly as
in the Day, not in rioting and Drunkenness. We must be chaste, and keep our
Body, as a Thing consecrated to God, from all Impurity. A Sobriety in Speech,
in Behavior, in Apparel, in Recreations; must be observed by us.

Again, We must live righteously, toward all Men; rendering to all their Dues;
Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, and
Honor to whom Honor is due; and we must owe no Man any Thing but Love; that
is a Debt, which we should be continually paying, by all suitable Expressions
of Affection and Tenderness, to all we have to do withal. We must abound in
Love to all Men, and exercise Lovingkindness in the Earth toward all. We must
be benign, kind, merciful, charitable, useful, helpful unto all Men. And be
ready to do our utmost to redress those Miseries, whether spiritual or
temporal, which our Fellow Creatures, and Fellow Christians may be laboring
under. We must be just and righteous in our Dealings, Traffic and Commerce,
with one another; governing our selves herein, by that Rule of universal Equity
laid down by our Savior; Whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do
ye even so to them, Mat. vii.12. We must speak the Truth to our Neighbor; for
this is his Due. We must be faithful in our Promises, peaceable in the
Societies to which we belong. And if at any Time we are injured, we must not
maintain any Grudges against those that have wronged us; but readily forgive
them, as God (we hope) for Christ's sake will forgive us. To conclude, we must
faithfully fill up all our Places and Relations, in which the Wisdom and
Goodness of God has set us, with suitable prescribed Duty.

Lastly, We must live godly toward God. Our Regards to him, must run through
all. 1 Cor. x.31. Whether ye Eat or Drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
Glory of God. Personal and relative Duties must be done in obedience to his
Commands, with Aims at the pleasing, gratifying and glorifying of him; from
Principles of holy Love and Fear of him. But there is an express and direct
Duty also, that we owe to God, and which we should be careful to pay him; our
Choice should be of him, as the Portion of our Souls; our Minds should be upon
him; our Desires fervent and affectionate after him; our Delight in him; and we
must fear him, trust in him, and depend upon him: and worship him in and by
those Ways and Means, which he has appointed in his Word; but of these I have
spoken under a former Head. Let me add here, we must be very careful to
sanctify the Lord's Day, and keep it holy, not only by a strict Attendance on
the public Worship of God in his House; but also by a faithful discharge of
private Duties in our own Houses. Such as Prayer, Reading, Mediation etc. not
doing our own Ways, not finding our own Pleasure, not speaking our own Words,
on God's holy Day.

And now by way of Motive,

1. Let us call to mind the second Doctrine, and what was said under the same;
and be thereby excited to our Duty. We there heard, that if declining Churches
do remember from whence they are fallen, and repent, and do their first Works;
that then the Lord Jesus Christ will continue their Church State to them, and
will not take his Kingdom from them. And if we so do, he will deal thus
graciously with us. If we return to him, he will assuredly return to us; pardon
and accept us, establish and bless us. Zech. 1.3. The Lord will then create
upon our Churches as it were a Cloud and Smoke by Day, and the shining of a
flame of Fire by Night; and on all the Glory create a Defense. As Birds flying,
so will the Lord of Hosts defend us, defending also he will deliver us, and
passing over, he will preserve us. The Lord will be unto us a Wall of Fire
round about, and will be the Glory in the midst of us. With joyful Souls may we
now sing, as in Isai. xxvi.I. We have a strong City, Salvation will God appoint
for Walls and Bulwarks. He will not suffer the Boar out of the Wood to waste
his Vineyard, nor the Wild Beast of the Field to devour it; nor shall the
Foxes, the little Foxes, be permitted to spoil the Vines.

He will shed down his benign Influences upon us; and we shall grow as the
Vine, and our Beauty shall be as the Olive Tree. We shall cast forth our Roots
as Lebanon, and spread abroad our Branches. The Lord now will be our Shepherd,
and we shall not want. He will make us to lie down in green Pastures; he will
lead us beside the still Waters. In this Mountain, will the Lord of Hosts make
unto us a Feast of fat Things, a Feast of Wines on the Lees, of fat Things full
of Marrow, of Wines on the Lees well refined. He will abundantly bless the
Provision of Zion, endue the Ministers of the Gospel with Righteousness, and
render the Ordinances of the Sanctuary effectual, through a divine Power
accompanying of them; to the Conversion of Sinners, and the Edification of
Saints. We shall be filled with Light, Life, and Love; we shall enjoy a sweet
Communion with Christ here; and at last, pass to a sweeter in the heavenly
World, even to an immediate, full, uninterrupted and everlasting Communion with
Christ. The Lord will give us Grace and Glory, and no good Thing will be
withhold from us, if we walk uprightly with him.

In recovering, and maintaining the Interest of Religion among us, we shall lay
a Foundation for temporal, as well as spirital and eternal Blessings. Besides
the natural tendency which our excellent Religion has to promote the outward
Good and Prosperity of a People; it has a moral, federal tendency to do it. See
Deuteronomy. 28. from ver. 1, to 13. So Deuteronomy. 29.9. Keep therefore the Words of this
Covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do. Isah. 1.19. If ye
be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land. Hos. 2.21, 22. And
it shall come to pass in that Day (the Day of God's betrothing his People unto
himself) I will hear, says the Lord, I will hear the Heavens, and they shall
hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil,
and they shall hear Jezreel. To close this Head, if we will incline our Hearts
unto the Lord our God, to walk in all his Ways, and to keep his Commandments,
and his Statutes, and his Judgments, which he commanded our Fathers; then he
will be with us, as he was with our Fathers: neither will he leave us, nor
forsake us. But,

2. Let us consider, that unless we do repent of our Sins, and return to God
and our Duty; we shall provoke the Lord Jesus, the Head and King of the Church,
to remove our Candlestick out of its Place. Thus has he dealt with other
Churches, for their Sins and Apostacies from him, as was shown under the third
Doctrine: And thus may we justly fear, he will deal with us, if like them, we
persist in our Sins and Rebellions against him. Our increasing Declensions,
will increase God's Anger against us, and we may justly expect that at last,
they will end in unchurching Dispensations. And Oh! How lamentable will our
Case be, if it come to this! If the Gospel be one of the greatest Blessings,
God can bless a People withal; then the removal of it, must be accounted one of
the sorest Judgments that can befall them. Of the three sore Judgments of God,
Famine, Sword and Pestilence; Famine seems to be the heaviest. David chose the
Pestilence, before the Sword and Famine, 2 Samuel xxiv.14. And the Prophet tells
us, in Lam. iv.9, 10. They that be slain with the Sword, are better than they
that be slain with Hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for want of
the Fruits of the Field. The Hands of the pitiful Women have sodden their own
Children, they were their Meat in the Destruction of the Daughter of my People.
And yet a Famine of Bread, or a Thirst of Water, is not so terrible, as a
Famine of Hearing the Word of the Lord. The one is bodily, the other is
spiritual; a Soul-Famine, and of all Evils, Soul-Evils are the worst. Bodily
Famine can but kill the Body: But this spiritual Famine, holds the Sinner under
spiritual Death, and will bring him under the Power of eternal Death. We are
told, Prove. xxix.18. Where there is no Vision, the People perish. When the
Gospel comes to be removed from a People, thick Darkness comes upon 'em; they
sit in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death. Such are Children of Darkness, and
are in the Way that leads down to the Blackness of Darkness for ever. The Way
to the internal Call, is by the external; and when this is not vouchsafed, it
is a sad Evidence, that the other is denied. Romans x.14. How shall they believe
in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher?
As much as to say, they cannot. Where the Light of the Gospel shines not, there
is no Illumination, Conversion, Edification or Salvation to be expected. The
Knowledge of Christ is none of Nature's Principles: The Book of the Creatures
is no Means alone, much less a sufficient Means to teach the Knowledge of
Christ. It may discover Mercy, but gives not the least hint of the way of
Mercy: It speaks nothing of God Incarnate; of the two Natures in one Person; of
Jesus the Son of Mary; of Christ's Suretiship, and Suffering for us, rising,
ascending, mediating, returning; of the two Covenants, and their several
Conditions, and the Rewards of keeping them, and Penalty of breaking them, etc.
It Is utterly silent in these Things. And to affirm that the Spirit calls or
teaches Men where the Word is not, and where the Creature or Nature speaks
not, is, I think, a groundless Fiction. Baxter's Saints Everlasting Rest. Page
128.
How sad then must the State of such a People be!

In a Word, When the Gospel goes from a People, all outward Peace and
Prosperity will go along with it. It never comes, but with a full Blessing; and
it never departs, but it leaves a full Curse behind it. 2 Chronicles. xv.3, 5, 6.
Now for a long Season, Israel had been without the true God, and without a
teaching Priest, and without Law. And in those Times there was no Peace to him
that went out, nor to him that came in: But great Vexations were upon all the
Inhabitants of the Countries. And Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of
City: for God did vex them with all Adversity. A universal Scourge, and all
Manner of Troubles were disquieting of 'em. While the Gospel stays with a
People, and is prized, and embraced, and obeyed by 'em; all will continue with
them: But when this is gone, our other Enjoyments will not last. In a Word, A
People in losing the Gospel, lose their God, and what a Loss is this! Hos.
ix.12. Woe unto them, when I depart from them. And, woe, woe, woe, unto us if God,
and the Gospel depart from us; we shall be in a most woeful State, if it once
come to this. Nothing can be expected then, but all Manner of Miseries,
temporal spiritual and eternal, Jer. xxiii.33. When this People shall ask thee,
saying, What is the Burden of the Lord? Thou shall say unto them, What Burden?
I will even forsake you. Awful Burden indeed, that will sink us into a
bottomless Abyss of Calamities. Let us then seriously say these Things to
Heart, and let us be persuaded, to reform those Things that are amiss among us,
and do the first Works.

By Way of Direction,

1. Let us cry to God, for his Spirit and the Influences thereof, to enable us
to comply with our Duty. Without me, says Christ, ye can do nothing, John xv.5.
We shall never repent, unless the Lord Jesus, who is exalted at God's right
hand, give Repentance unto us. Nor shall we do our first Works, unless God by
his Holy Spirit, work in us, both to Will and to do, of his own good Pleasure.
If God by his Spirit, will revive us, and raise us up; we shall live in his
Sight. If he will pour out his Spirit from on high upon us, our Wilderness
shall become a fruitful Field; and there is nothing short of this will do it.
Since then, there is such a Necessity of the almighty Power of the Spirit of
God, to effect a real and thorough Work of Reformation among us; let us
earnestly seek to God by Prayer, to pour him out upon us for that End: Such
Prayers are pleasing to God, since what is prayed for tends so directly to his
Glory, and the good of Men's Souls; And they are a very notable Means to obtain
the Holy Spirit from God. Luke xi.9. Ask, and it shall be given. What shall be
given? Even, the Holy Spirit to them that ask him, Ver. 13. Well then, Let us
knock hard at Heaven-Gates. Let us wrestle with God for so invaluable a Mercy,
and take no Denial. Let us cry mightily to Heaven, that he would return and
leave a Blessing behind him. Let us beg with the Prophet Habakkuk, Chap iii.2.
O Lord, revive thy Work in the midst of the Years, in the midst of the Years
make known: in Wrath remember Mercy. Let us pray with Moses the Man of God, as
in Psalm xc.16, 17. Let thy Work appear unto thy Servants; and thy Glory unto
their Children. And let the Beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, and
establish thou the Work of our Hands upon us: yea; the Work of our Hands
establish thou it. The Out-pouring of the Spirit of God for the reviving of
Religion among us, is a Matter of the last Importance; and therefore should we
pray for the same, with all Manner of Prayer, secret, private and public; in
Sincerity, Humility, Faith and Fervency.

Blessed be God, that there has been such a Spirit of Prayer, for spiritual
Blessings, awakened among his People of late Years. Let us continue herein, and
not faint. And let us be encouraged to perseverance in Prayer, from what God
has wrought in some Parts of this Land. I mean more especially, the County of
Hampshire. His People there, have had a mavelous Visit from the Lord of
Hosts, and the Man of his right hand. He has revived Religion marvellously
among them, by pouring out his Spirit upon them. As God is to be praised for
that wonderful Work See an Account of it in a Letter of the Rev. Mr. Edwards of
Northampton, annexed to a useful and excellent Book of the Rev. Mr. Williams of
Hatfield, entitled, The Duty and Interest of a People among whom Religion has
been planted, to continue steadfast and sincere in the Profession and Practice
of it, from Generation to Generation. With Directions for such as are concerned
to obtain a true Repentance and Conversion to God. -- Preached at a Time of
general Awakenings.
, and as we are to rejoice in all that great Goodness bestowed upon them, and
to be thankful for it; (if one Member be honored, all the Members rejoice with
it) so should we thereby be moved, earnestly to pray, that the Work may become
more general and universal. Since God seems to be on the giving Hand, let us
with Importunity ask of him, that the whole Land may partake of the like
blessed Effusions of the Holy Spirit.

2. Let us be directed to use what Means and Methods we can to promote
Religion, and a Work of Reformation. It is true, nothing short of the Spirit of
God, will effect a thorough Reformation; and therefore should we so earnestly
and incessantly seek him by Prayer. But if our endeavors in the several Places
and Stations, which God has set us in, are wanting; we have little Reason to
expect that God will hear us. It is in the Use of Means, that God is wont to
grant his efficacious Grace and Spirit. Wherefore then, let us lay out our
selves to the utmost in pushing forward this blessed Work.

Private Christians should exhort one another daily, least they be hardened
through the Deceitfulness of Sin. Such should edify one another in Love. They
should quicken one another to Duty. When the Lord had prophesied, Isai. ii.2.
that under the Gospel all Nations should flow unto the House of the Lord, he
adds, Ver. 3. And many People shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to
the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob. Such should be
their Zeal, that they should not only go themselves; but persuade and press
others, to go with them. So let Christians do now, call upon their Neighbors,
and draw them to the Assemblies of religious Worship, when they are backward in
giving their Attendance there. Let Christians urge and excite one another to
Duty, in one Instance of it, and another. By good Counsel, Reproof,
Instruction, Example; let them build up one another in the most holy Faith.

But there are two Orders of Men that I would particularly address here, and
beseech to do what in them lies, that dying, languishing Religion may be
revived among us. They are our civil Rulers, and the Ministers of the Gospel.

1. Let me address our honorable civil Rulers, and with a becoming Humility
entreat them, to make the Interest of Religion among us their chief Concern.
You are under the most solemn Bonds and Obligations thus to do. You are the
Ministers of God for Good unto us, for this Good, even to promote Religion
among us; and you are favored with singular Advantages and Opportunities
therefore; O see to it, that you improve them! Civil Rulers may do much to
prevent Apostasy among a professing People. It is remarked of Israel, Judges
ii.7. That they served the Lord all the Days of Joshua. And they may do much
too, in recovering them from their Apostacies. Yea, where do we read, either in
sacred or ecclesiastical History, of any remarkable, general Reformation
amongst a People, without the Help and Assistance of the Magistracy? Would
Judah of old have reformed, if those pious and excellent Kings, Asa,
Jehosaphat, Hezekiah and Josiah, had not bestowed their Care, Zeal and Pains in
effecting their Reformation? Would Luther at Germany, or Calvin at Geneva, been
able to carry on the glorious Work of Reformation to that length, if others of
the civil Order had not joined their Endeavors with theirs? Since then, (my
Fathers) the Matter belongs to you, and under God, has so great a Dependence
upon you; arise, and be of good Courage.

Various are the Ways and Means in, and by which, Civil Rulers may set forward
the Work of Reformation among a People; according to the various Stations,
which they hold in the Government. Will you then be persuaded in the several
Posts, which God, your King and Country, have placed you in, to be up and doing.

And here, I shall begin with those, who are especially concerned in the
important Business of this Day, His Majesty's Council in being, together with
the Representatives of this Province.

Honorable Gentlemen,

You have a special Opportunity before you to further the religious, as well as
civil Interests of this People. May God direct and assist you aright to improve
it. Let not so much as one of you, give up himself to the Conduct of others, to
do what they would have you, without examining whether it be right or wrong.
Use your own Light and Reason, which God has given you, in this weighty Affair.
It is a mean Thing indeed, to serve only as Tools, for others to work by. Will
you remember, Sirs, that your Suffrages are not your own. You may not give your
Voices to these and those, as you please. Consider, when you are together, that
God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty; he judges among the Gods. And
if any of you abuse your Power in choosing, which God by the Royal CHARTER has
conferred upon you, you must account for it another Day. Let all crooked
Designs and sinister Ends be now laid aside; and act in the Integrity of your
Hearts, as in the Presence of God, and under his impartial Eye; and be sure
that you choose for him. Be not by assed by Prejudice, Partiality, Disaffection,
or personal Favor in your Choice: But let the known Worth and Fitness of
Persons determine you. Such as have a Seat in his Majesty's Council, have a
very great and weighty Trust reposed in them; and superior Powers are needful
rightly to discharge it. Such had need to be Men of exce^^ing distinguishing
Knowledge and Wisdom; and ^^ your Choice you must have respect to these
Qualifications: but these are not all that are necessary; in designing Men to
this high Station, principal Regard must be had (...) Religion, that they be
Men of sincere Piety: And if Persons are void of this, how eminent soever they
may be, for their other Accomplishments, yet by all Means let them be rejected.
Among other Things, which the Council is betrusted withal, it must be
remembered, that they are an eminent Branch of the Legislature, and so bear a
special Part in framing our Laws: They also with the Governor, Constitute our
Judges and Justices; and the Oversight of the College, is in Part committed to
them. Choose Men then, that having Religion near their Hearts, mourn our
Degeneracies, tremble for the Ark of God, and will address themselves with
unfainting Application, for the reviving Religion among us, the regaining and
securing the gracious Presence of God with us. Particularly, Those that will be
ready to bring forward such wholesome Laws, as are necessary and useful to
advance Religion; and concerned to appoint suitable Persons to Execute such
Laws; and will take Care of the College, that it answer the End which our most
excellent Predecessors and renowned Forefathers had in founding it.

And now, with a thankful Acknowlegement of the many good and excellent Laws,
which former Assemblies have Enacted to promote Religion among us; I would
humbly request of this honorable Great and General Assembly here present, to
take Religion into their serious Consideration, and in their Wisdom meditate,
whether some other Laws may not be made, that will befriend the Interest of it?
It is our Life, the one Thing needful; it is our all. You cannot (my Fathers)
employ your selves about a bigger, or better Thing.

Will you allow me here to suggest one or two Things.

It is to be feared that Persons negligence in attending the public Worship of
the Sanctuary, is daily growing upon us; can nothing further be done for the
Remedy of it?

And does not the Sin of Drunkenness dreadfully increase among us? Bringing
with it, Woes, Miseries and Mischiefs of all Sorts. May not something more be
done to suppress so great an Evil? The licensing of unqualified Persons, to be
Innholders and Retailers; and the multiplying Houses to sell strong Drink, may
justly be thought to be the great Causes of this deluge of Debauchery, that is
flowing in upon us. If Persons who have little or no Conscience, come to be
Innholders or Retailers, they will allow of vile Disorders; and will not care
how much they corrupt their Neighbors, if they can gain by it themselves. Such
Houses will prove the Nurseries of Vice, Disorder and Irreligion. And the
needless multiplying of Taverns, and other Houses of public License among a
People, is of pernicious Consequence unto them. What are they up and down in a
Town, but so many Traps and Snares to catch and destroy the lovers of strong
Drink. They are Temptations to such, and the more there are of them, and the
nearer they are to them, the more likelihood there is of their being undone by
them. Can nothing now be done by the Legislature, for the removal of these
Nusances? We ask of our honorable Rulers these two Things; The one is, that no
Person be allowed to sell strong Drink, but what are of approved Sobriety, and
good Conversation, Men of Honesty and good Order. The other is, that Houses for
this Purpose, be not needlessly multiplied.

I am sensible, that there is a Law, which prohibits any to be Licensed to sell
strong Drink, but such as are approbated by the Select-Men of a Town. But then
it is not enjoined upon such as are vested with Power of granting Licenses,
that all such shall be Licensed. And it is to be hoped, that those that are
immediately concerned in that Affair, will not look upon such an Approbation,
as a safe Rule, always to be relied upon, and to go by.

There is one Thing more which I would recommend to the serious Consideration
of this Great and General Court; and that is, Whether there is not a great Duty
lying upon us, respecting the Transactions of the Year 1692, when not only many
Persons were taken off by the Hand of public Justice for the supposed Crime of
Witchcraft; but their Estates also ruined, and their Families impoverished.
None dispute the Integrity of those, who were then concerned to act and judge
most in those Matters. But it was a dark Day with them; they walked in the
Clouds, and could not clearly see their way, as to the Mystery of Iniquity then
working. All Orders of Persons have since seen Reason to condemn the Rules of
the whole Process as fallacious and insufficient to distinguish the Guilty from
the Innocent See the Rev. Mr. Hale's accurate and judicious Discourse
concerning Witchcraft, showing how Persons guilty of that Crime may be
convicted; and in which the Means used for their discovery are discussed both
negatively and affirmatively, according to Scripture and Experience.
. What the Sense even of our Predecessors, and those who were then upon the
Stage of Action was, in relation to this Affair, may be in some measure learned
from a Proclamation for a General Fast, emitted December. 17. 1696, four Years
after; in which is contained this Direction for public Prayers, viz. That God
would show us what we know not, and help us wherein we have done amiss, to do
so no more: And especially that whatever Mistakes on either Hand, have been
fallen into, either by the body of this People, or any order of Men, referring
to the late Tragedy raised by Satan and his Instruments, through the awful
Judgments of God: He would humble us therefore, and pardon all the Errors of his
Servants and People, that desire to love his Name; and be atoned to his Land.

Now though the loss of Parents cannot be made up to their surviving Posterity,
yet their Estates may: And the Question is (if it be not beyond all Question)
whether a Restitution is not due from the Public to them, and we are not bound
in Justice to make it. Hereby Infamy may be taken off from the Names and Memory
of such as were Executed, and who it may be did not in the least deserve it; as
well as a Reparation made to their Children for the Injuries done them; who
remain to this Day among us in mean, low and abject Circumstances. It is now
something more than forty Years since these sad Things were done among us; but
length of Time is no Argument that God is not at this Day, among other Things,
contending with us for these; since he punished Israel with Famine three Years
for a Sin of misguided Zeal committed forty Years before that, 2 Samuel xxi.1, 2.

I am speaking of the Ways whereby our civil Rulers may promote the Interest of
Religion among us. And I now proceed to say, that another Way, is, by putting
the Execution of the Laws made for this Purpose, into the Hands of
well-accomplished, and well-qualified Persons.

Will his EXCELLENCY then, and the HONORABLE BOARD, suffer me to entreat them,
carefully to heed this. Appoint none to this momentous Business, but such as
are Men of Knowledge, and well acquainted with the Laws; Men of Religion, that
will lay out themselves with Courage and Zeal to execute them. To design Men to
take Care of the Interest of Religion, that have none themselves; how
incongruous would this be? And what could we expect from such? Will they in
good earnest seek the advancement of what they hate? With what Face and Courage
can they execute the good Laws upon Offenders, who live in the violation of
them themselves? Will they discountenance Sin and Vice among a People, who are
daily encouraging it by their Practice? Such must be good Men, as well as
knowing Men; otherwise they will be like to destroy more good, than they will
do.

And now, I would with suitable Deference apply my self, to our honorable
Judges and Justices. And what is now requested of you, is, the vigorous,
faithful, impartial Execution of all those wholesome and good Laws, which are
made, or may be made, for the encouraging of Piety and Virtue, and the
discouraging of Vice and Wickedness. Take heed (Sirs) what ye do: for ye judge
not for Men, but for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment. Wherefore now,
let the fear of the Lord be upon you; take heed and do it: for there is no
Iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts, 2 Chronicles. xix.6, 7.

And it is greatly to be wished for, that UnderOfficers, Grand Jurors and
Tything-Men especially, would remember the Oath of God, which they are put
under; and be quickened thereby faithfully to discharge what they are so
solemnly obliged unto. And may such as are faithful, have all possible
Encouragement given them, in the way of their Duty.

I go on to say, It greatly serves the Interest of Religion in our Churches,
when they are supplied with a learned, orthodox and godly Ministry; and this is
the Province of our civil Rulers. 2 Chronicles. xvii.8, 9. And they should encourage
the Hearts, and strengthen the Hands of the Ministers of Christ, in the regular
discharge of their Office. Their faithfulness may sometimes expose them, to the
rage and fury of unreasonable and wicked Men: You, who are the Shields of our
Earth, should guard them against their Insults. With good Hezekiah, you should
speak comfortably to them. And like him, and that excellent Governor,
Nehemiah; take care, that they be supported; that being freed from the Cares
and Encumbrances of the World, they may give themselves wholly to their Work.

And now, let me recommend unto our civil Rulers, the good Education of the
Children and Youth among this People. Let not the Laws made, for the support of
lesser Schools through the Land, be shamed and eluded, as too often they have
shamefully been. And let the great School of the Prophets, be tenderly
cherished, maintained, and carefully inspected by you. Take care, that the
College be a Seminary of pure and undefiled Religion, as well as good
Literature.

We would mourn this Day the Death of the late reverend and honored President
of that Society Mr. Benjamin Wadsworth.
, and our great Loss therein; for he was a faithful Man, and feared God above
many. May God, with whom is the residue of the Spirit, fill up that vacancy
with One that shall be a rich Blessing to the College, and to the whole Land.
May those, who are more immediately concerned, in fixing a President there, be
directed to choose One that is of eminent Learning and Wisdom, of found
Principles, a fast Friend to these Churches, endowed with a Spirit of
Government; and to crown every Thing else, one of shining Piety; who will make
it his Business, to promote vital Religion, as well as Learning, among our
Youth: exhorting and comforting and charging every one of them as a Father does
his Children. This is the way to have a converted Ministry, without which we
must not expect a converting Ministry.

Our religious Interests have a great dependence upon the College. If that
Fountain be kept pure, the Streams thereof will make glad the City of God; but
if corrupted, the Churches will soon be infected. So it fared with the Belgic
Churches, when one of their illustrious Schools, became such a troubled
Fountain.

Permit me (Honorable Rulers) to mention one Thing more, which may greatly
conduce to the advancement of Religion among us, and that is, your setting good
Examples before us. Examples are very influencial, especially the Examples of
Rulers are so. This is evident from the Carriage of God's People of old, who
commonly walked with, or contrary to God, as their Kings, were good or bad. If
then you would have your People behave soberly, righteously and godly; see to
it, that you lead sober, righteous, and godly Lives your selves.

So have I put our civil Fathers in remembrance of several Ways, that are to be
taken by them, for our Reformation. Will you now be pleased to arise to the
Work, with an unwearied Application. God, we hope, will succeed and prosper
your sincere and pious Endeavors. However this be, they will find acceptance
with God through Christ; you will enjoy the Satisfaction and Pleasure of having
done your Duty; and shall not miss of the Reward of good and faithful Servants
in the heavenly World.

I come now,

2. To address my reverend Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry. And let me
beseech you to use your constant, painful, and faithful Endeavors to promote
the Interest of Religion among us. Our recovery from that Apostasy, that we are
fallen into, as to outward Means, does principally depend upon such your
Endeavors; and they are no more than what God and Man expect from you, and you
are solemnly obliged to.

Reverend and much Esteemed: Allow me here, mean and unworthy as I am, to put
you in mind of a few Things, the observance of which, may greatly contribute to
the advancement of the Kingdom and Interest of Christ among us.

And in the first Place, I humbly propose, that as the Apostle Paul among his
Corinthians, so we among our people, determine to know nothing, but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. Let Christ be the principal Subject of our
Preaching. Let us lift him up on high in our Congregations, and display his
Glory before our People. The glory of his Divinity, the glory of his Humanity,
and the glory of the Constitution of the Person of Christ, who is both God and
Man in one Person. Let us preach of the Offices of Christ, of his precious
Benefits, of the indearing Relations he stands in to his People's and of his
most excellent Example. Is Christ the very Marrow, Soul and Scope of the holy
Scriptures? Then such Sermons, as have much of Christ in them, come nearest to
those sacred Records, and we may conclude are most likely to do good. It is
justly to be feared (Sirs) that one great Cause of the woeful decay of vital
Piety in the christian Church, is the neglect which has been in preaching
Christ. Let us hear what the excellent Dr. Watts says, Let us Ministers
consider how little has been our Success, in comparison of the Multitudes
converted by our Fathers, in the Day of their Ministry. Now it is worth our
Inquiry, Whether it may not be ascribed unto the Absence of Christ in our
Sermons. And what Reason indeed can we have, to expect the Presence and
Influence of the Spirit of Christ, if we leave his Person, his Offices, his
Grace, and his Gospel, out of our Discourses; or give but a slight and casual
Hint at those glorious Subjects, which ought to be our daily Theme! Blessed be
God, we have had Fathers, who have been eminent for their preaching of Christ.
And it is Matter of Thankfulness, that we yet have Fathers among us, who
account, Christ the favorite Subject in the Course of their Studies for the
Pulpit. Let us, my Brethren, by all Means copy after them.

I go on to say, that the Truths of the Gospel, particularly, the important
Doctrines of Grace, are a most precious Treasure committed to our Custody. O
Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy Trust. But how should we keep
them? Surely, not to our selves, so locking up the Key of Knowledge. But we must
communicate them to others; we should preach those important Doctrines to our
People. Give me leave to mention some of them, even as I find them laid down
and expressed in a Pamphlet among us, bearing this Title, A seasonable
Testimony to the glorious Doctrines of Grace, at this Day many Ways undermined
in the World: Considered by a general Convention of Ministers, meeting at
Boston, May 28th. 1702; and voted by them, to be published, for the
Establishment of the Churches in the present Truth.

They are such as these. That the most high God, has from all Eternity elected
certain Persons from among the Children of Men, to be brought unto eternal
Happiness, in and by Jesus Christ; and this Decree was not founded in the
Foresight of any Merit or Goodness in the Chosen, but in the mere good Pleasure
of God, who made choice of them: That the elected of God, are in his
everlasting Covenant of Redemption, after a peculiar Manner given unto our Lord
Messiah, who therein undertook to be their Head, and their Redeemer: That the
Redeemed of the Lord, shall be in his Time and Way, every one of them
infallibly made Partakers of effectual Vocation, and have the Benefits which he
has purchased for them applied to them. That fallen Man having lost the
Freedom of his Will to spiritual Good, he will not believe and repent, and
answer the Call of the Gospel, until supernatural Operation of the Spirit of
Grace upon him, do change his Will; which Operation is bestowed in a Way of
mere sovereign Grace, upon those only that are ordained unto Life. That upon a
Sinner's accepting that Favor of God by Faith, God imputes to him the
Righteousness of that active and passive Obedience, with which the Lord Jesus
Christ, appearing as the Surety of his People, has fully answered the Law of
God for them; and the Sinner is justified before God, in that Righteousness of
the Lord Jesus Christ. That every Believer on the Lord Jesus Christ, being by
Faith united unto him, does henceforth glorify his Lord, in doing the good
Works of evangelical Obedience, by a Strength derived from him; which good
Works are the Fruit and Proof, but not the Cause of his Justification. And
finally, That the Saints of God, shall persevere in their Sanctity, and nothing
shall make them fall totally and finally from that Grace, wherein they stand,
and may rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of God.

Now when I say, that these great Truths of the Gospel should be preached; none
will understand so, as if I thought the preaching of christian and evangelical
Duties were a needless Thing; no, we must not shun to declare the whole Counsel
of God, but must preach the before mentioned Truths, as the Foundation of
practical Religion, and without which the Life and Power of Godliness is not
like to be maintained! 'Twas well said by Dr. Owen, Gospel Truth is the only
Root whereon Gospel-Holiness will grow. If any Worm corrode, or any other
corrupting Accident befall it, the Fruit will quickly fade and decay. It is
impossible to maintain the Power of Godliness, where the Doctrine from whence
it springs is unknown, corrupted, or despised See him of the Nature and Causes
of Apostasy from the Gospel. Page 436
.

I proceed,

To say, It may very much promote the Interest of Religion among us, to insist
upon the great Doctrine of Conversion; making that one grand Subject of our
preaching. It was excellently spoken by a dear Brother, The Rev. Mr.
Wigglesworth
. in an Election-Sermon preached here, four Years ago, I know not how we can
begin with our Flocks better, than the great Prophet and Teacher did with
Nicodemus, Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, John
iii.3. Let us teach the Nature of Conversion. Let us press the Necessity of it.
And since the Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, let us in the
most clear and affecting Manner we can, represent to Sinners the dreadful
Miseries of Hell, that they are exposed unto, and are in daily Danger of.
Though our blessed Lord, was anointed to preach the Gospel to the Poor; yet how
frequently do we find him preaching up the Doctrine of Hell Torments to the
Impenitent and Secure? It is needful that in this Way, sleepy Sinners should be
awakened; this is some Preparation to a sound Conversion. And since the Heart
is so very deceitful, and Men are so apt to think themselves rich, and
increased with Goods, and have need of nothing; when they are wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; it seems very necessary, that in our
preaching, we labor to discover what those Grounds, Reasonings or Pretenses
are, upon which Men build their Confidence, and show the Rottenness and Fallacy
of 'em. It was the saying of a Soul-searching Preacher, and happy Instrument in
the Hands of God, of converting many a Soul to him; For my own part, if I had
but one Sermon to preach while I lived, I think this should be it; to preach
down all ungrounded Hopes of Heaven: not to leave you there in Despair, but
that you may Hope upon better Grounds, which will never deceive you Baxter's
Saints R^st. p. 36
. Our Discourses should be adapted to reach Men's Consciences, and not to please
their Fancies.

And then, let us take Time for, and Pains in composing our Sermons: And when
we have made them, let us labor to get our own sinful Hearts into a due and
solemn Frame to deliver them. It is a known Saying of the famous Mr. Shepard of
Cambridge, and it deserves to be written in Letters of Gold upon our
Study-Doors: God will curse that Man's Labors, that lumbers up and down in the
World all the Week, and then upon Saturday in the Afternoon, goes to his Study:
whenas God knows, that Time were little enough to pray in, and weep in, and get
his Heart into a fit Frame for the Duties of the approaching Sabbath See his
Life, in Dr. Mather's History of New England. Book 3 p. 90
. O let us take Pains in our Preparations for the Pulpit! Let them smell of the
Lamp; let them be beaten Oil for the Sanctuary; having in the first place,
sought to God to direct and assist us therein. And then, let us beg of God,
that the holy Truths which we have got to deliver to others, may first be
impressed on our own Hearts, that we may speak of them in a very lively manner.
Very much depends upon this: for it is the Mind that convinces the Mind; and
the Heart, that persuades the Heart.

If we are burning and flaming in our own Breasts, there is the greater
likelihood of inkindling holy Affections, in the Hearts of others.

Ministers should be Men of Prayer. We must give our selves unto Prayer, as
well as to the Ministry of the Word. And in our Prayers respect must be had to
the Success of the Word preached by us, that it may run and be glorified; prove
effectual to the Conversion of Sinners, and the Edification of the Saints and
People of God. "That Preaching that is not accompanied with continual Prayer
for it is Success, is not like to have any great Blessing go along with it."

I find that holy Man of God, but now mentioned, viz. Mr. Shepard at such
Strains of Piety as these; Vide p. 9I, of the fore mentioned Book.
I saw my Blessedness did not lie in receiving of Good and Comfort from God,
but in holding forth the Glory of God, and his Virtues. For it is, I saw, an
amazing glorious Object, to see God in the Creature! God speak, God act; the
Deity not being the Creature, nor turned into it; but filling of it, shining
through it; to be covered with God as with a Cloud, or as a Glass Lanthorn to
have his Beams penetrate through it. -- I saw it was my Misery to hold forth
Sin and Satan and Self in my Course. And I saw one of these two Things must be
done. Now because my Soul wanted Pleasure, I purposed then to hold forth God;
and did hope it should be my Pleasure so to do, as it would be my Pain to do
otherwise. O Sirs, this is what we have got to do, even in our Persons and
Walkings, to hold forth and represent the Graces of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the Holiness of his Doctrine, which we preach.

To express his Humility, his Meekness, Self-Denial, readiness for the Cross,
contempt of the World, heavenly Mindedness, Benignity, Condescension, Patience,
etc. Such a Life as this, tends greatly to the Success of our Ministry. It
commands Respect and Reverence from our People, and our Preaching will come
with more Authority, Force and Energy, and sink deeper into their Souls. When
we exemplify the holy Doctrine, which we Preach in our Actions, and live the
Sermons which we deliver to others, this has a silent power of Attraction in
it, to draw Men to their Duty. Besides God will honor such as thus honor him,
1 Samuel ii.30. And will delight to succeed their Labors. -- He walked with me
in Peace and Equity, and did turn many away from Iniquity, Mal. ii.6. On the
other Hand, when a Minister in the Course of his Life, holds forth the Beast,
or the Devil; I mean the Lusts of the Flesh, or the Lusts of the Spirit; he
becomes contemptible, and deservedly so, Mat. v.I3. And if once his Person is
contemned, so will his Preaching be; and Men will not regard what he says. How
much then does it concern us, that in all Things, we show our selves Patterns
of good Works. Tit. ii.7. That we be Examples of the Believers, in Word, in
Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity.

With Intrepidity of Soul, let us faithfully rebuke the growing Sins of the
Times and Places, in which we live. That Scripture should be often founding in
our Ears, Ezekiel iii.17, 18. Son of Man, I have made thee a Watchman to the House
of Israel: therefore hear the Word at my Mouth, and give them warning from me.
When I say unto the Wicked, thou shall surely die; and thou give him not
Warning, nor speak to warn the Wicked from his Way to save his Life; the
same wicked Man shall die in his Iniquity; but his Blood will I require at
thine Hand. Let us be sollicitous to understand our Duty; and when we know it,
let us be bold and daring to do it. It was an honorable Character, that was
given by a Great Man The Earl of Murray.
, of Mr. Knox, that eminent Reformer in Scotland, at his Interment; Here lies
the Body of him, who in his life Time never feared the Face of any Man. Clark's
Marrow of Ecclesiastical History. Book 1 p. 343.
Let us be fond of the Character our selves; and not fear the Faces, nor spare
the Faults of any Offenders, when called of God to Reprove them. Isai. lviii.1.
Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show my People
their Transgression, and the House of Jacob their Sins.

Catechizing is a most needful and excellent Work. And what not only Parents
and Heads of Families are called to, but Ministers also. Most express are the
Words of our blessed Lord to Peter, and in him to all succeeding Ministers of
the Gospel, Feed my Lambs. And where shall be find a better Catechism, than
that which one of the greatest and best Men Dr. Usher so pronounced of the
Assemblies Catechism.
that ever the Irish Church saw, declares to be the best extant in the World.
Let us see to it, that the young Ones of our Flocks, get this by Heart: And not
only so, but let us take Pains, to lead them into a good Understanding of the
great Truths and Duties of Christianity contained therein. And when this is
done, let us select some of the weightiest Points, and apply them to their
tender Souls in a warm Address: This is the Life of all, and may prove a Means
of their early and saving Conversion to God.

Abundance of Good may be done among our People, by visiting of them; and
entertaining them, with our pious Discourse; suiting them with agreeable
Addresses; instructing, exhorting, reproving, counselling, and comforting them,
as there is Occasion. And perhaps, we may receive, as well as do a great deal
by such Visits. Romans xv.24. The Apostle speaking there to the believing Romans,
says, Whenever I shall take my Journey into Spain, I will come unto you: for
I trust to see you in my Journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by
you, if first I be somewhat filled with your Company. The Communion of Saints
is filling, not empty, vain and frothy, as the Company of most is; but
administering Grace and Comfort to those that enjoy it. Let us then, as our more
weighty Duties will allow attend this part of Duty also.

Before I pass from this Head of Visiting, allow me to say, we should as we
have Opportunity therefore, make our friendly Visits to each other. In such
Visits, Men of your high Station and Character, will disdain a low, grovelling,
insipid, trifling Conversation. Your Conversation with each other, will be
polite and learned; by all Means let it be religious too. It Is said of those
two excellent Ministers of Christ, Bishop Usher, and Dr. Preston, That after
much Discourse of Learning and other Matters had between them, the Bishop would
say, "Come Doctor, One Word of CHRIST now before" we part. Beautiful! charming
Example! But I Will go higher than this. We read of the Seraphims, Isai. 6.3.
That one cried unto another, and said, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts,
the whole Earth is full of his Glory. They cried one to another, and said; as
if they would by their holy, and heavenly Language, inflame each other's
Breasts. Let now the Angels of the Churches, go and do likewise.

If after all, we meet with Sufferings from those, to whom for Christ's Sake,
we have (through Grace) been faithful Servants; with base and unworthy Treatment
from those, for whose good, we have spent our Lives and Strength, let us not be
surprised at it. It is a Temptation, but common to the best of Ministers. It is
to try our Patience! O for the Gospel Sake, that that be not hindered, let it
have it is perfect Work in us. Let us now, not be overcome of Evil, but overcome
Evil with Good. In such a Case as this, let us hearken to the good Advice,
which the venerable old Mr. Eliot, was wont to give his Brethren, when
complaining to him, that such and such in their Flocks were too difficult for
them. Brother, (says he) Compass them! And, Brother, Learn the Meaning of those
three little Words, Bear, forbear, forgive. Brethren! Let none of these Things
move us, neither let us count our Lives dear unto us, so that we may finish our
Course with Joy, and the Ministry which we have received of the Lord Jesus, to
testify the Gospel of the Grace of God. Let us soar above 'em. Let us live
above 'em, even in Heaven, and then we shall better bear the Hardships, which
we may meet withal here upon Earth. Are our Labors of Love, ill-rewarded by
Men? Let us be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord;
for as much as we know that our Labor is not in vain in the Lord.

There is one Thing more, which I cannot well pass over; suffer me to offer
that, and I shall have done. It is, that we be very careful to maintain Peace
and Unity among ourselves; and not suffer different Sentiments in smaller
Matters to divide us, and drive us into Parties. You are very sensible (Rev.
Sirs,) that as the Truths of our holy Religion, are not all equally great and
necessary; for neither are they all alike clearly revealed. Some Truths
compared with others are lesser, more darkly revealed, and far less
discernable. Hence it cannot be expected, but that we shall have different
Apprehensions about 'em; though at the same time, we may be well agreed, in the
more weighty Matters of the Gospel. What shall we do in this Case? Different
Apprehensions in many Matters of Religion, we shall have while here in this
World; so many, so various, are the Causes of 'em, that it is impossible it
should be otherwise with us. Unity of the Faith is not to be expected, till we
get to Heaven; or the new Jerusalem comes down from God out of Heaven. Shall we
grow cold in our Regards and Affections to one another? Shall we grow angry
with one another, because of these unavoidable different Sentiments? By no
Means. But let us be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly Love, in
Honor preferring one another, notwithstanding. Let us not spend any of our
Time in wrangling and bitter Disputes, about these lower, dark and doubtful
Matters: Let us not spend too much of our short Time in any kind of Disputes
about them; but keeping them in their due Subordination, let us with one Heart
and Hand, with one Shoulder and Consent, lay out our selves in promoting the
common Interest of Christ's Kingdom, and the common Salvation of precious and
immortal Souls. By all Means, let us espouse generous Principles; let us
breathe a catholic Spirit; let us be one with every one, that is one with
Jesus Christ; whether they be Lutherans, or Calvinists, Episcopalians, or
Presbyterians, Congregationalists, or Antipoedobaptists; or whatever other
Denomination they may be of. I have met with a Passage of the very excellent
Mr. Matthew Henry, which seems worthy of a Remark, with which I shall close
this Head. The Differences (says he) that are among Christians, though fomented
by the Malice of Satan for the Ruin of Love, are permitted by the Wisdom of God
for the Trial of Love, that they which are perfect therein may be manifest.
Herein a Christian commends his Love, when he loves those who differ from
him, and joins in Affection to those with whom he cannot concur in Opinion.

Thus I have presumed to address the Fathers of the Country, civil and
ecclesiastical; and having spoken to 'em separately, what if I should now join
them together? May they ever be so in their Esteem of Love and Affection to
each other. So Moses and Aaron met in the Mount of God, and kissed each other.
And it might very much conduce to the Advancement of Religion among us, if
these two Orders of Men would join their Counsels, and unite in their
Consultations about the Ways and Methods in which to pursue it.

But it is high Time for me to come to a Conclusion. If then we were constant
and fervent in our Prayers and Supplications for the Effusions of the Holy
Spirit upon us; and were our Prayers accompanied with our sincere and vigorous
Endeavors to carry on a Work of Reformation? Did we in the several Places in
which God has set us, whether private or public, lay out ourselves to promote
the Interest of dying Religion among us; we might then hope, that we should not
be termed, forsaken and desolate; nor made to sigh out our Ichabod, and say,
the Glory is departed from us; but that the Name whereby we shall be called,
shall be Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there. And happy is that People, whose
God is the Lord.

FINIS.

