DISCOURSES on Various Important Subjects,

Nearly concerning the great Affair of the Soul's Eternal Salvation, Viz.

I. Justification by Faith alone. II. Pressing into the Kingdom of GOD. III.
Ruth's Resolution. IV. The Justice of GOD in the Damnation of Sinners. V. The
Excellency of JESUS CHRIST.
Delivered at Northampton, chiefly at the Time of the late wonderful pouring
out of the Spirit of GOD there.

By Jonathan Edwards, A. M.

Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Northampton.

Deuteronomy. iv. 8. -- Take heed to thy self, and keep thy Soul diligently, least
thou forget the Things which thine Eyes have seen, and least they depart from
thy Heart all the Days of thy Life. BOSTON: Printed (...) by S. KNEELAND and T.
GREEN, in Queen-str^^^ (...) against the Prison.

MDCCX^^^^^^.

PREFACE
THE following Discourses were all, excepting the last, delivered in the Time
of the late wonderful Work of God's Power and Grace in this Place, and are
(...) published on the earnest Desire of those to whom they were preached.
These particular Discourses are fixed upon, and designed for the Press, rather
than others that were delivered in that remarkable Season, by their Election.
What has determined them in their Choice, is the Experience they hope they have
had of special Benefit to their Souls from these Discourses. Their Desire to
have 'em in their Hands from the Press has been long manifested, and often
expressed to me; Their Earnestness in it is evident from this, that though it be
a Year of the greatest public Charge to them that over has been, by reason of
the Expense of building a new Meeting House, yet they chose rather to be at
this additional Expense now, though it be very considerable, than to have it
delayed another Year. I am fully sensible that their Value for these Discourses
has arisen more from the Frame in which they heard them, and the Good which
they hope they, through the sovereign Blessing of God, have received by them,
than any real Worth in them: And whatever the Discourses are in themselves, yet
those that heard them are not to be blamed or wondered at, if that is dear to
them, that they hope God has made a Means of saving and everlasting Benefit to
them. They have much insisted on this Argument with me, to induce me to comply
with their Desire, viz that they hoped that the reading these Discourses would
have a Tendency in some Measure to renew the same Effect in them that was
wrought in the hearing, and revive the Memory of that great Work of God, which
this Town has so much Cause ever to remember; which Argument has been of
principal Weight with me, to incline me to think it to be my Duty to comply
with their Desire; though I cannot say there are no other Considerations
concurring to induce me to it.

With respect to the Discourse on Justification, besides the desire of my
People to make it public, I have been advised to it by certain Rev. Gentlemen,
my Fathers, that happened to be the Hearers of it; (or, at least, Part of it,)
when preached, whose Opinion and Advice, in such an Affair, I thought should be
of as great Weight with me as of most that I was acquainted with.

The Beginning of the late Work of God in this Place was so circumstanced, that
I could not but look upon it as a remarkable Testimony of God's Approbation of
the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone, here asserted and vindicated: --
By the noise that had a little before been raised in this County, concerning
that Doctrine, People here seemed to have their Minds put into an unusual
Ruffle; some were brought to doubt of that Way of Acceptance with God, which
from their Infancy they had been taught to be the only Way, and many were
engaged more thoroughly to ^ook into the Grounds of those Doctrines they had
been educated in: -- The following Discourse of Justification, that was
preached, (though not so fully as it is here printed,) at two public Lectures,
seemed to be remarkably blessed, not only to establish the Judgments of many in
this Truth, but to engage their Hearts in a more earnest pursuit of
Justification, in that Way that had been explained and defended; And at that
Time, while I was greatly reproached for defending this Doctrine in the Pulpit,
and just upon my suffering a very open Abuse for it, God's Work wonderfully
brake forth amongst us, and Souls began to flock to Christ, as the Savior in
whose Righteousness alone they hoped to be justified: So that this was the
Doctrine on which this Work in its Beginning was ^ounded, as it evidently was
in the whole progress of it.

A great Objection that is made against the old Protestant Doctrine of
Justification by Faith alone, and the Scheme of those Divines that have chiefly
defended it, by those that value themselves upon the new fashioned Divinity,
is, That the Scheme is too much encumbered with speculative Niceties, and
subtle Distinctions, that, they say, serve only to involve the Subject in
endless Controversy and Dispute; whereas, their Scheme, they suppose, is a
plain, easy, and natural Account of Things. But their Prejudice against
Distinctions in Divinity, I humbly conceive, is carried to a great Extreme. So
great, and general, and loud a cry has been raised by modern Philosophers and
Divines, against the subtle Distinctions of the Schoolmen, for their learned
Impertinence, that many are ready to start at any Thing that looks like nice
Distinction, and to condemn it for Nonsense without Examination. Upon the same
Account, we might expect to have St. Paul's Epistles, that are full of very
nice Distinctions, called Nonsense, and unintelligible Jargon, had not they the
good Luck, to be universally received by all Christians, as part of the holy
Scriptures.

Our discovering the Absurdity of the impertinent and abstruse Distinctions of
the School Divines, may justly give us a Distaste of such Distinctions as have
a S^ew of Learning in obscure Words, but convey no Light to the Mind; but I can
see no Reason why we should also discard those that are clear and rational, and
can be made out to have their Foundation in Truth; and that although they may be
such as require some Diligence and Attention of Mind clearly to apprehended
them. So much of the Scripture Scheme of Justification as is absolutely
necessary to Salvation, may be very plain and level with the Understandings of
the weakest Christians; but it does not therefore follow that the Scripture
teaches us no more about it, that it would be exceeding profitable for us to
know, and by gaining the Knowledge of which, we may obtain a more full a^^
clear understanding of this Doctrine, and be better able to solve Doubts that
may arise concerning it, and to defend it from the Sophistry and Cavils of
subtle Opposers.

It Is so in most of the great Doctrines of Christianity, that are looked upon
as first Principles of the Christian Faith, that though they contain something
that is easy, yet they also contain great Mysteries, and there is room for
Progress in the Knowledge of them, and doubtless will be to the End of the
World; but it is unreasonable to expect that this Progress should be made, in
the Knowledge of Things that are high and mysterious, without accurate
Distinction, and close Application of Thought: And it is also unreasonable to
think that this Doctrine of the Justification of a Sinner by a Mediator, should
be without Mysteries. We all own it to be a Matter of pure Revelation, above
the Light of natural Reason, and that it is what the infinite Wisdom of God
revealed in the Gospel mainly appears in, That he has found out such a Way of
Reconciliation, that neither Men nor Angels could have thought of. And after
all, shall we expect that this Way when found out and declared, shall contain
nothing but what is obvious to the most cursory and superficial View, and may
be fully and clearly comprehended without some Diligence, Accuracy, and careful
Distinction?

It the Distinctions I have made use of in handling this Subject are found to
be inconsistent, trivial, and unscriptural Niceties, tending only to cloud the
Subject, I ought to be willing that they should be rejected; but if on due
Examination they are found both scriptural and rational, I humbly conceive that
it will be unjust to condemn them, merely because they are Distinctions, under
a Notion that Niceness in Divinity never helps it, but always perplexes and
darkens it. It Is to God's own Revelation that I make my Appeal, by which alone
we can know in what Way he will be pleased again to receive into Favor, those
that have offended him, and incurred his Displeasure. If there be any Part of
the Scheme here laid down, or any Distinction here made use of, not warranted
by Scripture, let it be rejected; and if any opposite Scheme can be found that
is more easy and plain, having fewer and more rational Distinctions, and not
demonstrably inconsistent with it self, and with the Word of God, let it be
received. Let the Arminian Scheme of Justification by our own Virtue, he as
plain and natural as it will, if at the same Time it is plainly contrary to the
certain and demonstrable Doctrine of the Gospel, as contained in the
Scriptures, we are bound to reject it, unless we reject the Scriptures
themselves, as perplexed and absurd, and make our selves wiser than God, and
pretend to know his Mind better than Himself.

This Discourse on Justification is printed much larger than it was preached;
but the practical Discourses that follow have but little added to them, and now
appear in that very plain and unpolished Dress, in which they were first
prepared and delivered; which was mostly at a Time, when the Circumstances of
the Auditory they were preached to, were enough to make a Minister neglect,
forget, and despise such Ornaments as Politeness, and Modishness of Style and
Method, when coming as a Messenger from God to Souls, deeply impressed with a
Sense of their Danger of God's everlasting Wrath, to treat with them about
their eternal Salvation. -- However unable I am to preach or write politely, if
I would, yet I have this to comfort me under such a Defect, that God has showed
us that he don't need such Talents in Men to carry on his own Work, and that he
has been pleased to smile upon and bless a very plain, unfashionable Way of
Preaching. And have we not Reason to think that it ever has been, and ever will
be, God's Manner to bless the Foolishness of Preaching to save them that
believe, let the Elegance of Language, and Excellency of Style, be carried to
never so great a Height, by the Learning and Wit of the present and future
Ages?

What is published at the End, concerning the Excellency of Christ, is added on
my own Motion; thinking that a Discourse on such an evangelical Subject, would
properly follow others that were chiefly legal and awakening, and that
something of the Excellency of the Savior, was proper to succeed those Things
that were to show the Necessity of Salvation. I pitched upon that particular
Discourse, partly, because I had been earnestly importuned for a Copy of it for
the Press, by some in another Town, in whose hearing it was occasionally
preached.

I request every Reader's candid Acceptance, and due Improvement of what is
here offered, and especially would earnestly beseech the People of my own
Charge, not to fail of improving those Discourses to those Purposes that they
have mentioned to me as the Ends for which they desired to have them published,
that I may have no cause to repent of my Labor in transcribing, nor they of
their Cost in printing them* Happy would it be for us, and an unspeakable Mercy
of Heaven, if God should bless what is here printed, so to revive the Memory of
the past great Work of God amongst us, and the lively Impressions and Sense of
divine Things that Persons then had on their Minds, and to cause us to lament
our Declensions, as that the same Work might renewedly break forth and go on
amongst us! Surely we have seen much to excite our Longings after such a Mercy,
and to encourage us to cry to God for it!

ERRATA
PAge 10. line 21. for he, read, the Believer. p. 20. l. 20. r. a Person. p.
21. l. 24. r. infinite. p. 34 l. 18. r. Administration. p. 41. l. 11. r. here.
p. 46. 1 24. r. proceeding. p. 55. l. 11. r. Christ should suffer. p. 63. l. 9
for them. r. then. p. 68 l. 35. r. nature. p. 70. l. 15. r. broke. p. 88. l.
30. for because r. that. p. 91 l. 25 r. Graces. p. 98. l. 30. for this r. the.
p. 103 l. 5 6, r. worthiness. ibid. l. 11. for. and he be freed, r. that he
might be freed p. 105. l. 30. dele, it is. p 107. l. 15 r. refutes. p. 110 l.
18. for should. r. shall. p. 115. l. 31. dele they. p. 119. l. 27. dele that.
p. 132. l. 5. dele of. p 133 l 6. r. and actually. p. 205. l. 13. dele what. p.
209 l. 6. r. your own. p. 216. l. 18. r. called p. 225. l. 34 r. were no Hope.
p. 253. l. 12. r. contemning. p. 254 l. 1, 2, for Heb. 6. 15. After he had
patiently endured he obtained the Promise, r. Heb. 12. 2 He endured the Cross,
despising the shame. p. 262. l. 31. dele same.

N. B. The Reader is desired to observe that by means of the wrong placing of
something sent to be added, after the Copy of these Discourses was gone to the
Press, the two last Paragraphs p. 81. are out of their proper Place, much to
the Hurt of the Sense, and should follow the Paragraph, p. 78. wherein is
mention made of David's Repentance of his Sin in the matter of Uriah.

JUSTIFICATION BY Faith alone.
DISCOURSE, I.
ROMANS IV. 5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness.
THE following Things may be noted in this Verse; 1. That Justification
respects a Man as ungodly: This is evident by those Words -- that justifies
the Ungodly. Which Words cannot imply less than that God in the Act of
Justification, has no Regard to any Thing in the Person justified, as
Godliness, or any Goodness in him; but that nextly, or immediately before this
Act, God beholds him only as an ungodly or wicked Creature; so that Godliness
in the Person to be justified is not so antecedent to his Justification as to
be the Ground of it. When it is said that God justifies the Ungodly, it is as
absurd to suppose that our Godliness, taken as some Goodness in us, is the
Ground of our Justification, as when it is said that Christ gave Sight to the
Blind, to suppose that Sight was Prior to, and the Ground of that Act of Mercy
in Christ, or as if it should be said that such an One by his Bounty has made a
poor Man rich, to suppose that it was the Wealth of this poor Man that was the
Ground of this Bounty toward him, and was the Price by which it was procured.

2. It appears that by him that works not in this Verse, is not meant only
one that don't conform to the ceremonial Law, because he that works not, and
the Ungodly are evidently synonimous Expressions, or what signify the same; it
appears by the Manner of their Connection; if it ben't so, to what Purpose is
the latter Expression the Ungodly brought in? The Context gives no other
Occasion for it, but only to show that the Grace of the Gospel appears in that
God in Justification has no Regard to any Godliness of ours: The foregoing
Verse is, Now to him that works is the Reward not reckoned of Grace, but of
Debt: In that Verse it is evident, that Gospel Grace consists in the Rewards
being given without Works; and in this Verse which nextly follows it and in
Sense is connected with it, it is evident that Gospel Grace consists in a Man's
being justified that is ungodly; by which it is most plain that by him that
works not, and him that is ungodly, are meant the same Thing; and that
therefore not only Works of the ceremonial Law are excluded in this Business of
Justification, but Works of Morality and Godliness.

3. It Is evident in the Words, that by that Faith that is here spoken of, by
which we are justified, is not meant the same Thing as a Course of Obedience,
or Righteousness, by the Expression, by which this Faith is here denoted, viz
believing on him that justifies the Ungodly -- They that oppose the
Solifidians, as they call them, do greatly insist on it, that we should take
the Words of Scripture concerning this Doctrine, in their most natural and
obvious Meaning; and how do they cry out of our clouding this Doctrine with
obscure Metaphors, and unintelligible Figures of Speech! But is this to
interpret Scripture according to it is most obvious Meaning, when the Scripture
speaks of our believing on him that justifies the Ungodly, or the Breakers of
his Law, to say that the Meaning of it is performing a Course of Obedience to
his Law, and avoiding the Breaches of it? Believing on God as a Justifier,
certainly is a different Thing from submitting to God as a Lawgiver; especially
a believing on him as a Justifier of the Ungodly, or Rebels against the
Lawgiver.

4. It Is evident that the Subject of Justification is looked upon as destitute
of any Righteousness in himself, by that Expression, it is counted, or imputed
to him for Righteousness; the Phrase, as the Apostle uses it here, and in the
Context, manifestly imports, that God of his sovereign Grace is pleased in his
Dealings with the Sinner, to take and regard, that which indeed is not
Righteousness, and in one that has no Righteousness, so that the Consequence
shall be the same as if he had Righteousness; (which may be from the Respect
that it bears to some thing that is indeed Righteousness.) It Is plain that this
is the force of the Expression in the preceding Verses: In the last Verse but
one, it is manifest that the Apostle lays the Stress of his Argument for the
free Grace of God, from that Text that he cites out of the old Testament about
Abraham, on that Word counted or imputed, and that this is the Thing that he
supposed God to show his Grace in, viz in his counting something for
Righteousness, in his consequential Dealings with Abraham, that was no
Righteousness in itself. And in the next Verse which immediately preceeds the
Text, Now to him that works is the Reward not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt;
the Word there translated reckoned, is the same that in the other Verses is
rendered imputed, and counted: And it is as much as if the Apostle had said, As
to him that works, there is no need of any gracious Reckoning, or counting it
for Righteousness, and causing the Reward to follow as if it were a
Righteousness; for if he has Works he has that which is a Righteousness in
itself, to which the Reward properly belongs. This is further evident by the
Words that follow, Ver. 6. Even as David also described the Blessedness of the
Man unto whom God imputes Righteousness without Works; what can here b^ meant
by imputing Righteousness without Works, but imputing Righteousness to him that
has none of his own? Ver. 7, 8. Saying blessed are they whose Iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered: Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord will
not impute Sin. How are these Words of David to the Apostle's Purpose? Or how
do they prove any such Thing, as that Righteousness is imputed without Works,
unless it be because the Word imputed is used, and the Subject of the
Imputation is mentioned, as a Sinner* and consequently destitute of a moral
Righteousness? For David says no such Thing, as that he is forgiven without the
Works of the Ceremonial Law; there is no Hint of the ceremonial Law, or
Reference to it, in the Words. I will therefore venture to infer this Doctrine
from the Words, for the Subject of my present Discourse, viz.

DOCTRINE, We are justified only by Faith in Christ, and not by any Manner of
Virtue or Goodness of our own.

Such an Assertion as this, I am sensible, many would be ready to cry out of as
absurd, betraying a great deal of Ignorance, and containing much Inconsistence;
but I desire every One's Patience 'till I have done.

In handling this Doctrine I would I. Explain the Meaning of it, and show how I
would be understood by such an Assertion. II. Proceed to the Consideration of
the Evidence of the Truth of it. III. Show how evangelical Obedience is
concerned in this Affair. IV. Answer Objections. V. Consider the Importance of
the Doctrine.


I. I would explain the Meaning of the Doctrine, or show in what Sense I assert
it, and would endeavor to evince the Truth of it: Which may be done in Answer
to these two Enquiries, viz. 1. What is meant by being justified? 2. What is
meant when it is said that this is by Faith alone, without any Manner of Virtue
or Goodness of our own?

First. I would show what Justification is, or what I suppose is meant in
Scripture by being justified. And here I would not at all enlarge, and
therefore to answer in short.

A Person is said to be justified when he is approved of God as free from the
Guilt of Sin, and it is deserved Punishment, and as having that Righteousness
belonging to him that entitles to the Reward of Life. That we should take the
Word in such a Sense, and understand it as the Judges accepting a Person as
having both a negative, and positive Righteousness belonging to him, and
looking on him therefore, as not only quit, or free from any Obligation to
Punishment but also ^s just and righteous, and so entitled to a positive
Reward, is not only most agreeable to the Etimology, and natural Import of the
Word, which signifies to make righteous, or to pass One for righteous in
Judgment, but also manifestly agreeable to the Force of the Word, as used in
Scripture.

Some suppose that nothing more is intended in Scripture by Justification than
barely the Remission of Sins: if it be so it is very strange, if we consider
the Nature of the Case; for it is most evident, and none will deny, that it is
with Respect to the Rule, or Law of God that we are under, that we are said in
Scripture to be either justified or condemned: Now what is it to justify a
Person, as the Subject of a Law or Rule, but to judge him, or look upon him,
and approve him as standing right with Respect to that Rule? To justify a
Person in a particular Case, is to approve of him as standing right, as subject
to the Law or Rule in that Case; and to justify in general, is to pass him in
Judgment, as standing right, in a State correspondent to the Law or Rule in
general. But certainly in order to a Person's being looked on as standing right
with Respect to the Rule in general, (...) or in a State corresponding with the
Law of God, more is needful than what is negative, or a not having the Guilt of
Sin; for whatever that Law is, whether a new one, or an old one, yet doubtless
something positive is needed in order to its being answered. We are no more
justified by the Voice of the Law, or of him that judges according to it, by a
mere Pardon of Sin, than Adam our first Surety, was justified by the Law, at
the first Point of his Existence, before he had done the Work, or fulfilled the
Obedience of the Law, or had had so much as any Trial whether he would fulfill
it or no. If Adam had finished his Course of perfect Obedience, he would have
been justified; and certainly his Justification would have implied something
more than what is merely negative; he would have been approved of, as having
fulfilled the Righteousness of the Law, and accordingly would have been
adjudged to the Reward of it: So Christ our second Surety, (in whose
Justification all who believe in him, and whose Surety he is, are vertually
justified,) was not justified 'till he had done the Work the Father had
appointed him, and kept the Father's Commandments, through all Trials, and then
in his Resurrection he was justified: When he that had been put to Death in the
Flesh was quickened by the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 18 then he that was manifest in
the Flesh was justified in the Spirit, 1 Timothy 3. 16. But God when he justified
him in raising him from the Dead, did not only release him from his Humiliation
for Sin, and acquit him from any further Suffering or Abasement for it, but
admitted him to that eternal and immortal Life, and to the Beginning of that
Exaltation, that was the Reward of what he had done. And indeed the
Justification of a Believer is no other than his being admitted to Communion
in* or Participation of the Justification of this Head and Surety of all
Believers; for as Christ suffered the Punishment of Sin, not as a private
Person, but as our Surety, so when after this Suffering he was raised from the
Dead, he was therein justified, not as a private Person, but as the Surety and
Representative of all that should believe in him; so that he was raised again
not only for his own, but also for our Justification, according to the Apostle
Romans 4 25. Who was delivered for our Offenses, and raised again for our
Justification. And therefore it is that the Apostle says as he does in Romans 8.
34. Who is he that condemns, it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen
again.

But that a Believer's Justification implies not only Remission of Sins, or
Acquittance from the Wrath due to it, but also an Admittance to a Title to that
Glory that is the Reward of Righteousness, is more directly taught in the
Scripture, as particularly in Romans 5. 1, 2. where the Apostle mentions both
these, as joint Benefits implied in Justification, Therefore being justified by
Faith, we have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we
have Access into this Grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in Hope of the Glory
of God. So Remission of Sins, and Inheritance among them that are sanctified,
are mentioned together as what are jointly obtained by Faith in Christ, Acts
26. 18. That they may receive Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance among them
that are sanctified, through Faith that is in me. Both these are without Doubt
implied in that passing from Death to Life, which Christ speaks of as the Fruit
of Faith, and which he opposes to Condemnation, John. 5. 24 Verily I say unto
you, he that hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting Life, and shall not come into Condemnation, but is passed from
Death to Life. I proceed now

Secondly. To show what is meant when it is said that this Justification is by
Faith only, and not by any Virtue or Goodness of our own.

This enquiry may be subdivided into two, viz 1. How it is by Faith. 2. How it is
by Faith alone, without any Manner of Goodness of ours.

1. How Justification is by Faith. Here the great Difficulty has been about the
Import and Force of the Particle BY, or what is that Influence that Faith has
in the Affair of Justification that is expressed in Scripture by being
justified BY Faith.

Here, if I may humbly express what seems evident to me, though Faith be indeed
the Condition of Justification so as nothing else is, yet this Matter is not
clearly and sufficiently explained by saying that Faith is the Condition of
Justification; and that because the Word seems ambiguous, both in common Use,
and also as used in Divinity: in one Sense Christ alone performs the Condition
of our Justification and Salvation; in another Sense, Faith is the Condition of
Justification; in another Sense, other Qualifications and Acts are Conditions
of Salvation and Justification too: there seems to be a great deal of ambiguity
in such Expressions as are commonly used, (which yet we are forced to use,)
such as Condition of Salvation, what is required in order to Salvation or
Justification; the Terms of the Covenant, and the like; and I believe they are
understood in very different Senses by different Persons. And besides as the
Word Condition is very often understood in the common use of Language, Faith is
not the only Thing, in us, that is the Condition of Justification; for by the
Word Condition, as it is very often, (and perhaps most commonly,) used; we mean
any thing that may have the Place of a Condition in a conditional Proposition,
and as such is truly connected with the Consequent, especially if the
Proposition holds both in the Affirmative and Negative, as the Condition is
either affirmed or denied; if it be that with which, or which being supposed, a
thing shall be, and without which, or it being denied, a Thing shall not be, we
in such a Case call it a Condition of that Thing: But in this Sense Faith is
not the only Condition of Salvation or Justification, for there are many Things
that accompany and flow from Faith, that are Things with which Justification
shall be, and without which it will not be, and therefore are found to be put
in Scripture in conditional Propositions with Justification and Salvation. in
Multitudes of Places; such are Love to God, and Love to our Brethren, forgiving
Men their Trespasses, and many other good Qualifications and Acts. And there
are many other Things besides Faith, which are directly proposed to us, to be
pursued or performed by us, in order to eternal Life, as those which if they
are done, or obtained we shall have eternal Life, and if not done or not
obtained, we shall surely perish. And if it were so, that Faith was the only
Condition of Justification in this Sense, yet I don't apprehend that to say
that Faith was the Condition of Justification, would express the Sense of that
Phrase of Scripture of being Justified BY Faith: there is a Difference between
being justified by a Thing, and that Thing universally, and necessarily, and
inseparably attending, or going with Justification; for so do a great many
Things that we ben't said to be justified by: it is not the inseparable
connection with justification that the Holy Ghost would signify, (or that is
naturally signified,) by such a Phrase, but some particular influence that
Faith has in the Affair, or some certain Dependence that that Effect has on its
Influence.

Some that have been aware of this have supposed that the influence or
dependence might well be expressed by Faith's being the Instrument of our
Justification; which has been misunderstood, and injuriously represented, and
ridiculed by those that have denied the Doctrine of Justification by Faith
alone, as though they had supposed that Faith was used as an Instrument in the
Hand of God, whereby he performed, and brought to pass that Act of his, viz.
Approving and Justifying the Believer: Whereas it was not intended that Faith
was the Instrument wherewith God justifies, but the Instrument wherewith we
receive Justification; not the Instrument where with the justifier acts in
Justifying, but wherewith the receiver of Justification acts in accepting
Justification. But yet it must be owned that this is an obscure way of
Speaking, and there must certainly be some impropriety in calling of it an
Instrument wherewith we receive or accept Justification; for the very Persons
that thus explain the Matter speak of Faith as being the Reception or
Acceptance it self; and if so how can it be the Instrument of Reception or
Acceptance? Certainly there is difference between the Act and the Instrument.
And besides by their own Descriptions of Faith, Christ the Mediator, by whom,
and his Righteousness, by which we are justified, is more directly the Object
of this Acceptance, and Justification which is the Benefit arising therefrom,
more indirectly: and therefore if Faith be an Instrument, it is more properly
the Instrument by which we receive Christ, than the Instrument by which we
receive Justification.

But I humbly conceive we have been ready to look too far to find out what that
Influence of Faith in our Justification is, or what is that Dependence of this
Effect on Faith, signified by the Expression of being justified by Faith, over
looking that which is most obviously pointed forth in the Expression, viz.
that, the Case being as it is, (there being a Mediator that has purchased
Justification,) Faith in this Mediator is that which renders i^ a meet and
suitable Thing, in the Sight of God, that he rather than others should have
this purchased Benefit assigned to him. There is this Benefit purchased, which
God sees it to be a more meet and suitable Thing that it should be assigned to
some than others, because he sees 'em differently qualified; that qualification
wherein the meetness to this Benefit, as the Case stands consists, is that, in
us, by which we are Justified If Christ had not come into the World and died,
etc. to purchase Justification, no Qualification whatever, in us, could render
it a meet or fit Thing that we should be justified; but the Case being as it
now stands, viz that Christ has actually purchased Justification by his own
Blood, for infinitely unworthy Creatures, there may be some certain
Qualification found in some Persons, that, either from the Relation it bears to
the Mediator and his Merits, or on some other Account, is the Thing that in the
Sight of God renders it a meet and condecent Thing that they should have an
interest in this purchased Benefit, and which if any are destitute of, it
renders it an unfit and unsuitable Thing that they should have it. The Wisdom
of God in his Constitutions, doubtless appears much in the Fitness and Beauty
of them, so that those Things are established to be done that are fit to be
done, and that these Things are connected in his Constitution, that are
agreeable one to another: so God justifies a Believer according to his revealed
Constitution, without doubt, because he sees something in this Qualification,
that as the Case stands, renders it a fit Thing that such should be justified;
whether it be because Faith is the Instrument, or as it were the Hand, by which
he that has purchased Justification is apprehended and accepted, or because it
is the Acceptance it self, or whatever. To be justified is to be approved of
God as a proper Subject of Pardon, and a right to eternal life; and therefore
when it is said that we are Justified BY Faith, what else can be understood by
it than that Faith is that BY which we are rendered approvable, fitly so, and
indeed, as the Case stands, proper Subjects of this Benefit?

This is something different from Faith's being the Condition of Justification,
only so as to be inseparably connected with Justification; so are many other
Things besides Faith, and yet nothing in us, but Faith, renders it meet that we
should have Justification assigned to us; as I shall presently show how, in
answer to the next Enq^^ry, viz.

2. How this is said to be by Faith alone, without any manner of Virtue or
Goodness of our own. This may seem to some to be attended with two
difficulties, viz. How this can be said to be by Faith alone, without any
Virtue or Goodness of ours, when Faith it self is a Virtue, and one Part of our
Goodness, and is not only some manner of goodness of ours, but is a very
excellent Qualification, and one chief Part of the inherent Holiness of a
Christian? And if it be a part of our inherent Goodness or Excellency, (whether
it be this Part or any other,) that renders it a condecent or congruous Thing
that we should have this Benefit of Christ assigned to us, what this is less
than what they mean that talk of a Merit of Congruity? And moreover, if this
Part of our Christian Holiness qualifies us in the Sight of God, for this
Benefit of Christ, and renders it a fit or meet Thing, in his Sight, that we
should have it, why should not other Parts of Holiness, and Conformity to God,
which are also very excellent, and have as much of the Image of Christ in them,
and are no less lovely in God's Eyes, qualify us as much, and have as much
Influence to render us meet, in God's Sight, for such a Benefit as this?
Therefore I answer,

When it is said that we are not justified by any Righteousness or Goodness of
our own, what is meant is that it is not out of Respect to the Excellent or
Goodness of any Qualifications, or Acts, in us whatsoever, that God judges it
meet that this Benefit of Christ should be ours; and it is not, in any wise, on
Account of any Excellency, or Value that there (...) in Faith, that it appears,
in the Sight of God, a me^^ Thing, that (...) that believes should have this
Benefit (...) Christ assigned to him, but purely from the Relation Faith has to
the Person in whom this Benefit is to be had, or as it unites to that Mediator,
in and by whom we are justified. Here for the greater Clearness, I would
particularly explain my self under several Propositions.

1. It is certain that there is some Union or Relation that the People of
Christ, stand in to him, that is expressed in Scripture, from time to time, by
being in Christ, and is represented frequently by those Metaphors of being
Members of Christ, or being united to him as Members to the Head, and Branches
to the Stock, Our Savior compares his mystical Body, that is his Church, to a
Vine, which his Father, whom he compares to a Husbandman, has planted, I am
the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. To represent to us the Union
that is betwixt Christ and all true Christians, and the Influence of Grace and
spiritual Life, which all that are United to him do derive and receive from
him, he sets it forth to us by the Resemblance of a Vine and Branches. As there
is a natural vital Union between the Vine and the Branches, so there is a
spiritual Union between Christ and true Christians; and this Union is the Cause
of our Fruitfulness, in the Works of Obedience and a good Life. There are some
indeed that seem to be grafted into Christ by an outward Profession of
Christianity, who yet derive no Influence from him, so as to bring forth Fruit,
because they are not vitally united to him. Dr. Tillotson in his 3d. Vol. of
Sermon. p. 307.

By this it appears that the vital Union between Christ and true Christians,
which is much more of a Mystery than the relative Union, and necessarily
implies it, was not thought an unreasonable Doctrine, by one of the greatest
Divines, on the other side of the Question in Hand.


and is compared to a Marriage Union between Husband and Wife. I don't now
pretend to determine of what Sort this Union is; nor is it necessary to my
present Purpose to enter into any Manner of Disputes about it: if any are
disgusted at the Word Union, as obscure and unintelligible, the Word Relation
equally serves my Purpose; I don't now desire to determine any more about it,
than all, of all Sorts, will readily allow, viz that there is a peculiar
Relation between true Christians and Christ, or a certain Relation between him
and them, that there is not between him and others; which is signified by those
metaphorical Expressions in Scripture, of being in Christ, being Members of
Christ, etc.

2. This Relation or Union to Christ, whereby Christians are said to be in
Christ, (whatever it be,) is the Ground of their Right to his Benefits. This
needs no Proof; the Reason of the Thing, at first Blush, demonstrates it: but
yet it is exceeding evident also by Scripture, 1 John 5. 12. He that has the
Son has Life, and he that has not the Son has not Life. 1 Cor. 1. 3. Of him
are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us -- Righteousness. First we
must be in him, and then he will be made Righteousness, or Justification to us.
Ephesians. 1. 6. Who has made us accepted in the Beloved. Our being in him is the
Ground of our being accepted. So it is in those Unions which the Holy Ghost has
thought fit to compare this Union to; the Union of the Members of the Body with
the Head is the Ground of their partaking of the Life of the Head; it is the
Union of the Branches to the Stock, which is the Ground of their partaking of
the Sap and Life of the Stock; it is the Relation of the Wife to the Husband,
that is the Ground of her joint Interest in his Estate, they are looked upon,
in several Respects, as one in Law: so there is a legal Union between Christ
and true Christians; so that (as all except Socinians allow,) one, in some
respects, is accepted for the other, by the supreme Judge.

3. And thus it is that Faith is that Qualification in any Person, that renders
it meet in the Sight of God that he should be looked upon as having Christ's
Satisfaction and Righteousness belonging to him, viz. because it is that in
him, which, on his Part, makes up this Union between him and Christ. By what
has been just now observed, it is a Person's being, according to Scripture
Phrase, in Christ, that is the Ground of having his Satisfaction and Merits
belonging to him, and a Right to the Benefits procured thereby: and the Reason
of it is plain; it is easy to see how a having Christ's Merits and Benefits
belonging to us, follows from our having (if I may so speak) Christ himself
belonging to us, or a being united to him; and if so it must also be easy to
see how, or in what Manner, that, in a Person, that on his Part makes up the
Union between his Soul and Christ, should be the Thing on the Account of which
God looks on it meet that he should have Christ's Merits belonging to him; and
also that it is a very different Thing, for God to assign to a particular
Person, a Right to Christ's Merits and Benefits, from Regard to any
Qualification in him, in this Respect, from his doing of it for him, out of
Respect to the Value or Loveliness of that Qualification, or as a Reward of the
Excellency of it.

As there is no Body but what will allow that there is a peculiar Relation
between Christ and his true Disciples, by which they are in some sense in
scripture said to be one; so I suppose there is no Body but what will allow,
that there may be something that the true Christian does on his Part, whereby
he is active in coming into this Relation or Union, some Act of the Soul of the
Christian, that is the Christian's uniting Act, or that which is done toward
this Union or Relation, (or whatever any please to call it,) (...) the
Christian's Part: Now Faith I suppose to be this Act

I don't now pretend to define justifying Faith, or to determine precisely how
much is contained in it, but only to determine thus much concerning it, viz.
That it is that by which the Soul, that before was separate, and alienated from
Christ, unites it self to him, or ceases to be any longer in that State of
Alienation, and comes into that sore mentioned Union or Relation to him, or to
use the Scripture Phrase, that it is that by which the Soul COMES TO Christ, and
RECEIVES him: and this is evident by the Scriptures using these very
Expressions to signify Faith. John 6* 35, 36, 37, 38, 39* He that comes to me
shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst. But I said
unto you that ye also have seen me and believe not. All that the Father gives
me shall come to me, and him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out; For
I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own Will, but the Will of him that sent
me ver. 40. And this is the Will of him that sent me, that every one which
sees the Son and believes on him, may have everlasting Life, and I will raise
him up at the last Day. Chap. 5* 38, 39, 40. -- Whom he has sent, him ye
believe not. Search the Scriptures for -- they are they which testify of me:
And ye will not come unto me, that ye might have Life ver. 43, 44. I am come in
my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his own Name
him ye will receive How can ye believe which receive honor one of another --?
Chap. 5* 12. But as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. If it be said that these
are obscure figures of Speech, that, however they might be well understood of
Old, among those that then commonly used such Metaphors, yet they are
difficultly understood now. I allow that the Expressions of receiving Christ
and coming to Christ, are metaphorical Expressions; and if I should allow 'em
to be obscure Metaphors; yet so much at least, is certainly plain in 'em, viz.
that Faith is that by which those that before were separated, and at a distance
from Christ, (that is to say were not so related and united to him as his
People are;) do cease to be any longer at such a Distance, and do come into
that Relation and nearness; unless they are so unintelligible, that nothing at
all can be understood by 'em.

God don't give those that believe, an Union with, or an interest in the
Savior, in reward for Faith, but only because Faith is the Soul's active
uniting with Christ, or is it self the very act of Unition, on their Part. God
sees it fit, that in order to an Union's being established between two
intelligent active Beings or Persons, so as that they should be looked upon as
one, there should be the mutual Act of both, that each should receive other, as
actively joining themselves one to another. God in requiring this in order to
an union with Christ as one of his People, treats Men as reasonable Creatures,
capable of Act, and Choice; and hence sees it fit that they only, that are one
with Christ by their own Act, should be looked upon as one in Law: what is real
in the Union between Christ and his People, is the Foundation of what is legal;
that is, it is something that is really in them, and between them, uniting
them, that is the Ground of the Suitableness of their being accounted as one by
the Judge: And if there be any Act, or Qualification in Believers, that is of
that uniting Nature, that it is meet on that Account that the Judge should look
upon 'em, and accept 'em as one, no wonder that upon the Account of the same
Act or Qualification, he should accept the Satisfaction and Merits of the one,
for the other, as if it were their Satisfaction and Merits: It necessarily
follows, or rather is implied.

And thus it is that Faith justifies, or gives an Interest in Christ's
Satisfaction and Merits, and a Right to the Benefits procured thereby, viz. as
it thus makes Christ and the Believer one in the Acceptance of the supreme
Judge. It Is by Faith that we have a Title to eternal Life, because, it is by
Faith that we have the Son of God, by whom Life is. The Apostle John in those
Words, 1 John 5. 12. He that has the son has Life, seems evidently to have
respect to those Words of Christ that he gives an Account of in his Gospel,
Chap. 3. 36. He that believes on the Son has everlasting Life, and he that
believes not the Son shall not see Life. And in the same Places that the
Scripture speaks of Faith as the Soul's receiving, or coming to Christ, it also
speaks of this receiving, or coming to, or joining with Christ, as the Ground
of an Interest in his Benefits: To as many as received him, to them gave he
Power to become the Sons of God. Ye will not come unto me that ye might have
Life, And there is a wide Difference between its being looked on suitable that
Christ's Satisfaction and Merits should be theirs that believe, because an
Interest in that Satisfaction and Merit is but a fit Reward of Faith, or a
suitable Testimony of God's Respect to the Amiableness and Excellency of that
Grace, and it is only being looked on suitable that Christ's Satisfaction and
Merits should be theirs, because Christ and they are so united, that in the
Eyes of the Judge they may suitably be looked upon, and taken, as one.

Although, on the Account of Faith in the Believer, it is, in the Sight of God,
fit and congruous, both that he that believes should be looked upon as in
Christ, and also as having an Interest in his Merits, in the way that has been
now explained, yet it appears that this is very wide from a merit of Congruity,
or indeed any moral Congruity at all to either. There is a twofold Fitness to a
State; I know not how to give them distinguishing Names otherwise than by
calling the one a moral, and the other a natural Fitness: A Person has a moral
Fitness for a State, when his moral Excellency commends him to it, or when his
being put into such a good State, is but a fit or suitable Testimony of Regard
or Love to the moral Excellency, or Value, or Amiableness of any of his
Qualifications or Acts. A Person has a natural Fitness for a State when it
appears meet and condecent that he should be in such a State or Circumstances,
only from the natural concord or agreableness there is between such
Qualifications and such Circumstances; not because the Qualifications are
lovely or unlovely, but only because the Qualifications, and the Circumstances
are like one another, or do in their nature suit and agree or unite one to
another. And it is on this latter Account only that God looks on it fit by a
natural Fitness, that he whose Heart sincerely unites it self to Christ as his
Savior, should be looked upon as united to that Savior, and so having an
Interest in him; and not from any moral Fitness there is between the excellency
of such a Qualification as Faith, and such a glorious Blessedness as the having
an Interest in Christ. God's bestowing Christ and his Benefits on a Soul in
consequence of Faith, out of Regard only to the natural Concord there is
between such a Qualification of a Soul, and such an union with Christ, and
Interest in him, makes the Case very widely different from what would be; if he
bestowed this from regard to any moral Suitableness; for in the former Case,
it is only from God's Love of order that he bestows these Things on the account
of Faith. In the latter God does it out of Love to the Grace of Faith it self.
God will neither look on Christ's Merits as ours, nor adjudge his Benefits to
us, till we be in Christ: nor will he look upon us as being in him, without an
active unition of our Hearts and Souls to him; because he is a wise Being, and
delights in Order, and not in Confusion, and that Things should be together or
asunder according to their nature; and his making such a Constitution is a
testimony of his love of Order: whereas if it were out of regard to any moral
Fitness or suitableness between Faith and such Blessedness, it would be a
Testimony of his Love to the Act or Qualification it self: The one supposes
this divine Constitution to be a Manifestation of God's regard to the Beauty of
the act of Faith, the other only supposes it to be a Manifestation of his
regard to the Beauty of that Order that there is in uniting those Things that
have a natural Agreement, and congruity, and unition the one with the other.
Indeed a moral Suitableness or Fitness to a State includes a natural; for it is
never so that if there be a moral Suitableness that a Person should be in such
a State, but that there is also a natural Suitableness; but such a natural
Suitableness as I have described, by no means necessarily includes a moral.

This is plainly what our Divines intend when they say that Faith don't justify
as a Work, or a Righteousness, viz. That it don't justify as a Part of our
moral Goodness or Excellency, or that it don't justify as a Work, in the Sense
that Man was to have been justified by his Works by the Covenant of Works,
which was to have a Title to eternal Life, given him of God in Testimony of his
pleasedness with his Works, or his regard to the inherent Excellency and Beauty
of his Obedience. And this is certainly what the Apostle Paul means, when he so
much insists upon it that we are not justified by works, viz. that we are not
justified by them as good Works, or by any goodness, value, or excellency of
our Works. For the proof of this I shall at present mention but one Thing,
(being like to have occasion to say what shall make it more abundantly manifest
afterward,) and that is, the Apostles, from Time to Time, speaking of our not
being justified by Works, as the Thing that excludes all boasting, Ephesians. 2 9.
Rom 3. 27. and Chap. 4. 2. now which way do Works give occasion for boasting,
but as good? What do Men use to boast of, but of something they suppose good or
excellent? And on what Account do they boast of any Thing, but for the supposed
Excellency that is in it?

From these Things we may learn in what manner Faith is the only Condition of
Justification and Salvation; for though it be not the only Condition, so as alone
truly to have the Place of a Condition in an hypothetical Proposition, in which
Justification and Salvation are the Consequent, yet it is the Condition of
Justification in a Manner peculiar to it, and so that nothing else has a
parallel Influence with it; because Faith includes the whole Act of Unition to
Christ as a Savior: The entire active uniting of the Soul, or the whole of
what is called coming to Christ, and receiving of him, is called Faith in
Scripture; and however other Things may be no less excellent than Faith, yet
it is not the nature of any other Graces or Virtues directly to close with
Christ as a Mediator, any further than they enter into the Constitution of
justifying Faith, and do belong to its Nature.

Thus I have explained my meaning, in asserting it as a Doctrine of the Gospel,
that we are justified by Faith only, without any manner of Goodness of our own.

I now proceed in the

II. Place, to the Proof of it, which I shall endeavor to produce in the
following Arguments,

First Such is our Case, and the State of Things, that neither Faith, nor any
other Qualification, or Act, or Course of Acts does, or can render it suitable
or fit that Person should have an Interest in the Savior, and so a Title to
his Benefits, on Account of any excellency therein, or any other way than only
as something in him may unite him to the Savior. It is not suitable that God
should give fallen Man an Interest in Christ and his Merits, as a Testimony of
his respect to any Thing whatsoever as a loveliness in him; and that because
it is not meet till a Sinner is actually justified, that any Thing in him should
be accepted of God, as any excellency or amiableness of his Person; or that God
by any Act, should in any manner or degree testify any pleasedness with him, or
favor toward him, on the account of any Thing inherent in him; and that for
two Reasons, 1. Because the nature of Things will not admit of it. 2. Because
an antecedent divine Constitution stands in the way of it.

1. The Nature of Things will not admit of it. And this appears from the
infinite Guilt that the Sinner 'till justified is under; which arises from the
infinite evil or heinousness of Sin. But because this is what some deny, I
would therefore first establish that Point, and show that Sin is a Thing that
is indeed properly of infinite Heinousness; and then show the Consequence, and
show that it being so, and so the Sinner under infinite Guilt in God's Sight,
it cannot be suitable, 'till the Sinner is actually justified, that God should
by any Act testify any pleasedness with, or acceptance of, any Thing as any
excellency or amiableness of his Person, or indeed have any acceptance of him,
or pleasedness with him to testify.

That the evil and demerit of Sin is infinitely great, is most demonstrably
evident, because what the evil or iniquity of Sin consists in, is the violating
of an Obligation, the doing contrary to what we are obliged to do, or doing
what we should not do; and therefore by how much the greater the Obligation is
that is violated, by so much the greater is the Iniquity of the violation. But
certainly our Obligation to love or honor any Being is great in proportion to
the greatness or excellency of that Being, or his worthiness to be loved and
honored: we are under greater Obligations to love a more lovely Being than a
less lovely; and if a Being be infinitely excellent and lovely, our Obligations
to love him are therein infinitely great: The matter is so plain it seems
needless to say much about it.

Some have argued exceeding strangely against the infinite evil of Sin, from
its being committed against an infinite Object, that if so, then it may as well
be argued that there is also an infinite value or worthiness in Holiness and
Love to God, because that also has an infinite Object; Whereas the Argument
from parity of Reason will carry it in the reverse: the Sin of the Creature
against God is ill deserving in proportion to the distance there is between^
God and the Creature, the greatness of the Object, and the meanness of the
Subject aggravates it; but it is the reverse with regard to the worthiness of
the respect of the Creature to God. it is worthless (and not worthy) in
proportion to the meanness of the Subject: so much the greater the Distance
between God and the Creature, so much the less is the Creature's respect worthy
of God's notice or regard. The unworthiness of Sin or opposition to God rises,
and is great in proportion to the dignity of the Object, and inferiority of the
Subject; but on the contrary the worth or value of respect rises in proportion
to the value of the Subject; and that for this plain Reason, viz. that the evil
of disrespect is in proportion to the Obligation that lies upon the Subject to
the Object; which Obligation is most evidently increased by the excellency and
superiority of the Object; but on the contrary the worthiness of respect to a
Being is in proportion to the Obligation that lies on him who is the Object,
(or rather the Reason he has) to regard the Subject, which certainly is in
proportion to the Subject's value or excellency. Sin or disrespect is evil or
heinous in proportion to the Degree of what it denies in the Object, and as it
were takes from it, viz. its excellency and worthiness of respect; On the
contrary, respect is valuable in proportion to the value of what is given to
the Object in that respect, which undoubtedly, (other Things being equal,) is
great in proportion to the Subject's value, or worthiness of regard; because
the Subject in giving his Respect, can give no more than himself; so far as he
gives his respect he gives himself to the Object; and therefore his gift is of
greater or lesser value in proportion to the value of himself.

Hence (by the way,) the Love, Honor, and Obedience of Christ toward God, has
infinite Value, from the excellency and dignity of the Person in whom these
Qualifications were inherent: and the Reason why we needed a Person of infinite
Dignity to obey for us, was because of our infinite comparative Meanness, who
had disobeyed, whereby our Disobedience was infinitely aggravated: We needed
one, the worthiness of whose Obedience, might be answerable to the unworthiness
of our Disobedience; and therefore needed one who was as great and worthy, as
we were unworthy.

Another Objection (that perhaps may be thought hardly worth mentioning.) is,
that to suppose Sin to be infinitely heinous is to make all Sins equally
heinous; for how can any Sin be more than infinitely heinous? But all that can
be argued hence is, that no Sin can be greater with respect to that aggravation
the worthiness of the Object against whom it is committed: one Sin cannot be
more aggravated than another in that respect, because in this respect the
aggravation of every Sin is infinite; but that don't hinder but that some Sins
may be more heinous than others in other respects: as if we should suppose a
Cylinder infinitely long, it cannot be greater in that respect, viz. with
respect to the length of it; but yet it may be doubled, and trebled, and made a
thousand fold more, by the increase of other Dimensions. Of Sins that are all
infinitely heinous, some may be more heinous than others, as well as of diverse
Punishments that are all infinitely dreadful Calamities, or all of them
infinitely exceeding all finite Calamities, so that there is no finite Calamity
however great but what is infinitely less dreadful, or more eligable than any
of them, yet some of them may be a thousand Times more dreadful than others. A
Punishment may be infinitely dreadful by reason of the infinite Duration of it;
and therefore cannot be greater with respect to that Aggravation of it, viz. its
length of continuance; but yet may be vastly more terrible on other Accounts.

Having thus, as I imagine, made it clear that all Sin is infinitely heinous,
and consequently that the Sinner, before he is justified, is under infinite
Guilt in God's Sight, it now remains that I show the Consequence, or how it
follows from hence, that it is not suitable that God should give the Sinner an
Interest in Christ's Merits, and so a title to his Benefits, from regard to any
Qualification, or Act, or course of Acts, in him, on the Account of any
Excellency or Goodness whatsoever therein, but only as uniting to Christ; or
(which fully implies it) that it is not suitable that God by any Act, should in
any Manner or Degree, testify any acceptance of, or pleasedness with any Thing,
as any Virtue, or Excellency, or any part of loveliness, or valuableness, in
his Person, until he is actually already interested in Christ's Merits; which
appears by this, that from the Premises it follows, that before the Sinner is
already interested in Christ, and justified, it is impossible God should have
any acceptance of, or pleasedness with the Person of the Sinner, as in any
Degree lovely in his Sight, or indeed less the Object of his Displeasure and
Wrath: For, by the Supposition, the Sinner still remains infinitely guilty in
the Sight of God; for Guilt is not removed but by Pardon; but to suppose the
Sinner already pardoned, is to suppose him already justified; which is contrary
to the Supposition: But if the Sinner still remains infinitely guilty in God's
Sight, that is the same Thing as still to be beheld of God as infinitely the
Object of his Displeasure and Wrath, or infinitely hateful in his Eyes; and if
so, where is any room for any Thing in him, to be accepted as some valuableness
or acceptableness of him in God's Sight, or for any Act of Favor, of any Kind
toward him, or any Gift whatsoever to him, in Testimony of God's Respect to
and Acceptance of something of him lovely and pleasing? If we should suppose
that it could be so, that a Sinner could have Faith, or some other Grace in his
Heart, and yet remain separate from Christ; and it should continue still to be
so, that he is not looked upon as being in Christ, or having any relation to
him, it would not be meet that that true Grace should be accepted of God as any
loveliness of his Person in the Sight of God: If it should be accepted as the
loveliness of the Person, that would be to accept the Person as in some Degree
lovely to God, but this cannot be consistent with his still remaining under
infinite Guilt, or infinite Unworthiness in God's Sight, which that Goodness
has no worthiness to balance. While God beholds the Man as separate from
Christ, he must behold him as h^ is in himself; and so his Goodness cannot be
beheld by God, but as taken with his Guilt and Hatefulness, and as put in the
Scales with it; and being beheld so, his Goodness is nothing; because there is
a finite on the balance against an infinite, whose Proportion to it is
nothing: In such a Case, if the Man be looked on as he is in himself, the
excess of the Weight in one Scale above another, must be looked upon as the
quality of the Man: These Contraries being beheld together, one takes from
another, as one Number is subtracted from another; and the Man must be looked
upon in God's Sight according to the remainder: For here by the Supposition all
Acts of Grace of Favor, in not imputing the Guilt as it is, are excluded,
because that supposes a Degree of Pardon, and that supposes Justification,
which is contrary to what is supposed, viz. that the Sinner is not already
justified: and therefore Things must be taken strictly as they are; and so the
Man is still infinitely unworthy, and hateful in God's Sight, as he was before,
without diminution, because his Goodness bears no proportion to his
Unworthiness; and therefore when taken together is nothing.

Hence may be more clearly seen, the Force of that Expression in the Text, of
believing on him that justifies the ungodly; for though there is indeed
something in Man that is really and spiritually Good, that is prior to
Justification, yet there is nothing that is accepted as any godliness or
excellency of the Person, till after Justification. Goodness or Loveliness of
the Person in the Acceptance of God, in any Degree, is not to be considered as
prior but posterior in the Order and Method of God's proceeding in this Affair:
Though a Respect to the natural Suitableness between such a Qualification, and
such a State, does go before Justification, yet the Acceptance even of Faith as
any Goodness or Loveliness of the Believer, follows Justification: The Goodness
is on the forementioned Account justly looked upon as nothing, until the Man is
justified: And therefore the Man is respected in Justification, as in himself
altogether hateful. -- Thus the Nature of Things will not admit of a Man's
having an Interest given him in the Merits or Benefits of a Savior, on the
Account of any Thing as a Righteousness, or Virtue, or Excellency in him.

2 A divine Constitution that is antecedent to that which establishes
Justification by a Savior, (and indeed to any need of a Savior,) stands in
the Way of it, viz. that original Constitution or Law which Man was put under;
by which Constitution or Law the Sinner is condemned, because he is a violater
of that Law; and stands condemned, till he has actually an Interest in the
Savior, through whom he is set at liberty from that Condemnation. But to
suppose that God gives a Man an Interest in Christ in reward for his
Righteousness or Virtue, is inconsistent with his still remaining under
Condemnation 'till he has an Interest in Christ; because it supposes that the
Sinner's Virtue is accepted, and he accepted for it, before he has an Interest
in Christ; inasmuch as an Interest in Christ is given as a Reward of his
Virtue; but the Virtue must first be accepted, before it is rewarded, and the
Man must first be accepted for his Virtue, before he is rewarded for it, with
so great and Glorious a Reward; for the very notion of a Reward is some Good
bestowed in testimony of Respect to and Acceptance of Virtue in the Person
rewarded. It don't consist with the Honor of the Majesty of the King of Heaven
and Earth, to accept of any Thing from a condemned Malefactor, condemned by the
Justice of his own holy Law, (...) 'till that Condemnation be removed: and then
such acceptance is inconsistent with, and contradictory to such remaining
Condemnation; for the Law condemns him that violates it, to be totally rejected
and cast off by God; but how can a Man continue under this Condemnation, i. e.
continue utterly rejected and cast off of God, and yet his Righteousness or
Virtue be accepted, and he himself accepted on the Account of it, so as to have
so glorious Reward as an Interest in Christ bestowed as a testimony of that
Acceptance?

I know that the Answer that will be ready for this is, that we now are not
subject to that Constitution that Mankind were at first put under; but that God
in Mercy to Mankind has abolished that rigorous Constitution or Law that they
were under originally, and has put us under a new Law, and introduced a more
mild Constitution; And that the Constitution or Law it self not remaining,
there is no need of supposing that the Condemnation of it remains, to stand in
the Way of the Acceptance of our Virtue. And indeed there is no other way of
avoiding this Difficulty; the Condemnation of the Law must stand in force
against a Man 'till he is actually interested in the Savior, that has
satisfied and answered the Law, effectually to prevent any Acceptance of his
Virtue, before, or in order to such an Interest, unless the Law or Constitution
it self be abolished. But the Scheme of those modern Divines by whom this is
maintained seems to contain a great deal of Absurdity and Self-Contradiction:
they hold that the old Law given to Adam, which requires perfect Obedience is
entirely repealed, and that instead of it we are put under a new Law, which
requires no more than imperfect, sincere Obedience, in compliance with our
poor, infirm, impotent Circumstances since the Fall, whereby we are unable to
perform that perfect Obedience that was required by the first Law: for they
strenuously maintain that it would be unjust in God to require any Thing of us
that is beyond our present Power and Ability to perform; and yet they hold that
Christ died to satisfy for the imperfections of our Obedience, that so our
imperfect Obedience might be accepted instead of perfect -- Now how can these
Things hang together. -- I would ask what Law these imperfections of our
Obedience are a breach of? if they are a breach of no Law, then they ben't
Sins; and if they ben't Sins, what need of Christ's dying to satisfy for them?
but if they are Sins, and so the breach of some Law, what Law is it? they cannot
be a breach of their new Law, for that requires no other than imperfect
Obedience, or Obedience with imperfections; and they cannot be a breach of the
old Law, for that they say is entirely abolished, and we never were under it;
and we cannot break a Law that we never were under. -- They say it would not be
just in God to exact of us perfect Obedience, because it would not be just in
God to require more of us than we can perform in our present State, and to
punish us for sailing of it; and therefore by their own Scheme the
imperfections of our Obedience don't deserve to be punished; What need
therefore of Christ's dying to satisfy for them? What need of Christ's
Suffering to satisfy for that which is no Fault, and in its own Nature deserves
no Suffering? What need of Christ's dying to purchase that our imperfect
Obedience should be accepted, when according to their Scheme it would be unjust
in it self that any other Obedience than imperfect should be required? What
need of Christ's dying to make way for God's accepting such an Obedience, as it
would in itself be unjust in him not to accept? Is there any need of Christ's
dying to persuade God not to do unjustly? -- If it be said that Christ died to
satisfy that Law for us, that so we might not be under that Law, but might be
delivered from it, that so there might be room for us to be under a more mild
Law; still I would inquire what need of Christ's dying that we might not be
under a Law, that (according to their Scheme) it would in it self be unjust
that we should be under, because in our present State we are not able to keep
it? What need of Christ's dying that we might not be under a Law, that it would
be unjust that we should be under, whether Christ died or no?

Thus far I have argued principally from Reason, and the Nature of Things: I
proceed now to the

Second Argument, which is, That this is a Doctrine that the holy Scriptures,
the Revelation that God has given us of his Mind and Will, by which alone we
can never come to know how those that have offended God can come to be accepted
of him, and justified in his Sight, is exceeding full in: Particularly the
Apostle Paul is abundant in teaching that we are justified by Faith alone
without the Works of the Law: There is no one Doctrine that he insists so much
upon, and is so particular in, and that he handles with so much distinctness,
explaining, and giving Reasons, and answering Objections.

Here it is not denied by any, that the Apostle does assert that we are
justified by Faith, without the Works of the Law, because the Words are
express; but only it is said that we take his Words wrong, and understand that
by 'em that never entered into his Heart, in that when he excludes the Works of
the Law, we understand him of the whole Law of God, or the Rule which he has
given to Mankind to walk by; whereas all that he intends is the ceremonial Law.

Some that oppose this Doctrine indeed say, that the Apostle sometimes means
that it is by Faith, i. e. an hearty embracing the Gospel in its first Act,
only, or without any preceding holy Life, that Persons are admitted into a
justified State; but, say they, it is by a persevering Obedience that they are
continued in a justified State, and it is by this that they are finally
justified. But this is the same Thing as to say that a Man on his first
embracing the Gospel is conditionally justified and pardoned. -- To pardon Sin,
is to free the Sinner from the Punishment of it, or from that eternal Misery
that is due to it; And therefore if a Person is pardoned, or freed from this
Misery, on his first embracing the Gospel, and yet not finally freed, but his
actual freedom still depends on some Condition yet to be performed, it is
inconceivable how he can be pardoned otherwise than conditionally: that is he
is not properly actually pardoned, and freed from Punishment, but only he has
God's Promise that he shall be pardoned on future Conditions; God promises him
that now, if he perseveres in Obedience, he shall be finally pardoned, or
actually freed from Hell; which is to make just nothing at all of the Apostle's
great Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone: such a conditional Pardon is no
Pardon or Justification at all, any more than all Mankind have, whether they
embrace the Gospel or no; for they all have a promise of final Justification on
Conditions of future sincere Obedience, as much as he that embraces the Gospel.
-- But not to dispute about this, we will suppose that there may be something
or other at the Sinner's first embracing the Gospel, that may properly be
called Justification or Pardon, and yet that final Justification, or real
freedom from the Punishment of Sin, is still suspended on Conditions hitherto
unfulfill'd; yet they that hold that Sinners are thus justified on embracing
the Gospel, they suppose that they are justified by this, no otherwise than as
this is a leading act of Obedience, or at least as Virtue and moral Goodness in
them, and therefore would be excluded by the Apostle as much as any other
Virtue or Obedience; if it be allowed that he means the moral Law, when he
excludes Works of the Law. And therefore if that Point be yielded that the
Apostle means the moral, and not only the ceremonial Law, their whole Scheme
falls to the Ground.

And because the issue of the whole Argument from those Texts in St. Paul's
Epistles depends on the determination of this Point, I would be particular in
the discussion of it.

Some of our Opponents in this Doctrine of Justification, when they deny that
by the Law, the Apostle means the moral Law, or the whole Rule of Life which
God has given to Mankind, seem to choose to express themselves thus, that the
Apostle only intends the Mosaic Dispensation: But this comes to just the same
Thing as if they said that the Apostle only means to ^^^lude the Works of the
Ceremonial Law; for when they say that it is intended only that we ben't
justified by the Works of the Mosaic Dispensation, if they mean any Thing by
it, it must be that we ben't justified by attending, and observing what is
Mosaic in that Dispensation, or by what was peculiar to it, and wherein it
differed from the Christian Dispensation; which is the same as that which is
ceremonial and positive, and not moral, in that Administration --. So that this
is what I have to disprove, viz. That the Apostle when he speaks of Works of
the Law in this Affair, means only Works of the Ceremonial Law, or those
Observances that were peculiar to the Mosaic Administration.

And here it must be noted, that no Body controverts it with them, whether the
Works of the Ceremonial Law ben't included or whether the Apostle don't
particularly argue against Justification by Circumcision, and other ceremonial
Observances; but all that is in Question is, whether when he denies
Justification by Works of the Law, he is to be understood only of the
Ceremonial Law, or whether the moral Law ben't also implied and intended; And
therefore those Arguments that are brought to prove that the Apostle meant the
Ceremonial Law are nothing to the Purpose, unless they prove more than that,
viz. that the Apostle meant those only.

What is much insisted on is, that it was the judaising Christians being so
fond of Circumcision, and other Ceremonies of the Law, and depending so much on
them, which was the very Occasion of the Apostles writing as he does against
Justification by the Works of the Law. But supposing it were so, that their
trusting in Works of the Ceremonial Law, were the sole Occasion of the
Apostle's writing; (which yet there is no reason to allow, as may appear
afterward;) if their trusting in a particular Work, as a Work of Righteousness
was all that gave occasion to the Apostle to write, how does it follow that
therefore the Apostle did not upon that Occasion write against trusting in all
Works of Righteousness whatsoever? Where is the absurdity of supposing that the
Apostle might take occasion from his observing some to trust in a certain Work
as a Work of Righteousness. ^o write to them against Persons trusting in any
Work^ of Righteousness at all, and that it was a very proper Occasion too? yea
it would have been anavoidable for the Apostle to have argued against trusting
in a particular Work in that quality of a Work of Righteousness, which quality
was general, but he must there in argue against trusting in Works of
Righteousness in general Supposing it had been some other particular sort of
Works that was the occasion of the Apostle's writing, as for instance, Works of
Charity, and the Apostle should hence take occasion to write to them not to
trust in their Works, could the Apostle by that be understood of no other Works
besides Works of Charity? Would it have been absurd to understand him as
writing against trusting in any Work at all, because it was their trusting to a
particular Work that gave occasion to his writing?

Another Thing that is alleged as an Evidence that the Apostle means the
ceremonial Law, when he says we can not be justified by the Works of the Law,
is that he uses that Argument to prove it, viz. that this Law that he speaks of
was given so long after the Covenant with Abraham, in Gal 3* 17. And this I say
that the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law that was
four hundred and thirty years after cannot disannul. But say they, it was only
the Mosaic Administration, and not the Covenant of Works that was given so long
after. -- But the Apostle's Argument seems manifestly to be mistaken by them.
The Apostle don't speak of a Law that began first to have being four hundred
and thirty Years after; if he did, there would be some force in their
Objection; But he has respect to a certain solemn Transaction, well known among
the Jews, by the Phrase of the giving of the Law, which was that great
Transaction at Mount Sinai, that we have Account of in the 19, and 20 Chapters
of Exodus, consisting especially in God's giving the ten Commandments, which is
the moral Law, with that terrible Voice, which Law he afterward gave in Tables
of Stone. This Transaction the Jews in the Apostles Time misinterpreted, they
looked upon it as God's establishing that Law as a Rule of Justification. This
conceit of theirs the Apostle brings this invincible Argument against, viz.
That God would never go about to disannul his Covenant with Abraham, which was
plainly a Covenant of Grace, by a Transaction with his Posterity, that was so
long after it, and was plainly built upon it: He would not overthrow a Covenant
of Grace that he had long before established with Abraham, for him, and his
Seed, (which is often mentioned as the Ground of God's making them his People,)
by now establishing a Covenant of Works with them at Mount Sinai, as the Jews
and judaizing Christians supposed.

But that the Apostle don't mean only Works of the ceremonial Law, when he
excludes Works of the Law in Justification, but also of the moral Law, and all
Works of Obedience, Virtue, and Righteousness whatsoever, may appear by the
following Things.

1. The Apostle don't only say, that we are not justified by the Works of the
Law, but that we are not justified by Works, using a general Term; as in our
Text it is said, unto him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies, etc. and in the 6. v. God imputes righteousness without Works, And
Chap 11. 6. "And if by Grace, then it is no more of Works, otherwise Grace is
no more Grace: But if it be of Works, then it is no more Grace; otherwise Grace
is no more Grace. St Ephesians. 2 8, 9 For by Grace ye are saved, through Faith, --
not of Works. By which, there is no Reason in the World to understand the
Apostle of any other than Works in general, as correlates of a Reward, or good
Works, or Works of Virtue and Righteousness. When the Apostle says we are
justified or saved not by Works, without any such Term annexed, as the Law, or
any other Addition to limit the Expression, what Warrant have any to confine it
to Works of a particular Law, or Institution, excluding others? Are not
Observances of other Divine Laws Works, as well as of that? It seems to be
allowed by the Divines in the Arminian Scheme, in their Interpretation of
several of those Texts where the Apostle only mentions Works, without any
Addition, that he means our own good Works in general; but then they say, he
only means to exclude any proper merit in those Works. But to say the Apostle
means one Thing when he says we ben't justified by Works, another when he says
we ben't justified by the Works of the Law, when we find the Expressions mixed.
and used in the same Discourse, and when the Apostle is evidently upon the same
Argument, is very unreasonable, it is to dodge, and fly from Scripture, rather
than to open and yield our selves to it is teachings.

2. In the third Chapter of Romans, our having been guilty of Breaches of the
moral Law, is an Argument that the Apostle uses why we cannot be justified by
the Works of the Law; Beginning with the 9th v There he proves out of the Old
Testament, that all are under Sin; There is none righteous, no not one^. Their
Throat is an open Sepulcher: With their Tongues they have used deceit: Their
Mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; and their Feet swift to shed Blood.
And so he* goes on mentioning only those Things that are Breaches of the moral
Law, and then when he has done, his Conclusion is, in the 19th, and 20th ver.
Now we know that whatsoever Things the Law says, it says to them that are
under the Law, that every Mouth may be stopped, and all the World may become
guilty before God. Therefore by the Deeds of the Law, shall no Flesh be
justified in his Sight. This is most evidently his Argument, because all had
sinned, (as it was said in the 9th ver.) and been guilty of those Breaches of
the moral Law, that he had mentioned, (and it is repeated over again, afterward
ver. 23.) For all have sinned and come short of the Glory of God. Therefore
none at all can be justified by the Deeds of the Law: Now if the Apostle meant
only that we are not justified by the Deeds of the ceremonial Law, what kind of
arguing would that be, Their Mouth is full of^ cursing and bitterness, their
Feet are swift to shed Blood, therefore, They cannot be justified by the Deeds
of the Mosaic Administration* They are guilty of the Breaches of the moral Law,
and therefore they cannot be justified by the Deeds of the ceremonial Law?
Doubtless the Apostle's Argument is, that the very same Law that they have
broken and sinned against, can never justify 'em as Observers of it, because
every Law don't justify, but necessarily condemns it is Violaters: And therefore
our Breaches of the moral Law, argue no more, than that we cannot be justified
by that Law that we have broken.

And it may be noted, that the Apostle's Argument here is the same that I have
already used. viz. That as we are in our selves, and out of Christ, we (...)
under the Condemnation of that original Law, or Constitution that God
established with Mankind; and therefore it is ^o Way fit that any Thing that we
do, any Virtue or Obedience of ours, should be accepted (...) accepted on the
Account of it.

(...) Apostle, in all the preceding part of this Epistle, wherever he has the
Phrase, the Law, evidently intends the moral Law principally: As in the 12th
ver. of the foregoing Chap. For as many as have sinned without Law, shall also
perish without Law. It Is evidently the written moral Law, the Apostle means, by
the next ver. but one. For when the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by
Nature the Things contained in the Law, -- That is, the moral Law that the
Gentiles have by Nature: And so the next ver. Which show the Work of the Law
written in their Hearts. It Is the moral Law, and not the Ceremonial that is
written in the Hearts of those that are destitute of Divine Revelation. And so
in the 18th ver. Thou approvest the Things that are more Excellent, being
instructed out of the Law. It Is the Moral Law, that shows us the Nature of
Things, and teaches us what is Excellent. 20th, ver. Thou have a form of
Knowledge, and truth in the Law. It Is the Moral Law, as is evident by what
follows, ver. 22. 23. Thou that says a Man should not commit Adultery, do
thou commit Adultery? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?
Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through breaking the Law dishonourest
thou God. Adultery, Idolatry and Sacrilege, surely are the breaking of the
moral, and not the ceremonial Law. So in the 27th ver. And shall not
uncircumcision which is by Nature, if it fulfill the Law, judge thee, who by the
letter and circumcision do transgress the Law. i e. The Gentiles, that you
despise because uncircumcised, if they live moral and holy Lives, in Obedience
to the Moral Law, shall condemn you though circumcised. And so there is not one
Place in all the preceding part of the Epistle, where the Apostle speaks of
the Law, but that he most apparently intends principally the moral Law: And ye^
when the Apostle, in continuance of the same Discourse, comes to tell us that
we cannot be justified by the Works of the Law, then they will needs have it,
that he means only the ceremonial Law; yea though all this Discourse about the
moral Law, showing how the Jews (...) well as Gentiles have violated it, is
evidently (...), and introductory to that Doctrine, Chap 3 20. That no Flesh,
that is none of Mankind, neither Jews nor Gentiles, can be justified by the
Works of the Law.

4. It Is evident that when the Apostle says, we cannot be justified by the Works
of the Law, he means the Moral as well as ceremonial Law, by his giving this
Reason for it, that by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin, as Rom 3. 20. By the
Deeds of the Law shall no Flesh be justified in his Sight, for by the Law is
the knowledge of Sin. Now that Law by which we come to the knowledge of Sin, is
the moral Law chiefly and primarily. -- If this Argument of the Apostle be
good, that we cannot be justified by the Deeds of the Law, because it is by the
Law that we come to the knowledge of Sin, then it proves that we cannot be
justified by the Deeds of the Moral Law, nor by the Precepts of Christianity;
for by them is the Knowledge of Sin. If the Reason be good, then where the
Reason holds, the Truth holds. -- It Is a miserable Shift, and a violent Force
put upon the Words, to say that the meaning is, that by the Law of Circumcision
is the Knowledge of Sin, because Circumcision signifying the taking away of
Sin, puts Men in mind of Sin. The plain meaning of the Apostle is, that as the
Law most strictly forbids Sin, it tends to convince us of Sin, and bring our
own Consciences to condemn us, instead of justifying of us; that the Use of it
is to declare to us our own Guilt and Unworthiness, which is the reverse of
justifying and approving of us as virtuous or worthy. This is the Apostle's
meaning, if we will allow him to be his own expositor; for he himself in this
very Epistle explains to us how it is that by the Law we have the Knowledge of
Sin, and that it is by the Law's forbidding Sin Chap. 7. 7. I had (...) known
Sin, but by the Law, for I had not known Lust, except the Law had said, thou
shall not covet. There the Apostle determines two Things, First, That, ^he Way
in which, by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin, (...) by the Law's forbidding
Sin: And Secondly, which (...) more directly still to the Purpose; he
determines ^^at it is the Moral Law by which we come to the knowledge of Sin;
for says he, I had not known Lust except the Law had said, thou shall not
covet: Now it is the moral, and not the ceremonial Law, that says thou shall not
covet: Therefore when the Apostle argues that by the Deeds of the Law no Flesh
living shall be justified, because by the Law is the knowledge of Sin, his
Argument proves, (unless he was mistaken as to the force of his Argument,) that
we cannot be justified by the Deeds of the Moral Law.

5. It Is evident that the Apostle don't mean only the ceremonial Law, because
he gives this Reason why we have Righteousness, and a Title to the Privilege of
God's Children, not by the Law, but by Faith, that the Law works Wrath, Romans
4. 13, 14, 15, 16. For the promise that he should be the Heir of the World, was
not to Abraham, or to his Seed through the Law, but through the Righteousness
of Faith: For if they which are of the Law be Heirs, Faith is made void, and
the promise made of none effect: Because the Law works Wrath; for where no
Law is there is no Transgression. Therefore it is of Faith that it might be by
Grace. Now the way in which the Law works Wrath, by the Apostles own Account,
in the Reason he himself annexes, is by forbidding Sin, and aggravating the
Guilt of the Transgression; for, says he, where no Law is there is
Transgression: And so, Chap 7 13. That Sin by the Commandment might become
exceeding sinful. -- If therefore this Reason of the Apostle be good, it is
much stronger against Justification by the moral Law, than the ceremonial Law;
for it is by Transgressions of the moral Law chiefly that there comes Wrath; for
they are most strictly forbidden, and most terribly threatened.

6. It Is evident that when the Apostle says, we be^^ justified by the Works of
the Law, that he excludes all our own Virtue, Goodness, or Excellency, by that
Reason that he gives for it, viz. That boasting might be excluded. Romans 3. 26,
27, 28. To declare I say at this Time his Righteousness, that he might be just,
and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Where is boas^ing then? It is
excluded. By what Law? of Works Nay; but by the Law of Faith. Therefore, We
conclude that a Man is justified by Faith without the Deeds of the Law, Ephesians. 2.
8. 9. For by Grace are we saved through Faith; and that not of your selves, it
is the Gift of God: Not of Works left any Man should boast. -- Now what are Men
wont to boast of, but what they esteem their own Goodness, or Excellency? -- If
we are not justified by Works of the ceremonial Law, yet how does that exclude
boasting, as long as we are justified by our own Excellency, or Virtue and
Goodness of our own, or Works of Righteousness which we have done?

But it is said that boasting is excluded, as Circumcision was excluded, which
was what the Jews especially used to glory in, and value themselves upon, above
other Nations.

To this I answer, that the Jews were not only used to boast of Circumcision,
but were notorious for boasting of their moral Righteousness. The Jews of those
Days were generally Admirers, and followers of the Pharisees, who were full of
their Boasts of their moral Righteousness, as we may see by the Example of the
Pharisee mentioned in the 18th of Luke, which Christ mentions as describing the
general Temper of that Sect; Lord, says he, I thank thee, that I am not as
other Men, an Extortioner nor Unjust, nor an Adulterer. The Works that he
boasts of were chiefly moral Works: He depended on the Works of the Law for
Justification; and therefore Christ tells us that the Publican, that renounced
all his own Righteousness, went down to his House justified rather than he. And
elsewhere we read of the Pharisees praying in the corners of the Streets and
sounding a Trumpet before 'em when they did A^ms: But those Works which they so
vainly boasted of were moral Works* And not only so, but what the Apostle, in
this very Epistle, is condemning the Jews for* is their boasting of the moral
Law. Chap. 2. 22, 23. Thou that says a Man should not commit Adultery do
thou commit Adultery! Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege.
Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through breaking the Law dishonourest
thou God The Law here mentioned that they made their boast of, was that of
which Adultery, Idolatry, and Sacrilege, were the breaches, which is the moral
Law: So that this is the boasting which the Apostle condemns them for; and
therefore if they were justified by the Works of this Law, then how comes he to
say that their boasting is excluded? And besides, when they boasted of the
Rites of the ceremonial Law, it was under a Notion of it is being a Part of
their own Goodness or Excellency, or what made them holier and more lovely in
the sight of God than other People; and if they were not justified by this Part
of their own supposed Goodness, or Holiness, yet if they were by another, how
did that exclude boasting? How was their boasting excluded, unless all Goodness
or Excellency of their own was excluded?

7. The Reason given by the Apostle why we can be justified only by Faith, and
not by the Works of the Law, in the 3d Chap. of Gal. viz. That they that are
under the Law are under the Curse, makes it evident that he don't mean only the
ceremonial Law. In that Chapter the Apostle had particularly insisted upon it
that Abraham was justified by Faith, and that it is by Faith only, and not by
the Works of the Law, that we can be justified and become the Children of
Abraham, and be made Partakers of the Blessing of Abraham: And he gives this
Reason for it, in the 10th v. For as many as are of the Works of the Law are
under the Curse; for it is written cursed is every one that continues not in
all Things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them. It Is manifest
that these Words cited from Deuteronomy, are spoken not only with Regard to the
ceremonial Law, but the whole Law of God to Mankind, and chiefly the moral Law;
and that all Mankind are therefore as they are in themselves under that Curse,
not only while the ceremonial Law lasted, but now since that has ceased: And
therefore all that are justified, are redeemed from that curse, by Christ's
bearing it for them; as there in the 13. ver. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, being made a curse for us; For it is written, cursed is every
one that hangs on a Tree. -- Now therefore, either it is being said so, that
he is cursed that continues not in all Things which are written in the Book of
the Law to do them, is a good Reason why we cannot be justified by the Works of
that Law, of which it is so said, or it is not; if it be, then it is a good
Reason why we cannot be justified by the Works of the moral Law, and of the
whole Rule which God has given to Mankind to walk by; for the Words are spoken
of the moral as well as ceremonial Law, and reach every Command, or Precept
which God has given to Mankind, and chiefly the moral Precepts, which are most
strictly enjoined, and the Violations of which in both New Testament and Old,
and in the Books of Moses themselves, are threatened with the most dreadful
Curse.

8. The Apostle does in like Manner argue against our being justified by our
own Righteousness, as he does against being justified by the Works of the Law;
and evidently uses the Expressions of our own Righteousness, and Works of the
Law, promiscuously, and as signifying the same Thing It is particularly evident
by Romans 10* 3. For they being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and going about
to establish their own Righteousness have not submitted themselves to the
Righteousness of God* Here it is plain that the same Thing is asserted as in the
two last Verses but one of the foregoing Chap. But Israel which followed after
the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to the Law of Righteousness:
Wherefore: Because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of
the Law. And it is very unreasonable, upon several Accounts, to suppose that the
Apostle by their own Righteousness, intends only their ceremonial
Righteousness. For when the Apostle warns us against trusting in our own
Righteousness for Justification, doubtless it is fair to interpret the
Expression in an Agreement with other Scriptures where we are warned not to
think that it is for the sake of our own Righteousness, that we obtain God's
Favor and Blessing; as particularly that in Deuteronomy. 9* 4, 5, 6* Speak not thou
in thine Heart, after that the Lord thy God has cast them out from before
thee, saying, for my Righteousness the Lord has brought me in, to possess this
Land; but for the wickedness of these Nations the Lord does drive them out from
before thee: Not for thy Righteousness, or for the uprightness of thy Heart,
do thou go to possess their Land; but for the wickedness of these Nations the
Lord thy God does drive them out from before thee, and that he may perform the
word which he swear unto thy Fathers, Abraham Isaac and Jacob. Understand
therefore that the Lord thy God gives thee not this good Land to possess it,
for thy Righteousness, for thou art a stiff necked People. None will pretend
that hear the Expression thy Righteousness, signifies only a ceremonial
Righteousness, but all Virtue or Goodness of their own; yea and the inward
Goodness of the Heart as well as the outward Goodness of Life; which appears by
the beginning of the 5 ver. Not for thy Righteousness, or for the uprightness
of thy Heart, -- and also by the Antithesis in the 6. v Not for thy
Righteousness, for thou art a stiffnecked People. Their stiffneckedness was
their moral Wickedness, Obstinacy, and perverseness of Heart: By Righteousness,
therefore, on the contrary, is meant their moral Virtue, and rectitude of
Heart, and Life. -- This is what I would argue from hence, That the Expression
of our own Righteousness, when used in Scripture, with Relation to the favor
of God, and when we are warned against looking upon it as that by which that
Favor, or the Fruits of it are obtained, don't signify only a ceremonial
Righteousness, but all manner of Goodness of our own.

The Jews also in the New Testament are condemned for trusting in their own
Righteousness in this Sense; Luke 18. 9 etc. -- And he spoke this Parable unto
certain that trusted in themselves that they were Righteous. -- This intends
chiefly a moral Righteousness, as appears by the Parable it self, in which we
have an Account of the Prayer of the Pharis^e, wherein the Things that he
mentions, as what he trusts in, are chiefly moral Qualifications and
Performances, viz. That he was not an Extortioner, unjust, nor an Adulterer,
etc. --

But we need not go to the Writings of other Penmen of the Scripture; but if we
will allow the Apostle Paul to be his own Interpreter, he when he speaks of our
own Righteousness as that which we are not justified or saved by, don't mean
only a ceremonial Righteousness, nor does he only intend a Way of Religion, and
serving God* of our own choosing and fixing on, without divine Warrant or
Prescription; but by our own Righteousness he means the same as a Righteousness
of our own doing, whether it be a Service or Righteousness of God's
prescribing, or our own unwarranted performing: Let it be an Obedience to the
ceremonial Law, or a Gospel Obedience, or what it will, if it be a
Righteousness of our own doing, it is excluded by the Apostle in this Affair,
as is evident by Titus 3, 5. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have done.
-- But I would more particularly insist on this Text; and therefore this may be
the*

9. Argument, That the Apostle when he denies Justification by Works, and by
Works of the Law, and by our own Righteousness, don't only mean Works of the
ceremonial Law viz. What is said by the Apostle in Tit 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7* For we
our selves also were sometimes foolish disobedient, deceived, serving diverse
Lusts and Pleasures, living in Malice, and Envy, hateful, and hating one
another. But after that the Kindness and Love of God our Savior, toward Man,
appeared, not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to
his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost; which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ Our Savior; that
being justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs, according to the Hope of
eternal Life. Works of Righteousness that we have done, are here excluded, as
what we are neither saved, nor justified by. The Apostle expressly says, we are
not saved by 'em; and it is evident that when he says this, he has respect to
the Affair of Justification, and that he means, we are not saved by 'em in not
being justified by 'em, by the next verse but one, which is part of the same
Sentence, That being justified by his Grace we should be made Heirs according
to the hope of eternal Life.

It Is several Ways manifest that the Apostle in this Text, by Works of
Righteousness which we have done, don't mean only Works of the ceremonial Law.
It appears by the 3d v. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, living in Malice and
Envy, hateful, and hating one another. These are Breaches of the moral Law,
that the Apostle observes they lived in before they were justified: and it is
most plain that it is this that gives Occasion to the Apostle to observe as he
does in the 5 ver. That it was not by Works of Righteousness which they had
done, that they were saved or justified.

But we need not go to the Context, it is most apparent from the Words
themselves, that the Apostle don't mean only Works of the ceremonial Law: If he
had only said, it is not by our own Works of Righteousness; what could we
understand by Works of Righteousness, but only Righteous Works, or which is the
same Thing, good Works? And to say that it is by our own righteous Works, that
we are justified, though not by one particular kind of righteous Works, would
certainly be a Contradiction to such an Assertion. But the Words are rendered
yet more strong, plain, and determined in their Sense, by those additional
Words, which we have done; which shows that the Apostle intends to exclude all
our own righteous or virtuous Works universally. If it should be asserted
concerning any Commodity, Treasure, or precious Jewel, that it could not be
procured by Money, and not only so, but to make the Assertion the more strong,
it should be asserted with additional Words, that it could not be procured by
Money that Men possess; how unreasonable would it be after all to say, that all
that was meant was, that it could not be procured with Brass Money?

And what renders the interpreting this Text of Works of the ceremonial Law,
yet more unreasonable is, that these Works were indeed no Works of
Righteousness at all, but were only falsely supposed to be so by the Jews; and
that our Opponents in this Doctrine suppose is the very reason why we ben't
justified by 'em, because they are not Works of Righteousness, or because (the
ceremonial Law being now abrogated) there is no Obedience in 'em: But how
absurd is it to (...) that the Apostle when he says we are not justified by
Works of Righteousness that we have done, meant only Works of the ceremonial
Law, and that for that very Reason because they are not Works of Righteousness.
To illustrate this by the forementioned Comparison; If it should be asserted
that such a Thing could not be procured by Money that Men possess, how
ridiculous would it be to say that the meaning only was, that it could not be
procured by counterfeit Money, and that for that Reason, because it was not
Money. -- What Scripture will stand before Men, if they will take liberty to
manage Scripture thus? Or what one Text is there in the Bible that may not at
this rate be explained all away, and perverted to any Sense Men please.

But then further, if we should allow that the Apostle intends only to oppose
Justification by Works of the ceremonial Law in this Text, yet it is evident by
the Expression he uses that he means to oppose it under that Notion, or in that
quality, of their being Works of Righteousness of our own doing. But if the
Apostle argues against our being justified by Works of the ceremonial Law under
the Notion of their being of that Nature and Kind, viz. Works of our own doing;
then it will follow that the Apostle's Argument is strong against, not only
those, but all of that Nature and Kind, even all that are of our own doing

If there were no other Text in the Bible about Justification but this, this
would clearly and invincibly prove that we are not justified by any of our own
Goodness, Virtue, or Righteousness or for the Excellency or Righteousness of
any Thing that we have done in Religion; because it is here so fully and
strongly asserted: But this Text does abundantly confirm other Texts of the
Apostle, where he denies Justification by Works of the Law: There is no doubt
can be rationally made but that, when the Apostle here shows that God saves us
according to his Mercy, in that he don't save us by Works of Righteousness that
we have done, v. 5, And that so we are justified by Grace. v. 7. herein
opposing Salvation by Works, and Salvation by Grace, he means the same Works as
he does in other Places, where he in like manner opposes Works and Grace, the
same Works as in Rom 11. 6* And if by Grace then it is no more of Works;
otherwise Grace is no more Grace: But if it be of Works, then it is no more
Grace; otherwise Work is no more Work. And the same Works as in Romans 4. 4* Now
to him that works, is the reward not reckoned of Grace but of Debt. And the
same Works that are spoken of in the Context of the 24. v. of the foregoing
Chapter, which the Apostle there calls Works of the Law, being justified freely
by his Grace -- And of the 4 Chap. 16. v. Therefore it is of Faith, that it
might be by Grace. Where in the Context, the Righteousness of Faith, is opposed
to the Righteousness of the Law: For here God's saving us according to his
Mercy, and justifying us by Grace, is opposed to saving us by Works of
Righteousness that we have done, in the same manner as in those Places
justifying us by his Grace, is opposed to justifying us by Works of the Law

10. The Apostle could not mean only Works of the ceremonial Law, when he says
we are not justified by the Works of the Law, because it is asserted of the
Saints, under the Old Testament, as well as new If Men are justified by their
sincere Obedience, it will then follow that formerly, before the ceremonial Law
was abrogated, Men were justified by the Works of the ceremonial Law, as w^ll
as the moral. For if we are justified by our sincere Obedience then it alters
not the Case, whether the Commands be moral, or positive, provided they be
God's Commands, and our Obedience be Obedience to God: And so the Case must be
just the same under the Old Testament, with the Works of the moral Law, and
ceremonial, according to the measure of the Virtue of Obedience, there was in
either. It Is true their Obedience to the ceremonial Law would have nothing to
do in the Affair of Justification, unless it was sincere; and so neither would
the Works of the moral Law: Obedience to the moral Law would have been
concerned in the Affair of Justification, if sincere; and so would Obedience to
the ceremonial. If Obedience was the Thing, then Obedience to the ceremonial
Law, while that stood in Force, and Obedience to the moral Law, had just the
same ^ort of concern, according to the Proportion of Obedience that consists in
each. As now under the New Testament, if Obedience is what we are justified by,
that Obedience must doubtless comprehend Obedience to all God's Commands now in
Force, to the positive Precepts of Attendance on Baptism and the Lord's Supper,
as well as moral Precepts. If Obedience be the Thing, it is not because it is
Obedience to such a kind of Commands, but because it is Obedience. So that by
this Supposition, the Saints under the Old Testament were justified, at least
in Part, by their Obedience to the ceremonial Law.

But it is evident that the Saints under the old Testament were not justified in
any measure, by the Works of the ceremonial Law. This may be proved proceeding
on the Foot of our Adversaries own Interpretation of the Apostle's Phrase of
the Works of the Law; and supposing him to mean by it only the Works of the
ceremonial Law. To Instance in David, it is evident that he was not justified in
any wise, by the Works of the ceremonial law, by Romans 4* 6, 7, 8* Even as David
also described the blessedness of the Man, unto whom God imputes Righteousness
without Works, saying, blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven* and
whose Sins are covered; blessed is the Man to whom the Lord will not impute
Sin. It Is plain that the Apostle is here speaking of Justification, by the
preceding Verse, and by all the Context; and the Thing spoken of, viz.
forgiving Iniquities, and covering Sins, is what our Adversaries themselves
suppose to be Justification, and even the whole of Justification. This Dav^^
speaking of himself, says (by the Apostle's Interpretation,) that he had
without Works. For it is manifest that David in the Words here cited, from the
beginning of the 32d Psalm, has a special Respect to himself: He speaks of his
own Sins being forgiven and not imputed to him: as appears by the Words that
nextly follow, When I kept Silence, my Bones waxed old, through my roaring all
the Day long; for Day and Night thy Hand was heavy upon me, my moisture is
turned into the drought of Summer I acknowledged my Sin unto thee, and mine
Iniquity have I not hid: I said I will confess my Transgressions unto the Lord;
and thou forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin. Let us therefore understand the
Apostle which way we will, by Works, when he says, David describes the
blessedness of the Man to whom the Lord imputes Righteousness without Works,
whether of all manner of Works, or only Works of the ceremonial Law, yet it is
evident at least, that David was not justified by Works of the ceremonial Law.
Therefore here is the argument; if our own Obedience be that by which Men are
justified, then under the Old Testament, Men were justified partly by Obedience
to the ceremonial Law, (as has been proved;) but the Saints under the Old
Testament were not justified partly by the Works of the ceremonial Law;
therefore Men's own Obedience is not that by which they are justified.

11. Another Argument that the Apostle when he speaks of the two opposite Ways
of Justification, one by the Works of the Law, and the other by Faith, don't
mean only the Works of the ceremonial Law, may be taken from that place, Rom
10. 5, 6. For Moses describes the Righteousness which is of the Law, that the
Man which does those Things shall live by them; but the Righteousness which is
of Faith speaks on this wise, etc* Here two Things are evident,

First, That the Apostle here speaks of the same two opposite Ways of
Justification, one by the Righteousness which is of the Law, the other by
Faith, that he had treated of in the former Part of the Epistle; and therefore
it must be the same Law that is here spoken of: The same Law is here meant as
in the last Verses of the foregoing Chapter, where he says the Jews had not
attained to the Law of Righteousness: Wherefore, because they sought it not by
Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law. As is plain, because the Apostle
is still speaking of the same Thing, the Words are a Continuation of the same
Discourse, as may be seen at first Glance, by any one that looks on the Context.

Secondly, It Is manifest that Moses when he describes the Righteousness which
is of the Law, or the Way of Justification by the Law* in the Words here cited,
He that does those Things shall live in them, don't speak only, nor chiefly, of
the Works of the ceremonial Law; For none will pretend that God ever made such
a Covenant with Man, that he that kept the ceremonial Law should live in it, or
that there ever was a Time that it was chiefly by the Works of the ceremonial
Law, that Men lived and were justified. Yea, it is manifest by the forementioned
Instance of David, mentioned in the 4th of Romans that there never was a Time
wherein Men were justified in any Measure, by the Works of the ceremonial Law,
(...) has been just now shown. Moses therefore in those Words, which the
Apostle says, are a Description of the Righteousness which is of the Law, cannot
mean only the ceremonial Law. And therefore it follows that when the Apostle
speaks of Justification by the Works of the Law, as opposite to Justification
by Faith, he don't mean only the ceremonial Law, but also the Works of the
moral Law, which are the Things spoken of by Moses, when he says he that does
th^se Things shall live in them; and which are the Things (...) the Apostle in
this very Place is arguing that we cannot be justified by; as is evident by the
Context, the last Verses of the preceding Chapter, But Israel which followed
after the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to the Law of Righteousness:
Wherefore? Because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of
the Law, etc. And in the 3d v, of this Chap For they being ignorant of God's
Righteousness, and going about to establish their own Righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the Righteousness of God.

And further, how can the Apostle's Description that he here gives from Moses,
of this exploded Way of Justification by the Works of the Law, consist with the
Arminian Scheme of a Way of Justification by the Virtue of a sincere Obedience,
that still remains as the true and only Way of Justification, under the Gospel.
It Is most apparent that it is the design of the Apostle to give a Description of
both the legal rejected, and the evangelical valid Ways of Justification, in
that wherein they differ, or are distinguished the one from the other: But how
is that, that he that does those Things shall live in them, that wherein the
Way of Justification by the Works of the Law, differs, or is distinguished from
that in which Christians under the Gospel are justified, according to their
Scheme; for still, according to them, it may be said, in the same Manner, of
the Precepts of the Gospel, he that does these Things shall live in them: The
difference lies only in the Things to be done, but not at all, in that that the
doing of them is not the Condition of living in them, just in the one Case, as
in the other. The Words, He that does them shall live in them, will serve just
as well for a Description of the latter as the former. -- By the Apostle's
saying, the Righteousness of the Law is described thus, he that does these
Things shall live in them, but the Righteousness of Faith, faith thus, plainly
intimates that the Righteousness of Faith faith otherwise, and in an opposite
manner. -- But besides, if these Words cited from Moses, are actually said by
him of the moral Law as well as ceremonial, as it is most evident they are, it
renders it still more absurd to suppose them mentioned by the Apostle, as the
very Note of Distinction between Justification by a ceremonial Obedience, and a
moral sincere Obedience, as the Arminians must suppose.

Thus I have spoken to a second Argument, to prove that we are not justified by
any manner of Virtue or Goodness of our own, viz. That to suppose otherwise is
contrary to the Doctrine that is directly urged, and abundantly insisted on by
the Apostle Paul, in his Epistles.

I proceed now to a

Third Argument, viz That to suppose that we are justified by our own sincere
Obedience, or any of our own Virtue or Goodness, derogates from Gospel Grace.

That Scheme of Justification that manifestly takes from, or diminishes the
Grace of God, is undoubtedly to be rejected; for it is the declared Design of
God in the Gospel to exalt the Freedom and Riches of his Grace, in that Method
of Justification of Sinners, and Way of admitting them to his Favor, and the
blessed Fruits of it, which it declares. The Scripture teaches that the Way of
Justification that is appointed in the Gospel Covenant, is appointed, as it is,
for that end, that free Grace might be expressed, and glorified; Romans 4. 16*
Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by Grace. The exercising, and
magnifying the free Grace of God in the Gospel contrivance for the
Justification and Salvation of Sinners, is evidently the chief Design of it:
And this Freedom and Riches of the Grace of the Gospel is every where spoken of
in Scripture as the chief Glory of it. Therefore that Doctrine that derogates
from the free Grace of God in justifying Sinners, as it is most opposite to
God's Design, so it must be exceeding offensive to him.

Those that maintain that we are justified by our own sincere Obedience, do
pretend that their Scheme does not diminish the Grace of the Gospel; for they
say that the Grace of God is wonderfully manifested in appointing such a Way
and Method of Salvation, by sincere Obedience, in assisting us to perform such
an Obedience, and in accepting our imperfect Obedience, instead of perfect.

Let us therefore examine that Matter, whether their Scheme of a Man's being
justified by his own Virtue, and sincere Obedience, does derogate from the
Grace of God or no; or whether free Grace is not mo^^ exalted, in supposing as
we do, that we are justified without any (...) of Goodness of our own. In order
to this, I (...) down this self evident

(...) position, That whatsoever that be, by which the abundant Benevolence of
the giver is expressed, and Gratitude in the receiver is obliged, that
magnifies free Grace. This I suppose none will ever controvert or dispute.

And it is not much less evident, that it does both show a more abundant
Benevolence in the Giver when he shows kindness without Goodness or Excellency
in the Object, to move him to it; and that it enhanses the Obligation to
gratitude in the Receiver.

1. It shows a more abundan^^ goodness in the Giver, when he shows kindness
without any Excellency in our Persons or Actions that should move the giver to
Love and Beneficence. For it certainly shows the more abundant and overflowing
Goodness, or Disposition, to communicate Good, by how much the less Loveliness
or Excellency there is to entice Beneficence: The less there is in the receiver
to draw good Will and Kindness, it argues the more of the Principle of good
Will and Kindness in the Giver; For one that has but a little of a principle of
Love and Benevolence, may be drawn to do Good, and to show Kindness, when there
is a great deal to draw him, or when there is much Excellency and Loveliness in
the Object to move good Will; when he whose Goodness and Benevolence is more
abundant, will show Kindness, where there is less to draw it forth; for he
don't so much need to have it drawn from without, he has enough of the
principle within (...) move him, of it self. Where there is most of the
principle, there it is most sufficient for itself; and stands in least need of
something without to excite it: For certainly a more abundant Goodness, more
easily flows forth, with less to impell or draw it. Than where there is less;
or which is the same Thing, the more any one is disposed of himself, the less
he needs. From without himself, to put him upon it, or stir him up to it. And
therefore his Kindness and Goodness appears the more exceeding great, when it
is bestowed without any, Excellency or Loveliness at all in the receiver, or
when the receiver is respected in the Gift, as wholly without Excellency: And
much more still when the Benevolence of the Giver not only finds nothing in the
receiver to draw it, but a great deal of Hatefulness to repel it: The abundance
of Goodness is then manifested, not only in flowing forth without any Thing
extrinsick to put it forward, but in overcoming great Repulsion in the Object.
And then does Kindness and Love appear most Triumphant, and wonderfully Great,
when the receiver is respected in the Gift, as not only wholly without all
Excellency or Beauty to attract it, but altogether, yea infinitely vile and
hateful.

2. It Is apparent also that it enhanses the Obligation to Gratitude in the
Receiver. This is agreeable to the common Sense of Mankind, that the less
worthy or excellent the Object of Benevolence, or the receiver of Kindness is,
the more he is obliged, and the greater Gratitude is due. He therefore is most
of all obliged, that receives Kindness without any Goodness or Excellency in
himself, but with a total and universal Hatefulness. And as it is agreeable to
the common Sense of Mankind; so it is agreeable to the Word of God: How often
does God in the Scripture insist on this Argument with Men, to move them to
love him, and to acknowledge his Kindness? How much does he insist on this as
an Obligation to Gratitude, that they are so sinful and ^^deserving, and
illdeserving.

Therefore it certainly follows, that that Doctrine that teaches that God, when
he justifies a Man, and shows him that great Kindness, as to give him a Right
to eternal Life, don't do it for any Obedience, or any manner of Goodness of
his; but that Justification respects a Man as ungodly, and wholly without any
manner of Virtue, Beauty, or Excellency. (...) say, this Doctrine does
certainly more exalt the free Grace of God in Justification, and Man's
Obligation to Gratitude to him, for such a Favor, th^n the contrary Doctrine,
viz. That God in showing this Kindness to Man, respects him as sincerely
obedient and virtuous, and as having something in him that is truly Excellent,
and Lovely, and Acceptable in his Sight, and that this Goodness or Excellency
of Man is the very fundamental Condition of the bestowment of that Kindness on
him, or of the distinguishing him from others by that Benefit. But I hasten to a

Fourth Argument for the Truth of the Doctrine, That to suppose that a Man is
justified by his own Virtue or Obedience, derogates from the Honor of the
Mediator, and ascribes that to Man's Virtue, that belongs only to the
Righteousness of Christ: It puts Man in Christ stead, and makes him his own
Savior, in a respect, in which Christ only is his Savior: And so it is a
Doctrine contrary to the Nature, and Design of the Gospel which is to abase
Man, and to ascribe all the Glory of our Salvation to Christ the Redeemer. --
It is inconsistent with the Doctrine of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, which is a Gospel Doctrine.

Here I would 1. Explain what we mean by the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness. 2. Prove the Thing intended by it to be true. 3. Show that this
Doctrine is utterly inconsistent with the Doctrine of our being justified by
our own Virtue, or sincere Obedience.


First, I would explain what we mean by the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness. Sometimes the Expression is taken by our Divines in a larger
Sense, for the Imputation of all that Christ did and suffered for our
Redemption, whereby we are free from Guilt, and stand Righteous in the sight of
God; and so implies the Imputation both of Christ's Satisfaction, and
Obedience. But here I intend it in a stricter Sense, for the Imputation of that
Righteousness, or moral Goodness, that consists in the Obedience of Christ. And
by that Righteousness being imputed to us, is meant no other than this, that
that Righteousness of Christ is accepted for us, and admitted instead of that
perfect inherent Righteousness that ought to be in our selves: Christ's perfect
Obedience shall be reckoned to our Account, so that we shall have the Benefit
of it, as though we had performed it our selves: And so we suppose that a Title
to eternal Life is given us as the reward of this Righteousness. The Scripture
uses the Word impute in this Sense, viz. For reckoning any Thing belonging to
any Person, to another Person's Account: As Philem. v. 18. If he have wronged
thee, or owes thee ought, put that on mine Account. In the Original it is
(...) impute that to me. It Is a Word of the same Root with that which is
translated impute, Rom 4. 6. To whom God imputes Righteousness without Works.
And it is the very same Word that is used, Romans 5. 13. that is translated
impute; sin is not imputed, where there is no Law.

The opposers of this Doctrine suppose that there is an absurdity in it: They
say that to suppose that God imputes Christ's Obedience to us, is to suppose
that God is mistaken, and thinks that we performed that Obedience that Christ
performed. But why cannot that Righteousness be reckoned to our Account, and be
accepted for us, without any such absurdity? Why is there any more absurdity in
it, then in a Merchant's transferring Debt or Credit from one Man's Account to
another, when one Man pays a Price for another, so that it shall be accepted as
if that other had paid it? Why is there any more absurdity in supposing that
Christ's Obedience is imputed to us, than that his Satisfaction is imputed? If
Christ has suffered the Penalty of the Law for us, and in our stead, then it
will follow, that his suffering that Penalty is imputed to us, i. e. That it is
accepted for us, and in our stead, and is reckoned to our Account, as though we
had suffered it. But why may not his obeying the Law of God be as rationally
reckoned to our Account, as his suffering the Penalty of the Law? Why may not a
Price to bring into Debt, be as rationally transferred from one Person's
Account to another, as a Price to pay a Debt -- Having thus explained what we
mean by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, I proceed,

Secondly, To prove that the Righteousness of Christ is thus imputed.

1. There is the very same need of Christ's obeying the Law in our stead, in
order to the Reward, as of his suffering the Penalty of the Law, in our stead,
in order to our escaping the Penalty; and the same Reason why one should be
accepted on our Account, as the other* There is the same need of one as the
other, that the Law of God might be answered: One was as requisite to answer
the Law as the other, This is certain, that that was the Reason why there was
need that Christ suffer the Penalty for us, even that the Law might be
answered; for this the Scripture plainly teaches: This is given as the Reason
why Christ was made a curse for us, that the Law threatened a curse to us, Gal.
3, 10, 13. But the same Law that fixes the curse of God, as the consequent of
not continuing in all Things written i^ the Law to do them, (v. 10.) has as
much fixed doing those Things as an antecedent of living in them, (as v. 1. the
next Verse but one;) There is as much of a Co^nection established in one Case
as in the other. The^^ is therefore exactly the same need from the Law of
perfect Obedience being fulfilled, in order to our obtaining the Reward, as
there is of Death's being suffered, in order to our escaping the Punishment, or
the same Necessity by the Law, of perfect Obedience preceding Life, as there
is of Disobedience being succeeded by Death: The Law is without doubt, as much
of an established Rule in one Case as in the other.

Christ by suffering the Penalty, and so making Atonement for us, only removes
the Guilt of our Sins and so sets us in the same State that Adam was in the
first Moment of his Creation: And it is no more fit, that we should obtain
eternal Life, only on that Account, than that Adam should have the Reward of
eternal Life, or of a confirmed and unalterable State of Happiness, the first
Moment of his existence, without any Obedience at all. -- Adam was not to have
the Reward merely on the Account of his being innocent; if so, he would have
had it fixed upon him at once, as soon as ever he was created; for he was as
innocent then as he could be: But he was to have the Reward on the Account of
his Activeness in Obedience; not on the Account merely of his not having done
ill, but on the Account of his doing well.

So on the same Account we have not eternal Life merely on the Account of being
void of Guilt, (as Adam was at first existence,) which we have by the
Atonement of Christ; but on the Account of Christ's activeness in Obedience,
and doing well. Christ is our second ^edeal. Head, and is called the second
Adam. 1 Cor. 15, 22. because he acted the Part for us, that the first Adam
should have done: When he had undertaken for us to stand in our stead, he was
looked upon, and treated as though he were guilty with our Guilt; and by his
satisfying, or bearing the Penalty, he did as it were free himself from this
Guilt. But by this, the second Adam did only bring himself into the State that
the first Adam was in on the first Moment of his Existence, viz a State of mee^
freedom from Guilt; and hereby indeed was free from any Obligation to suffer
Punishment: But this being supposed, there was need of something further, even
a positive Obedience, in order to his obtaining, as our second Adam, the Reward
of eternal Life.

God saw meet to place Man first in a State of Trial, and not to give him a
Title to eternal Life, as soon as he had made him: because it was his will that
he should first give Honor to his Authority, by fully submitting to it, in
Will and Act, and perfectly obeying his Law. God insisted upon it that his holy
Majesty and Law should have their due Acknowledgement, and Honor from Man,
such as became the Relation he stood in to that Being that created him, before
he would bestow the Reward of confirmed and everlasting Happiness upon him; and
therefore God gave him a Law when he created him, that he might have
Opportunity, by giving due Honor to his Authority in obeying it, to obtain
this Happiness. It therefore became Christ, seeing that in assuming Man to
himself, he ^ought a Title to this eternal Happiness for him, after he had
broken the Law, that he himself should become subject to God's Authority, and
be in the Form of a Servant, that he might do that honor to God's Authority
for him, by his Obedience, which God at first required of Man, as the Condition
of his having a Title to that Reward. Christ came into the World to that end,
to render the Honor of God's Authority and Law, consistent with the Salvation
and eternal Life of Sinners; he came to save them, and yet withal to assert and
vindicate the Honor of the Lawgiver, and his holy Law. Now if the Sinner after
his Sin was satisfied for, had eternal Life bestowed upon him, without active
Righteousness, the Honor of his Law would not be sufficiently vindicated.
Supposing this were possible, that the Sinner himself could by suffering pay
the Debt, and afterward be in the same State that he was in before his
Probation, that is to say, negatively righteous, or merely without Guilt; if he
now at last should have eternal Life bestowed upon him, without performing that
Condition of Obedience, then God would recede from his Law, and would give the
promised Reward, and his Law never have Respect and Honor shown to it, in that
Way of being obeyed* But now Christ by subjecting himself (...) the Law and
obeying of it, has done great Honor to the Law, and to the Authority of God
who gave it: That so glorious a Person should become subject to the Law, and
fulfill it, has done much more to honor it, than if mere Man had obeyed it: It
was a Thing infinitely honorable to God that a Person of infinite Dignity was
not ashamed to call him his God, and to adore and obey him as such: This was
more to God's Honor than if any mere Creature, of any possible Degree of
Excellency and Dignity, had so done.

It Is absolutely necessary that in order to a Sinner's being justified, the
Righteousness of some other should be reckoned to his Account; for it is
declared that the Person justified is looked upon as (in himself) ungodly; but
God neither will nor can justify a Person without a Righteousness; for
Justification is manifestly a forensick Term, as the Word is used in Scripture,
and the Thing a judicial Thing, or the act of a Judge: So that if a Person
should be justified without a Righteousness, the Judgment would not be
according to Truth: The Sentence of Justification would be a false Sentence,
unless there be a Righteousness performed that is by the Judge properly looked
upon as his. To say, that God don't justify the Sinner without sincere, though an
imperfect Obedience, don't help the Case; for an imperfect Righteousness before
a Judge is no Righteousness. To accept of something that falls short of the
Rule, instead of something else that answers the Rule, is no judicial Act, or
act of a Judge, but a pure Act of sovereignty. An imperfect Righteousness is no
Righteousness, before a Judge; For Righteousness [as one observes] is a
relative Thing, and has always Relation to a Law: The formal Nature of
Righteousness, properly understood, lies in a conformity of Actions to that
which is the Rule and Measure of them. Therefore that only is Righteousness in
the Sight of a Judge that answers the Law That it is perfect Obedience, that is
what is called Righteousness in the New Testament, and that this Righteousness
or perfect Obedience is by God's fixed unalterable Rule, the Condition of
Justification, is from the plain Evidence of Truth confessed, by a certain
great Man, that no Body will think to be a likely Person to be blinded by a
Prejudice in favor of the Doctrine we are maintaining, and one who did not
receive this Doctrine, viz. Mr. Lock in his Reasonableness of Christianity as
delivered in the Scriptures, Vol. 2d of his* Works. p 4^4. To one that thus
unbias^ed reads the Scripture, what Adam fell from is visible (...) the State
of perfect Obedience, which is called Justice (...) the New Testament, though
the Word which in the Original signifies Justice, be translated Righteousness.
Ibid. p. (...) For Righteousness, or an exact Obedience to the Law* seem^ by
the Scripture to have a Claim of Right to eternal Life, Romans 4* 4. To him that
w^r^eth i. e. does the Works of the Law, i^ the Reward not reckoned of Grace
but of Debt. -- (...) other Side it seems the unalterable purpose of the (...)
Justice, that no unrighteous Person, no one that is Guilty of any Breach of the
Law, should be in Paradise; but that the Wages of Sin should be to every Man,
as it was to Adam, an exclusion of him out of that happy State of Immortality,
and being Death upon him. And this is so conformable to the eternal and
established Law of right and wrong, that it is spoke of too as it could not be
otherwise. -- Here then we have the standing and fixed Measures of Life and
Death; Immortality and Bliss belonging to the Righteous: These who have l^ved
in an exact Conformity to the Law of God are out of the Reach of Death: But an
exclusion from Paradise, and loss of Immortality, is the Portion of Sinners, of
all those who have any way broke that Law, and failed of a complete Obedience
to it, by the Guilt of any one Transgression. And thus Mankind by the Law are
put upon the Issues of Life or Death, as they are Righteous or Unrighteous,
Just or Unjust, i e exact Performers, or Transgressors of the Law. Again in
477. p. The Law of Works then in short, is that Law which requires perfect
Obedience, without any Remission or Abatement; so that by that Law a Man cannot
be just, or justified, without an exact Performance of every Tittle* Such a
perfect Obedience in the New Testament is termed (...), which we transla^^
Righteousness. In which last Passage it is also to be noted, that Mr. Lock by
the Law of Works don't understand the Ceremonial Law, but the Covenant of
Works: as he more fully expresses himself in the next Paragraph but one. Where
this Law of Works was to be found, the New Testament tells us, viz in the Law
delivered by Moses, John 1 17. The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth
came by Jesus Christ. Chap. ^. 19. Did not Moses give you the Law, says our
Savior, and yet none of you keep the Law* And this is the Law which he speaks
of, v. 28 (...) do and thou shall live. This is that which St. Paul so often
(...) the Law without any other Distinction Romans 2. 13. Not the Heavers of the
Law are just before God, but the (...) of the Law are justified. It Is needless
to quote any more Places, his Epistles are all full of it, especially this to
the (...).
The Law is the Judges Rule: If he pardons and hides what really is, and so
don't pass Sentence according to what Things are in themselves, he either don't
act the Part of a Judge, or else judges falsely. The very Notion of judging, is
to determine what is, and what is not, in any one's Case. The Judge's Work is
two fold, it is to determine first what is fact, and then whether what is in
fact be according to Rule, or according to the Law. If a Judge has no Rule or
Law established before Hand, by which he should proceed in judging, he has no
Foundation to go upon in judging, he has no Opportunity to be a Judge; nor is
it possible that he should do the Part of a Judge. To judge without a Law or
Rule by which to judge, is impossible, for the very Notion of judging is to
determine whether the Object of Judgment be according to Rule; and therefore
God has declared that when he acts as a Judge he will not justify the Wicked,
and cannot clear the Guilty; and by parity of Reason cannot justify without
Righteousness.

And the Scheme of the old Law's being abrogated, and a new Law introduced,
will not help at all in this difficulty; for an imperfect Righteousness cannot
answer the Law of God that we are under, whither that be an old one or a new
one; for every Law requires perfect Obedience to it self: Every Rule whatsoever
requires perfect conformity to it self; it is a Contradiction to suppose
otherwise; for to say, that there is a Law that don't require perfect Obedience
to it self, is to say that there is a Law that don't require all that it
requires. That Law that now forbids Sin, is certainly the Law that we are now
under, (let that be an old one, or a new one;) or else it is not sin: That
which is not forbidden, and is the Breach of no Law, is no Sin: But if we are
now forbidden to commit Sin, then it is by a Law that we are now under, for
surely we are neither under the forbiddings, nor commandings of a Law that we
are not under. Therefore if all Sin is now forbidden, then we are now under a
Law that requires perfect Obedience; and therefore nothing can be accepted as a
Righteousness in the sight of our Judge, but perfect Righteousness So that our
Judge cannot justify us, unless he sees a perfect Righteousness, some way
belonging, to us, (...) performed by our selves, or by another, and justly and
duly reckoned to our Account.

God does in the Sentence of Justification pronounce a Man perfectly Righteous,
or else he would need a further Justification after he is justified: His Sins
being removed by Christ's Atonement, is not sufficient for his Justification;
for justifying a Man, as has been already shown, is not merely pronouncing him
innocent or without Guilt, but standing Right, with regard to the Rule that he
is under, and righteous unto Life; But this according to the established Rule
of Nature, Reason, and Divine Appointment, is a positive perfect Righteousness.

As there is the same need that Christ's Obedience should he reckoned to our
Account, as that his Atonement should; so there is the same Reason why it
should. As if Adam had persevered, and finished his course of Obedience, we
should have received the Benefit of his Obedience, as much as now we have the
Mischief of his Disobedience; so in like Manner, there is Reason that we should
receive the Benefit of the second Adam's Obedience, as of his Atonement of our
Disobedience: Believers are represented in Scripture as being so in Christ, as
that they are legally one, or accepted as one, by the supreme Judge: Christ has
assumed our Nature, and has so assumed all, in that Nature, that belong to him,
into such an Union with himself, that he is become their Head, and has taken
them to be his Members: And therefore what Christ has done in our Nature,
whereby he did honor to the Law and Authority of God by his Acts, as well as
the Reparation to the honor of the Law, by his sufferings, is reckoned to the
believers Account; so as that the believer should be made happy, because it was
so well, and worthily done by his Head, as well as freed from being miserable,
because he has suffered for our ill and unworthy doing.

When Christ had once undertaken with God, to stand for us, and put himself
under our Law, by that Law he was obliged to suffer and by the same Law he was
obliged to obey: By the same Law, after he had taken Man's Guilt upon him* he
himself being our Surety, could not be acquitted, till he had suffered, nor
rewarded 'till he had obeyed: But he was not acquitted as a private Person, but
as our Head, and Believers are acquitted in his Acquittance; nor was he
accepted to a Reward for his Obedience as a private Person, but as our Head,
and we are accepted to a Reward in his Acceptance. The Scripture teaches us,
that when Christ was raised from the dead, he was justified; which
Justification as I have already shown, implies, both his Acquittance from our
Guilt, and ^is Acceptance to the Exaltation and Glory that was the Reward of
his Obedience: But believers, as soon as they Believe are admitted to partake
with Christ in this his Justification: Hence we are told that he was raised
again for our Justification, Rom 4. 25. Which is true, not only of that Part of
his Justification that consists in his Acquittance; but also his Acceptance to
his Reward: The Scripture teaches us that he is exalted, and gone to Heaven, to
take Possession of Glory in our Name, as our forerunner. Heb 6 20 We are as it
were both raised up together with Christ, and also made to set together with
Christ, in heavenly Places, and in Him. Ephesians 2. 6.

If it be objected here, that there is this Reason, why what Christ suffered
should be accepted on our Account rather than the Obedience he performed, that
he was obliged to Obedience for himself, but was not obliged to suffer but only
on our Account. To this I answer, that Christ was not obliged on his own
Account, to undertake to obey. Christ in his original Circumstances, was in no
subjection to the Father, being altogether equal with him: He was under no
Obligation to put himself in Man's stead, and under Man's Law, or to put
himself into any State of Subjection to God whatsoever. There was a Transaction
between the Father and the Son, that was antecedent to Christ's becoming Man*
and being made under the Law, wherein he undertook to put himself under the
Law, and both to obey and to suffer* in which Transaction these Things were
already vertually done in the sight of God; as is evident by this, that God
acted on the Ground of that Transaction, justifying and saving Sinners, as if
the Things undertaken had been actually performed long before they were
performed indeed* And therefore, without doubt, in order to the estimating the
value, and validity of what Christ did and suffered, we must look back to that
Transaction, wherein these Things were first undertaken, and vertually done in
the sight of God, and see what Capacity and Circumstances Christ acted in then,
and then we shall find that Christ was under no manner of Obligation, either to
obey the Law, or suffer the Penalty of it. After this he was equally under
Obligation to both; for henceforward he stood as our Surety or Representative:
And therefore this consequent Obligation, may be as much of an Objection
against the validity of his suffering the Penalty, as against his Obedience.
But if we look to that original Transaction between the Father and the Son,
wherein both th^se were undertaken and accepted, as vertually done in the sight
of the Father, we shall find Christ acting with Regard to both, as one
perfectly in his own Right, and under no manner of previous Obligation, to
hinder the validity of either.

2. To suppose that all that Christ does is only to make Atonement for us by
suffering, is to make him our Savior but in Part. It Is to rob him of half his
Glory as a Savior. For if so, all that he does is to deliver us from Hell, he
don't purchase Heaven for us. The adverse Scheme supposes that he purchases
Heaven for us, in this Sense, that he satisfies for the imperfections of our
Obedience, and so purchases that our sincere imperfect Obedience might be
accepted as the Condition of eternal Life; and so purchases an opportunity for
us to obtain Heaven by our own Obedience. But to purchase Heaven for us, only
in this Sense, is to purchase it in no Sense at all; for all of it comes to no
more than a Satisfaction for our Sins, or removing the Penalty by suffering in
our stead: For all the purchasing they speak of, that (...) imperfect Obedience
should be accepted, is only his satisfying for the sinful imperfection of our
Obedience, or (which is the same Thing) making Atonement for the Sin that our
Obedience is attended with. But that is not purchasing Heaven, merely to set us
at Liberty again, that we may go, and get Heaven by what we do our selves: all
that Christ does is only to pay a Debt for us; there is no positive Purchase of
any Good. -- We are taught in Scripture that Heaven is purchased for us, it is
called the purchased Possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. The Gospel proposes the eternal
Inheritance, not to be acquired, as the first Covenant did, but as already
acquired and purchased: But he that pays a Man's Debt for him, and so delivers
him from Slavery, cannot be said to purchase an Estate for him, merely because
he sets him at Liberty, so that henceforward he has an opportunity to get an
Estate by his own hand Labor. So that according to this Scheme, the Saints in
Heaven have no Reason to thank Christ for purchasing Heaven for 'em, or
redeeming them to God, and making them King's and Priest's, as we have an
Account that they do in Rev.5. 9

3. Justification by the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ, is a Doctrine
that the Scripture teaches in very full Terms. Romans 5. 18, 19. By the
Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all Men unto Justification of
Life. For as by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners, so by the
Obedience of one shall many be made Righteous. Here in one verse we are told
that we have Justification by Christ's Righteousness; and that there might be
no room to understand the Righteousness spoken of merely of Christ's Atonement,
by his suffering the Penalty, in the next verse, it is put in other Terms, and
asserted that it is by Christ's Obedience that we are made Righteous. It Is
scarce possible any Thing should be more full and determined: The Terms, taken
singly, are such as do fix their own meaning, and taken together, they fix the
meaning of each other: The Words show that we are justified by that
Righteousness of Christ, that consists in his Obedience, and that we are made
righteous or justified by that Obedience of his, that is his Righteousness, or
moral Goodness before God.

Here possibly it may be objected, that this Text means only that we are
justified by Christ's passive Obedience.

To this I answer, whether we call it active or passive, it alters not the Case
as to the present Argument, as long as it is evident by the Words that it is not
merely under the Notion of an Atonement for Disobedience, or a Satisfaction for
Unrighteousness, but under the Notion of a positive Obedience, and a
Righteousness, or moral Goodness, that it justifies us, or makes us righteous;
because both the Words Righteousness, and Obedience are used, and used too as
the Opposites to Sin and Disobedience, and an Offense. Therefore, as by the
Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation; even so by the
Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all Men to Justification of Life.
For as by one Man's Disobedience* many were made Sinners; so by the Obedience
of one, shall many be made Righteous. Now what can be meant by Righteousness,
when spoken of as the Opposite to Sin, or moral Evil, but only moral Goodness?
What is the Righteousness that is the Opposite of an Offense; but only the
Behavior that is well pleasing? and what can be meant by Obedience, when
spoken o^ as the Opposite of Disobedience, or going contrary to a Command, but
a positive obeying and an actual complying with the Command? So that there is
no Room for any invented Distinction of active and passive, ^o hurt the
Argument from this Scripture, as long as it is evident by it as any Thing can
be, that Believers are justified by the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ
under the Notion of his moral Goodness, and his pos^^ive obeying, and actual
complying with the Commands of God, and that Behavior of his, that, because of
it is Conformity to his Commands, was well-pleasing in his Sight. This is all
that ever any need to desire to have granted in this Dispute.

By this it appears, that if Christ's dying be here included in the Words,
Righteousness and Obedience, it is not merely as a Propitiation, or bearing a
Penalty of a broken Law in our stead, but as his voluntary submitting and
yielding himself to those Sufferings, was an Act of Obedience to the Father's
Commands, and so was a Part of his positive Righteousness, or moral Goodness.

Indeed all Obedience considered under the Notion of Obedience or
Righteousness, is something active, something that is done in active and
voluntary Compliance with a Command; whether that which we do in Obedience is
something easy, and something that may be done without Suffering, or whether it
be something hard and difficult; yet as it is Obedience, or Righteousness, or
moral Goodness* it must be considered as something voluntary and active. If any
one is commanded to go through Difficulties, and Sufferings, and he in
Compliance with this command voluntarily does it, he properly obeys in so
doing; and as he voluntarily does it, in Compliance with a Command, his
Obedience is as active as any whatsoever: It Is the same sort of Obedience, a
Thing of the very same Nature, as when a Man in Compliance with a Command, does
a piece of hard Service, or goes through hard Labor; and there is no Room to
distinguish between such Obedience and other that is more easy, and to make a
different sort of Obedience of it, as if it were a Thing of quite a different
Nature, by such opposite Terms as active and passive: all the Distinction that
can be pretended, is that which is between obeying an easy Command and a
difficult one: But is not the Obedience it self of the same Nature, because the
Commands to be obeyed, are some of 'em more difficult than others? Is there
from hence any Foundation to make too Species of Obedience, one active and the
other passive? -- There is no Appearance of any such Distinction ever entering
into the Hearts of any of the Penmen of Scripture.

It Is true that of late, when a Man refuses to obey the Precept of an human
Law, but patiently yields himself up to suffer the Penalty of the Law, it is
called passive Obedience; but this I suppose is only a modern Use of the Word
Obedience; besure it is a Sense of the Word, that the Scripture is a perfect
Stranger to; and it is improperly called Obedience, unless there be such a
Precept in the Law, that he shall yield himself patiently to suffer, to which
his so doing shall be an active voluntary Conformity. There may in some Sense
be said to be a Conformity to the Law in a Person's Suffering the Penalty of
the Law; but no other Conformity to the Law is properly called Obedience to it,
but an active voluntary Conformity to the Precepts of it: The Word obey is
often found in Scripture with Respect to the Law of God to Man, but never in
any other Sense.

It Is true that Christ's willingly undergoing those Sufferings which he
endured, is a great Part of that Obedience o^ Righteousness by which we are
justified. The Sufferings of Christ are respected in Scripture under a twofold
Consideration, either merely as his being substituted for us, or put into our
stead, in suffering the Penalty of the Law; and so his Sufferings are
considered as a Satisfaction and Propitiation for Sin: Or as he in Obedience to
a Law, or Command of the Father, voluntarily submitted himself to those
Sufferings, and actively yielded himself up to bear them; and so they are
considered as his Righteousness, and a Part of his active Obedience. Christ
underwent Death in Obedience to the Command of the Father, Psalm 40 6, 7, 8.
Sacrifice and Offering thou did not desire: mine Ears have thou bored. Burnt
Offering and Sin Offering thou have not required: Then said I, so I come; in
the Volume of the Book it is written of me: I delight to do thy Will, O my God,
and thy Law is within my Heart. John 10. 17, 18. I lay down my Life that I may
take it again: No Man takes it from me; but I lay it down of my self: I have
Power to lay it down, and I have Power to take it again: This Commandment have
I received of my Father* John 18. 11. The Cup which my Father has given me to
drink, shall I not drink it? And this is Part, and indeed the principal Part of
that active Obedience that we are justified by*

It can be no just Objection against this, that that Command of the Father to
Christ that he should lay down his Life, was no Part of the Law that we had
broken, and therefore that his obeying this Command could be no Part of that
Obedience that he performed for us, because we needed that he should obey no
other Law for us, but only that which we had broken or failed of obeying* For
although it must be the same legislative Authority, whose Honor is repaired by
Christ's Obedience, that we have injured by our Disobedience; yet there is no
need that the Law that Christ obeys should be precisely the same that Adam was
to have obeyed, in that Sense that there should be no positive Precepts
wanting, nor any added: There was wanting the Precept about the forbidden
Fruit, and there was added the ceremonial Law. The Thing required was perfect
Obedience: It is no Matter whether the positive Precepts were the same, if they
were equivalent. The positive Precepts that Christ was to obey, were much more
than equivalent to what was wanting, because infinitely more difficult,
particularly the Command that he had received to lay down his Life, which was
his principal Act of Obedience, and which above all others, is concerned in our
Justification. As that Act of Disobedience by which we fell, was Disobedience
to a positive Precept that Christ never was under, viz. that of abstaining from
the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, so that Act of Obedience by which
principally we are redeemed, is Obedience to a positive Precept that Adam never
was under, viz the Precept of laying down his Life* It was suitable that it
should be a positive Precept that should try both Adam's and Christ's
Obedience: Such Precepts are the greatest and most proper Trial of Obedience,
because in them, the mere Authority and Will of the Legislator is the sole
Ground of the Obligation, (and nothing in the Nature of the Things themselves;)
and therefore they are the greatest Trial of any Person's Respect to that
Authority and Will.

The Law that Christ was subject to, and obeyed, was in some Sense the same
that was given to Adam: There are innumerable particular Duties that are
required by the Law only conditionally; and in such Circumstances, are
comprehended in some great and general Rule of that Law. Thus for Instance,
there are innumerable Acts of Respect and Obedience to Men, which are required
by the Law of Nature, (which was a Law given to Adam,) which yet ben'^ required
absolutely, but upon many prerequisite Conditions; as that there be Men
standing in such Relations to us, and that they give forth such Commands, and
the like: So many Acts of Respect and Obedience to God, are included, in like
manner, in the moral Law conditionally, or such and such Things being supposed*
as Abraham's going about to sacrifice his Son, the Jews circumcising their
Children when eight Days old, and Adam's not eating the forbidden Fruit; they
are virtually comprehended in that great general Rule of the moral Law, that we
should obey God, and be subject to him in whatsoever he pleases to command us.
Certainly the moral Law does as much require us to obey God's positive
Commands, as it requires us to obey the positive Commands of our Parents* And
thus all that Adam, and all that Christ was commanded, even his observing the
Rites and Ceremonies of the jewish Worship, and his laying down his Life, was
virtually included in this same great Law. Thus Mr. Lock in his Reasonableness
of Christianity, as delivered in the Scriptures, Vol. 2d. of his Work, p 478.
Nay whatever God requires any where to be done. without making any Allowance
for Faith, that is a Part of the Law of Works. So that forbidding Adam to eat
of the Tree of Knowledge, was Part of the Law of Works: Only we must take notice
here, that some of God's positive Commands being for peculiar Ends, and su^ed
to particular Circumstances of Times, Places and Persons, have a limited, and
only temporary Obligation, by Virtue of God's positive Injunction: Such as was
that Part of Moses's Law* which concerned the outward Worship, or ^olitical
Constitution of the Jews, and is called the ceremonial and judaical Law. Again,
p 4. 9. Thus then, as to the Law in short, the civil and ritual Part of the Law
delivered by Moses obliges nor Christians, though to the Jews it were a Part of
the Law of Works; it being a Part of the Law of Nature, that Men ought to obey
every positive Law of God, whenever ^e shall please to make any such Addition
to the Law of his Nature.


It Is no Objection against the last mentioned Thing, even Christ's laying down
his Life, its being included in the moral Law given to Adam, because that Law
it self allowed of no Occasion for any such Thing; for the moral Law virtually
includes all right Acts, on all possible Occasions, even Occasions that the Law
it self allows not: Thus we are obliged by the moral Law to mortify our Lusts,
and repent of our Sins, though that Law allows of no Lust to mortify, or Sin to
repent of.

There is indeed but one great Law of God, and that is the same Law that says,
if thou sinnest thou shall die, and cursed is every one that continues not in
all Things contained in this Law to do them: All Duties of positive
Institution, are virtually comprehended in this Law: and therefore if the Jews
brake the ceremonial Law, it exposed 'em to the Penalty of the Law, or Covenant
of Works, which threatened, thou shall surely die. The Law is the eternal and
unalterable Rule of Righteousness, between God and Man, and therefore is the
Rule of Judgment, by which all that a Man does shall be either justified or
condemned; and no Sin exposes to Damnation, but by the Law: So now he that
refuses to obey the Precepts that require an Attendance on the Sacraments of
the New Testament, is exposed to Damnation, by Virtue of the Law or Covenant of
Works. -- It may moreover be argued, that all Sins whatsoever, are Breaches of
the Law or Covenant of Works, because all Sins, even Breaches of the positive
Precepts, as well as others* have Atonement by the Death of Christ: But what
Christ died for, was to satisfy the Law, or to bear the Curse of the Law; as
appears by Gal. 3. 10, 11, 12, 1^. and Rom 8. 3, 4

So that Christ's laying down his Life might be Part of that Obedience by which
we are justified, though it was a positive Precept, not given to Adam. It was
doubtless Christ's main Act of Obedience, because it was Obedience to a Command
that was attended with immensely the greatest Difficulty, and so to a Command
that was the greatest Trial of his Obedience; his Respect shown to God in it,
and his Honor to God's Authority, was proportionably great: It is spoken of in
Scripture as Christ's principal Act of Obedience. Philip. 2. 7, 8. But made
himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the Form of a Servant, and was made
in the Likeness of Man, and being found in Fashion as a Man, he humbled himself
and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross Heb. 5. 8 Though he
were a Son, yet learned he Obedience by the Things that he suffered. It was
mainly by this Act of Obedience, that Christ purchased so glorious a Reward for
himself; as in that Place in Philippians 2. 8, 9. He became obedient unto
Death, even the Death of the Cross; wherefore God also has highly exalted him,
and given him a Name, which is above every Name: And it therefore follows from
what has been already said, that it is mainly by this Act of Obedience, that
Believers in Christ also, have the Reward of Glory, or come to partake with
Christ in his Glory. We are as much saved by the Death of Christ, as his
yielding himself to die was an Act of Obedience, as we are, as it was a
Propitiation for our Sins: For as it was not the only Act of Obedience that
merited, he having performed meritorious Acts of Obedience through the whole
Course of his Life; so neither was it the only Suffering that was propitiatory;
all his Sufferings through the whole Course of his Life being propitiatory, as
well as every Act of Obedience meritorious: Indeed this was his principal
Suffering; and it was as much his principal Act of Obedience.

Hence we may see how that the Death of Christ did not only make Atonement, but
also merited eternal Life; and hence we may see how by the Blood of Christ we
are not only redeemed from Sin, but redeemed unto God; and therefore the
Scripture seems every where to attribute the whole of Salvation to the Blood of
Christ: This precious Blood is as much the main Price by which Heaven is
purchased, as it is the main Price by which we are redeemed from Hell. The
positive Righteousness of Christ, or that Price by which he merited, was of
equal Value with that by which he satisfied; for indeed it was the same Price:
He spilled his Blood to satisfy, and by Reason of the infinite Dignity of his
Person, his Sufferings were looked upon as of infinite Value, and equivalent to
the eternal Sufferings of a finite Creature: And he spilled his Blood out of
Respect to the Honor of God's Majesty, and in Submission to his Authority, who
had commanded him so to do, and his Obedience there in was of infinite Value;
both because of the Dignity of the Person that performed it, and because he put
himself to infinite Expense to perform it, whereby the infinite Degree of his
Regard to God's Authority appeared.

One would wonder what Arminians mean by Christ's Merits: They talk of Christ's
Merits as much as any Body, and yet deny the Imputation of Christ's positive
Righteousness: What should there be that any one should merit or deserve any
Thing by, besides Righteousness or Goodness? If any Thing that Christ did or
suffered, merited or deserved any Thing* it was by Virtue of the Goodness, or
Righteousness, or Holiness of it: If Christ's Sufferings and Death merited
Heaven, it must be because there was an excellent Righteousness, and
transcendent moral Goodness in that Act of laying down his Life: And if by that
excellent Righteousness he merited Heaven for us, then surely that
Righteousness is reckoned to our Account, that we have the Benefit of it, or
which is the same Thing, it is imputed to us.

Thus I hope I have made it evident, that the Righteousness of Christ is indeed
imputed to us. I proceed now to the

Third, and last Thing under this Argument, That this Doctrine of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness is utterly inconsistent with the Doctrine
of our being justified by our own Virtue, or sincere Obedience. If Acceptance
to God's Favor, and a Title to Life, be given to Believers, as the Reward of
Christ's Obedience, then it is not given as the Reward of our own Obedience. In
what respect soever, Christ is our Savior, that doubtless excludes our being
our own Saviors, in that same respect. If we can be our own Saviors in the
same respect that Christ is, it will thence follow that the Salvation of Christ
is needless, in that respect; according to the Apostle's reasoning, Gal. 5. 4.
Christ is rendered of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the
Law. Doubtless it is Christ's Prerogative to be our Savior, in that Sense
wherein he is our Savior: And therefore if it be by his Obedience that we are
justified, then it is not by our own Obedience.

Here perhaps it may be said, that a Title to Salvation is not directly given
as the Reward of our Obedience; for that is not by any Thing of ours; but only
by Christ's Satisfaction and Righteousness; but yet an Interest in that
Satisfaction and Righteousness is given as a Reward of our Obedience.

But this don't at all help the Case; for this is to ascribe as much to our
Obedience, as if we ascribed Salvation to it directly, without the Intervention
of Christ's Righteousness: For it would be as great a Thing for God to give us
Christ, and his Satisfaction and Righteousness, in Reward for our Obedience, as
to give us Heaven immediately; it would be as great a Reward, and as great a
Testimony of respect to our Obedience. And if God gives as great a Thing as
Salvation, for our Obedience, why could he not as well give Salvation it self
directly? And then there would have been no need of Christ's Righteousness. And
indeed if God gives us Christ, or an Interest in him, properly in reward of our
Obedience, he does really give us Salvation in reward for our Obedience; for
the former implies the latter; yea it implies it as the greater implies the
less. So that indeed it exalts our Virtue and Obedience more, to suppose that
God gives us Christ in reward of that Virtue and Obedience, than if he should
give Salvation without Christ.

The Thing that the Scripture guards, and militates against, is our imagining
that it is our own Goodness, Virtue, or Excellency, that instates us in God's
Acceptance and Favor. But to suppose that God gives us an Interest in Christ^
in Reward for our Virtue, is as great an Argument that it instates us in God's
Favor, as if he bestowed a title to eternal Life, as it is direct reward. If
God gives us an Interest in Christ, as a reward of our Obedience, it will then
follow, that we are instated in God's Acceptance and Favor by our own
Obedience, antecedent to our having an Interest in Christ. For a rewarding any
one's Excellency, ever-more supposes Favor and Acceptance on the Account of
that Excellency: It is the very Notion of a reward, that it is a good Thing,
bestowed in Testimony of respect and Favor for the Virtue or Excellency
rewarded. So that it is not by Virtue of our Interest in Christ and his Merits,
that we first come into Favor with God, according to this Scheme; for we are
in God's Favor before we have any Interest in those Merits; in that we have an
Interest in those Merits given as a Fruit of God's Favor for our own Virtue.
If our Interest in Christ be the Fruit of God's Favor, then it cannot be the
Ground of it. If God did not accept us, and had no Favor for us, for our own
Excellency, he never would bestow so great a Reward upon us, as a Right in
Christ's Satisfaction and Righteousness. So that such a Scheme destroys it
self, for it supposes that Christ's Satisfaction and Righteousness are
necessary for us to recommend us to the Favor of God; and yet supposes that we
have God's Favor and Acceptance* before we have Christ's Satisfaction and
Righteousness, and have these given as a Fruit of God's Favor

Indeed, neither Salvation it self, nor Christ the Savior, are given as a
Reward of any Thing in Man: They are not given as a Reward of Faith, nor any
Thing else of ours: W^ are not united to Christ as a Reward of our Faith, but
have Union with him by Faith, only as Faith is the very Act of uniting, or
closing on our Part. As when a Man offers himself to a Woman in Marriage, he
don't give himself to her as a Reward of her receiving him in Marriage: Her
receiving him is not considered as a worthy Deed in her, for which he rewards
her* by giving himself to her; but it is by her receiving him, that the Union is
made, by which she has him for her Husband: It Is on her Part the Unition it
self. -- By these Things it appears how contrary to the Scheme of the Gospel of
Christ, their Scheme is, who say that Faith justifies as a 'Principle of
Obedience, or as a leading Act of Obedience; or (as others) the Sum, and
Comprehension of all evangelical Obedience: For by this it is the Obedience or
Virtue that is in Faith, that is the Thing, that gives it its justifying
Influence; and that is the same thing as to say, that we are justified by our
own Obedience, Virtue or Goodness.

Having thus considered the Evidence of the Truth of the Doctrine, I proceed
now to the

IIId Thing proposed, viz. To show in what Sense the Acts of a christian Life,
or of evangelical Obedience, may be looked upon to be concerned in this Affair.

From what has been said already, it is manifest that they cannot have any
Concern in this Affair as good Works, or by Virtue of any moral Goodness in
them; not as Works of the Law, or as that moral Excellency, or any Part of it,
that is the answering or Fulfillment of that great, and universal, and
everlasting Law or Covenant of Works, that the great Lawgiver has established,
as the highest and unalterable Rule of Judgment; which Christ alone answers, or
does any Thing toward it.

And it having been shown, out of the Scripture, that it is only by Faith, or
the Soul's receiving, and uniting to the Savior, that has wrought out
Righteousness, that we are justified; it therefore remains that the Acts of a
christian Life cannot be concerned in this Affair any otherwise, than as they
imply, and are the Expressions of Faith, and may be looked upon as so many Acts
of Reception of Christ the Savior.

But the determining what concern Acts of christian Obedience can have in
Justification in this Respect, will depend on the resolving of another Point,
viz Whether any other Act of Faith besides the first Act, has any Concern in
our Justification, or how far Perseverance in Faith, or the continued and
renewed Acts of Faith, have Influence in this Affair.

And it seems manifest that Justification is by the first Act of Faith, in some
Respects, in a Peculiar Manner, because a Sinner is actually and finally
justified as soon as he has performed one Act of Faith; and Faith in its first
Act does, virtually at least, depend on God for Perseverance, and intitles to
this among other Benefits. But yet the Perseverance of Faith is not excluded in
this Affair; it is not only certainly connected with Justification, but it is
not to be excluded from that on which the Justification of a Sinner has a
Dependence, or that by which he is justified.

I have shown that the Way in which Justification has a Dependence on Faith, is
that it is the Qualification on which the Congruity of an Interest in the
Righteousness of Christ depends, or wherein such a Fitness consists. But the
Consideration of the Perseverance of Faith, cannot be excluded out of this
Congruity or Fitness, for it is congruous that he that believes in Christ
should have an Interest in Christ's Righteousness, and so in the eternal
Benefits purchased by it, because Faith is that by which the Soul has Union or
Oneness with Christ, and there is a natural Congruity in it, that they that are
one with Christ, should have a joint Interest with him in his eternal Benefits;
but yet this Congruity depends on its being an abiding Union. As it is needful
that the Branch should abide in the Vine, in order to its receiving the lasting
Benefits of the Root, so it is necessary that the Soul should abide in Christ,
in order to its receiving those lasting Benefits of God's final Acceptance and
Favor. John 15. 6, 7. If a Man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a Branch.
If ye abide in me, and my Words abide you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it
shall be done unto you. Verses 9, 10. Continue ye in my Love: If ye keep (or
abide in) my Commandments, ye shall abide in my Love, even as I have kept my
Father's Commandments, and abide in his Love. There is the same Reason why it
is necessary that the Union with Christ should remain, as why it should be
begun, why it should continue to be, as why it should once be: If it should be
begun without remaining, the beginning would be in vain. In order to the Soul's
being now in a justified State, and now free from Condemnation, it is necessary
that it should now be in Christ, and not only that it should once have been in
him. Romans 8. 1. There is no Condemnation to them are in Christ Jesus. The Soul
is saved in Christ, as being now in him, when the Salvation is bestowed, and
not merely as remembering that it once was in him. Philip. 3 9. That I may be
FOUND IN HIM, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that
which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by
Faith. 1 John 2. 28. And now little Children abide in him; that when he shall
appear, we may have Confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his Coming. In
order to Persons being blessed after Death, it is necessary not only that they
should once be in him, but that they should die in him. Rev. 14. 13. Blessed
are the Dead that die in the Lord

And there is the same Reason why Faith, the uniting Qualification, should
remain, in order to the Union's remaining, as why it should once be, in order
to the Union's once being.

So that although the Sinner is actually, and finally justified on the first Act
of Faith, yet the Perseverance of Faith, even then, comes into Consideration,
as one Thing on which the Fitness of Acceptance to Life depends* God in the Act
of Justification, which is passed on a Sinner's first believing, has Respect to
Perseverance, as being virtually contained in that first Act of Faith; and it is
looked upon and taken by him that justifies, as being as it were a Property in
that Faith that then is: God has Respect to the Believer's Continuance in
Faith, and he is justified by that, as though it already were, because by divine
Establishment it shall follow; and it being by divine Constitution connected
with that first Faith, as much as if it were a Property in it, it is then
considered as such, and so Justification is not suspended; but were it not for
this it would be needful that it should be suspended, till the Sinner had
actually persevered in Faith.

And that it is so, that God in that Act of final Justification that he passes
at the Sinner's Conversion, has Respect to Perseverance in Faith, and future
Acts of Faith, as being virtually implied in that first Act, is further
manifest by this, viz. That in a Sinner's Justification at his Conversion,
there is virtually contained a Forgiveness as to eternal, and deserved
Punishment, not only of all past Sins, but also of all future Infirmities and
Acts of Sin, that they shall be guilty of; because that first Justification is
decisive and final. And yet Pardon, in the Order of Nature, properly follows
the Crime, and also follows those Acts of Repentance and Faith that respect the
Crime pardoned, as is manifest both from Reason and Scripture. David in the
beginning of Psalm 32. speaks of the Forgiveness of Sins of his, that were
doubtless committed long after he was first godly, as being consequent on those
Sins, and on his Repentance and Faith with Respect to them; and yet this
Forgiveness is spoken of by the Apostle in the 4th of Romans, as an Instance of
Justification by Faith. Probably the Sin David there speaks of is the same that
he committed in the Matter of Uriah, and so the Pardon the same with that
Release from Death, or eternal Punishment, that the Prophet Nathan speaks of, 2 Samuel 12. 13. The Lord also has put away thy Sin; thou shall not die. Not only
does the Manifestation of this Pardon follow the Sin in the Order of Time, but
the Pardon it self, in the Order of Nature, follows David's Repentance and
Faith with Respect to this Sin; for it is spoken of in the 32nd Psalm as
depending on it.

And besides, if no other Act of Faith could be concerned in Justification but
the first Act, it will then follow that Christians ought never to seek
Justification by any other Act of Faith. For if Justification is not to be
obtained by after Acts of Faith, then surely it is not a Duty to seek it by
such Acts: And so it can never be a Duty for Persons after they are once
converted, by Faith to seek to God; or believingly to look to him for the
Remission of Sin, or Deliverance from the Guilt of it, because Deliverance from
the Guilt of Sin is Part of what belongs to Justification. And if it ben't
proper for Converts by Faith to look to God through Christ for it, then it will
follow that it is not proper for them to pray for it, for christian Prayer to
God for a Blessing is but an Expression of Faith in God for that Blessing;
Prayer is only the Voice of Faith. But if these Things are so, it will follow
that that Petition of the Lord's Prayer, for give us our Debts, is not proper
to be put up by Disciples of Christ, or to be used in christian Assemblies, and
that Christ improperly directed his Disciples to use that Petition, when they
were all of them, except Judas, converted before. The Debt that Christ directs
his Disciples to pray for the Forgiveness of, can mean nothing else, but the
Punishment that Sin deserves, or the Debt that we owe to divine Justice, the
ten thousand Talents we owe our Lord. To pray that God would forgive our Debts,
is undoubtedly the same Thing as to pray that God would release us from
Obligation to due Punishment; but releasing from Obligation to the Punishment
due to Sin, and forgiving the Debt that we owe to divine Justice, is what
appertains to Justification.

And then to suppose that no after Acts of Faith are concerned in the Business
of Justification, and so that it is not proper for any ever to seek
Justification by such Acts, would be forever to cut off those Christians, that
are doubtful concerning their first Act of Faith, from the Joy and Peace of
Believing. As the Business of a justifying Faith is to obtain Pardon and Peace
with God, by looking to God and trusting in him for these Blessings, so the Joy
and Peace of that Faith, is in the Apprehension of Pardon and Peace obtained by
such a Trust. This a Christian that is doubtful of his first Act of Faith,
cannot have from that Act, because, by the Supposition, he is doubtful whether
it be an Act of Faith, and so whether he did obtain Pardon and Peace by that
Act: The proper Remedy, in such a Case, is now by Faith to look to God in
Christ for these Blessings; but he is cut off from this Remedy, because he is
uncertain whether he has Warrant so to do, for he don't know but that he has
believed already; and if so, then he has no Warrant to look to God by Faith for
these Blessings now, because by the Supposition no new Act of Faith is a proper
Means of obtaining these Blessings* And so he can never properly obtain the Joy
of Faith; for there are Acts of true Faith, that are very weak Acts, and the
first Act may be so as well as others; it may be like the first Motion of the
Infant in the Womb, it may be so weak an Act that the Christian by examining of
it, may never be able to determine whether it was a true Act of Faith or n^;
and it is evident from Fact, and abundant Experience, that many Christians are
forever at a Loss to determine which was their first Act of Faith. And those
Saints that have had a good Degree of Satisfaction concerning their Faith, may
be subject to great Declensions and Falls, in which Case they are liable to
great Fears of eternal Punishment; and the proper Way of Deliverance is to
forsake their Sin by Repentance, and by Faith now to come to Christ for
Deliverance from the deserved eternal Punishment; but this it would not be, if
Deliverance from that Punishment, was not this Way to be obtained.

But what is a still more plain and direct Evidence of what I am now arguing
for, is that that Act of Faith that Abraham exercised in the great Promise of
the Covenant of Grace that God made to him, of which it is expressly said, Gen
15. 16. It was accounted to him for Righteousness; which is the grand Instance
and Proof, that the Apostle so much insists upon throughout the 4th Chapter of
Romans, and 3d. Chapter of Galatians, to confirm his Doctrine of Justification
by Faith alone, was not Abraham's first A^^ of Faith, but was ex^^ted long
after he had by Faith forsaken his own Country, Heb. 11. 8. and had been
treated as an eminent Friend of God.

Moreover, The Apostle Paul in the third Chapter of Philippians, tells us how
earnestly he sought Justification by Faith, or to win Christ and obtain that
Righteousness which was by the Faith of him, in what he did after his
Conversion. Verses 8, 9 For whom I have suffered the loss of all Things, and do
count them but, Dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having on
mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the
Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. And in the two
next Verses he expresses the same Thing in other Words, and tells us how ^e
went through Sufferings, and became conformable to Christ's Death, that he
might be a Partaker with Christ in the Benefit of his Resurrection; which the
same Apostle elsewhere teaches us, is especially Justification: Christ's
Resurrection was his Justification; in this, he that was put to Death in the
Flesh, was justified by the Spirit, and he that was delivered for our Offenses,
rose again for our Justification. And the Apostle tells us in the Verses that
follow, in that third Chapter of Philippians, that he thus fought to attain the
Righteousness which is through the Faith of Christ, and so to partake of the
Benefit of his Resurrection, still, as though he had not already attained, but
that he continued to follow after it.

But in as much as a Sinner, in his first Justification, is forever justified
and freed from all Obligation to eternal Punishment, it hence of necessity
follows, that future Faith and Repentance are beheld in that Justification, as
virtually contained in that first Faith and Repentance; because Repentance of
those future Sins, and Faith in a Redeemer, with Respect to them, or, at least,
the Continuance of that Habit and Principle in the Heart, that has such an
actual Repentance and Faith, in it is Nature and Tendency, is now made sure by
God's Promise.

If Remission of Sins, committed after Conversion, in the order of Nature,
follows that Faith and Repentance that is after them, then it follows that
future Sins are respected in the first Justification, no otherwise than as
future Faith and Repentance are respected in it. And future Repentance and
Faith are looked upon by him that justifies, as virtually implied in the first
Repentance and Faith, in the same Manner as Justification from future Sins, is
virtually implied in the first Justification; which is the Thing that was to be
proved.

On the whole, it appears that the Perseverance of Faith is necessary, even to
the Congruity of Justification, and that not the less, because a Sinner is
justified, and Perseverance promised on the first Act of Faith, but God in that
Justification has Respect not only to the past Act of Faith, but to his own
Promise of future Acts, and to the fitness of a Qualification beheld as yet
only in his own Promise.

And, that Perseverance in Faith is thus necessary to Salvation, not merely as
a sine qua^non, or as an universal Concomitant of it, but by Reason of such an
Influence and Dependence, seems manifest by many Scriptures; I would mention
two or three; Heb. 3. 6. Whose House are we, if we hold fast the Confidence,
and the Rejoicing of the Hope, firm unto the End. Verse 14. For we are made
Partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our Confidence, steadfast unto
the End. Chap. 5 12. Be ye followers of them, who through Faith and Patience
inherit the Promises. Rom 11. 20. Well, because of Unbelief they were broken
off, but thou stand by Faith: Be not highminded, but fear.

And as the Congruity to a final Justification depends on Perseverance in
Faith, as well as the first Act, so oftentimes the Manifestation of
Justification in the Conscience, arises a great deal more from after Acts, than
the first Act. And all the difference whereby the first Act of Faith has a
Concern in this Affair that is peculiar, seems to be as it were only an
accidental Difference, arising from the Circumstance of Time, or its being
first in Order of Time; and not from any peculiar Respect that God has to it,
or any Influence it has of a peculiar Nature, in the Affair of our Salvation.

And thus it is that a truly christian Walk, and the Acts of an evangelical,
child like, believing Obedience, are concerned in the Affair of our
Justification, and seem to be sometimes so spoken of in Scripture, viz. as an
Expression of a persevering Faith in the Son of God, the only Savior. Faith
unites to Christ, and so gives a Congruity to Justification, not merely as
remaining a dormant Principle in the Heart, but as being, and appearing in its
active Expressions.

The Obedience of a Christian, so far as it is truly evangelical, and performed
with the Spirit of the Son sent forth into the Heart, has all relation to
Christ the Mediator, and is but an Expression of the Soul's believing Unition
to Christ: All evangelical Works are Works of that Faith that works by Love;
and every such Act of Obedience, wherein it is inward, and the Act of the Soul,
is only a new effective Act of Reception of Christ, and Adherence to the
glorious Savior. Hence that of the Apostle, Gal 2. 20. I live, yet not I; but
Christ lives in me; and the Life that I now live in the Flesh, is by the Faith
of the Son of God. And hence we are directed, in whatever we do, whether in
Word or Deed* to do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Col. 3. 17.

And that God in Justification has respect, not only to the first Act of Faith,
but also to future persevering Acts, in this Sense, viz as expressed in Life,
(...) seems manifest by Rom 1. 17. For therein is the Righteousness of God
revealed, from Faith to Faith: As it is written, the Just shall live by Faith.
And Heb. 10. 38, 39. Now the Just shall live by Faith; but if any Man draw
back, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him. But we are not of them that draw
back unto Perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the Soul.

So that as was before said of Faith, so may it be said of a child like,
believing Obedience, it has no concern in Justification by any Virtue, or
Excellency in it; but only as there is a Reception of Christ in it. And this is
no more contrary to the Apostle's frequent Assertion of our being justified
without the Works of the Law, than to say that we are justified by Faith; for
Faith is as much a Work or act of christian Obedience, as the Expressions of
Faith, in spiritual Life and Walk. And therefore as we say that Faith don't
justify as a Work, so we say of all these effective Expressions of Faith.

This is the reverse of the Scheme of our modern Divines* who hold that Faith
justifies only as an Act, or Expression of Obedience; whereas in Truth*
Obedience has no concern in Justification, any otherwise than as an Expression
of Faith.

I now proceed to the

IV. Thing proposed, viz To answer objections.

Object 1 We frequently find Promises of eternal Life and Salvation, and
sometimes of Justification itself, made to our own Virtue and Obedience.
Eternal Life is promised to Obedience, in Romans 2 7 To them who by patient
Continuance in well doing, s^ek for Glory, Honor and Immortality, eternal
Life. And the like in innumerable other Places. And Justification it self is
promised to that Virtue of a forgiving Spirit or Temper in us, Mat. 6 14 For if
ye forgive Men their Trespass, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but
if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
Trespasses. All allow that Justification in great Part consists i^ the
forgiveness of Sins.

To this I answer,

1 These Things being promised to our Virtue and Obedience, argues no more,
than that there is a Connection between them and evangelical Obedience; which I
have already observed is not the Thing in dispute. All that can be proved by
Obedience and Salvation being connected in the Promise, is that Obedience and
Salvation are connected in fact; which no body denies, and whether it be owned
or denied, is as has been shown, nothing to the Purpose. There is no need that
an Admission to a Title to Salvation, should be given on the Account of our
Obedience, in order to the Promises being true. If we find such a Promise, that
he that obeys shall be saved, or he that is holy shall be justified, all that
is needful in order to such Promises being true, is that it be really so, that
he that obeys shall be saved, and that Holiness and Justification shall indeed
go together: That Proposition may be a Truth, that he that obeys shall be
saved, because Obedience and Salvation are connected together in fact; and yet
an Acceptance to a Title to Salvation not be granted upon the Account of any of
our own Virtue or Obedience. What is a Promise, but only a Declaration of
future Truth, for the Comfort and Encouragement of the Person to whom it is
declared? Promises are conditional Propositions; and as has been already
observed, it is not the Thing in Dispute, whether other Things besides Faith
may not have the Place of the Condition in such Propositions wherein Pardon and
Salvation are the consequent.

2. Promises may rationally ^e made to Signs and Evidences of Faith, and yet
the Thing promised not be upon the Account of the Sign, but the Thing
signified. Thus for Instance, human Government may rationally make Promises of
such and such Privileges, to those that can show such Evidences of their being
free of such a City, or Members of such a Corporation, or descended of such a
Family; when it is not at all for the sake of that which is the Evidence or
Sign, in it self considered, that they are admitted to such a Privilege, but
only, and purely, for the sake of that which it is an evidence of.

And though God don't stand in need of Signs to know whether we have true Faith
or not, yet our own Consciences do; so that it is much for our Comfort that
Promises are made to Signs of Faith. A finding in our selves a forgiving Temper
and Disposition, may be a most proper and natural Evidence to our Consciences
that our Hearts have, in a Sense of our own utter unworthiness, truly closed*
and fallen in, with the way of free, and infinitely gracious forgiveness of our
Sins, by Jesus Christ; whence we may be enabled, with the greater Comfort to
apply to our selves the Promises of forgiveness by Christ.

3. It has been just now shown* how that Acts of evangelical Obedience are
indeed concerned in our Justification it self, and are not excluded from that
Condition that Justification depends upon, without the least Prejudice to that
Doctrine of Justification by Faith, without any Goodness of our own, that has
been maintained, and therefore it can be no Objection against this Doctrine,
that we have sometimes in Scripture, Promises of Pardon and Acceptance, made to
such Acts of Obedience.

4. Promises of particular Benefits implied in Justification and Salvation, may
especially be fitly made to such Expressions and Evidences of Faith, as they
have a peculiar natural Likeness and Suitableness to: As forgiveness is
promised to a forgiving Spirit in us; obtaining Mercy is fitly promised to
mercifulness in us, and the like: And that upon several Accounts; they are the
most natural Evidences of our Heart's closing with those Benefits by Faith; for
they do especially show the sweet Accord and Consent that there is between the
Heart and these Benefits; and by Reason of the natural Likeness that there is
between the Virtue and the Benefit, the one has the greater Tendency to bring
the other to mind; the Practice of the Virtue tends the more to renew the
Sense, and refresh the Hope of the Blessing promised; and also to convince the
Conscience of the justice of being denied the Benefit, if the Duty be neglected.

And besides the Sense and Manifestation of divine Forgiveness in our own
Consciences; yea and many Exercises of God's forgiving Mercy, as it respects
God's fatherly Displeasure, that are granted after Justification, through the
course of a christian's Life, may be given as the proper Rewards of the Virtue
of a forgiving Spirit, and yet this not be at all to the prejudice of the
Doctrine we have maintained; as will more fully appear, when we come to answer
another Objection hereafter to be mentioned.

Object. 2. Our own Obedience, and inherent Holiness, is necessary to prepare
Men for Heaven; and therefore is doubtless what recommends Persons to God's
Acceptance, as the Heirs of Heaven.

To this I answer,

1. Our own Obedience being necessary, in order to a Preparation for an actual
bestowment of Glory, is no Argument that it is the Thing, upon the Account of
which we are accepted to a Right to it. God may, and does, do many Things to
prepare the Saints for Glory, after he has accepted them as the Heirs of Glory.
A Parent may do much to prepare a Child for an Inheritance in it is Education,
after the Child is an Heir: yea there are many Things necessary to fit a Child
for the actual Possession of the Inheritance, that ben't necessary in order to
it is having a Right to the Inheritance.

2. If every Thing, that is necessary to prepare Men for Glory, must be the
proper Condition of Justification, then perfect Holiness is the Condition of
Justification. Men must be made perfectly Holy, before they are admitted to the
Enjoyment of the blessedness of Heaven; for there must in no wise enter in
there any spiritual Defilement: And therefore when a Saint dies he leaves all
his Sin and Corruption, when he leaves the Body.

Object 3. Our Obedience is not only indissolubly connected with Salvation, and
Preparatory to it, but the Scripture expressly speaks of bestowing eternal
Blessings as Rewards for the good Deeds of the Saints. Math. 10 42. Whosoever
shall give to drink, unto one of these little ones, a Cup of cold Water, only
in the Name of a Disciple, he shall in no wise lose his Reward. 1 Cor. 3. 8.
Every Man shall receive his own Reward, according to his own Labor. And in
many other Places. This seems to militate against the Doctrine that has been
maintained, two Ways, 1. The bestowing a Reward carries in it a Respect to a
moral Fitness, in the Thing rewarded, to the Reward: The very Notion of a
Reward being a Benefit bestowed in Testimony of Acceptance of, and respect to,
the goodness or amiableness of some Qualification or Work, in the Person
rewarded. And besides the Scripture seems to explain it self in this Matter, in
Rev. 3. 4. Thou have a few Names, even in Sa^dis, which have not defiled their
Garments; and they shall walk with me in While; for they are Worthy This is
here given as the Reason why they should have such a Reward, because they were
Worthy: Which, though we suppose it to imply no proper Merit, yet it at least
implies a moral fitness, or that the excellency of their Virtue in God's Sight,
recommends them to such a Reward; which seems directly repugnant to what has
been supposed, viz That we are accepted, and approved of God, as the Heirs of
Salvation, not out of Regard to the Excellency of our own Virtue or Goodness,
or any moral fitness therein to such a Reward, but only on the Account of the
Dignity, and moral fitness of Christ's Righteousness. 2 Our being eternally
rewarded for our own Holiness, and good Works, necessarily supposes that our
future Happiness will be greater or smaller, in some Proportion, as our own
Holiness and Obedience is more or less; and that there are different Degrees of
Glory, according to different Degrees of Virtue and good Works, is a Doctrine
very expressly, and frequently taught us in Scripture. But this seems quite
inconsistent with the Saints all having their future blessedness as a Reward of
Christ's Righteousness: For if Christ's Righteousness be imputed to all, and
this be what entitles each one to Glory, then it is the same Righteousness that
entitles one to Glory, which entitles another: But if all have Glory as the
Reward of the same Righteousness, why han't all the same Glory? Don't the same
Righteousness merit as much Glory, when imputed to one, as when imputed to
another.

In Answer to the first Part of this Objection. I would observe, that it don't
argue that we are justified by our good Deeds, because we shall have eternal
Blessings in Reward for them; for it is in Consequence of our Justification,
that our good Deeds become rewardable, with spiritual and eternal Rewards. The
acceptableness, and so the rewardableness of our Virtue is not antecedent to
Justification, but follows it, and is built entirely upon it; which is the
reverse of what those in the adverse Scheme of Justification suppose, viz That
Justification is built on the Acceptableness and Rewardableness of our Virtue.
They suppose that a saving Interest in Christ is given as a Reward of our
Virtue, or (which is the same Thing,) as a Testimony of God's Acceptance of our
Excellency, in our Virtue. But the contrary is true; that God's respect to our
Virtue, as our amiableness in his Sight, and his Acceptance of it as
rewardable, is entirely built on our Interest in Christ already established. So
that that Relation to Christ, whereby Believers in Scripture Language, are said
to be in Christ, is the very Foundation of our Virtues, and good Deeds, being
accepted of God, and so of their being rewarded; for a Reward is a Testimony of
Acceptance. For we, and all that we do, are accepted only in the beloved, Ephesians
1. 6. Our Sacrifices are acceptable, only through our Interest in him, and
through his Worthiness, and Preciousness, being as it were made ours. 1 Pet. 2.
4 5. To whom coming as unto a living Stone, disallowed indeed of Men, but
chosen of God and precious; ye also as lively Stones, are built up a spiritual
House, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God
by Jesus Christ. Here a being actually built on this Stone, precious to God, is
mentioned as all the Ground of the Acceptableness of our good Works to God, and
their becoming, also precious in his Eves. So Heb. 13^ 21. Make you perfect in
every good Work, to do his Will, working in you that which is well pleasing in
his Sight, through Jesus Christ* And hence we are directed, whatever we offer
to God, to offer it in Christ's Name, as expecting to have it accepted no other
Way, than from the Value that God has to that Name. Col. 3. 17. And whatsoever
ye do, in Word or Deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving Thanks to
God, and the Father by him To act in Christ's Name, is to act under him, as our
Head, and as having him to stand for us, and represent us to God ward.

The Reason of this may be seen, from what has been already said, to show that
it is not meet that any Thing in us, should be accepted of God* as any
Excellency of our Persons, until we are actually in Christ, and justified
through him. The Loveliness of the Virtue of fallen Creatures, is nothing in
the Sight of God, till he beholds them in Christ, and clothed with his
Righteousness. 1. Because till then we stand condemnned before God, by his own
holy Law, to his utter Rejection, and Abhorrence, And, 2. Because we are
infinitely Guilty before him, and the Loveliness of our Virtue bears no
Proportion to our Guilt; and must therefore pass for nothing before a strict
Judge. And, 3 Because our good Deeds, and virtuous Acts themselves, are in a
Sense corrupt, and the hatefulness of the Corruption of them, if we are beheld
as we are in our selves, or separate from Christ, infinitely outweighs the
Loveliness of the Good that is in them: So that if no other Sin was considered,
but only that which attends the Act of Virtue itself, the Loveliness vanishes
into nothing in Comparison of it: And therefore the Virtue must pass for
nothing, out of Christ. Not only are our best Duties defiled, in being attended
with the Exercises of Sin and Corruption, that precede them and follow them,
and are intermingled with holy Acts; but even the holy Acts themselves, and the
gracious Exercises of the godly, though the Act most simply considered is good,
yet take the Acts in their Measure, and Dimensions, and the manner in which
they are exerted, and they are corrupt Acts; that is, they are defectively
corrupt, or sinfully defective; there is that defect in them, that may well be
called the Corruption of them; that defect is properly Sin, an Expression of a
vile Sinfulness of Heart, and what tends to provoke the just anger of God; not
because the Exercise of Love and other Grace, is not equal to God's loveliness;
for it is impossible the Love of Creatures (Men or Angels) should be so; but
because the Act is so very disproportionate to the Occasion given for Love or
other Grace, considering God's loveliness, and the Manifestation that is made
of it, and the exercises of Kindness, and the capacity of human Nature, and our
Advantages, (and the like) together. A negative Expression of Corruption may be
as truly Sin, and as just Cause of Provocation, as a positive. Thus if a Man, a
worthy and excellent Person, should from mere Generosity and Goodness,
exceedingly lay out himself, and should with great Expense and Suffering, save
another's Life, or redeem him from some extreme Calamity; and when he had done
all, that other Person should never thank him for it, or express the least
Gratitude any way; this would be a negative Expression of his Ingratitude and
Baseness; but is Equivalent to an Act of Ingratitude, or positive exercise of a
base unworthy Spirit; and is truly an Expression of (...), and brings as much
Blame, as if he by some positive Act, had much injured another Person. And so
it would be, (only in a lesser Degree,) if the Gratitude was but very small,
bearing no Proportion to the Benefit and Obligation; as if for so great and
extraordinary a Kindness, he should express no more Gratitude than would have
been becoming toward a Person that had only given him a cup of Water when
thirsty, or shown him the Way in a Journey, when at a loss, or had done him
some such small Kindness: If he should come to his Benefactor to express his
Gratitude, and should do after this manner* he might truly he said to act
unworthily and odiously; he would show a most ungrateful Spirit: And his doing
after such a Manner might justly be abhorred by all: And yet the Gratitude,
that little there is of it, most simply considered, and so far as it goes, is
good. And so it is with respect to our exercise of Love, and Gratitude, and
other Graces toward God, they are defectively corrupt and sinful, and take 'em
as they are, in their Manner, and Measure, might justly be odious, and
provoking to God, and would necessarily be so, were we beheld out of Christ:
For in that this Defect is Sin, it is infinitely hateful; and so the
hatefulness of the very Act, infinitely out weighs the Loveliness of it;
because all Sin has infinite hatefulness and heinousness; but our Holiness has
but little Value and Loveliness, as has been elsewhere demonstrated.

Hence, though it be true that the Saints are rewarded for their good Works, yet
it is for Christ's sake only, and not for the Excellency of their Works in
themselves considered, or beheld seperately from Christ; for so they have no
excellency in God's sight, or acceptableness to him, as has now been shown.
It Is acknowledged that God in rewarding the Holiness and good Works of
Belivers, does in some respect give them Happiness as a Testimony of his
Respect to the Loveliness of their Holiness and good Works in his Sight; for
that is the very Notion of a Reward: But in a very different Sense from what
would have been* if Man had not fallen; which would have been to bestow eternal
Life on Man, as a Testimony of God's Respect to the Loveliness of what Man did,
considered as in it self, and as in Man, seperately by himself, and not beheld
as a Member of Christ: In which Sense also, the Scheme of Justification we are
opposing, necessarily supposes, the Excellency of our Virtue to be respected
and rewarded; for it supposes a saving Interest in Christ it self to be given
as a Reward of it.

Two Things come to pass, relating to the Saints Reward for their inherent
Righteousness, by Virtue of their Relation to Christ. 1. The Guilt of their
Persons is all done away, and the Pollution and Hatefulness that attends, and
is in, their good Works, is hid. 2. Their Relation to Christ adds a positive
Value and Dignity to their good Works, in God's Sight. That little Holiness,
and those faint and feeble Acts of Love, and other Grace, receive an exceeding
Value in the Sight of God, by Virtue of God's beholding them as in Christ, and
as it w^^e Members of one so infinitely Worthy in his Eyes; and th^^ because
God looks upon the Persons, as Persons of greater Dignity on this Account. Isai
43. 4 Since thou wast precious in my Sight, thou have been honorable. God, for
Christ's Sake, and because they are Members of his own righteous and dear Son,
sets an exceeding Value upon their Persons; and hence it follows, that he all
sets a great Value upon their good Acts and Offerings. The same Love and
Obedience, in a Person of greater Dignity and Value in God's Sight, is more
valuable his Eyes, than in one of less Dignity. Love and Respe^^ (as has been
before observed,) is valuable, in Proportion to the Dignity of the Person,
whose Love it is; because, so far as any one gives his Love to another, he
gives himself, in that he gives his Heart: But this is a more excellent
Offering, in Proportion as the Person whose self is offered, is more worthy.
Believers are become immensely more honorable in God's Esteem, by Virtue of
their Relation to Christ, th^n Man would have been, considered as by himself,
though he had been free from Sin; as a mean Person becomes more honorable when
married to a King. Hence God will probably reward the little weak Love, and
poor and exceeding imperfect Obedience of Believers in Christ, with a more
glorious Reward, than he would have done Adam's perfect Obedience. According to
the Tenor of the first Covenant, the Person was to be accepted and rewarded,
only for the Work's Sake; but by the Covenant of Grace, the Work is accepted
and rewarded, only for the Person's Sake; the Person being beheld antecedently,
as a Member of Christ, and clothed with his Righteousness. So that though the
Saints inherent Holiness is rewarded, yet this very Reward is indeed, not the
less founded on the Worthiness and Righteousness of Christ: None of the Value
that their Works have in his Sight, nor any of the Acceptance they have with
him, is out of Christ, and out of his Righteousness; but his Worthiness as
Mediator, is the prime and only Foundation on which all is built, and the
universal Source whence all arises. God indeed does great Things out of Regard
to the Saints Loveliness, but it is only as a secondary and derivative
Loveliness, as it were. -- When I speak of a derivative Loveliness, I don't
mean only, that the Qualifications themselves, that are accepted as lovely, are
derived from Christ, and are from his Power and Purchase; but that the
Acceptance of them as a Loveliness, and all the Value that is set upon them,
and all their Connection with the Reward, is founded in, and derived from
Christ's Righteousness and Worthiness.

If we suppose that not only higher Degrees of Glory in Heaven, but Heaven it
self, is in some Respect given in Reward for the Holiness, and good Works of
the Saints, in this secondary and derivative Sense, it will not prejudice the
Doctrine we have maintained It Is no Way impossible that God may bestow Heaven's
Glory wholly out of Respect to Christ's Righteousness, and yet in Reward for
Man's inherent Holiness, in different Respects, and different Ways It may be
only Christ's Righteousness, that God has respect to, for its own Sake, the
independent Acceptableness, and Dignity of it being sufficient of it self, to
recommend all that believe in Christ, to a Title to this Glory; and so it may
be only by this that Persons enter into a Title to Heaven, or have their prime
Right to it: And yet God may also have Respect to the Saints own Holiness, for
Christ's Sake, and as deriving a Value from Christ's Merit, which he may
testify in bestowing Heaven upon them. The Saints being beheld as Members of
Christ, their Obedience is looked upon by God, as something of Christ's, it
being the Obedience of the Members of Christ; as the Sufferings of the Members
of Christ, are looked upon, in some Respect, as the Sufferings of Christ. Hence
the Apostle speaking of his Sufferings, says Col 1. 24. Who now rejoice in my
Sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the Afflictions of
Christ in my Flesh. To the same Purpose is Matthew 25. 35, etc. I was an hungered,
naked, sick, and in Prison, etc. And so that in Rev. 11. 8. And their dead
Bodies shall lie in the Street of the great City, which spiritually is called
Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.

By the Merit and Righteousness of Christ, such Favor of God toward the
Believer may be obtained, as that God may hereby, be already, as it were
disposed to make them perfectly and eternally happy: But yet this don't hinder,
but that God in his Wisdom, may choose to bestow this perfect and eternal
Happiness, in this Way, viz. in some Respect, as a Reward of their Holiness,
and Obedience: It Is not impossible but that the Blessedness may be bestowed as
a Reward for that which is done after that an Interest is already obtained in
that Favor, which (to speak of God after the Manner of Men) disposes God to
bestow the Blessedness. Our heavenly Father may already have that Favor for a
Child, whereby he may be thoroughly ready to give the Child an Inheritance,
because he is his Child; which he is by the Purchase of Christ's Righteousness;
and yet that don't hinder but that it should be possible, that the Father may
choose to bestow the Inheritance on the Child, in a Way of Reward for his
Dutifulness, and behaving becoming a Child. And so great, and exceeding a
Reward, may not be judged more than a meet Reward for his Dutifulness, but that
so great a Reward is judged meet, don't arise from the Excellency of the
Obedience, absolutely considered, but from his standing in so near, and
honorable a Relation to God, as that of a Child, which is obtained only by the
Righteousness of Christ. And thus the Reward, and the Greatness of it, arises
properly from the Righteousness of Christ; though it be indeed in some sort the
Reward of their Obedience. As a Father might justly esteem the Inheritance, no
more than a meet Reward for the Obedience of his Child, and yet esteem it more
than a meet Reward for the Obedience of a Servant. The Favor whence a
Believer's heavenly Father bestows the eternal Inheritance, and his Title as an
Heir, is founded in that Relation he stands in to him as a Child, purchased by
Christ's Righteousness; though he in Wisdom, chooses to bestow it in such a Way,
as therein to testify his Acceptance of the Amiableness of his Obedience in
Christ.

Believers having a Title to Heaven by Faith antecedent to their Obedience, or
it is being absolutely promised to them before, don't hinder but that the actual
Bestowment of Heaven may also be a Testimony of God's Regard to their
Obedience, though performed afterward. Thus it was with Abraham, the Father and
Pattern of all Believers: God bestowed upon him that Blessing of multiplying
his Seed as the Stars of Heaven, and causing that in his Seed all the Families
of the Earth should be blessed, in Reward for his Obedience, in Offering up his
Son Isaac, Genesis 22. 16, 17, 18. And said by my self have I sworn, says the
Lord; for because thou have done this Thing, and have not withheld thy Son,
thine only Son, that in blessing I will bless thee; and in multiplying I will
multiply thy Seed, as the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand which is upon the
Sea Shore, and thy Seed shall possess the Gate of his Enemies, and in thy Seed
shall all the Nations of the Earth ^e blessed; because thou have obeyed my
Voice. And yet the very same Blessings had been from time to time promised to
Abraham, in the most positive Terms, and the Promise with great Solemnity,
confirmed and sealed to him; as Chap. 12. 2, 3 Chap. 13. 16. Chap. 15. 1, 4, 5,
6, 7, etc. Chap. 17. throughout. Chap. 18 10, 18.

From what has been said we may easily solve the Difficulty arising from that
Text, in Rev. 3. 4 They shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy. Which
is parallel with that Text in Luke 20. 35. But they which shall be accounted
worthy to obtain that World, and the Resurrection from the Dead --. I allow (as
in the Objection) that this Worthiness does doubtless denote a moral Fitness to
the Reward, or that God looks on these glorious Benefits a meet Testimony of
his Regard to the Value which their Persons and Performances have in his Sight.

1. God looks on these glorious Benefits as a meet Testimony of his Regard to
the Value which their Persons have in his Sight. But he sets this Value upon
their Persons purely for Christ's Sake: They are such Jewels, and have such
Preciousness in his Eyes, only because they are beheld in Christ, and by Reason
of the Worthiness of the Head, they are the Members of, and the Stock they are
grafted into. And this Value that God sets upon them on this Account is so
great, that God thinks meet from Regard to it to admit them to such exceeding
Glory The Saints on the Account of their Relation to Christ are such precious
Jewels in God's Sight, that they are thought worthy of a Place in his own
Crown. Mal. 3. 17. Z^^h. 9 16. So far as the Saints are said to be valuable in
God's Sight, upon whatever Account they are so, so far may they properly be
said to be worthy, or meet for that Honor that is answerable to that Value or
Price which God sets upon them. A Child, or Wife of a Prince, is worthy to be
treated with great Honor, and therefore if a mean Person should be adopted to
be a Child of a Prince, of should be espoused to a Prince, it would be proper
to say that she was worthy of such and such Honor and Respect, and there would
be no Force upon the Words in saying that she ought to have such Respect paid
her, for she is worthy, though i^ be only on the Account of her Relation to the
Prince that she is so.

2. From the Value God sets upon their Persons, for the Sake of Christ's
Worthiness, he also sets a high Value in their V^i^^ue^ and Performance. Their
meek and quiet Spirit is of great Price in his Sight. Their Fruits are pleasant
Fruits, their Offering are an Odou^ of sweet Smell to him: And that because of
the Value he sets on their Persons, as has been already observed and explained.
This Preciousness, or high Valuableness of Believers is a moral Fitness to a
Reward, and yet this Valuableness is all in the Righteousness of Christ, that
is the Foundation of it* The Thing that Respect is had to, is not the
Excellency that is in them, seperately by themselves, or in their Virtue by it
self, but to the Value that in God's Account arises thereto on other
Considerations; which is the natural import of the Manner of Expression in Luke
20 35. They which shall be accounted worthy, to obtain that World. etc And Luke
21 36. That ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these Things that shall
come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man. 2 Thessalonians 1. 5 That ye may be
accounted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer

There is a vast Difference between this Scheme, and what is supposed in the
Scheme of those that oppose the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone. This
lays the Foundation of first Acceptance with God, and all actual Salvation
consequent upon it, wholly in Christ and his Righteousness. On the contrary, in
their Scheme, a Reg^d to Man's own Excellency or Virtue is supposed to be
first, and to have the Place of the first Foundation in actual Salvation, though
not in that ineffectual Redemption, which they suppose common to all: They lay
the Foundation of all discriminating Salvation in Man's own Virtue and moral
Excellency: This is the very bottom Stone in this Affair; for they suppose that
it is from Regard to our Virtue, that even a special Interest in Christ it self
is given. The Foundation being thus contrary, the whole Scheme becomes
exceeding diverse and contrary; the one Scheme is an evangelical Scheme, the
other a legal one; the one is utterly inconsistent with our being justified by
Christ's Righteousness, the other not at all.

From what has been said we may understand what has been before mentioned, viz.
How that not only is that Forgiveness of Sin that is granted in Justification
indissolubly connected with a forgiving Spirit in us, but there may be many
Exercises of forgiving Mercy that may properly be granted in Reward for our
forgiving those that trespass against us: For none will deny but that there are
many Acts of divine Forgiveness toward the Saints, that don't presuppose an
unjustified State immediately preceding that Forgiveness; none will deny that
Saints, that never fell from Grace or a justified State, do yet commit many
Sins which God forgives afterward, by laying aside his fatherly Displeasure.
This Forgiveness may be in Reward (...) Forgiveness, without any Prejudice to
the Doctrine that has been maintained, as well as other Mercies and Blessings
consequent on Justification.

With Respect to the second Part of the Objection, that relates to the
different Degrees of Glory, and the seeming Inconsistence there is in it, that
the Degrees of Glory in different Saints should be greater or lesser according
to their inherent Holiness and good Works, and yet that every ones Glory should
be purchased with the Price of the very same imputed Righteousness.

I answer, That Christ by his Righteousness purchased for every one, complete
and perfect Happiness, according to his Capacity: But this don't hinder but
that the Saints being of various Capacities, may have various Degrees of
Happiness, and yet all their Happiness be the Fruit of Christ's Purchase.
Indeed it cannot be properly said that Christ purchased any particular Degree of
Happiness, so that the Value of Christ's Righteousness in the Sight of God, is
sufficient to raise a Believer so high, in Happiness, and no higher; and so
that if the Believer were made happier, it would exceed the Value of Christ's
Righteousness: But in general, Christ purchased eternal Life, or perfect
Happiness for all, according to their several Capacities. The Saints are as so
many Vessels, of different Sizes, cast into a Sea of Happiness, where every
Vessel is full; this Christ purchased for all: But after all it is left to God's
sovereign Pleasure to determine the Largeness of the Vessel; Christ's
Righteousness meddles not with this Matter. Ephesians. 4. 4. 5, 6, 7. There is one
Body, and one Spirit; even as ye are called in one Hope of your Calling; one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, etc. -- But unto every one of us, is given Grace
according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ. God may dispense in this Matter
according to what Rule he pleases, not the less for what Christ has done: He
may dispense either without Condition, or upon what Condition he pleases to
fix. It Is evident that Christ's Righteousness meddles not with this Matter; for
what Christ did, was to fulfill the Covenant of Works; but the Covenant of Works
did not meddle at all with this: If Adam had persever'd in perfect Obedience,
he and his Posterity would have had perfect and full Happiness; every ones
Happiness would have so answered his Capacity, that he would have been
completely blessed; but God would have been at Liberty to have made some of one
Capacity, and others of another as he pleased. The Angels have obtained eternal
Life, or a State of confirmed Glory by a Covenant of Works, whose Condition was
perfect Obedience; but yet some are higher in Glory than others, according to
the several Capacity that God, according to his sovereign Pleasure, has given
them. So that it being still left with God, notwithstanding the perfect
Obedience of the second Adam, to fix the Degree of each ones Capacity, by what
Rule he pleases, he ^gree of each ones Capacity, by what Rule he please; he
has been pleased to fix the Degree of Capacity, and so of Glory by the
Proportion of the Saints Grace and Fruitfulness here: He gives higher Degrees
of Glory, in Reward for higher Degrees of Holiness and good Works, because it
pleases him; and yet all the Happiness of each Saint is indeed the Fruit of the
Purchase of Christ's Obedience. If it had been but one Man, that Christ had
obeyed and died for, and it had pleased God to make him of a very large
Capacity, Christ's perfect Obedience would have purchased that his Capacity
should be filled, and then all his Happiness might properly be said to be the
Fruit of Christ's perfect Obedience; though if he had been of a less Capacity,
he would not have had so much Happiness, by the same Obedience; and yet would
had as much as Christ merited for him. Christ's Righteousness meddles not with
the Degree of Happiness, any otherwise than as he merits that it should be
full, and perfect, according to the Capacity: And so it may be said to be
concerned in the Degree of Happiness, as perfect is a Degree, with Respect to
imperfect; but it meddles not with Degrees of perfect Happiness.

This Matter may be yet better understood, if we consider that Christ and the
whole Church of Saints, are as it were, one Body, of which he is the Head and
they Members, of different Place and Capacity: Now the whole Body, Head and
Members, have Communion in Christ's Righteousness, they are all Partakers of
the Benefit of it; Christ himself the Head is rewarded for it, and every Member
is Partaker of the Benefit and Reward: But it does by no Means follow, that
every Part should equally partake of the Benefit; but every Part in Proportion
to its Place and Capacity; the Head partakes of far more than other Parts,
because it is of a far greater Capacity; and the more noble Members partake of
more than the Inferior. As it is in a natural Body that enjoys perfect Health,
the Head, and the Heart, and Lungs have a greater Share of this Health, they
have it more seated in them, than the Hands and Feet, because they are Parts of
greater Capacity; though the Hands and Feet are as much in perfect Health as
those nobler Parts of the Body: So it is in the mystical Body of Christ, all
the Members are Partakers of the Benefit of the Righteousness of the Head; but
it is according to the different Capacity and Place they have in the Body; and
God determines that Place and Capacity as he pleases; he makes whom he pleases
the Foot, and whom he pleases the Hand, and whom he pleases the Lungs, etc. 1
Cor. 12 18 God has set the Members, every one of them, in the Body, as it has
pleased him. And God efficaciously determines the Place, and Capacity of every
Member, by the different Degrees of Grace, and Assistance in the Improvement of
it, here in this World: Those that he intends for the highest Place in the
Body, he gives them most of his Spirit, the greatest Share of the divine
Nature, the Spirit and Nature of Christ Jesus the Head, and that Assistance
whereby they perform the most excellent Works, and do most abound in them.

Object 4 It may be objected against what has been supposed, viz. That Rewards
are given to our good Works only in Consequence of an Interest in Christ, or in
Testimony of God's Respect to the Excellency or Value of them in his Sight, as
built on an Interest in Christ's Righteousness already obtained, that the
Scripture speaks of an Interest in Christ it self, as being given out of
Respect to our moral Fitness. Matthew. 10 37,38,39. He that loves Father or
Mother more than me, is not worthy of me: He that loves Son or Daughter more
than me, is not worthy of me: He that takes not up his Cross, and follows
after me, is not worthy of me. He that finds his Life shall lose it, etc.
Worthiness here, at least signifies a moral Fitness, or an Excellency or Virtue
that recommends: And this Place seems to intimate as though it were from Respect
to a moral Fitness that Men are admitted, even to an Union with Christ, and
Interest in him: And therefore this Worthiness cannot be consequent on a being
in Christ, and by the Imputation of his Worthiness, or from any Value that is
in us, or in our Actions in God's Sight, as beheld in Christ.

To this I answer, That though Persons when they are accepted, are not accepted
as worthy, yet when they are rejected, they are rejected as unworthy. He that
don't love Christ above other Things, that treats him with such Indignity, as
to set him below earthly Things, shall be treated as unworthy of Christ; his
Unworthiness of Christ, especially in that Particular, shall be marked against
him, and imputed to him: And though he be a professing Christian, and live in the
Enjoyment of the Gospel, and has been visibly ingrafted into Christ, and
admitted as one of his Disciples, as Judas was, yet he shall be thrust out in
Wrath, as a Punishment of his vile Treatment of Christ. The forementioned Words
don't imply that if a Man does love Christ above Father and Mother, etc. that
he would be worthy; the most they imply is, that such a visible Christian shall
be treated, and thrust out, as unworthy. He that believes is not received for
the Worthiness, or moral Fitness of Faith; but yet the visible Christian is
cast out by God, for the Unworthiness and moral Unfitness of Unbelief. A being
accepted as one of Christ's, is not the Reward of Believing; but being thrust
out from being one of Christ's Disciples, after a visible Admission as such, is
properly a Punishment of Unbelief. John 3. 18, 19. He that believes on him is
not condemned; but he that believes not is condemned already, because he has
not be^^^^ed on the Name of the only begotten Son of God: And this is the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men loved Darkness rather
than Light, because their Deeds were Evil. Salvation is promised to Faith as a
free Gift, but Damnation is threatened to Unbelief as a Debt, or Punishment due
to Unbelief. They that believed in the Wilderness, did not enter into Canaan,
because of the Worthiness of their Faith; but God swear in his Wrath that they
that believed not should not enter in, because of the Unworthiness of their
Unbelief* The admitting a Soul to an Union with Christ is an Act of free and
sovereign Grace; but an excluding at Death, and at the Day of Judgment, those
Professors of Christianity that have had the Offers of a Savior, and enjoyed
great Privileges as God's People, is a judicial Proceeding, and a just
Punishment of their unworthy Treatment of Christ. The Design of this Saying of
Christ is to make sensible of the Unworthiness of their Treatment of Christ,
that pro^ess'd him to be their Lord and Savior, an^ (...) him below Father and
Mother, etc. and not to persuade of the Unworthiness of loving him above Father
and Mother. If a Beggar should be offered any great and preciou Gift, but as
soon as offered, should trample it under his Feet, it might be taken from him,
as unworthy to have it: Or if a Malefactor should have his Pardon offered him,
and he be freed from Execution, and should only scoff at it, his Pardon might
be refused him, as unworthy of it; though if he had received it, he would not
have had it for his Worthiness, or as being recommended to it by his Virtue;
for his being a Malefactor supposes him unworthy, and its being offered him to
have it only on accepting, supposes that the King looks for no Worthiness,
nothing in him for which he should bestow Pardon as a Reward. -- This may teach
us how to understand Acts 13 46 It was necessary that the Word of God should
first be spoken to you; but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of everlasting Life, ^o we turn to the Gentiles.

Object. 5 'Ti^ objected against the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone,
That Repentance is evidently spoken of in Scripture as that which is in a
special Manner the Condition of Remission of Sins: But Remission of Sins is by
all allowed to be that wherein Justification does, (at least) in great Part
consist

But it must certainly arise from a Misunderstanding of what the Scripture says
about Repentance, to suppose that Faith and Repentance are two distinct Things,
that in like manner are the Conditions of Justification. For it is m^st plain
from the Scripture that the Condition of Justification, or that in us by which
we are justified, is but one, and that is Faith* Faith and Repentance are not
two distinct Conditions of Justification, not are they two distinct Things,
that together make one Condition of Justification; but Faith comprehends the
whole of that by which we are justified, or by which we come to have an
Interest in Christ, and there is nothing else has a parallel Concern with it,
in the Affair of our Salvation. And this the Divines on the other Side
themselves are sensible of, and therefore they suppose that that Faith that the
Apostle Paul speaks of, which he says we are justified by alone, comprehends in
it Repentance.

And therefore, in Answer to the Objection, I would say, That when Repentance
is spoken of in Scripture as the Condition of Pardon, thereby is not intended
any particular Grace, or Act, properly distinct from Faith, that has a parallel
Influence with it, in the Affair of our Pardon or Justification; but by
Repentance is intended nothing distinct from active Conversion, (or Conversion
actively considered,) as it respects the Term from which. Active Conversion is
a Motion or Exercise of the Mind, that respects two Terms, viz. Sin and God:
And by Repentance is meant this Conversion, or active Change of the Mind, so
far as it is conversant about the Term from which, or about Sin* This is what
the Word Repentance properly signifies; which in the Original of the New
Testament is Metanoia which signifies a Change of the Mind, or which is the
same Thing, the turning or the Conversion of the Mind. Repentance is this
turning, as it respects what is turned from Acts 26. 20. Whereupon, O King
Agrippa, I showed unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all
the Coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn
to God* Both these are the same turning, but only with Respect to opposite
Terms; in the former is expressed the Exercise of Mind that there is about Sin
in this Turning, in the other the Exercise of Mind toward God.

If we look over the Scriptures that speak of evangelical Repentance, we shall
presently see that Repentance is to be understood in this Sense; as Matthew. 9.
13. I am not come to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance. Luke 13 3.
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish; And Chap 15. 7, 10. There is
Joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repents, i. e. over one Sinner that is
converted. Acts 11. 18. Then has God, also to the Gentiles, granted Repentance
unto Life. This is said by the Christians of the Circumcision at Jerusalem,
upon Peter's giving an Account of the Conversion of Cornelius and his Family,
and their embracing the Gospel, though Peter had said nothing expressly about
their Sorrow for Sin. And again, Acts 17. 30. But now commands all Men, every
where, to repent. And Luke 16. 30. Nay Father Abraham, but if one went to them
from the Dead, they would repent. 2 Pet. 3. 9 The Lord is not slack concerning
his Promise, as some Men count Slackness, but is Long-suffering to us ward not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance* It Is
plain that in these and other Places, by Repentance is meant Conversion.

Now, 'ti true, that Conversion i^ the Condition of Pardon and Justification:
But ^f it be so, how absurd is it to say that Conversion is one Condition ^f
Justification, and Faith another; as though they were two distributively
distinct and parallel Conditions? Conversion is the Condition of Justification,
because it is that great Change by which we are brought from Sin to Christ, and
by which we become Believers in him: Agreeable to Matthew. 21. 32. And ye when ye
had seen it, repented not afterward that ye might believe him. When we are
directed to repent that our Sins may be blotted out, it is as much as to say,
Let your Minds and Hearts be changed that your Sins may be blotted out: But if
it be said, Let your Hearts be changed that you may be justified; and (...)
also said, Believe that you may be justified; does it therefore follow that the
Heart's being changed is one Condition of Justification, and Believing another?
But our Minds must be changed, that we may believe, and so may be justified.

And besides, evangelical Repentance, being active Conversion, is not to be
treated of as a particular Grace, properly and entirely distinct from Faith, as
by some it seems to have been. What i Conversion, but the sinful, alienated
Soul's closing with Christ or the Sinner's being brought to believe in Christ?
That Exercise of Soul that there is in Conversion, that respects Sin, cannot be
excluded out of the Nature of Faith in Christ: There is something in Faith, or
closing with Christ that respects Sin, and that is evangelical Repentance: That
Repentance which in Scripture is called Repentance for the Remission of Sins,
is that very Principle or Operation of the Mind it self, that i called Faith,
so far as it is conversant about Sin. Justifying Faith in a Mediator, is
conversant about two Things: It is conversant about Sin or Evil, to be rejected
and to be delivered from by the Mediator, and about positive Good to be
accepted and obtained by the Mediator; as conversant about ^he former of these,
it is evangelical Repentance or Repentance for Remission of Sins. Surely they
must be very ignorant, or at least very inconsiderate, of the whole Tenor of
the Gospel, that think that that Repentance by which Remission of Sins is
obtained, can be completed, as to all that is essential to it, without any
Respect to Christ, or Application of the Mind to the Mediator, who alone has
made Atonement for Sin: Surely so great a Part of Salvation as Remission of
Sins, is not to be obtained, without looking, or (...) to the great and only
Savior. It Is true Repentance in its more general abstracted Nature, is only a
Sorrow for Sin, and forsaking of it, which is a Duty of natural Religion; but
evangelical Repentance, or Repentance for Remission (...) Sins, has more than
this essential to it; a Dependence of Soul on the Mediator for Deliverance from
Sin is of the Essence of it.

That justifying Repentance has the Nature of Faith seems evident by Acts 19 4.
Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the Baptism of Repentance, saying
unto the People, that they should believe on him that should come after him,
that is on Christ Jesus. The latter Words, Saying unto the People, that they
should believe on him etc. are evidently exegetical of the former, and explain
how he preached Repentance for the Remission of Sins: When it is said that he
preached Repentance for the Remission of Sin, saying that they should believe
on Christ, it cannot be supposed but that it is intended, that his saying that
they should believe on Christ, was as directing them what to do that they might
obtain the Remission of Sins. So 2 Timothy 2. 25. In Meekness instructing those
that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance, to the
acknowleging of the Truth. That acknowleging of the Truth which there is in
Believing, is here spoken of as what is attained in Repentance. And on the
other Hand, that Faith includes Repentance in its Nature, is evident by the
Apostle's speaking of Sin as destroyed in Faith, Gal. 2. 18. In the preceding
Verses, the Apostle mentions an Objection against the Doctrine of Justification
by Faith alone, viz. that it tends to encourage Men in Sin, and so to make
Christ the Minister of Sin: This Objection he rejects and refuses with this, If
I build again the Things that I destroyed, I make my self a Transgressor. If
Sin be destroyed by Faith, it must be by Repentance of Sin included in it; for
we know that it is our Repentance of Sin, or the Metanoia, or turning of the
Mind from Sin, that is our destroying our Sin.

That in justifying Faith, that directly respects Sin, or the Evil to be
delivered from by the Mediator, is as follows, A Sense of our own Sinfulness,
and the Hatefulness of it, and an hearty Acknowlegement of its Dese^^ of the
threatened Punishment, looking to the free Mercy of God in a Redeemer, for
Deliverance from it and its Punishment.

Concerning this, here described, three Things may be noted, 1. That it is the
very same with that evangelical Repentance to which Remission of Sins is
promised in Scripture. 2. That it is all of it of the Essence of justifying
Faith, and is the same with that Faith, so far as it is conversant about the
Evil to be delivered from by the Mediator. 3 That this is indeed the proper and
peculiar Condition of Remission of Sins.

1. All of it is essential to evangelical Repentance, and is indeed the very
Thing meant by that Repentance, to which Remission of Sins is promised in the
Gospel. As to the former Part of the Description, viz A Sense of our own
Sinfulness, and the Hatefulness of it, and an hearty Acknowlegement of its
Desert of Wrath, none will deny it to be included in Repentance: But this don't
comprehend the whole Essence of evangelical Repentance; but what follows does
also properly and essentially belong to its Nature, looking to the free Mercy
of God in a Redeemer, for Deliverance from it, and the Punishment of it. That
Repentance to which Remission is promised not only always has this with it, but
it is contained in it, as what is of the proper Nature and Essence of it: And
Respect is ever had to this in the Nature of Repentance, whenever Remission is
promised to it; and it is especially from Respect to this in the Nature of
Repentance, that it has that Promise made to it: If this latter Part be
missing, it fails of the Nature of that evangelical Repentance to which
Remission of Sins is promised: If Repentance remains in Sorrow for Sin, and
don't reach to a looking to the free Mercy of God in Christ for Pardon, it is
not that which is the Condition of Pardon, neither shall Pardon be obtained by
it Evangelical Repentance is an Humiliation for Sin before God; but the Sinner
never comes and humbles himself before God, in any other Repentance, but that
which includes an hoping in his Mercy for Remission: If his Sorrow be not
accompanied with that, there will be no coming to God in it, but a flying
further from him. There is some Worship of God in justifying Repentance; but
that there is not in any other Repentance, but that which has a Sense of, and
Faith in the divine Mercy to forgive Sin. Psalm 130 4. There is Forgiveness
with thee, that thou may be feared. The Promise of Mercy to a true Penitent,
in Prove. 28. 13. is expressed in these Terms, Whosoever confesses, and forsakes
his Sins, shall have Mercy. But there is Faith in God's Mercy in that
confessing. The Psalmist in Psalm 32 speaking of the Blessedness of the Men
whose Transgression is forgiven, and whose Sin is covered, to whom the Lord
imputes not Sin, says, that while he kept Silence, his Bones waxed old, but
then he acknowleged his Sin unto God, his Iniquity he did not hide, he said he
would confess his Transgression to the Lord, and then God forgave the Iniquity
of his Sin. The Manner of Expression plainly holds forth that then he began to
encourage himself in the Mercy of God, when before his Bones waxed old, while
he kept Silence; and therefore the Apostle Paul in the 4 of Romans brings this
Instance, to confirm the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone, that he had
been insisting on. When Sin is aright confessed to God, there is always Faith
in that Act: That confessing of Sin that is joined with Despair, such as was in
Judas, is not the Confession to which the promise is made. In Acts 2. 38. the
Direction that was given to those that were pricked in their Heart, with a
Sense of the Guilt of Sin, was to repent and be baptized in the Name of Jesus
Christ, for the Remission of their Sins. A being baptized in the Name of Christ
for the Remission of Sins, implied Faith in Christ for the Remission of Sins.
Repentance for the Remission of Sins, was typified of old by the Priests
confessing the Sins of the People over the Scapegoat, laying his Hands on him,
Lev. 16. 21. denoting that it is that Repentance and Confession of Sin only that
obtains Remission, that is made over the Scapegoat, over Christ the great
Sacrifice, and with Dependence on him. Many other Things might be produced from
the Scripture, that do in like manner confirm this Point, but these may be
sufficient.

2. All the forementioned Description is of the Essence of justifying Faith,
and not different from it, so far as it is conversant about Sin, or the Evil to
be delivered from, by the Mediator. For it is doubtless of the Essence of
justifying Faith, to embrace Christ as a Savior from Sin and its Punishment,
and all that is contained in that Act is contained in the Nature of Faith it
self: But in the Act of embracing Christ as a Savior from our Sin and its
Punishment, is implied a Sense of our Sinfulness, and a Hatred of our Sins, or
a rejecting them with Abhorrence, and a Sense of our Desert of their
Punishment. An embracing Christ as a Savior from Sin implies the contrary Act
toward Sin, viz. rejecting of Sin: If we fly to the Light to be delivered from
Darkness, the same Act is contrary toward Darkness, viz. a rejecting of it. In
Proportion to the Earnestness or Appetite with which we embrace Christ as a
Savior from Sin, in the same Proportion is the Abhorrence with which we reject
Sin, in the same Act. Yea if we suppose there to be in the Nature of Faith as
conversant about Sin, no more than the hearty embracing Christ as a Savior
from the Punishment of Sin, this Act will imply in it the whole of the
abovementioned Description. It implies a Sense of our own Sinfulness: Certainly
in the hearty embracing a Savior from the Punishment of our Sinfulness, there
is the Exercise of a Sense of our Sinfulness, or that we be sinful: We cannot
heartily embrace Christ as a Savior from the Punishment of that which we are
not sensible we are guilty of. There is also in the same Act, a Sense of our
Desert of the threatened Punishment: We cannot heartily embrace Christ as a
Savior from that, which we be not sensible that we have deserved: For if we
are not sensible that we have deserved the Punishment, we should not be
sensible that we have any Need of a Savior from it, or at least, shall not be
convinced but that the God that offers the Savior, unjustly makes him needful;
and we cannot heartily embrace such an Offer. And further, there is implied in a
hearty embracing Christ as a Savior from Punishment, not only a Conviction of
Conscience, that we have deserved the Punishment, such as the Devils and Damned
have; but there is a hearty Acknowlegement of it, with the Submission of the
Soul, so as with the Accord of the Heart, to own that God might be just, and
worthy in the Punishment. If the Heart rises against the Act or Judgment of
God, in holding us obliged to the Punishment, when he offers us his Son as a
Savior from the Punishment, we cannot with the Consent of the Heart receive
him in that Character: But if Persons thus submit to the Righteousness of so
dreadful a Punishment of Sin, this carries in it an Hatred of Sin.

That such a Sense of our Sinfulness, and utter Unworthiness, and De^ert of
Punishment, belongs to the Nature of saving Faith, is what the Scripture from
time to time seems to hold forth; as particularly in Matthew. 15. 26, 27, 28. But
he answered and said, it is not not meet to take the Children's Bread, and to
cast it to Dogs. And she said, truth Lord: yet the Dogs eat of the Crumbs which
fall from their Master's Table. Then Jesus answered, and said unto her, O
Woman, gre^^^ thy Faith. And Luke 7. 6, 7, 8, 9. The Centurion sent Friends to
him, saying unto him, Lord trouble not thy self, for I am not worthy that thou
should enter under my Roof: wherefore neither thought I my self worthy to
come unto thee, but say in a Word, and my Servant shall be healed: for I am a
Man set under Authority, etc. -- When Jesus heard these Things, he marvelled at
him, and turned him about and said unto the People that followed him, I say
unto you, I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel. And also Verses
37, 38. And behold a Woman in the City, which was a Sinner, when she knew that
Jesus sat at Meat in the Pharisees House, brought an Alabaster Box of Ointment,
and stood at his Feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his Feet with
Tears, and did wipe them with the Hairs of her Head, and kissed his Feet, and
anointed them with the Ointment. Together with Verse 50 He said unto the Woman,
thy Faith has saved thee; go in Peace.

These Things don't necessarily suppose that Repentance and Faith are Words of
just the same Signification; for it is only so much in justifying Faith, as
respects the Evil to be delivered from, by the Savior, that is called
Repentance: And besides, both Repentance and Faith, take them only in their
general Nature, and they are entirely distinct; Repentance is a Sorrow for Sin,
and forsaking of it; and Faith is a trusting in God's Sufficiency and Truth:
But Faith and Repentance, as evangelical Duties, or justifying Faith, and
Repentance for Remission of Sins, contain more in them, and imply a Respect to
a Mediator, and involve each others Nature Agreeable to this, is what Mr. Lock
says in his second Vindication of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. Vol.
2. of his Works, (...) 630, 631. "The believing him therefore, to be the
Messiah, is very often, with great Reason put both for Faith and Repentance
too, which are sometimes set down singly, where one is put for both, as
implying the other"
; though it be true, that they still bear the Name of Faith and Repentance,
from those general moral Virtues, that Repentance which is a Duty of natural
Religion, and that Faith that was a Duty required under the first Covenant,
that are contained in this evangelical Act; which severally appear, when this
Act is considered with Respect to its different Terms and Objects, that it is
conversant about.

It may be objected here, that the Scripture sometimes mentions Faith and
Repentance together, as if they were entirely distinct Things; as in Mark 1. 15
Repent ye, and believe the Gospel. But there is no need of understanding these
as two distinct Conditions of Salvation, but the Words are exegetical one of
another: It is to teach us after what Manner we must repent, viz. as believing
the Gospel, and after what Manner we must believe the Gospel, viz. as
repenting: These Words no more prove Faith and Repentance to be entirely
distinct, than those forementioned Matthew. 21. 32 And ye when ye had seen it,
repented not afterward, that ye might believe him. Or those 2 Timothy 2. 25. If
peradventure God will give them Repentance, to the acknowleging of the Truth.
The Apostle in Acts 19 4 seems to have Reference to these Words of John the
Baptist, John baptized with the Baptism of Repentance, saying unto the People,
that they should believe, etc. where the latter Words* as we have already
observed, are to explain how he preached Repentance.

Another Scripture, where Faith and Repentance are mentioned together, is Acts
20 21 Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks. Repentance toward
God, and Faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ. It may be objected. that in this
Place. Faith and Repentance are not only spoken of as distinct Things, but
having distinct Objects.

To this I answer, That it is true that Faith and Repentance in their general
Nature* are distinct Things: And Repentance for the Remission of Sins, or that
in justifying Faith that respects the Evil to be delivered from, so far as it
regards that Term, which is what especially denominates it Repentance, has
Respect to God as the Object, because he is the Being offended by Sin, and to
be reconciled, but that in this justifying Act, whence it is denominated Faith,
does more especially respect Christ. -- But let us interpret it how we will,
the Objection of Faith being here so distinguished from Repentance, is as much
of an Objection against the Scheme of those that oppose Justification by Faith
alone, as against this Scheme; for they hold that the justifying Faith that the
Apostle Paul speaks of, includes Repentance, as has been already observed

3. This Repentance that has been described. is indeed the special Condition of
Remission of Sin. This seems very evident by the Scripture, as particularly,
Mark 1 4. John did baptize in the Wilderness, and preach the Baptism of
Repentance, for the Remission of Sins. So, Luke (...) And he came into all the
Country about J^^^an, preaing the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of
(...) Luke 24 47 And that Repentance, and Remission of Sins, should be preached
in his Name among all Nations. Acts 5 31. Him has God exalted with his own
Right Hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give Repentance unto Israel,
and Forgiveness of Sins Chap 2, 38 Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in
the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins. And, Chap. 3. 19. Repent,
ye therefore and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted out. The like is
evident by Lev. 26 40, 41, 42 Job 33. 27, 28. Psalm 32. 5 Prove. 28 13. Jer. 3.
13. And 1 John 1. 9 and other Places.

And the Reason may be plain from what has been said. We need not wonder that
that in Faith, that especially respects Sin, should be especially the Condition
of Remission of Sins; or that this Motion, or Exercise of the Soul, as it
rejects and flies from Evil, and embraces Christ as a Savior from it, should
especially be the Condition of being free from that Evil; in like manner as the
same Principle or Motion, as it seeks good, and cleaves to Christ as the
Procurer of that Good, should be the Condition of obtaining that Good. Faith
with Respect to Good is accepting, and with Respect to Evil it is rejecting;
Yea this rejecting Evil, is it self an Act of Acceptance; it is accepting
Freedom or Separation from that Evil; and this Freedom or Separation is the
Benefit bestowed in Remission. No Wonder that that in Faith which immediately
respects this Benefit, and is our Acceptance of this Benefit, should be the
special Condition of our having it: It Is so with Respect to all the Benefits
that Christ has purchased. Trusting in God through Christ for such a particular
Benefit that we need, is the special Condition of obtaining that Benefit. When
we need Protection from Enemies, the Exercise of Faith with Respect to such a
Benefit, or trusting in Christ for Protection from Enemies, is especially the
Way to obtain that particular Benefit, rather than trusting in Christ for
something else; and so of any other Benefit that might be mentioned. So Prayer,
(which is the Expression of Faith) for a particular Mercy needed, is especially
the Way to obtain that Mercy. If Repentance justifies, or be that by which we
obtain Pardon of Sin any other Way than this, it must be either as a Virtue or
Righteousness, or something amiable in us; or else it must be, that our Sorrow
and condemning what is past, is accepted as some Atonement for it; both which
are equally contrary to the Gospel-Doctrine of Justification by Christ.


So that we see that no Argument can be drawn from hence against the Doctrine
of Justification by Faith alone. And there is that in the Nature of Repentance,
which peculiarly tends to establish the Contrary of Justification by Works: for
nothing so much renounces our own Worthiness and Excellency, as Repentance; the
very Nature of it is to acknowledge our own utter Sinfulness and Unworthiness,
and to renounce our own Goodness, and all Confidence in self; and so to trust
in the Propitiation of the Mediator, and ascribe all the Glory of Forgiveness
to him.

Object. 6 The last Objection I shall mention, is that Paragraph in the second
Chapter of James, where Persons are said expressly to be justified by Works;
Verse 21. Was not Abraham our Father justified by Works? Verse 24. Ye see then
how that by Works a Man is justified and not by Faith only. Verse 25. Was not
Raha^ the Harlot justified by Works?

In Answer to this Objection, I would

1. Take notice of the great Unfairness of the Divines that oppose us, in the
Improvement they make of this Passage against us. All will allow that in that
Proposition of St. James, By Works a Man is justified, and not by Faith only,
one of the Terms, either the Word Faith, or else the Word justify, is not to be
understood precisely in the same Sense, as the same Terms when used by St.
Paul; because they suppose, as well as we, that it was not the Intent of the
Apostle James to contradict St. Paul, in that Doctrine of Justification by
Faith alone, that he had instructed the Churches in: But if we understand both
the Terms, as used by each Apostle, in precisely the same Sense, then what one
asserts is a precise, direct, and full Contradiction of the other, the one
affirming and the other denying the very same Thing. So that all the
Controversy from this Text comes to this, viz. Which of these two Terms, shall
be understood in a Diversity from St. Paul. They say that it is the Word Faith;
for they suppose, that when the Apostle Paul uses the Word, and makes Faith
that by which alone we are justified, that then by it is understood a
Compliance with, and Practice of Christianity in general; so as to include all
saving christian Virtue and Obedience. But as the Apostle James uses the Word
Faith in this Place, they suppose thereby is to be understood only an Assent of
the Understanding to the Truth of Gospel Doctrines, as distinguished from good
Works, and that (...) may exist separate from them, and from all saving Grace.
We on the other hand suppose that the Word Justify is to be understood in a
different Sense from the Apostle Paul. So that they are forced to go as far, in
their Scheme, in altering the Sense of Terms from Paul's Use of them, as we.
But yet at the same Time, that they freely vary the Sense of the former of
them, viz. Faith, yet when we understand the latter, viz. Justify, in a
different Sense from St. Paul, they cry out of us, What Necessity of framing
this Distinction, but only to serve an Opinion? At this Rate a Man may maintain
any Thing, though never so contrary to Scripture, and elude the clearest Text in
the Bible! Though they don't show us why we have not as good Warrant to
understand the Word Justify in a Diversity from St. Paul, as they the Word
Faith. If the Sense of one of the Words must be varied on either Scheme, to
make the Apostle James's Doctrine consistent with the Apostle Paul's, and the
varying the Sense of one Term or the other, be all that stands in the Way of
their agreeing with either Scheme, and the varying the Sense of the latter be
in it self as fair as of the former, then the Text lies as fair for one Scheme
as the other, and can no more fairly be an Objection against our Scheme than
theirs. And if so, what becomes of all this great Objection from this Passage
in James?

2. If there be no more Difficulty in varying the Sense of one of these Terms
than another, from any Thing in the Text it self, so as to make the Words suit
with either Scheme, then certainly that is to be chosen, that is most agreeable
to the Current of Scripture, and other Places where the same Matter is more
particularly and fully treated of; and therefore that we should understand the
Word Justify, in this Passage of James, in a Sense in some Respect diverse from
that in which St. Paul uses it. For by what has been already said it may
appear, that there is no one Doctrine in the whole Bible is more fully
asserted, explained, and urged than the Doctrine of Justification by Faith
alone, without any of our own Righteousness.

3. There is a very fair Interpretation of this Passage of St James, that is no
Way inconsistent with this Doctrine of Justification, which I have shown that
other Scriptures do so abundantly teach, which Interpretation the Words
themselves will as well allow of, as that which the Objectors put upon them,
and much better agrees with the Context; and that is, that Works are here
spoken of as justifying as Evidences. A Man may be said to be justified by that
which clears him, or vindicates him, or makes the Goodness of his Cause
manifest. When a (...) has a Cause tried in a civil Court, and is justified or
(...) he may be said in different Senses to be justified or cleared, by the
Goodness of his Cause, and by the Goodness of the Evidences of it. He may be
said to be cleared by what evidences ^his Cause to be good; but not in the same
Sense as he is by that which makes his Cause to be good. That which renders
(...) Cause good, is the proper Ground of his Justification (...) it is by that
that he is himself a proper Subject of it (...) but Evidences justify, only as
they manifest that his Cause is good in Fact, whether they are of such a Nature
as to have any Influence to render it so or no. It Is by Works that our Cause
appears to be good; but by Faith our Cause not only appears to be good, but
becomes good; because thereby we are united to Christ. That the Word Justify
should be sometimes understood to signify the former of these, as well as the
latter, is agreeable to the Use of the Word in common Speech; as we say such an
one stood up to justify another, i. e. he endeavored to show or manifest his
Cause to be good. And it is certain that the Word is sometimes used in this
Sense in Scripture, when speaking of our being justified before God: as where
it is said we shall be justified by our Words; Matthew. 12 37. For by thy Words
thou shall be justified, and by thy Words thou shall be condemned. It cannot be
meant that Men are accepted before God, on the Account of their Words; for God
has told us nothing more plainly, than that it is the Heart that he looks at,
and that when he acts as Judge toward Men, in order to justifying or
condemning, he tries the Heart, Jer. 11.20. But, O Lord of Hosts, that judge
righteously, that triest the Reins and the Heart, let me see thy Vengeance on
them; for unto thee have I revealed my Cause. Psalm 7. 8. 9. The Lord shall
judge the People: judge me, O Lord, according to my Righteousness, and
according to mine Integrity that is in me. O let the Wickedness of the Wicked
come to an End; but establish the Just; for the righteous God tries the Hearts
and Reins. Verse 11. God judges the Righteous. And many other Places to the
like Purpose. And therefore Men can be justified by their Words, no otherwise
than as Evidences or Manifestations of what is in the Heart. And it is thus that
Christ speaks of Words in this very Place, as is evident by the Context. Verse
34, 35 Out of the Abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks. A good Man out of
the good Treasure of the Heart, etc. The Words, or Sounds themselves, are
neither Parts of Godliness, nor Evidences of Godliness, but as Signs of what is
inward.

God himself when he acts toward Men as Judge, in Order to a declarative
Judgment, makes use of Evidences, and so judges Men by their Works. And
therefore at the Day of Judgment, God will judge Men according to their Works:
For though God will stand in no Need of Evidence to inform him what is right, yet
it is to be considered that he will then sit in Judgment; not as earthly Judges
do, to find out what is right in a Cause, but to declare and manifest what is
right; and therefore that Day is called by the Apostle, the Day of the
Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2 5.

To be justified is to be approved and accepted: But a Man may be said to be
approved and accepted in two Respects; the one is to be approved really, and
the other to be approved and accepted declaratively. Justification is twofold;
it is either the Acceptance and Approbation of the Judge it self, or the
Manifestation of that Approbation, by a Sentence or Judgment declared by the
Judge, either to our own Consciences, or to the World. If Justification be
understood in the former Sense, for the Approbation it self, that is only that
by which we become fit to be approved: But if it be understood in the latter
Sense, for the Manifestation of this Approbation, it is by whatever is a proper
Evidence of that Fitness. In the former, only Faith is concerned; because it is
by that only in us, that we become fit to be accepted and approved: In the
latter, whatever is a^ Evidence of our Fitness, is alike concerned And
therefore take Justification in this Sense, and then Faith, and all other
Graces, and good Works, have a common and equal Concern in it: For any other
Grace, or holy Act, is equally an Evidence of a Qualification for Acceptance or
Approbation, as Faith.

To justify has always, in common Speech, signified indifferently, either
simply Approbation, or testifying that Approbation; sometimes one, and
sometimes the other: And that because they are both the same, only as one is
outwardly, what the other is inwardly. So we, and it may be all Nations, are
wont to give the same Names to two Things, when one is only declarative of the
other. Thus sometimes judging, intends only judging in our Thoughts; at other
Times, testifying and declaring Judgment. So such Words a justify, condemn,
accept, reject, prize, slight, approve, renounce, are sometimes put for mental
Acts, at other Times for an outward Treatment. So in the Sense in which the
Apostle James seems to use the Word justify, for manifestative Justification, a
Man is justified not only by Faith, but also by Works; as a Tree is manifested
to be good, not only by immediately examining the Tree, but also by the Fruit.
Prove. 20 11. Even a Child is known by his D^ings, whether his Work be pure, and
whether it be right.

The Drift of the Apostle don't require that he should be understood in any
other Sense: For all that he aims at, as appears by a View of the Context, is
to prove that good Works are necessary. The Error of those that he opposed was
this, That good Works were not necessary to Salvation; that if they did but
believe that there was but one God, and that Christ was the Son of God, and the
like; and were baptized; (...) they were safe, let them live how they would:
which Doctrine greatly tended to Licentiousness. The evincing the contrary of
this, is evidently the Apostle's Scope.

And that we should understand the Apostle of Works justifying as an Evidence,
and in a a^clarative Judgment, is what a due Consideration of the Context will
naturally lead us to For it is plain that the Apostle is here insisting on Works
in the Quality of a necessary Manifestation and Evidence of Faith, or as what
the Truth of Faith is showed or made to appear by: As Verse 18. Show me thy
Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works. And when he
says, Verse 26. As the Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works
is dead also. It Is much more rational and natural, to understand him as
speaking of Works as the proper Signs and Evidences of the Reality, Life and
Goodness of Faith. Not that the very Works or Actions done are properly the
Life of Faith, as the Spirit in the Body; but it is the active, working Nature
of Faith, of which the Actions or Works done are the Signs, that is it self the
Life and Spirit of Faith. The Sign of a Thing is often in Scripture Language
said to be that Thing. As it is in that Comparison by which the Apostle
illustrates it. It Is not the Actions themselves of a Body, that is properly the
Life or Spirit of the Body; but it is the active Nature, of which those Actions
or Motions are the Signs, that are the Life of the Body. That which makes Men
call any Thing alive, is that they observe that it has an active operative
Nature in it; which they observe no otherwise than by the Actions or Motions
that are the Signs of it. It Is plainly the Apostle's Aim to prove that Works
are necessary from that, That if Faith has not Works, it is a Sign that it is
not a good Sort of Faith; which would not have been to his Purpose, if it was
his Design to show that it is not by Faith alone, though of a ^ight Sort, that we
have Acceptance with God, but that we are accepted on the Account of Obedience
as well as Faith. It Is evident by the Apostle's Reasoning, that the Necessity
of Works that he speaks of, is not as having a parallel Concern in our
Salvation with Faith; but he speaks of Works only as related to Faith, and
expressive of it; which after all leaves Faith the alone fundamental Condition,
without any Thing else having a parallel Concern with it in this Affair, and
other Things Conditions, only as several Expressions, and Evidences of it.

That the Apostle speaks of Works justifying only as a Sign, or Evidence, and
in God's declarative Judgment, is further confirmed by Verse 21. Was not
Abraham our Father justified by Works, when he had offered up Isaac his Son
upon the Altar? Here the Apostle seems plainly to refer to that declarative
Judgment of God, concerning Abraham* Sincerity, manifested to him, for the
Peace and Assurance of his own Conscience, after his offering up Isaac his Son
on the Altar, that we have Account of, Gen 22. 12 Now I know that thou fear
God; seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me. But here it
is plain, and expressed in the very Words of Justification or Approbation, that
this Work of Abraham's, his offering up his Son on the Altar, justified him as
an Evidence. When the Apostle James says we are justified by Works, he may, and
ought to be understood in a Sense agreeble to the Instance he brings for the
Proof of it: But Justification in that Instance appears by the Words of
Justification themselves referred to, to be by Works as an Evidence And where
this Instance of Abraham's Obedience is elsewhere mentioned, in the New
Testament, it is mentioned as a Fruit and Evidence of his Faith. Heb. 11. 17. By
Faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac, and he that had received
the Promises, offered up his only begotten Son.

And in the other Instance which the Apostle mentions, Verse 25. Likewise also
was not Rahab the Harlot justified by Works, when she had received the
Messengers, and had sent them out another Way? The Apostle refers to a
declarative Judgment, in that particular Testimony which was given of God's
Approbation of her as a Believer, in directing ^^^hua to save her, when the
Rest of Jericho was destroyed, Josh. 6. 25. And Joshua saved Rahab the Harlot
alive, and her Father's Household, and all that she had; and she dwells in
Israel even unto this Day; because she hid the Messengers which Joshua sent to
spy out Jericho This was accepted as an Evidence and Expression of her Faith.
Heb 11 31 By Faith the Harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not,
when she had received the Spies with Peace The Apostle in saying, Was not Rahab
the Harlot justified by Works? by the Manner of his Speaking has Reference to
something in her History; but we have no Account in her History of any other
Justification of her but this

4. If notwithstanding, any choose to take Justification in St. James,
precisely as we do in Paul's Epistles, for God's Acceptance or Approbation it
self, and not any Expression of that Approbation, what has been already said
concerning the Manner in which Acts of evangelical Obedience are concerned in
the Affair of our Justification, affords a very easy, clear, and full Answer:
For if we take Works as Acts or Expressions of Faith, they are not excluded; so
a Man is not justified by Faith only, but also by Works; i. e. he is not
justified only by Faith as a Principle in the Heart, or in its first and more
immanent Acts, but also by the effective Acts of it in Life, which are the
Expressions of the Life of Faith, as the Operations and Actions of the Body are
of the Life of that; agreeable to Verse 26.

What has been said in Answer to these Objections, may also, I hope, abundantly
serve for an Answer to that Objection, that is often made against this
Doctrine, viz. That it encourages Licentiousness in Life. For, from what has
been said, we may see, that the Scripture Doctrine of Justification by Faith
alone, without any Manner of Goodness or Excellency of ours, does in no wise
diminish, either the Necessity, or Benefit of a sincere evangelical universal
Obedience: In that Man's Salvation is not only indissolubly connected with it,
and Damnation with the Want of it, in those that have Opportunity for i^, but
that it depends upon it in many Respects; as it is the Way to it, and the
necessary Preparation for it, and also as eternal Blessings are bestowed in
Reward for it, and as our Justification in our own Consciences, and at the Day
of Judgment, depends on it, as the proper Evidence of our acceptable State, and
that, even in accepting of us as entitled to Life in our Justification, God has
Respect to this, as that on which the Fitness of such an Act of Justification
depends: So that our Salvation does as truly depend upon it, as if we were
justified for the moral Excellency of it. And besides all this, the Degree of
our Happiness to all Eternity is suspended on, and determined by the Degree of
this. So that this Gospel. Scheme of Justification is as far from encouraging
Licentiousness, and contains as much to encourage and excite to strict and
universal Obedience, and the utmost possible Eminency of Holiness, as any
Scheme that can be devised, and indeed unspeakably more.

I come now to the

V. and last Thing proposed, which is to consider the Importance of this
Doctrine.

I know there are many that make as though this Controversy was of no great
Importance; that it is chiefly a Matter of nice Speculation, depending on
certain subtle Distinctions, which many that make use of them don't understand
themselves; and that the Difference is not of such Consequence, as to be worth
the being zealous about; and that more Hurt is done by raising Disputes about
it, than good.

Indeed I am far from thinking that it is of absolute Necessity that Persons
should understand, and be agreed upon, all the Distinctions needful
particularly to explain and defend this Doctrine, against all Cavils and
Objections; (though all Christians should strive after an Increase of Knowledge;
and none should content themselves without some clear and distinct
Understanding in this Point:) But that we should believe in the General,
according to the clear and abundant Revelations of God's Word, that it is none
of our own Excellency, Virtue, or Righteousness, that is the Ground of our
being received from a State of Condemnation into a State of Acceptance in God's
Sight, but only Jesus Christ, and his Righteousness, and Worthiness, received
by Faith. This I think to be of great Importance, at least in Application to
our selves; and that for the following Reasons.

1. The Scripture treats of this Doctrine, as a Doctrine of very great
Importance. That there is a certain Doctrine of Justification by Faith, in
Opposition to Justification by the Works of the Law, that the Apostle Paul
insists upon as of the greatest Importance, none will deny; because there is
nothing in the Bible more apparent. The Apostle under the infallible Conduct of
the Spirit of God, thought it worth his most strenuous and zealous disputing
about and defending. He speaks of the contrary Doctrine as fatal and ruinous to
the Souls of Men, in the latter End of the ninth Chapter of Romans, and
beginning of the tenth. He speaks of it as subversive of the Gospel of Christ,
and calls it another Gospel, and says concerning it, if any one, though an
Angel from Heaven preach it, let him be accursed. Gal 1. 6, 7, 8, 9. compared
with the following Part of the Epistle. Certainly we must allow the Apostles to
be good Judges of the Importance and Tendency of Doctrines; at least the Holy
Ghost in them* And doubtless we are safe, and in no Danger of Harshness and
Censoriousness, if we only follow him, and keep close to his express Teachings,
in what we believe and say of the hurtful and pernicious Tendency of any Error.
-- Why are we to blame, or to be cried out of, for saying what the Bible has
taught us to say, or for believing what the Holy Ghost has taught us to that
End that we might believe it?

2. The adverse Scheme lays another Foundation of Man's Salvation than God has
laid. I don't now speak of that ineffectual Redemption that they suppose to be
universal, and what all Mankind are equally the Subjects of; but, I say, it
lays entirely another Foundation of Man's actual, discriminating Salvation, or
that Salvation wherein true Christians differ from wicked Men. We suppose the
Foundation of this to be Christ's Worthiness and Righteousness: On the
contrary, that Scheme supposes it to be Men's own Virtue; even so, that this is
the Ground of a saving Interest in Christ it self. It takes away Christ out of
the Place of the bottom Stone, and puts in Men's own Virtue in the Room of him:
So that Christ himself in the Affair of distinguishing actual Salvation, is
laid upon this Foundation. And the Foundation being so different, I leave it to
every one to judge whether the Difference between the two Schemes consists only
in Punctilios of small Consequence. The Foundations being contrary makes the
whole Scheme exceeding Diverse and Opposite; the one is a Gospel Scheme, the
other a legal one.

3. It Is in this Doctrine, that the most essential Difference lies, between the
Convenant of Grace, and the first Covenant. The adverse Scheme of Justification
supposes that we are justified by our Works, in the very same Sense wherein Man
was to have been justified by his Works under the first Covenant. By that
Covenant our first Parents were not to have had eternal Life given them, for
any proper Merit in their Obedience; because their perfect Obedience was a Debt
that they owed God: Nor was it to be bestowed for any Proportion between the
Dignity of their Obedience, and the Value of the Reward; but only it was to be
bestowed from a Regard to a moral Fitness in the Virtue of their Obedience, to
the Reward of God's Favor; and a Title to eternal Life was to be given them,
as a Testimony of God's Pleasedness with their Works, or his Regard to the
inherent Beauty of their Virtue. And so it is the very same Way that those in
the adverse Scheme suppose that we are received into God's special Favor now,
and to those saving Benefits that are the Testimonies of it. I am sensible the
Divines of that Side, entirely disclaim the popish Doctrine of Merit; and are
free to speak of our utter Unworthiness, and the great Imperfection of all our
Services: But after all, it is our Virtue as imperfect as it is, that recommends
Men to God, by which good Men come to have a saving Interest in Christ, and
God's Favor, rather than others; and these Things are bestowed in Testimony of
God's Respect to their Goodness. So that whether they will allow the Term Merit
or no, yet they hold that we are accepted by our own Merit, in the same Sense,
though not in the same Degree, as under the first Covenant.

But the great and most distinguishing Difference between that Covenant, and
the Covenant of Grace is, that by the Covenant of Grace we are not thus
justified by our own Works, but only by Faith in Jesus Christ. It Is on this
Account chiefly that the new Covenant deserves the Name of a Covenant of Grace,
as is evident by Rom 4 16 Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by Grace.
And, Chap. 3 20, 24 Therefore by the Deeds of the Law there shall no Flesh be
justified in his Sight; -- Being justified freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. And, Chap. 11. 6. And if by Grace, then it
is no more of Works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace: But if it be of Works,
then it is no more Grace, otherwise Work is no more Work. Gal. 5 4 Whosoever of
you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace. And therefore the
Apostle when he in the same Epistle to the Galatians, speaks of the Doctrine of
Justification by Works as another Gospel, he adds, which is not another, Chap
1. Verse 6, 7. It Is no Gospel at all; it is Law: It Is no Covenant of Grace, but
of Works: It Is not an evangelical, but a legal Doctrine. Certainly that
Doctrine wherein consists the greatest and most essential Difference between
the Covenant of Grace and the first Covenant, must be a Doctrine of great
Importance. That Doctrine of the Gospel by which above all others it is worthy
of the Name of Gospel, is doubtless a very important Doctrine of the Gospel.

4 This is the main Thing that fallen Men stood in Need of divine Revelation
for, to teach us how we that have sinned, may come to be again accepted of God;
or which is the same Thing, How the Sinner may be justified Something beyond
the Light of Nature is necessary to Salvation, chiefly on this Account. Mere
natural Reason afforded no Means by which we could come to the Knowledge of
this, it depending on the sovereign Pleasure of the Being that we had offended
by Sin. This seems to be the great Drift of that Revelation that God has given,
and of all those Mysteries it reveals, all those great Doctrines that are
peculiarly Doctrines of Revelation, and above the Light of Nature. It seems to
have been very much on this Account that it was requisite that the Doctrine of
the Trinity it self should be revealed to us; that by a Discovery of the
Concern of the several divine Persons, in the great Affair of our Salvation, we
might the better understand and see how all our Dependence in this Affair is on
God, and our Sufficiency all in him, and not in our selves; that he is all in
all in this Business, agreeable to that in 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30, 31. That no Flesh
should glory in his Presence: But of him, are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God,
is made unto us, Wisdom. and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.
That according as it is written, he that glories let him glory in the Lord.
What is the Gospel, but only the glad Tidings of a new Way of Acceptance with
God, unto Life, a Way wherein Sinners may come to be free from the Guilt of
Sin, and obtain a Title to eternal Life? And if when this Way is revealed, it
is rejected, and another of Man's devising, be put in the Room of it, without
Doubt, it must (...) an Error of great Importance, and the Apostle might (...)
say it was another Gospel.

5. The contrary Scheme of Justification derogates much from the Honor of God,
and the Mediator. I have already shown how it diminishes the Glory of the
Mediator, in ascribing th^^ to Man's Virtue and Goodness, which belongs alone
to his Worthiness and Righteousness. By the Apostle's Sense of the Matter it
renders Christ needless. Gal. 5 4 Christ is become of no Effect to you,
whosoever of you are justified by the Law. If that Scheme of Justification be
followed in it is Consequences, it utterly overthrows the Glory of all the great
Things that have been contrived, and done, and suffered in the Work of
Redemption. Gal 2 21. If Righteousness come by the Law, Christ is dead in vain.
It has also been already shown, how it diminishes the Glory of divine Grace;
(which is the Attribute God has especially set himself to glorify in the Work
of Redemption;) and so that it greatly diminishes the Obligation to Gratitude
in the Sinner that is saved: Yea that, in the Sense of the Apostle, it makes
void the distinguishing Grace of the Gospel. Gal. 5 4. Whosoever of you are
justified by the Law, are fallen from Grace. It diminishes the Glory of the
Grace of God and the Redeemer, and proportionably magnifies Man: It makes him
something before God, when indeed he is nothing: It makes the Goodness and
Excellency of fallen Man to be something, which I have shown are nothing I have
also (...) already shown that it is contrary to the Truth of God in the
Threatening of his holy Law, to justify the Sinner for his Virtue. And whether
it were contrary to God's Truth or no, it is a Scheme of Things very unworthy
of God, that supposes that God, when about to lift up a poor forlorn
Malefactor, condemned to eternal Misery, for sinning against his Majesty, out
of his Misery, and to make him unspeakably and eternally happy, by bestowing
his Son and himself upon him, as it were sets all this to Sale, for the Price
of his Virtue and Excellency. I know that those that we oppose do acknowledge
that the Price is very disproportionate to the Benefit bestowed; and say that
God's Grace is wonderfully manifested in accepting so little Virtue, and
bestowing so glorious a Reward, for such imperfect Righteousness. But seeing we
are such infinitely sinful and abominable Creatures in God's Sight, and by our
infinite Guilt have brought our selves into such wretched and deplorable
Circumstances, and (...) our Righteousnesses are nothing, and ten thousand
times worse than nothing, (if God looks upon them as they be in themselves) is
it not immensely more worthy of the infinite Majesty and Glory of God, to
deliver and make happy such poor filthy Worms, such wretched Vagabonds and
Captives, without any Money or Price of theirs, or any Manner of Expectation of
any Excellency or Virtue in them, in any wise to recommend them? Will it not
betray a foolish exalting Opinion of our selves, and a mean one of God, to have
a Thought of offering any thing of ours, to recommend us, to the Favor of
being brought from wallowing like filthy Swine in the Mire of our Sins, and
from the Enmity and Misery of Devils in the lowest Hell, to the State of God's
dear Children, in the everlasting Arms of his Love, in heavenly Glory; or to
imagine that that is the Constitution of God, that we should bring our filthy
Rags, and offer them to him as the Price of this?

6. The opposite Scheme does most directly tend to lead Men to trust in their
own Righteousness for Justification, which is a Thing fatal to the Soul. This
is what Men are of themselves exceeding prone to do, (and that though they are
never so much taught the contrary) through the exceeding partial and high
Thoughts they have of themselves, and their exceeding Dullness of apprehending
any such Mystery, as our being accepted for the Righteousness of another. But
this Scheme does directly teach Men to trust in their own Righteousness for
Justification; in that it teaches them that this is indeed what they must be
justified by, being the Way of Justification that God himself has appointed So
that if a Man had naturally no Disposition to trust in his own Righteousness,
yet if he embraced this Scheme, and acted consistent with it, it would lead him
to it. But that trusting in our own Righteousness, is a Thing fatal to the
Soul, is what the Scripture plainly teaches us: It tells us that it will cause
that Christ shall profit us nothing, and be of no Effect to us, Gal. 5. 2, 3,
4. For though the Apostle speaks there particularly of Circumcision, yet (I have
shown already, that) it is not merely being circumcised, but trusting in
Circumcision as a Righteousness, that the Apostle has Respect to. He could not
mean that merely being circumcised would render Christ of no Profit or Effect
to a Person; for we read that he himself for certain Reasons, took Timothy and
circumcised him, Acts 16 3. And the same is evident by the Context, and by the
Rest of the Epistle. And the Apostle speaks of trusting in their own
Righteousness, as fatal to the Jews, Romans 9 31, 32. But Israel, which followed
after the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to the Law of Righteousness:
Wherefore? Because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of
the Law; for they stumbled at that stumbling Stone. Together with Chap. 10.
Verse 3. For they being ignorant of God's Righteousness, and going about to
establish their own Righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the
Righteousness of God And this is spoken of as fatal to the Pharisees, in the
Parable of the Pharisee and the Publican, that Christ spoke to them, to reprove
them for trusting in themselves, that they were Righteous. The Design of the
Parable is to show them that the very Publicans shall be justified, rather than
they; as appears by the Reflection Christ makes upon it, Luke 18. 14 I tell you
this Man went down to his House justified, rather than the other That is, this
and not the other. -- The fatal Tendency of it might also be proved from its
Inconsistence with the Nature of justifying Faith, and also its Inconsistence
with the Nature of that Humiliation that the Scripture often speaks of, as
absolutely necessary to Salvation; but these Scriptures are so express, that it
is needless to bring any further Arguments.

How far a wonderful and mysterious Agency of God's Spirit, may so influence
some Men's Hearts, that their Practice in this Regard may be contrary to their
own Principles, so that they shall not trust in their own Righteousness, though
they profess that Men are justified by their own Righteousness; or how far they
may believe the Doctrine of Justification by Men's own Righteousness in
general, and yet not believe it in a particular Application of it to
themselves; or how far that Error, which they may have been led into by
Education, or cunning Sophistry of others, may yet be indeed contrary to the
prevailing Disposition of their Hearts, and contrary to their Practice: Or how
far some may seem to maintain a Doctrine contrary to this Gospel Doctrine of
Justification, that really do not, but only express themselves differently from
others; or seem to oppose it through their Misunderstanding of our Expressions,
or we of theirs, when indeed our real Sentiments are the same in the Main; or
may seem to differ more than they do, by using Terms that are without a
precisely fixed and determinate Meaning; or to be wide in their Sentiments from
this Doctrine, for Want of a distinct Understanding of it; whose Hearts at the
same Time entirely agree with it, and if once it was clearly explained to their
Understandings, would immediately close 'with it, and embrace it: How far these
things may be I will not determine, but am fully persuaded that great Allowances
are to be made, on these, and such like Accounts, in innumerable Instances;
though it is manifest from what has been said, that the teaching and propagating
contrary Doctrines and Schemes is of a pernicious and fatal Tendency.

Pressing into the Kingdom of GOD.
DISCOURSE, II.
LUKE XVI. 16. THE Law and the Prophets were until John: Since that Time the
Kingdom of GOD is preached, and every Man presses into it.
IN these Words two Things may be observed; First, Wherein the Work and Office
of John the Baptist consisted, viz. preaching the Kingdom of God, to prepare
the Way for it is Introduction to succeed the Law and the Prophets. By the Law
and the Prophets, in the Text, seems to be intended the ancient Dispensation
under the Old Testament, which was received from Moses and the Prophets. These
are said to be until John; not that the Revelations given by them are out of
Use since that Time, but that the State of the Church founded and regulated,
under God, by them, the Dispensation of which they were the Ministers (...),
and wherein the Church depended mainly on Light received from them, fully
continued till John; who first began to introduce the New Testament
Dispensation, or Gospel-State of the Church; which with its glorious spiritual
and eternal Privileges and Blessings, is often called the Kingdom of Heaven, or
Kingdom of God John the Baptist preached that the Kingdom of God was at Hand.
That is the Account that we have of his Preaching, by the Evangelists, Repent,
says he, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand: Since that Time, says Christ,
the Kingdom of God is preached. John the Baptist first began to preach it; and
then after him, Christ, and his Disciples, preached the same. Thus Christ
preached, Matthew. 4. 17. From that Time Jesus began to preach, and to say,
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand. So the Disciples were directed to
preach, Matthew. 10. 7. And as ye go preach, saying, the Kingdom of Heaven is an
Hand. It was not John the Baptist, but Christ that fully brought in, and
actually established this Kingdom of God; but he as Christ's Forerunner, to
prepare his Way before him, did the first Thing that was done toward
introducing it. The old Dispensation was abolished, and the new brought in by
Degrees; as the Night gradually ceases, and gives Place to the increasing Day,
which succeeds in it is Room: First the Day Star rises; next follows the Light
of the Sun it self, but dimly reflected, in the dawning of the Day; but this
Light increases, and shines more and more, and the Stars that served for Light
during the foregoing Night, gradually go out, and their Light ceases, as being
now needless, till at length the Sun rises, and enlightens the World by his own
direct light, which increases as ^e ascends higher above the Horizon, till the
Day ^^ar it self is gradually put out, and disappears; agreeable to what John
says of himself, John 3. (...) He must increase; but I must decrease. John was
the Forerunner of Christ, and Harbinger of the Gospel-Day; much as the
Morning Star is the Forerunner of the Sun. He had the most honorable Office of
any of the Prophets; when as the other Prophets foretold Christ to come, he
revealed him as already come, and had the Honor to be that Servant that should
come immediately before him and actually introduce him, and even to be the
Instrument concerned in his solemn Inauguration, as he was in Baptizing him. He
was the greatest of the Prophets that came before Christ, as the Morning Star
is the brightest of all the Stars, Matthew. 11. 11. He came to prepare Men's
Hearts to receive that Kingdom of God, that Christ was about more fully to
reveal and erect. Luke 1. 17. To make ready a People prepared for the Lord.

Secondly, We may observe wherein his Success appeared, viz. in that since he
began his Ministry, every Man pressed into that Kingdom of God that he
preached. The Greatness of his Success appeared in two Things;

1. In the Generalness of it, with Regard to the Subject, or the Persons in
whom the Success appeared; every Man: Here is a Term of Universality; but it is
not to be taken as universal with Regard to Individuals, but Kinds; as such
universal Terms are often used in Scripture. When John preached there was an
extraordinary pouring out of the Spirit of God, that attended his preaching;
and an uncommon Awakening, and Concern for Salvation, appeared on the Minds of
all sorts of Persons; and even in the most unlikely Persons, and those from
whom such a Thing might least be expected; as the Pharisees, who were exceeding
proud, and selfsufficient, and conceited of their own Wisdom and Righteousness,
and looked on themselves fit to be Teachers of others, and used to scorn to be
taught; and the Sadducees, who were a kind of Infidels, that denied any
Resurrection, Angel, or Spirit, or any future State: So that John himself seems
to be surprised to see them come to him, under such Concern for their
Salvation; as in Mat. 3. 7. But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees
come to his Baptism, he said unto them, O Generation of Vipers, Who has warned
you to flee from the Wrath to come? And besides these, the Publicans who were
some of the most infamous sort of Men, came to him, inquiring what they should
do to be saved. And the Soldiers, that were doubtless a very profane, loose,
and profligate sort of Persons; they made the same Inquiry Luke 3 12* and 14.
Then came also Publicans to be baptized, and said unto him, Master, What shall
we do? And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do?

2. His Success appeared in the Manner in which his Hearers sought the Kingdom
of God, they pressed into it: It is elsewhere set forth by their being violent
for the Kingdom of Heaven, and taking it by Force. Matthew. 11. 12 From the Days
of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the
Violent take it by Force.

The DOCTRINE that I observe from the Words is this.

IT concerns every one that would obtain the Kingdom of God, to be pressing
into it.

In discoursing on this Subject, I would

First, Show what is that Way of seeking Salvation that seems to be pointed
forth, in the Expression of pressing into the Kingdom of God.

Secondly, Give the Reasons why it concerns every one that would obtain the
Kingdom of God, to seek it in this Way.

And then make Application.

I. I would show what Manner of seeking Salvation seems to be denoted by
pressing into the Kingdom of God.

1. This Expression denotes Strength of Desire. Men in general, that live under
the Light of the Gospel, and be not Atheists, do desire the Kingdom of God;
that is, they desire to go to Heaven rather than to Hell; but most of them are
not much concerned about it; but on the contrary live a secure and careless
Life. And there are those that are many Degrees above these, that are under
some Degrees of the Awakenings of God's Spirit, that yet are not pressing into
the Kingdom of God. But they that may be said to be truly so have strong
Desires to get out of a natural Condition, and to get an Interest in Christ:
They have such a Conviction of the Misery of their present State, and of the
extreme Necessity of obtaining a better, that their Minds are as it were
possessed with, and wrapped up in Concern about it: To obtain Salvation is
desired by them above all Things in the World: This Concern is so great that it
very much shuts out other Concerns: They used before to have the Stream of
their Desires after other Things, or it may be had their Concern divided
between this and them; but when they come to answer the Expression in the Text,
of pressing into the Kingdom of God, this Concern prevails* above all others;
it lays other Things low, and does in a Manner engross the Care of the Mind. --
This seeking eternal Life should not only be one Concern that our Souls are
taken up about, with other Things; but Salvation should be sought as the one
Thing needful, Luke 10. 42. And as the one Thing that is desired, Psalm 27.4.

2 Pressing into the Kingdom of Heaven denotes Earnestness and Firmness of
Resolution. There should be Strength of Resolution, accompanying Strength of
Desire, as it was in the Psalmist in the Place just now referred to; One Thing
have I desired, and that will I seek after. In order to a thorough Engagedness
of the Mind in this Affair, both these must meet together; besides Desires
after Salvation, there should be an earnest Resolution in Persons to pursue
this Good as much as lies in their Power; to do all that in the Use of their
utmost Strength they are able to do, in an Attendance on every Duty, and
resisting and militating against all Manner of Sin, and to continue in such a
Pursuit.

There are two Things needful in a Person in order to these strong Resolutions
in him: there must be a Sense of the great Importance and Necessity of the
Mercy sought, and their must also be a Sense of Opportunity to obtain it, or
the Encouragement there is to seek it. The Strength of Resolution depends on
the Sense which God gives the Heart of these Things. Persons without such a
Sense may seem to themselves to take up Resolutions; they may as it were force
a Promise to themselves, and say with in themselves, I will seek as long as I
live, I will not give out till I obtain, when they do but deceive themselves,
their Hearts are not in it; neither do they indeed take up any such Resolution
as they seem to themselves to do; it is the Resolution of the Mouth more than of
the Heart; their Hearts ben'^ strongly bent to fulfill what their Mouth says,.
The Firmness of Resolution lies in the Fullness of the Disposition of the Heart
to do what is resolved to be done. Those that are pressing into the Kingdom of
God have a Disposition of Heart to do every Thing that is required, and that
lies in their Power to do, and to continue in it: They have not only
Earnestness, but Steadiness of Resolution: They don't seek with a wavering
unsteady Heart, by Turns, or Fits, being off and on; but it is the constant Bent
of the Soul, if possible, to obtain the Kingdom of God.

3. By pressing into the Kingdom of God is signified Greatness of Endeavor.
It Is expressed in Eccles. 9. 10. by doing what our Hand finds to do with our
Might. And this is the natural and necessary Consequence of the two
forementioned Things; where there is Strength of Desire, and Firmness of
Resolution, there will be answerable Endeavors: Persons thus engaged in their
Hearts will strive to enter in at the strait Gate, and will be violent for
Heaven; their Practice will be agreeable to the Counsel of the wise Man, in
Prove. 2. at the beginning, My Son, if thou will receive my Words, and hide my
Commandments with thee; so that thou inclin thine Ear unto Wisdom, and apply
thine Heart to Understanding: Yea, if thou criest after Knowledge, and liftest
up thy Voice for Understanding; if thou seek her as Silver, and searchest
for her as for hid Treasures; then shall thou understand the Fear of the Lord,
and find the Knowledge of God. Here the Earnestness of Desire and Strength of
Resolution is signified by inclining the Ea^ to Wisdom, and applying the Heart
to Understanding; and the Greatness of Endeavor is denoted by crying after
Knowledge, and lifting up the Voice for Understanding, seeking her as Silver,
and searching for her as for hid Treasures: Such Desires and Resolutions, and
such Endeavors go together.

4 Pressing into the Kingdom of God denotes ^n Engagedness and Earnestness,
that is directly about that Business of getting into the Kingdom of God Persons
may be in very great Exercise and Distress of Mind, and that about the
Condition of their Souls; their Thoughts and Cares may be greatly engaged and
taken up about Things of a spiritual Nature, and yet not be pressing into the
Kingdom of God, nor toward it; because the Exercise of their Minds is not
directly about the Work of seeking Salvation, in a diligent Attendance on the
Means that God has appointed in order to it; but something else that is beside
their Business; it may be about God's Decrees, and secret Purposes, prying into
them, searching for Signs whereby they may determine, or at least conjecture,
what they be, before God makes them known by the Accomplishment of them; and
distressing their Minds with ^ears that they be not elected, or that they have
committed the unpardonable Sin, or that their Day is past, and that God has
given them up to judicial and final Hardness, and never intends to show them
Mercy, and therefore that it is in vain for them to seek Salvation; or
intangling themselves about the Doctrine of original Sin, and other mysterious
Doctrines of Religion, that are above their Comprehension. Many Persons that
seem to be in great Distress about a future eternal State, get much into a Way
of perplexing themselves with such Things as these. When it is so, let them be
never so much concerned and engaged in their Minds they cannot be said to be
pressing toward the Kingdom of God; because their Exercise is not in their
Work, but rather in that which tends to hinder them in their Work: If they are
violent, they are only working violently to entangle themselves, and lay Blocks
in their own Way: Their Pressure is not forwards: Instead of getting along,
they do but loose their Time, and worse than merely loose it; instead of
fighting with the Giants that stand in the Way to keep them out of Canaan, they
spend away their Time and Strength in conflicting with Shadows, that appear by
the Way side.

Hence we are not to judge of the Hopefulness of the Way that Persons are in,
or of the Probability of their Success in seeking Salvation, only by the
Greatness of the Concern and Distress that they are in; for many Persons have
needless Distresses that they had much better be without. It Is thus very often
with Persons that are over run with the Distemper of Melancholy; whence the
Adversary of Souls is will not to take great Advantage. But then are Persons in
the most likely Way to obtain the Kingdom of Heaven, when the Intent of their
Minds, and the Engagedness of their Spirits, is about their proper Wor^^ and
Business, and all the Bent of their Souls is to attend on God's Means, and to
do what he commands and directs them to. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 9 26.
that he did not fight as those that beat the Air. Our Time is short enough; we
had not need to spend it in that which is nothing to the Purpose. There are
real Difficulties and Enemies enough for Persons to encounter* to employ all
their Strength; they had not need to waste it in fighting with any Phantoms.

5. By pressing into the Kingdom of God is denoted a breaking through
Opposition and Difficulties. There is in the Expression a plain Intimation of
Difficulty. If there were no Opposition, but the Way was all clear and open*
there would be no Need of pressing to get along. They therefore that are
pressing into the Kingdom of God, go on with such Engagedness, that they break
through the Difficulties that are in their Way: They are so set for Salvation
that those Things by which others are discouraged, and stopped, and turned back,
don't stop them, but they press through them. Persons ought to be so resolved
for Heaven, that if by any Means they can use they can obtain, they will
obtain. Whether those Means be difficult or easy, cross or agreeable, if they
are requisite Means of Salvation, they should be complied with. When any Thing
is presented to be done, the Question should not be, Is it easy, or hard? Is it
agreeable to my carnal Inclinations or Interest, or against them? But is it a
required Means of my obtaining an Interest in Jesus Christ, and eternal
Salvation? Thus the Apostle, Philip 3. 11. If by any Means I might obtain the
Resurrection of the Dead. He tells us there in the Context, what Difficulties
he broke through, that he suffered the Loss of all Things, and was willingly
made conformable even to Christ's Death, though that was attended with such
extreme Torment and Ignominy.

He that is pressing into the Kingdom of God, commonly finds many Things in the
Way that are against the Grain; but he is not stopped by the Cross that lies
before him, but takes it up and carries it: If there be something that it is
incumbent (...) him to do as he is one that seeks Salvation, that is cross to
his natural Temper, and is irksome to him on that Account, or something that he
cannot do without Suffering in his Estate, or that he apprehends will look odd
and strange in the Eyes of others, and expose him to Ridicule and Reproach, or
any Thing that will offend a Neighbor, and get his ill Will, or something that
will be very cross to his own carnal Appetite, he will press through such
Difficulties: Every Thing that is found to be a Weight that hinders him in
running this Race, he casts from him, though it be a Weight of Gold or Pearls;
yea, if it be a Right Hand or Foot that offends him, he will cut them off; and
will not stick at plucking out a Right Eye with his own Hands. These Things are
insuperable Difficulties to those that are not thoroughly engaged in seeking
their Salvation; they boggle exceedingly at them; they are stumbling Blocks
that they never get over. But it is not so (...) with him that presses into the
Kingdom of God: those Things that, before he was thoroughly roused from his
Security, he used to stick at, and was wont to have long Parlyings and
Disputings with his own Conscience about, and set carnal Reason to work to
invent Arguments and Pleas to excuse himself from, he now sticks at no longer;
he has done with this endless Disputing and Reasoning, and presses violently
through all Difficulties; let what will be in the Way, Heaven is what he must,
and will obtain, not if he can without Difficulty, but if it be possible. He
meets with Temptation; the Devil is often whispering him in his Ear, setting
Allurements before him, magnifying the Difficulties of the Work he is engaged
in, telling him that they are insuperable, and that he can never conquer them,
and trying all Ways in the World to discourage him; but still he presses
forward: God has given and maintains such an earnest Spirit for Heaven, that
the Devil cannot stop him in his Course; he is not at Leisure to lend an Ear to
what he has to say.

I come now,

II. To show way the Kingdom of Heaven should be sought in this Manner.

It should be thus sought

1. On Account of the extreme Necessity we are in of getting into the Kingdom
of Heaven. We are in a Perishing Necessity of it: Without it we are utterly and
eternally lost. Out of the Kingdom of God is no Safety; there is no other
hiding Place; this is the only City of Refuge, in which we can be secure from
the Avenger that pursues all the Ungodly. The Vengeance of God will pursue,
overtake, and eternally destroy, them that are not in this Kingdom. All that
are without this Enclosure will be swallowed up in an overflowing fiery Deluge
of Wrath: They may stand at the Door and knock, and cry Lord, Lord, open to us,
in vain; they will be thrust back; and God will have no Mercy on them; they
shall be eternally left of him; his fearful Vengeance will seize them; the
Devils will lay hold on them; and all Evil will come upon them; and there will
be none to pity or help; their Case will be utterly desperate, and infinitely
doleful: It will be a gone Case with them; all Offers of Mercy, and Expressions
of divine Goodness will be finally withdrawn, and all Hope will be lost: God
will have no Kind of Regard to their Well-Being; will take no Care of them to
save them from any Enemy, or any Evil; but himself will be their dreadful
Enemy, and will execute Wrath with Fury, and will take Vengeance in an
inexpressibly dreadful Manner. Such as shall be in this Case will be lost and
undone indeed! They will be funk down into Perdition, infinitely below all that
we can think: For who knows the Power of God's Anger? And who knows the Misery
of that poor Worm, on whom that Anger is executed without Mercy?

2. On Account of the Shortness and Uncertainty of the Opportunity for getting
into this Kingdom. When a few Days are past, all our Opportunity for it will be
gone. Our Day is limited; God has set our Bounds, and we know not where. While
Persons are out of this Kingdom, they are in Danger every Hour of being
overtaken with Wrath. We know not how soon we shall get past that Line, beyond
which there is no Work, Device, Knowledge, nor Wisdom; and therefore we should
do what we have to do with our Might. Eccles. 9 10.

3. On Account of the Difficulty of getting into the Kingdom of God. There are
innumerable Difficulties in the Way; such as few conquer; most of them that try
have not Resolution, Courage, Earnestness, and Constancy enough; but they fail,
give out, and perish. The Difficulties are too many, and too great for them
that don't violently press forward, to grapple with; they never get along, but
stick by the Way, or are turned aside, and turned back, and ruined. Matthew. 7.
14. Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which leads unto Life, and few
there be that find it. Luke 13. 24 Strive to enter in at the strait Gate; for
many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

4 The Possibility of obtaining. Though it be a Thing attended with so much
Difficulty, yet it is not a Thing impossible. Acts 8 22. If perhaps the Thought
of thine Heart may be forgiven thee. 2 Timothy 2. 25. If peradventure God will
give them Repentance, to the acknowleging of the Truth. However sinful a Person
is, and whatever his Circumstances are, there is notwithstanding a Possibility
of his Salvation; he himself is capable of it; and God is able to accomplish
it, and has Mercy sufficient for it; and there is sufficient Provision made
through Christ, that God may do it consistent with the Honor of his Majesty,
Justice, and Truth: So that there is no Want either of Sufficiency in God, or
Capacity in the Sinner, in order to this: The greatest and vilest, most blind,
dead, hard hearted Sinner living, is a Subject capable of saving Light and
Grace. Seeing therefore there is such Necessity of obtaining the Kingdom of
God, and so short a Time, and such Difficulty, and yet such a Possibility, it
may well induce us to press into it. Jonah 3. 8, 9.

5. It Is meet that the Kingdom of Heaven should be thus sought* because of the
great Excellency of it. We are willing to seek earthly Things, of trifling
Value, with great Diligence, and through much Difficulty; it therefore
certainly becomes us to seek that with great Earnestness. which is of
infinitely greater Worth and Excellence: And how well may God expect and
require it of us, that we should seek it in such a Manner, in order to our
obtaining it!

6 Such a Manner of seeking is needful to prepare Persons for the Kingdom of
God. Such Earnestness and Thoroughness of Endeavors, is the ordinary Means
that God makes Use of, to bring Persons to an Acquaintance with themselves, to
a Sight of their own Hearts, to a Sense of their own Helplesness, and to a
Despair in their own Strength and Righteousness. And such Engagedness and
Constancy in seeking the Kingdom of Heaven prepare the Soul to receive it the
more joyfully and thankfully, and the more highly to prize and value it when
obtained. So that it is in Mercy to us, as well as for the Glory of his own
Name, that God has appointed such earnest Seeking, to be the Way in which he
will bestow the Kingdom of Heaven.

APPLICATION.
The USE I would make of this Doctrine, is of Exhortation to all Christless
Persons to press into the Kingdom of God. Some of you are inquiring what you
shall do. You seem to desire to know what is the Way wherein Salvation is to be
sought, and how you may be likely to obtain it: You have now heard the Way that
the holy Word of God directs to. -- Some are seeking, but it cannot be said of
them that they are pressing into the Kingdom of Heaven. There are many that in
Time past have sought Salvation, but not in this Manner, and so they never
obtained, but are now gone to Hell: Some of them sought it Year after Year, but
failed of it, and perished at last: They were overtaken with divine Wrath, and
are now suffering the fearful Misery of Damnation, and have no Rest Day nor
Night, having no more Opportunity to seek, but must suffer and be miserable
throughout the never ending Ages of Eternity. Be exhorted therefore not to seek
Salvation as they did, but let the Kingdom of Heaven suffer Violence from you.

Here I would first answer an Objection or two, and then proceed to give some
Directions how to press into the Kingdom of God.

Object. 1. Some may be ready to say, We cannot do this of our selves, that
Strength of Desire, and Firmness of Resolution, that have been spoken of, is
out of our Reach: If I endeavor to resolve and to seek with Engagedness of
Spirit, I find I fail: my Thoughts are presently off from the Business, and I
feel my self dull, and my Engagedness relaxed in Spite of all I can do.

Ans. 1 Though Earnestness of Mind be not immediately in your Power, yet the
Consideration of what has been now said of the Need of it, may be a Means of
stirring you up to it. It Is true, Persons never will be thoroughly engaged in
this Business unless it be by God's Influence; but God influences Persons by
Means: Persons are not stirred up to a thorough Earnestnes;s without some
Considerations that move them to it: And if Persons ca^ but be made sensible of
the Necessity of Salvation, and also do duly consider the exceeding Difficulty
of it, and the Greatness of the Opposition, and how short and uncertain the
Time is, but yet are sensible that they have an Opportunity, and that there is
a Possibility of their obtaining, they will need no more in order to their
being thoroughly engagedandresolved in this Matter. If we see Persons slack,
and unresolved, and (...) steady, it is because they don't enough consider
these Things.

2. Though strong Desires and Resolutions of Mind be not in your Power, yet
Painfulness of Endeavors is in your Power. It Is in your Power to take Pains in
the Use of Means, yea very great Pains. You can be very painful and diligent in
watching your own Heart, and striving against Sin; though there is all Manner
of Corruption in the Heart, that is continually ready to work, yet you can very
laboriously watch and strive against these Corruptions; and it is in your Power,
with great Diligence to attend the Matter of your Duty toward God, and toward
your Neighbor It Is in your Power to attend all Ordinances, and all public and
private Duties of Religion, and to do it with your Might. It would be a
Contradiction to suppose that a Man cannot do these Things with all the Might he
has, though he cannot do them with more might than he ha^. The Dullness and
Deadness of the Heart, and Slothfulness of Disposition, don't hinder Men's
being able to take Pains; though it hinders their being willing: That is one
Thing wherein your Laboriousness may appear, even striving against your own
Dullness. That Men have a dead and sluggish Heart, don't argue that they be not
able to take Pains; it is so far from that, that it gives Occasion for Pains:
It is one of the Difficulties in the Way of Duty, that Persons have to strive
with, and that gives Occasion for Struggling and Labor. If there were no
Difficulties attended seeking Salvation there would be no Occasion for
Striving; a Man would have nothing to strive about. There is indeed a great
Deal of Difficulty attending all Duties required of those that would obtain
Heaven. It Is an exceeding difficult Thing for them to keep their Thoughts; it is
a difficult Thing seriously, or to any good Purpose, to consider of Matters of
the greatest Importance; it is a difficult Thing to hear, or read, or pray
attentively: But it don't argue that a Man cannot strive in these Things because
they are difficult; nay, he could not strive in them ^f there were not
Difficulty in them: For what is there excepting Difficulties that any can have
to strive or struggle with, in any Affair or Business? -- Earnestness of Mind,
and Diligence of Endeavor, tend to promote each other. He that has an Heart
earnestly engaged, will take Pains; and he that is diligent and painful in all
Duty, probably will not be so long, before he finds the Sensibleness of his Heart,
and Earnestness of his Spirit greatly increased.

Object. 2. Some may object that if they are earnest, and take a great Deal of
Pains, they shall be in Danger of trusting to what they do; they are afraid of
doing their Duty for Fear of making a Righteousness of it.

Ans There is ordinarily no Kind of Seekers that trust so much to what they do,
as slack and dull Seekers. Though all that are seeking Salvation, that have
never been the Subjects of a thorough Humiliation, do trust in their own
Righteousness; yet some do it much more fully than others. Some though they trust
in their own Righteousness, yet be not quiet in it. And those that are most
disturbed in their Self-Confidence, and are therefore in the likeliest Way to
be wholly brought off from it, are not those that go on in a remiss Way of
Seeking, but those that are most earnest and thoroughly engaged; partly because
in such a Way Conscience i^ kept more sensible. A more awakened Conscience
will not rest so quietly in moral and religious Duties, (...) one that is less
awakened. A dull Seeker's Conscience will be in a great Measure satisfied and
quieted with his own Works and Performances; but one that is thoroughly
awakened cannot be stilled or pacified with such Things as these. And, partly,
because in this Way Persons gain much more Knowledge of themselves, and
Acquaintance with their own Hearts, than in a negligent slighty Way of Seeking;
for they have a great Deal more Experience of themselves. It Is Experience of
our selves, and finding what we are, that God commonly makes Use of as the
Means of bringing us off from all Dependence on our selves: But Men never get
Acquaintance with themselves so fast, as in the most earnest Way of Seeking.
They that are in this Way, have more to engage them to think of their Sins, and
strictly to observe themselves, and have much more to do with their own Hearts
than others. Such an one has much more Experience of his own Weakness, than
another that don't put forth, and try his Strength; and will therefore sooner
see himself dead in Sin: Such an one, though he has a Disposition continually
to be flying to his own Righteousness, yet finds Rest in nothing; he wanders
about from one Thing to another, seeking something to ease his disquieted
Conscience; he is driven from one Refuge to another, goes from Mountain to
Hill, seeking Rest and finding none; and therefore will the sooner prove that
there is no Rest to be found, nor Trust to be put, in any Creature Confidence
whatsoever.

It Is therefore quite a wrong Notion that some entertain, that the more they
do, the more they shall depend on it: Whereas the Reverse is true; the more
they do, or the more thorough they are in seeking, the less will (...) they be
likely to rest in their Doings, and the sooner (...) they see the Vanity of all
that they do. So that (...) will exceedingly miss it, if ever they neglect to
(...) any Duty either to God or Man, whether it be any (...) of Religion,
Justice, or Charity, under a Notion (...) its exposing them to trust in their
own Righteouss^^ns. It Is very true, that it is a common Thing for (...) when
they earnestly seek Salvation, to trust in the (...) that they take: But yet
commonly those that go (...) a more slighty Way, trust a great Deal more (...)
to their dull Services, than he that is pressing (...) Kingdom of God does to
his Earnestness. Men's Slackness in Religion, and their Trust in their own
Righteousness, do strengthen and establish one another. Their Trust in what
they have done, and what they now do, settles them in a slothful Rest and Ease,
and hinders their being sensible of their Need of rousing up themselves and
pressing forward. And on the other Hand, their Negligence tends so to benumb
them, and keep them in such Ignorance of themselves, that the most miserable
Refuges are stupidly rested in as sufficient. Therefore we see that when
Persons have been going on for a long Time in such a Way, and God afterward
comes more thoroughly to awaken them, and to stir them up to be in good
Earnest, he shakes all their old Foundation, and rouses them out of their old
Resting Places; so that they cannot quiet themselves with those Things that
formerly kept them secure.

I would now proceed to give some Directions how you should press into the
Kingdom of God.

1. Be directed as it were to sacrifice every Thing to your Souls eternal
Interest. Let seeking this be so much your Bent, and what you are so resolved
in, that you will make every Thing give Place to it. Let nothing stand before
your Resolution of Seeking the Kingdom of God. Whatever it be that you used to
look upon as a Convenience, or Comfort, or Ease, or Thing desirable on any
Account, if it stands in the Way of this great Concern, let it be dismissed
without Hesitation; and if it be of that Nature that it is like always to be an
Hindrance, then wholly have done with it, and never entertain any Expectation
from it more. If in Time past, you have, for the sake of worldly Gain, involved
your self in more Care and Business than you find to be consistent with your
being so thorough in the Business of Religion as you ought to be, then get into
some other Way, though you suffer in your worldly Interest by it. Or if you have
heretofore been conversant with Company that you have Reason to think have
been, and will be a Snare to you, and a Hindrance to this great Design, in any
wise break off from their Society, however it may expose you to Reproach from
your old Companions, or let what will be the Effect of it. Or whatever it be
that stands in the Way of your most advantagiously seeking Salvation, if it be
some dear sinful Pleasure, or strong carnal Appetite, or if it be Credit and
Honor, or if it be the Good Will of some Person whose Friendship you Desire,
or a being accounted of by those whose Esteem and Liking you have highly
valued, and there be Danger if you do as you ought, you shall be looked upon by
them as odd, and ridiculous, and become contemptible in their Eyes; or if it be
your Ease and Indolence, and Aversion to continual Labor; or if it be your
outward Convenience in any Respect, whereby you might avoid Difficulties of one
Kind or ^ther; LET ALL GO; offer up all such Things together, as it were in one
Sacrifice to the Interest of your Soul: Let nothing stand in Competition with
this, but make every Thing to fall before it. If the Flesh must be crossed,
then cross it, spare it not, crucify it, and don't be afraid of being too cruel
to it. Gal. 5. 24 They that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh with the
Affections and Lusts. Have no Dependence on any worldly Enjoyment whatsoever.
Let Salvation be the one Thing with you. This is what is certainly required of
you: and this is what many stick at; this giving up other Things for Salvation,
is a stumbling Block that few get over. While others pressed into the Kingdom
of God, at the preaching of John the Baptist, there was Herod, one of his
Hearers, that was pretty much stirred up by his Preaching; it is said, he heard
him, and observed him, and did many Things; but when he came to tell him that
(...) part with his beloved Herodias, here he stuck; this he never would yield
to, Mark 7. 18, 19, 20. The rich young Man was considerably concerned for
Salvation; and accordingly was a very strict Liver in many Things (...) when
Christ came to direct him to go and sell all tha^ he had, and give to the Poor,
and come and follow him, he could no^ find in his Heart to comply with it, but
went away sorrowful; he had great Possessions, and set his Heart much on his
Estate, and could not hear to part with it. It may be if Christ had directed
him only to give away a considerable Part of his Estate, he would have done it;
yea, perhaps, if he had bid him part with half of it, he would have complied
with it; but when he directed him to throw up all, he could not grapple with
such a Proposal. Herein the Straitness of the Gate very much consists, and it is
on this Account that so many seek to enter in, and are not able. There are many
that have a great Mind to have Salvation, and spend great Part of their Time in
wishing that they had it, but they will not comply with the necessary Means of
it.

2. Be directed to forget the Things that are behind; that is, not to keep
thinking and making much of what you have done, but let your Mind be wholly
intent on what you have to do. In some Sense you ought to look back; you should
look back on your Sins. Jer. 2. 23. See thy Way in the Valley, know what thou
have done. You should look back on the Wretchedness of your religious
Performances, and consider how you have fallen short in them, and how
exceedingly polluted all your Duties have been, and how justly God might reject
and loath them, and you for them: But you ought not to spend your Time in
looking back, as many Persons do, thinking how much they have done for their
Salvation, what great Pains they have taken and how that they have done what
they can, and don't see how they can do more, how long a Time they have been
seeking, and how much more they have done than others, and even than such and
such who have obtained Mercy; and so think with themselves how hardly God deals
with them, that he don't extend Mercy to them* but turns a deaf Ear to their
Cries; and hence discourage themselves, and complain of God. Don't thus spend
your Time in looking on what is (...) forward, and consider what is before you,
(...) is that you can do, and what it is necessary that you should do, and what
God calls you still to do, in order to your own Salvation. The Apostle in the
third Chapter to the Philippians, tells us what Things he did while a Jew, how
much he had to boast of, if any could have any Thing of their own to boast of;
but he tells us that he forgot those Things, and all others that were behind,
and reached forth toward the Things that were before, pressing forwards,
toward the Mark, for the Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus.

3. Labor to get your Heart thoroughly disposed to go on and hold out to the
End. Many that seem to be earnest have not a Heart thus disposed. It Is a common
Thing for Persons to appear greatly affected for a little while; but all is
soon past away, and there is no more to be seen of it. Labor therefore to
obtain a thorough Willingness, and Preparation of Spirit, to continue Seeking,
in the Use of your utmost Endeavors, without Limitation; and don't think your
whole Life too long. And in order to this be advised to two Things.

1. Remember that if ever God bestows Mercy upon you, he will use his sovereign
Pleasure about the Time when. He will bestow it on some in a little Time, and
on others not till they have sought it long. If other Persons are soon
enlightened and comforted, while you remain long in Darkness, there is no other
Way but for you to wait. God will act arbitrarily in this Matter, and you cannot
help it. You must even be content to wait, in a Way of laborious and earnest
Striving, till his Time comes. If you refuse, you will but undo your self; and
when you shall hereafter find your self undone, and see that your Case is past
Remedy, how will you condemn your self for foregoing a great Probability of
Salvation, only because you had not Patience to hold out, and was not willing
to be at the Trouble of a persevering Labor? And what will it avail before
God, or your own Conscience, to say that you could not bear to be obliged to
seek Salvation so long, when God bestowed it on others that sought it but for a
very short Time? Though God may have bestowed the Testimonies of his Favor on
others in a few Days, or Hours after they have begun earnestly to seek it, how
does that alter the Case as to you, if there proves to be a Necessity of your
laboriously seeking many Years before you obtain them? Is Salvation the less
Worth the taking a great Deal of Pains for, because, through the sovereign
Pleasure of God, others have obtained with comparatively but little Pains? If
there are two Persons, the one of which has obtained converting Grace with
comparative Ease, and another that has obtained it after continuing for many
Years in the greatest and most earnest Labors after it, how little Difference
does it make at last, when once Salvation is obtained! Put all the Labor, and
Pains, and long continued Difficulties and Strugglings of the one, in the Scale
against Salvation, and how little does it substract; and put the Ease with
which the other has obtained, in the Scale with Salvation, and how little does
it add? What is either added or subtracted, is lighter than Vanity, and a
Thing worthy of no Consideration, when compared with that infinite Benefit that
is obtained. Indeed if you were to live ten thousand Years, and all that Time
should strive and press forward with as great Earnestness as ever a Person did
for one Day, all this would bear no Proportion to the Importance of the
Benefit, and would doubtless appear little to you, when once you come to be in
actual Possession of eternal Glory, and to see what that eternal Misery is that
you have escaped. -- You must not think much of your Pains, and of the length
of Time; you must press toward the Kingdom of God, and do your utmost, and
hold out to the End, and learn to make no Account of it when you have done. You
must undertake the Business of seeking Salvation upon these Terms, and with no
other Expectation than this, that if ever God bestows Mercy it will be in his
own Time, and not only so, but also that when you have done all, God will not
hold himself obliged to show you Mercy at last.

2. Endeavor now thoroughly to weigh in your Mind the Difficulty, and to count
the Cost of Perseverance in seeking Salvation. You that are now setting out in
this Business, (as there are many here that have very lately set about it; --
Praised be the Name of God that he has stirred you up to it!) be exhorted to
attend this Direction. Don't undertake in this Affair, with any other Thought,
but of giving your self wholly to it for the remaining Part of your Life, and
going through many and great Difficulties in it. Take ^eed that you don't
engage secretly upon this Condition, that you shall obtain in a little Time,
promising your self that it shall be within this present Season of the pouring
out of God's Spirit, or with any other Limitation of Time whatsoever. Many when
they begin, seeming to set out very earnestly, don't expect that they shall
need to seek very long; and so don't prepare themselves for it: And therefore
when they come to find it otherwise, and meet with unexpected Difficulty, they
are found unguarded, and easily overthrown. But let me advise all that are now
seeking their Salvation, not to entertain any self flattering Thoughts; but
weigh the utmost Difficulties of Perseverance, and be provided for them, having
your Mind fixed in it to go through them, let them be what they will. Consider
now beforehand, how tedious it would be, with utmost Earnestness and Labor, to
strive after Salvation, for many Years, in the mean time receiving no joyful o^
comfortable Evidence of your having obtained. Consider what a great Temptation
to Discouragement there probably would be in it; how apt you would be to yield
the Case; how ready to think that it is in vain for you to seek any longer, and
that God never intends to show you Mercy, in that he has not yet done it; how
apt you would be to think with your self, What an uncomfortable Life do I live!
how much more unpleasantly do I spend my Time than others, that don't perplex
their Minds about the Things of another World, but are at Ease, and take the
Comfort of their worldly Enjoyments! Consider what a Temptation there would
probably be in it, if you saw others brought in, that began to seek the Kingdom
of Heaven long after you, rejoicing in a Hope and Sense of God's Favor after
but little Pains, and a short Time of Awakening; while you from Day to Day, and
from Year to Year, seemed to labor in Vain. Prepare for such Temptations now:
Lay in beforehand for such Trials and Difficulties, that you may not think any
strange Thing has happened when they come.

I hope that those that have given Attention to what has been said, have by
this Time conceived in some Measure what is signified by the Expression in the
Text* and after what Manner they ought to press into the Kingdom of God. Here
is this to induce you to a Compliance with what you have been directed to; if
you sit still you die, if you go backward behold you shall surely die, if you
go forward you may live. And though God has not bound himself to any Thing that
a Person does, while destitute of Faith, and out of Christ, yet there is great
Probability, that in a Way of hearkening to this Counsel you will live, and
that by pressing onward, and persevering, you will at last as it were by
Violence take the Kingdom of Heaven. Those of you that have now heard me, that
have not only heard the Directions that have been given, but shall, through
God's merciful Assistance, practice according to them, are those that probably
will overcome, that we may well hope at last to see standing with the Lamb on
Mount Sion, chathed in white Robes, with Palms in their Hands; when all your
Labor and Toil will be abundantly compensated, and you will not repent that
you have taken so much Pains, and denied your self so much, and waited so long:
This Pains, th^s SelfDenial, this Waiting, 'will then look little, and vanish
into nothing in your Eyes, being all swallowed up in the first Mi^^tes
Enjoyment of that Glory, that you will then be in Possession of, and will
uninterruptedly possess and enjoy to all Eternity.

4th Direction. Improve the present Season of the pouring out of the Spirit of
God on this Town. Prudence in any Affair whatsoever consists very much in
^inding and improving our Opportunities. If you would have spiritual
Prosperity, you must exercise Prudence ^n the Concerns of your Souls, as well
as in outward Concerns, when you seek outward Prosperity. The prudent
H^sbandman will observe his Opportunities; he will improve Seed-time and
Harvest; he will make his Advantage of the Showers and Shines of Heaven. The
prudent Merchant will discern his Opportunities; he will not be idle in a Market
Day; he is careful not to let slip his Seasons for enriching himself: So will
those that prudently seek the Fruits of Righteousness, and the Merchandise of
Wisdom, improve their Opportunities for their eternal Wealth and Happiness.

God is pleased at this Time, in a very remarkable Manner, to be pouring out
his Spirit amongst us; (Glory be to his Name therefore!) You that have a Mind to
obtain converting Grace, and to go to Heaven when you die, now is your Season!
Now, if you have any Sort of Prudence for your own Salvation, and have not a
Mind to go to Hell, improve this Time! Now is the accepted Time! Now is the Day
of Salvation! You that in Time past have been called upon, and have turned a
deaf Ear to God's Voice, and long stood out and resisted his Commands and
Counsels, hear God's Voice to Day, while it is called to Day! Don't harden your
Hearts at such a Day as this is! Now you have a special and remarkable price
put into your Hands to get Wisdom, if you have but a Heart to improve it.

God has his certain Days, or appointed Seasons of the Exercise both of Mercy
and Judgment. There are some Seasons that are remarkable Times of Wrath, that
are laid out by God for that Purpose, viz for his awful Visitation, and the
Executions of his Anger; which Times are called Days of Vengeance, Prove 6. 34
And Days wherein God will visit for Sin, Exodus 32. 34 And so on the contrary,
there are some other Times, that God has laid out in his sovereign Counsels,
for Seasons of remarkable Mercy, wherein he will appear, and manifest himself,
in the Exercises of his Grace and Lovingkindness, more than at other Times:
Such Times, in Scripture are called by Way of Eminency, accepted Times, and
Days of Salvation, and also Days of God's Visitation; because they are Days
wherein God will visit in a Way of Mercy; as Luke 19 44. And shall lay thee
even with the Ground, and thy Children within thee, and they shall not leave in
thee one Stone upon another* because thou knew not the Time of thy
Visitation. It Is such a Time now in this Town; it is with us a Day of God's
gracious Visitation. It is indeed a Day of Grace with us as long as we live in
this World, in the Enjoyment of the Means of Grace; but such a Time as this, is
especially, and in a distinguishing Manner, a Day of Grace. There is a Door of
Mercy always standing open for Sinners; but at such a Day as this God opens an
extraordinary Door.

We are directed to seek the Lord while he may be found, and to call upon him
while he is near, Isai. 55 6. If you that are hitherto Christless, be not
strangely besotted and infatuated, you will by all Means improve such an
Opportunity as this to get Heaven, when Heaven is brought so near, when the
Fountain is opened in the midst of us in so extraordinary a Manner. Now is the
Time to obtain a Supply of the Necessities of your poor perishing Souls! This
is the Day for Sinners that have a Mind to be converted before they die, when
God is dealing forth so liberally and bountifully amongst us, when Conversion
and Salvation Work is going on amongst us from Sabbath to Sabbath, and many are
pressing into the Kingdom of God! Now don't stay behind, but press in among the
Rest! Others have been stirred up to be in good Earnest, and have taken Heaven
by Violence; be entreated to follow their Example, if you would have a Part of
the Inheritance with them, and would not be le^t at the great Day, when they
are taken!

How should it move you to consider, that you have this Opportunity now in your
Hands! You are in the actual Possession of it! If it were past, it would not be
in your Power to recover it, or in the Power of any Creature to bring it back
for you; but it is not past; it is NOW, at this Day; NOW is the accepted Time,
even while it is called to Day! Will you sit still at such a Time? Will you
sleep in such a Harvest? Will you deal with a slack Hand, and stay behind out
of mere Sloth, or Love to some Lust, or Lothness to grapple with some small
Difficulty, or to put your self a little out of your Way, when so many are
^^owing to the Goodness of the Lord? You are behind still! and so you will be
in Danger of being left behind, when the whole Number is completed that are to
enter in, if you don't earnestly be stir your self! To be left behind, at the
close of such a Season as this, will be awful, next to the being left behind on
that Day when God's Saints shall mount up as with Wings to meet the Lord in the
Air, and will be what will appear very threatening of it.

God is now calling you in an extraordinary Manner, and it is agreeable to the
Will and Word of Christ that I should now, in his Name call you* as one set
over you, and sent to you to that End; so it is his Will that you should hearken
to what I say, as his Voice: I therefore beseech you in Christ's Stead now to
press into the Kingdom of God! Whoever you are, whether young or old, small or
great; whatever you be; if you are a great Sinner, if you have be^n a
Backslider, if you have quenched the Spirit, let you be who you will, and
whatever you have done, don't stand making Objections, but arise, apply your
self to your Work! Do, what you have to do, with your Might. Christ is calling
you before, and holding forth his Grace and everlasting Benefits, and Wrath is
pursuing you behind; wherefore fly for your Life, and look not behind you!

But here I would particularly direct my self to several Sorts of Persons.

I. To those Sinners that are in a Measure awakened, and are concerned for
their Salvation. You have Reason to be glad that you have such an Opportunity,
and to prize it above Gold. To induce you to prize and improve it, consider
several Things.

1. God has doubtless a Design now to deal forth saving Blessings to a Number.
God has done it to some already, as we have Reason to think; and it is not
probable that ^e has yet finished his Work, that he at this Time is come forth
to do amongst us: We may well hope still to see others brought out of Darkness
into mavelous Light. And therefore,

2. God comes this Day and knocks at many Persons Doors, and at your Door among
the Rest. God seems to be come in a very unusual Manner amongst us, upon a
gracious and merciful Design, a Design of saving a Number of poor miserable
Souls out of a lost and perishing Condition, and bringing them into a happy
State, in Safety from Misery, and a Title to eternal Glory! This is offered to
you, not only as it has always been in the Word and Ordinances, but by the
particular Influences of the Spirit of Christ awakening of you! This special
Offer is made to many amongst us; and you be not passed over: Christ has not
forgot or over looked you; but has come to your Door; and there as it were
stands waiting for you to open to him. If you have Wisdom and Discretion to
discern your own Advantage, you will know that now is your Opportunity.

3. How much more easily converting Grace is obtained at such a Time, than at
other Times. The Work is equally easy with GOD at all Times; but there is far
less Difficulty in the Way, as to Men, at such a Time, than at other Times. It
is, as I said before, a Day of God's gracious Visitation, a Day that he has as
it were set apart for the more liberally and bountifully dispensing his Grace;
a Day wherein God's Hand is opened wide: Experience shows it. God seems to be
more ready to help, to give proper Convictions, to help against Temptations,
and let in divine Light: He seems to carry on his Work, with a more glorious
Discovery of his Power, and Satan is more chained up* than at other Times:
Those Difficulties and Temptations that Persons before stuck at, from Year to
Year, they are soon helped over: The Work of God is carried on with greater
Speed and Swiftness, and there are often Instances of sudden Conversion at such
a Time. So it was in the Apostle's Days, when there was a Time of the most
extraordinary pouring out of the Spirit that ever was: How quick and sudden
were Conversion^ in those Days! Such Instances as that of the Jayler abounded
then, in Fulfillment of that Prophecy, Isai. 66 7, 8. Before she travailed she
brought forth; before her Pain came she was delivered of a Man child. Who has
heard such a Thing? Who has seen such Things? For as soon as Zion travailed,
she brought forth her Children. So it is in some Degree, whenever there is an
extraordinary pouring out of the Spirit of God; more or less so, in Proportion
to the Greatness of that Effusion. There is seldom such quick Work made of it
at other Times: Persons are not so soon delivered from their various
Temptations, and Intanglements; but are much longer wandering in a Wilderness,
and groping in Darkness, And yet,

4. There are probably some here present, that are now concerned about their
Salvation, that never will obtain. It Is not to be supposed that all that are
now moved and awakened, will ever be savingly converted: Doubtless there are
many now seeking that will not be able to enter. When has it been so in Times
past, when there have been Times of great Out pourings of God's Spirit, but
that many that for a while, have inquired with others, what they should do to
be saved, have failed, and afterward grown hard and secure? All of you that
are now awakened, have a Mind to obtain Salvation, and probably hope to get a
Title to Heaven, in the Time of this present moving of God's Spirit: But yet,
(though it be awful to be spoken, and awful to be thought) we have no Reason to
think any other, than than some of you will burn in Hell to all Eternity. You
all are afraid of Hell, and seem at present disposed to take Pains to be
delivered from it; and yet it would be unreasonable to think any other, than
that some of you will have your Portion in the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone. Though there are so many that seem to obtain so easily, having been
but a little while under Convictions, yet, for all that, some never will
obtain. Some will soon loose the Sense of Things they now have; though their
Awakenings seem to be very considerable for the present, they wont hold; they
have not Hearts disposed to hold on through very many Difficulties. Some that
have set out for Heaven, and hope as much as others to obtain, are indeed but
slighty and slack, even now, in the midst of such a Time as this: And others,
that for the present seem to be more in Earnest, will probably before long
decline, and ^ail, and gradually return to be as they were before. The
Convictions of some seem to be great, while that which is the Occasion of their
Convictions is new* which when that begins to grow old, will gradually decay,
and wear off. Thus, it may be, the Occasion of your Awakening has been the
Hearing of the Conversion of some Person, or your seeing so extraordinary a
Dispensation of Providence as this is, in which God now appears amongst us; but
by and by the Newness and Freshness of these Things will be gone, and so will not
affect your Mind as now they do; and it may be your Convictions will go away
with it.

Though such a Time as this, be a Time wherein God does more liberally bestow his
Grace than at other Times, and so a Time of greater Advantage for obtaining it,
yet there seems to be, upon some Accounts, greater Danger of Backsliding, than
when Persons are awakened at other Times. For commonly such extraordinary Times
don't last long; and then when they cease there are Multitudes that loose their
Convictions as it were together: As the Spirit of God departs, awakenings ease
off from the Minds of Persons all over a Town.

We speak of it as an happy Thing, that God is pleased to be causing of it to
be such a Time amongst us; and so it is indeed: but there are some that it will
be no Benefit to; it will but be an Occasion of their greater Misery; they will
wish they had never seen this Time; it will be more tolerable for those that
never saw it, or any Thing like it, in the Day of Judgment than for them. It Is
an awful Consideration, that there are probably those here, that the great
Judge will hereafter call to a strict Account about this very Thing, why they
no better improved this Opportunity, when he did so set open the Fountain of
his Grace, and did so loudly call upon them, and came and strove with them in
particular, by the Awakening Influences of his Spirit; and they will have no
good Account to give to the Judge, but their Mouths will be stopped, and they
will stand Speechless before him.

You had need therefore to be earnest, and very thorough and resolved in this
Affair, that you may not be one of those that shall thus fail, that you may so
fight, as not uncertainly, and so run, as that you may win the Prize.

5. Consider what sad Circumstances Times of extraordinary Effusion of God's
Spirit commonly leave Persons in, when they leave them unconverted. They find
them in a doleful Condition, because in a natural Condition, but commonly leave
them in a much more doleful Condition. They are left dreadfully hardened, and
with a great Increase of Guilt, and their Souls under a mo^strong Dominion and
Possession of Satan. And frequently, Seasons of extraordinary Advantage for
Salvation, when they pass over Persons, and they don't improve them, nor
receive any Good in them, seal their Damnation. As such Seasons leave them, God
for ever leaves them, and gives them up to judicial Hardness. Luke 19. 41, 42.
And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying* If
thou had known, even thou, the Things which belong to thy Peace! -- But now
they are hid from thine Eyes.

6. Consider, that it is very uncertain whether you will ever see such another
Time as this is. If there should be such another Time, it is very uncertain
whether you will live to see it. Many that are now concerned for their
Salvation amongst us, will probably be in their Graves, and it may be in Hell
before that Time; and if you should miss this Opportunity, it may be so with
you. And what Good will that do you, to have the Spirit of God poured out upon
Earth, in the Place where you once lived, while you are tormented in Hell? What
will it avail you, that others are crying, What shall I do to be saved? while
you are shut up for ever in the bottomless Pit, and are wailing and gnashing
your Teeth in everlasting Burnings?

Wherefore improve this Opportunity, while God is pouring out his Spirit on
Earth, and you are on Earth, and while you dwell in that Place where the Spirit
of God is thus poured out, and you your self have the awakening Influences of
it, that you may never wail and gnash your Teeth in Hell, but may sing in
Heaven for ever, with others that are redeemed from amongst Men, and redeemed
amongst us.

7. If you should see another such Time, it will be under far greater
Disadvantages than you now see this Time. You will probably then be much older,
and will have more hardened your Heart; and so will be under less Probability
of receiving Good. Some Persons are so hardened in Sin, and so left of God,
that they can live through such a Time as this, and not be much awakened or
affected by it; they can stand their Ground, and be but Little moved. And so
may it be with you, by another such Time, if there should be another amongst
us, and you should live to see it. The Case in all Prohability will be greatly
altered with you by that Time. If you should continue Christless and Graceless
till then, you will be much further from the Kingdom of God, and much deeper
involved in Snares and Misery; and the Devil will probably have a vastly
greater Advantage against you, to tempt and confound you.

8. We don't know but that God is now gathering in his Elect, before some great
and sore Judgment. It has been God's Manner before he casts off a visible
People, or brings some great and destroying Judgments upon them, first to
gather in his Elect, that they may be secure. So it was before the casting off
of the Jews from being God's People: There was first a very remarkable pouring
out of the Spirit, and gathering in of the Elect, by the Preaching of the
Apostles and Evangelists, as we read in the beginning of the Acts: But after
this Harvest, and it is Gleanings were over, the Rest were blinded, and
hardened; the Gospel had little Success amongst them, and the Nation was given
up, and cast off from being God's People, and their City and Land was destroyed
by the Romans* in a terrible Manner; and they have been cast off by God now for
a great many Ages, and still remain a hardened and rejected People. So we read
in the beginning of the 7th Chapter of the Revelations, that God, when about to
bring destroying Judgments on the Earth, first sealed his Servants in the
Forehead: He set his Seal upon the Hearts of the Elect, gave them the saving
Influences and Indwelling of his Spirit, by which they were sealed to the Day
of Redemption. Rev. 7. 1, 2, 3. And after these Things, I saw four Angels,
standing on the four Corners of the Earth, holding the four Winds of the Earth,
that the Wind should not blow on the Earth, nor on the Sea, nor on any Tree.
And I saw another Angel ascending from the East, having the Seal of the living
God: And he cried with a loud Voice, to the four Angels, to whom it was given
to hurt the Earth, and the Sea, saying, Hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea,
nor the Trees, till we have sealed the Servants of our God in their Foreheads.

And we don't know but that this may be the Case now, that God is about, in a
great Measure, to forsake this (...) and, and give up this People, and to bring
most awful and overwhelming Judgments upon it, and that he is now gathering in
his Elect, to secure them from the Calamity. The State of the Nation, and of
this Land, never looked so threatening of such a Thing as it does at this Day.
The present Aspect of Things exceedingly threatens the dying of vital Religion,
and even of those Truths that are especially the Foundation of it, out of this
Land, and so God's departing from us. If it should be so, how awful will the
Case be with those that shall be left, and not brought in, while God continues
the Influences of his Spirit, to gather in those that are to be redeemed from
amongst us!

9. If you neglect the present Opportunity, and ^e finally unbelieving, those
that are converted in this Time of the pouring out of God's Spirit, will rise
up in Judgment against you. Your Neighbors, your Relations, Acquaintance, or
Companions that are converted, will that Day appear against you: They will not
only be taken while you are left, mounting up with Joy to meet the Lord in the
Air, while you are left below with those that are to be destroyed, and will
stand at the Right Hand with glorious Saints and Angels, while you are at the
left with Devils, but they will rise up in Judgment against you. However
friendly you have been together, and have taken Pleasure in one another
Company, and have often familiarly conversed together, they will then surely
appear against you. They will rise up against you as Witnesses, and will
declare what a precious Opportunity you had, and did not improve; how you
continued unbelieving, and rejecting the Offers of a Savior, when those Offers
were made in so extraordinary a Manner, and when so many others were prevailed
upon to accept of Christ; how you was negligent and slack, and did not know the
Things that belonged to your Peace, in that your Day. And not only so, but they
shall be your Judges, as Assessors with the great Judge; and as such will
appear against you; they will be with the Judge in passing Sentence upon you. 1
Cor. 6. 2 Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the World. Christ will admit
them to the Honor of judging the World with him: They shall sit with him in
his Throne. Rev. 3. 21. They shall sit with Christ in his Throne of Government,
and they shall sit with him in his Throne of Judgment, and shall be Judges with
him when you are judged, and as such shall condemn you.

10. and lastly. You don't know that you shall live through the present Time of
the pouring out of God's Spirit. You may be taken away in the midst of it, or
you may be taken away in the beginning of it; as God in his Providence is
putting you in mind by the late Instance of Death, in a young Person in the
Town. Joseph Clark's Wife, a young Woman that had been lately married, that
died suddenly the Week before this was delivered.
God has of late been very awful in his Dealings with us, in the repeated
Deaths of young Persons that have happened amongst us. This should stir every
one up ^o be in the more haste to press into the Kingdom of God, that so you
may be sa^e whenever Death comes. This is a blessed Season and Opportunity; but
you don't know how little of it you may have: You may have much less of it than
others: You may by Death be suddenly snatched away from all Advantages that are
here enjoyed for the Good of Souls. Therefore make haste and escape for thy
Life: One Moment's Delay ^s dangerous; for Wrath is pursuing, and divine
Vengeance hanging over every unconverted Person.

Let these Considerations move every one to be improving this Opportunity, that
while others receive saving Good, and are made Heirs of eternal Glory, you may
not be left behind, in the same miserable doleful Circumstances in which you
came into the World, a poor Captive to Sin and Satan, a lost She^p a perishing
u^d^ne Creature, sinking down into everlasting Perdition; that you may not be
one of them spoken of, Jer 17 6. that shall be like the Heath in the Desert,
and shall not see Good when Good comes. -- If you don't improve this
Opportunity, remember I have told you, you will hereafter lament it; and if you
don't lament it in this World, then I will leave it wi^h you for you to
remember throughout a miserable Eternity.

II. I would address my self to such as yet remain unawaken'd It Is an awful
Thing that there should be any one Person remaining secure amongst us, at such
a Time a^ this; but yet it is to be feared that there are some of this Sort* I
would here a little expostulate with such Persons.

I would put it to you,

1. When you expect that it will be more likely that you should be awakened,
and wrought upon than now? You are in a Christless Condition; but yet without
Doubt intend to go to Heaven; and therefore intend to be convert^d some Time
before you die; which is not to be expected till you are first awakened, and
deeply concerned about the Welfare of your Soul, and brought earnestly to seek
God's converting Grace, And when do you intend that this shall be? How do you
lay Things out in your own Mind, or what Projection have ^^u a^ou^ th^s Ma^ter?
Is it ever so likely that a Person will be awakened, as at such a Time as this?
How do we see that many that before were secure are now roused out of their
Sleep, and are crying, What shall I do to be ^^v^d? But you are yet secure! --
Do you flatt^r your self that it will be more likely that you should be
awakened, when it is a dull and d^ad Time? Do you lay Matters out thus in your
own Mind, that though you are Senseless when others are generally awakened, that
yet you shall be awakened when others are generally Senseless? Or do you hope
to see another such Time of the pouring out of God's Spirit hereafter? And do
you think that it will be more likely that you should be wrought upon then,
than now? And why do ye think so? Is it because then you shall be so much older
than you are now, and so that your Heart will be grown softer and mo^^ tender
with Age? Or because you will then have stood out so much longer against the
Calls of the Gosp^l, and all Means of Grace? Do you think it more likely, that
God will give you needed Influences of his Spirit then, than now, because then
you will have provoked him so much more, and your Sin and Guilt will be so much
greater? And do you think it will be any Benefit to you, to s^and it out through
the present Season of Grace, as Proof against the extraordinary Means of
Awakening that now there are? Do you think that this will be a good Preparation
for a saving Work of the Spirit hereafter?

2. What Means do you expect to be awakened by? As to the awakening awful
Things of the Word of God, those you have had set before you Times without
Number, in the most moving Manner that the Dispensers of the Word have been
capable of. As to particular solemn Warnings, directed to those that are in
your Circumstances, those you have frequently had, and have them now from Time
to Time. Do you expect to be awakened by awful Providence? Those also you have
lately had, of the most awakening Nature, ^^e after another. Do you expect to
be moved by the Deaths of others? We have lately had repeated Instances of
these: The^e have been Deaths of old and young: The Year has been remarkable
for the Deaths of young Persons, in the Bloom of Life, and some of them very
sudden Deaths. Will the Conversion of others move you? -- There is indeed
scarce any Thing that is found to have so great a Tendency to stir Persons up
as this: But this you have been tried with of late in frequent Instances; but
are hitherto Proof against it. Will a general pouring out of the Spirit, and
seeing a Concern about Salvation amongst all Sorts of People do it? This Means
you now have, but without Effect. Yea you have all these Things together; you
have the solemn Warnings of God's Word, and awful Instances of Death, and the
Conversion of others, and see a general Concern about Salvation: But all
together don't move you to any great Concern, about your own precious,
immortal, and miserable Soul. Therefore consider by what Means it is that you
expect ever to be awakened.

You have heard that it is probable that some that are now awakened, will never
obtain Salvation; how dark then does it look upon you that remain stupidly
unawaken'd! -- Those that be not moved at such a Time as this, that are come to
adult Age, have Reason to fear whether or no they be not given up to judicial
Hardness. I don't say they have Reason to conclude it, but they have Reason to
fear it -- How dark does it look upon you, that God comes and knocks at so many
persons Doors, and misses yours! that God is giving the Strivings of his Spirit
so generally amongst us, while you are left Senseless!

3. Do you expect to obtain Salvation without ever seeking of it? If you are
sensible that there is a Necessity of your seeking in order to obtaining, and
ever intend to seek, one would think you could not avoid it at such a Time as
this. Inquire therefore whether you intend to go to Heaven, living all your
Days a secure, negligent, careless Life. Or, (...)

4. Do you think you can bear the Damnation of Hell? Do you imagine that you
can tolerably endure the devouring Fire, and everlasting Burnings? Do you hope
that you shall be able to grapple with the Vengeance of God Almighty, when he
girds himself with Strength, and clothes himself with Wrath? Do you think to
strengthen your self against God, and to be able to make your part good with
him? 1 Cor. 10. 22. Do we provoke the Lord to Jealousy? Are we stronger than
he? Do you flatter your self that you shall find out Ways for your Ease and
Support, and to make it out tolerable well, to bear up your Spirit in those
everlasting Burnings, that are prepared for the Devil and his Angels? Ezekiel. 22.
14. Can thine Heart endure, or can thine Hands be strong, in the Days that I
shall deal with thee? -- It Is a difficult Thing to conceive what such
Christless Persons think, that are unconcerned at such a Time as this is.

III. I would direct my self to them that are grown considerably into Years,
and are yet in a natural Condition. I would now take Occasion earnestly to
exhort you, to improve this extraordinary Opportunity, and press into the
Kingdom of God. You have lost many Advantages that once you had, and now have
not the same Advantages that others have: The Case is very different with you
from what it is with many of your Neighbors. You above all had need to improve
such an Opportunity. Now is the Time for you to bestir your self, and take the
Kingdom of Heaven!

Consider,

1. Now there seems to be a Door opened for old Sinners. Now God is dealing
forth freely to all Sorts: His Hand is opened wide, and he don't pass by old
ones so much as he used to do. You are not under such Advantages as others are
that are younger; but yet, so wonderfully has God ordered it, that now you are
not destitute of great Advantage: Though old in Sin, God has put a new and
extraordinary Advantage into your Hands. O, improve this Price that you have to
get Wisdom! You that have been long seeking to enter in at the strait Gate, and
yet remain without, now take your Opportunity and press in! You that have been
long in the Wilderness, fighting with various Temptations, and have been
laboring under Discouragements, and have been ready to give up the Case, have
been often tempted to Despair, now, behold the Door that God opens for you!
Don't give Way to Discouragements now; this is not a Time for it: Don't spend
Time in thinking that you have done what you can already, and that you see
Signs that you be not elected, and in giving Way to other perplexing,
weakening, disheartening Temptations: Don't waste away this precious
Opportunity in such a Manner: You have no Time to spare for such Things as
these: God calls you now to something else: Improve this Time in seeking and
striving for Salvation, and not in that which tends to hinder it. It Is no Time
now for you to stand talking with the Devil; but hearken to God, and apply your
self to that, which he does now so loudly call you to.

Some of you have often lamented the Loss of past Opportunities: As
particularly the Loss of the Time of Youth, and have been wishing that you had
so good an Opportunity again; have been ready to say, O! if I was young again,
how would I improve such an Advantage! That Opportunity that you have had in
Time past, is irrecoverable; you can never have it again: but God can give you
other Advantages of another Sort, that are very great, and he is so doing at
this Day. He is now putting a new Opportunity into your Hands; though not of the
same Kind with that which you once had, and have lost, yet in some Respects as
great of another Kind. If you lament, and are ready to cry out of your Folly in
neglecting and loosing past Opportunities, then don't be guilty of the Folly of
neglecting the Opportunity which God now gives you. This Opportunity you could
not have purchased, if you would have given all that you had in the World for
it: But God is putting of it into your Hands, of himself, of his own free and
sovereign Mercy, without your purchasing of it. Therefore when you have it,
don't neglect it.

2. It is a great deal more likely with Respect to such Persons than others,
that this is their last Time. There will be a last Time of any special Offer of
Salvation to impenitent Sinners. God's Spirit shall not always strive with Man,
Genesis 6 3. God sometimes continues long knocking at the Doors of wicked Men's
Hearts; but there are the last Knocks, and the last Calls, that ever they shall
have. And sometimes God's last Calls are the loudest, and then if Sinners don't
hearken, God finally leaves them. How long has God been knocking at many of
your Doors, that are old in Sin! It Is a great deal more likely that these are
his last Knocks. You have resisted God's Spirit in Times past, and have
hardened your Heart once and again; but God will not be thus dealt with always:
There is Danger, that if now, after so long a Time, you will not hearken, he will
utterly desert you, and leave you to walk in your own Counsels.

It seems, by God's Providence, as though God had yet an elect Number amongst old
Sinners in this Place, that perhaps he is now about to bring in. It looks as
though there were some that long lived under Mr. Stoddard's Ministry, that God
has not utterly cast off, though they so stood it out under such great Means as
they then enjoyed. It Is to be hoped that God will now bring in a Remnant from
among them. But it is the more likely that God is now about finishing with them,
one Way or the other, for their having been so long the Subjects of such
extraordinary Means. You have seen former T^mes of the pouring out of God's
Spirit upon the Town, when others were taken and you left, others were called
out of Darkness into mavelous Light, and were brought into a glorious and
happy State, and you was one that saw not Good when Good came. How dark will
your Circumstances appear, if you shall also stand it out through this
Opportunity, and still be left behind! Take heed that you be not one of those
spoken of, Heb 6. 7. 8. that are like the Earth that has Rain coming o^t upon
it, and only bears Briars and Thorns. As we see there are some Pieces of
Ground, the more Showers of Rain fall upon them, the more fruitful Seasons
there are, the more do the Briars, and other useless and hurtful Plants, that
are rooted in them, grow and flourish. Of such Ground the Apostle says, It is
rejected, and is high unto cursing, whose End is to be burned. The Way that the
Husbandman takes with such Ground, is to set Fire to it, to burn up the Growth
of it. -- If you miss this Opportunity, there is Danger that you will be
utterly rejected, and that your End will be to be burned. And if this is to be,
it is to be feared, that you are not far from, but nigh unto Cursing.

Those of you that are already grown old in Sin, and are now under Awakenings,
when you feel your Convictions begin to go off, if ever that should be, then
remember what you have now been told: It may well then strike you to the Heart!

IV. I would direct the Advice to those that are Young, and now under their
first special Convictions. I would earnestly urge such to improve this
Opportunity, and press into the Kingdom of God.

Consider two Things,

1. You have all Manner of Advantages now centring upon you. It is a Time of
great Advantage for all; but your Advantages are above others. There is no
other Sort of Persons, that have now so great and happy an Opportunity as you
have. You have that great Advantage that is common to all that live in this
Place, viz. That now it is a Time of the extraordinary pouring out of the
Spirit of God; and also have that great Advantage, that you have the awakening
Influences of the Spirit of God on you in particular; and besides that, you
have this peculiar Advantage, that you are now in your Youth: And added to
this, you have another unspeakable Advantage, that you now are under your first
Convictions. Happy is he that never has hardened his Heart, and blocked up his
own Way to Heaven by backsliding, and has now the awakening Influences of God's
Spirit, if God does but enable him thoroughly to improve them! Such above all
in the World bid fair for the Kingdom of God. God is wont, on such, above any
Kind of Persons, as it were easily and readily to bestow the saving Grace and
Comforts of his Spirit. Instances of speedy and sudden Conversion are most
commonly found among such -- Happy are they that have the Spirit of God with
them, and never have quenched it, if they did but know the Price they have in
their Hands!

If you have a Sense of your Necessity of Salvation, and the great Worth and
Value of it, you will be willing to take the surest Way to it, or that which
has the greatest Probability of Success; and that certainly is, thoroughly to
improve your first Convictions: If you do so, it is not likely that you will
fail; there is the greatest Probability that you will succeed What is it not
worth to have such an Advantage in ones Hands, for obtaining eternal Life? --
The present Season of the pouring out of God's Spirit, is the first such Season
that many of you that are now under Awakenings have ever seen, since you came
to Years of Understanding: On which Account, and because it is the first Time
that you have ever been stir^'d up by the Spirit of God your self, it is the
greatest Opportunity that ever you have had, and probably by far the greatest
that ever you will have. There are many here present that wish they had such an
Opportunity, but they never can obtain it; they cannot buy it for Money; but you
have it in your Possession, and can improve it if you will.

But yet,

2. There is on some Accounts greater Danger that such as are in your
Circumstances will fail of thoroughly improving their Convictions, with Respect
to Stedsastness and Perseverance, than others. Those that are young are more
unstable than elder Persons: They that never had Convictions before, have less
Experience of the Difficulty of the Work they have engaged in; they are more
ready to think that they shall obtain Salvation easily, and are more easily
discouraged by Disappointments; and young Persons have less Reason and
Consideration to fortify them against Temptations to Backsliding: You should
therefore labor now the more to guard against such Temptations -- By all Means
be thorough now! Make but one Work of seeking Salvation! Make thorough Work of
it the first Time! -- There are vast Disadvantages that they bring themselves
under, that have several Turns of Seeking with great Intermissions: By such a
Course Persons exceedingly wound their own Souls, and entangle themselves in
many Snares. -- Who are those that commonly meet with so many Difficulties, and
are so long laboring in Darkness and Perplexity, but those that have had
several Turns at seeking Salvation, who have one while had Convictions, and
then have quenched them, and then have set about the Work again, and have
backsliden again, and have gone on after that Manner? The Children of Israel
would not have been forty Years in the Wilderness, if they had held their
Courage, and had gone on as they set out; but they were of an unstable Mind,
and were for going back again into Egypt Otherwise if they had gone right
forward, without Discouragement, as God would have led them, they would have
soon entered, and taken Possession of Canaan: They had got to the very Borders
of it, when they turned back, but then were thirty-eight Years after that,
before they got through the Wilderness. Therefore as you regard the Interest of
your Soul, don't run your self into a like Difficulty, by Unsteadiness,
Intermission, and Backsliding; but press right forward, from henceforth, and
make but one Work of seeking converting and pardoning Grace, however great, and
difficult, and long a Work that may be.

Ruth's Resolution.
DISCOURSE, III.
RUTH 1. 16. AND Ruth said, Entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
following after thee; for whither thou go, I will go, and where thou
lodgest, I will lodge; thy People shall be my People, and thy GOD, my GOD.
THE Things that we have the History of in this Book of Ruth, seem to be
ins^rted into the Canon of the Scripture especially on two Accounts.

First, Because Christ was of Ruth's Posterity. The Holy Ghost thought fit to
take particular Notice of that Marriage of Boaz with Ruth, whence sprang the
Savior of the World. -- We may often observe it, that the Holy Spirit that
indicted the Scriptures often takes Notice of little Things, minute Occurrences,
that do but remotely relate to Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Because this History seems to be typical of the Calling of the
Gentile Church, and indeed of the Conversion of every Believer. Ruth was not
originally of Israel, but was a Moabitess, an Alien from the Commonwealth of
Israel: But she forsook her own People, and the Idols of the Gentiles, to
worship the God of Israel, and to join her self to that People: Herein she
seems to be a Type of the Gentile Church, and also of every sincere Convert.
Ruth was the Mother of Christ; He came of her Posterity: so the Church is
Christ's Mother, as she is represented, Rev 12. at the Beginning. And so also
is every true Christian his Mother. M^tth 12. 50 Whosoever shall do the Will of
my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother.
Christ is what the Soul of every one of the Elect is in Travail with, in the
New Birth. Ruth forsook all her natural Relations, and her own Country, the
Land of her Nativity, and all her former Possessions there, for the sake of the
God of Israel; as every true Christian forsakes all for Christ. Psalm 45. 10.
Hearken O Daughter, and consider, and incline thine Ear; forget also thine own
People, and thy Father's House.

Naomi was now returning out of the Land of Moab, into the Land of Israel, with
her two Daughters-in-law, Orpah and Ruth; who well represent to us, two Sorts
of Professors of Religion; Orpah that Sort, that indeed make a fair Profession,
and seem to set out well, but dure but for a while, and then turn back; Ruth
that Sort, that are sound and sincere, and therefore are steadfast and
persevering in the Way that they have set out in. Naomi, in the preceding
Verses represents to these her Daughters the Difficulties of their leaving
their own Country to go with her. And in this Verse may be observed,

1. The remarkable Conduct and Behavior of Ruth on this Occasion; with what
inflexible Resolution she cleaves to Naomi, and follows her. When Naomi first
arose to return from the Country of Moab, into the Land of Israel, Orpah and
Ruth both set out with her: And Naomi exhorts them both to return: And they
both of them wept, and seemed as if they could not bear the Thoughts of leaving
her, and appeared as if they were resolved to go with her. Verse 10. And they
said unto her, Surely we will return with thee, unto thy People. Then Naomi
says to them again, Turn again my Daughters* go your Way, etc. And then they
were greatly affected again, and Orpah returned and went back. Now Ruth's
Stedfastness in her Purpose had a greater Trial, but yet is not overcome: She
clave unto her, Verse 14. Then Naomi speaks to her again, Verse 15. Behold thy
Sister in law is gone back unto her People, and unto her gods; Return thou
after thy Sister in-law. And then she shows her immovable Resolution in the
Text and following Verse.

2. I would particularly observe that wherein the Virtuousness of this her
Resolution consists, viz. That it was for the Sake of the God of Israel, and
that she might be one of His People, that the was thus resolved to cleave to
Naomi: Thy People shall be my People, and thy God, my God. It was for God's
Sake that she did thus; and therefore her so doing is afterward spoken of as a
Virtuous Behavior in her, Chap. 2. 11, 12 And Boaz answered and said unto her,
It has fully been showed me, all that thou have done unto thy Mother in law,
since the Death of thine Husband, and ^ow thou have left thy Father, and thy
Mother, and the Land of thy Nativity, and art come unto a People which thou
knew not heretofore. The Lord recompense thy Work, and a full Reward be
given thee of the Lord God of Israel, under whose Wings thou art come to trust.
She left her Father and Mother, and the Land of her Nativity, to come and trust
under the Shadow of God's Wings; and she had indeed a full Reward given her as
Boaz wished; for besides immediate spiritual Blessings to her own Soul, and
eternal Rewards in another World, she was rewarded with plentiful, and
prosperous outward Circumstances, in the Family of Boaz; and God raised up
David and Solomon of her Seed, and established the Crown of Israel, (the People
that she chose before her own People) in her Posterity, and (which is much
more) of her Seed he raised up Jesus Christ, in whom all the Families of the
Earth are blessed.

From the Words thus opened, I observe this for the Subject of my present
Discourse.

When those that we have formerly been conversant with, are turning to God, and
joining themselves to his People, it ought to be our firm Resolution, that we
will not leave them; but that their People shall be our People, and their God,
our God. It is sometimes so, that of those that have been conversant one with
another, that have dwelt together as Neighbors, and have been often together
as Companions, or have been united in near Relation, and have been together in
Darkness, Bondage, and Misery, in the Service of Satan, some are inlighten'd
and have their Minds changed, are made to see the great Evil of Sin, and have
their Hearts turned to God, and are influenced by the Holy Spirit of God, to
leave their Company that are on Satan's Side, to go and join themselves with
that blessed Company that are with Jesus Christ; they are made willing to
forsake the Tents of Wickedness, to dwell in the Land of Uprightness, with the
People of God.

And sometimes this proves a final Parting or Separation between them, and
those that they have been formerly conversant with. Though it may be no Parting
in outward Respects, they may still dwell together, and may converse one with
another, yet in other Respects it sets them at a great Distance one from
another: one is a Child of God, and the other the Enemy of God; one is in a
miserable, and the other in a happy Condition; one is a Citizen of the heavenly
Zion, the other is under Condemnation to He^l. They are no longer together in
those Respects, wherein they used to be together: They used to be of one Mind
to serve Sin, and do Satan's Work; now they are of contrary Minds: They used to
be together in Worldliness, and sinful Vanity; now they are of exceeding
different Dispositions. They are separated as they are in different Kingdoms;
the one remains in the Kingdom of Darkness, the other is translated into the
Kingdom of God's dear Son. And sometimes they are finally separated in these
Respects: while one dwells in the Land of Israel, and in the House of God; the
other, like Orpah, lives and dies in the Land of Moab.

Now it is lamentable when it is thus: It Is awful being parted so: It Is doleful
when of those that have formerly been together in Sin, some turn to God, and
join themselves with his People, that it should prove a Parting between them
and their former Companions and Acquaintance. -- It should be our firm and
inflexible Resolution in such a Case, that it shall be no Parting, but that we
will follow them, that their People shall be our People, and their God our God;
and that for the following Reasons.

I. Because their God is a glorious God. There is none like him, who is
infinite in Glory and Excellency: He is the most high God, glorious in
Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders: His Name is excellent in all the
Earth, and his Glory is above the Earth and the Heavens: Among the God's there
is none like unto him; there is none in Heaven to be compared to him, nor are
there any among the Sons of the Mighty, that can be liken'd unto him. -- Their
God is the Fountain of all Good, and an inexhaustible Fountain; he is an
alsufficient God; a God that is able to protect and defend them, and do all
Things for them: He is the King of Glory, the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord
mighty in Battle: A strong Rock, and an high Tower. There is none like the God
of Jes^urun, who rides on the Heaven in their Help, and in his Excellency on
the Sky: The eternal God is their Refuge, and underneath are everlasting Arms:
He is a God that has all Things in his Hand, and does whatsover he pleases: He
kills, and makes alive; he brings down to the Grave, and brings up; he
makes poor, and makes rich: The Pillars of the Earth are the Lord's. -- Their
God is an infinitely holy God: There is none holy as the Lord. And he is
infinitely good and merciful. Many that others worship and serve as God's, are
cruel Beings, Spirits that seek the Ruin of Souls; but this is a God that
delights in Mercy; his Grace is infinite, and endures for ever: He is Love it
self, an infinite Fountain and Ocean of it.

Such a God is their God! Such is the Excellency of Jacob! Such is the God of
them, who have forsaken their Sins and are converted! They have made a wise
Choice, who have chosen this God for their God. They have made an happy
Exchange indeed, that have exchanged Sin, and the World, for such a God!

They have an excellent and glorious Savior, who is the only begotten Son of
God; the Brightness of his Father's Glory; one in whom God from Eternity had
infinite Delight; A Savior of infinite Love; one that has shed his own Blood,
and made his Soul an Offering for their Sins; and one that is able to save them
to the uttermost.

II. Their People are an excellent and happy People. God has renewed them, and
instamped his own Image upon them, and made them Partakers of his Holiness.
They are more excellent than their Neighbors, Prove. 12. 26 Yea, they are the
excellent of the Earth, Psalm 16. 3 They are lovely in the Sight of the Angels;
and they have their Souls adorned with those Graces, that in the Sight of God
him self are of great Price.

The People of God are the most excellent and happy Society in the World. That
God whom they have chosen for their God, is their Father; he has pardoned all
their Sins, and they are at Peace with him; and he has admitted them to all the
Privileges of his Children. As they have devoted themselves to God, so God has
given himself to them: He is become their Salvation, and their Portion: His
Power and Mercy, and all his Attributes are theirs. They are in a safe State,
free from all Possibility of perishing: Satan has no Power to destroy them. God
carries them on Eagles Wings, far above Satan's Reach, and above the Reach of
all the Enemies of their Souls. God is with them in this World; they have his
gracious Presence: God is for them; Who then can be against them? As the
Mountains are round about Jerusalem, so JEHOVAH is round about them. God is
their Shield, and their exceeding great Reward; and their Fellowship is with
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: And they have the divine Promise and
Oath, that in the World to come, they shall dwell for ever in the glorious
Presence of God.

It may well be sufficient to induce us to resolve to cleave to those that
forsake their Sins and Idols, to join themselves with this People, that God is
with them. Zech. 8 23 Thus faith the Lord of Hosts, In those Days it shall come
to pass, that ten Men shall take hold, out of all Languages of the Nations;
even shall take hold of the Skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with
you; for we have heard that God is with you. So should Persons, as it were take
hold of the Skirt of their. Neighbors and Companions, that have turned to God,
and resolve that they will go with them, because God is with them.

III. Happiness is no where else to be had, but in their God, and with their
People. There are that are called gods many, and lords many. Some make gods of
their Pleasures; some choose Mammon for their god; some make gods of their own
supposed Excellencies, or the outward Advantages they have above their
Neighbors; some choose one Thing for their god, and others another: But Men
can be happy in no other God, but the God of Israel. He is the only Fountain of
Happiness. Other gods cannot help in Calamity; nor can any of them afford what
the poor empty Soul stands in need of. Let Men adore those other gods never so
much, and call upon them never so earnestly, and serve them never so
diligently, they will never the less remain poor, wretched, unsatisfied, undone
Creatures. All other People are miserable, but that People whose God is the
Lord. -- The World is divided into two Societies: There are the People of God,
the little Flock of Jesus Christ, that Company that we read of, Rev. 14. 4.
These are they, which were not defiled with Women; for they are Virgins: These
are they, which follow the Lamb whithersoever he g^eth: These were redeemed
from among Men, being the first Fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. And there are
those that belong to the Kingdom of Darkness; that are without Christ, being
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, Strangers from the Covenants of
Promise, having no Hope, and without God in the World. All that are of this
latter Company, are wretched and undone; they are the Enemies of God, and under
his Wrath and Condemnation: They are the Devil's Slaves, that serve him
blindfold, and are besool'd, and ensnared by him, and hurried along in the
broad Way to eternal Perdition.

IV. When those that we have formerly been conversant with, are turning to God,
and to his People, their Example ought to influence us. Their Example should be
looked upon as the Call of God to us, to do as they have done. God, when he
changes the Heart of one, calls upon another; especially does he loudly call on
those that have been their Friends and Acquaintance. -- We have been influenced
by their Examples in Evil; and shall we cease to follow them, when they make
the wisest Choice that ever they made, and do the best Thing that ever they
did! If we have been Companions with them in Worldliness, in Vanity, in
unprositable and sinful Conversation, it will be an hard Case, if there must be
a Parting now, because we be not willing to be Companions with them in
Holiness, and true Happiness. Men are greatly influenced by seeing one
another's Prosperity in other Things. If those that they have been much
conversant with, grow rich, and obtain any great earthly Advantages, it awakens
their Ambition, and eager Desire after the like Prosperity: How much more
should they be influenced, and stirred up to follow them, and be like them,
when they obtain that spiritual and eternal Happiness, that is infinitely more
Worth than all the Prosperity and Glory of this World.

V. Our Resolutions to cleave to and follow those that are turning to God, and
joining themselves to his People, ought to be fixed and strong, because of the
great Difficulty of it. If we will cleave to them, and have their God for our
God, and their People for our People, we must mortify and deny all our Lusts,
and cross every evil Appetite and Inclination, and forever part with all Sin.
But our Lusts are many and violent. Sin is naturally exceeding dear to us; to
part with it is compared to plucking out our right Eyes. Men may refrain from
wanted Ways of Sin, for a little while, and may deny their Lusts in a partial
Degree, with less Difficulty; but it is heart-rending Work, finally to part with
all Sin, and to give our dearest Lusts a Bill of Divorce, utterly to send them
away. But this we must do, if we would follow those that are truly turning to
God: Yea, we must not only forsake Sin, but must, in a Sense, forsake all the
World, Luke 14. 33 Whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has,
he cannot be my Disciple. That is, he must forsake all in his Heart, and must
come to a thorough Disposition and Readiness, actually to quit all for God, and
the glorious spiritual Privileges of his People, whenever the Case may require
it; and that without any Prospect of any Thing of the like Nature, or any
worldly Thing whatsoever, to make amends for it; and all to go into a strange
Country, a Land that has hitherto been unseen; like Abraham, who being called
of God, went out of his own Country, and from his Kindred, and from his
Father's (...) use for a Land that God should show him, not knowing whither he
went.

Thus* it was an hard Thing for Ruth to forsake her native Country, and her
Father and Mother, her Kindred and Acquaintance, and all the pleasant Things
she had in the Land of Moab, to dwell in the Land of Israel, where she never
had been. Naomi told her of the Difficulties once and again They were too hard
for her Sister O^p^h; the Consideration of them turned her back after she was
set out. Her R^solution was not firm enough to overcome them. But so firmly
resolved was Ruth, that she brake through all; she was steadfast in it, that let
the Difficulty be what it would, she would not leave her Mother in law. So
Persons had need to be very firm in their Resolution to conquer the
Difficulties that are in the Way of cleaving to them, that are indeed turning
from Sin to God.

VI. Our cleaving to them, and having their God for our God, and their People
for our People, depends on our Resolution and Choice: And that in two Respects.

1. The Firmness of Resolution in using Means in order to it, is the Way to
have Means effectual. There are Means appointed in order to our becoming some
of the true Israel, and having their God for our God; and the thorough Use of
these Means, is the Way to have Success; but not a slack or slighty Use of
them. And that we may be thorough, there is need of Strength of Resolution, a
firm and inflexible Disposition, and bent of Mind to be universal in the Use of
Means, and to do what we do with our Might, and to persevere in it. Matthew. 11.
12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the violent take it by Force.

2. A choosing of their God, and their People, with a full Determination, and
with the whole Soul, is the Condition of an Union with them. God gives every
Man his Choice in this Matter; as Orpah and Ruth had their Choice, whether they
would go with Naomi into the Land of Israel, or stay in the Land of Moab. A
natural Man may choose Deliverance from Hell; but no Man does ever heartily
choose God, and Christ, and the spiritual Benefits that Christ has purchased,
and the Happiness of God's People, till he is converted. On the contrary, He is
averse to them; he has no Relish of them; and is wholly ignorant of the
inestimable Worth and Value of them.

Many carnal Men do seem to choose these Things, but do it not really; as O pah
seemed at first. to choose to forsake Moab to go into the Land of Israel: But
when Naomi come to set before her the Difficulty of it, she went back; and
thereby showed that she was not fully determined in her Choice, and that her
whole Soul was not in it, as Ruth's was.

APPLICATION.
The USE that I shall make of what has been said, is to move Sinners to this
Resolution, with Respect to those amongst us, that have lately turned to God,
and joined themselves to the Flock of Christ. It is so, through the abundant
Mercy and Grace of God to us in this Place, that it may be said of many of you,
that are in a Christless Condition, that you have lately been left by those
that were formerly with you in such a State. There are those that you have
formerly been conversant with, that have lately forsaken a Life of Sin and the
Service of Satan, and have turned to God, and fled to Christ, and joined
themselves to that blessed Company that are with him. They formerly were with
you in Sin and in Misery, but now they are with you no more, in that State or
Manner of Life: They are changed, and have fled from the Wrath to come: They
have chosen a Life of Holiness here, and the Enjoyment of God hereafter. They
were formerly your Associates in Bondage, and were with you in Satan's
Business; but now you have their Company no longer, in these Things. Many of
you have seen those that you live with under the same Roof, turning from being
any longer with you in Sin, to be with the People of Jesus Christ. Some of you
that are Husbands, have had your Wives; and some of you that are Wives, have
had you Husbands; some of you that are Children, have had your Parents; and
Parents have had your Children; many of you have had your Brothers and Sisters;
and many your near Neighbors, and Acquaintance, and special Friends; many of
you that are young have had your Companions: I say, many of you have had those
that you have been thus concerned with, leaving you, forsaking that doleful
Life, and wretched State that you still continue in. God of his good Pleasure,
and wonderful Grace, has lately caused it to be so, in this Place, that
Multitudes have been forsaking their old Abodes in the Land of Moab, and under
the gods of Moab, and going into the Land of Israel, to put their Trust under
the Wings of the Lord God of Israel. Though you and they have been nearly
related, and have dwelt together, or have been often together, and intimately
acquainted one with another, they have been taken, and you hitherto left! O let
it not be the Foundation of a final Parting! But earnestly follow them; be firm
in your Resolution in this Matter. Don't do as Orpah did, who though at first
she made as though she would follow Naomi, yet when she had the Difficulty of
it set before her, went back: But say as Ruth, I will not leave thee, but where
thou go^st, I will go: Thy People shall be my People, and thy God my God. Say
as she said, and do as she did. Consider the Excellency of their God, and their
Savior, and the Happiness of their People, the blessed State that they are in,
and the doleful State that you are in.

You that are old Sinners, that have lived long in the Service of Satan, have
lately seen some that were with you, that have traveled with you in the Paths
of Sin, these many Years, that with you enjoyed great Means and Advantages,
that have had Calls and Warnings with you, and have with you passed through
remarkable Times of the pouring out of God's Spirit in this Place, and have
hardened their Hearts, and stood it out with you, and with you have grown old
in Sin; I say, you have seen some of them turning to God, i. e. you have seen
those Evidences of it in them, whence you may rationally judge that it is so.
O! let it not be a final Parting! You have been thus long together in Sin, and
under Condemnation; let it be your firm Resolution, that, if possible, you will
be with them still, now they are in an holy and happy State, and that you will
follow them into the holy and pleasant Land.

You that tell of your having been seeking Salvation for many Years, though,
without Doubt, in a poor, dull Way, in comparison of what you ought to have
done. You have seen some that have been with you in that Respect, that were old
Sinners, and old Seekers, as you are, obtaining Mercy. God has lately roused
them from their Dullness, and caused them to alter their Hand, and put them on
more thorough Endeavors; and they have now, after so long a Time heard God's
Voice, and have fled for Refuge to the Rock of Ages. Let this awaken
Earnestness, and Resolution in you. Resolve that you will not leave them.

You that are in your Youth, how many have you seen of your Age and Standing,
that have of late, hopefully chosen God for their God, and Christ for their
Savior! You have follo^^^ them in Sin, and have perhaps followed them into
vain Company; and will you not now follow them to Christ?

And you that are Children, there have lately been some of your Sort, that have
repented of their Sins, and have loved the Lord Jesus Christ, and trusted in
him, and are become God's Children, as we have Reason to hope; Let it stir you
up to resolve to your utmost to seek and cry to God, that you may have the like
Change made in your Hearts, that their People may be your People, and their God
your God.

You that are great Sinners, that have made your selves distinguishingly
guilty, by the wicked Practices you have lived in, there are some of your Sort,
that have lately (as we have Reason to hope) had their Hearts broken for Sin,
and have forsaken it, and have trusted in the Blood of Christ for the Pardon of
it, and have chosen an holy Life, and have betaken themselves to the Ways of
Wisdom: Let it ex^^^^ and encourage you, resolutely to cleave to them, and
earnestly to follow, them.

Let the following Things be here considered.

1. That your Soul is as precious as theirs. It is immortal as theirs is; and
stands in as much Need of Happiness, and can as ill bear eternal Misery. You
was born in the same miserable Condition that they were, having the same Wrath
of God abiding on you. You must stand before the same Judge; who will be as
strict in Judgment with you, as with them; and your own Righteousness will
stand you in no more Stead before him, than theirs; and therefore you stand in
as absolute Necessity of a Savior as they. Carnal Confidences can no more
answer your End than theirs; nor can this World or it is Enjoyments, serve to
make you happy, without God, and Christ, more than them. When the Bridegroom
comes, the foolish Virgins stand in as much Need of Oil, as the Wise, Matthew.25
at the Beginning.

2. Unless you follow them, in their turning to God, their Conversion will be a
Foundation of an eternal Separation between you and them. You will be in
different Interests, and in exceeding different States, as long as you live;
they the Children of God, and you the Children of Satan: and you will be parted
in another World; when you come to die, there will be a vast Separation made
between you. Luke 16. 26. And besides all this, between us and you, there is a
great Gulf fixed; so that they that would pass from hence to you, cannot;
neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence. And you will be
parted at the Day of Judgment. You will be parted at Christ's first Appearance
in the Clouds of Heaven: While they are caught up in the Clouds, to meet the
Lord in the Air, to be ever with the Lord, you will remain below, confined to
this cursed Ground, that is kept in Store, reserved unto Fire, against the Day
of Judgment, and Perdition of ungodly Men. You will appear separated from them,
while you stand before the great Judgment Seat, they being at the Right Hard,
while you are set at the left. Matthew. 25. 32, 33. And before him shall be
gathered all Nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a
Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats; and he shall set the Sheep on his
Right Hand; but the Goats on the left. And you shall then appear in exceeding
different Circumstances: While you stand with Devils, in the Image and
Deformity of Devils, and in ineffable Horror and Amamazement, they shall appear
in Glory, sitting on Thrones, as Assessors with Christ, and as such passing
Judgment upon you, I Cor 6. 2. And what Shame and Confusion will then cover
you, when so many of your Contemporaries, your Equals, your Neighbors,
Relations and Companions, shall be honored, and openly acknowleged, and
confes^ed by the glorious Judge of the Universe, and Redeemer of Saints, and
shall be seen by you sitting with him in such Glory, and you shall appear to
have neglected your Salvation, and not to have improved your Opportunities, and
rejected the Lord Jesus Christ, the same Person that will then appear as your
great Judge, and you shall be the Subjects of such Wrath, and as it were
trodden down in eternal Contempt and Disgrace! Dan. 12. 2. Some shall rise to
everlasting Life, and some to Shame and overlasting Contempt. And what a wide
Separation will the Sentence that shall be then passed and executed, make
between you and them? When you shall be sent away out of the Presence of the
Judge, with Indignation and Abhorrence, as cursed and loathsome Creatures, and
they shall be sweetly accosted, and invited into his Glory, as his dear
Friends, and the blessed of his Father! When you, with all that vast Throng of
wicked and accursed Men and Devils, shall descend with loud Lamentings, and
horrid Shri^ks, into that dreadful Gulf of Fire and B^i^nstone, and shall be
swallowed up in that great and everlasting Furnace, while they shall joyfully
and with sweet Songs of Glory and Praise, ascend with Christ, and all that
beauteous and blessed Company of Saints and Angels, into eternal Felicity, in
the glorious Presence of God, and the sweet Embraces of his Love; and you and
they shall spend Eternity in such a Separation, and immensely different
Circumstances! And that however you have been intimately acquainted and nearly
related, closely united and mutually conversant here in this World; and how
much soever you have taken Delight in each others Company! Shall it be so after
you have been together a great while, each of you in undoing your selves,
enhansing your Guilt, and heaping up Wrath, that their so wisely changing their
Minds, and their Course, and choosing such Happiness for themselves, should now
at length, be the Beginning of such an exceeding and everlasting Separation
between you and them? How awful will it be to be parted so!

3. Consider the great Encouragement that God gives you, earnestly to strive
for the same Blessing that others have obtained. There is great Encouragement
in the Word of God to Sinners, to seek Salvation; in the Revelation that we
have of the abundant Provision made for the Salvation even of the chief of
Sinners, and in the Appointment of so many Means to be used with, and by
Sinners, in order to their Salvation; and by the Blessing which God in his Word
connects with the Means of his Appointment. There is hence great Encouragement
for all, at all Times, that will be thorough in using of these Means. But now
God gives extraordinary Encouragement in his Providence, by pouring out his
Spirit so remarkably amongst us, and bringing savingly Home to himself, all
S^r^s, young and old, rich and poor, wise and unwise, sober and vicious, old
self righteous Seekers, and profligate Livers; -- No Sort are exempt. There is
now at this Day, amongst us, the loudest Call, and the greatest Encouragement,
and the widest Door opened to Sinners, to escape out of a State of Sin and
Condemnation, that perhaps God ever granted in New England. Who is there that
has an immortal Soul, that is so sottish as not to improve such an Opportunity,
and that will not bestir himself with all his Might ^^w? How unreasonable is
Negligence, and how exceeding unseasonable is Discouragement, at such a Day as
this! Will you be so stupid, as to neglect your Soul now? Will any Mortal
amongst us, be so unreasonable, as to lagg behind, or look back in
Discouragement, when God opens such a Door? Let every single Person, be
thoroughly awake! Let every one encourage himself now to press forward, and fly
for his Life!

4. Consider how earnestly desirous they that have obtained are, that you
should follow them, and that their People should be your People, and their God
your God. They desire that you should partake of that great Good that God has
given them, and that unspeakable and eternal Blessedness that he has promised
them: They wi^h and long for it. If you don't go with them, and are not still
of their Company, it will not be for Want of their Willingness, but your own. That
of Moses to Hobab, is the Language of every true Saint of your Acquaintance to
you. Numb. 10 29. We are journeying unto the Place, of which the Lord said, I
will give it you: Come thou with us, and we will do thee Good; for the Lord
has spoken Good concerning Israel. As Moses, when on his Journey through the
Wilde^ness, following the Pillar of Cloud and Fire, invited Hobab, that he had
been acquainted with, and nearly allied to, out of the Land of Midian, where
Moses had formerly dwelt with him, to go with him and his People to Canaan, to
partake with them in the Good that God had promised them; so do those of your
Friends and Acquaintance, invite you out of a Land of Darkness and Wickedness,
where they have formerly been with you, to go with them to the heavenly Canaan.
The Company of Saints, the true Church of Christ invite you. The lovely Bride
calls you to the Marriage Supper. She has Authority to invite Guests to her
own Wedding; and you ought to look on her Invitation and Desire, as the Call of
Christ the Bridegroom; for it is the Voice of his Spirit in her, Rev. 22. 17.
The Spirit, and the Bride say come. Where seems to be a Reference to what had
been said, Chap 19 7, 8, 9. The Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has
made her self ready. And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine
Linen, clean and white; for the fine Linen is the Righteousness of Saints.
And he ^aith unto me, (...); Blessed are they which are called to the Marriage
Supper of the Lamb. It Is with Respect to this her Marriage Supper, that she,
from the Motion of the Spirit of the Lamb in her, says, Come So that you are
invited on all Hands; all conspire to call you. God the Father invites you:
This is the King that has made a Marriage for his Son; and he sends forth his
Servants, the Ministers of the Gospel, to invite the Guests. And the Son
himself invites you: It Is he that speaks, Rev. 22. 17. And let him that hears
say come; and let him that is athirst, Come; and whosoever will let him come.
He tells us who he is, in the foregoing Verse, I Jesus, the Root and Offspring
of David, the bright and morning Star. And God's Ministers invite you, and all
the Church invites you; and there will be Joy in the Presence of the Angels of
God, that Hour tha^ you accept the Invitation.

5. Consider what a doleful Company that will be, that be left after this
extraordinary Time of Mercy is over. We have Reason to think that there will a
Number left. We read that when Ezekiel's healing Waters increased so
abundantly, and the healing Effect of them was so very general; yet there were
certain Places, where the Waters came, that never were healed. Ezekiel. 47 9, 10,
11 And it shall come to pass, that every Thing that lives, which moves,
whither soever the Rivers come, shall live. And there be a very great Multitude
of Fish, because these Waters shall come thither: for they shall be healed, and
every Thing shall live, whither the River comes. And it shall come to pass,
that the Fishers shall stand upon it, from En^ged; even unto En-egl^im; they
shall be a Place to spread forth Nets: There Fish shall be according to their
Kinds, as the Fish of the great Sea, exceeding many. But the miry Places
thereof, and the Marshes thereof, shall not be healed, they shall be given to
Salt. And even in the Apostles Times, when there was such wonderful Success of
the Gospel, yet wherever they came there were some that did not believe. Acts
13. 48. And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the
Word of the Lord, and as many as were ordained to eternal Life believed. And
Chap 28 24. And some believed, and some believed not. So we have no Reason to
expect, but there will be some left amongst us. It Is to be hoped it will be but
a small Company: But what a doleful Company will it be! How darkly and awfully
will it look upon them! -- If you shall be of that Company, how well may your
Friends and Relations lament over you, and bemoan your dark and dangerous
Circumstances! -- If you would not be one of them, make haste, delay not, and
look not behind you. -- Shall all Sorts obtain, shall every one press into the
Kingdom of God, while you stay loitering behind, in a doleful undone Condition?
Shall every one take Heaven, while you remain, with no other Portion but this
World? Now take up that Resolution, that if it be possible you will cleave to
them that have fled for Refuge to lay hold of the Hope set before them. Count
the Cost of a thorough, violent, and perpetual Pursuit of Salvation, and
forsake all, as Ruth forsook her own Country, and all her pleasant Enjoyments
in it. Don't do as Orpah did; who set out, and then was discouraged, and went
back: but hold out with Ruth through all Discouragement and Opposition. When
you consider others, that have 'chosen the better Part, let that Resolution be
ever firm with you, Where thou go I will go; where thou lodgest I will
lodge; thy People shall be my People, and thy God my God.

The Justice of GOD in the Damnation of Sinners.
DISCOURSE, IV.
ROMANS III. 19. -- That every Mouth may be stopped, --
THE main Subject of the doctrinal Part of this Epistle, is the free Grace of
God, in the Salvation of Men by Jesus Christ; especially as it appears in the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone. And the more clearly to evince this
Doctrine, and show the Reason of it, the Apostle, in the first Place,
establishes that Point, that no Flesh living can be justified by the Deeds of
the Law. And to prove it, he is very large and particular in showing, that all
Mankind, not only Gentiles, but Jews, are under Sin, and so under the
Condemnation of the Law; which is what he insists upon from the beginning of
the Epistle to this Place. He first begins with the Gentiles; and in the first
Chapter, shows that they are under Sin, by setting forth the exceeding
Corruptions and horrid Wickedness, that overspread the Gentile World: And then
through the second Chapter, and the former Part of this third Chapter, to the
Text and following Verse, he shows the same of the Jews, that they also are in
the same Circumstances with the Gentiles, in this regard. They had an high
Thought of themselves, because they were God's Covenant People, and
circumcised, and the Children of Abraham. They despised the Gentiles, as
polluted, condemned, and accursed; but looked on themselves, on Account of
their external Privileges, and ceremonial and moral Righteousness, as a pure
and holy People, and the Children of God; as the Apostle observes in the second
Chapter. It was therefore strange Doctrine to them, that they also were unclean
and guilty in God's Sight, and under the Condemnation and Curse of the Law. The
Apostle does therefore, on Account of their strong Prejudices against such
Doctrine, the more particularly insist upon it, and shows that they are no
better than the Gentiles; as in the 9th Verse of this Chapter, What then? Are
we better than they? No in no wise; for we have before proved both Jews and
Gentiles, that they are all under Sin. And to convince them of it, he then
produces certain Passages out of their own Law, or the Old Testament, (whose
Authority they pretended a great Regard to,) from the 9th Verse to the Verse
wherein is our Text. And it may be observed, that the Apostle, first, cites
certain Passages to prove that Mankind are all corrupt, in the 10, 11, and 12.
Verses; as it is written, There is none righteous, no not one: There is none
that understands: There is none that seeks after God: They are all gone out
of the Way: They are together become unprofitable: There is none that does
good; no not one. Secondly, The Passages he cites next, are to prove that not
only are all corrupt, but each one ^^^lly corrupt, as it were all over unclean,
from the crown of his Head, to the Soles of his Feet; and therefore several
particular Parts of the Body are mentioned, as the Throat, the Tongue, the
Lips, the Mouth, the Feet, Verses 13, 14, 15. Their Throat is an open
Sepulcher, with their Tongues they have used Deceit, the Poison of Asps is
under their Lips; whose Mouth is full of Cursing and Bitterness, their Feet are
swift to shed Blood. And, Thirdly, He quotes other Passages to show, that each
one is not only all over corrupt, but corrupt to a desperate Degree, in the 16,
17, and 18. Verses; in which the exceeding Degree of their Corruption is shown,
both by affirming and denying: By affirmatively expressing the most pernicious
Nature and Tendency of their Wickedness, in the 16. Verse. Destruction and
Misery are in their Ways And then by denying all Good, or Godliness, of them,
in the 17, and 18, Verses, And the Way of Peace have they not known: There is
no Fear of God before their Eyes. And then, lest the Jews should think these
Passages of their Law don't concern them, and that only the Gentiles are
intended in them, the Apostle shows in the Verse of the Text, not only that
they are not exempt, but that they especially must be understood, Now we know,
that whatsoever Things the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law.
By those that are under the Law, is meant the Jews, and the Gentiles by those
that are without Law; as appears by the 12th Verse of the preceding Chapter.
There is special Reason to understand the Law, as speaking to and of them, to
whom it was immediately given. And therefore the Jews would be unreasonable in
exempting themselves. And if we examine the Places of the Old Testament, whence
these Passages are taken, we shall see plainly that special Respect is had to
the Wickedness of the People of that Nation, in every one of them. So that the
Law shuts all up in universal and desperate Wickedness, that every Mouth may be
stopped. The Mouths of the Jews, as well as of the Gentiles; notwithstanding
all those Privileges by which they were distinguished from the Gentiles,

The Things that the Law says, are sufficient to stop the Mouths of all
Mankind, in two Respects.

1. To stop them from boasting of their Righteousness, as the Jews were wont to
do; as the Apostle observes in the 23. Verse of the preceding Chapter. -- That
the Apostle has Respect to stopping their Mouths in this Respect, appears by
the 27th Verse of the Context, Where is Boasting then? It is excluded. The Law
stops our Mouths from making of any Plea for Life, or the Favor of God, o^ any
posi^ive Good, from our own Righteousness

2. To stop them from making any Excuse for our selves, or Objection against
the Execution of the Sentence of the Law, or the Infliction of the Punishment
that it threatens. That this is intended, appears by the Words immediately
following, That all the World may become guilty before God. That is that they
may appear to be guilty, and stand convicted before God, and justly liable to
the Condemnation of his Law, as guilty of Death, according to the jewish Way of
Speaking.

And thus the Apostle proves that no Flesh can be justified in God's Sight, by
the Deeds of the Law; as he draws the Conclusion in the following Verse; and so
prepares the Way for the establishing of the great Doctrine of Justification by
Faith alone, which he proceeds to do, in the next Verse to that, and in the
following Part of the Chapter, and of the Epistle.

DOCTRINE. It Is just with God eternally to cast off, and destroy Sinners.

-- For this is the Punishment which the Law condemns to; which the Things that
the Law says may well stop every Mouth from all Manner of Objection against.

The Truth of this Doctrine may appear, by the joint Consideration of two
Things, viz. Man' Sinfulness, and God's Sovereignty.

I. It appears from the Consideration of Man's Sinfulness. And that whether we
consider the infinitely evil Nature of all Sin, or how much Sin Men are guilty
of.

1. If we consider the infinite Evil, and Heinousness of Sin in general. It Is
not unjust in God to inflict what Punishment is deserved; because the very
Notion of deserving any Punishment is, that it may be justly inflicted: A
deserved Punishment and a just Punishment are the same Thing. To say that one
deserves such a Punishment, and yet to say that he don't justly deserve it, is
a Contradiction; and if he justly deserves it, then it may be justly inflicted.

Every Crime or Fault deserves a greater or lesser Punishment, in Proportion as
the Crime it self is greater or less. If any Fault deserves Punishment, then so
much the greater the Fault, so much the greater is the Punishment deserved. The
faulty Nature of any Thing, is the formal Ground and Reason of its Desert of
Punishment; and therefore the more any Thing has of this Nature, the more
Punishment it deserves. And therefore the Terribleness of the Degree of
Punishment, let it be never so terrible, is no Argument against the Justice of
it, if the Proportion does but hold, between the Heinousness of the Crime, and
the Dreadfulness of the Punishment. So that if there be any such Thing as a
Fault infinitely Heinous, it will follow that it is just to inflict a Punishment
for it, that is infinitely dreadful.

A Crime is more or less Heinous, according as we are under greater or lesser
Obligations to the contrary. This is self-evident, because it is herein that
the Criminalness, or Faultiness of any Thing consists, that it is contrary to
what we are obliged or bound to, or what ought to be in us. So the Faultiness
of one Beings hating another, is in Proportion to his Obligation to love him:
The Crime of one Beings despising, and casting Contempt on another, is
proportionably more or less Heinous as he was under greater or lesser
Obligations to honor him: The Fault of disobeying another, is greater or less,
as any one is under greater or lesser Obligations to obey him. And therefore if
there be any Being, that we are under infinite Obligations to love, and honor,
and obey, the Contrary toward him must be infinitely Faulty.

Our Obligation to love, honor, and obey any Being, is in Proportion to his
Loveliness, Honourableness, and Authority. For that is the very Meaning of the
Words, when we say any one is very lovely; it is the same as to say, that he is
one very much to be loved: Or if we say such an one is more honorable than
another; the Meaning of the Words is, that he is one that we are more obliged
to honor. If we say any one has great Authority over us, it is the same as to
say that he has great Right to our Subjection and Obedience.

But God is a Being infinitely lovely, because he has infinite Excellency and
Beauty. To have infinite Excellency and Beauty, is the same Thing as to have
infinite Loveliness. He is a Being of infinite Greatness, Majesty and Glory;
and therefore is infinitely honorable. He is infinitely exalted above the
greatest Potentates of the Earth, and highest Angels in Heaven; and therefore
is infinitely more honorable than they. His Authority over us is infinite; and
the Ground of his Right to our Obedience, is infinitely strong; for he is
infinitely worthy to be obeyed in himself, and we have an absolute universal
and infinite Dependence upon him.

So that Sin against God being a Violation of infinite Obligations, must be a
Crime infinitely heinous; and so deserving of infinite Punishment. -- Nothing
is more agreeable to the common Sense of Mankind, than that Sins committed
against any one, must be proportionably heinous, to the Dignity of the Being
offended and abused; as it is also agreeable to the Word of God. 1 Samuel 2 25. If
one Man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him; (i. e. shall judge him,
and inflict a finite Punishment, such as finite Judges can inflict;) but if a
Man sin against the Lord. Who shall (...) for him! This was the Aggravation of
Sin that made Joseph afraid of it, Gen 39 9. How shall I commit this great
Wickedness, and sin against God? This was the Aggravation of David's Sin, in
comparison of which he esteemed all others as nothing, because they were
infinitely exceeded by it. Psalm 51. 4 Against thee, thee only have I sinned.
-- The Eternity of the Punishment of ungodly Men renders it infinite; and it
renders it no more than infinite; and therefore renders no more than
proportionable to the Heinousness of what they are guilty of.

If there be any Evil or Faultiness in Sin against God, there is certainly
infinite Evil: For if it be any Fault at all, it has an infinite Aggravation,
viz. that it is against an infinite Object. If it be ever so small upon other
Accounts; yet if it be any Thing, it has one infinite Dimension; and so is an
infinite Evil. Which may be illustrated by this: If we suppose a Thing to have
infinite Length, but no Breadth and Thickness, but to be only a mere
mathematical Line, it is nothing: But if it have any Breadth and Thickness at
all, though never so small, yet if it have but one infinite Dimension, viz. that
of Length, the Quantity of it is infinite; it exceeds the Quantity of any
Thing, however broad, thick and long, wherein these Dimensions are all finite.

So that the Objections that are made against the infinite Punishment of Sin,
from the Necessity, or rather previous Certainty of the Futurition of Sin,
arising from the Decree of God, or unavoidable original Corruption of Nature,
if they argue any Thing, don't argue against the Infiniteness of the Degree of
the Faultiness of Sin directly, and no otherwise than they argue against any
Faultiness at all: For if this Necessity or Certainty, leaves any Evil at all
in Sin, that Fault must be infinite by Reason of the infinite Object.

But every such Objector, as would argue from hence, that there is no Fault at
all in Sin* confutes himself, and shows his own Insincerity in his Objection.
For at the same Time that he objects, that Men's Acts are necessary, from God's
Decrees, and original Sin, and that this Kind of Necessity is inconsistent with
Faultiness in the Act, his own Practice shows that he don't believe what he
objects to be true: Otherwise why does he at all blame Men? Or why are such
Persons at all displeased with Men, for abusive, injurious, and ungrateful Acts
toward them? Whatever they pretend, by this they show that indeed they do
believe that there is no Necessity in Men's Acts, from divine Decrees, or
Corruption of Nature, that is inconsistent with Blame. And if their Objection
be this, That this previous Certainty is by God's own Ordering, and that where
God orders an antecedent Certainty of Acts, he transfers all the Fault from the
Actor on himself; their Practice shows, that at the same Time they don't
believe this; but fully believe the Contrary: For when they are abused by Men,
they are displeased with Men, and not with God only.

The Light of Nature teaches all Mankind, that when an Injury is voluntary, it
is Faulty, without any Manner of Consideration of what there might be
previously to determine the Futurition of that evil Act of the Will: And it
really teaches this, as much to those that object and cavil most, as to others;
as their universal Practice shows. By which it appears that such Objections are
insincere and perverse -- Men will mention others corrupt Nature in their own
Case, o^ when they are injured, as a Thing that aggravates their Crime, and
that wherein their Faultiness partly consists. How common is it for Persons,
when they look on themselves greatly injured by another, to inveigh against
him, and aggravate his Baseness, by saying, He is a Man of a most pervese
Spirit: He is naturally of a selfish, niggardly, or proud and haughty Temper:
He is one of a base and vile Disposition. And yet Men's natural corrupt
Dispositions are mentioned as an Excuse for them, with Respect to their Sins
against God, and as (...) they rendered them Blameless.

2. That it is just with God eternally to cast off wicked Men, may more
abundantly appear, if we consider how much Sin they are guilty of. From what
has been already said, it appears, that if Men were guilty of Sin, but in one
Particular, that is sufficient Ground of their eternal Rejection and
Condemnation: If they are Sinners, that is enough: Merely this might be
sufficient to keep them from ever lifting up their Heads, and cause them to
smite on their Breasts, with the Publican that cried, God be merciful to me a
Sinner. But sinful Men are not only thus, but they are full of Sin; full of
Principles of Sin, and full of Acts of Sin: Their Guilt is like great
Mountains, heaped one upon another, till the Pile is grown up to Heaven. They
are totally corrupt, in every Part, in all their Faculties; and all the
Principles of their Nature, their Understandings, and Wills; and in all their
Dispositions and Affections, their Heads, their Hearts, are totally depraved;
all the Members of their Bodies are only Instruments of Sin; and all their
Senses, seeing, hearing, tasting, etc are only Inlets and Outlets of Sin,
Channels of Corruption. There is nothing but Sin, no Good at all. Romans 7. 18.
In me, that is in my Flesh, dwells no good Thing. There is all Manner of
Wickedness. There are the Seeds of the greatest and blackest Crimes. There are
Principles of all Sorts of Wickedness against Men; and there is all Wickedness
against God. There is Pride; there is Enmity; there is Contempt; there is
Quarrelling; there is Atheism; there is Blasphemy. There are these Things in
exceeding Strength; the Heart is under the Power of them, is sold under Sin,
and is a perfect Slave to it. There is Hard heartedness, Hardness greater than
that of a Rock, or an adamant Stone. There is Obstinacy and Perverseness,
Incorrigibleness and Inflexibleness in Sin, that will not be overcome by
Threatenings or Promises, by Awakenings or Encouragements, by Judgments or
Merci^s, neither by that which is terrifying, nor that which is winning: The
very Blood of God will not win the Heart of a wicked Man.

And there is actual Wickednesses without Number or Measure. There are Breaches
of every Command, in Thought, Word, and Deed; a Life full of Sin; Days and
Nights filled up with Sin; Mercies abused, and Frowns despised; Mercy, and
Justice, and all the divine Perfections trampled on; and the Honor of each
Person in the Trinity trod in the Dirt. -- Now if one sinful Word or Thought
has so much Evil in it, as to deserve eternal Destruction, how do they deserve
to be eternally cast off and destroyed, that are guilty of so much Sin!

II. If with Man's Sinfulness, we consider God's Sovereignty, it may serve
further to clear God's Justice in the eternal Rejection and Condemnation of
Sinners, from Men's Cavils and Objections. I shall not now pretend to determine
precisely, what Things are, and what Things are not, proper Acts and Exercises
of God's holy Sovereignty; but only that God's Sovereignty extends to the
following Things.

1. That such is God's sovereign Power and Right, that he is originally under
no Obligation to keep Men from sinning; but may in his Providence permit, and
leave them to sin. He was not obliged to keep either Angels or Men from falling
-- It Is unreasonable to suppose that God should be obliged, if he makes a
reasonable Creature capable of knowing his Will, and receiving a Law from him,
and being subject to his moral Government, at the same Time to make it
impossible for him to sin, or break his Law. For (...) God be obliged to this
it destroys all Use of any Commands, Laws, Promises, or Threatenings and the
very Notion of any moral Government of God over those reasonable Creatures. For
to what Purpose would it be, for God to give such and such Laws, and declare
his holy Will to a Creature, and annex Promises, and Threatenings, to move him
to his Duty, and make him careful to perform it, if the Creature at the same
Time has this to think of, that God is obliged to make it impossible for him to
break his Laws? How can God's Threatenings move to Care or Watchfulness, when,
at the same Time, God is obliged to render it impossible that he should be
exposed to the Threatening? Or, to what Purpose is it for God to give a Law at
all? For according to this Supposition, it is God, and not the Creature, that is
under Law. It Is the Lawgiver's Care, and not the Subjects, to see that his Law
is obeyed; and this Care is what the Lawgiver is absolutely obliged (...) If
God be obliged never to permit a Creature to fall, there is an End of all
divine Laws, or Government* (...) Authority (...) God over the Creature; there
can be (...) Manner of Use of these Things.

God may permit Sin, though the Being of Sin will certainly ensue on that
Permission: And so, by Permission, (...) may (...) and order the Event. If
there were any such Thing as Chance, or mere Contingence, and the very Notion
of it did not carry a gross Absurdity, (as might easily be shown that it does)
it would have been very unfit, that God should have left it to mere Chance,
whether Man should fall or no^* For Chance, if there should be any such Thing,
is undesigning and blind. And certainly it is more fit that an Event of so great
Importance, and that is attended with such an infinite Train of great
Consequences, should be disposed and ordered by infinite Wisdom, than that it
should be left to blind Chance.

If it be said that God need not have interposed to render it impossible for
Man to sin, and yet not leave it to mere Contingence, or blind Chance, neither;
but might have left it with Man's free Will, to determine whether to sin or no:
I answer, If God did leave it to Man's free Will, without any Sort of Disposal,
or Ordering in the Case, whence it should be previously certain how that ^ree
Will should determine, then still that first Determination of the Will, must be
merely Contingent or by Chance. It could not have any antecedent Act of the
Will to determine it; for I speak now of the very first Act or Motion of the
Will, respecting the Affair that may be looked upon as the prime Ground, and
highest Source of the Event. To suppose this to be determined by a foregoing
Act is a Contradiction. God's (...) this Determination of the Will, by his
Permission, (...) at all infringe the liberty of the Creature It Is (...)
Respect any more inconsistent with Liberty, than mere Chance or Contingence.
For if the Determination of the Will, be from blind, undesigning Chance, it is
no m^^^ from the Agent himself, or from the Will it self, than if we suppose,
in the Case, a wise, divine Disposal by Permission.

2. It was fit that it should be at the Ordering of the divine Wisdom and good
Pleasure, whether every particular Man should stand for himself, or whether the
first Father of Mankind, should be appointed as the moral and federal Head, and
Representative, of the Rest. If God has not Liberty in this Matter to determine
either of these two, as he pleases, it must be because determining that the
first Father of Men should represent the Rest, and not that every one should
stand for himself, is injurious to Mankind. For if it be not injurious to
Mankind, how is it unjust? But it is not injurious to Mankind; for there is
nothing in the Nature of the Case it self, that makes it better for Mankind,
that each Man should stand for himself, than that all should be represented by
their common Father; as the least Reflection or Consideration will convince any
one. And if there be nothing in the Nature of the Thing, that makes the former
better for Mankind than the latter, then it will follow, that Mankind are not
hurt in God's choosing and appointing the latter, rather than the former; or
which is the same Thing, that it is not injurious to Mankind.

3 When Men are fallen, and become sinful, God by his Sovereignty has a Right
to determine about their Redemption as he pleases. He has a Right to determine
whether he will redeem any or no. He might, if he had pleased, have left all to
perish, or might have redeemed all. Or, he may redeem some, and leave others;
and if he does so, he may take who he pleases, and leave who he pleases. To
suppose that all have forfeited his Favor, and deserved to perish, and to
suppose that he may not leave any one individual of them to perish, implies a
Contradiction; because it supposes that such an one has a Claim to God's
Favor, and is not justly liable to perish; which is contrary to the
Supposition.

It Is meet that God should order all those Things, according to his own
Pleasure. By Reason of his Greatness and Glory, by which he is infinitely above
all, he is worthy to be Sovereign, and that his Pleasure should in all Things
take Place: He is worthy that he should make himself his End, and that he
should make nothing but his own Wisdom his Rule in pursuing that End, without
asking Leave or Counsel of any, and without giving any Account of any of his
Matters. -- It Is fit that he that is absolutely perfect, and infinitely wise,
and the Fountain of all Wisdom, should determine every Thing by his own Will,
even Things of the greatest Importance, such as the eternal Salvation or
Damnation of Sinners. It Is meet that he should be thus Sovereign, because he^is
the first Being, the eternal Being, whence all other Beings are* He is the
Creator of all Things; and all are absolutely and universally dependent on him;
and therefore it is meet that he should act as the sovereign Possessor of Heaven
and Earth.

APPLICATION.
In the Improvement of this Doctrine, I would first direct my self to Sinners
that are afraid of Damnation, in a Use of Conviction. -- This may be Matter of
Conviction to you, that it would be just and righteous with God eternally to
reject and destroy you. This is what you are in Danger of: You that are a
Christless Sinner, are a poor condemned Creature: God's Wrath still ab^^es upon
you; and the Sentence of Condemnation lies upon you: You are in God's Hands,
and it is uncertain what he will do with you. You are afraid what will become of
you: You are afraid that it will be your Portion to suffer eternal Burnings;
and your Fears are not without Grounds; you have Reason to tremble every
Moment. But let you be never so much afraid of it, let eternal Damnation be
never so dreadful, yet it is just: God may nevertheless do it, and be righteous,
and holy, and glorious in it. Though eternal Damnation be what you cannot bear;
and how much soever your Heart shrinks at the Thoughts of it, yet God's Justice
may be glorious in it. The Dreadfulness of the Thing on your Part, and the
Greatness of your Dread of it, don't render it the less righteous on God's
Part. If you think otherwise, it is a Sign that you don't see your self, that
you are not sensible what Sin is, nor how much of it you have been guilty of.
Therefore for your Conviction, be directed,

First. To look over your past Life: Inquire at the Mouth of Conscience, and
hear what that has to testify concerning it. Consider what (...) you are, what
Light you have had, and what Means you have lived under: -- And yet how have
you behaved your self! What have those many Days and Nights, that you have
lived, been filled up with? How have those Years, that have rolled over your
Heads, one after another been spent? What has the Sun shone upon you for, from
Day to Day, while you have improved his Light to serve Satan by it? What has
God kept your Breath in your Nostrils for, and given you Meat and Drink, from
Day to Day for, that you have spent that Life and Strength that have been
supported by them, in opposing God, and Rebellion against him?

How many Sorts of Wickedness have you been guilty of? How manifold have been
the Abominations of your Life? What Profaneness and Contempt of God has been
exercised by you? How little Regard have you had to the Scriptures, to the Word
preached, to Sabbaths, and Sacraments? How profanely have you talked, many of
you, about those Things that are holy? After what Manner have many of you kept
God's holy Day, not regarding the Holiness of the Time, not caring what you
thought of in it. Yea, you have not only spent the Time in worldly, vain, and
unprofitable Thoughts, but in immoral Thoughts; pleasing your self with the
Reflection on past Acts of Wickedness, and in contriving new Acts. Have not you
spent much holy Time, in gratifying your Lusts in your Imaginations; yea not
only holy Time, but the very Time of God's public Worship, when you have
appeared in God's more immediate Presence? How have you not only not attended
to the Worship, but have in the mean time been feasting your Lusts, and
wallowing your self in abominable Uncleanness! How many Sabbaths have you
spent, one after another, in a most wretched Manner! Some of you not only in
worldly and wicked Thoughts, but also a very wicked outward Behavior! When you
on Sabbath^ Days, have got along with your wicked Companions, how has holy Time
been treated among you! What Kind of Conversation has there been! Yea, how have
some of you by a very indecent Carriage, openly dishonored and cast Contempt
on the sacred Services of God's House, and holy Day! And what you have done
some of you alone, what wicked Practices there have been in Secret, even in
holy Time, God and your own Consciences know.

And how have you behaved your self in the Time of Family Prayer! And what a
Trade have many of you made of absenting your selves from the Worship of the
Families you belong to, for the Sake of vain Company! And how have you
continued in the Neglect of secret Prayer! therein wilfully living in a known
Sin, going a Breast against as plain a Command as any in the Bible! Have you
not been one that has cast off Fear, and restrained Prayer before God?

What wicked Carriage have some of you been guilty of toward your Parents! How
far have you been from paying that Honor to them, that God has required! Have
you not even harbored Ill Will, and Malice toward them? And when they have
displeased you, have wished Evil to them? Yea, and shown your vile Spirit in
your Behavior? And it is well if you have not mocked them behind their Backs;
and like the accursed Ham and Canaan derided your Parents Nakedness instead of
covering it, and hiding your Eyes from it. Have not some of you often disobeyed
your Parents, yea, and refused to be subject to them? Is it not a Wonder of
Mercy and Forbearance, that that has not before now been accomplished on you,
in Prove. 30. 17. The Eye that mocketh at his Father, and refuses to obey his
Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall
eat it.

What Revenge and Malice have you been guilty of toward your Neighbors? How
have you indulged this Spirit of the Devil, ^hating others, and wishing Evil to
them, rejoicing when Evil befell them, and grieving at others Prosperity, and
lived in such a Way for a long Time! -- Have not some of you allowed a
passionate furious Spirit, and behaved your selves in your Anger more like wild
Beasts, than like Christians?

What Coveteousness has been in many of you? Such has been your inordinate Love
of the World, and Care about the Things of it, that it has taken up your Heart;
you have allowed no Room for God and Religion; you have minded the World more
than your eternal Salvation. For the Vanities of the World, you have neglected
Reading, Praying, and Meditation: For the Things of the World, you have broken
the Sabbath: For the World you have spent a great Deal of your Time in
Quarrelling: For the World you have envied, and hated your Neighbor: For the
World you have cast God, and Christ, and Heaven behind your Back: For the World
you have sold your own Soul: You have as it were drowned your Soul in worldly
Cares and Desires: You have been a mere Earth-Worm, that is never in its
Element but when grovelling and buried in the Earth.

How much of a Spirit of Pride has appeared in you! which is in a peculiar
Manner the Spirit and Condemnation of the Devil. How have some of you vaunted
your selves in your Apparel! Others in their Riches! Others in their Knowledge
and Abilities! How has it gauled you to see others above you! How much has it
gone against the Grain, for you to give others their due Honor! And how have
you shown your Pride by setting up your Wills, and in opposing others, and
stirring up and promoting Division, and a party Spirit in public Affairs!

How sensual have you been! Are there not some here, that have debased
themselves below the Dignity of humane Nature, by wallowing in sensual
Filthiness, as Swine in the Mire, or as filthy Vermin seeding with Delight on
rotten Carrion? What Intemperance have some of you been guilty of! How much of
your precious Time have you spent away at the Tavern, and in drinking
Companies, when you ought to have been at Home seeking God, and your Salvation
in your Families and Closets!

And what abominable Lasciviousness have some of you been guilty of! How have
you indulged your self, from Day to Day, and from Night to Night, in all Manner
of unclean Imaginations! Has not your Soul been filled with them, till it has
become an Hold of soul Spirits, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird?
What ^oul mouthed Persons have some of you been, often in le^d and lascivious
Talk, and unclean Songs, wherein were Things not fit to be spoken! And such
Company, where such Conversation has been carried on has been your Delight. --
And what unclean Acts and Practices have you defiled your self with! God and
your own Consciences know what abominable Lasciviousness you have practiced in
Things not fit to be named, when you have been alone; when you ought to have
been reading, or meditating, or on your Knees before God in secret Prayer. And
how have you corrupted others, as well as polluted your selves! What vile
Uncleanness have you Practiced in Company! What Abominations have you been
guilty of in the Dark! Such as the Apostle doubtless had Respect to, in Ephesians. 5.
12. For it is a Shame even to speak of those Things, that are done of them in
Secret. Some of you have corrupted others, and done what in you lay to undo
their Souls; (if you have not actually done it,) and by your vile Practices and
Examples, have made Room for Satan, and invited his Presence, and established
his Interest, in the Town where you have lived.

What Lying have some of you been guilty of, especially in your Childhood! And
have not your Heart and Lips often disagreed, since you came to riper Years?
What Fraud, and Deceit, and Unfaithfulness, have many of you Practiced in your
Dealings with your Neighbors, that you, own Heart is conscious to! if you have
not been noted for it by others.

And how have some of you behaved your selves in your Family Relations! How
have you neglected your Children's Souls! And not only so, but have corrupted
their Minds by your bad Examples; and instead of training them up in the
Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, have rather brought them up in the Devil's
Service!

How have some of you attended that sacred Ordinance of the Lord's Supper,
without any Manner of serious Preparation, and in a careless slighty Frame of
Spirit, and chiefly to comply with Custom! Have you not ventured to put the
sacred Symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ into your Mouth, while at the
same Time you lived in Ways of known Sins and intended no other than still to
go on in the same wicked Practices? And it may be have sat at the Lord's Table,
with Rancour in your Heart against some of your Brethren, that you have sat
there with. You have come even to that holy Feast of Love among God's children,
with the leaven of Malice and Envy in your Heart; and so have eat and drank
Judgment to your self.

What Stupidity and Sattishness has atten^^^ your Course of Wickedness! Which
has appeared ^n your Obstinacy under awakening Dispensations of God's Word and
Providence. And how have some of you backsliden, after you have set out in
Religion, and quenched God's Spirit after he had been striving with you! And
what Unsteadiness, and Slothfulness, and great Misimprovement of God's
Strivings with you, have you been chargeable with, that have long been the
Subject of them!

Now, can you think when you have thus behaved your self, that God is obliged
to show you Mercy? Are you not after all this ashamed to talk of its being hard
with God to cast you off? Does it become one that has lived such a Life, to
open his Mouth to excuse himself, or object against God's Justice in his
Condemnation, or to complain of it as hard in God not to give him converting
and pardoning Grace, and make him his Child, and bestow on him eternal Life! Or
to talk of his Duties and great Pains in Religion, and such like Things, as if
such Performances were worthy to be accepted, and to draw God's Heart to such a
Creature! If this has been your Manner, does it not show how little you have
considered your self, and how little a Sense you have had of your own
Sinfulness?

Secondly. Be directed to consider, If God should eternally reject and destroy
you, what an Agreableness, and exact mutual Answerableness, there would be
between God's so dealing with you, and your Spirit and Behavior. There would
not only be an Equality but a Similitude. God declares that his Dealings with
Men, shall be suitable to their Disposition and Practice. Psalm 18. 25, 26. With
the merciful Man, thou will show thy self merciful: With an upright Man, thou will show thy self Upright: With the Pure, thou will show thy self Pure: and
with the Froward, thou will show thy self Froward. How much soever you dread
Damnation, and are affrighted and concerned at the Thoughts of it; yet if God
should indeed eternally damn you, you would but be met with in your own Way:
you would be dealt with exactly according to your own Dealing; God would but
measure to you, in the same Measure in which you mete. -- Surely it is but fair
that you should be made to buy in the same Measure in which you ^ell.

Here I would particularly show, 1. That if God should eternally destroy you,
it would be agreeable to your Treatment of God. 2. That it would be agreeable to
your Treatment of Jesus Christ. 3. That it would be agreeable to your Behavior
toward your Neighbors. 4. That it would be according to your own foolish
Behavior toward your self.

I. If God should forever cast you off, it would be exactly agreeable to your
Treatment of Him. That you may be sensible of this, consider,

1. You never have exercised the least Degree of Love to God; and therefore it
would be agreeable to your Treatment of ^^^m, if he should never express any
Love to you. When God converts and saves a Sinner, it is a wonderful and
unspeakable Manifestation of divine Love. When a poor lost Soul is brought Home
to Christ, and has all his Sins forgiven him, and is made a Child of God, it
will take up a whole Eternity to express and declare the Greatness of that
Love. And why should God be obliged to express such wonderful Love to you, who
never exercised the least Degree of Love to him in all your Life? You never
have loved God who is infinitely glorious and lovely; and why then is God under
Obligation to love you, who are all over deformed and loathsome, as a filthy
Worm, or rather a hateful Viper? You have no Benevolence in your Heart toward
God; you never rejoiced in God's Happiness; if he had been miserable, and that
had been possible, you would have liked it as well, as if he were happy; you
would not have cared how miserable he was, nor mourned for it, any more than
you now do for the Devil's being miserable: And why then, should God be looked
upon as obliged to take so much Care for your Happiness, as to do such great
Things for it, as he does for those that are saved? Or why should God be called
hard, in Case he should not be careful to save you from Misery? You care not
what becomes of God's Glory; you are not di^rested how much so ever his Honor
seems to suffer in the World: And why should God care any more for your
Welfare? -- Has it not been so, that if you could but promote your private
Interest, and gratify your own Lusts, you cared not how much the Glory of God
suffered? And why may not God advance his own Glory, in the Ruin of your
Welfare, not caring how much your Interest suffers by it? You never so much as
stirred one Step, sincerely making the Glory of God your End, or acting from
real Respect to him; And why then is it hard, if God don't do such great Things
for you, as the changing your Nature, raising you from spiritual Death to Life,
conquering the Powers of Darkness for you, translating you out of the Kingdom
of Darkness, into the Kingdom of his dear Son, delivering you from eternal
Misery, and bestowing eternal Glory upon you? You don't use to be willing to
deny your self for God; you never cared to put your self out of your Way for
Christ: Whenever any Thing cross or difficult came in your Way, that the Glory
of God was concerned in, it has been your Manner to shun it, and Excuse your
self from it: You did not care to hurt your self for Christ; that you did not
see worthy of it: And why then must it be looked upon such a hard and cruel
Thing, if Christ has not been pleased to spill his Blood, and be tormented to
Death for such a Sinner.

2. You have slighted, and made light of God; and why then may not God justly
slight you? When Sinners are sensible in some Measure of their Misery, they are
ready to think it hard that God will take no more Notice of them; that he will
see them in such a lamentable distressed Condition, beholding their Burdens and
Tears, and seem to slight it, and manifest no Pity to them. Their Souls they
think are precious: it would be a dreadful Thing, if they should perish, and
burn in Hell for ever. They don't see through it, that God should make so light
of their Salvation. But then ought they not to consider that as their Souls are
precious, so is God's Honor precious? The Honor of the infinite God, the
great King of Heaven and Earth, is a Thing of as great Importance, (and surely
may justly be so esteemed by God,) as the Happiness of you a poor little Worm
But yet you have slighted that Honor of God, and valued it no more than the
Dirt under your Feet. You have been told that such and such Things were
contrary to the Will of an holy God, and against his Honor; but you cared not
for that. God called upon you, and exhorted you to be more tender of his
Honor; but you went on without regarding him. Thus have you slighted God! And
yet, is it hard that God should slight you? Are you more honorable than God,
that he must be obliged to make much of you, how light soever you make of him,
and his Glory?

And you have not only slighted God in Time past, but you slight him still. You
indeed now make a Pretense and Show of honoring him, in your Prayers, and
Attendance on other external Duties, and by a sober Countenance, and seeming
Devoutness in your Words and Behavior; but it is all mee^ Dissembling. That
downcast Look, and seeming Reverence, is not from any Honor you have to God in
your Heart; though you would have it go so, and would have God take it so. You
that have not believed in Christ, have not the least Jot of Honor to God; that
Show of it is merely forced, and what you are driven to by Fear, like those
mentioned in Psalm 66 * 3. Through the Greatness of thy Power, shall thine
Enemies submit themselves to thee. In the Original it is, shall lie unto thee;
that is, yield feigned Submission, and dissemble Respect and Honor to thee.
There is a Rod held over you, that makes you seem to pay such Respect to God.
This Religion and Devotion, even the very Appearance of it, would soon be gone,
and all vanish away, if that were removed. Sometimes it may be you weep in your
Prayers, and in your hearing Sermons, and hope God will take Notice of it, and
take it for some Honor; but he sees it to be all Hypocrisy. You weep for your
self; you are afraid of Hell; and do you think that that is worthy that God
should take much Notice of you, because you can cry when you are in Danger of
being damned; when at the same Time you indeed care nothing for God's Honor?

Seeing you thus disregard so great a God, is it a heinous Thing for God to
slight you, a little, wretched, despicable Creature; a Worm, a mere Nothing,
and less than Nothing; a vile In^ect, that has risen up in Contempt against the
Majesty of Heaven and Earth?

3. Why should God be looked upon obliged to bestow Salvation upon you, when
you have been so ungrateful for the Mercies he has bestowed upon you already?
God has tried you with a great Deal of Kindness, and he never has sincerely
been thanked by you for any of it. God has watched over you, and preserved you,
and provided for you, and followed you with Mercy all your Days; (...) yet you
have continued sinning against him. He (...) given you Food and Raiment, but
you have improved both in the Service of Sin. He has preserved you while you
slept; but when you arose, it was to return to the old Trade of sinning. God
notwithstanding this Ingratitude, has still continued his Mercy; but his
Kindness has never won your Heart, or brought you to a more grateful Behavior
toward him. It may be you have received many remarkable Mercies, Recoveries
from Sickness, or Preservations of your Life, when at one Time and another
exposed by Accidents, when if you had died, you would have gone directly to
Hell: But you never had any true Thankfulness for any of these Mercies. God has
kept you out of Hell, and continued your Day of Grace, and the Offers of
Salvation, this so long a Time; and that, it may be, while you did not regard
your own Salvation so much as to go in Secret and ask God for it: And now God
has greatly added to his Mercy to you, by giving you the Strivings of his
Spirit, whereby you have a most precious Opportunity for your Salvation in your
Hands. But what Thanks has God received for it? What Kind of Returns have you
made for all this Kindness? As God has multiplied Mercies, so have you
multiplied Provocations.

And yet now are you ready to quarrel for Mercy, and to find Fault with God,
not only that he don't bestow more Mercy, but to contend with him, because he
don't bestow infinite Mercy upon you, Heaven with all it contains, and even
Himself, for your eternal Portion? What Ideas have you of your self, that you
think God is obliged to do so much for you, though you treat him never so
ungratefully for his Kindness that you have been followed with all the Days of
your Life?

4. You have voluntarily chosen to be with Satan in his Enmity and Opposition
to God, how justly therefore might you be with him in his Punishment! You did
not choose to be on God's Side, but rather chose to side with the Devil, and
have obstinately continued in it, against God's often repeated Calls and
Counsels. You have chosen rather to hearken to Satan than to God, and would be
with him in his Work: You have given your self up to him, to be subject to his
Power and Government, in Opposition to God. How justly therefore may God also
give you up to him, and leave you in his Power, to accomplish your Ruin? Seeing
you have yielded your self to his Will, to do as he would have you, surely God
may leave you in his Hands to execute his Will upon you. If Men will be with
God's Enemy, and on his Side, why is God obliged to redeem them out of his
Hands, when they have done his Work? Doubtless you would be glad to serve the
Devil, and be God's Enemy while you live, and then to have God your Friend, and
to deliver you from the Devil, when you come to die: But will God be unjust if
he deals otherwise by you? No surely! It will be altogether and perfectly just,
that you should have your Portion with him, with whom you have chosen your
Work; and that you should be in his Possession to whose Dominion you have
yielded your self; and if you cry to God for Deliverance, he may most justly
give you that Answer, Judges 10. 14. Go to the Gods which ye have chosen.

5. Consider how often you have refused to hear God's Calls to you, and how
just it would therefore be, if he should refuse to hear you when you call upon
him. You are ready, it may be, to complain that you have often prayed, and
earnestly begged of God to show you Mercy, and yet have no Answer of Prayer:
One says, I have been constant in Prayer for so many Years, and God has not
heard me. Another says, I ha^^ done what I can; I have prayed as earnestly as I
am able; I don't see how I can do more; and it will (...) hard if after all I
am denied. But do you consider how often God has called, and you have denied
him? God has called earnestly and for a long Time; he has called, and called
again, in his Word, and in his Providence, and you have refused. You was not
uneasy for Fear you should not show Regard enough to his Calls. You let him
call as loud, and as long as he would; for your Part, you had no Leisure to
attend to what he said; you had other Business to mind; you had these and those
Lusts to gratify and please, and worldly Concerns to attend; you could not
afford to stand considering of what God had to say to you^ When the Ministers
of Christ that he sent on that Errand, have stood and pleaded with you, in his
Name, Sabbath after Sabbath, and have even spent their Strength in it, how
little was you moved by it! It did not alter you, but you went on still as you
used to do; when you went away, you returned again to your Sins, to your
Lasciviousness, to your vain Mirth, to your Covetousness, to your Intemperance,
and that has been the Language of your Heart and Practice. Exodus 5. 2. Who is
the Lord, that I should obey his Voice? Was it no Crime for you to refuse to
hear when God called? And yet is it now very hard that God don't hear your
earnest Calls, and that though your calling on God be not from any Respect to
him, but merely from Self-Love? The Devil would beg as earnestly as you, if he
had any Hope to get Salvation by it, and a thousand Times as earnestly, and yet
be as much of a Devil as he is now. Are your Calls more worthy to be heard than
God's? Or is God more obliged to regard what you say to him, than you to regard
his Commands, Counsels and Invitations to you? What can have more Justice in it
than that, in Prove. 1. 24, etc. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have
stretched out my Hand, and no Man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my
Counsel, and would none of my Reproof: I will laugh at your Calamity, and mock
when your Fear comes; when your Fear comes as Desolation, and your
Destruction comes as a Whirlwind; when Distress and Anguish comes upon you:
Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me.

6. Have you not taken Encouragement to sin against God, on that very
Presumption, that God would show you Mercy when you sought it? And may not God
justly refuse you that Mercy that you have so presumed upon? That has been what
you have flattered your self with, and that which has made you bold to disobey
God, viz. That though you did so, yet God would show you Mercy when you cried
earnestly to him for it: How righteous therefore would it be in God, to
disappoint such a wicked Presumption? It was upon that very Hope, that you
dared to affront the Majesty of Heaven, so dreadfully as you have done; and can
you now be so sottish as to think that God is obliged not to frustrate that
Hope?

When a Sinner takes Encouragement to neglect that secret Prayer that God has
commanded, and to gratify his Lusts, and to live a carnal vain Life, and thwart
God, and run upon him, and contemn him to his Face, thinking with himself, If I
do so, God will not damn me; he is a merciful God, and therefore when I seek his
Mercy he will bestow it upon me; must God be accounted hard because he will not do
according to such a Sinner's Presumption? Cannot he be excused from showing such
a Sinner Mercy when he is pleased to seek it, without incurring the Charge of
being unjust? If this be the Case, God has no Liberty to vindicate his own
Honor and Majesty; but must lay himself open to all Manner of Affronts, and
yield himself up to the Abuses of vile Men, and let them disobey, despise, and
dishonor him, as much as they will; and when they have done, his Mercy and
pardoning Grace, must not be in his own Power, and at his own Disposal, but he
must be obliged to dispense it at their Call: He must take these bold and vile
Contemners of his Majesty, when it ^utes them to ask it, and must forgive all
their Sins, and not only so, but must adopt them into his Family, and make them
his Children, and bestow eternal Glory upon them -- What mean, low, and strange
Thoughts, have such Men of God, as think thus of him?

Consider that you have injured God the more, and have been the worse Enemy to
him, for his being a merciful God. So have you treated that Attribute of God's
Mercy! How just is it therefore, that you never should have any Benefit of that
Attribute!

There is something peculiarly heinous in sinning against the Mercy of God more
than other Attributes. There is such base and horrid Ingratitude, in being the
worse to God because he is a Being of infinite Goodness and Grace, that it
above all Things renders Wickedness vile and detestable. This ought to win us,
and engage us to serve God better; but instead of that, to sin against him the
more, has something inexpressibly bad in it, and does in a peculiar Manner
enhance Guilt, and incense Wrath; as seems to be intimated in Romans 2 4, 5 Or
despisest thou the Riches of his Goodness, and Forbearance, and Long suffering*
not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance: But after thy
Hardness and impenitent Heart, treasurest up unto thy self (...) against the
Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God.

The greater the Mercy of God is, the more should you be engaged to love him,
and live to his Glory. But it has been contrariwise with you; the Consideration
of the Mercies of God being so exceeding great, is the Thing where with you
have encouraged your self in Sin. You have heard that the Mercy of God was
without Bounds, that it was sufficient to pardon the greatest Sinner, and you
have upon that very Account, ventured to be a very great Sinner: Though it was
very offensive to God, though you heard that God infinitely hated Sin, and that
such Practices as you went on in were exceeding contrary to his Nature, Will,
and Glory, yet that did not make you uneasy; you heard that he was a very
merciful God, and had Grace enough to pardon you and so cared not how offensive
your Sins were to him. How long have some of you gone on in Sin, and what great
Sins have some of you been guilty of, on that Presumption! Your own Conscience
can give Testimony to it, that this has made you refuse God's Calls, and has
made you Regardless of his repeated Commands. Now, how righteous would it be if
God should swear in his Wrath, that you should never be the better for his
being infinitely merciful!

Your Ingratitude has been the greater, that you have not only abused the
Attribute of God's Mercy, taking Encouragement from it to continue in Sin, but
you have thus abused this Mercy, under that very Notion of its being exercised
toward you, in a Supposition that God would exercise infinite Mercy to you in
particular; which Consideration should have especially endeared God to you. --
You have taken Encouragement to sin the more, from that Consideration that
Christ came into the World and died to save Sinners; That Thanks has Christ had
from you, for enduring such a tormenting Death for his Enemies! Now, how justly
might it be so, that God should refuse that you should ever be the better for
his Son's laying down his Life! -- It was because of these Things that you put
off seeking Salvation: You would take the Pleasures of Sin still longer,
hardening your self with that, that Mercy was infinite, and it would not be too
late, if you sought afterward; Now, how justly may God disappoint you in this,
and order it so that it shall be too late!

7. How have some of you risen up against God, and in the Frame of your Minds
opposed him in his sovereign Dispensations! And how justly upon that Account,
might God oppose you, and set himself against you! You never yet would submit
to God; never could willingly comply with it that God should have Dominion over
the World, and that he should govern it for his own Glory, according to his own
Wisdom. You a poor Worm, a potsherd, a broken Piece of an earthen Vessel, have
da^ed to find Fault, and quarrel with God. Isai. 45. 9. Woe to him that strives
with his Maker. Let the Potsherd strive with the Potsherds of the Earth: Shall
the Clay say to him that fashioneth it, what make thou? But yet you have
venture^ to do it. Romans 9. 20. Who are thou, O Man, that reply against God?
But yet you have thought you was big enough; You have taken upon you to call
God to an Account, why he does thus and thus; you have said to Jehovah, What
do thou?

If you have been restrained by Fear from openly venting your Opposition, and
Enmity of Heart against God's Government, yet it has been in you; you have not
been quiet in the Frame of your Mind; you have had the Heart of a Viper within,
and have been ready to spit Venom at God: And it is well if sometimes you have
not actually done it, by tolerating blasphemous Thoughts, and malignant Risings
of Heart against him; yea, and the Frame of your Heart in some Measure
appeared, in an impatient and fretful Behavior.

Now, seeing you have thus opposed God, how just is it that God should oppose
you! Or, is it because you are so much better, and so much greater than God,
that it is a Crime for God to make that Opposition against you that you do
against him? Do you think you ought to appropriate the Liberty of making
Opposition to your self, as being your Prerogative, so that you may be an Enemy
to God, but God must by no Means be an Enemy to you, but must be looked upon
under Obligation never the less to help you and save you by his Blood, and
bestow his best Blessings upon you?

Consider how in the Frame of your Mind, you have thwarted God, in those very
Exercises of Mercy toward others, that you are seeking for your self. God's
exercising his infinite Grace toward your Neighbors, has put you into an ill
Frame, and it may be set you into a mere Tumult of Mind: How justly therefore
may God refuse ever to exercise that Mercy toward you! Have you not thus
opposed God's showing Mercy to others, even at the very Time when you pretended
to be earnest with God for Pity and Help for your self? Yea, and while you was
endeavoring to get some Thing wherewith to recommend your self to God? And
will you look to God still with a Challenge of Mercy, and contend with him for
it notwithstanding? Can you who have such an Heart, and have thus behaved your
self, come to God for any other than mere sovereign Mercy?

II. If you should be for ever cast off by God, it would be agreeable to your
Treatment of Jesus Christ. It would have been just with God if he had cast you
off for ever, without ever making you the Offer of a Savior. But God has not
done that; but has provided a Savior for Sinners, and offered him to you, even
his own Son Jesus Christ; who is the only Savior of Men; all that be not
forever cast off are saved by him: God offers Men Salvation through him,* and
has promised us that if we come to him we shall not be cast off* But you have
treated, and still treat this Savior after such a Manner, that if you should
be eternally cast off by God, it would be most agreeable to your Behavior
toward him; which appears by this, viz.

That you reject Christ, and will not have him for your Savior. If God offers you
a Savior from deserved Punishment, and you will not receive him, then surely
it is just that you should go without a Savior. Or, is God obliged, because you
don't like this Savior, to provide you another? If when he has given an
infinitely honorable and glorious Person, even his only begotten Son, to be a
Sacrifice for Sin, in the Fire of his Wrath, and so provided Salvation, and
this Savior is offered to you, you be not suited in him, and refuse to accept
of him, is God therefore unjust if he don't save you? Is he obliged to save you
in a Way of your own choosing, because you don't like the Way of his choosing? Or
will you charge Christ with Injustice because he don't become your Savior,
when at the same Time you will not have him, when he offers himself to you, and
beseeches you to accept of him as your Savior?

I am sensible that by this Time, many Persons are ready to open their Mouths
in Objection against this: I^ all should speak what they now think, we should
hear a Murmuring all over the Meeting House, and one and another would say, I
cannot see how this can be that I be not willing that Christ should be my
Savior, when I would give all the World that he was my Savior: How is it
Possible that I should not be willing to have Christ for my Savior, when this
is what I am seeking after, and praying for, and striving for, as for my Life?

Here therefore I would endeavor to convince you that you are under a gross
Mistake in this Matter. And 1. I would endeavor to show the Weakness of the
Grounds of your Mistake. And, 2. To demonstrate to you, that you have rejected,
and do wilfully reject Jesus Christ.

1. That you may see the Weakness of the Grounds of your Mistake, consider,

1. There is a great Deal of Difference between a Willingness not to be damned,
and a being willing to receive Christ for your Savior. You have the former;
there is no doubt to be made of that; no Body supposes that you love Misery so
well, as to choose an Eternity of it: And so doubtless you are willing to be
saved from eternal Misery. But that is a very different Thing from being
willing to come to Christ: Persons very commonly mistake the one for the other,
but they are quite two Things: You may love the Deliverance, but hate the
Deliverer. You tell of a Willingness; but consider what is the Object of that
Willingness: It don't respect Christ; the Way of Salvation by him is not at all
the Object of it; but it is wholly terminated on your Escape from Misery: The
Inclination of your Will goes no further than self, it never reaches Christ.
You are willing not to be miserable; that is you love your self; and there your
(...) Choice terminates: And it is but a vain Pretense, and Delusion, to say or
think that you are willing to accept of Christ.

2. There is certainly a great Deal of Difference between a forced Compliance,
and a free Willingness. Force and Freedom cannot consist together. Now that
Willingness that you tell of, whereby you think you are willing to have Christ
for a Savior, is merely a forced Thing. Your Heart does not go out after
Christ of it self; but you are forced and driven to seek an Interest in him
Christ has no Share at all in your Heart; there is no Manner of closing of the
Heart with him. This forced Compliance is not what Christ seeks of you; (...)
seeks a free and willing Acceptance, Psalm 110. 3. Thy People shall be willing
in the Day of thy Power. He seeks not that you should receive him against your
Will, but with a free Will: He seeks Entertainment in your Heart and Choice. --
And,

If you refuse thus to receive Christ, how just is it that Christ should refuse
to receive you! How reasonable are Christ's Terms, who offers to save all those
that willingly, or with a good Will, accept of him for their Savior! Who can
rationally expect that Christ should force himself upon any Man, to be his
Savior? Or what can be looked for more reasonable, than that all that would be
saved by Christ, should heartily and freely entertain him? And surely it would
be very dishonorable for Christ to offer himself upon lower Terms.

But I would now proceed,

2. To show that it is really so that you are not willing to have Christ for a
Savior. To convince you of it, consider,

1. How it is possible that you should be willing to accept of Christ as a
Savior from the Desert of a Punishment, that you are not sensible you have
deserved. If you are truly willing to accept of Christ as a Savior, it must be
as a Sacrifice to make Atonement for your Guilt: Christ came into the World on
this Errand, to offer himself as an Atonement, to answer for our Desert of
Punishment. But how is it possible that you should be willing to accept of
Christ, as an Atonement for that Guilt that you be not sensible that you have?
How can you be willing to have Christ for a Savior from a Desert of Hell, if
you be not sensible that you have a Desert of Hell? If you have not really
deserved everlasting Burnings in Hell, then the very Offer of an Atonement for
such a Desert is an Imposition upon you. If you have no such Guilt upon you,
then the very Offer of a Satisfaction for that Guilt is an Injury, because it
implies in it a Charge of Guilt that you are free from. Now therefore it is
impossible that a Man that is not convinced of his Guilt, can be willing to
accept of an Offer; because he cannot be willing to accept the Charge that the
Offer implies: that he looks upon as injurious. A Man that is not convinced
that he has deserved so dreadful a Punishment, cannot willingly submit to be
charged with it; if he thinks he is willing, it is but a mere forced, feigned
Business; because in his Heart he looks upon himself greatly injured: And
therefore he cannot freely accept of Christ, under that Notion, of a Savior
from that Guilt, and from the Desert of such a Punishment; for such an
Acceptance is an implicit owning that he does deserve such a Punishment.

I don't say, but that Men may be willing to be saved from an undeserved
Punishment; they may rather not suffer it than suffer it: But a Man cannot be
willing to accept one at God's Hands, under the Notion of a Savior from a
Punishment deserved from him, that he thinks he has not deserved; it is
impossible that any one should freely allow a Savior under that Notion. Such
an one cannot like the Way of Salvation by Christ; for if he thinks he has not
deserved Hell, then he will think that Freedom from Hell is a Debt; and
therefore cannot willingly and heartily receive it as a free Gift. -- If a King
should condemn a Man to some exceeding tormenting Death, which the condemned
Person thought himself not deserving off, but looked upon the Sentence unjust
and cruel, and the King, when the Time of Execution drew nigh, should offer him
his Pardon, under the Notion of a very great Act of Grace and Clemency, the
condemned Person never could willingly and heartily allow it under that Notion,
because he judged himself unjustly condemned.

Now by this it is evident that you are not willing to accept of Christ as your
Savior; because you never yet had such a Sense of your own Sinfulness, and
such a Conviction of your great Guilt in God's Sight, as to be indeed convinced
that you lay justly condemned to the Punishment of Hell. You never was
convinced that you had forfeited all Favor, and was in God's Hands, and at his
sovereign and arbitrary Disposal, to be either destroyed or saved, just as he
pleased. You never yet was convinced of the Sovereignty of God. Hence are there
so many Objections arising against the Justice of your Punishment, from
original Sin, and from God's Decrees, from Mercy shown to others, and the like.

2. That you be not sincerely willing to accept of Christ as your Savior,
appears by this, That you never have been convinced that he is sufficient for
the Work; of your Salvation. You never had a Sight or Sense of any such
Excellency or Worthiness in Christ, as should give such great Value to his
Blood and his Mediation with God, as that it was sufficient to be accepted for
such exceeding guilty Creatures, and those that have so provoked God, and
exposed themselves to such amazing Wrath. A saying it is so, and a customary
yielding and allowing it to be as others say, is a very different Thing from
being really convinced of it, and a being made sensible of it in your own
Heart. The Sufficiency of Christ depends upon, or rather consists in his
Excellency. It is because he is so excellent a Person, that his Blood is of
sufficient Value to atone for Sin, and it is hence that his Obedience is so
worthy in God's Sight; it is also hence that his Intercession is so prevalent;
and therefore those that never had any spiritual Sight or Sense of Christ's
Excellency, cannot be sensible of his Sufficiency.

And that Sinners be not convinced that Christ is sufficient for the Work he
has undertaken, appears most manifestly when they are under great Convictions
of their Sin, and Danger of God's Wrath. Though it may be before they thought
they could allow Christ to be sufficient, (for it is easy to allow any one to
be sufficient for our Defense, at a Time when we see no Danger,) yet when they
come to be sensible of their Guilt, and God's Wrath, what discouraging Thoughts
do they entertain! How are they ready to draw toward Despair, as if there no
Hope or Help for such wicked Creatures as they! The Reason is, They have no
Apprehension or Sense of any other Way that God's Majesty can be vindicated*
but only in their Misery: To tell them of the Blood of Christ, signifies
nothing, it don't relieve their sinking despairing Hearts. This makes it most
evident that they are not convinced that Christ is sufficient to be their
Mediator.

And as long as they are unconvinced of this, it is impossible they should be
willing to accept of him as their Mediator and Savior. A Man in distressing
Fear will not willingly betake himself to a Fort that he judges not sufficient to
defend him from the Enemy: A Man will not willingly venture out into the Ocean, in
a Ship that he suspects is leaky, and will sink before he gets through his
Voyage.

3. It Is evident that you are not willing to have Christ son your Savior,
because you have so mean an Opinion of him, that you durst not trust his
Faithfulness. One that undertakes to be the Savior of Souls had need be
faithful; for if he fails in such a Trust, how great is the Loss! But you are
not convinced of Christ's Faithfulness; as is evident, because at such Times as
when you are in a considerable Measure sensible of your Guilt and God's Anger,
you cannot be convinced that Christ is willing to accept of you, or that he
stands ready to receive you if you should come to him, though Christ so much
invites you to come to him, and has so fully declared that he will not reject you,
if you do come; as particularly, John 6* 37. He that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast cut. Now, there is no Man can be heartily willing to trust his
eternal Welfare in the Hands of an unfaithful Person, or one whose Faithfulness
he suspects.

4. You are not willing to be saved in that Way by Christ, as is evident,
because you are not willing that your own Goodness should be set at naught. In
the Way of Salvation by Christ Men's own Goodness is wholly set at naught,
there is no Account at all made of it. Now you cannot be willing to be saved in
a Way wherein your own Goodness is set at naught, as is evident by that, that
you make much of it your self. You make much of your Prayers and Pains in
Religion, and are often thinking of them; how considerable* do they appear to
you, when you look back upon them! And how much are some of you in thinking how
much more you have done than some others, and in expecting some Respect or
Regard that God should manifest to what you do? Now, if you make so much of
what you do your self, it is impossible that you should be freely willing that
God should make nothing of it. As we may see in other Things; if a Man is proud
of a great Estate, or if he values himself much upon his honorable Office, or
his great Abilities, it is impossible that he should like it, and heartily
approve of it, that others should make light of these Things, and despise them.

Seeing therefore that it is so evident that you refuse to accept of Christ as
your Savior, Why is Christ to be blamed that he don't save you? Christ has
offered himself to you to be your Savior in Time past, and he continues
offering himself still, and you continue to reject him, and yet complain that
he don't save you. -- So strangely unreasonable, and inconsistent with
themselves, are Gospel Sinners!

But ^^xpect that there are many of you, that in your Hearts still object; your
Mouths be not stopped. -- Such an Objection as this, is probably now in the
Hearts of many here present.

Object. If it be so, that I am not willing to have Christ for my Savior, yet
I cannot make my self willing.

But I would give an Answer to this Objection, by laying down two Things, that
must be acknowleged to be exceeding evident.

1 It Is no Excuse that you cannot receive Christ of your self, unless you would
if you could. This is so evident of it self, that it scarce needs any Proof.
Certainly if Persons would not if they could, it is just the same Thing as to
the Blame that lies upon them, whether they can or cannot. If you were willing,
and then found that you could not, your being unable would alter the Case, and
might be some Excuse; because then the Defect would not be in your Will, but
only in your Ability: But as long as you will not, it is no Matter what the
Ability is, whether you have Ability or no Ability.

If you be not willing to accept of Christ, it will follow that you have no
sincere Willingness to be willing; because the Will always necessarily approves
of, and rests in its own Acts. To suppose the Contrary would be to suppos^ a
Contradiction; it would be to suppose that a Man's Will is contrary to it self,
or that he wills contrary to what he himself wills. So that as you are not
willing to come to Christ, and cannot make your self willing, so you have no
sincere Desire to be willing; and therefore may most justly perish without a
Savior. There is no Excuse at all for you; for say what you will about your
Inability, the Seat of your Blame lies in your perverse Will, that is an Enemy
to the Savior. It Is in vain for you to tell of your Want of Power, as long as
your Will is found defective. If a Man should hate you, and devour you, and
exalt himself, and smite you in the Face, and tell you that he did it
voluntarily, and because he had a Mind to, but only should tell you at the same
Time, that he hated you so much that he could not help choosing and willing so
to do, would you take it the more patiently for that? Would not your
Indignation be rather stirred up the more?

2. If you would be willing if you could, that is no Excuse, unless your
Willingness to be willing be sincere. That which is hypocritical, and don't
come from the Heart, but is merely forced, ought wholly to be set aside, as
worthy of no Consideration, and that because common Sense teaches that that
which is not hearty but hypocritical is indeed nothing, being only a Show of
what is not; but that which is good for nothing, ought to go for nothing. But
if you set aside all that is not free, and call nothing a Willingness but a
free hearty Willingness, then see how the Case stands, and whether or no you
have not lost all your Excuse for standing out against the Calls of the Gospel
You say you would make your self willing to accept if you could; but it is not
from any good Principle that you are willing for that; it is not from any free
Inclination, or true Respect to Christ, or any Love to your Duty, or any Spirit
of Obedience, or from the influence of any Manner of real Respect, or Tendency
in your Heart, toward any Thing that is good, or from any other Principle than
such as is in the Hearts of Devils, and would make them have the same Sort of
Willingness in the same Circumstances. It is therefore evident that there can
be no Goodness in that woulding to be willing to come to Christ: And that which
has no Goodness, cannot be an Excuse for any Badness. If there be no good in it,
then it signifies nothing and weighs nothing, when put into the Scales to
counterbalance that which is bad.

Sinners therefore spend their Time in foolish arguing and objecting, making
much of that which is good for nothing, making those Excuses that be not worth
offering. -- It Is in vain to keep making Objections: You stand justly
condemned: The Blame lies all at your Door: Thrust it off from you as often as
you will, it will return upon you: Sew Fig leaves as long as you will, your
Nakedness will appear: You continue wilfully and wickedly rejecting Jesus
Christ, and will not have him for your Savior, and therefore it is sottish Madness
in you to charge Christ with Injustice that he don't save you.

Here is the Sin of Unbelief! Thus the Guilt of that great Sin lies upon you!
If you never had thus treated a Savior, you might most justly have been damned
to all Eternity: It would but be exactly agreeable to your Treatment of God. But
besides this, when God notwithstanding, has offered you his own dear Son to
save you from this endless Misery you had deserved, and not only so, but to
make you happy eternally in the Enjoyment of himself, you refused him, and
would not have him for your Savior, and still refuse to comply with the Offers
of the Gospel; what can render any Person more inexcuseable? If you should now
perish for ever, what can you have to say?

Hereby the Justice of God in your Destruction appears in two Respects,

1. It is more abundantly manifest that it is just that you should be
destroyed. Justice never appears so conspicuous as it does after refused and
abused Mercy. Justice in Damnation appears abundantly the more clear and
bright, after a wilful Rejection of offered Salvation. What can an offended
Prince do more than freely offer Pardon to a condemned Male factor? And if he
refuses to accept of it, will any one say that his Execution is unjust?

2. God's Justice will appear in your greater Destruction. Besides the Guilt
that you would have had if a Savior never had been offered, you bring that
great additional Guilt upon you, of most ungratefully refusing offered
Deliverance. What more base and vile Treatment of God can there be, than for
you, when justly condemned to eternal Misery, and ready to be executed, and God
graciously sends his own Son, who comes and knocks at your Door with a Pardon
in his Hand, and not only a Pardon, but a Deed of eternal Glory; I say, what
can be worse, then for you out of Dislike, and Enmity against God, and his Son,
to refuse to accept those Benefits at his Hands! How justly may the Anger of
God be greatly incensed and increased by it! When a Sinner thus ungratefully
rejects Mercy, his last Error is worse than the first; this is more heinous
than all his former Rebellion, and may justly bring down more fearful Wrath
upon him.

The Heinousness of this Sin of rejecting a Savior especially appears in two
Things,

1. The Greatness of the Benefits offered; which appears in the Greatness of
the Deliverance, which is from inexpressible Degrees of Corruption and
Wickedness of Heart and Life, the least Degree of which is infinitely Evil; and
from Misery that is everlasting; and in the Greatness and Glory of the
Inheritance purchased and offered, Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great Salvation?

2. The Wonderfulness of the Way in which these Benefits are procured and
offered. That God should lay Help on his own Son, when our Case was so
deplorable that Help could be had in no mere Creature; and that He should
undertake for us, and should come into the World, and take upon him our Nature,
and should not only appear in a low State of Life, but should die such a Death,
and endure such Torments and Contempt for Sinners while Enemies, How wonderful
is it! And what Tongue or Pen can set forth the Greatness of the Ingratitude,
Baseness and Perverseness that there is in it, when a perishing Sinner that is
in the most extreme Necessity of Salvation, rejects it, after it is procured in
such a Way as this! That so glorious a Person should be thus treated, and that
when he comes on so gracious an Errand! That he should stand so long offering
himself, and calling and inviting, as he has done to many of you, and all to no
Purpose, but all the while be set at naught! -- Surely you might justly be cast
into Hell without one more Offer of a Savior! Yea, and thrust down into the
lowest Hell! Herein you have exceeded the very Devils; for they never rejected
the Offers of such glorious Mercy; no, nor of any Mercy at all. This will be
the distinguishing Condemnation of Gospel Sinners, John 3. 18. He that has not
believed is condemned already, because he has not believed in the Name of the
only begotten Son of God.

That outward Smoothness of your Carriage toward Christ, that Appearance of
Respect to Him in your Looks, your Speeches, and Gestures, don't argue but that
you set him at naught in your Heart. There may be much of these outward Shows
of Respect, and yet you be like Judas that betrayed the Son of Man with a kiss;
and like those Mockers that bowed the Knee before him, and at the same Time
spit in his Face.

III. If God should for ever cast you off and destroy you, it would be agreeable
to your Treatment of others: It would be no other than what would be exactly
answerable to your Behavior toward your Fellow Creatures, that have the same
humane (...), and are naturally in the ^ame Circumstances with you, and that
you ought to love as your self. And that appears especially in two Things.

1. You have many of you been opposite in your Spirit to the Salvation of
others. There are several Ways that natural Men manifest a Spirit of Opposition
against the Salvation of others Souls It sometimes appears by a Fear that their
Companions, Acquaintance, and Equals will obtain Mercy, and so become
unspeakably happier than they. It is sometimes manifested by an Uneasiness at
the News of others having hopefully obtained. It appears when Persons envy
others for it, and dislike them the more, and disrelish their Talk, and avoid
their Company, and cannot bear to hear their religious Discourse, and especially
to receive Warnings and Counsels from them. And it oftentimes appears by their
Backwardness to entertain charitable Thoughts of them, and their being
difficultly brought to believe that it is really so, that they have obtained
Mercy, and a Forwardness to listen to any Thing that seems to contradict it.
The Devil hated to own Job's Sincerity, Job 1. 7, etc. And Chap. 2. Verses 3,
4, 5. There appears very often much of this Spirit of the Devil in natural Men.
Sometimes they are ready to make a Ridicule of others pretended Godliness: They
speak of the Ground of others Hopes, as the Enemies of the Jews did of the Wall
that they built. Neh. 4. 3 Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he said,
that which they build, if a Fox go up, he shall even break down their Stone
Wall. There are many that join with Sanballat and Tobiah, and are of the same
Spirit with them. There always was, and always will be, an Enmity betwixt the
Seed of the Serpent, and the Seed of the Woman. It appeared in Cain who hated
his Brother, because he was more acceptable to God than himself; and it appears
still in these Times, and in this Place. There are many that are like the elder
Brother, who could not bear it that the Prodigal when he returned should be
received with such Joy and good Entertainment, and was put into a Fret by it,
both against his Brother that had returned, and his Father that made him so
welcome. Luke 15.

Thus have many of you been opposite to the Salvation of others, that stand
(...) Necessity of it (...) you^ You have been against (...) being delivered
from everlasting Misery, that can bear it no better than you; not because their
Salvation would do you any Hurt, o^ their Damnation help you, any otherwise
than as it would gratify that vile Spirit that is so much like the Spirit of
the Devil, who, because he is miserable himself, is unwilling that others
should be happy. How just therefore is it that God should be opposite to your
Salvation! If you have so little Love or Mercy in you, as to begrutch your
Neighbors Salvation, whom you have no cause to hate, but the Law of God and
Nature requires you to love, why is God bound to exercise such infinite Love
and Mercy to you, as to save you at the Price of his own Blood, that he is no
Way bound to love, but that have deserved his Hatred a thousand and a thousand
Times? You are not willing that others should be converted, that have behaved
themselves injuriously toward you; and yet will you count it hard if God don't
bestow converting Grace upon you, that have deserved ten thousand Times as ill
of God, as ever any of your Neighbors have of you? You are opposite to God's
showing Mercy to these and those, that you think have been vicious Persons, and
are very unworthy of such Mercy. -- Is others Unworthiness a just Reason why
God should not bestow Mercy on them? And yet will God be hard, if
notwithstanding all your Unworthiness, and the Abominableness of your Spirit
and Practice in his Sight, he don't show you Mercy? You would have God bestow
liberally on you, and upbraid not; but yet when he shows Mercy to others, you
are ready to upbraid, as soon as you hear of it; you immediately are thinking
with your self how ill they have behaved themselves; and it may be your Mouths
on this Occasion are open, enumerating and aggravating the Sins they have been
guilty of. -- You would have God bury all your Faults, and wholly blot out all
your Transgressions; but yet if he bestows Mercy on others, it may be you will
take that Occasion to ^ake up all their old Faults that you can think of. --
You don't much reflect on and condemn your self, for your Baseness and unjust
Spirit toward others, in your Opposition to their Salvation; you don't quarrel
with yourself, and condemn your self for this; but yet you in your Heart will
quarrel with God, and condemn him, and fret at his Dispensations, because you
think he seems opposite to showing Mercy to you. -- One would think that the
Consideration of these Things should for ever stop your Mouth.

2. Consider how you have promoted others Damnation. Many of you by the bad
Examples you have set, by corrupting the Minds of others, by your sinful
Conversation, by leading them into Sin, or strengthening them in Sin, and by
the Mischief that you have done in humane Society other Ways that might be
mentioned, have been guilty of those Things that have tended to others
Damnation. You have heretofore appeared on the Side of Sin and Satan, and have
behaved your self so as much to strengthen their Interest, and have been many
Ways accessory to others Sins, have hardened others Hearts, and thereby have
done what has tended to the Ruin of their Souls.

And without Doubt there are those here present, that have been in a great
Measure the Means of others Damnation. Though it is true that it is determined
of God who he will save, and who not, from all Eternity, yet one Man may really
be a Means of others Damnation, as well as Salvation. Christ charges the
Scribes and Pharisees with this, Matthew. 23. 13. Ye shut up the Kingdom of
Heaven against Men; for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them
that are entering to go in. We have no Reason to think that this Congregation
has none in it, that are cursed from Day to Day, by poor Souls that are roaring
out in Hell, whose Damnation they have been a Means of, or have greatly
contributed to.

There are many that contribute to their own Childrens Damnation, by neglecting
their Education and setting them bad Examples, and bringing them up in sinful
Ways: They take some Care of their Bodies, but take but little Care of their
poor Souls; they provide for them Bread to eat, but deny them the Bread of Life
that their famishing Souls stand in Need of^ And are there no such Parents here
that have thus treated their Children? If their Children be not gone to Hell,
it is no thank to them; it is not because they have not done what has tended to
their Destruction. -- Seeing therefore you have had no more Regard to others
Salvation, and have promoted their Damnation, how justly might God leave you to
perish your self?

IV. If God should eternally cast you off, it would but be agreeable to your own
Behavior toward your self: And that in two Respects;

1. In being so Careless of your own Salvation. You have refused to take Care
for your Salvation, as God has counseled and commanded you, from Time to Time;
and why may not God neglect it, now you seek it of him? Is God obliged to be
more careful of your Happiness, than you are, either of your own Happiness, or
his Glory? Is God bound to take that Care for you, out of Love to you, that you
will not take for your self, either from Love to your self, or Regard to his
Authority? How long, and how greatly, have you neglected the Welfare of your
precious Soul, refusing to take Pains and deny your self, or put your self a
little out of your Way for your Salvation, while God has been calling upon you!
Neither your Duty to God, nor Love to your own Soul, were enough to induce you
to do little Things for your own eternal Welfare; and yet do you now expect
that God should do great Things, putting forth almighty Power, and exercising
infinite Mercy for it? You was urged to take care for your Salvation, and not
to put it off: You was told that that was the best Time, before you grew older,
and that it might be, if you would put it off, God would not hear you
afterward; but yet you would not hearken; you would run the Venture of it. Now
how justly might God order it so, that it should be too late, leaving you to
seek in Vain! You was told that you would repent of it, if you delayed; but you
would not hear: How justly therefore may God give you Cause to repent of it, by
refusing to show you Mercy now! If God sees you going on in Ways contrary to
his Commands, and his Glory, and requires you to forsake them, and tells you
that they are Ways that tend to the Destruction of your own Soul, and therefore
Counsels you to avoid them, and you refuse, how just would it be if God should
be provoked by it, henceforward to be as careless of the Good of your Soul as
you are your self!

2. You have not only neglected your Salvation, but you have wilfully taken
direct Courses to undo your self. You have gone on in those Ways and Practices
that have directly tended to your Damnation, and have been perverse and
obstinate in it. -- You cannot plead Ignorance; you had all the Light set before
you that you could desire; God told you that you was undoing your self; but yet
you would do it: He told you that the Path you was going in led to Destruction,
and counseled you to avoid it; but you would not hearken: How justly therefore
may God leave you to be undone! You have obstinately persisted to travel in the
Way that leads to Hell for a long Time, contrary to God's continual Counsels
and Commands, till it may be at length you are got almost to your Journey's
End, and are come near to Hell's Gate, and so begin to be sensible of your
Danger and Misery; and now account it unjust and hard, if God will not deliver
you! You have destroyed your self, and destroyed your self wilfully, contrary
to God's repeated Counsels, yea, and destroyed your self in fighting against
God: Now therefore why do you Blame any but your self, if you are destroyed? If
you will undo your self in opposing God, and while God opposes you by his Calls
and Counsels, and, it may be too, by the Convictions of his Spirit, what can
you object against it, if God now leaves you to be undone? You would have your
own Way, and did not like that God should oppose you in it, and your Way was to
ruin your own Soul: How just therefore is it, if now at length, God ceases to
oppose you, and falls in with you, and lets your Soul be ruined, and as you
would destroy your self, so should put to his Hand to destroy you too! The Ways
you went on in had a natural Tendency to your Misery: If you would drink
Poison, in Opposition to God, and in Contempt of him and his Advice, who can
you Blame but your self if you are poisoned, and so perish? If you would run
into the Fire against all Restraints both of God's Mercy and Authority, you
must even blame your self if you are burnt.

Thus I have proposed some Things to your Consideration, which if you are not
exceeding blind, senseless, and perverse, will stop your Mouth, and convince
you that you stand justly condemned before God, and that he would in no wise
deal hardly with you, but altogether justly, in denying you any Mercy, and in
refusing to hear your Prayers, let you pray never so earnestly, and never so
often, and continue in it never so long; and that God may utterly disregard
your Tea^s and Moans, your heavy Heart, your earnest Desires, and great
Endeavors, and that he may cast you into eternal Destruction, without any
Regard to your Welfare, denying you converting Grace, and giving you over to
Satan, and at last cast you into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone,
to be there to Eternity, having no Rest Day nor Night, for ever glorifying his
Justice upon you, in the Presence of the holy Angels, and the Presence of the
Lamb.

Object But here many may still object, (for I am sensible it is an hard Thing
to stop Sinners Mouths,) God shows Mercy to others that have done these Things
as well as I, yea, that have done a great Deal worse than I.

Ans. 1. That does not prove that God is any Way bound to show Mercy to you, or
them either. If God does bestow it on others, he don't bestow it on them
because he is bound to bestow it: He might if he had pleased, with glorious
Justice have denied it them. If God bestows it on some, that does not prove
that he is bound to bestow it on any; and if he is bound to bestow it on none,
then he is not bound to bestow it on you. God is in Debt to none, and if he
gives to some that he is not in Debt to, because it is his Pleasure, that don't
bring him into Debt to others. -- It alters not the Case as to you, at all,
whether others have it or have it not: You don't deserve Damnation the less,
than if Mercy never had been bestowed on any at all. Matthew. 20 15. Is thine Eye
evil, because mine is good?

2. If this Objection be good, then the Exercise of God's Mercy is not in his
own Right, and his Grace is not his own to give. That which God may not dispose
of as he pleases, is not his own; for that which is ones own, is at his own
Disposal: but if it be not God's own, then he is not capable of making a Gift
or Present of it to any one; it is impossible to give a Debt.

What is it that you would make of God? Must the great God be tied up to that,
that he must not use his own Pleasure in bestowing his own Gifts, but if he
bestows them on one, must be looked upon obliged to bestow them on another? Is
not God worthy to have the same Right, with Respect to the Gifts of his Grace,
that a Man has to his Money or Goods? Is it because God is not so great, and
should be more in Subjection than Man, that this cannot be allowed him? If any
of you see Cause to show Kindness to a Neighbor, do all the Rest of your
Neighbors come to you, and tell you that you owe them so much as you have
given to such a Man? But this is the Way that you deal with God! as though God
were not worthy to have as absolute a Property in his Goods, as you have in
yours!

At this Rate God cannot make a Present of any Thing; he has nothing of his own
to bestow; if he has a Mind to show peculiar Favor to some, or to lay some
particular Persons under peculiar Obligations to him, he cannot do it; because
he has no special Gift, that his Creatures stand in great need of, and that
would tend greatly to their Happiness, at his own Dispose. -- If this be the
Case, why do you pray to God to bestow saving Grace upon you? If God don't do
fairly to deny it you, because he bestows it on others, then it is not worth
your while to pray for it, but you may go and tell him that he has bestowed it
on these and those, as bad or worse than you, and so demand it of him as a
Debt. -- And at this Rate Persons never need to thank God for Salvation, when
it is bestowed; for what Occasion is there to thank God for that which was not
at his own Disposal, and that he could not fairly have denied. -- The Thing at
Bottom is, that Men have low Thoughts of God, and high Thoughts of themselves;
and therefore it is that they look upon God as having so little Right, and they
so much. Matthew. 20 15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own?

3. God may justly show greater Respect to others than to you, for you have
shown greater Respect to others than to God. You have shown greater Respect to
Men than to God: You have rather chosen to offend God than offend Men. God only
shows a greater Respect to others that are by Nature your Equals, than to you;
but you have shown a greater Respect to those that are infinitely inferior to
God, than to Him You have shown a greater Regard to wicked Men, than to God;
you have honored them more, loved them better, and adhered to them rather than
to Him. Yea, you have honored the Devil, in many Respects, more than God; you
have chosen his Will, and his Interest, rather than God's Will, and his Glory.
You have chosen a little worldly Pelf, rather than God: You have set more by a
vile Lust, than by him You have chosen these Things, and rejected God: You have
set your Heart on these Things, and cast God behind your Back: And where is the
Injustice if God is pleased to show greater Respect to others than to you, or
if he chooses others and rejects you? You have shown great Respect to vile and
worthless Things, and no Respect to God's Glory; and why may not God set his
Love on others, and have no Respect to your Happiness? You have shown great
Respect to others, and not to God, that you are laid under infinite Obligations
to respect above all; and why may not God show Respect to others, and not to
you, that never have laid him under the least Obligation?

And will you not be ashamed, notwithstanding all these Things, still to open
your Mouth, to object and cavil about the Decrees of God, and other Things that
you cannot fully understand. -- Let the Decrees of God be what they will, that
alters not the Case as to your Liberty, any more than if God had only fore
known. -- And why is God to blame for decreeing Things? How unbecoming an
infinitely wise Being, would it have been to have made a World and let Things
run at Random, without disposing Events, or fore ordering how they should come
to pass? And what is that to you, how God has fore-ordered Things, as long as
your constant Experience teaches you, that that don't hinder your Liberty, or
your doing what you choose to do. This you know, and your daily Practice and
Behavior amongst Men declares that you are fully sensible of it, with Respect
to your self and others. And still to object, because there are some Things in
God's Dispensations above your Understanding, is exceeding unreasonable. Your
own Conscience charges you with great Guilt, and with those Things that have
been mentioned, let the secret Things of God be what they will. Your Conscience
charges you with those vile Dispositions, and that base Behavior toward God,
that you would at any Time most highly resent in your Neighbor toward you,
and that not a Whit the less for any Concern those secret Counsels and
mysterious Dispensations of God, may have in the Matter. -- It is in Vain for
you to exalt your self against an infinitely great, and holy, and just God: If
you continue in it it will be to your eternal Shame and Confusion, when
hereafter you shall see at whose Door all the Blame of your Misery lies.

I will finish what I have to say to natural Men, in the Application of this
Doctrine, with a Caution not to improve the Doctrine to Discouragement. For
though it would be righteous in God forever to cast you off, and destroy you,
yet it will also be just in God to save you, in and through Christ, who has
made complete Satisfaction for all Sin. Romans 3 25, 26 Whom God has set forth
to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness,
for the Remission of Sins that are past, through the Forbearance of God; To
declare, I say, at this Time his Righteousness, that he might be just, and the
Justifier of him which believes in Jesus. Yea, God may through this Mediator,
not only justly, but honorably, show you Mercy. The Blood of Christ is so
precious, that it is fully sufficient to pay that Debt that you have
contracted, and perfectly to vindicate the divine Majesty from all that
Dishonor that has been cast upon it, by those many great Sins of yours that
have been mentioned. It was as great, and indeed a much greater Thing, for
Christ to die, than it would have been for you, and all Mankind, to have burnt
in Hell to all Eternity. Of such Dignity and Excellency is Christ in the Eyes
of God, that seeing he has suffered so much for poor Sinners, God is willing to
be at Peace with them, however vile and unworthy they have been, and on how
many Accounts so ever the Punishment would be just. So that you need not be at
all discouraged from seeking Mercy, for there is enough in Christ.

Indeed it would not become the Glory of God's Majesty, to show Mercy to you,
that have been so sinful and vile a Creature, for any Thing that you have done,
for such worthless and despicable Things as your Prayers, and other religious
Performances; it would be very dishonorable and unworthy of God so to do, and
it is in vain to expect it: He will show Mercy only on Christ's Account, and
that according to his sovereign Pleasure, on whom he pleases, when he pleases,
and in what Manner he pleases: You cannot bring him under Obligation by your
Works; do what you will, he will not look on himself obliged. But if it be his
Pleasure, he can honorably show Mercy through Christ, to any Sinner of you
all, not one in this Congregation excepted.

Therefore here is Encouragement for you still to seek and wait,
notwithstanding all your Wickedness; agreeable to Samuel's Speech to the
Children of Israel, when they were terrified with the Thunder and Rain that God
sent, and their Guilt stared them in the Face, 1 Samuel 12 20 Fear not; ye have
done all this Wickedness; yet turn not aside from following the Lord; but serve
the Lord with all your Hearts.

I would conclude this Discourse, by improving the Doctrine in the second
Place, very briefly to put the godly in Mind of the Freeness and Wonderfulness
of the Grace of God toward them. For such were some of you. -- The Case was
just so with you, as you have heard; you had such a wicked Heart, you lived
such a wicked Life, and it would have been most just with God for ever to have
cast you off: but he has had Mercy upon you; he has made his glorious Grace
appear in your everlasting Salvation. You behaved your self so as you have
heard toward God; you had no Love to God, but yet he has exercised unspeakable
Love to you: You have contemned God, and set Light by him; but so great a Value
has God's Grace set on you, and your Happiness, that you have been redeemed at
the Price of the Blood of his own Son: You chose to be with Satan in his
Service; but yet God has made you a Joint-Heir with Christ, of his Glory: You
was ungrateful for past Mercies, but yet God not only continued those Mercies,
but bestowed unspeakably greater Mercies upon you: You refused to hear when God
called; but yet God heard you, when you called: You abused the Infiniteness of
God's Mercy to encourage your self in Sin against God; but yet God has
manifested the Infiniteness of that Mercy, in the Exercises of it toward you:
You have r^^^cted Christ, and set him at naught; and yet he is (...) your
Savior: You have neglected your own Salvation; but God has not neglected it:
You have destroyed your self; but yet in God has been your Help^ God has
magnified his free Grace toward you and not to others; because he has chosen
you, and it has pleased him to set his Love upon you.

O! What Cause is here for Praise? What Obligations are upon you to bless the
Lord, who has dealt bountifully with you, and to magnify his holy Name? What
Cause for you to praise him in Humility, to walk humbly before God, and to be
conformed to that, in Ezekiel. 16 63. That thou may remember, and be
confounded, and never open thy Mouth any more, because of thy Shame, when I am
pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done, says the Lord God! You
should never open your Mouth in Boasting, or Self-Justification: You should lie
the lower before God for his Mercy to you. But you have Reason, the more
abundantly for your past Sins, to open your Mouth in God's Praises, that they
may be continually in your Mouth, both here and to all Eternity, for his rich,
unspeakable, and sovereign Mercy to you, whereby he, and he alone, has made
you to differ from others.

The Excellency of CHRIST.
DISCOURSE, V.
REV. V. 5, 6. AND one of the Elders says unto me, Weep not; behold the LION
of the Tribe of Juda, the Root of David, has prevailed to open the Book, and
to lo^se the seven Seals thereof. And I beheld, and to in the midst of the
Throne, and of the four Beasts, and in the midst of the Elders, stood a LAMB,
as it had been slain --.
THE Visions and Revelations that the Apostle John had of the future Events of
God's Providence, are here introduced with a Vision of the Book of God's
Decrees, by which those Events were fore ordained; which is represented in the
first Verse of this Chapter, as a Book in the Right Hand of him that sat on the
Throne, written within, and on the back Side, and sealed with seven Seals.
Books in the Form in which they were wont of old to be made, were broad Leaves
of Parchment, or Paper, or some^hing of that Nature, joined together at one
Edge, and so rolled up together, and then sealed, or some Way fastened
together, to prevent their unfolding and opening. Hence we read of the Roll of
a Book, Jer. 36. 2. It seems to have been such a Book that John h^d a Vision of
here; and therefore it is said to be written within, and on the back Side, i. e.
on the inside Pages, and also on one of the outside Pages, viz. that that was
rolled in, in the rolling the Book up together. And it is said to be se^led
with seven Seals, to signify that what was written in it was perfectly hidden
and secret; or that God's Decrees of future Events are sealed, and shut up from
all Possibility of being discovered by Creatures, till God is pleased to make
them known. We find that seven is often used in Scripture as the Number of
Perfection, to signify the superlative, or most perf^ct Degree of any Thing;
which probably come from that, that on the seventh Day God beheld the Works of
Creation finished, and rested and rejoiced in them, as being complete and
perfect.

When John saw this Book, he tells us he saw a strong Angel proclaiming with a
loud Voice, Who is worthy to open the Book, and to loose the Seals thereof? And
no Man in Heaven, nor in Earth, neither under the Earth, was able to open the
Book, neither to look thereon: And that he wept much, because no Man was found
worthy to open and read the Book, neither to look thereon. And then tells us
how his Tears were dried up, viz. that one of the Elders said unto him, Weep
not; Behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah has prevailed, etc -- as in the
Text. Though no Man nor Angel, nor any mere Creature, was ^ound either able to
loose the Seals, or worthy to be admitted to the Privilege of Reading the Book,
yet this was declared, for the Comfort of this beloved Disciple, that Christ
was found both able and worthy. And we have an Account in the succeeding
Chapters how he actually did it, opening the Seals in Order, first one, and
then another, rev^aling what God had decreed should come to pass hereafter. And
we have an Account in this Chapter, of his coming and taking the Book out of
the Right Hand of him that sat on the Throne, and of the joyful Praises that
were sung to him, in Heaven and Earth, on that Occasion.

Many Things might be observed in the Words of the Text; but it is to my present
Purpose only to take Notice of the two distinct Appellations here given to
Christ.

1. He is called a Lion. Behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. He seems to be
called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, in Allusion to what Jacob said, in his
blessing of the Tribes on his Death Bed, who when he came to bless Judah,
compares him to a Lion, Genesis 49. 9. Judah is a Lion's Whelp: From the Prey my
Son ar^ thou gone up: H^ stooped down, he couched as a Lion, and as an old
Lion; who shall raise him up? And also to the Standard of the Camp of Judah in
the Wilderness, on which was displayed a Lion, according to the ancient
Tradition of the Jews. It Is much on Account of the valiant Acts of David, that
the Tribe of Judah, of which David was, is in Jacob's prophetical Blessing
compared to a Lion; but more especially with an Eye to Jesus Christ, who also
was of that Tribe, and was descended of David, and is in our Text called the
Root of David; and therefore Christ is here called the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah.

2. He is called a Lamb. John was told of a Lion that had prevailed to open the
Book, and probably expected to see a Lion in his Vision; but while he is
expecting, behold a Lamb appears to open the Book, an exceeding diverse Kind of
Creature from a Lion! A Lion is a Devourer, one that is wont to make terrible
Slaughter of others; and no Creature more easily falls a Prey to him than a
Lamb. And Christ is here represented not only as a Lamb, a Creature very liable
to be slain, but a Lamb as it had been slain, that is, with the Marks of it is
deadly Wounds appearing on it.

That which I would observe from the Words, for the Subject of my present
Discourse is this, viz.

There is an admirable Conjunction of diverse Excellencies in Jesus Christ. The
Lion and the Lamb, though very diverse Kinds of Creatures, yet have each their
peculiar Excellencies. The Lion excells in Strength, and in the Majesty of his
Appearance and Voice. The Lamb excells in Meekness and Patience, besides the
excellent Nature of the Creature as good for Food, and yielding that which is
fit for our Clothing, and being suitable to be offered in Sacrifice to God. But
we see that Christ is in the Text compared to both; because the diverse
Excellencies of both wonderfully meet in him.

In handling this Subject, I would

First, Show wherein there is an admirable Conjunction of diverse Excellencies
in Christ.

Secondly, How this admirable Conjunction of Excellencies appears in Christ's
Acts.

And then make Application.

First. I would show wherein there is an admirable Conjunction of diverse
Excellencies in Jesus Christ. Which appears in three Things,

I. There is a Conjunction of such Excellencies in Christ, as, in our Manner of
conceiving, are very diverse one from another.

II. There is in him a Conjunction of such really diverse Excellencies, as
otherwise would have seemed to us utterly incompatible in the same Subject.

III. Such diverse Excellencies are exercised in him toward Men, that
otherwise would have seemed impossible to be exercised toward the same Object.

I. There is a Conjunction of such Excellencies in Christ. as, in our Manner of
conceiving, are very diverse one from another. Such are the various divine
Perfections and Excellencies that Christ is possessed of. Christ is a divine
Person, or one that is God; and therefore has all the Attributes of God. The
Difference there is between these is chiefly relative, and in our Manner of
conceiving of them. And those that in this Sense are most Diverse, do meet in
the Person of Christ. I shall mention two Instances.

1. There do meet in Jesus Christ, infinite Highness, and infinite
Condescension Christ, as he is God, is infinitely great and high above all. He
is higher than the Kings of the Earth; for he is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords. He is higher than the Heavens, and higher than the highest Angels of
Heaven. So great is He, that all Men, all Kings and Princes, are as Worms of
the Dust before him, all Nations are as the Drop of the Bucket, and the light
Dust of the Balance; yea, and Angels themselves are as nothing before him. He
is so high, that he is infinitely above any Need of us; above our Reach, that
we cannot be profitable to him, and above our Conceptions, that we cannot
comprehend him. Prove. 30 4. What is his Name, and what is his Son's Name, if
thou can tell? Our Understandings, if we stretch them never so far, c^n't
reach up to his divine Glory. Job 11. 8 It is high as Heaven, what can tho
(...) do? -- Christ is the Creator, and great Possessor of Heaven and Earth: He
is sovereign Lord of all: He rules over the whole Universe, and does whatsoever
pleases him: H^^ Knowledge is without Bound: His Wisdom is perfect, and what
none can circumvent: His Power is infinite, and none can resist him: His Riches
are immense and inexhaustable: His Majesty is infinitely awful.

And yet he is one of infinite Condescension. None are so low, or in^eriour,
but Christ's Condescension is sufficient to take a gracious Notice of them. He
condescends not only to the Angels, humbling himself to behold the Things that
are done in Heaven, but he also condescends to such poor Creatures as Men; and
that not only so as to take Notice of Princes and great Men, but of those that
are of meanest Rank and Degree, the Poor of the World, James, 2 5. Such as are
commonly despised by their Follow Creatures, Christ don't despise. 1 Cor. 1.
28. Base Things of the World, and Things that are despised, has God chosen.
Christ condescends to take Notice of Beggars, Luke. 16 22. and of Servants, and
People of the most despised Nations: In Christ Jesus is neither Barbarian,
Sythian, Bond, nor Free, Col. 3. 11. He that is thus high, condescends to take
a gracious Notice of little Children, Matthew. 19. 14. Suffer little Children to
come unto me. Yea, which is much more, his Condescension is sufficient to take
a gracious Notice of the most unworthy, sinful Creatures, those that have no
good Deservings, and those that have infinite ill Deservings.

Yea, so great is his Condescension, that it is not only sufficient to take
some gracious Notice of such as these, but sufficient for every Thing that is
an Act of Condescension. His Condescension is great enough to become their
Friend: It Is great enough to become their Companion, to unite their Souls to
him in spiritual Marriage: It Is great enough to take their Nature upon him, to
become one of them, that he may be one with them: Yea, it is great enough to
abase himself yet lower for them, even to expose himself to Shame and Spitting;
yea, to yield up himself to an ignominious Death for them. And what Act of
Condescension can be conceived of greater? Yet such an Act as this, has his
Condescension yielded to, for those that are so low and mean, despicable and
unworthy!

Such a Conjunction of such infinite Highness, and low Condescension, in the
same Person, is admirable. We see by manifold Instances, what a Tendency an
high Station has in Men, to make them to be of a quite contrary Disposition. If
one Worm be a little exalted above another, by having more Dust, or a bigger
Dunghill, how much does he make of himself! What a Distance does he keep from
those that are below him! And a little Condescension, is what he expects should
be made much of, and greatly acknowleged. Christ condescends to wash our Feet;
but how would great Men, (or rather the bigger Worms,) account themselves
debased by Acts of far less Condescension!

2. There meet in Jesus Christ, infinite Justice, and infinite Grace. As Christ
is a divine Person he is infinitely holy and just, infinitely hating Sin, and
disposed to execute condign Punishment for Sin. He is the Judge of the World,
and is the infinitely just Judge of it, and will not at all acquit the wicked,
or by any Means clear the guilty.

And yet he is one that is infinitely gracious and merciful. Though his Justice
be so strict with Respect to all Sin, and every Breach of the Law, yet he has
Grace sufficient for every Sinner, and even the chief of Sinners. And it is not
only sufficient for the most unworthy to show them Mercy, and bestow some good
upon them, but to bestow the greatest Good; yea, it is sufficient to bestow all
Good upon them, and to do all Things for them. There is no Benefit or Blessing
that they can receive so great, but the Grace of Christ is sufficient to bestow
it on the greatest Sinner that ever lived. And not only so, but so great is his
Grace, that nothing is too much as the Means of this Good: It Is sufficient not
only to do great Things, but also to suffer in order to it; and not only to
suffer, but to suffer most extremely, even unto Death, the most terrible of
natural Evils; and not only Death, but the most ignominiousandtormenting, and
every Way the most terrible Death that Men could inflict; yea, and greater
Sufferings than Men could inflict, who could only torment the Body, but also
those Sufferings in his Soul, that were the more immediate Fruits of the Wrath
of God against the Sins of those he undertakes for.

II. There do meet in the Person of Christ, such really diverse Excellencies,
which otherwise would have been thought ^^terly incompatible in the same
Subject; such as are conjoined in no other Person whatever, either divine,
human, or angelical; and such as neither Men nor Angels would ever have
imagined could have met together in the same Person, had it not been seen in
the Person of Christ. I would give some Instances.

1. In the Person of Christ do meet together, infinite Glory, and the lowest
Humility. Infinite Glory, and the Virtue of Humility, meet in no other Person
but Christ. They meet in no created Person; for no created Person has infinite
Glory: And they meet in no other divine Person but Christ. For though the
divine Nature be infinitely abhorrent to Pride, yet Humility is not properly
predicable of God the Father, and the Holy Ghost, that exist only in the divine
Nature; because it is a proper Excellency only of a created Nature; for it
consists radically in a Sense of a comparative Lowness and Littleness before
God, or the great Distance between God and the Subject of this Virtue; but it
would be a Contradiction to suppose any such Thing in God.

But in Jesus Christ, who is both God and Man, these two diverse Excellencies,
are sweetly united. He is a Person infinitely exalted in Glory and Dignity.
Phil. 2. 6. Being in the Form of God, he thought it not Robbery to be equal
with God. There is equal Honor due to him with the Father. John 5. 23. -- That
all Men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. God himself says
to him, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever, Heb. 1. 8. And there is the
same supreme Respect, and divine Worship, paid to him by the Angels of Heaven,
as to God the Father; as there, Verse 6. Let all the Angels of God worship him.

But however he is thus above all, yet he is lowest of all in Humility. There
never was so great an Instance of this Virtue, among either Men or Angels, as
Jesus. None ever was so sensible of the Distance between God and him, or had a
Heart so lowly before God, as the Man Christ Jesus. Matthew. 11. 29. What a
wonderful Spirit of Humility appeared in him, when he was here upon Earth, in
all his Behavior! In his Contentment in his mean outward Condition,
contentedly living in the Family of Joseph the Carpenter, and Mary his Mother,
for thirty Years together, and afterward choosing outward Meanness, Poverty
and Contempt, rather than earthly Greatness; in his washing his Disciples Feet,
and in all his Speeches and Deportment toward them; in his cheerfully
sustaining the Form of a Servant through his whole Life, and submitting to such
immense Humiliation at Death!

2. In the Person of Christ do meet together, infinite Majesty, and
transcendent Meekness. These again are two Qualifications that meet together in
no other Person but Christ. Meekness, properly so called, is a Virtue proper
only to the Creature: We scarcely ever find Meekness mentioned as a divine
Attribute in Scripture; at least not in the New Testament; for thereby seems to
be signified, a Calmness and Quietness of Spirit arising from Humility, in
mutable Beings, that are naturally liable to be put into a Ruffle, by the
Assaults of a tempestuous and injurious World. But Christ being both God and
Man, has both infinite Majesty and superlative Meekness.

Christ was a Person of infinite Majesty. It is he that is spoken of, Psalm.
45. 3. Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O most mighty, in thy Glory and thy
Majesty. It Is he that is mighty, that rides on the Heavens, and in his
Excellency on the Sky. It Is he that is terrible out of his holy Places; who is
mightier than the Noise of many Waters, yea, than the mighty Waves of the Sea;
before whom a Fire goes, and burns up his Enemies round about; at whose
Presence the Earth does quake, and the Hills do melt; who sits on the Circle
of the Earth, and all the Inhabitants thereof are as Grasshoppers; who rebukes
the Sea and makes it dry, and dries up the Rivers; whose Eyes are as a Flame
of Fire, from whose Presence, and from the Glory of whose Power, the Wicked
shall be punished with everlasting Destruction; who is the blessed and only
Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that has Heaven for his
Throne, and the Earth for his Footstool, and is the high and lofty One who
inhabits Eternity, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and of whose
Dominion there is no End.

And yet he was the most mavelous Instance of Meekness, and humble Quietness
of Spirit, that ever was, agreeable to the Prophecies of him. Matthew. 21. 4, 5.
All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet,
saying, Tell ye the Daughter of Sion, behold thy King comes unto thee, Meek,
and sitting upon an Ass, and a Colt the Fool of an Ass. And agreeable to what
Christ declares of himself, Matthew. 11. 29. I am meek and lowly of Heart. And
agreeable to what was manifest in his Behavior here in this World. For there
never was such an Instance seen on Earth of a meek Behavior, under Injuries
and Reproaches, and toward Enemies; who when he was reviled, reviled not
again; who was of a wonderful Spirit of Forgiveness, was ready to forgive his
worst Enemies, and prayed for them with servent and effectual Prayers. With
what Meekness did he appear, when in the Ring of Soldiers, that were con^^mning
and mocking him, when he was silent, and opened not his Mouth, but went as a
Lamb to the Slaughter. Thus is Christ a Lion in Majesty, and a Lamb in Meekness.

3. There meet in the Person of Christ, the deepest Reverence toward God, and
Equality with God. Christ, when he was here on Earth, appeared full of holy
Reverence toward the Father: He paid the most reverential Worship to him,
praying to him with Postures of Reverence. Thus we read of his kneeling down
and praying, Matthew. 22. 41. This became Christ, as he was one that had taken on
him the human Nature. But at the same Time he existed in the divine Nature;
whereby his Person was in all Respects equal to the Person of the Father. God
the Father has no Attribute or Perfection, that the Son has not, in equal
Degree, and equal Glory. These Things meet in no other Person but Jesus Christ.

4. There are conjoined in the Person of Christ, infinite Worthiness of Good,
and the greatest Patience under Sufferings of Evil. He was perfectly innocent,
and deserved no Suffering. He deserved nothing from God, by any Guilt of his
own; and he deserved no Ill from Men. Yea, he was not only harmless, and
undeserving of Suffering, but he was infinitely worthy, worthy of the infinite
Love of the Father, worthy of infinite and eternal Happiness, and infinitely
worthy of all possible Esteem, Love, and Service from all Men. And yet he was
perfectly patient under the greatest Sufferings, that ever were endured in this
World. Heb. 6. 15. After he had patiently endured, he obtained the Promise. He
suffered not from his Father, for his Faults, but ours; and he suffered from
Men* not for his Faults, but for those Things, on Account of which, he was
infinitely worthy of their Love and Honor; which made his Patience the more
wonderful, and the more glorious. 1 Pet. 2. 20, etc. For what Glory (...) it if
when ye be buffeted for your Faults, ye shall take it patiently? But if when ye
do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God:
For even hereunto were ye called because Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an Example, that we should follow his Steps; who did no Sin, neither was
Guile found in his Mouth; who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he
suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously: Who his own self, bare our Sins in his own Body, on the Tree, that
we being dead to Sin, should live unto Righteousness; by whose Stripes ye were
healed. There is no such Conjunction of Innocence, Worthiness, and Patience
under Sufferings, as in the Person of Christ.

5. In the Person of Christ are conjoined, an exceeding Spirit of Obedience,
with supreme Dominion over Heaven and Earth. Christ is the Lord of all Things,
in two Respects. He is so as he is God-Man, and Mediator; and so his Dominion
is appointed, and given of the Father, and is by Delegation from God, and he is
as it were the Father's Vicegerent But he is Lord of all Things in another
Respect, viz. as he is, (by his original Nature) God. And so he is by natural
Right, the Lord of all, and supreme over all, as much as the Father. Thus he
has Dominion over the World, not by Delegation, but in his own Right: He is not
an Under God, as the Asians suppose, but to all Intents and Purposes, supreme
God.

And yet, in the same Person, is found the greatest Spirit of Obedience to the
Commands and Law of God that ever was in the Universe; which was manifest in
his Obedience here in this World* John. 14 31. As the Father gave me
Commandment, even so I do. John. 15 10. Even as I have kept my Father's
Commandments, and abide in his Love. The Greatness of his Spirit of Obedience
appears in the Perfection of his Obedience, and in his obeying Commands of such
exceeding Difficulty. Never any one received Commands from God, of such
Difficulty, and that were so great a Trial of Obedience, as Jesus Christ. One
of God's Commands to him was, that he should yield himself to those dreadful
Sufferings that he underwent. See John 10. 18. No Man takes it from me, but I
lay it down of my self. -- This Commandment received I of my Father. And Christ
was thoroughly obedient to this Command of God. Heb. 5. 8. Though he were a Son,
yet learned he Obedience by the Things that he suffered. Philip. 2 8. He
humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross.
Never was there such an Instance of Obedience in Man nor Angel, as this; though
he that obeyed was at the same Time, supreme Lord of both Angels and Men.

6. In the Person of Christ are conjoined absolute Sovereignty, and perfect
Resignation. This is another unparalled Conjunction. Christ as he is God, is
the absolute Sovereign of the World: He is the sovereign Disposer of all
Events. The Decrees of God are all his sovereign Decrees; and the Work of
Creation, and all God's Works of Providence, are his sovereign Works. It Is he
that works all Things according to the Counsel of his own Will. Col. 1. 16,
17. By him, and through him, and to him, are all Things. John. 15. 17. The Father
works hitherto, and I work. Matthew. 8. 3. I will, be thou clean.

But yet Christ was the most wonderful Instance of Resignation, that ever
appeared in the World. He was absolutely and perfectly resigned, when he had a
near, and immediate Prospect of his terrible Sufferings, and the dreadful Cup
that he was to drink, the Idea and Expectation of which, made his Soul
exceeding Sorrowful, even unto Death, and put him into such an Agony, that his
Sweat was as it were great Drops, or Clots of Blood, falling down to the
Ground. But in such Circumstances, be was wholly resigned to the Will of God.
Matthew. 26. 39. O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me!
Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. Verse 42. O my Father, if this
Cup may not pass from me, except I drink it, Thy Will be done!

7. In Christ do meet together, Self-sufficiency, and an entire Trust and
Reliance on God; which is another Conjunction peculiar to the Person of Christ.
As he is a divine Person he is self-sufficient, standing in Need of nothing;
all Creatures are dependent on him, but he is dependent on none, but is
absolutely independent. His Proceeding from the Father in his eternal
Generation, or Filiation, argues no proper Dependence on the Will of the
Father; for that Proceeding was natural and necessary, and not arbitrary. But
yet Christ entirely trusted in God: His Enemies say that of him, He trusted in
God that he would deliver him, Matthew. 27. 43. And the Apostle testifies, 1 Pet.
2. 23. That he committed himself to God.

III. Such diverse Excellencies are expressed in him toward Men, that
otherwise would have seemed impossible to be exercised toward the same Object;
as particularly these three, Justice, Mercy and Truth. The same that are
mentioned, Psalm. 85. 10. Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and
Peace have kissed each other. The strict Justice of God, and even his revenging
Justice, and that against the Sins of Men, never was so gloriously manifested
as in Christ. He manifested an infinite Regard to the Attribute of God's
Justice, in that when he had a Mind to save Sinners, he was willing to undergo
such extreme Sufferings, rather than that their Salvation should be to the
Injury of the Honor of that Attribute. And as he is the Judge of the World, he
does himself exercise strict Justice; he will not clear the Guilty, nor at all
acquit the Wicked in Judgment. And yet, how wonderfully is infinite Mercy
toward Sinners, displayed in him! And what glorious and ineffable Grace and
Love have been, and are exercised by him, toward sinful Men! Though he be the
just Judge of a sinful World, yet he is also the Savior of the World: Though
he be a consuming Fire to Sin, (...) he is the Light and Life of Sinners. Romans
3. 25, 26 Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his
Blood, to declare his Righteousness, for the Remission of Sins that are past,
through the Forbearance of God; To declare, I say, at this Time, his
Righteousness, th^^ he might be just, and the Justifier of him which believes
in Jesus.

So the immutable Truth of God, in the Threatenings of his Law against the Sins
of Men, was never so manifested, as it is in Jesus Christ; for there never was
any other so great a Trial of the Unalterableness of the Truth of God, in those
Threatenings, as when Sin came to be imputed to his own Son. And then in
Christ, has been seen already, an actual, complete Accomplishment of those
Threatenings; which never has been, nor will be seen in any other Instance;
because the Eternity that will be taken up in fulfilling those Threatenings on
others, never will be finished. Christ manifested an infinite Regard to this
Truth of God in his Sufferings. And in his judging the World, he makes the
Covenant of Works that contains those dreadful Threatenings, his Rule of
Judgment: He will see to it that it is not infringed in the least Jot or
Tittle* he will do nothing contrary to the Threatenings of the Law, and their
complete Fulfillment. And yet in him we have many great, and precious Promises,
Promises of perfect Deliverance from the Penalty of the Law. And this is the
Promise that he has promised us, even eternal Life. And in him are all the
Promises of God, Yea, and Amen

Having thus shown wherein there is an admirable Conjunction of Excellencies in
Jesus Christ, I now proceed,

Secondly, To show how this admirable Conjunction of Excellencies appears in
Christ's Acts

I It appears in what Christ did in taking on him our Nature. In this Act his
infi^i^^ Cond^s^^nsion wonderfully appeared; that he that was God, should
become Man; that the Word should be made Flesh, and should take on him a Nature
infinitely below his original Nature! And it appears yet more remarkably, in
the low Circumstances of his Incarnation: He was conceived in the Womb of a
poor young Woman; whose Poverty appeared in that when she came to offer
Sacrifices for her Purification, she brought what was allowed of in the Law,
only in Case of Poverty; as Luke 2 34. According to that which is said in the
Law of the Lord, a Pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons. This was
allowed only in Case the Person was so Poor, that she was not able to offer a
Lamb. Levit. 12. 8.

And though his infinite Condescension thus appeared in the Manner of his
Incarnation, yet his divine Dignity also appeared in it; for though he was
conceived in the Womb of a poor Virgin, yet he was there conceived by the Power
of the Holy Ghost. And his divine Dignity also appeared in the Holiness of his
Conception and Birth. Though he was conceived in the Womb of one of the corrupt
Race of Mankind, yet he was conceived and born without Sin; as the Angel said
to the blessed Virgin, Luke 1. 35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
Power of the Highest shall over shadow thee; therefore also, that holy Thing
which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God.

His infinite Condescension marvellously appeared in the Manner of his Birth.
He was brought forth in a Stable, because there was no Room for them in the
Inn. The Inn was taken up by others, that were looked upon as Persons of
greater Account. The blessed Virgin being poor and despised, was turned or shut
out; though she was in such necessitous Circumstances, yet those that counted
themselves her Betters, would not give Place to her; and therefore in the Time
of her Travail she was forced to betake her self to a Stable; and when the
Child was born, it was wrapped in Swaddling Clothes, and laid in a Manger; and
there Christ lay a little Infant; and there he eminently appeared as a Lamb.
But yet this feeble Infant that was born thus in a Stable, and laid in a
Manger, was born to conquer and triumph over Satan, that roaring Lion: He came
to subdue the mighty Powers of Darkness, and make a Show of them openly; and so
to restore Peace on Earth, and to manifest God's Good Will toward Men, and to
bring Glory to God in the highest; according as the End of his Birth was
declared by the joyful Songs of the glorious Hosts of Angels, appea^^^g to the
Shepherds, at the same Time that the Infant lay in the Manger; whereby his
divine Dignity was manifested.

II. This admirable Conjunction of Excellencies appears in the Acts, and
various Passages of Christ's Life. Though Christ dwelt on the Earth in mean
outward Circumstances, whereby his Condescension and Humility especially
appeared, and his Majesty was veiled; yet his divine Dignity and Glory did in
many of his Acts shine through the Veil, and it illustriously appeared that he
was, not only the Son of Man, but, the great God.

Thus in the Circumstances of his Infancy, his outward Meanness appeared; yet
there was something then to show forth his divine Dignity, in the wise Men's
being sti^r'd up to come from the East to give Honor to him, their being led
by a miraculous Star, and coming and falling down and worshipping him, and
presenting him with Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh. His Humility and Meekness
wonderfully appeared in his Subjection to his Mother and reputed Father, when
he was a Child: He herein appeared as a Lamb. But his divine Glory broke forth
and shone, when at twelve Years old, he disputed with the Doctors in the
Temple: In that he appeared, in some Measure, as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.

And so after he entered on his public Ministry, his mavelous Humility and
Meekness was manifested in his choosing to appear in such mean outward
Circumstances, and in being so contented in them, when he was so Poor that he
had not where to lay his Head, and depended on the Charity of some of his
Followers for his Subsistence; as appears by Luke. 8. at the begin. As also in
his meek, condescending* and familiar Treatment of his Disciples; in his
Discourses with them, treating them as a Father his Children, yea, as Friends
and Companions: And in his patient bearing such Affliction and Reproach, and so
many Injuries from the Scribes and Pharisees, and others: In these Things he
appeared as a Lamb. And yet he at the same Time did many Ways show forth his
divine Majesty and Glory; particularly in the Miracles that he wrought, which
were evidently divine Works, and manifested omnipote^^ Power, and so declared
him to be the Lion of the Tribe of Judah His wonderful and miraculous Works
plainly showed him to be the God of Nature; in that it appeared by them that he
had all Nature in his Hands, and could lay an Arrest upon it, and stop and
change it is Course, as he pleased. In healing the Sick, and opening the Eyes of
the Blind, and unstopping the Ears of the Deaf, and healing the Lame, he showed
that he was the God that framed the Eye, and created the Ear, and was the
Author of the Frame of Man's Body. By the Dead's rising at his Command, it
appeared that he was the Author and Fountain of Life, and that God the LORD, to
whom belong the Issues from Death. By his walking on the Sea in a Storm, when
the Waves were raised, he showed himself to be that God, spoken of Job 9. 8.
That treads on the Waves of the Sea. By his stilling the Storm, and calming
the Rage of the Sea, by his powerful Command, saying, Peace, be still, He
showed himself to be he that has the Command of the Universe, and to be that
God that brings Things to pass by the Word of his Power, that speaks and it is
done, that commands and it stands fast, and he that is spoken of, Psalm 65.7
Who stilleth the Noise of the Seas, the Noise of their Waves. And Psalm 107.
29. That makes the Storm a Calm; so that the Waves thereof are still. And
Psalm 89. 8, 9. O Lord God of Hosts, Who is a strong Lord like unto thee, o^ to
thy Faithfulness round about thee? Thou rebukest the raging of the Sea; when
the Waves thereof arise, thou stillest them -- Christ by casting out Devils,
remarkably appeared as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and showed that he was
stronger than that roaring Lion, that seeks whom he may devour. He commanded
them to come out, and they were forced to obey: They were terribly afraid of
him; they fall down before him, and beseech him not to torment them: He forces
a whole Legion of them to forsake their old Hold, by his powerful Word; and
they could not so much as enter into the Swine without his Leave. -- He showed
the Glory of his Omniscience, by telling the Thoughts of Men; as we have often
an Account. Herein he appeared to be that God spoken of, Amos 4 13. That
declares unto Man what is his Thought. Thus in the midst of his Meanness and
Humiliation, his divine Glory appeared in his Miracles, John 2. 11. This
beginning of Miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth his
Glory.

And though Christ ordinarily appeared without outward Glory, and in great
Obscurity, yet at a certain Time he threw off the Veil, and appeared in his
divine Majesty, so far as it could be outwardly manifested to Men in this frail
State, when he was transfigured in the Mount. The Apostle Peter speaks of it, 2
Pet. 1. 16, 17. speaking there of himself, as one that was an Eye Witness of
his Majesty, when he received from God the Father, Honor and Glory, when there
came such a Voice to him, from the excellent Glory, This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased; which Voice that came from Heaven, they heard, when
they were with him in the holy Mount.

And at the same Time that Christ was wont to appear in such Meekness,
Condescension and Humility, in his familiar Discourses with his Disciples,
appearing therein as the Lamb of God, he was also wont to appear as the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah, with divine Authority and Majesty, in his so sharply
rebuking the Scribes and Pharisees, and other Hypocrites.

III. This admirable Conjunction of Excellencies remarkably appears, in his
offering up himself a Sacrifice for Sinners in his last Sufferings. As this was
the greatest Thing in all the Work of Redemption, the greatest Act of Christ in
that Work; so in this Act especially, does th^^e appear that admirable
Conjunction of Excellencies, that has been spoken of. Christ never so much
appeared as a Lamb, as when he was s^ain: He came like a Lamb to the Slaughter,
Isai. 53. 7. Then he was offered up to God as a Lamb without Blemish, and
without Spot: Then especially did he appear to be the Antitype of the Lamb of
the Passover: 1 Cor. 5. 7. Christ our Passover sacrificed for us. And yet in
that Act, he did in an especial Manner appear as the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah; yea, in this above all other Acts, in many Respects, as may appear in
the following Things.

1. Then was Christ in the greatest Degree of his Humiliation, and yet by that,
above all other Things, his divine Glory appears Christ's Humiliation was
great, in being born in such a low Condition, of a poor Virgin, and in a
Stable: His Humiliation was great, in being subject to Joseph the Carpenter,
and Mary his Mother, and afterward in living in Poverty, so as not to have
where to lay his Head, and in suffering such manifold and bitter Reproaches as
he suffered, while he went about preaching and working Miracles: But his
Humiliation was never so great, as it was in his last Sufferings, beginning
with his Agony in the Garden, till he expired on the Cross. Never was he
subject to such ignominy as then; never did he suffer so much Pain in his Body,
or so much Sorrow in his Soul; never was he in so great an Exercise of his
Condescension, Humility, Meekness, and Patience, as he was in these last
Sufferings; never was his divine Glory and Majesty covered with so thick and
dark a Veil; never did he so empty himself, and make himself of no Reputation,
as at this -- Time: And yet never was his divine Glory so manifested, by any
Act of his, as in that Act, of yielding himself up to these Sufferings. -- When
the Fruit of it came to appear, and the Mystery and Ends of it to be unfolded,
in the Issue of it, then did the Glory of it appear; then did it appear, as the
most glorious Act of Christ that ever he exercised toward the Creature. This
Act of his is celebrated by the Angels and Hosts of Heaven with peculiar
Praises, as that which is above all others glorious, as you may see in the
Context, Verse 9. etc. And they sung a new Song, saying, Thou are worthy to
take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof, FOR THOU WAST SLAIN, and have
redeemed us to God BY THY BLOOD, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People,
and Nation, and have made us, to our God, Kings, and Priests, and we shall
reign on Earth. And I beheld, and I heard the Voice of many Angels, round about
the Throne, and the Beasts, and the Elders, and the Number of them was ten
thousand Times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, saying, with a loud
Voice, Worthy is the Lamb THAT WAS SLAIN, to receive Power, and Riches, and
Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing.

2. He never in any Act gave so great a Manifestation of Love to God, and yet
never so manifested his Love to those that were Enemies to God, as in that Act.
Christ never did any Thing whereby his Love to the Father was so eminently
manifested, as in his laying down his Life, under such inexpressible
Sufferings, in Obedience to his Command, and for the Vindication of the Honor
of his Authority and Majesty; nor did ever any mere Creature give such a
Testimony of Love to God as that was: And yet this was the greatest Expression
of all, of his Love to sinful Men, that were Enemies to God, Romans 5. 10. While
we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the Death of his Son. The
Greatness of Christ's Love to such, appears in nothing so much, as in it is
being dying Love. That Blood of Christ that was sweat out, and fell in great
Drops to the Ground, in his Agony, was shed from Love to God's Enemies, and his
own. That Shame and Spitting, that Torment of Body, and that exceeding Sorrow,
even unto Death, that he endured in his Soul, was what he underwent from Love
to Rebels against God, to save them from Hell, and to purchase for them eternal
Glory. -- Never did Christ so eminently show his Regard to God's Honor, as in
offering up himself a Victim to revenging Justice, to vindicate God's Honor:
And yet in this above all, he manifested his Love to them that dishonored God,
so as to bring such Guilt on themselves, that nothing less than his Blood could
atone for it.

3. Christ never so eminently appeared for divine Justice, and yet never
suffered so much from divine Justice, as when he offered up himself a Sacrifice
for our Sins. In Christ's great Sufferings, did his infinite Regard to the
Honor of God's Justice distinguishingly appear; for it was from Regard to
that, that he thus humbled himself: And yet in these Sufferings, Christ was the
Mark of the vindictive Expressions of that very Justice of God. Revenging
Justice then spent all it is Force upon him, on the Account of our Guilt that
was laid upon him; he was not spared at all; but God spent the Arrows of his
Vengeance upon him, which made him sweat Blood, and cry out upon the Cross, and
probably rent his Vitals, broke his Heart, the Fountain of Blood, or some other
internal Blood Vessels, and by the violent Fermentation turned his Blood to
Water: For the Blood and Water that issued out of his Side, when pierced by the
Spear, seems to have been extravasated Blood; and so there might be a Kind of
literal Fulfillment of that, in Psalm. 22. 14. I am poured out like Water, and
all my Bones are out of Joint: My Heart is like Wax, it is melted in the midst
of my Bowels -- And this was the Way and Means by which Christ stood up for the
Honor of God's Justice, viz. By thus suffering it is terrible Executions. For
when he had undertaken for Sinners, and had substituted himself in their Room,
divine Justice could have it is due Honor, no other Way than by his Suffering
it is Revenges.

In this the diverse Excellencies that met in the Person of Christ appeared,
viz. His infinite Regard to God's Justice, and such Love to those that have
exposed themselves to it, as induced him thus to yield himself a Sacrifice to
it.

4. Christ's Holiness never so illustriously shone forth, as it did in his last
Sufferings; and yet he never was to such a Degree, treated as Guilty. Christ's
Holiness never had such a Trial, as it had then; and therefore never had so
great a Manifestation. When it was tried in this Furnace, it came forth as,
Gold, or as Silver purified seven Times. His Holiness then above all appeared
in his steadfast Pursuit of the Honor of God, and in his Obedience to him: For
his yielding himself unto Death was transcendently the greatest Act of
Obedience, that ever was paid to God, by any one since the Foundation of the
World.

And yet then Christ was in the greatest Degree treated as a wicked Person. He
was apprehended and bound as a Malefactor. His Accusers represented him as a
most wicked Wretch. In his Sufferings before his Crucifixion he was treated as
if he had been the worst and vilest of Mankind; and then, he was put to a Kind
of Death, that none but the worst Sort of Malefactors were wont to suffer,
those that were most abject in their Persons, and guilty of the blackest
Crimes. And he suffered as though Guilty from God himself, by Reason of our
Guilt imputed to him; for he was made Sin for us, who knew no Sin; he was made
Subject to Wrath as if he had been sinful himself: He was made a Curse for us.

Christ never so greatly manifested his Hatred of Sin, as against God, as in
his dying to take away the Dishonor that Sin had done to God; and yet never
was he to such a Degree subject to the terrible Effects of God's Hatred of Sin,
and Wrath against it, as he was then -- In this appears those diverse
Excellencies meeting in Christ, viz. Love to God, and Grace to Sinners.

5. He never was so dealt with as unworthy as in his last Sufferings, and yet
it is chiefly on Account of them that he is accounted worthy. He was the^ in
dealt with as if he had not been worthy to live: They cry out, Away with him!
Away with him! Crucify him. John. 19. 15. And they pre^^r Barabbas before him.
And he suffered from the Father, as one whose D^merits were infinite, by Reason
of our Demerits that were laid upon him. And yet it was especially by that Act
of his subjecting himself to those Sufferings, that he merited, and on the
Account of which chiefly he was accounted worthy of, the Glory of his
Exaltation Philip. 2. 8* 9 He humbled himself, and (...) unto Death; --
wherefore God has highly, (...) And we see that it is on this Account chiefly,
that he is extolled as worthy by Saints and Angels in the Context; Worthy, say
they, is the Lamb that was slain -- This shows an admirable Conjunction in him
of infinite Dignity, and infinite Condescension and Love to the infinitely
unworthy.

6. Christ in his last Sufferings suffered most extremely from those that he
was then in his greatest Act of Love to. He never suffered so much from his
Father, (though not from any Hatred to him, but from Hatred to our Sins) for he
then forsook him, (as Christ on the Cross expresses it) or took away the
Comforts of his Presence; and then it pleased the Lord to bruise him, and put
him to Grief, as Isai. 53. 10. And yet never gave so great a Manifestation of
Love to God as then, as has been already observed. So Christ never suffered so
much from the Hands of Men as he did then; and yet never was in so high an
Exercise of Love to Men. He never was so ill treated by his Disciples; who were
so unconcerned about his Sufferings, that they would not watch with him one
Hour, in his Agony; and when he was apprehended, all forsook him and fled,
except Peter, who denied him with Oaths and Curses. And yet then he was
suffering, shedding his Blood, and pouring out his Soul unto Death, for them.
Yea, he probably was then shedding his Blood, for some of them that shed his
Blood: He was dying for some that killed him; whom he prayed for, while they
were crucifying him; and were probably afterward brought Home to Christ by
Peter's Preaching. Compare Luke 23. 34. Acts 2. 23, 36, 37, 41. And Chap. 3.
17. And Chap. 4. 4 -- This shows an admirable Meeting of Justice and Grace in
the Redemption of Christ.

7. It was in Christ's last Sufferings, above all, that he was delivered up to
the Power of his Enemies; and yet by these, above all, he obtained Victory over
his Enemies. Christ never was so in his Enemies Hands, as in the Time of his
last Sufferings. They sought his L^fe before! but from Time to Time they were
restrained, and Christ escaped out of their Hands; and this Reason is given for
it, that his Time was not yet come; but now they were suffered to work their
Will upon him; he was in a great Degree delivered up to the Malice and Cruelty
of both wicked Men and Devils: And therefore when Christ's Enemies came to
apprehend him, he says to them, Luke 22. 53. When I was daily with you in the
Temple, ye stretched forth no Hand against me: But this is your Hour and the
Power of Darkness.

And yet it was principally by Means of those Sufferings, that he conquered and
overthrew his Enemies. Christ never so effectually bruised Satan's Head, as
when he bruised his Heel. The Weapon with which Christ warred against the
Devil, and obtained a most complete Victory and glorious Triumph over him, was
the Cross, the Instrument and Weapon with which he thought he had overthrown
Christ, and brought on him shameful Destruction. Col. 2. 14, 15 Blotting out
the Handwriting of Ordinances. -- nailing it to his Cross: And having spoiled
Principalities and Powers, he made a Show of them openly, triumphing over them
in it. In his last Sufferings Christ sapp'd the very Foundations of Satan's
Kingdom; he conquered his Enemies in their own Territories, and beat them with
their own W^apons; as David cut off Goliath's Head with his own Sword. The
Devil had as it were swallowed up Christ, as the Whale did Jonah; but it was
deadly Poison to him; he gave him a mortal Wound in his own Bowels; he was soon
Sick of his Morsel, and forced to vomit him up again; and is to this Day
Heart-sick of what he then swallowed as his Prey. -- In those Sufferings of
Christ, was laid the Foundation of all that glorious Victory that he has
already obtained over Satan, in the Overthrow of his heathenish Kingdom, in the
Roman Empire, and all the Success the Gospel has had since; and also of all his
future and still more glorious Victory that is to be obtained in all the Earth.
-- Thus Samson's Riddle is most eminently fulfilled, Judges 14. 14. Out of the
Eater came forth Meat, and out of the Strong came forth Sweetness. And thus the
true Samson does more toward the Destruction of his Enemies at his Death, than
in his Life, in yielding up himself to Death, he pulls down the Temple of
Dagon, and destroys many thousands of his Enemies even while they are making
themselves Sport in his Sufferings; and so he whose Type was the Ark, pulls
down Dagon, and breaks off his Head and Hands in his own Temple, even while he
is brought in there as Dagon's Captive.

Thus Christ appeared at the same Time, and in the same Act, as both a Lion and
a Lamb. He appeared as a Lamb in the Hands of his cruel Enemies; as a Lamb in
the Paws, and between the devouring Jaws of a roaring Lion; yea, he was a Lamb
actually slain by this Lion: And yet at the same Time, as the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah, he conquers and triumphs over Satan, destroying his own Devourer; as
Samson did the Lion that roared upon him, when he rent him as he would a Kid.
And in nothing has Christ appeared so much as a Lion, in glorious Strength
destroying his Enemies, as when he was brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter: In
his greatest Weakness, he was most Strong; and when he suffered most from his
Enemies, he brought the greatest Confusion on his Enemies.

Thus this admirable Conjunction of diverse Excellencies was manifest in
Christ, in his offering up himself to God in his last Sufferings.

IV. It Is still manifest in his Acts, in his present State of Exaltation in
Heaven Indeed in his exalted State he most eminently appears in a Manifestation
of those Excellencies, on the Account of which he is compared to a Lion; but
still he appears as a Lamb. Rev. 14. 1. And I looked, and ^o a Lamb stood on
Mount Sion. As in his State of Humiliation, he chiefly appeared as a Lamb, and
yet did not appear without Manifestations of his divine Majesty and Power, as
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah Though Christ be now at the Right Hand of God,
exalted as King of Heaven, and Lord of the Universe; yet as he still is in the
human Nature, he still excells in Humility. Though the Man Christ Jesus be the
highest of all Creatures in Heaven, yet he as much excells them all in
Humility, as he does in Glory and Dignity; for none sees so much of the
Distance between God and him, as he does. And though he now appears in such
glorious Majesty and Dominion in Heaven, yet he appears as a Lamb in his
condescending, mild and sweet Treatment of his Saints there; for he is a Lamb
still, even in the midst of the Throne of his Exaltation; and he that is the
Shepherd of the whole Flock, is himself a Lamb, and goes before them in Heaven
as such. Rev. 7. 17. For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the Throne, shall
feed them, and shall lead them unto living Fountains of Waters, and God shall
wipe away all Tears from their Eyes. Though in Heaven every Knee bows to him,
and though the Angels fall down before him, adoring him, yet he treats his
Saints with infinite Condescension, Mildness and Endearment. And in his Acts
toward the Saints on Earth, ^e still appears as a Lamb, manifesting exceeding
Love and Tenderness, in his Intercession for them, as one that has had
Experience of Affliction and Temptation: He has not forgot what these Things
are; nor has he forgot how to pity those that are subject to them. And he still
manifests his Lamb-like Excellencies, in his Dealings with his Saints on Earth,
in admirable Forbearance, Love, Gentleness, and Compassions, instructing,
supplying, supporting, and comforting them, often coming to them, and
manifesting himself to them by his Spirit, that he may sup with them, and they
with him, admitting them to sweet Communion with him, enabling them with
Boldness and Confidence to come to him, and solace their Hearts in him. -- And
in Heaven Christ still appears, as it were with the Marks of his Wounds upon
him; and so appears as a Lamb as it had been slain; as he was represented in
Vision to St. John, in the Text, when he appeared to open the Book sealed with
seven Seals, which is Part of the Glory of his Exaltation

5 and lastly. This admirable Conjunction of Excellencies will be manifest in
Christ's Acts at the last Judgment. He then (...) all other Times will appear
as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, in infinite Greatness and Majesty, when he
shall come in the Glory of his Father, with all the holy Angels, and the Earth
shall tremble before him, and the Hills shall melt. This is he, spoken of, Rev.
20. 11. that shall sit on a great white Throne, before whose Face, the Earth
and Heaven shall flee away. He will then appear in the most dreadful and
amazing Manner to the Wicked: The Devils tremble at the Thoughts of that
Appearance; and when it shall be, the Kings, and the great Men, and the rich
Men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty Men, and every Bond Man, and every
Free Man, shall hide themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains,
and shall cry to the Mountains and Rocks to fall on them, to hide them from the
Face and Wrath of the Lamb. And none can declare or conceive of the amazing
Manifestations of Wrath, in which he will then appear, toward these; or the
Trembling and Astonishment, the shrieking and gnashing of Teeth, with which
they shall stand before his Judgment Seat, and receive the terrible Sentence of
his Wrath.

And yet he will at the same Time, appear as a Lamb to his Saints. He will
receive them as Friends and Brethren, treating them with infinite Mildness and
Love: There shall be nothing in him terrible to them; but toward them, he will
cloth himself wholly with Sweetness and Endearment. The Church shall then be
admitted to him as his Bride: That shall be her Wedding Day: The Saints shall
all be sweetly invited to come with him, to inherit the Kingd^^^, and reign in
it with him, to all Eternity.

APPLICATION.
I. From this Doctrine we may learn one Reason why Christ is called by such a
Variety of Names, and h^ld for (...) under such a Variety of Representations in
Scripture. It Is the better to signify, and exhibit to us, that Variety of
Excellencies that meet together, and are conjoined in him. Many Appellations
are mentioned together in one Verse, Isai 9 6. For unto us a Child is born,
unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his Shoulder: And his
Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace. It shows a wonderful Conjunction of Excellencies,
that the same Person should be a Son, born and given, and yet be the
everlasting Father, without Beginning or End; that he should be a Child, and
yet be he whose Name is Counselor, and the mighty God; and well may his Name,
in whom such Things are conjoined, be called Wonderful.

By Reason of the same wonderful Conjunction, Christ is represented by a great
Variety of sensible Things, that are on some Account excellent. Thus in some
Places he is called a Sun, as Mal. 4. 2. in others a Star, Numb. 24. 17. And he
is especially represented by the Morning Star, as being that which excells all
other Stars in Brightness, and is the Forerunner of the Day, Rev. 22. 16. And
as in our. Text, he is compared to a Lion, in one Verse, and a Lamb in the
next, so sometimes he is compared to a Roe or a young Heart, another Creature
most diverse from a Lion. So in some Places he is called a Rock, in others he
is compared to a Pearl: In some Places he is called a Man of War, and the
Captain of our Salvation, in other Places he is represented as a Bridegroom. In
the second Chapter of Canticles the first Verse, he is compared to a Rose and
Lilly, that are sweet and beautiful Flowers; in the next Verse but one, he is
compared to a Tree, bearing sweet Fruit. In Isai. 53. 2. He is called a Root
out of a dry Ground; but elsewhere, instead of that, he is called the Tree of
Life, that grows (not in a dry or barren Ground, but) in the midst of the
Paradise of God, Rev. 2. 7.

II. Let the Consideration of this wonderful Meeting of diverse Excellencies in
Christ induce you to accept of him, and close with him as your Savior. As all
Manner of Excellencies meet in him, so there are concurring in him all Manner
of Arguments and Motives, to move you to choose him or your Savior, and every
Thing that tends to encourage poor Sinners to come and put their Trust in him:
His Fullness and All Sufficiency as a Savior, gloriously appear in that Variety
of Excellencies that has been spoken of.

Fallen Man is in a State of exceeding great Misery, and is helpless in it; he
is a poor weak Creature, like an Infant cast out in it is Blood, in the Day that
it is born: But Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; he is strong, though
we are weak; he has prevailed to do that for us, which no Creature else could
do. Fallen Man is a mean despicable Creature, a contemptible Worm; but Christ,
who has undertaken for us, is infinitely honorable and worthy. Fallen Man is
polluted, but Christ is infinitely holy: Fallen Man is hateful, but Christ is
infinitely lovely: Fallen Man is the Object of God's Indignation, but Christ is
infinitely dear to him: W^ have dreadfully provoked God, but Christ has
performed that Righteousness that is infinitely precious in God's Eyes.

And here is not only infinite Strength and infinite Worthiness, but infinite
Conde^cersion; and Love and Mercy, as great as Power and Dignity. If you are a
poor distressed Sinner, whose Heart is ready to sink for Fear that God never
will have Mercy on you, you need not be afraid to go to Christ, for Fear that
he is either unable or unwilling to help you: Here is a strong Foundation, and
an inexhaustible Treasure, to answer the Necessities of your poor Soul; and
here is infinite Grace and Gentleness to invite and embolden a poor unworthy
fearful Soul to (...) to it. If Christ accepts of you, you need not fear but
that you will be safe; for he is a strong Lion for your Defense: And if you
come, you need not fear but that you shall be accepted* (...) he is like a Lamb
to all that come to him* and receives them with infinite Grace and Tenderness.
It Is true he has awful Majesty; he is the great God, and is infinitely high
above you; but there is this to encourage and embolden the poor Sinner, that
Christ is Man as well as God; he is a Creature, as well as the Creator; and he
is the most humble and lowly in Heart of any Creature in Heaven or Earth. This
may well make the poor unworthy Creature bold in coming to him. You need not
hesitate one Moment; but may run to him, and cast your self upon him: You will
certainly be graciously and meekly received by him. Though he be a Lion, he
will only be a Lion to your Enemies; but he will be a Lamb to you. -- It could
not have been conceived, had it not been so in the Person of Christ, that there
could have been so much in any Savior, that is inviting, and tending to
encourage Sinners to trust in him. Whatever your Circumstances are, you need
not be afraid to come to such a Savior as this: Be you never so wicked a
Creature, here is Wor^^^ness enough: Be you never so poor, and mean, and
ignorant a Creature, there is no Danger of being despised; for though he be so
much greater than you, he is also immensely more humble than you. Any one of
you that is a Father or Mother, will not despise one of your own Children that
comes to you in Distress; much less Danger is there of Christ despising you, if
you in you^ Heart come to him.

Here let me a little expostulate with the poor, burdened, distressed Soul.

1. What are you afraid of, that you dare not venture your Soul upon Christ?
Are you afraid that he cannot save you, that he is not strong enough to conquer
the Enemies of your Soul? But how can you desire one stronger than the mighty
God? as Christ is called, Isai. 9 6. (...) need of greater than infinite
Strength? Are you afraid that he will not be willing to stoop so low, as to (...)
any gracious Notice of you? But (...), look on him, (...) he stood in the Ring
of Soldiers, exposing his blessed Face to be buffeted and spit upon, by them*
Behold him bound, (...) his Back uncovered to those that smote him! And behold
him hanging on the Cross! Do you think that he that had Condescension enough to
stoop to these Things, and that for his Crucifiers, w^ll be unwilling to accept
of you if you come to him? Or, are you afraid that if he does accept of you,
that God the Father will not accept of him for you? But consider, Will God reject
his own Son, in whom his infinite Delight is, and has been, from all Eternity,
and that is so united to him, that if he should reject him he would reject
himself?

2. What is there that you can desire should be in a Savior, that is not in
Christ? Or, Wherein should you desire a Savior should be otherwise than Christ
is? What Excellency is there wanting? What is there that is great or good? What
is there that is venerable or winning? What is there that is adorable or
endearing? Or, what can you think of that would be encouraging, that is not to
be found in the Person of Christ? Would you have your Savior to be great and
honorable, because you are not willing to be beholden to a mean Person? And,
is not Christ a Person honorable enough to be worthy that you should be
dependant on him? Is he not a Person high enough to be worthy to be appointed
to so honorable a Work as your Salvation? Would you not only have a Savior
that is of high Degree, but would you have him notwithstanding his Exaltation
and Dignity, to be made also of low Degree, that he might have Experience of
Afflictions and Trials, that he might learn by the Things that he has suffered,
to pity them that suffer and are tempted? And has not Christ been made low
enough for you? And has he not suffered enough? Would you not only have him
have Experience of the Afflictions you now suffer, but also of that amazing
Wrath that you fear hereafter, that he may know how to pity those that are in
Danger of it and afraid of it? This Christ has had Experience of, which
Experience gave him a greater Sense of it, a thousand Times, than you have, or
any Man living has. Would you have your Savior to be one that is near to God,
that so his Mediation might be prevalent with him? And can you desire him to be
nearer to God than Christ is, who is his only begotten Son, of the same Essence
with the Father? And would you not only have him near to God, but also near to
you, that you may have free Acce^s to him? And would you have him nearer to you
than to be in the same Nature, and not only so, but united to you by a
spiritual Union, so close as to be fitly represented (...) the Union of the
Wife to the Husband, of the Branch to the Vine, of the Member to the Head yea,
so as to be looked upon as one, and called one Spirit? For so he will be united
to you, if you accept of him. Would you have a Savior that has given some
great and extraordinary Testimony of Mercy and Love to Sinners, by some Thing
that he has done, as well as by what he says? And can you think, or conceive of
greater Things than Christ has done? Was it not a great Thing for him, who was
God, to take upon him human Nature, to be not only God, but Man thence forward
to all Eternity? But would you look upon Suffering for Sinners to be a yet
greater Testimony of Love to Sinners, than m^erly Doing, though it be never so
extraordinary a Thing that he has done? And would you desire that a Savior
should suffer more than Christ has suffered for Sinners? -- What is there
wanting, or what would you add if you could, to make him more fit to be your
Savior?

But further to induce you to accept of Christ as your Savior, consider two
Things particularly.

1. How much Christ appears as the Lamb of God, in his Invitations to you, to
come to him and trust in him. With what sweet Grace and Kindness does he from
Time to Time, call and invite you; as Prove. 8. 4 Unto you, O Men I call, and my
Voice is to the Sons of Men. And Isai. 55. 1, 2, 3. Ho every one that
thirsts, Come ye to the Waters, and he that has no Money, come ye, buy and
eat, yea, come buy Wine and Milk, without Money, and without Price. How
gracious is he here in inviting every one that thirsts, and in so repeating his
Invitation over and over, Come ye to the Waters, Come buy and eat, yea come!
and in declaring the Excellency of that Entertainment which he invites you to
accept of, Come buy Wine and Milk! and in assuring you that your Poverty, and
having nothing to pay for it, shall be no Objection* Come, he that has no
Money, come without Money, and without Price! And in the gracious Arguments and
Expostulations that he uses with you! As it follows, Wherefore do ye spend
Money for that which is not Bread, and your Labor for that which satisfies
not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your
Soul delight it self in Fatness. As much as to say, It Is altogether needless
for you to continue laboring and toiling for that which can never serve your
Turn, seeking Rest in the World, and in your own Righteousness; -- I have made
abundant Provision for you, of that which is really good, and will fully
satisfy your Desires, and answer your End, and stand ready to accept of you:
You need not be afraid; if you will come to me* I will engage to see all your
Wants supplied, and you made an happy Creature. As he promises in the third
Verse, Incline your Ear, and come unto me; Hear, and your Soul shall live; and
I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of David.
And so, Prove. 9 at the Beg. How gracious and sweet is the Invitation there!
Whosoever is simple, let him turn in hither; let you be never so poor, ignorant,
and blind a Creature, you shall be welcome. And in the following Words, Christ
sets forth the Provision that he has made for you, Come eat of my Bread, and
drink of the Wine which I have mingled. You are in a poor famishing State, and
have nothing wherewith to feed your perishing Soul; you have been seeking
something, but yet remain destitute; Hearken! how Christ calls you to eat of
his Bread, and to drink of the Wine that he has mingled! And how much like a
Lamb does Christ appear, in Matthew 11. 28, 29, 30. Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest: Take my Yoke upon you,
and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart, and ye shall find Rest to
your Souls. For my Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light. O thou poor distressed
Soul! Whoever thou art that art afraid that you never shall be saved, consider
that this that Christ mentions is your very Case, when he calls to them that
labor and are heavy laden! And how he repeatedly promises you Rest if you come
to him! In the 28th Verse he says, I will give you Rest; and in the 29th Verse,
Ye shall find Rest to your Souls. This is what you want! This is the Thing you
have been so long in Vain seeking after! O how sweet would Rest be to you, if
you could but obtain it! Come to Christ, and you shall obtain it. And hear how
Christ, to encourage you, represents himself as a Lamb! He tells you that he is
meek and lowly in Heart; and are you afraid to come such an one? And again,
Rev. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the Door and knock: If any Man hear my Voice,
and open the Door, I will come in to him, and I will sup with him, and he with
me. Christ condescends not only to call you to him; but he comes to you, he
comes to your Door, and there knocks. He might send an Officer, and seize you
as a Rebel and vile Malefactor; but instead of that, he comes and knocks at
your Door, and seeks that you would receive him into your House, as your Friend
and Savior. And he not only knocks at your Door, but he stands there waiting,
while you are backward and unwilling. And not only so, but he makes Promises
what he will do for you, if you will admit him, what Privileges he will admit
you to; he will sup with you, and you with him. And again, Rev. 22 16, 17. I am
the Root, and the Offspring of David, the bright and the Morning Star. And the
Spirit and the Bride say, Come: And let him that hears, say, Come; and let
him that is athirst, Come: And whosoever will let him come, and take of the
Water of Life freely. How does Christ here graciously set before you his own
winning attractive Excellency! And how does he condescend to declare to you,
not only his own Invitation, but the Invitation of the Spirit and the Bride, if
by any Means he might encourage you to come! And how does he invite every one
that will, that they may take of the Waters of Life freely, that they may take
it a free Gift, however precious it be, and though it be the Water of Life!

2. If you do come to Christ he will appear as a Lion, in his glorious Power
and Dominion, to defend you. All those Excellencies of his in which he appears
as a Lion, shall be yours, and (...) be employed for you, in your Defense, for
your Safety, and to promote your Glory; he will be as a Lion to fight against
your Enemies: He that touches you, or offends you, will provoke his Wrath, as
he that stirs up a Lion. -- Unless your Enemies can conquer this Lion, they
shall not be able to destroy or hurt you; unless they are stronger than he,
they shall not be able to hinder your Happiness. Isai. 31. 4. For thus has the
Lord spoken unto me, like as the Lion, and the young Lion, roaring on his Prey,
when a Multitude of Shepherds is called forth against him, he will not be
afraid of their Voice, nor abase himself (...) the Noise of them; so shall the
Lord of Hosts come down to fight for Mount Zion, and for the Hill thereof.

III. Let what has been said, be improved to induce you to love the Lord Jesus
Christ, and choose him for your Friend and Portion. As there is such an
admirable Meeting of diverse Excellencies in Christ, so there is every Thing in
him to render him worthy of your Love and Choice, and to win and engage it.
Whatsoever there is, or can be, that is desirable to be in a Friend, is in
Christ, and that to the highest Degree that can be desired.

Would you choose a Friend that is a Person of great Dignity? -- It is a Thing
taking with Men to have those for their Friends that are much above them;
because they look upon themselves honored by the Friendship of such. Thus how
taking would it be with an inferior Maid, to be the Object of the dear Love of
some great and excellent Prince. But Christ is infinitely above you, and above
all the Princes of the Earth; for he is the King of Kings. -- So honorable a
Person as this offers himself to you, in the nearest and dearest Friendship.

And would you choose to have a Friend not only great but good? -- In Christ
infinite Greatness, and infinite Goodness meet together, and receive Luster and
Glory one from another. His Greatness is rendered lovely by his Goodness. The
greater any one is without Goodness, so much the greater Evil; but when
infinite Goodness is joined with Greatness, it renders it a glorious and
adorable Greatness. So on the other Hand, his infinite Goodness receives Luster
from his Greatness. He that is of great Understanding and Ability, and is
withal of a good and excellent Disposition, is deservedly more esteemed, than a
lower and lesser Being, with the same kind Inclination and Good Will. Indeed
Goodness is excellent in whatever Subject it be found; it is Beauty and
Excellency it self, and renders all excellent that are possessed of it; and yet
more excellent when joined with Greatness; as the very same excellent Qualities
of Gold, do render the Body in which they are inherent more precious, and of
greater Value, when joined with greater, than when with lesser Dimensions. And
how glorious is the Sight, to see him who is the great Creator and supreme Lord
of Heaven and Earth, full of Condescension, and tender Pity and Mercy, toward
the mean and unworthy! His almighty Power, and infinite Majesty and Self
Sufficiency render his exceeding Love and Grace the more surprising. And how do
his Condescension and Compassions endear his Majesty, Power, and Dominion, and
render those Attributes pleasant, that would otherwise be only terrible! Would
you not desire that your Friend, though great and honorable, should be of such
Condescension and Grace, and so to have the Way opened to free Access to him,
that his Exaltation above you might not hinder your free Enjoyment of his
Friendship?

And would you choose, not only, that the infinite Greatness and Majesty of
your Friend should be as it were mollified and sweetened with Condescension and
Grace; but would you also desire to have your Friend in your own Nature, that
he might be brought nearer to you? Would you choose a Friend far above you, and
yet as it were upon a Level with you too? (Though it be taking with Men to have
a near and dear Friend of superior Dignity, yet there is also an Inclination in
them to have their Friend a Sharer with them in Circumstances.) Thus is Christ.
Though he be the great God, yet (...) himself down to be upon a Level (...)
you, (...) become Man as you are, that he might not only be your Lord, but your
Brother, and that he might be the more fit to be a Companion for such a Worm of
the Dust. -- This is one End of Christ's taking upon him Man's Nature, that his
People might be under Advantages for a more familiar Converse with him, than
the infinite Distance of the divine Nature would allow of. And upon this
Account the Church longed for Christ's Incarnation, Cant. 8. 1. O thou that
were my Brother, that s^cked the Breasts of my Mother; when I should find thee
without, I would kiss thee; yea, I should not be despised. One Design of God in
the Gospel, is to bring us to make God the Object of our undivided Respect,
that he may engross our Regard every Way, that whatever natural Inclination
there is in our Souls, he may be the Center of it; that God may be all in all*
But there is an Inclination in the Creature, not only to the Adoration of a
Lord and Sovereign, but to Complacence in some one as a Friend, to love and
delight in some one that may be conversed with as a Compa^^ion. And Virtue and
Holiness don't destroy or weaken this Inclination of our Nature. But so has
God contrived in the Affair of our Redemption, that a divine Person may be the
Object even of this Inclination of our Nature. And in order hereto, such an one
is come down to us, and has taken our Nature, and is become one of us, and
calls himself our Friend, Brother, and Companion. Psalm 122. 8. For my Brethren
and Companions Sake, will I now say, Peace be within thee.

But, is it not enough to invite and encourage to free Access to a Friend so
great and high, that he is one of infinite condescending Grace, and also has
taken your own Nature, and is become Man? But would you further to embolden and
win you, have him a Man of wonderful Meekness and Humility? Why such an one is
Christ! He is not only become Man for you, but far the meekest and most humble
of all Men, the greatest Instance of these sweet Virtues, that ever was, or
will be. And besides these, he has all other human Excellencies, in the highest
Perfection. These indeed are no proper Addition to his divine Excellencies.
Christ has no more Excellency in his Person, since his Incarnation, than he had
before; for divine Excellency is infinite, and cannot be added to: Yet his human
Excellencies are additional Manifestations of his Glory and Excellency to us,
and are additional Recommendations of him to our Esteem and Love, who are of
finite Comprehension. Though his human Excellencies are but Communications and
Reflections of his divine; and though this Light, as reflected, falls
infinitely short of the divine Fountain of Light; in its immediate Glory; yet
the Reflection shines not without its proper Advantages, as presented to our
View and Affection. As the Glory of Christ appears in the Qualifications of his
human Nature, it appears to us in Excellencies that are of our own Kind, and
are exercised in our own Way and Manner, and so, in some Respects, are
peculiarly sitted to invite our Acquaintance, and draw our Affection. The Glory
of Christ as it appears in his Divinity, though it be far brighter, yet does i^
also more dazzle our Eyes, and exceeds the Strength o^ Comprehension of our
Sight: But as it shines in the human Excellencies of Christ, it is brought more
to a Level with our Conceptions, and Sutableness to our Nature and Manner, yet
retaining a Semblance of the same divine Beauty, and a Savor of the same
divine Sweetness But as both divine and human Excellencies meet together in
Christ, they set off and recommend each other to us. It is what tends to endear
the divine and infinite Majesty and Holiness of Christ to us, that these are
Attributes of a Person that is in our Nature, that is one of us, that is become
our Brother, and is the meekest and humblest of Men; it encourages us to look
upon these divine Perfections, however high and great, yet as what we have some
near Concern in, and more of a Right to, and Liberty freely to enjoy. And on
the other Hand, how much more glorious and surprising do the Meekness, the
Humility, Obedience, and Resignation, and other human Excellencies of Christ
appear, when we consider that they are in so great a Person, as the eternal Son
of God, the Lord of Heaven and Earth!

By your choosing Christ for your Friend and (...) you will obtain these two
infinite Benefits.

1. Christ will give himself to you, with all those various Excellencies that
meet in him, to your full and everlasting Enjoyment. He will ever after treat
you as his dear Friend; and you shall e're long be where he is, and shall
behold his Glory, and shall dwell with him, in most free and intimate Communion
and Enjoyment.

When the Saints get to Heaven, they shall not merely see Christ, and have to
do with him as Subjects and Servants with a glorious and gracious Lord and
Sovereign, but Christ will entertain them as Friends and Brethren. This we may
learn from the Manner of Christ's conversing with his Disciples here on Earth:
Though he was their Sovereign Lord, and did not refuse, but required, their
supreme Respect and Adoration, yet he did not treat them as earthly Sovereigns
are wont to do their Subjects; he did not keep them at an awful Distance; but
all along conversed with them with the most friendly Familiarity, as a Father
amongst a Company of Children, yea, as with Brethren. So he did with the
twelve, and so he did with Mary, Martha and Lazarus He told his Disciples, that
he did not call them Servants, but Friends, and we read of one of them that
leaned on his Bosom. And doubtless he will not treat his Disciples with less
Freedom and Endearment in Heaven: He will not keep them at a greater Distance for
his being in a State of Exaltation; but he will rather take them into a State
of Exaltation with him. This will be the Improvement Christ will make of his
own Glory, to make his beloved Friends Partakers with him, to glorify them in
his Glory, as he says to his Father, Joh. 17 22, 23. And the Glory which thou
have given (...), have I give them, that they may be one, even as we are one, I
in them, etc. We are to consider, that though Christ is greatly exalted, yet he
is exalted not as a private Person, for himself only, but as his People's Head;
he (...) exalted in their Name, and upon their Account, as the First Fruits,
and as representing the whole Harvest. (...) not exalted that he may be at a
greater Distance from them, but that they may be exalted with him. The
Exaltation and Honor of the Head is not to make a greater Distance between the
Head and the Members; but the Members have the same Relation and Union with the
Head they had before, and are honored with the Head; and instead of the
Distance being greater, the Union shall be nearer, and more perfect. When
Believers get to Heaven, Christ will conform them to himself; as he is set down
in his Father's Throne, so they shall sit down with him on his Throne, and
shall in their Measure be made like him.

When Christ was going to Heaven, he comforted his Disciples with that, that
after a while, he would come again, and take them to himself, that they might
be with him again. And we are not to suppose that when the Disciples got to
Heaven, they found him keeping a greater Distance, than he used to do. No,
doubtless, he embraced them as Friends, and welcomed them to his, and their,
Father's House, and to his, and their, Glory. They that had been his Friends in
this World, that had been together with him here, and had together partook of
Sorrows and Troubles, are now welcomed by him to Rest, and to partake of Glory
with him. He took them and led them into his Chambers, and showed them all h^s
Glory; as he prayed, John 17. 24 Father, I will, that they also whom thou have
given me, be with me, that they may behold the Glory which thou have given me.
And he led them to his living Fountains of Waters, and made them partake of his
Delights; as he prays, John 17. 13. (...) Joy may be fulfilled in themselves.
And set them down with him at his Table in his Kingdom, and made them partake
with him of his Dainties, according to his Promise, Luke 22. 30. And led them
into his Banqueting House, and made them to drink new Wine with him in the
Kingdom of his heavenly Father; as he foretold them, when he instituted the
Lord's Supper; Matthew. 26. 2^.

Yea, the Saints Conversation with Christ in Heaven, shall not only be as
intimate, and their Access to him as free, as of the Disciples on Earth* but in
many Respects, much more so: for in Heaven, that vital Union shall be perfect,
which is exceeding imperfect here. While the Saints are in this World, there
are great Remains of Sin and Darkness, to separate or disunite them from
Christ; which shall then all be removed. This is not a Time for that full
Acquaintance, and those glorious Manifestations of Love, which Christ d^signs
for his People hereafter; which seems to be sign^fi^d by Christ's Speech to
Mary Magdalene, when ready to embrace him, when ^he met him after his
Resurrection* John 20. 17 Jesus ^aith unto her, touch me not, for I am not yet
ascended to my Father. --

When the Saints shall see Christ's Glory and Exaltation in Heaven, it will
indeed possess their Hearts with the greater Admiration and ad^^ing Respect,
but will not (...) into any Separation, but will serve only to heighten their
Surprise and Joy, when they find Christ condescending to admit them to such
intimate Access, and so freely and fully communicating himself to them*

So that if we choose Christ for our Friend and Portion, we shall hereafter be
so received to him, that there shall be nothing to hinder the fullest Enjoyment
of him, to the satisfying the utmost Cravings of our Souls. We may take our
full Swing at gratifying our spiritual Appetite after these holy Pleasures.
Christ will then say, as in Cant 5. 1 Eat. O Friends* Drink, yea drink
abundantly, O Beloved And this shall be our Entertainment to all Eternity!
There shall never be any End of this Happiness, or any Thing to in^e^rupt our
Enjoyment of it, or in the least to molest us in it!

2 By your being united to Christ, you will have a more glorious Union with,
and Enjoyment of, God the Father, than otherwise could be. For hereby the
Saints Relation to God becomes much nearer; they are the Children of God in an
higher Manner, than otherwise could be. For being Members of God's (...)
natural Son, th^^ are in a Sort Partakers of his Relation to the Father: They
are not only Sons of God by Regeneration, but by a Kind of Communion in the
So^^h^p of the eternal Son. This seems to be intended, Gal. 4 4, 5, 6. God sent
forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that are
under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. And because ye are
Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying Abba,
Father. -- The Church is the Daughter of God, not only as he has begotten her
by his Word and Spirit, but as the is the Spouse of his eternal Son.

So we being Members of the Son, are Partakers in our Measure, of the Father's
Love to the Son, and Complacence in him. John 17. 23. I in them, and thou in
me, -- Thou have loved them, as thou have loved me. And Verse 26. That the Love
wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them. And Chap 16. 27. The Father
himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out
from God. So we shall, according to our Capacities, be Partakers of the Son's
Enjoyment of God, and have his Joy fulfilled in our selves, John 17. 13. And by
this Means, we shall come to an immensely higher, more intimate, and full
Enjoyment of God, than otherwise could have been. For there is doubtless an
infinite Intimacy between the Father and the Son; which is expressed by his
being in the Bosom of the Father. And Saints being in him, shall, in their
Measure and Manner, partake with him in it, and of the Blessedness of it.

And thus is the Affair of our Redemption ordered, that thereby we are brought
to an immensely more exalted Kind of Union with God, and Enjoyment of him, both
the Father and the Son, than otherwise could have been. For Christ being united
to the human Nature, we have Advantage for a more free and full Enjoyment of
him, than we could have had if he had remained only in the divine Nature. So
again, we being united to a divine Person, as his Members, can have a more
intimate Union and Intercourse with God the Father, who is (...) in the divine
Nature, than otherwise could be* Christ who is a divine Person, by taking on
him our Nature, d^scends from the infinite Distance and Height above us, and is
brought nigh^ to us; whereby we have Advantage for the full Enjoyment of him.
And, on the other Hand, we, by being in Christ a divine Person, do as it were
ascend up to God, through the infinite Distance, and have hereby Advantage for
the full Enjoyment of him also.

This was the Design of Christ, to bring it to pass, that He, and his Father,
and his People, might all be united in one. John 17. 21, 22, 23. That they all
may be one; as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one
in us; that the World may believe that thou have sent me. And the Glory which
thou have given me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are
one; I in them, and thou in me; that they may be made Perfect in one. Christ
has brought it to pass, that those that the Father has given him, should be
brought into the Household of God; that He, and his Father, and his People,
should be as it were one Society, one Family; that the Church should be as it
were admitted into the Society of the blessed Trinity.

FINIS.
A Faithful NARRATIVE OF THE Surprising Work of GOD IN THE CONVERSION OF Many
HUNDRED SOULS in Northampton, and the Neighboring Towns and Villages of the
County of Hampshire, in the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.

In a LETTER to the Reverend Dr. BENJAMIN COLMAN, of Boston.

Written by the Revd. Mr. EDWARDS, Minister of Northampton, Nov. 6. 1736.

Published with a Large PREFACE by the Rev. Dr. WATTS and Dr. GUYSE of London:

To which a Shorter is added by Some of the Reverend Ministers of BOSTON.

Together with an ATTESTATION from Some of the Reverend Ministers of Hampshire.

The THIRD EDITION.

BOSTON: N. E PrintedandSold by S. KNEELAND T. GREEN, over against the Prison
in Queen Street. 1738.

THE PREFACE*
THE Friendly Correspondence which we maintain with our Brethren of New
England, gives us now and then the Pleasure of hearing some remarkable
Instances of divine Grace in the Conversion of Sinners, and some eminent
Examples of Piety in that American Part of the World. But never did we hear or
read, since the first Ages of Christianity, any Event of this Kind so
surprising as the present Narrative has set before us. The Revd and worthy Dr.
Colman of Boston had given us some short Intimations of it in his Letters; and
upon our Request of a more large and particular Account, Mr. Edwards, the happy
and successful Minister of Northampton, which was one of the chief Scenes of
these Wonders, drew up this History in an Epistle to Dr Colman.

There were some useful Sermons of the Venerable and Aged Mr William Williams
published lately in New England, which were Preached in that Part of the
Country during this Season of the glorious Work of God in the Conversion of
Men; to which Dr. Colman (...) a most judicious and accurate Abridgement of
this Epistl^: And a little after, he sent the Original to our Hands, to be
communicated to the World under our Care here in London.

We are abundantly satisfied of the Truth of this Narrative, not only from the
pious Character of the Writer, but from the concurrent Testimony of many ^her
Persons in New England; for this Thing was not (...) in a Corner. There is a
Spo^ of Ground, as we are (...) informed, wherein there are twelve or fourteen
Towns and Villages, chiefly situate in the County of Hampshire near the Banks
of the River of Connecticut, within the Compass of Thirty Miles, wherein it
pleased God two Years ago to display his free and sovereign Mercy in the
Conversion of a great Multitude of Souls in a short Space of Time, turning them
from a formal, cold and careless Profession of Christianity to the lively
Exercise of every Christian Grace, and the powerful Practice of our holy
Religion. The great God has seemed to act over again the Miracle of Gideon's
Fleece, which was plentifully watered with the Dew of Heaven, while the rest of
the Earth round about it was dry, and had no such remarkable Blessing.

There has been a great and just Complaint for many Years among the Ministers
and Churches in Old England, and in New, (except about the Time of the late
Earthquake there) that the Work of Conversion goes on very slowly, that the
Spirit of God in his saving Influences is much withdrawn from the Ministrations
of his Word, and there are few that receive the Report of the Gospel, with any
eminent Success upon their Hearts. But as the Gospel is the same divine
Instrument of Grace still, as ever it was in the Days of the Apostles, so our
ascended Savior now and then takes a special Occasion to manifest the Divinity
of this Gospel by a plentiful Effusion of his Spirit where it is preached: then
Sinners are turned into Saints in Numbers, and there is a new Face of Things
spread over a Town or Country: The Wilderness and the solitary Places are glad,
the Desert rejoices and blossoms as the Rose; and surely concerning this
Instance we may add, that they have seen the Glory of the Lord there, and the
Excellency of our God, they have seen the Out goings of God our King in his
Sanctuary.

Certainly it becomes us, who profess the Religion of Christ, to take Notice of
such astonishing Exercises of his Power and Mercy, and give him the Glory which
is due, when he begins to accomplish any of his Promises concerning the latter
Days: and it gives us further Encouragement to pray, and wait, and hope for the
like Display of his Power in the midst of us. The Hand of God is not shortened
that it cannot save, but we have Reason to fear that our Iniquities, our
Coldness in Religion, and the general Carnality of our Spirits, have raised a
Wall of Separation between God and us: And we may add, the Pride and perverse
Humor of Infidelity, Degeneracy and Apostasy from the Christian Faith, which
have of late Years broken out amongst us, seem to have provoked the Spirit of
Christ to absent himself much from our Nation. Return, O Lord, and visit thy
Churches, and revive thine own Work in the midst of us.

From such blessed Instances of the Success of the Gospel, as appear in this
Narrative, we may learn much of the Way of the Spirit of God in his Dealing
with the Souls of Men, in order to Convince Sinners, and restore them to his
Favor and his Image by Jesus Christ, his Son. We acknowledge that some
particular Appearances in the Work of Conversion among Men may be occasioned by
the Ministry which they sit under, whether it be of a more or less Evangelical
Strain, whether it be more severe and affrighting, or more gentle and
Persuasive. But wheresoever God works with Power for Salvation upon the Minds
of Men, there will be some Discoveries of a Sense of Sin, of the Danger of the
Wrath of God, of the All sufficiency of his Son Jesus, to ^elieve us under all
our Spiritual Wants and Distresses, and a hearty Consent of Soul to receive him
in the various Offices of Grace, wherein he is set forth in the holy
Scriptures. And if our Readers had Opportunity (as we have had) to peruse
several of the Sermons which were Preached during this glorious Season, we
should find that it is the common plain Protestant Doctrine of the Reformation,
without stretching toward the Antinomians on the one Side, or the Arminians on
the other, that the Spirit of God has been pleased to honor with such
illustrious Success.

We are taught also by this happy Event how easy it will be for our blessed
Lord to make a full Accomplishment of all his Predictions concerning his
Kingdom, and to spread his Dominion from Sea to Sea, through all the Nations of
the Earth. We see how easy it is for him with one Turn of his Hand, with one
Word of his Mouth, to awaken whole Countries of stupid and sleeping Sinners,
and kindle divine Life in their Souls. The heavenly Influence shall run from
door to door, filling the Hearts and Lips of every Inhabitant with importunate
Inquiries, What shall we do to be saved? And ^ow shall we escape the Wrath to
come? And the Name of Christ the Savior shall diffuse it self like a rich and
vi^al Perfume to Multitudes that were ready to sink and perish under the
painful Sense of their own Guilt and Danger. Salvation shall spread through all
the Tribes and Ranks of Mankind, as the Lightning from Heaven in a few Moments
would communicate a living Flame through ten thousand Lamps or Torches placed in
a proper Situation and Neighborhood. Thus a Nation shall be born in a Day when
our Redeemer pi^ases, and his faithful and obedient Subjects shall become as
numerous as the Spires of Grass in a Meadow newly mown, and refreshed with the
Showers of Heaven. But the Pleasure of this agreeable Hint bears the Mind away
from our Theme.

Let us return to the present Narrative. It Is worthy of our Observation, that
this great and surprising Work does not seem to have taken i^ Rise from any
sudden and distre^^^ng Calamity or public Terror that might universally
impress the Minds of a People: Here was no Storm, no Earthquake, no Inundation
of Water, no Desolation by Fire, no Pestilence or any other sweeping Distemper,
nor any cruel Invasion by their Indian Neighbors, that might force the
Inhabitants into a serious Thoughtfulness, and a religious Temper by the Fears
of approaching Death and Judgment. Such Scenes as these have sometimes been
made happily effectual to awaken Sinners in Zion, and the formal Professor and
the Hypocrite have been terrified with the Thoughts of divine Wrath breaking in
upon them, Who shall dwell with everlasting Burrings? But in the present Case
the immediate Hand of God in the Work of his Spirit appears much more evident,
because cause there is no such awful and threatening Providence attending it.

It is worthy also of our further Notice, that when many profane Sinners, and
formal Professors of Religion have been affrighted out of their present
Carelessness and Stupidity by some astonishing Terrors approaching them, those
religious Appearances have not been so durable, nor the real Change of Heart so
thoroughly effected: Many of these sort of sudden Converts have dropped their
religious Concerns in a great Measure when their Fears of the threatening
Calamity are vanished. But it is a blessed Confirmation of the Truth of this
present Work of Grace, that the Persons who were divinely wrought upon in this
Season continue still to profess serious Religion, and to practice it without
returning to their former Follies.

It may not be amiss in this Place to take Notice, that a very surprising and
threatening Providence has this last Year attended the People of Northampton,
among whom this Work of divine Grace was so remarkable: Which Providence at
first might have been construed by the unthinking World to be a signal Token of
God's Displeasure against that Town, or a Judgment from Heaven upon the People;
but soon afterward, like Paul's shaking the Viper off from his Hand, it
discovered the astonishing Care and Goodness of God expressed toward a Place
where such a Multitude of his young Converts were assembled: Nor can we give a
better Account of it than in the Language of this very Gentleman, the Revd Mr.
Edwards, Minister of that Town, wh^ wrote the following Letter, which was
published in New England.

Northampton, March 19th. 1737.
WE in this Town, were the last Lord's Day the Spectators, and many of us the
Subjects, of one of the most amazing Instances of divine Preservation, that
perhaps was ever known in the Land: Our Meeting House is old and deca^'d, so
that we have been for some time building a new one, which ^s yet* unfinished:
It has been observed of late, that the House that we have hitherto met in has
gradually spread at bottom, the Cells and Walls giving way, especially in the
Foreside, by reason of the Weight of Timber at top, pressing on the Braces that
are inserted into the Posts and Beams of the House. It has so done more than
ordinarily this Spring; which seems to have been occasioned by the heaving of
the Ground by the extreme Frosts of the Winter past, and its now settling again
on that side which is next the Sun, by the Thaws of the Spring: By this means
the under-pinning has been considerably disordered, which People were not
sensible of, till the ends of the Joysts which bore up the front Gallery, by
the Walls giving way, were drawn off from the Girts on which they rested; so
that in the midst of the public Exercise in the Forenoon, soon after the
beginning of Sermon, the whole Gallery full of People, with all the Seats and
Timber suddenly and without any Warning sunk, and fell down, with most amazing
noise upon the Heads of those that sat under, to the astonishment of the
Congregation, the House being filled with dolorous, Shrieking and Crying; and
nothing else was expected than to find many People dead, and dashed to pieces.

The Gallery in falling seemed to break and sink first in the middle; so that
those who were upon it were thrown together in heaps before the front Door: But
the whole was so sudden, that many of them that felt knew nothing in the time
of it what it was that had befallen them; and others in the Congregation knew
not what it was that had happened with so great a Noise (...) many thought it
had been an amazing Clap of Thunder: The falling Gallery seemed to be broken
all to pieces before it got down; so that some that fell with it, as well as
those that were under, were buried in the Ruins, and were found pressed under
heavy Loads of Timber, and could do nothing to help themselves.

But so mysteriously and wonderfully did it come to pass, that every Life was
preserved; and though many were greatly bruised, and their Flesh torn, yet there
is not* as I can understand, one ^one broke, or so much as put out of Joint
among them all: Some that were thought to be almost dead at first, are greatly
recovered; and but one young Woman seems yet to remain in dangerous
Circumstances, by an inward Hurt in her Breast: but of late there appears more
Hope of her Recovery.

There is none can give any Account, or conceive by what Means it should come
to pass, that Peoples Lives and Limbs should be thus preserved, when so great a
Multitude were thus imminently exposed: It looked as though it was impossible it
should be otherwise, thanthat great Numbers should instantly he cr^sh^d to
death or dashed in pieces: It seems unreasonable to ascribe it to any thing
else, but the Care of Providence in disposing the Motions of every Stick of
Timber, and the precise Place of Safety where every one should sit, and fall,
when none were in any Capacity to take care for their own Preservation. The
Preservation seems to be most wonderful, with Respect to the Women, and
Children that were in the middle Alley, under the Gallery, where it came down
first, and with greatest Force, and where was nothing to break the Force of the
falling Weight.

Such an Event may be a sufficient Argument of a Divine Providence over the
Lives of Men. We thought ourselves called to set apart a Day to be spent in the
solemn Worship of God, so humble ourselves under such a Rebuke of God upon us
in the Time of public Service in God's House by so dangro^s and surprising an
Accident; and to praise his Name for so wonderful, and as it were Miraculous a
Preservation; and the last Wednesday was kept by us to that End: And a Mercy in
which the Hand of God is so remarkably evident, may be well worthy to effect
the Hearts of all that hear it.

Thus far the Letter.

But it is time to conclude our Preface. If there should be any thing found in
this Narrative of the surprising Conversion of such Numbers of Souls, where the
Sentiments or the Style of the Relater, or his Inferences from Matters of Fact,
do not appear so agreeable to every Reader, we hope it will have no unhappy
influence to discourage the Belief of this glorious Event. We must allow every
Writer his own Way; and must allow him to choose what particular Instances he
would select, from the numerous Cases which came before him. And though he might
have chosen others perhaps, of more significancy in the eye of the World, th^n
the Woman and the Child, whose Experiences he relates at large; yet it is
evident he chose that of the Woman, because she was dead, and she is thereby
incapable of knowing any Honors or Reproaches on this Account. And as for the
Child, those who were present, and saw and heard such a remarkable and lasting
Change, on one so every young, must necessarily receive a stronger Impression
from it, and a more agreeable Surprise than the mere Narration of it can
communicate to others at a distance. Childrens Language always loses its
striking Beauties at second-hand.

Upon the whole, we declare our Opinion, that this Account of such an
extraordinary and illustrious Appearance of divine Grace in the Conversion of
Sinners, is very like by the Blessing of God to have a happy Effect, toward
the Honor and Enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ.

May the worthy Writer, of this Epistle, and all those his Revd Brethren in the
Ministry, who have been honored in this excellent and important Service, go on
to see their Labors crowned with daily and persevering Success! May the
numerous Subjects of this surprising Work hold fast what they have received,
and increase in every Christian Grace and Blessing! May a plentiful Effusion of
the blessed Spirit, also, descend on the British Isles, and all their American
Plantations, to renew the Face of Religion there! And we entreat our Readers in
both Englands, to join with us in our hearty Addresses to the Throne of Grace,
that this wonderful Discovery of the hand of God in saving Sinners, may
encourage our Faith and Hope of the Accomplishment of all his Words of Grace,
which are written in the Old Testament and in the New, concerning the large
Extent of this Salvation in the Latter Days of the World. Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, and spread thy Dominion through all the Ends of the Earth, Amen.

London, October 12, 1737. ISAAC WATTS. JOHN GUYSE.


PREFACE.
WHEN the Disciples of our glorious Lord were filled with Sorrow upon the heavy
Tidings of his Departure from them. He cheered their drooping Spirits with that
good Word, John 16. 7. Nevertheless, I tell you the Truth; it is expedient for
you that I go away: For if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you;
but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And after his Ascension, he
fulfilled this great and precious Promise by the extraordinary Effusion of his
Spirit, under whose Conduct and Influence, the Apostles went forth, and
preached every where, the Lord working with them: so that when we read the Acts
of the Apostles, we must say; Not by Might, nor by Power, but by the Spirit of
the Lord of Hosts. And though, soon after the first Days of Christianity, there
was a dreadful Apostasy, yet God did not wholly take his Spirit from his
People; but raised up faithful Witnesses to testify against the Heresies and
Corruptions of the Times wherein they lived. And since Antichrist that wicked
One has been revealed, our Lord, according to his Word, has been gradually
consuming him with the Spirit of his Mouth, in the Reformation.

Nor have we in these remote Corners of the Earth, where Satan had his Seat
from Time immemorial, been lest without a Witness of the divine Power and
Grace. Very remarkable was the Work of God's Spirit stirring up our Fore
Fathers to leave a pleasant Land, and transport themselves over a vast Ocean
into this then howling Wilderness; that they might enjoy Communion with Christ
in the Purity of his Ordinances, and leave their Children in the quiet
Possession of the Blessings of his Kingdom And God was eminently present with
them by his Word and Spirit.

Yea, we need look no higher than our own Times, to find abundant Occasion to
celebrate the wonderful Works of God. Thus when God arose and shook the Earth.
October 29. Anno, 1727.
his loud Call to us in that amazing Providence was followed, so far as Man can
judge, with the still Voice of his Spirit, in which He was present to awaken
many and bring them to say trembling, What must we do to be saved? Yea, as we
hope. to turn not a few from Sin to God in a thorough Conversion. But when the
Bitterness of Death was past, much the greater Part of those whom God's Terrors
affrighted, gave sad Occasion to remember those Words, Psalm 78. 34. -- 36 When
he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned and enquired early after
God. And they remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their
Redeemer. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their Mouths, and they lied
unto him with their Tongues. And there has since been great Reason to complain
of our speedy Return to our former Sins, notwithstanding some Hopes given of a
more general Reformation. Yea when more lately, it pleased God to visit many of
our Towns with a very mortal Distemper, to that Time in a Manner unknown;
whereby great Numbers of our hopeful Children and Youth have been cut off, many
very suddenly, and with Circumstances exceedingly distressing and awful: Yet
alas! We have not generally seen, nor duly considered God's Hand stretched out
against us; but have given him Reason to complain, as of his ancient People,
Why should ye be Stricken any more, ye will revolt more and more And
accordingly His Anger is not turned away; but his Hand is stretched out still.
A plain Proof of this awful Truth, that the most awakening Dispensations can no
farther humble and do us good, than as it pleases God to accompany them with
his Spirit, and so command his Blessing upon them. But when the Almighty will
work by such Means, or with u^^ them, who can hinder him? He acts with
sovereign Liberty and irresistible Power. John 3. 8. The Wind blows where it
lifts, and thou hear the Sound thereof, but can not tell whence it
comes, and whither it goes: so is every one that is born of the Spirit. Such
was his wonderful Work at Northampton, and the neighboring Towns in the County
of Hampshire, and some other Places. The Holy Spirit was in a plentiful and
extraordinary Manner poured out on Persons of every Age and Condition, without
such remarkable Providence going before to awaken them; as the Dew falls in
the Night, and yet the Effects appeared as the Light which goes forth. So that
we might well admiring say, What has God wrought! Great was the Number of them
who published the Wonders of the Divine Power and Grace; declaring with
Humility, what God had done for their Souls. And others who went among them,
acknowleg'd that the Work exceeded the Fame of it.

Now the psalmist observes that God has made his wonderful Works to be
remembered. We therefore apprehend that our Reverend Brother has done well to
record and publish this surprising Work of God; and the Fidelity of his Account
would not have been at all doubted of by us, though there had not been the
concurrent Testimony of Others to it. It is also a Pleasure to us to hear what
Acceptance the following Narrative has found in the other England, where it has
had two Impressions already, and been honored with a recommendatory Preface,
by two Divines of eminent Note in London, viz. the Rev. Dr. Watts, and Dr.
Guyse: after whom it may seem Presumption in us to attempt any Thing of this
Kind. But it having been though it proper to Reprint this Letter here, and disperse
it among our People: We Thankfully embrace this Opportunity to praise the most
High, for the exceeding Riches of his Grace, and earnestly to recommend this
Epistle to the diligent Reading and attentive Consideration of all into whose
Hands these shall come. He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says
unto the Churches. And indeed the particular and distinct Account which the
Author has given of God's Dealings with the Souls of Men, at this remarkable
Season, in the variety of Cases then set before him, and many of his
Observations thereupon, we apprehend are written with that Judgment and Skill
in divine Things, as declare him to be a Scribe well instructed unto the
Kingdom of Heaven; and we judge may be very useful to Ministers in leading
weary Souls to Christ for Rest, and for the Direction and Encouragement of all
under the like Operations of the Holy Spirit. -- Yea, as the Author observes,
There is no one Thing I know of, that God has made such a Means of promoting
his Work among us as the News of others Conversion --; We hope that the further
Spreading of this Narrative may, by the Divine Blessing, still promote the
Conversion of Souls, and quicken God's Children to labor after the clearer
Evidences of their Adoption and to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance. And
as this wonderful Work may be considered as an Earnest of what God will do
toward the Close of the Gospel Day, it affords great Encouragement to our
Faith and Prayer in pleading those Promises which relate to the glorious Extent
and Flourishing of the Kingdom of Christ upon Earth, and have not yet had their
full and final Accomplishment. And surely the very threatening Degeneracy of our
Times calls aloud to us all, to be earnest in Prayer for this most needed
Blessing, the plentiful Effusion of the Spirit of Truth and Holiness Nor ought
the Sense of our own Unworthiness discourage us when we go to our heavenly
Father in the Name of his dear Son, who has purchased and received this great
Gift for his People, and says to us, Luke 11 9 -- 13. Ask and it shall be given
you -- If ye then, being Evil, know how to give good Gifts unto your Children,
how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask
him.

But we must draw to a Close. May the worthy Author be restored to Health, and
long continues to be a rich Blessing to his People! May he still see the
Pleasure of the Lord prospering in his Hand; and in particular, may the Spirit
of Grace accompany this pious Endeavor to spread the Savor of the Knowledge of
Christ, for the everlasting Advantage of many! May it please God to r^v^ue his
Work throughout this Land; and may all the Ends of the Earth see his Salvation!

Boston, November. 4th. 1738. Joseph Sewall Thomas Prince John Webb William
Cooper.

P. S. Since the writing this Preface, One of us has received a Letter from a
Reverend and very worthy Minister in Glas^ow, in which is the following Passage;

"The Friends of serious Religion here were much refreshed with a printed
Account of the extraordinary Success of the Gospel, of late, in some Parts of
New England. If you can favor me with more particular Accounts of those joyful
Events, when you have Opportunity of writing to me, it will much oblige me."



To the REVEREND Benjamin Colman, D. D. Pastor of a Church in Boston,
Westfield, October. 11 1738. SIR,
IN your Letter of August 19 you inform us, that the Rev. Dr. Watts and Dr.
Guyse desire that some other Ministers, who were Eye and Ear Witnesses to some
of those numerous Conversions in the other Towns about Northampton, would
Attest unto what the Rev. Mr. Edwards has written of them.

We take this Opportunity to assure you that the Account Mr. Edwards has given
in his Narrative of our several Towns or Parishes is true; and that much more
of the like Nature might have been added with Respect to some of them.

We are, Reverend Sir, Your Brethren and Servants William Williams, Pastor of
Hatfield. Ebenezer Devotion -- of Suffield. Stephen Williams -- of Long Meadow.
Peter Raynolds -- of Enfield. Nehemiah Bull -- of Westfield. Samuel Hopkins --
of W. Springfield.


A Faithful NARRATIVE OF The Surprising Work of GOD in the Conversion of many
Hundred Souls in Northampton, of New England, etc.
In a LETTER to the Revd. Dr. COLMAN of Boston, etc.
Reverend and Honored Sir,
HAVING seen your Letter to my honored Uncle Williams of Hatfield of July 20,
wherein you inform him of the Notice that has been taken of the late wonderful
Work of God, in this, and some other Towns in this County; by the Rev. Dr.
Watts and Dr. Guyse of London, and the Congregation to which the last of these
preached on a monthly Day of solemn Prayer; as also, of your desire to be more
perfectly acquainted with it, by some of us on the spot: and having been since
informed by my Uncle Williams, that you desire me to undertake it; I would now
do it, in as just and faithful a Manner as in me lies.

The People of the County, in general, I suppose, are as sober, and orderly,
and good sort of People, as in any Part of New England; and I believe they have
been preserved the freest by far, of any Part of the Country, from Error, and
variety of Sects and Opinions. Our being so far within the Land, at a distance
from Seaports, and in a Corner of the Country, has doubtless been one Reason
why we have not been so much corrupted with Vice, as most other Parts. But
without question, the Religion, and good Order of the County, and their Purity
in Doctrine, has, under God, been very much owing to the great Abilities, and
eminent Piety, of my venerable and honored Grandfather Stoddard. I suppose we
have been the freest of any Part of the Land from unhappy Division, and
Quarrels in our acclesiastical and religious Affairs, till the late lamentable
The Springfield Contention relates to the Settlement of a Minister there, which
occasioned too warm Debates between some, both Pastors and People, that were
for it, and others that were against it, on account of their different
Apprehensions about his Principles, and about some Steps that were taken to
procure his Ordination.
Springfield Contention.

We being much separated from other Parts of the Province, and having
comparatively but little Intercourse with them, have from the beginning, till
now, always managed our ecclesiastical Affairs within our selves: it is the way
in which the County, from its Infancy, has gone on, by the practical Agreement
of all, and the way in which our Peace and good Order has hither to been
maintained.

The Town of Northampton is of about 82 Years standing, and has now about 200
Families; which mostly dwell more compactly together than any Town of such a
Bigness in these Parts of the Country; which probably has been an Occasion that
both our Corruptions, and Reformations have been, from time to time, the more
swiftly propagated, from one to another, through the Town. Take the Town is
general, and so far as I can judge, they are as Rational and Understanding a
People as most I have been acquainted with: Many of them have been noted for
Religion, and particularly, have been remarkable for their distinct Knowledge
in things that relate to Heart Religion, and Christian Experience, and their
great Regards thereto.

I am the third Minister that has been settled in the Town: the Rev. Mr.
Eleazer Mather, who was the first, was ordained in July, 1669. He was one whose
Heart was much in his Work, abundant in Labors for the good of precious Souls;
he had the high Esteem and great Love of his People, and was blessed with no
small Success. The Rev. Mr. Stoddard, who succeeded him, came first to the Town
the November after his Death, but was not ordained till September 11. 1672, and
died Feb. 11. 1728. 9. So that he continued in the Work of the Ministry here,
from his first coming to Town, near 60 Years. And as he was eminent and
renowned for his Gifts and Grace; so he was blessed, from the beginning, with
extraordinary Success in his Ministry, in the Conversion of many Souls. He had
five Harvests, as he called them: The first was about 57 Years ago; the second
about 53 Years; the third about 40; the fourth about 24; the fifth and last
about 18 Years ago. Some of these Times were much more remarkable than others,
and the ingathering of Souls more plentiful. Those that were about 53, and 40,
and 24 Years ago, were much greater than either the first or the last: but in
each of them, I have heard my Grandfather say, the bigger Part of the young
People in the Town, seemed to be mainly concerned for their eternal Salvation.

After the last of these came a far more degenerate time, (at least among the
young People) I suppose, than ever before. Mr. Stoddard, indeed, had the
Comfort before he died, of seeing a time where there were no small Appearences
of a divine Work amongst some, and a considerable Ingathering of Souls, even
after I was settled with him in the Ministry, which was about two Years before
his Death; and I have reason to bless God for the great Advantage I had by it.
In these two Years there were near twenty that Mr. Stoddard hoped to be
savingly converted; but there was nothing of any General Awakening. The greater
Part seemed to be at that time very insensible of the things of Religion, and
engaged in other Cares and Pursuits. Just after my Grandfather's Death, it
seemed to be a time of extraordinary Dullness in Religion: Licentiousness for
some Years greatly prevailed among the Youth of the Town; they were many of
them very much addicted to Night-walking, and frequenting the Tavern, and lend
Practices, wherein some, by their Example exceedingly corrupted others. It was
their Manner very frequently to get together, in Conventions of both Sexes, for
Mirth and Jollity, which they called Frolicks; and they would often spend the
greater part of the Night in them, without regard to any Order in the Families
they belonged ^o: and indeed Family-Government did too much fail in ^he Town.
It was become very customary with many of our young People, to be Indecent in
their Carriage at Meeting, which doubtless, would not have prevailed to such a
degree, had it not been that my Grandfather, through his great Age, (though he
retained his Powers surprizingly to the last) was not so able to Observe them.
There had also long prevailed in the Town, a Spirit of Contention between two
Parties, into which they had for many Years been divided, by which, was
maintained a Jealousy one of the other, and they were prepared to oppose one
another in all public Affairs.

But in two or three Years after Mr. Stoddard's Death, there began to be a
sensible Amendment of these Evils; the young People showed more of a
Disposition to hearken to Counsel, and by degrees left off their Frolicking,
and grew observably more Decent in their Attendance on the public Worship, and
there were more that manifested a Religious Concern than there used to be.

At the latter end of the Year 1733. there appeared a very unusual
flexibleness, and yielding to Advice, in our young People. It had been too long
their manner to make the Evening after the Sabbath It must be noted, that it
has never been our Manner, to observe the Evening that follows the Sabbath; but
that which pr^^edes it, as part of holy Time.
and after our public Lecture, to be especially the Times of their Mirth, and
Company keeping. But a Sermon was now preached on the Sabbath before the
Lecture, to show the Evil Tendency of the Practice, and to persuade them to
reform it; and it was urged on Heads of Families, that it should be a thing
agreed upon among them to govern their Families, and keep their Children at
home, at these times; and withal it was more privately moved, that they should
meet together, the next Day, in their several Neighbourhoods, to know each
other's Minds: which was accordingly done, and the Motion complied with
throughout the Town. But Parents found little, or no occasion for the exercise
of Government in the Case: the young People declared themselves convinced by
what they had heard from the Pulpit, and were willing of themselves to comply
with t^^ Counsel that had been given: and it was immediately, and, I suppose,
almost universally complied with; and there was a thorough Reformation of these
Disorders thenceforward, which has continued ever since.

Presently after this, there began to appear a remarkable Religious Concern at
a little Village, belonging to the Congregation, Called Pascommuck, where a few
Families were settled, at about three Miles distance from the main Body of the
Town. At this place, a number of Persons seemed to be savingly wrought upon. In
the April following, Anno 1734, there happened a very sudden and awful Death of
a young Man, in the Bloom of his Youth; who being violently seized with a
Pleurisy, and taken immediately very delirious, died in about two Days; which
(together with what was preached publicly on that Occasion) much affected many
young People. This was followed with another Death of a young married Woman,
who had been considerably exercised in Mind, about the Salvation of her Soul,
before she was ill, and was in great Distress, in the beginning of her Illness;
but seemed to have satisfying Evidences of God's saving Mercy to her, before
her Death; so that she died very full of Comfort, in a most earnest and moving
Manner warning, and counselling others. This seemed much to contribute to the
solemnizing of the Spirits of many young Persons: and there began evidently to
appear more of a Religious Concern on People's Minds.

In the Fall of the Year, I proposed it to the young People, that they should
agree among themselves to spend the Evenings after Lectures in social Religion,
and to that end divide themselves into several Companies to meet in various
parts of the Town; which was accorgingly done, and those Meetings have been
since continued, and the Example imitated by elder People. This was followed
with the Death of an elderly Person, which was attended with many unusual
Circumstances, by which many were much moved and affected.

About this time, began the great Noise that was in this Part of the Country,
about Arminianism, which seemed to appear with a very threatening Aspect upon
the Interest of Religion here. The Friends of vital Piety trembled for fear of
the Issue; but it seemed, contrary to their Fear, strongly to be overruled for
the promoting of Religion. Many who looked on themselve as in a Christless
Condition, seemed to be awakened by it, with fear that God was about to
withdraw from the Land, and that we should be given up to Heterodoxy, and
corrupt Principles; and that then their Opportunity for obtaining Salvation
would be past; and many who were brought a little to doubt about the Truth of
the Doctrines they had hitherto been taught, seemed to have a kind of a
trembling Fear with their Doubts, lest they should be led into Bypath, to
their eternal undoing: And they seemed with much Concern and Engagedness of
Mind, to enquire what was indeed the Way in which they must come to be accepted
with God. There were then some things said publicly on that Occasion,
concerning Justification by Faith alone.

Although great Fault was found with meddling with the Controversy in the Pulpit,
by such a Person, and at that time, and though it was ridiculed by many
elsewhere; yet it proved a Word spoken in season here; and was most evidently
attended with a very remarkable Blessing of Heaven to the Souls of the People
in this Town. They received thence a general satisfaction with respect to the
main thing in question, which they had been in trembling doubts and concern
about; and their Minds were engaged the more earnestly to seek that they might
come to be accepted of God, and saved in the Way of the Gospel, which had been
made evident to them to be the true and only Way. And th^n it was, in the
latter part of December, that the Spirit of God began extraordinarily to set
in, and wonderfully to work amongst us; and there were, very suddenly, one
after another, five or six Persons, who were to all appearance savingly
converted, and some of them wrought upon in a very remarkable manner.

Particularly, I was surprised with the relation of a young Woman, who had been
one of the greatest Company-Keepers in the whole Town: When she came to me, I
had never heard that she was become in any wise serious, but by the
Conversation I then had with her, it appeared to me, that what she gave an
account of, was a glorious Work of God's infinite Power and sovereign Grace;
and that God had given her a new Heart, truly broken and sanctified. I could
not then doubt of it, and have seen much in my Acquaintance with her since to
confirm in.

Though the Work was glorious, yet I was filled with concern about the Effect it
might have upon others: I was ready to conclude (though ^oo rashly) that some
would be hardened by i^, in carelessness and looseness of Life; and would take
occasion from it to open their Mouths, in Reproaches of Religion. But the Even^
was the Reverse, to a wonderful degree; God made it, I suppose, the greatest
occasion of awakening to others, of any thing that ever came to pass in the
Town. I have had abundant Opportunity to know the Effect it had, by my private
Conversation with many. The news of it seemed to be almost like a flash of
Lightning, upon the Hearts of young People, all over the Town, and upon many
others. Those Persons amongst us, who used to be farthest from seriousness, and
that I most feared would make an ill Improvement of it, seemed greatly to be
awakened with it; many went to talk with her, concerning what she had met with;
and what appeared in her seemed to be to the Satisfaction of all that did so.

Presently upon this, a great and earnest Concern about the great things of
Religion, and the eternal World, became universal in all parts of the Town, and
among Persons of all Degrees, and all Ages; the Noise amongst the Dry Bones
waxed louder and louder: All other talk but about spiritual and eternal things,
was soon thrown by; all the Conversation in all Companies, and upon all
occasions, was upon these things only, unless so much as was necessary for
People, carrying on their ordinary secular Business. Other Discourse than of
the things of Religion, would scarcely be tolerated in any Company. The Minds
of People were wonderfully taken off from the World, it was treated amongst us
as a thing of very little Consequence: They seemed to follow their worldly
Business, more as a part of their Duty, than from any Disposition they had to
it; the Temptation now seemed to lie on that hand, to neglect worldly Affairs
too much, and to spend too much Time in the immediate Exercise of Religion:
Which Thing was exceedingly misrepresented by Reports that were spread in
distant Parts of the Land, as though the People here had wholly thrown by all
worldly Business, and betook themselves entirely to Reading, and Praying, and
such like religious Exercises.

But although People did not ordinarily neglect their worldly Business; yet there
then was the Reverse of what commonly is: Religion was with all sorts the great
Concern, and the World was a thing only by the Bye. The only Thing in their
view was to get the Kingdom of Heaven, and every one appeared pressing into it:
The Engagedness of their Hearts in this great Concern could not be hid, it
appeared in their very Countenances. It then was a dreadful Thing amongst us to
lie out of Christ, in danger every day of dropping into Hell; and what Persons
minds were intent upon was to escape for their Lives, and to fly from the Wrath
to come. All would eagerly lay hold of Opportunities for their Souls; and were
wont very often to meet together in private Houses, for religious Purposes: And
such Meetings when appointed were wont greatly to be thronged.

There was scarcely a single Person in the Town, either old or young, that was
left unconcerned about the great Things of the eternal World. Those that were
wont to be the vainest, and loosest, and those that had been most disposed to
think, and speak slightly of vital and experimental Religion, were now
generally subject to great awakenings. And the Work of Conversion was carried
on in a most astonishing manner, and increased more and more; Souls did as it
were come by Flocks to Jesus Christ. From Day to Day, for many Months together,
might be seen evident Instances of Sinners brought out of Darkness into
mavelous Light, and delivered out of an horrible Pit, and from the miry Clay,
and set upon a Rock, with a new Song of Praise to God in their mouths.

This Work of God, as it was carried on, and the Number of true Saints
multiplied, soon made a glorious Alteration in the Town; so that in the Spring
and Summer following, Anno 173^. the Town seemed to be full of the Persence of
God: It never was so full of Love, nor so full of Joy; and yet so full of
Distres^, as i^ was then. There were remarkable Tokens of God's Presence in
almost every House. It was a time of Joy in Families on the account of
Salvation's being b^ought unto them; Parents rejoicing over their Children as
new born, and Husbands over their Wives, and Wives over their Husbands. The
goings of God were then seen in his Sanctuary, God's Day was a delight, and his
Tabernacles were amiable. Our public Assemblies were then beautiful; the
Congregation was alive in God's Service, every one earnestly intent on the
Public Worship, every Hearer eager to drink in the Words of the Minister as
they came from his Mouth; the Assembly in general were from time to time, in
Tears while the Word was preached; some weeping with Sorrow and Distress,
others with Joy and Love, others with Pity and Concern for the Souls of their
Neighbors.

Our public Praises were then greatly; enlivened; God was then served in our
Psalmody, in some measure, in the Beauty of Holiness. It has been observable,
that there has been scarce any part of Divine Worship, wherein good Men amongst
us have had Grace so drawn forth, and their Hearts so lifted up in the Ways of
God, as in singing his Praises: Our Congregation excelled all that ever I knew
in the external Part of the Duty before, generally carrying regularly, and
well, three Parts of Music, and the Women a Part by themselves: But now they
were evidently wont to sing with unusual Elevation of Heart and Voice, which
made the Duty pleasant indeed.

In all Companies on other Days, on whatever Occasions Persons met together,
Christ was to be heard of and seen in the midst of them. Our young People, when
they met, were wont to spend the Time in talking of the Excellency and dying
Love of JESUS CHRIST, the Gloriousness of the way of Salvation, the wonderful,
free, and sovereign Grace of God, his glorious Work in the Conversion of a
Soul, the Truth and Certainty of the great Things of God's Word, the Sweetness
of the Views of his Perfections, etc. And even at Weddings, which formerly were
merely occasions of Mirth and Jollity, there was now no discourse of any thing
but the things of Religion, and no appearance of any, but spiritual Mirth.

Those amongst us that had been formerly converted, were greatly enlivened and
renewed with fresh and extraordinary Incomes of the Spirit of God; though some
much more than others, according to the measure of the Gift of Christ: Many
that before had labored under Difficulties about their own State, had now
their Doubts removed by more satisfying Experience, and more clear Discoveries
of God's Love.

When this Work of God first appeared, and was so extraordinarily carried on
amongst us in the Winter, others round about us, seemed not to know what to
make of it; and there were many that scoffed at and ridiculed it; and some
compared what we called Conversion, to certain Distempers. But it was very
observable of many, that occasionally came amongst us from abroad, with
disregardful Hearts, that what they saw here cured them of such a Temper of
Mind: Strangers were generally surprised to find Things so much beyond what
they had heard, and were wont to tell others that the State of the Town could
not be conceived of by those that had not seen it. The Notice that was taken of
it by the People that came to Town on occasion of the Court, that sat here in
the beginning of March, was very observable. And those that came from the
Neighborhood to our public Lectures, were for the most part remarkably
affected. Many that came to Town, on one occasion or other, had their
Consciences smitten, and awakened, and went home with wounded Hearts, and with
those Impressions that never wore off till they had hopefully a saving Issue;
and those that before had serious Thoughts, had their Awakenings and
Convictions greatly increased. And there were many Instances of Persons that
came from abroad, on Visits, or on Business, that had not been long here before
to all Appearance they were savingly wrought upon, and partook of that Shower
of divine Blessing that God rained down here, and went home Rejoicing; 'till at
length the same Work began evidently to appear and prevail in several other
Towns in the County.

In the Month of March, the People in South-Hadley began to be seized with deep
Concern about the Things of Religion; which very soon became universal: And the
Work of God has been very wonderful there; not much, if any thing, short of
what it has been here, in proportion to the bigness of the Place. About the
same Time, it began to break forth in the West part of Suffield, (where it has
also been very great,) and it soon spread into all parts of the Town. It next
appeared at Sunderland, and soon overspread the Town; and I believe was, for a
Season, not less remarkable than it was here. About the same time, it began to
appear in a part of Deerfield, called Green-River, and afterward filled the
Town, and there has been a glorious Work there: It began also to be manifest,
in the South part of Hatfield, in a place called the Hill, and after that the
whole Town, in the second Week in April, seemed to be seized, as it were at
once, with Concern about the Things of Religion; and the Work of God has been
great there. There has been also a very general Awakening at West Springfield,
and Long-Meadow; and in Enfield, there was for a time no small Concern amongst
some that before had been very loose Persons. About the same time that this
appeared at Enfield, the Rev. Mr. B^ll of Westfield informed me, that there had
been a great Alteration there, and that more had been done in one Week there
than in seven Years before. Something of this Work like wise appeared in the
first Precinct in Springfield, principally in the North and South Extremes of
the Parish. And in Hadley old Town, there gradually appeared so much of a Work
of God on Souls, as at another time would have been thought ^orthy of much
Notice. For a short time there was also a very great and general Concern, of
the like nature, at Northfield. And wherever this Concern appeared, it seemed
not to be in vain: But in every P^ace God brought saving Blessings with him,
and his Word attended with his Spirit (as we have all reason to think) returned
not void. It might well be said at that time in all Parts of the County, Who
are these that fly as a Cloud, and as Doves to their Windows?

As what other Towns heard of and found in this, was a great means of awakening
them; so our hearing of such a swift, and extraordinary Propagation, and Extent
of this Work, did doubtless for a time serve to uphold the Work amongst us. The
continual News kept alive the talk of Religion, and did greatly quicken and
rejoice the Hearts of God's People, and much awakened those that looked on
themselves as still left behind, and made them the more earnest that they also
might share in the great Blessing that others had obtained.

This remarkable pouring out of the Spirit of God, which thus extended from one
end to the other of this County, was not confined to it, but many Places in
Connecticut, have partook in the same Mercy: As for instance, the first Parish
in Windsor, under the pastoral Care of the Rev. Mr. Marsh was thus blessed about
the same time, as we in Northampton, while we had no Knowledge of each other's
Circumstances: There has been a very great Ingathering of Souls to Christ in
that Place, and something Considerable of the same Work began after wards, in
East Windsor, my honored Father's Parish, which has in times past, been a
Place favored with Mercies of this nature, above any on this western side of
New England, excepting Northampton; there having been four or five Seasons of
the pouring out of the Spirit to the general awakening of the People there,
since my Father's Settlement amongst them

There was also the last Spring and Summer a wonderful Work of God carried on
at Coventry under the Ministry of the Rev. Mr. Meacham: I had opportunity to
converse with some of Coventry People, who gave me a very remarkable Account of
the surprising Change that appeared in the most rude and vicious Persons there.
The like was also very great at the same time in a Part of Lebanon, called the
Crank, where the Rev. Mr. Wheelock, a young Gentleman is lately settled: And
there has been much of the same at Durham, under the Ministry of the Rev. Mr.
Chauncy; and to appearance no small Ingathering of Souls there And likewise
amongst many of the young People in the first Precinct in Stratford, under the
Ministry of the Rev. Mr. Gould; where the Work was much promoted by the
remarkable Conversion of a young Woman that had been a great Company-Keeper, as
it was here.

Something of this Work appeared in several other Towns in those Parts, as I
was informed when I was there, the last Fall. And we have since been acquainted
with something very remarkable of this nature at another Parish in Stratford
called Ripton, under the pastoral Care of the Rev. Mr. Mills. And there was a
considerable Revival of Religion last Summer at NewHaven old Town, as I was
once and again informed by the Rev. Mr. Noyes the Minister there, and by
others: And by a Letter which I very lately received from Mr Noyes, and also by
Information we have had otherwise, this flourishing of Religion still
continues, and has lately much increased: Mr. Noyes writes, that many this
Summer have been added to the Church, and particularly mentions several young
Persons that belong to the principal Families of that Town.

There has been a degree of the same Work at a Part of Guilford; and very
considerable at Mansfield, under the Ministry of the Rev. Mr. Eleazer Williams;
and an unusual religious Concern at Tolland; and something of it at Hebron, and
Bolton. There was also no small Effusion of the Spirit of God in the North
Parish in Preston, in the eastern Part of Connecticut, which I was informed of,
and saw something of it, when I was the last Autumn at the House, and in the
Congregation of the Rev. Mr. Lord, the Minister there; who, with the Rev. Mr.
Owen of Groton, came up hither in May, the last Year, on purpose to see the
Work of God here; and having heard various and contradictory Accounts of it,
were careful when they were here to inform, and satisfy themselves; and to that
end particularly conversed with many of our People; which they declared to be
entirely to their Satisfaction, and that the one half had not been told them,
nor could be told them. Mr. Lord told me that, when he got home, he informed
his Congregation of what he had seen, and that they were greatly affected with
it, and that it proved the beginning of the same Work amongst them, which
prevailed till there was a general Awakening, and many Instances of Persons,
who seemed to be remarkably converted. I also have lately heard that there has
been something of the same Work at Woodbury.

But this Shower of divine Blessing has been yet more extensive: There was no
small Degree of it in some parts of the Jerseys; as I was informed when I was
at NewYork, (in a long Journey I took at that time of ^he Year for my Health,)
by some People of the Jerseys, whom I saw: Especially the Rev. Mr. William
T^^^^nt, a Minister, who seemed to have such Things much at Heart, told me of a
very great awakening of many in a Place called the Mountains, under the
Ministry of one Mr. Cross; and of a very considerable Revival of Religion in
another Place under the Ministry of his Brother the Rev. Mr. Gilbert Tennent;
and also at another Place, under the Ministry of a very pious young Gentleman,
a Dutch Minister, whose Name as I remember was Freelinghousa.

This seems to have been a very extraordinary Dispensation of Providence: God
has in many Respects gone out of, and much beyond his usual, and ordinary Way.
The Work in this Town, and some others about us, has been extraordinary on
account of the Universality of it, affecting all sorts, sober and vicious, high
and low, rich and poor, wise and unwise; it reached the most considerable
Families and Persons, to all appearance, as much as others. In former stirrings
of this nature, the Bulk of the young People have been greatly affected; but
old Men, and little Children have been so now. Many of the last have, of their
own accord, formed themselves into religious Societies, in different Parts of
the Town: A loose careless Person could scarcely find a Companion in the whole
Neighborhood; and if there was any one that seemed to remain senseless or
unconcerned, it would be spoken of as a strange Thing.

This Dispensation has also appeared very extraordinary in the Numbers of
those, on whom ^e have reason to hope it has had a saving Effect: We have about
six hundred and twenty Communicants, which include almost all our adult
Persons. The Church was very large before; but Persons never thronged into it,
as they did in the late extraordinary Time: -- Our Sacraments are eight Weeks
asunder, and I received into our Communion about an hundred before one
Sacrament, and fourscore of them at one time, whose Appearance, when they
presented themselves together to make an open explicit Profession of
Christianity, was very affecting to the Congregation: -- I took in near sixty
before the next Sacrament Day: But it must be noted that it is not the Custom
here, as it is in many other Churches in this Country, to make a credible
Relation of their inward Experiences the ground of Admission to the Lord's
Supper.

I am far from pretending to be able to determine how many have lately been the
Subjects of such Mercy; but it I may be allowed to declare any thing that
appears to me probable in a thing of this nature, I hope that more than three
Hundred Souls were savingly brought home to Christ, in this Town, in the space
of half a Year, (how many more I don't guess) and about the same Number of
Males as Females; which, by what I have heard Mr. Stoddard say, was far from
what has been usual in Years past, for he observed that in his Time, many more
Women were converted than Men. Those of our young People, that are on other
accounts most likely and considerable, are mostly, as I hope, truly Pious, and
leading Persons in Ways of Religion. Those that were formerly looser young
Persons, are generally to all Appearance, become true Lovers of God and Christ,
and spiritual in their Dispositions. And I hope that by far the greater part of
Persons in this Town, above 16 years of Age, are such as have the saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ; and so by what I heard I s^ppose it is in some other
Places, particularly a^ Sunderland and South Hadley.

This has also appeared to be a very extraordinary Dispensation, in that the
Spirit of God has so much extended not only his awakening, but regenerating
Influences both to elderly Persons, and also those that are very young. It has
been a thing heretof^^e rarely to be heard of, that any were converted, past
middle Age; but now we have the same Ground to think, that many such have in
this time been savingly changed, as that others have been so in more early
Years. I suppose there were upwards of fifty Persons in this Town above 40
years of Age; and more than twenty of them above 50, and about ten of them
above 60, and two of them above 70 years of Age.

It has heretofore been looked on as a strange Thing, when any have seemed to
be savingly wrought upon, and remarkably changed in their Childhood; but now I
suppose, near thirty were to Appearance so wrought upon between 10 and 14 Years
of Age, and two between 9 and 10, and one of about 4 years of Age; and because
I suppose this last will be most difficultly believed, I will hereafter give a
particular Account of it. The Influences of God's Spirit have also been very
remarkable on Children in some other Places, particu^^^ly at Sunderland and
South-Hadley, and the West part of Suffield. There are several Families in this
Town that are all hopefully pious; yea, there are several numerous Families, in
which, I think we have reason to hope that all the Children are truly godly,
and most of them lately become so: And there are very few Houses in the whole
Town, into which Salvation has not lately come, in one or more Instances. There
are several Negroes, that from what was seen in them then, and what is
discernable in them since, appear to have been truly born again in the late
remarkable Season.

God has also seemed to have gone out of his usual way, in the Quickness of his
Work, and the swift Progress his Spirit has made in his Operations on the
Hearts of many: It Is wonderful that Persons should be so suddenly, and yet so
greatly changed: Many have been taken from a loose and careless way of Living,
and seized with strong Convictions of their Guilt and Misery, and in a very
little time old Things have passed away, and all Things have become new with
them.

God's Work has also appeared very extraordinary, in the Degrees of the
Influences of his Spirit, both in the Degree of Awakening and Conviction, and
also in the Degree of saving Light, and Love, and Joy, that many have
experienced. It has also been very extraordinary in the Extent of it, and its
being so swiftly propagated from Town to Town. In former Times of the pouring
out of the Spirit of God on this Town, though in some of them it was very
Remarkable, yet it reached no further than this Town, the neighboring Towns
all around continued unmoved.

The Work of God's Spirit seemed to be at its greatest Height in this Town, in
the former part of the Spring, in March and April; at which time God's Work in
the Conversion of Souls was carried on amongst us in so wonderful a manner,
that so far as I, by looking back, can judge from the particular Acquaintance I
have had with Souls in this Work, it appears to me probable, to have been at
the Rate, at least, of four Persons in a Day, or near thirty in a Week, take
one with another, for five or six Weeks together: When God in so remarkable a
manner took the Work into his own Hands, there was as much done in a Day or
two, as at ordinary Times, with all Endeavors that Men can use, and with such
a Blessing as we commonly have, is done in a Year.

I am very sensible how apt many would be, if they should see the Account I
have here given, presently to think with themselves that I am very fond of
making a great many Converts, and of magnifying and aggrandi^ing the matter;
and to think that, for want of Judgment, I take every religious Pang, and
enthusiastic Conceit, for saving Conversion; and I don't much wonder if they
should be apt to think so* and for this reason (...) have forborne to publish an
Account of this great Work of God, though I have often been put upon it; but
having now as I thought a special Call to give an account of it, upon mature
Consideration, I thought it might not be beside my Duty to declare this amazing
Work, as it appeared to me, to be indeed Divine, and to conceal no part of the
Glory of it, leaving it with God to take care of the Credit of his own Work,
and running the venture of any censorious Thoughts, which might be entertained
of me to my disadvantage: But that distant Persons may be under as great
Advantage as may be, to judge for themselves of this Matter, I would be a
little more large, and particular.

I therefore proceed to give an Account of the manner of Persons being wrought
upon; and here there is a vast Variety, perhaps as manifold as the Subjects of
the Operation; but yet in many Things there is a great Analogy in all.

Persons are first awakened with a Sense of their miserable Condition by
Nature, the Danger they are in of perishing eternally, and that it is of great
Importance to them that they speedily escape, and get into a better State.
Those that before were secure and senseless, are made sensible how much they
were in the way to ruin in their former Courses. Some are more suddenly seized
with Convictions; it may be, by the News of others Conversion, or something
they hear in public, or in private Conference, their Consciences are suddenly
smitten, as if their Hearts were pierced through with a Dart: Others have
Awakenings that come upon them more gradually, they begin as first to be
something more thoughtful and considerate, so as to come to a Conclusion in
their Minds, that it is their best and wisest way to delay no longer, but to
improve the present Opportunity; and have accordingly set themseves seriously
to meditate on those Things that have the most awakening Tendency, on purpose
to obtain Convictions; and so their Awakenings have increased, till a Sense of
their Misery, by God's Spirit setting in therewith, has had fast hold of them.
Others that, before this wonderful time, had been something religious and
concerned for their Salvation, have been awakened in a new manner, and made
sensible that their slack and dull way of seeking was never like to attain
their Purpose, and so have been roused up to a greater Violence for the Kingdom
of Heaven.

These Awakenings when they have first seized on Persons have had two Effects:
One was, that they have brought them immediately to quit their sinful
Practices, and the loo^er Sort have been brought to forsake and dread their
former Vices and Extravagancies When once the Spirit of God began to be so
wonderfully poured out in a general way through the Town, People had soon done
with their old Quarrels, Backbitings, and intermeddling with other Men's
Matters; the Tavern was soon left empty, and Persons kept very much at home;
none went abr^ad unless on necessary Business, or on some religions Account,
and every Day seemed in many respects like a Sabbath Da^. And the other Effect
was, that it put them on earnest Application to the means of Salvation,
Reading, Prayer, Meditation, the Ordinances of God's House, and private
Conference; their Cry was, What shall we do to be saved? The place of Resort
was now altered, it was no longer the Tavern, but the Minister's House; that
was thronged far more than ever the Tavern had been wont to be.

There is a very great variety as to the Degree of Fear and Trouble that
Persons are exercised with, before they obtain any comfortable Evidences of
Pardon and Acceptance with God: some are from the beginning carried on with
abundantly more Encouragement and Hope than others: some have had ten times
less trouble of Mind than others, in whom yet the Issue seems to be the same.
Some have had such a Sense of the Displeasure of God, and the great Danger they
were in of Damnation, that they could not sleep at Nights; and many have said
that when they have laid down, the Thoughts of sleeping in such a Conditon have
been f^ightful to them, and they have scarcely been free from Terror while
they have been asleep, and they have awaked with Fear, Heaviness, and Distress
still abiding on their Spirits. It has been very common, that the deep and
fixed Concern that has been on Persons Minds, has had a painful Influence on
their Bodies, and had given Disturbance to animal Nature.

The awful Apprehensions Persons have had of their Misery, have for the most
part been increasing, the nearer they have approached to Deliverance; though they
often pass through many Changes, and Alterations in the Frame, and
Circumstances of their Minds: Sometimes they think themselves wholly senseless,
and fear that the Spirit of God has left them, and that they are given up to
judicial Hardness; yet they appear very deeply exercised about that Fear, and
are in great earnest to obtain Convictions again.

Together with those Fears, and that Exercise of Mind which is rational, and
which they have just ground for, they have often suffered many needless
Distresses of Thought, in which Satan probably has a great hand, to entangle
them, and block up their way; and sometimes the Distemper of Melancholy has
been evidently mixed; of which when it happens, the Tempter seems to make great
advantage, and puts an unhappy Bar in the way of any good Effect; One knows not
how to deal with such Persons, they turn every Thing that is said to them the
wrong way, and most to their own Disadvantage: And there is nothing that the
Devil seems to make so great a handle of, as a melancholy Humor, unless it be
the real Corruption of the Heart.

But it has been very remarkable, that there has been far less of this Mixture
in this time of extraordinary Blessing, than there was wont to be in Persons
under awakenings at other Times; for it is evident that many that before had
been exceedingly involved in such Difficulties, seemed now strangely to be set
at liberty: Some Persons that had before, for a long time, been exceedingly
entangled with peculiar Temptations, of one sort or other, and unprofitable and
hurtful Distresses, were soon helped over former Stumbling Blocks, that
hindered any Progress toward saving Good; and Convictions have wrought more
kindly, and they have been successfully carried on in the way to Life. And thus
Satan seemed to be restrain^d, till toward the latter end of this wonderful
Time, when God's Spirit was about to withdraw.

Many times Persons under great Awakenings were concerned, because they thought
they were not awakened, but miserable, hard-hearted, senseless, so^tish
Creatures still, and sleeping upon the brink of Hell: The sense of the Need
they have to be awakened, and of their comparative Hardness, grows upon them
with their Awakenings; so that they seem to themselves to be very senseless,
when indeed most sensible. There have been some Instances of Persons that have
had as great a Sense of their Danger and Misery, as their Natures could well
subsist under, so that a little more would probably have destroyed them; and
yet they have expressed themselves much amazed at their own Insensibility and
Sottishness, in such an extraordinary Time as it then was.

Persons are sometimes brought to the Borders of Despair, and it looks as black
as Midnight to them a little before the Day dawns in their Souls; some few
Instances there have been of Persons, who have had such a Sense of God's Wrath
for Sin, that they have been overborn, and made to cry out under an astonishing
Sense of their Guilt, wondering that God suffers such guilty Wretches to live
upon Earth, and that he does not immediately send them to Hell; and sometimes
their Guilt does so glare them in the Face, that they are in exceeding Terror
for fear that God will instantly do it; but more commonly the Distresses under
legal Awakenings have not been to such a Degree. In some these Terrors don't
seem to be so sharp, when near Comfort, as before; their Convictions have not
seemed to work so much that way, but they seem to be led further down into
their own Hearts, to a further Sense of their own universal Depravity, and
Deadness in Sin.

The Corruption of the Heart has discovered it self in various Exercises, in
the time of legal Convictions; sometimes it appears in a great Struggle, like
something roused by an Enemy, and Satan the old Inhabitant seems to exert
himself, like a Serpent disturbed and enraged. Many in such Circumstances, have
felt a great Spirit of Envy, toward the Godly, especially toward those that
are thought to have been lately converted, and most of all toward Acquaintance
and Companions, when they are thought to be converted: Indeed, some have felt
many Heart-risings against God, and murmurings at his ways of Dealing with
Mankind, and his Dealings with themselves in Particular. It has been much
insisted on, both in public and private, that Persons should have the utmost
dreard of such envious Thoughts, which if allowed tend exceedingly to quench
the Spirit of God, if not to provoke him finally to forsake them. And when such
a Spirit has much prevailed, and Persons have not so earnestly strove against
it as they ought to have done, it has seemed to be exceedingly to the hindrance
of the Good of their Souls: but in some other Instances, where Persons have
been much terrified at the Sight of such Wickedness in their Hearts, God has
brought Good to them out of Evil; and made it a Means of convincing them of
their own desperate Sinfulness, and bringing them off from all Self-confidence.

The drift of the Spirit of God in his legal strivings with Persons, has seemed
most evidently to be, to make way for, and to bring to, a Conviction of their
absolute Dependence on his sovereign Power and Grace, and universal Necessity
of a Mediator, by leading them more and more to a Sense of their exceeding
Wickedness and Guiltiness in his sight; the Pollution and Insufficiency of
their own Righteousness, that they can in ^no wise help themselves, and that
God would be wholly just and righteous in rejecting them, and all that they do,
and in casting them off for ever: Though there be a vast variety, as to the
manner, and distinctness of Persons Convictions of these things.

As they are gradually more and more convinced of the Corruption and Wickedness
of their Hearts, they seem to themselves to grow worse and worse, harder and
blinder, and more desperately wicked, instead of growing better; they are ready
to be discouraged by it, and oftentimes never think themselves so far off from
Good as when they are nearest. Under the sense which the Spirit o^ God gives
them of their Sinfulness, they often think that they differ from all others;
their Hearts are ready to sink with the thought, that they are the worst of
all, and that none ever obtained Mercy that were so wicked as they.

When Awakenings first begin, their Consciences are commonly most exercised
about their outward vicious Course, or other Acts of Sin; but afterward are
much more burdened with a sense of Heart sins, the dreadful Corruption of their
Nature, their Enmity against God, the Pride of their Hearts, their Unbelief,
their Rejection of Christ, the Stubbornness and Obstinacy of their Wills; and
the like. In many, God makes much use of their own Experience, in the course of
their Awakenings and Endeavors after saving Good, to convince them of their
own vile Emptiness and universal Depravity.

Very often under first Awakenings, when they are brought to reflect on the Sin
of their past Lives, and have something of a terrifying sense of God's Anger,
they set themselves to walk more strictly, and confess their Sins, and perform
many religious Dutys, with a secret Hope of appeasing God's Anger and making up
for the Sins they have committed* and oftentimes, at first setting out, their
Affections are moved, and they are full of Tears, in their Confessions and
Prayers, which they are ready to make very much of, as though they were some
Atonement, and had Power to move correspondent Affections in God too: and
hence they are for a while big with Expectation of what God will do for them;
and conceive that they grow better apace, and shall soon be thoroughly
converted. But these Affections are but short-lived, they quickly find that
they fail, and then they think themselves to be grown worse again; they don't
find such a Prospect of being soon converted, as they thought: instead of being
nearer, they seem to be farther off; their Hearts they think are grown harder,
and by this means their fears of perishing greatly increase. But though they are
disappointed, they renew their Attempts again and again; and still as their
Attempts are Multiplied, so are their Disappointments; all fails, they see no
token of having inclined God's Heart to them, they don't see that he hears
their Prayers at all, as they expected he would; and sometimes there have been
great Temptations arising hence to leave off seeking, and to yield up the Case.
But as they are still more terrified with Fears of perishing, and their former
Hopes of prevailing on God to be merciful to them in a great measure fail;
sometimes their religious Affections have turned into Heart-risings against
God, because that he will not pity them, and seems to have little regard to their
Distress, and piteous Cries, and to all the Pains that they take; They think of
the Mercy that God has shown to others, how soon, and how easily others have
obtained Comfort, and those too that were worse than they, and have not
labored so much as they have done, and sometimes they have had even dreadful
blasphemous Thoughts, in these Circumstances.

But when they reflect on these wicked Workings of Heart against God, if their
Convictions are continued* and the Spirit of God, is not provoked utterly to
forsake them, they have more distressing Apprehensions of the Anger of God
toward those, whose Hearts work after such a sinful manner about him; and it
may be have great Fears that they have committed the unpardonable Sin, or that
God will surely never show Mercy to them that are such Vipers; and are often
tempted to leave off in despair. But then perhaps by something they read or
hear of the infinite Mercy of God, and All Sufficiency of Christ for the chief
of Sinners; they have some Encouragement and Hope renewed; but think that as
yet they are not fit to come to Christ; they are so wicked that Christ will
never accept of them: and then it may be they set themselves upon a new Course
of fruitless Endeavors in their own Strength to make themselves better, and
still meet with new Disappointments: They are earnest to enquire what they
shall do? They don't know but there is something else to be done, in order to
their obtaining converting Grace, that they have never done yet. It may be they
hope that they are something better than they were; but then the pleasing Dream
all vanishes again. If they are told, that they trust too much to their own
Strength and Righteousness, they go about to strive to bring themselves off
from it, and it may be, think they have done it, when they only do the same
thing under a new disguise, and still find no appearance of any Good, but all
looks as dark as Midnight to them. Thus they wander about from Mountain to
Hill, seeking rest, and finding none: when they are beat out of one Refuge they
fly to another, till they are as it were debilitated, broken, and subdued with
legal Humblings; in which God gives them a Conviction of their own utter
Helplessness and Insufficiency, and discovers the true Remedy.

When they begin to seek Salvation, they are commonly profoundly ignorant of
themselves; they are not sensible how blind they are, and how little they can
do toward bringing themselves to see spiritual things aright, and toward
putting forth gracious Exercises in their own Souls: they are not sensible how
^remote they are from Love to God, and other holy Dispositions, and how dead
they are in Sin. When they see unexpected Pollution in their own Hearts, they
go about to wash away their own Defilements and make themselves clean; and they
weary themselves in vain, till God shows them that it is in vain, and that their
help is not where they have sought it, but elsewhere.

But some Persons continue wandering in such a kind of Labyrinth, ten times as
long as others, before their own Experience will convince them of their
Insufficiency; and so it appears not to be their own Experience only, but the
convincing Influence of God's Spirit with their Experience, that attains the
Effect: and God has of late abundantly shown, that he don't need to wait to
have Men convinced by long and often repeated fruitless Trials; for in
multitudes of Instances he has made a shorter work of it: he has so awakened
and convinced Persons Consciences, and made them so sensible of their exceeding
great Vileness, and given 'em such a sense of his Wrath against Sin, as has
quickly overcome all their vain Self-confidence, and born them down into the
Dust before a holy and righteous God.

There have been some who have not had great Terrors, but have had a very quick
Work. Some of those that han't had so deep a Conviction of these things before
their Conversion, have, it may be, much more of it afterward. God has appeared
far from limiting himself to any certain Method in his Proceedings with Sinners
under legal Convictions. In some Instances it seems easy for our reasoning
Powers to discern the methods of divine Wisdom, in his Dealings with the Soul
under awakenings: in others his Footsteps cannot be traced, and his Ways are
past finding out: and some that are less distinctly wrought upon, in what is
preparatory to Grace, appear no less eminent in gracious experiences afterward.

There is in nothing a greater Difference, in different Persons, than with
respect to the Time of their being under Trouble; some but a few Days, and
others for Months or Years. There were many in this Town, that had been, before
this Effusion of God's Spirit upon us, for Years, and some for many Years,
concerned about their Salvation; though probably they were not thoroughly
awakened, yet they were concerned to such a Degree as to be very uneasy, so as
to live an uncomfortable disquieted Life, and so as to continue in a way of
taking considerable Pains about their Salvation, but had never obtained any
comfortable Evidence of a good Estate, who now in this extraordinary time have
received Light; but many of them were some of the last: They first saw
Multitudes of others rejoicing, and with Songs of Deliverance in their Mouths,
who seemed wholly careless and at ^ase, and in pursuit of Vanity, while they
had been bowed down with solicitude about their Souls; yea some had lived
licenciously, and so continued till a little before they were converted, and
grew up to a holy Rejoicing in the infinite Blessings God had bestowed upon
them.

And whatever Minister has the like Occasion to deal with Souls, in a Flock
under such Circumstances as this was in the last Year, I cannot but think he
will soon find himself under a Necessity, greatly to insist upon it with them,
that God is under no manner of Obligation to show Mercy to any natural Man,
whose Heart is not turned to God: and that a Man can challenge nothing, either
in absolute Justice, or by free Promise, from any Thing he does before he has
believed on Jesus Christ, or has true Repentance begun in him. It appears to
me, that if I had taught those that came to me under Trouble, any other
Doctrine, I should have taken a most direct Course utterly to have undone them;
I should have directly crossed what was plainly the Drift of the Spirit of God
in his Influence upon them; for if they had believed what I said, it would
either have promoted Self-flattery and Carelessness, and so put an End to their
Awakenings; or cherished and established their Contention and Strife with God,
concerning his Dealings with them and others, and blocked up their Way to that
Humiliation before the Sovereign Disposer of Life and Death, whereby God is
wont to prepare them for his Consolations. And yet those that have been under
Awakenings, have oftentimes plainly stood in need of being encouraged, by being
told of the infinite and all-sufficient Mercy of God in Christ; and that it is
God's Manner to succeed Diligence, and to bless his own Means, that so
Awakenings and Encouragements, Fear and Hope may be duly mixed, and
proportioned to preserve their Minds in a just Medium between the two Extremes
of Self-flattery and Despondence, both which tend to Slackness, and Negligence,
and in the End to Security. I think I have found that no Discourses have been
more remarkably blessed, than those in which the Doctrine of God's absolute
Sovereignty with Regard to the Salvation of Sinners, and his just Liberty, with
Regard to his answering the Prayers, or succeeding the Pains of natural Men,
continuing such, have been insisted on. I never found so much immediate saving
Fruit, in any Measure, of any Discourses I have offered to my Congregation, as
some from those Words, Romans 3. 19. That every Mouth may be stopped;
endeavoring to show from thence, that it would be just with God for ever to
reject and cast off mere natural (...).

In those in whom Awakenings seem to have a saving Issue, commonly the first
Thing that appears after their legal Troubles, is a Conviction of the Justice
of God in their Condemnation, in a Sense of their own exceeding Sinfulness, and
the Vileness of all their Performances: In giving Account of this, they
expressed themselves very variously; some, that God was Sovereig^^ and might
receive others and reject them; some, that they were convinced, that God might
justly bestow Mercy on every Person in the Town, and on every Person in the
World, and damn themselves to all Eternity; some, that they see that God may
justly have no Regard to all the Pains they have taken, and all the Prayers
they have made; some, that they see that if they should seek, and take the
utmost Pains, all their Lives, God might justly cast them into Hell at last,
because all their Labors, Prayers, and Tears, cannot make an Atonement for the
least Sin, nor merit any Blessing at the Hands of God; some have declared
themselves to be in the Hands of God, that he can, and may dispose of them just
as he pleases, some, that God may glorify himself in their Damnation, and they
wonder that God has suffered them to live so long, and has not cast 'em into
Hell long ago.

Some are brought to this Conviction by a great Sense of their Sinfulness, in
general, that they are such vile wicked Creatures in Heart and Life: Others
have the Sins of their Lives in an extraordinary Manner set before them,
Multitudes of them coming just then fresh to their Memories, and being set
before them with their Aggravations; some have their Minds especially fixed, on
some particular wicked Practice, they have indulged; some are especially
convinced by a Sight of the Corruption and Wickedness of their Hearts; some,
from a View they have of the Horridness of some particular Exercises of
Corruption, which they have had in the Time of their Awakenings* whereby the
Enmity of the Heart against God has been manifested; some are convinced
especially by a sense of the Sin of Unbelief, the Opposition of their Hearts to
the Way of Salvation by Christ, and their Obstinacy in rejecting him and his
Grace.

There is a great deal of difference as to Persons Distinctness here; some,
that han't so clear a Sight of God's Justice in their Condemnation, yet mention
things that plainly imply it. They find a Disposition to acknowledge God to be
just and righteous in his Threatenings, and that they are deserving of nothing:
And many times, though they had not so particular a Sight of it at the Beginning,
they have very clear Discoveries of it soon afterward, with great Humblings in
the Dust before God.

Commonly Persons Minds immediately before this Discovery of God's Justice are
exceeding restless, and in a kind of Struggle and Tumult, and sometimes in mere
Anguish; but generally, as soon as they have this Conviction, it immediately
brings their Minds to a Calm, and a before unexpected Quietness and Composure;
and most frequently, though not always, then the pressing weight upon their
Spirits is taken away, and a general Hope arises, that some time or other God
will be gracious, even before any distinct and particular Discoveries of Mercy;
and often they then come to a Conclusion within themselves, that they will lie
at God's Feet, and wait his Time, and they rest in that, not being sensible
that the Spirit of God has now brought them to a Frame whereby they are
prepared for Mercy: for it is remarkable that persons, when they first have this
sense of the Justice of God, rarely in the time of it, think any thing of its
being that Humiliation that they have often heard insisted on, and that others
experience.

In many Persons, the first Conviction of the Justice of God in their
Condemnation, which they take particular notice of, and probably the first
distinct Conviction of it that they have, is of such a Nature, as seems to be
above any thing merely legal; Though it be after legal Humblings, and much of the
sense of their own Helplessness and of the Insufficiency of their own Duties;
yet it does not appear to be forced by mere legal Terrors and Convictions; but
rather from an high Exercise of Grace, in saving Repentance, and evangelical
Humiliation; for there is in it a sort of Complacency of Soul, in the Attribute
of God's Justice, as displayed in his Threatenings of eternal Damnation to
Sinners. Sometimes at the Discovery of it, they can scarcely forbear crying
out, IT IS JUST! IT IS JUST! Some express themselves, that they see the Glory of
God would shine bright in their own Condemnation; and they are ready to think
that if they are damned, they could take part with God against themselves, and
would glorify his Justice therein. And when it is thus, they commonly have some
evident sense of free and all-sufficient Grace, though they give no distinct
Account of it, but it is manifest, by that great degree of Hope and
Encouragement that they then conceive, though they were never so sensible of
their own Vileness and Illdeservings as they are at that time.

Some, when in such Circumstances; have felt that sense of the Excellency of
God's Justice, appearing in the vindictive Exercises of it, against such
Sinfulness as theirs was, and have had such a Submission of Mind in their Idea
of this Attribute, and of those Exercises of it, together with an exceeding
loathing of their own Unworthiness, and a kind of Indignation against
themselves, that they have sometimes almost called it a Willingness to be
damned; though it must be owned they had not clear and distinct Ideas of
Damnation, nor does any Word in the Bible require such Self denial as this. But
the truth is, as some have more clearly expressed it, that Salvation has appeared
too good for them, that they were worthy of nothing but Condemnation, and they
could not tell how to think of Salvation's being bestowed upon them, fearing it
was inconsistent with the Glory of God's Majesty, that they had so much
contemned and affronted.

That Calm of Spirit that some Persons have found after their legal Distresses,
continues some time before any special and delightful Manifestation is made to
the Soul of the Grace of God, as revealed in the Gospel; but very often some
comfortable and sweet View of a merciful God, of a sufficient Redeemer, or of
some great and joyful things of the Gospel, immediately follows, or in a very
little time: And in some, the first Sight of their just Desert of Hell, and
God's Sovereignty with respect to their Salvation, and a Discovery of
all-sufficie^t Grace, are so near, that they seem to go as it were together.

These gracious Discoveries that are given, whence the first special Comforts
are derived, are in many respects very various; more frequently Christ is
distinctly made the Object of the Mind, in his All Sufficiency and Willingness
to save Sinners: But some have their Thoughts more especially fixed on God, in
some of his sweet and glorious Attributes manifested in the Gospel, and shining
forth in the Face of Christ: Some view the All Sufficiency of the Mercy and
Grace of God; some chiefly the infinite Power of God, and his Ability to save
them, and to do all things for them; and some look most at the Truth and
Faithfulness of God: In some, the Truth and Certainty of the Gospel in general
is the first joyful Discovery they have; in others, the certain Truth of some
particular Promises; in some, the Grace and Sincerity of God in his
Invitations, very commonly in some particular Invitation in the Mind, and it
now appears real to them that God does indeed invite them. Some are struck with
the Glory and Wonderfulness of the dying. Love of Christ; and some with the
Sufficiency and Precio^sness of his Blood, as offered to make an Atonement for
Sin; and others with the Value and Glory of his Obedience and Righteousness. In
some the Excellency and Loveliness of Christ, chiefly engages their Thoughts;
in some his Divinity, that he is indeed the Son of the living God; and in
others, the Excellency of the way of Salvation by Christ, and the Suitableness
of it to their Necess^^ies.

Some have an Apprehension of these things so given, that it seems more natural
to them to express it by Sight or Discovery; others think what they experience
better expressed by the Realizing Conviction, or a lively or feeling Sense of
Heart; meaning, as I suppose, no other Difference but what is mearly
circumstantial or gradual

There is, often, in the Mind, some particular Text of Scripture, holding forth
some evangelical ground of Consolation; sometimes a Multitude of Texts,
gracious Invitations and Promises flowing in one after another, filling the
Soul more and more, with Comfort and Satisfaction: and Comfort is first given
to some, while reading some Portion of Scripture; but in some it is attended
with no particular Scripture at all, either in Reading or Meditation. In some,
many divine things seem to be discovered to the Soul as it were at once; others
have their Minds especially fixing on some one thing at first, and afterward a
sense is given of others; in some with a swifter, and others a ^lower
Succession, and sometimes with Interruptions of much Darkness

The way that Grace seems sometimes first to appear after legal Humiliation, is
in earnest Longings of Soul after God and Christ, to know God, to love him, to
be humbled before him, to have Communion with Christ in his Benefits, which
Longings, as they express them, seem evidently to be of such a nature as can
arise from nothing but a sense of the superlative Excellency of divine things,
with a spiritual Taste and Relish of 'em, and an Esteem of 'em as their highest
Happiness and best Portion. Such Longings as I speak of, are commonly attended
with firm Resolutions to pursue this Good for ever, together with a hoping,
waiting Disposition. When Persons have begun in such Frames, commonly other
Experiences and Discoveries have soon followed, which have yet more clearly
manifested a change of Heart.

It must needs be confessed that Christ is not always distinctly and explicitly
thought of in the first sensible Act of Grace, (though most commonly he is;) but
sometimes he is the Object of the Mind only implicitly. Thus sometimes when
Persons have seemed evidently to be stripped of all their own Righteousness, and
to have stood self condemned as guilty of Death, they have been comforted with
a joyful and satisfying View, that the Mercy and Grace of God is sufficient for
them; that their Sins, though never so great, shall be no Hindrance to their
being accepted; that there is Mercy enough in God for the whole World, and the
like, when they give no Account of any particular or distinct Thought of
Christ; but yet when the Account they give is duly weighed, and they are a
little interrogated about it, it appears that the Revelation of the Mercy of
God in the Gospel, is the Ground of this their Encouragement and Hope; and that
it is indeed the Mercy of God through Christ, that is discovered to them, and
that it is depended on in him, and not in any wise moved by any thing in them.

So sometimes disconsolate Souls amongst us, have been revived and brought to
rest in God, by a sweet sense given of his Grace and Faithfulness, in some
special Invitation or Promise, in which is no particular mention of Christ, nor
is it accompanied with any distinct Thought of him, in their Minds; but yet it
is not received as out of Christ, but as one of the Invitations or Promises
made of God to poor Sinners through his Son Jesus, as it is indeed: and such
Persons have afterward had clear and distinct Discoveries of Christ,
accompanied with lively and special Actings of Faith and Love toward him.

It has more frequently been so amongst us, that when Persons have first had
the Gospel Ground of Relief for lost Sinners discovered to them, and have been
entertaining their Minds with the sweet Prospect, they have thought nothing at
that time of their being converted: To see that there is such an
All Sufficiency in God, and such plentiful Provision made in Christ, after they
have been borne down, and sunk with a sense of their Guilt and Fears of Wrath,
exceedingly refreshes them; the View is joyful to them, as it is in its own
nature glorious, and gives them quite new, and more delightful Ideas of God and
Christ, and greatly encourages them to seek Conversion, and begets in them a
strong Resolution to give up themselves, and devote their whole Lives to God
and his Son, and patiently to wait till God shall see fit to make all
effectual; and very often they entertain a strong Persuasion, that he will in
his own time do it for them.

There is wrought in them a holy Repose of Soul in God through Christ, and a
secret Disposition to fear and love him, and to hope for Blessings from him in
this Way: and yet they have no Imagination that they are now converted, it
don't so much as come into their Minds: and very often the Reason is, that they
don't see that they do accept of this sufficiency of Salvation, that they
behold in Christ, having entertained a wrong Notion of Acceptance; not being
sensible that the obedient and joyful Entertainment which their Hearts give to
this Discovery of Grace, is a real Acceptance of it: They know not that the
sweet Complacence they feel in the Mercy and complete Salvation of God, as it
includes Pardon and Sanctification, and is held forth to them only through
Christ, is a true receiving of this Mercy, or a plain Evidence of their
receiving it. They expected I know not what Kind of Act of Soul, and perhaps
they had no distinct Idea of it themselves.

And indeed it appears very plainly in some of them, that before their own
Conversion they had very imperfect Ideas what Conversion was: It is all new and
strange, and what there was no clear Conception of before. It Is most evident as
they themselves acknowledge, that the Expressions that were used to describe
Conversion, and the Graces of God's Spirit, such as a spiritual Sight of
Christ, Faith in Christ, Poverty of Spirit, Trust in God, Resignedness to God,
etc. were Expressions that did not convey those special and distinct Ideas to
their Minds, which they were intended to signify, in some respects no more than
the Names of Colors are to convey the Ideas to one that is blind from his
Birth.

This Town is a Place where there has always been a great deal of Talk of
Conversion, and spiritual Experiences; and therefore People in general had
before formed a Notion in their own Minds what these things were; but when they
come to be the Subjects of them themselves, they find themselves much
confounded in their Notions, and overthrown in many of their former Conceits.
And it has been very observable, that Persons of the greatest Understanding,
and that had studied most about things of this nature, have been more
confounded than others. Some such Persons that have lately been converted,
declare that all their former Wisdom is brought to naught, and that they appear
to have been mere Babes, who knew nothing It has appeared that none have stood
more in need of Enlightening and Instruction, even of their Fellow Christians,
concerning their own Circumstances and Difficulties, than they: and it has
seemed to have been with delight, that they have seen themselves thus brought
down and become nothing, that free Grace, and divine Power may be exalted in
them.

It was very wonderful to see after what manner Persons Affections were
sometimes moved and wrought upon, when God did as it were, suddenly open their
Eyes and let into their Minds, a sense of the Greatness of his Grace, and
Fullness of Christ, and his readiness to save, who before were broken with
Apprehensions of divine Wrath, and ^unk into an Abyss under a sense of Guilt,
which they were ready to think was beyond the Mercy of God: their joyful
Surprise has caused their Hearts as it were to leap, so that they have been
ready to break forth into Laughter, Tears often at the same time issuing like a
Flood, and intermingling a loud Weeping: and sometimes they have not been able to
forbear crying out with a loud Voice, expressing their great Admiration. In
some even the View of the Glory of God's Sovereignty in the Exercises of his
Grace has surprised the Soul with such Sweetness, as to produce the same
Effects. I remember an Instance of one* who, reading something concerning God's
sovereign way of saving Sinners, as being self-moved, and having no regard to
Men's own Righteousness as the Motive of his Grace, but as magnifying himself
and abasing Man, or to that purpose, felt such a sudden Rapture of Joy and
Delight in the Consideration of it: and yet then suspected himself to be in a
Christless Condition, and had been long in great Distress for fear that God
would not have mercy on him.

Many continue a long time in a Course of gracious Exercises and Experiences,
and don't think themselves to be converted, but conclude themselves to be
otherwise; and none knows how long they would continue so, were they not helped
by particular Instruction. There are undoubted I^st^nces of some that have
^ived in this way for many Years together; and a continuing in these
Circumstances of being con^erted and not be^ieving it, has had various
consequences, with various Persons, and with the same Persons, at various
Times; some continue in great Encouragement and Hope, that they shall obtain
Mercy, in a steadfast Resolution to persevere in seeking it, and in an humble
waiting for it at God's foot; but very often when the lively Sense of the
Sufficiency of Christ, and the Riches of divine Grace begins to vanish, upon a
withdraw of the Influences of the Spirit of God, they return to greater
Distress than ever; for they have now a far greater Sense of the Misery of a
natural Condition than before, being in a new manner sensible of the reality of
eternal Things, and the greatness of God, and his Excellency, and how dreadful
it is to be separated from him, and to be subject to his Wrath; so that they
are sometimes swallowed up with Darkness and Amazement. Satan has a vast
Advantage in such Cases to ply them with various Temptations, which he is not
wont to neglect. In such a case Persons do very much need a Guide to lead them
to an Understanding of what we are taught in the Word of God of the Nature of
Grace, and to help them to apply it to themselves

I have been much blamed and censured by many, that I should make it my
Practice, when I have been satisfied concerning Persons good Estate, to signify
it to them: Which Thing has been greatly misrepresented abroad, as innumerable
other Things concerning us, to prejudice the Country against the whole Affair
But let it be noted, that what I have undertaken to judge of, has rather been
Qualifications, and declared Experiences, than Persons: Not but that I have
thought (...) Duty as a Pastor to assist and instruct Persons in applying
Scripture Rules and Characters to their own Case, (in doing of which, I think
many greatly need a Guide,) and have, where I thought the Case plain, used
Freedom in signifying my Hope of them, to others: but have been far from doing
this concerning all that I have had some hopes of; and I believe have used much
more Cau^ion than many have supposed. Yet I should account it a great Calamity
to be deprived of the Comfort of Rejoicing with those of my Flock, that have
been in great Distress, whose Circumstances I have been acquainted with, when
there seems to be good Evidence that those that were dead are alive, and those
that were lost are found. I am sensible the Practice would have been safer in
the hands of one of a riper Judgment and greater Experience; but yet there has
seemed to be an absolute Necessi^^ of it on the forementioned Accounts; and it
has ^^en found to be that which God has most remarkably owned and blessed
amongst us, both to the Persons themselves and others.

Grace in many Persons, through this Ignorance of their State, and their
looking on themselves still as the Objects of God's Displeasure, has been like
the Trees in Winter, or like Seed in the Spring suppressed under a hard Clod of
Earth; and many in such Cases have labored to their utmost to divert their
Minds from the pleasing and joyful Views they have had, and to suppress those
Consolations and gracious Affections that arose thereupon. And when it has once
come into their Minds to enquire whether or no this was no^ true Grace, they
have been much afraid lest they should be d^ceiv'd with common Illuminations
and Flashes of Affection, and eternally undone with a false Hope. But when they
have been better instructed, and so brought to allow of Hope, this has awakened
the gracious Disposition of their Hearts into Life and Vigor, as the warm Beams
of the S^n in the Spring, have quickened the Seeds and Productions of the
Earth: Grace being now at liberty, and cherished with Hope, has soon flowed out
to their abundant Satisfaction and Increase.

There is no one thing that I know of that God has made such a means of
promoting his Work amongst us, as the News of others Conversion; in the
awakening Sinners, and engaging them earnestly to seek the same Blessing, and
in the quickening of Saints. Though I have thought that a Minister's declaring
his Judgment about particular Persons Experiences might from these Things be
^^stified, yet I am often signifying to my People how unable Man is to know
another's Heart, and how unsafe it is depending merely on the Judgment of
Ministers, or others, and have abundantly insisted on it with them that a
manifestation of Sincerity in Fruits brought forth, is better than any
manifestation they can make of it in Words alone, can be; and that without
this, all Presences to spiritual Experiences are vain; as all my Congregation
can witness. And the People in general, in this late extraordinary Time, have
manifested an extraordinary Dread of being deceived, being exceeding fearful
le^t they should build wrong, and some of them backward to receive Hope, even
to a great Extreme.

Conversion is a great and glorious Work of God's Power, at once Changing the
Heart, and infusing Life into the dead Soul; though that Grace that is then
implanted does more gradually display it self in some than in others But as to
fixing on the precise Time when they put forth the very first Act of Grace,
there is a great deal of difference in different Persons; in some it seems to
be very discernable when the very Time of this was; but others are more at a
loss. In this respect there are very many that don't know the Time, (as has
been already observed) that when they have the first Exercises of Grace, don't
know that it is the Grace of Conversion, and sometimes don't think it to be so
till a long time after: And many, even when they come to entertain great Hope
that they are converted if they remember what they experienced in the first
Exercises of Grace, they are at a loss whether it was any more than a common
Illumination; or whether some other, more clear and remarkable Experience, that
they had afterward, was not the first that was of a saving nature And the
manner of God's Work on the Soul is (sometimes especially) very mysterious, and
it is with the Kingdom of God as to it. Manifestation in the Heart of a Convert,
as is said* Mark 1 26, 27, 28 So is the Kingdom of God, as if a Man should cast
Seed into the Ground and should sleep and rise Night and Day, and the Seed
should spring, and grow up he knows not how; for the Earth brings forth of
her self first the Blade, then the Ear, then the full Corn in the Ear.

In some, converting Light is like a glorious Brightness suddenly shining in
upon a Person, and all around him: They are in a remarkable manner brought out
of Darkness into mavelous Light. In many others it has been like the dawning
of the Day, when at first but a little Light appears, and it may be is
presently hid with a Cloud; and then it appears again, and shines a little
brighter, and gradually increases, with intervening Darkness, till at length,
perhaps, it breaks forth more clearly from behind the Clouds. And many are,
doubtless, ready to date their Conversion wrong, throwing by those lesser
Degrees of Light that appeared at first dawning, and calling some mo^^
remarkable Experience, they had afterward, their Conversions; which often in
great measure arises from a wrong Understanding of what they have always been
taught, that Conversion is a great Change, wherein old Things are done away,
and all Things become now, or at least from a false arguing from that Doctrine.

Persons commonly at first Conversion, and afterward, have had many Texts of
Scripture brought to their Minds, that are exceeding suitable to their
Circumstances, which often come with great Power, and as the Word of God or
Christ indeed; and many have a multitude of swee^ Invitations, Promises, and
Doxologi^s flowing in one after another, bringing great Light and Comfort with
them, filling the Soul brim f^ll, enlarging the Heart, and opening the Mouth in
Religion. And it seems to me necessary to suppose, that there is an immediate
Influence of the Spirit of God, oftentimes in bringing Texts of Scripture to
the Mind: Not that I suppose it is done in a way of immediate Revelation,
without any manner of use of the Memory; but yet there seems plainly to be an
immediate and extraordinary Influence, in leading their Thoughts so such and
such Passages of Scripture, and exciting them in the Memory. Indeed in some God
seems to bring Texts of Scripture to their Minds no otherwise than by leading
them into such Frames and Meditations, as harmonize with those Scriptures; but
in many Persons there seems to be something more than this.

Those that, while under legal Convictions, have had the greatest Terrors, have
not always obtained the greatest Light and Comfort; no^ have they always Light
most suddenly communicated; but yet, I think, the time of Conversion has
generally been most sensible in such Persons. Oftentimes, the first sensible
Change after the Extremity of Terrors, is a Calmness, and then the Light
gradually comes in; small Glimpses at first, after their midnight Darkness, and
a word or two of Comfort, as it were softly spoken to 'em; they have a little
Taste of the Sweetness of divine Grace, 'and the Love of a Savior, when Terror
and Distress of Conscience begins to be turned into an humble, meek Sense of
their own Unworthiness before God; and there is felt inwardly, perhaps, some
Disposition to praise God; and after a little while the Light comes in more
clearly and powerfully. But yet, I think more frequently, great Terrors have
been followed with more sudden and great Light, and Comfort; when the Sinner
seems to be as it were subdued and brought to a Calm, from a kind of Tumult of
Mind, then God lets in an extraordinary Sense of his great Mercy through a
Redeemer.

The converting Influences of God's Spirit very commonly bring an extraordinary
Conviction of the Reality and Certainty of the great Things of Religion; (though
in some this is much greater, some time after Conversion, than at first*) they
have that sight and taste of the Divinity, or divine Excellency, that there is
in the Things of the Gospel, that is more to convince them, than reading many
Volumes of Arguments without it. It seems to me that in many Instances amongst
us, when the divine Excellency and Glory of the Things of Christianity have
been set before Persons, and they have at the same time as it were seen, and
tasted, and felt the Divinity of them, they have been as far from doubting of
the Truth of them, as they are from doubting whether there be a Sun, when their
Eyes are open upon it in the midst of a clear Hemisphere, and the strong Blaze
of his Light overcomes all Objections against his Being. And yet many of them,
if we should ask them why they believed those Things to be true, would not be
able well to express, or communicate a sufficient Reason, to satisfy the
Enquirer, and perhaps would make no other Answer but that they se^ 'em to be
true: But a Person might soon be satisfied, by a particular Conversation with
'em, that what they mean by such an Answer is, that they have intuitively
beheld, and immediately felt most illustrious Works, and powerful Evidence of
Divinity in them.

Some are thus convinced of the Truth of the Gospel in general, and that the
Scriptures are the Word of God: Others have their Minds more especially fixed
on some particular great Doctrine of the Gospel, some particular Truths that
they are meditating on; or are in a special manner convinced of the Divinity of
the Things they are reading of* in some portion of Scripture. Some have such
Convictions in a much more remarkable manner than others: And there are some
that never had such a special Sense of the Certainty of divine Things,
impressed upon them with such inward Evidence and Strength, have yet very clear
Exercises of Grace; i. e. of Love to God, Repentance and Holiness. And if they
be more particularly examined, they appear plainly to have an inward firm
Persuasion of the Reality of divine Things, such as they don't use to have
before their Conversion. And those that have the most clear Discoveries of
divine Truth, in the manner that has been spoken of, cannot have this always in
view. When the Sense and Relish of the divine Excellency of these Things fades,
on a withdraw of the Spirit of God, they have not the medium of the Conviction of
their Truth at command: In a dull Frame they cannot recall the ^ea, and inward
Sense they had, prefectly to mind; Things appear very dim to what they did
before: And though there still remains an habitual strong Persuasion; yet not so
as to exclude Temptations to Unbelief, and all possibility of Doubting, as
before: But then at particular Times, by God's Help, the same Sense of Things
revives again, like Fire that lay hid in Ashes.

I suppose the grounds of such a Conviction of the Truth of divine Things to be
just and rational, but yet in some God makes use of their own Reason much more
sensibly than in others. Oftentimes Persons have (so far as could be judged)
received the first saving Conviction from reasoning, which they have heard from
the Pulpit; and often in the course of Reasoning, which they are led into in
their own Meditations

The Arguments are the same that they have heard hundreds of times; but the
Force of the Arguments, and their Conviction by 'em, is altogether new; they
come with a new and before unexperienced Power: Before they heard it was so,
and they allowed it to be so; but now they see it to be so indeed. Things now
look exceeding plain to 'em, and they wonder that they did not see 'em before.

They are so greatly taken with their new Discovery, and Things appear so
plain, and so rational to 'em, that they are often at first ready to think they
can convince others; and are apt to engage in talk with every one they meet
with, almost to this End; and when they are disappointed, are ready to wonder
that their Reasonings seem to make no more Impression.

Many fall under such a Mistake as to be ready to doubt of their good Estate,
because there was so much use made of their own Reason in the Convictions they
have received; they are afraid that they have no Illumination above the natural
Force of their own Faculties: And many make that an Objection against the
Spirituality of their Convictions, that it is so easy to see Things as they now
see them. They have often heard that Conversion is a work of mighty Power,
manifesting to the Soul what no Man nor Angel can give such a Conviction of;
but it seems to them that the Things that they see are so plain, and easy, and
rational, that any body can see them: And if they are enquired of, why they
never saw so before; they say, it seems to them it was because they never
thought of it. But very often these Difficulties are soon removed by those of
another nature; for when God withdraws, they find themselves as it were blind
again, they for the present lose their realizing Sense of those Things that
looked so plain to 'em, and by all that they can do they cannot recover it, till
God renews the Influences of his Spirit.

Persons after their Conversion often speak of Things of Religion as seeming
new to them; that Preaching is a new thing; that it seems to them they never
heard Preaching before; that the Bible is a new Book: They find there new
Chapters, new Psalms, new Histories, because they see them in a new Light. Here
was a remarkable Instance of an aged Woman that had spent most of her Days
under Mr. Stoddard's powerful Ministry; who reading in the New Testament,
concerning Christ's Sufferings for Sinners, seemed to be surprised and
astonished at what she read, as at a Thing that was real and very wonderful,
but quite new to her, insomuch that at first, before she had time to turn her
Thoughts, she wondered within her self that she had never heard of it before;
but then immediately recollected her self, and thought that she had often heard
of it, and read it, but never till now saw it as a thing real; and then cast in
her Mind, how wonderful this was, that the Son of God should undergo such
things for Sinners, and how she had spent her Time in ungratefully sinning
against so good a God, and such a Savior; though she was a Person, as to what
was visible, of a very blameless and inoffensive Life, And she was so overcome
by those Considerations, that her Nature was ready to fail under them: Those
that were about her, and knew not what was the matter, were surprised, and
thought she was a dying.

Many have spoken much of their Hearts being drawn out in Love to God and
Christ; and their Minds being wrapped up in delightful Contemplation of the
Glory, and wonderful Grace of God, and the Excellency, and dying Love of Jesus
Christ; and of their Souls going forth in longing Desires after God and Christ
Several of our young Children have expressed much of this; and have manifested
a Willingness to leave Father and Mother and all Things in the World, to go to
be with Christ. Some Persons have had longing Desires after Christ, which have
risen to that degree, as to take away their natural Strength. Some have been so
overcome with a Sense of the dying Love of Christ, to such poor, wretched, and
unworthy Creatures, as to weaken the Body. Several Persons have had so great a
Sense of the Glory of God, and Excellency of Christ, that Nature and Life has
seemed almost to sink under it; and in all probability, if God had showed them
a little more of himself, it would have dissolved their Frame. I have seen
some, and been in Conversation with them in such Frames, who have certainly
been perfectly sober, and very remote from any thing like enthusiastic
Wildness: And have talked, when able to speak, of the Glory of God's
Perfections, and the wonderfulness of his Grace in Christ, and their own
Unworthiness, in such a manner that cannot be perfectly expressed after them.
Their Sense of their exceeding littleness and vileness, and their Disposition
to abase themselves before God, has appeared to be great in proportion to their
Light and Joy. Such Persons amongst us as have been thus distinguished with the
most extraordinary Discoveries of God, have commonly in no wise appeared with
the assuming, and self-conceited, and selfsufficient Airs of Enthusiasts, but
exceedingly the contrary; and are eminent for a Spirit of Meekness, Modesty,
Self diffidence, and low Opinion of themselves: No Persons seem to be so
sensible of their need of Instruction, and so eager to receive it, as some of
them; nor so ready to think others better than themselves. Those that have been
thought to be converted amongst us have generally manifested a longing to lie
low, and in the dust before God; withal complaining of their not being able to
lie low enough. They very often speak much of their Sense of the Excellency of
the way of Salvation, by free and sovereign Grace, through the Righteousness of
Christ alone; and how it is with delight that they renounce their own
Righteousness, and rejoice in having no Account made of it Many have expressed
themselves to this purpose, that it would lessen the Satisfaction they hope for
in Heaven to have it by their own Righteousness, or in any other way than as
bestowed by free Grace, and for Christ's sake alone. They speak much of the
Inexpressibleness of what they experience, how their Words fail, so that they
can in no wise declare it: and particularly speak with exceeding Admiration of
the superlative Excellency of that pleasure and delight of Soul, which they
sometimes, enjoy; how a little of it is sufficient to pay 'em for the Pains and
Trouble they have gone through in seeking Salvation; and how far it exceeds all
earthly Pleasures: And some express much of the Sense which these spiritual
Views give 'em of the Vanity of earthly Enjoyments, how mean and worthless all
these Things appear to 'em.

Many, while their Minds have been filled with spiritual Delights, have as it
were forgot their Food; their bodily Appetite has failed, while their Minds
have been entertained with Meat to eat that others knew not of. The Light and
Comfort which some of them enjoy, gives a new relish to their common Blessings,
and causes all Things about 'em to appear as it were beautiful, sweet and
pleasant to them: All Things abroad, the Sun, Moon and Stars, the Clouds and
Sky, the Heavens and Earth, appear as it were with a Cast of divine Glory and
Sweetness upon them. The sweetest Joy that these good People amongst us
express, is not that which consists in a Sense of the Safety of their own
State, and that now they are out of danger of Hell; frequently, in times of
their highest spiritual Entertainment, this seems to be as it were forgotten.
The supreme Attention of their Minds is to the glorious Excellencies of God and
Christ, which they have in view; not but that there is very often a ravishing
Sense of God's Love accompanying a Sense of his Excellency, and they rejoice in
a Sense of the Faithfulness of God's Promises, as they respect the future
eternal Enjoyment of God.

The Joy that many of them speak of as that, to which none is to be paralleled;
is that which they find when they are lowest in the Dust, emptied most of
themselves, and as it were annihilating themselves before God, when they are
nothing, and God is all, are seeing their own Unworthiness, depending not at
all on themselves, but alone on Christ, and ascribing all Glory to God: Then
their Souls are most in the Enjoyment of satisfying Rest; excepting that, at
such times, they apprehend themselves to be not sufficiently self-abased, for
then above all times do they long to be lower. Some speak much of the exquisite
Sweetness, and Rest of Soul that is to be found in the exercises of a Spirit of
Resignation to God, and humble Submission to his Will. Many express earnest
Longings of Soul to praise God; but at the same time complain that they cannot
praise him as they would do, and they want to have others help them in praising
him: They want to have every one praise God, and are ready to call upon every
thing to praise him. They express a longing Desire to live to God's Glory, and
to do something to his Honor; but at the same time ^^y out of their
Insufficiency and Barrenness, that they are poor impotent Creatures, can do
nothing of themselves, and are utterly insufficient to glorify their creator
and Redeemer.

While God was so remarkably present amongst us by his Spirit, there was no
Book so delighted in as the Bible; especially the Book of Psalms, the Prophecy
of Is^lah, and the New Testament Some by reason of their Esteem and Love to
God's Word, have at some times been greatly and wonderfully delighted and
affected at the sight of a Bible: and then also, there was no Time so prized as
the Lord's Day, and no Place in this World so desired as God's House. Our
Converts then remarkably appeared united in dear Affection to one another, and
many have expressed much of that Spirit of Love which they felt toward all
Mankind; and particularly to those that had been least friendly to them. Never,
I believe, was so much done in confessing Injuries, and making up Differences
as the last Year. Persons after their own Conversion, have commonly expressed
an exceeding desire for the Conversion of others: Some have thought that they
should be willing to die for the Conversion of any Soul, though of one of the
meanest of their Fellow Creatures, or of their worst Enemies; and many have
indeed been in great Distress with Desires and Longings for it. This Work of
God had also a good Effect to unite the People's Affections much to their
Minister.

There are some Persons that I have been acquainted with, but more especially
two, that belong to other Towns, that have been swallowed up exceedingly with a
Sense of the awful Greatness and Majesty of God; and both of them told me to
this purpose, that if they in the time of it, had had the least Fear that they
were not at at peace with this so great a God, they should instantly have died.

It is worthy to be remarked, that some Persons by their Conversion seem to be
greatly helped as to their doctrinal Notions of Religion; it was particulary
remarkable in one, who having been taken captive in his Childhood, was trained
up in Canada, in the Popish Religion; and some Years since returned to this his
native Place, and was in a measure brought off from Popery: but seemed very
awkward and dull of receiving any true and clear Notion of the Protestant
Scheme, till he was converted; and then he was remarkably altered in this
respect.

There is a vast difference, as has been observed in the Degree, and also in
the particular Manner of Persons Experiences, both at, and after Conversion;
some have Grace working more sensibly in one way, others in another. Some speak
more fully of a Conviction of the Justice of God in their Condemnation; others
more of their consenting to the way of Salvation by Christ; some more of the
Actings of Love to God and Christ: Some more of Acts of Affiance, in a sweet
and assured Conviction of the Truth and Faithfulness of God in his Promises;
others more of their choosing and resting in God as their whole and everlasting
Portion, and of their ardent and longing Desires after God, to have Communion
with him; others more of their abhorrence of themselves for their past Sins,
and earnest Longings to live to God's Glory for the time to come: Some have
their Mind fixed more on God; others on Christ, as I have observed before, but
it seems evidently to be the same Work, the same Thing done, the same habitual
Change wrought in the Heart; it all tends the same way, and to the same End:
and it is plainly the same Spirit that breathes and acts in various Persons.
There is an endless Variety in the particular manner and circumstances in which
Persons a^^ wrought on, and an opportunity of seeing so much of such a Work of
God, will show that God is further from confining himself to certain Steps, and
a particular Method, in his Work on Souls, than it may be some do imagine. I
believe it has occasioned some good People amongst us, that were before too
ready to make their own Experiences a Rule to others, to be less censorious and
more extended in their Charity. The Work of God has been glorious in its
Variety, it has the more displayed the manifoldness and unsearchableness of the
Wisdom of God, and wrought more Charity among his People.

There is a great Difference among those that are converted as to the Degree of
Hope and Satisfaction that they have concerning their own State. Some have a
high degree of Satisfaction in this Matter almost constantly: And yet it is
rare that any do enjoy so full an Assurance of their Interest in Christ, that
Self-Examination should seem needless to them; unless it be at particular
Seasons, while in the actual enjoyment of some great Discovery, that God gives
of his Glory and rich Grace in Christ, to the drawing forth of extraordinary
acts of Grace. But the greater part, as they sometimes fall into dead Frames of
Spirit, are frequently exercised with Scruples and Fears concerning their
Condition.

They generally have an awful Apprehension of the Dreadfulness and undoing
Nature of a false Hope; and there has been observable in most a great Caution,
left in giving an account of their Experiences, they should say too much, and
use too strong Terms: And many after they have related their Experiences, have
been greatly afflicted with Fears, left they have played the Hypocrite, and
used stronger Terms than their Case would fairly allow of; and yet could not
find how they could correct themselves.

I think that the main ground of the Doubts and Fears that Persons, after their
Conversion, have been exercised with about their own State, has been that they
have found so much Corruption remaining in their Hearts. At first their Souls
seem to be all alive, their Hearts are fixed, and their Affections flowing;
they seem to live quite above the World, and meet with but little Difficulty in
religious Exercises; and they are ready to think it will always be so: Though
they are truly abased under a Sense of their Vileness by reason of former Acts
of Sin, yet they are not then sufficiently sensible what Corruption still
remains in their Hearts; and therefore are surprised when they find that they
begin to be in dull and dead Frames, to be troubled with wandering Thoughts in
the time of public and private Worship, and to be utterly unable to keep
themselves from 'em; also when they find themselves unaffected at Seasons in
which, they think there is the greatest Occasion to be affected; and when they
feel worldly Dispositions working in them, and it may be Pride, and Envy, and
stirrings of Revenge, or some ill Spirit toward some Person, that has injured
(...), as well as ^other workings of indwelling Sin: Their Hearts are almost
sunk with the Disappointment, and they are ready presently to think that all
this they have met with is nothing, and that they are mee^ Hypocrites.

They are ready to argue, that if God had indeed done such great Things for
them, as they hoped, such Ingratitude would be inconsistent with it: They cry
out of the hardness and wickedness of their Hearts; and say there is so much
Corruption, that it seems to them impossible that there should be any Goodness
there: and many of them seem to be much more sensible how corrupt their Hearts
are, than ever they were before they were converted; and some have been too
ready to be impressed with Fear, that instead of becoming better, they are
grown much worse, and make it an Argument against the Goodness of their State.
But in truth the Case seems plainly to be, that now they feel the pain of their
own Wound; they have a watchful Eye upon their Hearts, that they don't use to
have: They take more notice what Sin is there, and Sin is now more burdensome
to 'em, they strive more against it, and feel more of the Strength of it.

They are somewhat surpised that they should in this respect find themselves
so different from the Idea that they generally had entertained of godly
Persons; for though Grace be indeed of a far more excellent nature than they
imagined; yet those that are godly have much less of it, and much more
remaining Corruption, than they thought. They never realized it, that Persons
were wont to meet with such Difficulties, after they were once converted. When
they are thus exercised with Doubts about their State, through the Deadness of
their Frames of Spirit, as long as these Frames last, they are commonly unable
to satisfy themselves of the Truth of their Grace, by all their
Self-examination. When they hear of the Signs of Grace laid down for 'em to try
themselves by, they are often so clouded, that they don't know how to apply
them: they hardly know whether they have such and such things in them or no,
and whether they have experienced them or not: That which was sweetest, and
best, and most distinguishing in their Experiences, they cannot recover a sense
or Idea of. But on a Return of the Influences of the Spirit of God, to revive
the lively Actings of Grace, the Light breaks through the Cloud, and Doubting
and Darkness soon vanish away.

Persons are often revived out of their dead and dark Frames, by religious
Conversation: while they are talking of divine things, or ever they are aware,
their Souls are carried away into holy Exercises with abundant Pleasure. And
oftentimes, while they are relating their past Experiences to their Christian
Brethren, they have a fresh sense of them revived, and the same Experiences in
a Degree again renewed. Sometimes while Persons are exercised in Mind with
several Objections against the Goodness of their State, they have Scriptures,
one after another, coming to their Minds, to answer their Scruples, and unravel
their Difficulties, exceeding apposite and proper to their Circumstances; by
which means their Darkness is scattered; and often before the Bestowment of any
new remarkable Comforts, especially after long continued Deadness and ill
Frames, there are renewed Humblings, in a great sense of their own exceeding
Vileness and Unworthiness, as before their first Comforts were bestowed.

Many in the Country have entertained a mean Thought of this great Work that
there has been amongst us, from what they have heard of Impressions that have
been made on Persons Imaginations. But there have been exceeding great
Misrepresentations, and innumerable false Reports concerning that Matter. It Is
not, that I know of, the Profession or Opinion of any one Person in the Town,
that any weight is to be laid on any thing seen with the bodily Eyes: I know
the contrary to be a received and established Principle amongst us. I cannot
say that there have been no Instances of Persons that have been ready to give
too much heed to vain and useless Imaginations; but they have been easily
corrected, and I conclude it will not be wondered at, that a Congregation
should need a Guide in such Cases, to assist them in distinguishing Wheat from
Chaff. But such Impressions on the Imagination as have been more usual, seem to
me, to be plainly no other, than what is to be expected in human Nature in such
Circumstances, and (...) is the natural Result of the strong Exercise of the
Mind, and Impressions on the Heart.

I do not suppose that they themselves imagined that they saw any thing with
their bodily Eyes; but only have had within them Ideas strongly impressed, and
as it were, livel^ Pictures in their Minds: As for instance, some when in great
Terrors, through fear of Hell, have had lively Ideas of a dreadful Furnace.
Some, when their Hearts have been strongly impressed, and their Affections
greatly moved with a sens^ of the Beauty and Excellency of Christ, it has
wrought on their Imaginations so, that together with a sense of his gloriou^
spiritual Perfections, there has arisen in the Mind an Idea of one of glorious
Majesty, and of a sweet and a gracious Aspect: So some when they have been
greatly affected with Christ's Death, have at the same time a lively Idea of
Christ hanging upon the Cross, and of his Blood running from his Wounds; which
things will not be wondered at by them that have observed how strong Affections
about temporal Matters will excite lively Ideas and Pictures of different
things in the Mind.

But yet the vigorous Exercise of the Mind, does doubtless more strongly
impress it with imaginary Ideas, in some than others, which probably may arise
from the difference of Constitution, and seems, evidently in some, partly to
arise from their peculiar Circumstances: When Persons have been exercised with
extreme Terrors, and there is a sudden change to Light and Joy, the Imagination
seems more susceptive of strong Ideas, and the inferior Powers, and even the
Frame of the Body, is much more affected and wrought upon, than when the same
Persons have as great spiritual Light and Joy afterward; of which it might,
perhaps, be easy to give a Reason. The forementioned Rev. Messi Lord and Owen,
who I believe, are esteemed Persons of Learning and Discretion where they are
best known, declared that they found these Impressions on Persons Imaginations,
quite different things from what Fame had before represented to them, and that
they were what none need to wonder at, or be stumbled by, or to that purpose.

There have indeed been some few Instances, of Impressions on Persons
Imaginations, that have been (...) mysterious to me, and I have been at a loss
about them; for though it has been exceeding evident to me by many things that
appeared in them, both then (when they related them) and afterward, that they
indeed had a great sense of the spiritual Excellency of Divine Things
accompanying them; yet I have not been able well to satisfy myself, whether
their imaginary Ideas have been more than could naturally arise from their
spiritual Sense of things. However, I have used the utmost Caution in such
Cases; great Care has been taken both in public and in private to teach
Persons the difference between what is spiritual and what is merely imaginary.
I have often warned Persons not to lay the stress of their Hope on any Ideas of
any outward Glory, or any external thing whatsoever, and have met with no
Opposition in such Instructions. But it is not strange if some weaker Persons,
in giving an account of their Experiences, have not so prudently distinguished
between the spiritual and imaginary Part; which some that have not been well
affected to Religion, might take advantage of.

There has been much talk in many parts of the Country, as though the People have
symbolized with the Quakers, and the Quakers themselves have been moved with
such Reports; and came here, once and again, hoping to find good Waters to fish
in; but without the least Success, and seem to be discouraged, and have left
off coming. There have also been Reports spread about the Country, as though the
first Occasion of so remarkable a Concern on People's Minds here, was an
Apprehension that the World was near to an end, which was altogether a false
Report: Indeed after this Stirring and Concern became so general and
extraordinary, as has been related, the Minds of some were filled with
Speculation, what so great a Dispensation of divine Providence might forebode:
and some Reports were heard from abroad, as though certain Divines and others
thought the Conflagration was nigh: but such Reports were never generally
looked upon worthy of Notice.

The Work that has now been wrought on Souls is evidently the same that was
wrought in my venerable Predecessor's Days; as I have had abundant Opportunity
to know, having been in the Ministry here two Years with him, and so conversed
with a considerable Number that my Grandfather thought to be savingly converted
in that time; and having been particularly acquainted with the Experiences of
many that were converted under his Ministry before. And I know no one of them,
that in the least doubts of its being the same Spirit, and the same Work.
Persons have now no otherwise been subject to Impressions on their
Imaginations, than formerly: The Work is of the same nature, and has not been
attended with any extraordinary Circumstances, excepting such as are analogous
to the extraordinary degree of it before described. And God's People, that were
formerly converted, have now partook of the same Shower of divine Blessing, in
the renewing, strengthening, edifying Influences of the Spirit of God, that
others have in his converting Influences; and the Work here has also been
plainly the same with that, which has been wrought in those of other Places
that have been mentioned, as partaking of the same Blessing I have particularly
conversed with Persons about their Experiences that belong to all parts of the
County, and in various parts of Connecticut, where a religious Concern has
lately appeared; and have been informed of the Experiences of many others by
their own Pastors.

It Is easily perceived by the foregoing Account that it is very much the
Practice of the People here, to converse freely one with another of their
spiritual Experiences, which is a thing that many have been disgusted at. But
however our People may have, in some respects, gone to extremes in it, yet it is
doubtless a Practice that the Circumstances of this Town, and neighboring
Towns, has naturally led them into. Whatsoever People are in such
Circumstances, where all have their Minds engaged to such a Degree, in the same
Affair, that it is ever uppermost in their Thoughts; they will naturally make it
the Subject of Conversation one with another when they get together, in which
they will grow more and more free: Restraints will soon vanish; and they will
not conceal from one another what they meet with. And it has been a Practice
which, in the general, has been attended with many good Effects, and what God
has greatly blessed amongst us: But it must be contest, there may have been
some ill Consequences of it; which yet are rather to be laid to the indiscreet
Management of it, than to the Practice it self; and none can wonder, if among
such a multitude some sail of exercising so much Prudence in choosing the time,
manner, and occasion of such Discourse, as is desirable.

But to give a clearer Idea of the Nature and Manner of the Operations of God's
Spirit, in this wonderful Effusion of it, I would give an Account of two
particular Instances. The first is an Adult Person, a young Woman whose Name
was Abigail Hutc^inson. I pitch upon her especially because she is now dead,
and so it may be more fit to speak freely of her then of living Instances: though
I am under far greater Disadvantages, on other accounts, to give a full and
clear Narrative of her Experiences, than I might of some others; nor can any
Account be given b^t what has been retained in the Memories of her near
Friends, and some others, of what they have heard her express in her life time

She was of a rational understanding Family: there could be nothing in her
Education that tended to Enthusiasm, but rather to the contrary extreme. It Is
in no wise the Temper of the Family to be oftentatious of Experiences, and it
was far from being her Temper. She was before her Conversion; to the
Observation of her Neighbors, of a sober and inoffensive Conversation; and was
a still, quie^, reserved Person. She had long been infirm of Body, but her
Infi^mity had never been observed at all to incline her to be notional or
fanciful, or to occasion any thing of religious Melancholy. She was under
Awakenings scarcely a Week before there seemed to be plain Evidence of her
being savingly converted.

She was first awakened in the Winter Season, on Monday, by something she heard
her Brother say of the Necessity of being in good earnest in seeking
regenerating Grace, together with the News of the Conversion of the young Woman
before mentioned, whose Conversion so generally affected most of the young
People here. This News wrought much upon her, and stirred up a Spirit of Envy
in her toward this young Woman, whom she thought very unworthy of being
distinguished from others by such a Mercy; but withal it engaged her in a firm
Resolution to do her u^most to obtain the same Blessing; and considering with
herself what Course she should take, she thought, that she had not a sufficient
Knowledge of the Principles of Religion, to render her capable of Conversion;
whereupon she resolved thoroughly to search the Scriptures; and accordingly
immediately began at the beginning of the Bible, intending to read it through.
She continued thus till Thursday; and then there was a sudden Alteration, by a
great Increase of her Concern, in an extraordinary sense of her own Sinfulness,
particularly the Sinfulness of her Nature, and Wickedness of her Heart, which
came upon her (as she expressed it) as a Flash of Lightning, and struck her
into an exceeding Terror. Upon which she left off reading the Bible in Course
as she had begun, and turned to the New Testament, to see if she could not find
some relief there for her distressed Soul.

Her great Terror she said was, that she had sinned against God: Her Distress
grew more and more for three Days, until (as she said) she saw (...).(...) but
Blackness of Darkness before her, and, her very Flesh troubled for fear of
God's w^ath; she wondered and was aston^shed at herself, that she had been so
concerned for (...) Body, and had applied so often to Physicians to heal that,
and had neglected her Soul. Her Sinfulness appeared with a very awful Aspect to
her, especially in three things ( viz.) her Original Sin, and her Sin in
murmuring at God's Providence, in the Weakness and Afflictions she had been
under, and in want of Duty to Parents, though others had looked upon her to exc^l
in Daufulness. On Saturday, she was so earnestly engaged in reading the Bible
and other Book^, that she con^^^ed in it, searching for something (...) her,
till her Eyes were so dim, that (...) know the Letters. Whilst she (...) thus
engaged in Reading, Prayer, and other religious Exercises, she thought of those
Words of Christ, wherein he warns us not to be as the Heathen, that think they
shall be heard for their much speaking; which, she said, led her to see that
she had trusted to her own Prayers and religious Performances, and now she was
put to a nonplus, and knew not which way to turn herself, or where to seek
Relief.

While her Mind was in this Posture, her Heart, she said, seemed to fly to the
Minister for Refuge, hoping that he could give her some Relief. She came the
same Day to her Brother, with the Countenance of a Person in distress,
expostulating with him, why he had not told her more of her Sinfulness, and
earnestly enquiring of him what she should do. She seemed that Day to feel in
herself an Enmity against the Bible, which greatly affrighted her. Her sense of
her own exceeding Sinfulness continued increasing from Thursday till Monday;
and she gave this account of i^, that it had been an Opinion, which till now
she had entertained, that she was not guilty of Adam's, Sin, nor any way
concerned in it, because she was not active in it; but that now she saw she was
guilty of that Sin, and all over defiled by it; and that the Sin which she
brought into the World with her, was alone sufficient to condemn her.

On the Sabbath day she was so ill that her Friends thought it not best that
she should go to public Worship, of which she seemed very desirous: But when
she went to Bed on the Sabbath day Night, she took up a Resolution, that she
would the next Morning go to the Minister, hoping to find some relief their. As
she awaked on Monday Morning, a little before Day she wondered within herself at
the Easiness and Calmness she felt in her Mind, which was of that kind which
she never felt before; as she thought of this, such Words as these were in her
Mind; The Words of the Lord are pure Words, Health to the Soul, and Marrow to
the Bones: And then these Words came to her Mind, the Blood of Christ cleanses
from (...) Sin; which ^^re (...) companied with a lively sense of (...) of
Christ, and his Sufficiency to satisfy for the Sins of the whole World. She
then thought of that Expression; It Is a pleasant thing for the Eyes to behold
the Sun; which Words then seemed to her to be very applicable to Jesus Christ.
By these things her Mind was led into such Contemplations and Views of Christ,
as filled her exceeding full of Joy. She told her Brother in the Morning that
she had seen (i e. in realizing Views by Faith) Christ the last Night, and,
that she had really thought that she had not Knowledge enough to be converted;
but, says she, God can make it quite easy! On Monday she felt all day a
constant Sweetness in her Soul. She had a Repetition of the same Discoverys of
Christ three Mornings together, that she had on Monday Morning, and much in the
same manner, at each time waking a little before day; but brighter and brighter
every time.

At the last time on Wednesday Morning, while in the Enjoyment of a spiritual
View of Christ's Glory and Fullness, her Soul was filled with Distress for
Christless Persons, to consider with a miserable Condition they were in: and
she felt in herself a strong Inclination immediately to go forth to warn
Sinners; and proposed it the next Day to her Brother to assist her in going
from house to house; but her Brother restrained her, by telling her of the
unsuitableness of such a Method. She told one of her Sisters that Day, that she
loved all Mankind, but especially the People of God. Her Sister asked her why
she loved all Mankind? She replied because God had made them. After this there
happened to come into the Shop where she was at work, three Persons that were
thought to have been lately converted; her seeing them as they stepped in one
after another into the Door, so affected her, and so drew forth her love to
them, that it overcame her, and she almost fainted: And when they began to talk
of the things of Religion, it was more than she could bear; they were obliged
to cease on that account. It was a very frequent thing with her to be overcome
with a flow of Affection to them that she thought Godly, in Conversation with
them, and sometimes only at the Sight of them.

She had many extraordinary Discoveries of the Glory of God and Christ;
sometimes, in some particular Attributes, and sometimes in many. She gave an
Account, that once, as those four Words passed through her Mind, WISDOM, JUSTICE,
GOODNESS, and TRUTH, her So I was filled with a sense of the Glory of each of
these divine Attributes, but especially the last: Truth, said she, sunk the
deepest! And therefore as these Words passed, this was repeated, TRUTH, TRUTH!
Her Mind was so swallowed up with a sense of the Glory of God's Truth and other
Perfections, that she said, it seemed as though her Life was going, and that she
saw it was easy with God to take away her Life by Discoveries of himself. Soon
after this she went to a private religious Meeting, and her Mind was full of a
Sense and View of the Glory of God all the Time; and when the Exercise was
ended, some asked her concerning what she had experienced: and she began to
give them an Account; but as she was relating it, it revived such a Sense of
the same Things, that her Strength failed, and they were obliged to take her,
and la^ her upon the Bed. Afterward she was greatly affected, and rejoiced
with these Words, Worthy is the Lamb that was stain.

She had several Days together a sweet sense of the Excellency and Loveliness
of Christ in his Meekness, which disposed her continually to be repeating over
these Words, which were sweet to her, MEEK AND LOWLY IN HEART, MEEK AND LOWLY
IN HEART. She once expres'd herself to one of her Sisters, to this purpose,
that she had continued whole: days and whole Nights, in a constant ravishing
View of the Glory of God and Christ, having enjoyed as much as her Life could
bear. Once as her Brother was speaking of the dying Love of Christ, she told
him that she had such a sense of it, that the mee^ Mentioning it was ready to
overcome her.

Once, when she came to me, she told how that at such and such a time she
thought she saw as much of God, and had as much Joy and Pleasure as was
possible in this Life, and that yet afterward God discovered himself yet far
more abundantly, and she saw the same things that she had seen before, yet more
clearly, and in another and far more excellent and delightful manner, and was
filled with a more exceeding Sweetness; she likewise gave me such an Account of
the Sese the once had, from day to day, of the Glory of Christ, and of God, in
his various Attributes, that it seemed to me she dwelt for Days together in a
kind of beatisic Vision of God; and seemed to have, as I thought, as immediate
an Intercourse with him, as a Child with a Father: and at the same time, she
appeared most remo^e from any high Thought of herself, and of her own
Sufficiency; but was like a little Child, and expressed great Desire to be
instructed, telling me that she longed very often to come to me for
Instruction, and wanted to live at my House, that I might tell her her Duty

She often expressed a sense of the Glory of God appearing in the Trees, and
Growth of the Fields and other Works of God's Hands. She told her Sister that
lived near the Heart of the Town, that she once thought it a pleasant thing to
live in the middle of the Town, but now, says she, I think it much more
pleasant to sit and see the Wind blowing the Trees, and to behold what God has
made. She had sometimes the powerful Breathings of the Spirit of God on her
Soul, while reading the Scripture, and would express a sense that she had of
the certain Truth and Divinity thereof. She sometimes would appear with a
pleasant Smile on her Countenance; and once when her Sister took notice of it,
and asked why she smiled, she replied, I am brim-full of a sweet feeling
within! She often used to express how good and sweet it was to the low before
God, and the lower (said she) the better! and that it was pleasant to think of
lying (...) the Dust all the Days of her Life, mourning for Sin. She was wont
to manifest a great sense of her own Meanness and Dependence. She often
expressed an exceeding Compassion, and pitiful Love, which she found in her
Heart toward Persons in a Christless Condition; which was sometimes so strong,
that as she was passing by such in the streets, or those that she feared were
such, she would be overcome by the Sight of them. She once said, that she
longed to have the whole World saved, she wanted, as it were* to pull them all
to her; she could not bear to have one lost*

She had great Longings to die, that she might be with Christ; which increased
'till she thought she did not know how to be patient to wait till God's time
should come. But once when she felt those Longings, she thought with herself,
If I long to die, why do I go to Physicians? Whence she concluded that her
Longings for Death were not well regulated After this she often put it to
herself, which she should choose, whether to live or to die, to be sick, or to
be well; and she found she could not tell, till at last she found herself
disposed to say these Words; I am quite willing to live, and quite willing to
die; quite willing to be sick, and quite willing to be well; and quite willing
for any thing that God will bring upon me! And then, said she, I felt my self
perfectly easy, in a full Submission to the Will of God. She then lamented
much, that she had been so eager in her Longings for Death, as it argued want
of such a Resignation to God, as ought to be. She seemed henceforward to
continue in this resigned Frame till Death.

After this her Illness increased upon her: and once after she had before spent
the greater Part of the Night in extreme Pain, she waked out of a little sleep
with these Words in her Heart and Mouth; I am willing to suffer for Christ's
sake, I am willing to spend and be spent for Christ's sake; I am willing to
spend my Life, even my very Life for Christ's sake! And though she had an
extraordinary Resignation, with respect to Life or Death, yet the Thoughts of
Dying were exceeding sweet to her. At a time when her Brother was reading in
Job, concerning Worms feeding on the dead Body, she appeared with a pleasant
Smile; and being enquired of about it, she said, it was sweet to her to think
of her being in such Circumstances. At another time, when her Brother mentioned
to her the Danger there seemed to be that the Illness she then labored under,
might be an Occasion of her Death, it filled her with Joy that almost overcame
her. At another time, when she met a Company following a Corpse to the Grave,
she said, it was sweet to her to think, that they would in a little time follow
her in like manner.

Her Illness in the latter part of it was seated much in her Throat; and
swelling inward, filled up the Pipe, so that she could swallow nothing but what
was perfectly liquid, and but very little of that, and with great and long
Strugglings and Stranglings, that which she took in, flying out at her
Nostrils, till she at last could swallow nothing at all: She had a raging
Appetite to Food, so that she told her Sister, when talking with her about her
Circumstances, that the worst Bit that she threw to her Swine, would be sweet
to her: but yet when she saw that she could not swallow it, she seemed to be as
perfectly contented without it, as if she had no Appetite to it. Others were
greatly moved to see what she underwent, and were filled with Admiration at her
unexampled Patience. At a Time when she was striving in vain to get down a
little Food, something liquid, and was very much spent with it; she looked up
on her Sister with a Smile, saying, O Sister, this is for my Good! At another
time, when her Sister was speaking of what she underwent, she told her, that
she lived an Heaven upon Earth for all that She used sometimes to say to her
Sister, under her extreme Sufferings, It is good to be so! Her Sister once
asked her, why she said to, why, says she, because God would have it so: It is
best that things should be as God would have 'em: It looks best to (...). After
her Confinement, as they were leading her from the Bed to the Door, she seemed
overcome by the Sight of things abroad, as showing forth the Glory of the Being
that had made them. As she lay on her Deathbed, she would often say these
Words, God is my Friend! And once looking up on her Sister, with a Smile* said
O Sister! How good it is! How sweet and comfortable it is to consider, and
think of heavenly things! and used this Argument to persuade her Sister to be
much in such Meditations.

She expressed on her Death Bed, an exceeding Longing, both for Persons in a
natural State, that they might be converted, and for the Godly that they might
see and know more of God. And when those that looked on themselves as in a
Christless State came to see her, she would be greatly moved with compassionate
Affection. One in particular that seemed to be in a great distress about the
State of her Soul, and had come to see her from time to time, she desired her
Sister to persuade not to come any more, because the Sight of her so wrought on
her Compassions, that it overcame her Nature. The same Week that she died, when
she was in distressing Circumstances as to her Body, some of the Neighbors
that came to see her, asked if she was willing to die? She replied, that she
was quite willing either to live or die; she was willing to be in pain; she was
willing to be so always as she was then, if that was the Will of God. She
willed what God willed They asked her whether she was willing to die that
Night? She answered, Yes, if it be God's Will. And seemed to speak all with
that perfect composure of Spirit, and with such a cheerful and pleasant
Countenance, that it filled them with Admiration.

She was very weak a considerable time before she died, having pined away with
Famine and Thirst, so that her Flesh seemed to be dried upon her Bones; and
therefore could say but little, and manifested her Mind very much by Signs. She
said she had Matter enough to fill up all her Time with Talk, if she had but
Strength A few Days before her Death, some asked her, whether she h^ld her
Integrity still? Whether she was not afraid of Death? She answered to this
purpose, that she had not the least Degree of fear of Death. They asked her why
she would be so confident? She answered, If I should say otherwise, I should
speak contrary to what I know: there is, says she, indeed, a dark Entry that
looks something dark, but on the other Side there appears such a bright shining
light, that I cannot be afraid! She said no^ long before she died, that she
used to be afraid how she should grapple with Death; but, says she, God has
showed me that he can make it easy in great Pai^* Several Days before she died,
she could scarcely say any thing but just yes, and no, to Questions that were
asked her, for she seemed to be dying for three Days together* but seemed to
continue in an admirable sweet Composure of Soul, without any Interruption, to
the last, and died as a Person that went to sleep, without any struggling,
about Noon, on Friday, June 27. 1735.

She had long been infirm, and often had been exercised with great Pain; but
she died chiefly of Famine. It was, doubtless, partly owing to her bodily
Weakness, that her Nature was so often overcome, and ready to sink with
gracious Affection; but yet the truth was, that she had more Grace, and greater
Discoveries of God and Christ, than the present ^rail State did well consist
with. She wanted to be where strong Grace might have more Liberty, and be
without the Clog of a weak Body; there she longed to be, and there she
doubtless now is. She was looked upon amongst us, as a very eminent Instance of
Christian Experience: but this is but a very broken and imperfect Account I
have given of her* Her Eminency would much more appear, if her Experiences were
fully related, as she was wont to express, and manifest them, while living. I
once read this Account to some of her pious Neighbors, who were acquainted
with her, who said, to this purpose, that the Picture ^ell much short of the
Life; and particularly that it much fa^l'd of duly representing her Humility,
and that admirable Lowliness of Heart, that at all times appeared in her. But
there are (blessed be God!) many living Instances, of much the like nature, and
in some Things no less extraordinary.

But I now proceed to the other Instance that I would give an Account of, which
is of the little Child forementioned. Her Name is Ph^be Bartlet, Daughter of
William Bartlet I shall give the Account as I look it from the Months of her
Parents, whose Veracity none* that know them doubt of

She was born in March, in the year 1731. About the latter end of April, or
beginning of May, 1735, she was greatly affected by the talk of her Brother,
who had been hopefully converted a little before, at about eleven years of Age,
and then seriously talked to her about the great Things of Religion. Her
Parents did not know of it at that time, and were not wont, in the Counsels
they gave to their Children, particularly to direct themselves to her, by
reason of her being so young, and as they supposed not capable of
Understanding: but after her Brother had talked to her, they observed her very
earnestly to listen to the Advice they gave to the other Children; and she was
observed very constantly to retire, several times in a Day, as was concluded,
for secret Prayer; and grew more and more engaged in Religion, and was more
frequent in her Closer; till at last she was wont to visit it five or six times
in a Day: and was so engaged in it, that nothing would at any Time divert her
from her stated Close^ Exercises. Her Mother often observed and watched her,
when such Things occurred, as she thought most likely to divert her, either by
putting it out of her Thoughts, or otherwise engaging her Inclinations; but
never could observe her to fail. She mentioned some very remarkable Instances.

She once of her own accord spoke of her Unsuccessfulness, in that she could
not find God, or to that purpose. But on Thursday, the last Day of July, about
the middle of the Day, the Child being in the Close^, where it used to retire,
its Mother heard it speaking aloud; which was unusual, and never had been
observed before: And her Voice seemed to be as of one exceeding importunate and
engaged; but her Mother could distinctly here only these Words, (spoken in her
childish Manner, but seemed to be spoken with extraordinary earnestness, and
out of Distress of Soul,) PRAY BLESSED LORD give me Salvation! I PRAY BEG
pardon all my Sins! When the Child had done Prayer she came out of the Closet,
and came and sat down by her Mother, and cried out aloud. Her Mother very
earnestly asked her several times, what the matter was, before she would make
any Answer; but she continued exceedingly crying, and wreathing her Body to and
fro, like one in anguish of Spirit. Her Mother then asked her, whether she was
afraid that God would not give her Salvation* She answered yes, I am afraid I
shall go to Hell! Her Mother then endeavored to quiet her, and told her she
would not have her cry, she must be a good Girl, and pray every Day, and she
hoped God would give her Salvation. But this did not quiet her at all; but she
continued thus earnestly crying, and taking on for some time, till at length
she suddenly ceased crying, and began to smile, and presently said with a
smiling Countenance, Mother, the Kingdom of Heaven is come to me! Her Mother
was surprised at the sudden Alteration, and at the Speech; and knew not what to
make of it, but at first said nothing to her. The Child presently spoke again,
and said, there is another come to me, and there is another, there is three;
and being asked what she meant, she answered one is, Thy will be done, and
there is another, Enjoy him for ever; by which it seems that when the Child
said there is three come to me, she meant three Passages of its Catrchism that
came to her Mind.

After the Child had said this, she retired again into her Closet; and her
Mother went over to her Brother's, who was next Neighbor; and when she came
back, the Child, being come out of the Closet, meets her Mother with this
cheerful Speech, I can find God now! referring to what she had before
complained of that she could not find God. Then the Child spoke again and said,
I love God! Her Mother asked her, how well she loved God, whether she loved God
better than her Father and Mother, she said yes. Then she asked her whether she
loved God better than her little Sister Rachel? She answered yes, better than
any thing! Then her eldest Sister, referring to her saying she could find God
now, asked her where she could find God. She answered in Heaven: Why, said she,
have you been in Heaven? No, said the Child. By this it seems not to have been
any Imagination of any thing seen with bodily Eyes, that she called God, when
she said I can find God now. Her Mother asked her whether she was afraid of
going to Hell, and that had made her cry. She answered, yes, I was; but now I
shall not. Her Mother asked her whether she thought that God had given her
Salvation; She answered, yes. Her Mother asked her, when. She answered, to day.
She appeared all that Afternoon exceeding cheerful and joyful. One of the
Neighbors asked her, how she fe^^ her self? She answered, I feel better than I
did. The Neighbor asked her, what made her feel better. She answered, God
makes me. That Evening as she lay a bed, she called one of her little Cousins
to her that was present in the Room* as having something to say to him; and
^hen he came, she told him, that Heaven was better than Earth. The next Day
being Friday, ^e^ Mother asking her her Catechism, asked her what God made her
for: She answered to serve him* and added, every body should serve God, and get
an Interest in Christ.

The same Day the elder Children, when they came home from School, seemed much
affected with the extraordinary Change that seemed to be made in Phebe: And her
Sister Abigail standing by, her Mother took occasion to counsel her, now to
improve her Time, to prepare for another World: On which Phebe burst out in
Tears, and cried out Poor Nabby! Her Mother told her she would not have her
cry, she hoped that God would give Nabby Salvation; but that did not quiet her,
but she continued earnestly crying for some time; and when she had in a measure
ceased, her Sister Eunice being by her she burst out again, and cried Poor
Eunice! and cried exceedingly; and when she had almost done she went into
another Room, and there looked up on her Sister Naomi: and burst out again,
crying Poor Amy! Her Mother was greatly affected at such a Behavior in the
Child, and knew not what to say to her. One of the Neighbors coming in a
little after, asked her what she had cried for. She seemed at first backward to
tell the Reason: her Mother told her she might tell that Person, for he had
given her an Ap^l: Upon which she said, she cried because she was afraid they
would go to Hell.

At Night a certain Minister, that was occasionally in the Town, was at the
House, and talked considerable with her, of the Things of Religion; and after
he was gone she sat leaning on the Table, with Tears running out of her Eyes*
And being asked what made her cry, she said it was thinking (...) God. The next
Day, being Saturday, she seemed great part of the Day to be in a very
affectionate Frame, had four turns of Crying, and seemed to endeavor to curb
her felt, and hide her Tears, and was very backward to ta^k of the occasion of
it. On the Sabbath Day she was asked whether she believed in God; she answered
yes: And being told that Christ was the Son of God, she made ready Answer, and
said, I know it.

From this Time there has appeared a very remarkable abiding Change in the
Child: She has been very strict upon the Sabbath; and seems to long for the
Sabbath Day before it comes* and will often in the Week time be enquiring how
long it is to the Sabbath Day, and must have the Days particularly counted over
that are between, before she will be contented. And she seems to love God's
House, is very eager to go thither: Her Mother once asked her why she had such
a mind to go? whether it was not to see fine Folks? She said no, it was to hear
Mr. Edwards preach. When she is in the place of Worship, she is very far from
spending her Time there as Children at her Age usually do, but appears with an
Attention that is very extraordinary for such a Child. She also appears very
desirous at all Opportunities to go to pri^^^e religious Meetings; and is very
still and attentive at Home, in Prayer time, and has appeared affected in time
of Family Prayer. She seems to delight much in hearing religious Conversation:
When I once was there with some others that were Strangers, and ^alked to her
something of Religion, she seemed more than ordinarily attentive; and when we
were gone.she looked out very wistly after us, and said, I wish they would come
again! Her Mother asked her why: Says she, I love to hear 'em talk!

She seems to have very much of the Fear of God before her Eyes* and as
extraordinary Dread of Sin against him; of which her Mother mentioned the
following remarkable Instance. Some time in August, the last Year, she went
with some bigger Children, to get some Plumbs, in a Neighbor's Lot, knowing
nothing of any harm in what she did, but when she brought some of the (...)
into the House, her Mother mildly reproved her, and told her that she (...)
Plumbs without leave, because it was Sin: God had commanded her not to steal
The Child seemed greatly surprised, and burst out in Tears, and cried out, I
will not have these Plumbs! and turning to her Sister Eunice, very earnestly said
^o her why did you ask me to go to that Plumb. Tree? I should not have gone if
you had not asked me. The other Children did not seem to be much affected or
concerned; but there was no pacifying Phebe. Her Mother told her she might go
and ask leave, and then it would not be sin for her to eat them; and sent one
of the Children to that end; and when she returned, her Mother told her that
the Owner had given leave, now she might eat them, and it would not be
stealing. This stilled her a little while; but presently she broke out again
into an exceeding Fit of Crying: Her Mother asked her what made her cry again?
Why she cried now, since they had asked leave? What it was that troubled her
now? And asked her several times very earnestly, before she made any Answer;
but at last said, it was because BECAUSE IT WAS SIN. She continued a
considerable time crying; and said she would not go again if Eunice asked her
an hundred Times; and she retained her Aversion to that Fruit for a
considerable time, under the remembrance of her former Sin.

She at some times appears greatly affected, and delighted with Texts of
Scripture that come to her mind. Particularly, about the beginning of November,
the last Year, that Text came to her mind, Rev. iii.20. Behold, I stand at the
Door and knock: If any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in,
and sup with him, and he with me. She spoke of it to those of the Family, with
a great appearance of Joy, a smiling Countenance, and Elevation of Voice, and
afterward she went into another Room, where her Mother overheard her talking
very earnestly to the Children about it, and particularly heard her say to
them, three or four times over, with an air of exceeding Joy and Admiration,
Why it is to SUP WITH GOD. At some time about the middle of Winter, very late
in the Night, when all were a bed, her Mother perceived that she was awake, and
heard her, as though she was weeping. She called to her, and asked her what was
the matter. She answered with a low Voice, so that her Mother could not hear
what she said; but thinking that it might be occasioned by some spiritual
Affection, said no more to her; but perceived her to lie awake, and to continue
in the same Frame, for a considerable time. The next Morning, she asked her
whether she did not cry the last Night: The Child answered yes, I did cry a
little, for I was thinking about God and Christ, and they loved me, Her Mother
asked her whether to think of God and Christ's loving her made her cry: She
answered yes, it does sometimes.

She has often manifested a great Concern for the good of others Souls: and has
been wont many times affectionately to counsel the other Children. Once about
the latter end of September, the last Year, when she and some others of the
Children where in a Room by themselves, a husking Indian Corn, the Child, after
a while, came out and sat by the Fire. Her Mother took notice that she appeared
with a more than ordinary serious and pensive Countenance, but at last she
broke silence, and said, I have been talking to Nabby and Eunice: Her Mother
asked her what she had said to 'em Why said she, I told 'em they must pray, and
prepare to die, that they had but a little while to live in this World, and
they must be always ready When Nabby came out, her Mother asked her whether she
had said that to them. Yes said she, she said that, and a great deal more. At
other times, the Child took her Opportunities to talk to the other Children
about the great Concern of their Souls, sometimes, so as much to affect them,
and set them into Tears. She was once exceeding importunate with her Mother to
go with her Sister Naomi to pray: Her Mother endeavored to put her off; but
she pulled her by the Sleeve, and seemed as if she would by no means be denied.
At last her Mother told her, that Amy must go and pray her self; but, says the
Child, she will not go; and persisted earnestly to beg of her Mother to go with
her.

She has discovered an uncommon Degree of a Spirit of Charity; particularly on
the following Occasion: A poor Man that lives in the Woods, had lately lost a
Cow that the Family much depended on, and being at the House, he was relating
his Misfortune, and telling of the Straits and Difficulties they were reduced
to by i^* She took much notice of it, and it wrought exceedingly on her
Compassions: And after she had attentively heard him a while, she went away to
her Father, who was in the Shop, and entreated him to give that Man a Cow: and
told him that the poor Man had no Cow! that the Hunters or something else had
killed his Cow! and entreated him to give him one of theirs. Her Father told
her that they could not spare one. Then she entreated him to let him and his
Family come and live at his House: And had much more talk of the same nature,
whereby she manifested Bowels of Compassion to the Poor.

She has manifested great Love to her Minister: Particularly when I returned
from my long Journey for my Health, the last Fall, when she heard of i^, she
appeared very joyful at the News, and told the Children of it, with an elevated
Voice, as the most joyful Tidings, repeating it over and over, Mr. Edwards is
come home! Mr. Edwards is come home! She still continues very constant in
secret Prayer, so far as can be observed, (for she seems to have no Desire that
others should observe her when she retires, but seems to be a Child of a
reserved Temper) and every Night, before she goes to Bed, will say her
Catechism, and will by no means miss of i^: she never forgot it but once, and
then after she was a bed, thought of it, and cried out in Tears, I have not said
my Catechism! and would not be quieted till her Mother asked her the Catechism
as she lay in Bed. She sometimes appears to be in doubt about the Condition of
her Soul, and when asked whether she thinks that she is prepared for Death,
speaks something doubtfully about it: At other times seems to have no doubt,
but when asked replies yes without hesitation.

In the former part of this great Work of God amongst us, till it got to its
height, we seemed to be wonderfully smiled upon and blessed in all respects.
Satan (as has been already observed*) seemed to be unusually restrained:
Persons that before had been involved in Melancholy, seemed to be as it were
waked up out of it; and those that had been entangled with extraordinary
Temptations, seemed wonderfully to be set at liberty; and not only so, but it
was the most remarkable time of Health, that ever I knew since I have been in
the Town. We ordinarily have several Bills put up, every Sabbath, for Persons
that are sick; but now we had not so much as one for many Sabbaths together.
But after this it seemed to be otherwise, when this Work of God appeared to be
at its greatest Height, a poor weak Man that belongs to the Town, being in
great spiritual Trouble, was hurried with violent Temptations to cut his own
Throat, and made an Attempt; but did not do it effectually. He after this
continued a considerable Time exceeding overwhelmed with Melancholy; but has
now of a long time been very greatly delivered, by the Light of God's
Countenance lifted up upon him, and has expressed a great Sense of his Sin in
so far yielding to Temptation; and there are in him all hopeful Evidences of
his having been made a Subject of saving Mercy.

In the latter part of May, it began to be very sensible that the Spirit of God
was gradually withdrawing from us, and after this Time Satan seemed to be more
let loose, and raged in a dreadful manner. The first Instance wherein it
appeared, was a Person's putting an end to his own Life, by cutting his Throat.
He was a Gentleman of more than common Understanding, of strict Morals,
religious in his Behavior, and an useful honorable Person in the Town; but
was of a Family that are exceeding prone to the Disease of Melancholy, and his
Mother was killed with it. He had, from the beginning of this extraordinary
Time, been exceedingly concerned about the State of his Soul, and there were
some Things in his Experience, that appeared very hopefully; but he durst
entertain no Hope concerning his own good Estate. Toward the latter part of
his Time, he grew much discouraged, and Melancholy grew amain upon him, till he
was wholly overpowered by it, and was in great measure past a Capacity of
receiving Advice, or being reasoned with to any purpose: The Devil took the
advantage, and drove him into despairing Thoughts. He was kept awake a-nights,
medi^ating Terror; so that he had scarce any Sleep at all, for a long time
together. And it was observed at last, that he was scarcely well capable of
managing his ordinary Business, and was judged delirious by the Coroner's
Inquest. The News of this extraordinarily affected the Minds of People here,
and struck them as it were with Astonishment. After this, Multitudes in this,
and other Towns, seemed to have it strongly suggested to 'em, and pressed upon
'em, to do as this Person had done. And many that seemed to be under no
Melancholy, some pious Persons, that had no special Darkness, or Doubts about
the goodness of their State, nor were under any special Trouble or Concern of
Mind about any thing Spiritual or Temporal, yet had it urged upon 'em, as if
somebody had spoke to 'em, Cut your own Throat, now is a good Opportunity. Now;
now! So that they were obliged to fight with all their might to resist it, and
yet no Reason suggested to 'em why they should do it.

About the same time, there were two remarkable Instances of Persons led away
with strange Enthusiastic Delusions: one at Suffield, another at South-Hadley:
That which has made the greatest noise in the Country was of the Man at
South-Hadley, whose Delusion was, that he thought himself divinely instructed
to direct a poor Man in melancholy and despairing Circumstances, to say certain
Words in Prayer to God, as recorded in Psalm. cxvi 4. for his own Relief. The
Man is esteemed a pious Man: I have since this Error of his, had a particular
Acquaintance with him; and I believe none would question his Piety, that had
had such an Acquaintance. He gave me a particular Account of the Manner how he
was deluded; which is too long to be here inserted. But in short, he was
exceedingly rejoiced and elevated with this extraordinary Work, so carried on
in this part of the Country: and was possessed with an Opinion that it was the
beginning of the glorious Times of the Church spoken of in Scripture: And had
read it as the Opinion of some Divines, that there would be many in these Times
that should be endued with extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and had
embraced the Notion; though he had at first no Apprehensions that any besides
Ministers would have such Gifts. But he since exceedingly laments the Dishonor
he has done to God, and the Wound he has given Religion in it, and has lain low
before God and Man for it.

After these things the Instances of Conversion were rare here in comparison of
what they had before been, (though that remarkable Instance of the little Child
was after this,) and the Spirit of God not long after this time, appeared very
sensibly withdrawing from all parts of the County; (though we have heard of its
going on in some Places of Connecticut, and that it continues to be carried on
even to this Day.) But Religion remained here, and I believe in some other
Places, the main Subject of Conversation, for several Months after this. And
there were some Turns, wherein God's Work seemed something to revive, and we
were ready to hope that all was going to be renewed again: yet in the main
there was a gradual Decline of that general, engaged, lively Spirit in
Religion, which had been before. Several things have happened since, that have
diverted Peoples Minds, and turned their Conversation more to others Affairs,
particularly his Excellency the Governor's coming up, and the Committee of
General Court, on the Treaty with the Indians; and afterward the Springfield
Controversy; and since that, our People in this Town have been engaged in the
building of a new Meetting-house: and some other Occurrences might be
mentioned, that have seemed to have this Effect. But as to those that have been
thought to be converted among us, in this time, they generally seem to be
Persons, that have had an abiding Change wrought on them: I have had particular
acquaintance with many of them since, and they generally appear to be Persons
that have a new Sense of Things, new Apprehensions and Views of God, of the
divine Attributes, and Jesus Christ, and the great Things of the Gospel: They
have a new Sense of the Truth of them, and they affect them in a new manner;
though it is very far from being always alike with them, neither can they revive
a Sense of things when they please. Their Hearts are often touched, and
sometimes filled, with new Sweetnesses and Delights; there seems to be an
inward Ardour and burning of Heart that they express, the like to which they
never experienced before; sometimes, perhaps, occasioned only by the Mention of
Christ's Name, or some one of the Divine Perfections: There are new Appetites,
and a new kind of Breathings and Pantings of Heart, and Groanings that cannot
be uttered. There is a new kind of inward Labor and Struggle of Soul toward
Heaven and Holiness.

Some that before were very rough in their Temper and Manners, seem to be
remarkably fo^^ed and sweetened. And some have had their Souls exceedingly
filled, and overwhelmed with Light, Love, and Comfort, long since the Work of
God has ceased to be so remarkably carried on in a general way: and some have
had much greater Experiences of this nature than they had before. And there is
still a great deal of religious Conversation continued in the Town, amongst
young and old; a religious Disposi^ion appears to be still maintained amongst
our People, by their upholding frequent private religious Meetings; and all
Sorts are generally worshipping God at such Meetings, on Sabbath Nights, and in
the Evening after our public Lecture. Many Children in the Town do still keep
up such Meetings among themselves. I know of no one young ^^^son in the Town
that has returned to former ways of Looseness and Extravagancy in any respect;
but we still remain a reformed People, and God has evidently made us a new
People.

I cannot say that there has been no Instance of any one Person that has carried
hemself so, that others should justly be stumbled concerning his Profession;
nor am I ^o vain as to imagine that we have not been mistaken concerning any that
we have entertained a good Opinion of, or that there are none pass amongst us
for Sheep, that are indeed, Wolves in Sheep's clothing; who probably may some
time or other discover themselves by their Fruit. We are not so pure, but that
we have great Cause to be humbled and ashamed, that we are so impure; nor so
religious, but that those that watch for our Halting, may see things in us,
whence they may take occasion to reproach us and Religion: but in the main,
there has been a great and mavelous Work of Conversion and Sanctification
among the People here; and they have paid all due Respects to those who have
been blessed of God to be the Instruments of it. Both old and young have shown a
Forwardness to hearken not only to my Counsels, but even to my Reproofs from
the Pulpit.

A great part of the Country have not received the most favorable Thoughts of
this Affair; and to this day many retain a Jealousy concerning it, and
Prejudice against it: I have Reason to think that the meanness and weakness of
the Instrument, that has been made use of in this Town, has prejudiced many
against it; it don't appear to me strange that it should be so: But yet this
Circumstance of this great Work of God, is analogous to other Circumstances of
it: God has so ordered the manner of the Work in many Respects, as very
signally and remarkably to show it to be his own peculiar and immediate Work,
and to secure the Glory of it wholly to his own Almighty Power, and Sovereign
Grace. And whatever the Circumstances and Means have been, and though we are so
unworthy, yet so has it pleased God to work! And we are evidently a People
blessed of the Lord! And here, in this Corner of the World, God dwells, and
manifests his Glory.

Thus, Rev. Sir, I have given a large and particular Account of this remarkable
Affair; and yet, considering how manifold God's Works have been amongst us,
that are worthy to be written, it is but a very brief one. I should have sent it
much sooner, had I not been greatly hindered by Illness in my Family, and also
in myself. It is probably, much larger than you expected, and it may be than
you would have chosen. I thought that the Extraordinariness of the Thing, and
the innumerable Misrepresentations which have gone abroad of it, many of which
have, doubtless, reached your Ears, made it necessary that I should be
particular. But I would leave it entirely with your Wisdom to make what use of
it you think best, to send a part of it to England, or all, or none if you
think it not worthy; or otherwise to dispose of it as you may think most for
God's Glory, and the Interest of Religion. If you are pleased to send any thing
to the Revd. Dr. Guyse, I should be glad to have it signified to him as my
humble Desire, that since he, and the Congregation to which he preached have
been pleased to take so much notice of us, as they have, that they would also
think of us at the Throne of Grace, and seek there for us, that God would not
forsake us, but enable us to bring forth Fruit answerable to our Profession,
and our Mercies, and that our Light may shine before Men, that others seeeing
our good Works, may glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

When I first heard of the Notice the Revd. Dr. Watts and Dr. Guyse took of
God's Mercies to us, I took occasion to inform our Congregation of it in a
Discourse from these Words; A City that is set upon an Hill cannot be bid. And
having since seen a particular Account of the Notice the Revd Dr. Guyse and the
Congregation he preached to, took of it, in a Letter you wrote to my Honored
Uncle Williams, I read that part of your Letter to the Congregation, and
labored as much as in me lay to enforce their Duty from it. The Congregation
were very sensibly moved and affected at both times.

I humbly request of you, Rev Sir, your Prayers, for this County, in its
present melancholy Circumstances, into which it is brought by the Springfield
Quarrel, which, doubtless, above all things that have happened, has tended to
put a Stop to the glorious Work here, and to prejudice this Country against it,
and hinder the Propagation of it. I also ask your Prayers for this Town, and
would particularly beg an Interest in them for him who is,

Honored Sir, With humble Respect, Your Obedient Son and Servant, Jonathan
Edwards.
Northampton, Nov. 6. 1736.

