Mr. Campbell's SERMON UPON Judgment after Death.

After SOULS by DEATH are separated from their Bodies, they come to JUDGMENT.
ASSERTED IN A SERMON Delivered At Worcester, November 24th, 1737. Being the Day
of the EXECUTION of John Hamilton, alias Hugh Henderson. [With his Confession
and Dying Warning.]

By John Campbell, M. A. And Pastor of the Church in Oxford, N. E.

Acts x. 42. And he commanded us to preach unto the People, and to testify that
it is he which was ordained of God, to be the Judge of Quick and Dead. Acts
xxiv. 25. And as he reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to
come, Felix trembled. In magnis vol^isse sat est

BOSTON, Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queen Street over
against the Prison, 1738.

After DEATH, the JUDGMENT.
1. PETER IV. 5. WHO shall give Account to him that is ready to judge the Quick
and the Dead.
THE Lord Jesus Christ is the best, and most perfect Pattern, most worthy of
Imitation; he that says, he abides in him, ought also so to walk, as he
walked, 1 John ii. 6

Wherefore the Apostle Peter having in the former Chapter exhorted Believers to
patient bearing Afflictions by the Example of Christ, Ver. 18. He proceeds in
this to persuade them to improve the Cross they have outwardly, to inward
Mortification. Christ's Death is proposed to us in Scripture as an Examplar
both of external Mortification in bearing Reproaches, Persecution, and all
other Troubles; this the Apostle prosecutes in the former Chapter, and of
internal in the destroying the Body of Sin; this he exhorts to in this Chapter,
and draws his Argument from Christ's Death, not only as the Examplar, but
efficient and meritorious Cause of our Mortification, and which has a real
Influence upon it, in that Christ by his Death did not only merit the Pardon of
Sin, but the giving the Spirit, whereby Corruption might be destroyed, and our
Natures renewed. And being armed with this Mind, that we being dead with Christ
to Sin, should not live any longer in it, or be seduced by the corrupt Desires,
and sinful Ways of carnal Men, and make them the Rule of our Living: But the
holy Will of God revealed in his Word, (which is the Rule by which we ought to
walk) in Opposition to the Lusts of Men, we are to live not as Men would have
us, but as God commands. Since every one of us shall give an Account, whether
he be high or low, rich or poor, great or small, strong or weak, etc. Of
himself, of his own Actions, and not another's; he shall give an Account of
himself in his natural Capacity, as a Man, and in his Capacity as a rich or
great Man, and in his religious Capacity, as one that has enjoyed such
Education, such Means of Grace, etc. I say with the Apostle in my Text, He
shall give Account to him that is ready to judge the Quick and the Dead. Give
Account, i.e. come to a Reckoning, and answer for his Offices, Relations and
Behavior in the World To him, i. e. to God and Christ That is ready, i. e.
fit, prepared, well furnished and near at hand. To judge, etc. i. e. to
pronounce a righteous and true Sentence upon all Things and Persons.

From this Text, thus briefly opened, we observe the following Doctrine: Namely,

DOCT. That it is a Matter of the highest Concernment and Importance to Men, to
be ready to give Account to him that is ready to judge the Quick and the Dead.
That the Judge of all Things and Persons stands ready to call all Men to a
strict Account of all their Actions and Deportments in this World, is
undoubtedly true. The Apostle James witneseth, Chap. v. Ver. 9. Grudge not one
against another, Brethren, lest ye be condemned: Behold, the Judge stands
before the Door: i. e. He is in a Readiness to bring those Evils upon Men,
which they wish may fall upon others; or to give their Reward to them, who
through patient Continuance in well doing seek for it, Rom ii. 7. And it is
observable, that our Text is a Metaphor taken from Stewards giving Account to
their Masters. Mat. xviii. 25 Luke xvi. 2. Give an Account of thy Stewardship,
for thou may be no longer Steward. If we carefully attend to the Design and
Aim of the Parable of which the Text last mentioned is a Part, we shall easily
see, that the main Things in which our Savior seems desirous by this Parable
to instruct us are two; the one, that we are but Stewards of the good Things
God lends us, and must give an Account to our Master for them. And the other,
That being no other than Stewards entrusted with some of our Master's Goods for
a Time, it is our highest Prudence, while we have them in our Trust, to make
such an Use of them, as may be for our Advantage, when we give up our Account.

In the handling of the Doctrine, I shall endeavor to show,

I. That Men shall give an Account to God that is ready to judge the Quick and
the Dead.

II. That it is of the highest Concernment and Importance to them to be ready
to do it.

III. That God is ready to take an Account of all Men. And

IV. Make an Application suitable to the awful and affecting Occasion of this
Day.

Of these in their Order. And

I. That Men shall give an Account to God that is ready to judge the Quick and
the Dead This Men shall do immediately after the Separation of the Soul from
the Body; and as it is appointed unto Men ouce to die, but after this the
Judgment, Heb. ix. 27. After Souls by Death are separated from their Bodies,
they come to Judgment; and thus every particular Man is handed over by Death to
the Bar of God, the great Judge, and so is dispatched by his Sentence to it is
particular State and Place with it is respective People, Romans xiv. 12. So then
every one of us must give an Account of himself to God. At the great and
general Assize, the Day of Judgment, shall the general and universal One take
Place. Acts xvii 31 Because he has appointed a Day in the which he will judge
the World in Righteousness by that Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has
given Assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised him from the Dead. When
all Sinners in their entire Persons, Bodies and Souls united, shall be adjudged
to their final unalterable and eternal State. Romans xiv. 10. But why do thou
judge thy Brother? Or why do thou set at naught thy Brother? for we shall all
stand, or be set, before the Judgment seat of Christ.

There is a Variety of Scripture that leads us to the Knowledge, and should also
lead us to the Acknowlegement of this necessary Point, viz. That every one
as soon as his Spirit takes it is last Farewell of his Body, makes his Appearance
before the impartial Tribunal of God, and that then a righteous and true
Sentence is passed without any Delay, whereby their future State is
unalterably, and irrevocably determined. Luke xvi 22, 23. And it came to pass
that the Beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom: the
rich Man also died and was buried. And in Hell he lift up his Eyes being in
Torments. The particular Judgment of every single Man follows immediately his
Departure out of this Life. The Souls of wicked Men depart to go to their own
Place, Acts i 25. The Souls of wicked Men are no less punished in Hell than the
apostate Angels, Jude Ver. 6, 7. And the Spirits of them who in the Time of
Noah were disobedient, are said to be in Prison. 1 Pet. iii. 19. And preached
unto the Spirits in Prison: That is Souls of Men departed, which are frequently
called Spirits. Eccles. xii. 7. Acts vii 59. In Prison, that is Hell. So it is
taken, Prove. xxvii 20. compared with Mat. v. 25. This is the State of the
Wicked to which their Souls are cast immediately after Death, where they remain
in Torments and utter Darkness, reserved to the Judgment of the great Day. But
the Souls of the Righteous after Death are with Christ in Heaven, and enjoy
that blessed Vision, Phil. i. 23. Christ promised that the Thief on the Cross
should be with him in Paradise, that very same Day he died, Luke xxiii. 43.
(And it will be a happy Exchange for thy Soul, when by and by it takes its
Flight from thy Body, if this may be thy Lot.) The Spirits of just Men after
Death return to God, and are received by God, Eccles. xii. 7. Though Solomon
only may speak here of the People of God, yet some understand it of the Souls
both of Believers, and Unbelievers, which are both sentenced by God as supreme
Judge, immediately when a Man dies, every Man to his Place, the Souls of
Believers to Heaven, of Unbelievers to Hell. Thus I leave the first, and
proceed to treat of the second Article of the Doctrine; viz.

II. That it is of the highest Concernment and Importance to Men, to be ready
to give up their Account to him that is ready to judge the Quick and the Dead.
Our principal Concern and Business in this World, is to prepare for another.
And this is to be done by improving all we are and have to God's Glory, which
is the principal End of our Creation, and all the Blessings and good Things
which our heavenly Father freely, and undeservedly bestows upon us. It is a
Justice due from us to God, to promote and maintain his Glory in the World. Do
we swear, says a Heathen Arria in Epict
, to prefer none before Caesar, and have we not greater Reason to prefer none
before God. What we have, ought to be used for the Honor of God the Giver: He
never divests himself of the Dominion and Lordship of his Creatures; he only
grants us the Use, not the Abuse of them. We are but Stewards, not Proprietors,
in Regard of God who expects an Account from us how we have employed his Goods
for his Honor and Praise in the World.

In Pursuance of this Part of the Doctrine, I have a fair Opportunity given me
to enter upon the Consideration and Resolution of two Questions; viz.

Quest. 1. How shall Men prepare to give an Account to him that is ready to
judge the Quick and the Dead?

Quest. 2. What makes it of so great Concernment and Importance to Men, to
prepare to give Account to him that is ready to judge the Quick and the Dead?

These are Questions of great Moment, and deserve full and distinct Answers:
But I must be as clear and comprehensive as I can in these, and the other Parts
of the Doctrine, considering the scanty Measure of Time now left me. I resume
the first Question which is,

1. How shall Men prepare to give Account to him that is ready to judge the
Quick and the Dead?

This now is to be considered and resolved in this general Manner, viz They
that will have the Crown of Glory determined for them at God's Tribunal, must
run for it, they must so run as to obtain it, 1 Cor. ix. 24. This is a Work
which requires much Striving and Labor: Men must make it their Business not
only to do Things in themselves lawful or good, but which are so clothed in
all their Circumstances, and in the best Manner for the Glory of God, and the
Good of others. Forgetting those Things which are behind, and reaching forth
unto those Things which are before. To be so intent upon this one Thing, as if
there were not any thing else worthy of their Thoughts and Care. One Thing have
I desired of the Lord, (says David) that will I seek after, that I may dwell
in the House of the Lord all the Days of my Life, to behold the Beauty (or the
Delights, Marg) of the Lord, and to inquire in his Temple, Psalm xxvi. 4.
Trusting that they shall through Grace, be kept all along, Maugre all
Difficulties in the Hand of Christ, till upon his Account they shall be
possessed of all they aim at, viz. the purchased Inheritance eternally settled
upon the Sons of God. Laying aside every Weight, and the Sin that does so
easily beset them, and running with Patience the Race that is set before them,
Heb. xii. 1. Putting off the old Man, the corrupt Nature which remained in
every Christian, styled by the Apostle Paul, The Body of Death, Romans vii. 24.
But especially every Christian his own personal, and proper Iniquity, which
cleaves nearer and closer to him than his Garments, improving daily holy
David's Care and Study in Psalm xviii. 23. I was also upright before him, and
kept my self from mine own Iniquity. This they are to mortify in them, that how
distant soever the Goal is, which finisheth the Race of a Christian's Life, yet
the Way passing to it, though it be troublesome and long, and be set to us all
by God himself, must be patiently, strenuosly and constantly run that they may
obtain it. Psalm cxix 32, 33. I will run the Way of thy Commandments, when thou
shall enlarge my Heart. Teach me, O Lord, the Way of thy Statutes, and I shall
keep it unto the End. In a Word, The Apostle Paul gives us the Substance of
this in a few Words, 2 Timothy iv. 7. I have fought the good Fight, I have finished
my Course, I have kept the Faith. The Life of a Christian, of him that would
prepare for Death, and the Judgment which immediately follows after it, should
be a military Life, but they must not fight the evil Fights of ambitious or
quarrelsome Men, but their Fighting should be the good and noble Fight of
Faith, a daily Conflict with the World, the Flesh and the Devil, contending for
the Faith delivered to the Saints Exercising themselves unto Godliness, 1 Timothy
iv 7. Their constant Study should be Things that promote Godliness, imparting
those Things unto others, and living up to them in their own Conversation;
herein exercising themselves to have always Consciences void of Offense, toward
God, and toward Men, improving all their Care and Thought chiefly that they may
not offend GOD or Men in any Thing, but that they may be without Blame at the
Judgment of God, as well as of Man. They only are blessed and happy whose
Belief concerning another World, and the Account they have to give to God (who
will bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret Thing) do make them
endeavor after Holiness in this World. Thus have we considered and resolved
the first Question, and proceed next to the second Question, which is,

2. What makes it of so great Concernment and Importance to Men to prepare to
give Account to him that is ready to judge the Quick and the Dead? Many are the
forceable, and cogent Arguments and Motives that might here be subjoined to
support and resolve this Question I shall mention a few of them, and I must but
just mention them.

As,

1. The Certainty of the Account to be given by all Men to God The Apostle
Peter in our Text ascertains it, Who shall give an Account, etc It is a Matter
not to be doubted of, they shall not fail of doing it. I said in my Heart,
(says Solomon) God shall judge the Righteous and the Wicked, Eccl. iii. 17 So
then, every one of us must give an Account of himself to God, Romans xiv. 12. Men
shall certainly give an Account to God* whether they be Superiors, Inferiors,
or Equals; and in whatsoever Station and Relation, they stand in the World.
Heb. xiii. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves,
for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give Account, Not only
Ministers, but Magistrates, yea all Men in their several Capacities, Relations
and Conditions in this Life, must do it, they must certainly appear before the
Bar of God, who will call all Men unto Judgment.

2. The Account to be given to God by Men, is very Extensive. It will reach
unto all the Deportments, Degrees and Periods of a Man's Life; even their idle
Words will be brought unto the Reckoning. Mat. xii. 36. But I say unto you,
that every idle Word that Men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in
the Day of Judgment. Rejoice O young Man in thy Youth, (says Solomon) and let
thy Heart cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth and walk in the Ways of thy
Heart, and in the Sight of thine Eyes, but know thou that for all these Things
God will bring thee into Judgment. The most secretoins shall not escape the
Notice and Censure of the Judge: For God shall bring every Work into Judgment,
with every secret Thing, whether it be Good, or whether it be Evil. Eccl. xii.
14.

3. It will be an impartial and critical Account. Unto thee, O Lord belongs
Mercy, for thou rendrest to every Man according to his Work, Psalm lxii 22. God
will judge every Man according (not to what others have done, but) to what he
himself has done. His eternal Joy and Rejoicing, or Sorrow and Mourning shall
be according to what he himself has wrought, not according to what others has
wrought For every Man shall bear his own Burden, Gal. vi 5. If ever they enter
into the Joy of Heaven, they shall rejoice in their own Work, and if eternal
Sorrow be their Portion, they shall groan under their own Burdens, they will
not be the Sins of others, but their own Sins which will sink them into eternal
Misery. For though Superiors shall answer to God for the Sins of their
Inferiors, yet it shall not properly be for their Inferiors Sins, but for
their own Sins, in neglecting to warn and reprove them, and to do what in them
lay to have hindered them in their sinful Courses. For the Lord our God judges
righteously, he tries the Reins and the Heart, Jer. xi 20. He is a just God,
who will deal with all according to their Works. He is a God that takes notice
not only of overt Acts, that are scandalous and criminal, but of the secret
Thoughts, Motions and Designs of Men's Hearts, Rev. ii 23. I will kill her
Children with Death; and all the Churches shall know that I am he which
searches the Reins and the Hearts, and I will give every one of you according
to your Works.

4. The Account may be very sudden and unexpected. Many a Candle is
extinguished before it be half burnt out, many a clear Morning is overcast and
clouded before Noon. Oh, how many sudden and untimely Deaths have we seen, and
heard of in our Day? And how little do Men lay it to Heart? The Sun knows his
going down, but no Man knows the Day or Hour of his Dissolution and Judgment.
Good old Isaac, he knew not the Day of his Death, Genesis xxvii. 2 Nevertheless
Man's Days are determined the Number of his Months is with God, who has
appointed his Bounds that he cannot pass, and Man shall accomplish as an
Hireling his Day, Job xiv. 5, 6. Yet the particular Day of a Man's Death is
uncertain* and may be very sudden with Respect to any Man. Boast not thy self
of tomorrow, (says Solomon) for thou know not what a Day may bring forth,
Prove. xxvii 1. Not only daily Observation and Experience, but many Scripture
Records give Testimony to this Truth. Nadab and Abihu offered strange Fire
before the Lord, which he commanded them not, and there went out Fire from the
Lord, and devoured them, and they died before the Lord, Lev. x. 1, 2. Again, It
was a sudden and unexpected Death and Judgment, which the Lord's of the
Philistines met with, when the House wherein they were feasting and rejoicing,
fell upon them by the Hands of Samson, Judges xvi 30 And Job's Children,
(though he was a very good Man) were overtaken with a very sudden and unlooked
for End; when they were rejoicing together, behold there came a great Wind from
the Wilderness, and smote the four Corners of the House, and it fell upon the
young Men, and they are dead, Job i. 19. How sudden and unexpected soever Death
comes, so sudden the Judgment, for after this the Judgment, Heb. ix. 27.

5. A joyful Sentence of endless Bliss and Glory shall at Death be pronounced
on all them that are ready and prepared to give up their Account to him that is
ready to judge the Quick and the Dead. They shall near a Voice from Heaven
pronouncing their welcome Sentence upon them. Rev. xiv. 13. And I heard a Voice
from Heaven, saying unto me, Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea says the Spirit* that they may rest from their Labors, and
their Works do follow them. They shall be at Rest from the Troubles of this
Life, and their good Deeds and patient Sufferings, shall follow them as
Witnesses for them before the Judge of the Quick and the Dead. The Souls of the
Righteous are made perfect in Holiness, and received into the highest Heavens,
where they behold the Face of God in Light and Glory* Good Asaph being hard put
to it to understand and reconcile the Mystery of divine Providence, because of
the Prosperity of the Wicked, and the many Troubles and Distresses of the
Righteous; he satisfyeth and supports himself with the Consideration of their
different Ends. As to the Wicked, says he, Surely thou did set them in
slippery Places, thou castedst them down into Destruction, Psalm lxxiii. 18.
But as to the Righteous, he assures such, that God is their Guide here, and
unchangeable Portion hereafter, Ver. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel,
and afterward receive me to Glory. But

6. The Account will be terrible and surprising to such as are unprepared, and
unprovided, to give Account to him that is ready to judge the Quick and the
Dead. Their Sentence will be, Depart from me, ye cursed into everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. xxv. 41. The Judgment of the Wicked
is to eternal Misery; lying in two Things. (1.) In a Departure from God, so as
never more to have any Favor from him. (2.) In a Sense of Pain and Misery,
exceeding that which Fire causes to a Body consuming with it. In this Life
wicked Men are capable of some Presence of God with them. and receive several
Favors from God, in Gifts of common Providence, and common Grace, which might
serve either as Encouragements to allure them, or Means to help them in turning
to God, but having abused these, the righteous God, in that Day, even the Day
of Death, will totally depart from them, and they shall receive no more Tokens
of Kindness and Favor from him; and whereas by the Advantages they had from
such a Presence of divine Providence as God was pleased in this Life to allow
them, they lived in some Degrees of Pleasure and Liberty which they were not
thankful for, they shall at that Day, i. e. the Day of Death and Judgment, be
adjudged to eternal Torments.

7. Lastly, The righteous Sentence that shall be pronounced by God the
righteous Judge, upon every Man at Death, shall be derisive and irrevocable.
Here there is left no Room for Abatement, Appeal or Review. There can be no
Evasion at God's Bar, for he is Judge alone, and is justified when he speaks
and clear when he judges, Psalm li. 4. Then every Man is ordered to the Place
appointed for him, the Wicked to a State of endless Misery from which there is
no Recovery. Judas went to his own Place, Acts i. 25. And the Glutton is
tormented forever in that Place without the least Hopes of Reprieve or Escape.
The State of the Damned will be void of any Degree of Comfort or Satisfaction.
But the Souls of good Men when they leave their Bodies, go into an unalterable
Estate of eternal Bliss, where are Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and enjoy a
Felicity, which we are not able to express, but is set out to us under the
Notion of Abraham's Bosom, to let us know that it is a Place of Rest and
Communion with Saints, and the same Felicity which Abraham the Friend of God
does enjoy. For we know, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. V. 1 that if our earthly
House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House
not made with Hands eternal in the Heavens. In such a State as that it shall be
incorruptible, no more subject to any Corruption or Decay.

Come we now to the third general Point in the Doctrine, which is,

III. That God is ready to take an Account of Men. He is always sit, prepared,
furnished and well appointed, to sit upon his Judgment Seat, and pronounce
Sentence according to the various Cases and Suits of all that are summoned, to
appear before him. Behold the Judge stands before the Door, James v. 9 But
some Men wish there were no God, no Judge to call them unto an Account. The
Fool has said in his Heart there is no God, Psalm xiv. 1. That is, he wishes
there were no God, for he sees nothing but Matter of Fear, Terror and Amazement
round about. As the Wicked here lived without the Bounds of God's Law, they are
afraid to fall under the Stroke of his Justice: Fear wishes the Destruction of
that which it apprehends hurtful: And the amazing Fear of the Wicked considers
God as a God to whom Vengeance belongs, as the Judge of all the Earth, Psalm
live. 12.

That God is prepared, and incontestably well furnished to take an Account of
Men, may in some measure appear from the few following Considerations.

1. His unaccountable Sovereignty. He is the blessed and only Potentate, the
King of kings, and Lord of lords, 1 Timothy vi 15. He is the only Potentate
because he has only Power in, and from himself, by him Kings reign, and he is
the blessed Potentate, because he is the Fountain of all Felicity, and
Happiness, yea, he is the most mighty Being, and Lord, to whom all other
Princes are Subjects, all other Lords are Vassals* he rules all as the Heavens
do over the Earth. He is King of Worlds, King of Ages, as the Word translated
Eternal signifies, 1 Timothy i. 17. God is Being of the invisible World, and the
sensitive. Whatsoever is in Time is subject to the Sovereignty of the great
God, who gave Being to all Things. The Lord has prepared his Throne in the
Heavens: and his Kingdom rules over all, Psalm ciii 19 His royal Authority
extends over Angels and Devils, over godly and ungodly, over rational and
irrational Creatures; all Things and Persons, at all Times, and in all Places,
are swayed and governed by his mighty Scepter. Earthly Kings may step out of
their own Country, into the Territory of a neighboring Prince, and as such
leave their Country, they leave their Dominion behind them; but Heaven and
Earth and every particular Part of both is the Territory of God

2 His Power is great and incomprehensible. The Thunder of his Power who can
understand? Job xxvi. 14. Infinite and unconceivable Power is essential to the
divine Nature. This is a Truth not to be doubted of: For though Goodness,
Wisdom, Mercy and Justice be essential, yet Power is more apparently essential,
because no Acts of Goodness, Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, can be exercised by him
without Power. Some have observed, That God is called Almighty seventy Times in
Scripture L^ssins de Perfect. div.
. And though it be true that God has given Evidences of his Power in all his
Works, yet it is as true, that he has a Power beyond the Expression of it in
his Works; and as this is truly the Glory of the divine Nature, so it is most
certainly the Support and great Comfort of Believer. And to this very Purpose
the Apostle Paul expresses it by an excellent Periphrasis for the Honor and
Glory of Jehovah, Ephesians. iii. 20. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we can ask or think, unto him be Glory in the
Churches. By the exceeding Greatness of his Power, God works Faith, enables to
bear Afflictions, and preserves to Salvation.

3. His Knowledge is infinite. O Lord, How great are thy Works! and thy Thoughts
are very deep, Psalm xcii. 5. God knows the Essence, Qualities and Properties
of all his Creatures, he has an universal Knowledge of Things, Persons, and all
their Motions and Actions he knows all Things, whether they be possible, past,
present or future. He knows all the Actions of Creatures. He counts in
particular, all the Ways of Men. Does he not see all my Ways, and count all my
Steps, Job xxxi. 4. He discerns the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart, all that
is in the Mind, all that is in the Affections, every Stirring and Purpose; so
that not one Thought can be withheld from him, yea, Hell and Destruction are
before him: how much more then the Hearts of the Children of Men? Prove. xv. 11.
All Things are naked and manifest unto the Eye of that God with whom we have to
do, our secret Sins are not hid from his Eyes. Psalm xc. 8. We are consumed by
thine Anger, and by thy Wrath we are troubled. Thou have set our Iniquities
before thee, and our secret Sins in the Light of thy Countenance. Yet the
Corruption of Men does still keep a contrary Notion, and Conceit in their
Minds, that God has forgotten, that he hides his Face from Transgressions, and
will not regard their Iniquity, Psalm x. 11. God therefore in his infinite
Wisdom, will (in their Time and Order) summon the Children of Men to Trial,
that his most excellent Knowledge might be publicly manifested, and receive an
universal Testimony, that no Secrecy can be a Cover from it. And at Death the
Judgment will be set, and the Books opened, Dan. vii 10. as well as at the Day
of Judgment, with respect to every individual Person, the Book of God's
Records, and Conscience the Counterpart, will be fully opened and read before
us, and out of those Books shall Men be judged according to their Works, Rev xx
12.

4. Lastly, Consider his spotless Justice and unbounded Mercy. Justice and
Judgment are the Habitation of thy Throne; Mercy and Truth shall go before thy
Face, Psalm. lxxxix. 14 When the guilty Sinner, (bound in the Chains of both
original and actual Transgressions of the righteous Law of God, whereby he is
bound over to the Wrath of God, and the Curse of the Law, and made subject to
Death, with all Miseries, temporal, spiritual and eternal,) I say when the
guilty Sinner, this vile and wretched Criminal stands forth at the Bar of God's
Tribunal, doubtless there are such Pleas as these suggested, viz Justice pleads
against every Son of Adam, thus, I arraign before thy Tribunal a Rebel who was
the glorious Work of thy Hands, the Center of thy rich Goodness Thou have made
him a little lower than the Angels, and have crowned him with Glory and Honor.
Thou made him to have Dominion over the Works of thy Hands; thou have put all
Things under his Feet, Psalm viii. 5, 6. able is indeed Miserable whereby to
excite thy Compassion; but he is not miserable without being criminal. He is a
Rebel not by Necessity, but by Will. But Mercy steps in, and pleads in the
behalf of the Offender, and most warmly urges, if Man be destroyed and made
Fuel for Hell Fire, the Creation is vain and to no Purpose: But then Justice
answers, if Man be not condemned, the Law is insignificant, and will be
entirely frustrated: Truth backs and supports Justice, and free Grace warmly
urges Mercy! How can these Pleas be answered, this seeming Contradiction
accorded, and the Difference adjusted? The Reason of Man cannot reach this
Case, nor his Ability provide a Salvo, but God in the Depth of his Wisdom found
out an Expedient, by which Truth and Justice shall be satisfied in punishing,
and Grace and Mercy most illustriously displayed in pardoning, by transferring
the Punishment of our Crimes upon a Surety, even the Lord Jesus Christ, from
whose precious Blood Justice exacts a Recompense, and for whose Blood, Life and
Salvation are conferred upon us by Mercy, without the Expense and Loss of one
Drop of our own. This is the admirable Temperament found out in the
unsearchable Wisdom of God, whereby his Justice is honored in the Sufferings
of Man's Surety, and his Mercy glorified in the Application of the Propitiation
to the Offender, Rom iii. 24, 25. Being justified freely by his Grace, through
the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ Whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
Remission of Sins that are past, through the Forbearance of God. Thus does God
freely justify those, whom he effectually calls, not by infusing
Righteousness into them* but by pardoning their Sins, and by accounting, and
accepting their Persons, as righteous, not for any Thing wrought in them, or
done by them, but for Christ's Sake alone, who by his Obedience and Death, did
fully discharge the Debt of all those, who are thus justified, and did make a
proper, real and full Satisfaction to the Father's Justice, in their Behalf.

APPLICATION.
In the Improvement of this Doctrine, I shall in the first Place address this
numerous Assembly; and in the second Place, the poor Prisoner, who is the
Occasion of so great an Assembly here at this Time. As to the Assembly, I might
apply the Doctrine, and this melancholy Occasion many Ways to them, but that I
must not intrude upon your Time, or Patience. Let then your Ears, and rather
your Hearts, give diligent Attention to a few Words. As

1. That it is a necessary Point of your Faith to believe that there is a God
that will call us all (in our Time and Order) to an Account, and that with him
there are future Rewards and Punishments. We should humbly and feelingly
acknowledge with holy David, Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous, verily,
he is a God that judges in the Earth, Psalm lviii. 11. I beseech you
entertain, and improve this most certain Truth, viz. That it is no longer to be
doubted, or questioned by any, that there is a God that inquires into, tries
and discerns all Things and Persons. The Lord's Throne is in Heaven, his Eyes
behold, his Eye lids try the Children of Men, Psalm xi 4. And this he does not
as a Spectator only but to render to every one according to his Work, Psalm
lxii. 12. To God the sovereign Being, the supreme and universal Lawgiver and
Judge, does belong the universal Right and Power of vindictive Justice, it is
his Propriety, as he will avenge all Injuries against his People, he will much
more avenge the Sins and Injuries against his Son, and will actually return to
Evildoers as a Recompense for their Sins the Evil of Punishment. He is not
only just and powerful, but actually manifesting both in his Retribution on
them. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 41. If I whet my glittering Sword and mine Hand take hold on
Judgment, I will render Vengeance to mine Enemies, and will reward them that
hate me. If Men did believe, and constantly revere this Truth, it is impossible
that they should allow themselves in so many Crimes as they are guilty of, and
daily perpetrating. But before I finish this Use, I must take leave to mention
a few Errors and Objections alleged and maintained by some Adversaries to this
Truth, and offer Scripture Confutation of them.

1. The Greeks and Arminians and some others say, the Souls of the Righteous
are not presently after Death, admitted to enjoy Happiness, which consists in
seeing of God, but are put into some Mansion, though it be not a heavenly one,
yet a Place above Hell, where they enjoy, even until the Resurrection, some
heavenly Delight and Recreation, without seeing God. And the Socinians likewise
tell us, that the Souls of the Righteous after Death, until the Resurrection
are (as it were) extinguished. These Errors are broached and maintained in
Opposition to many express Texts of Scripture, as Eccles. xii. 7. where the
wise Man declares that the Spirits of just Men after Death, return to God and
are rewarded by him. And the Protomartyr Stephen died in the Belief of this
Truth, and sealed it with his Blood, Acts vii. 59. And they stoned Stephen,
calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Agreably the Author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews assures us, That the Spirits of just Men are made
perfect in Holiness, and placed in the heavenly Jerusalem, with the Angels, Heb
xii. 22, 23. And a more excellent Author, namely, Jesus Christ the Lord of
Glory intimates Luke xvi. 22, 25. That the Souls of the Righteous after Death
are comforted, and carried into Abraham's Bosom.

2. The Greeks and others allege and maintain that the Souls of the Wicked are
not adjudged to the Torments of Hell, till after the Resurrection: And the
Socinians go still farther, saying, that the Souls of the Wicked shall never be
tormented in Hell. These Errors contradict the sacred Text, in sundry Places,
and Instances, Heb. ix. 27. And as it is appointed unto Men once to die, but
after this the Judgment. Which evidently shows, that the particular Judgment
of every single Man follows immediately his Departure out of this Life: Of this
also Instances shall now be produced, namely, The Soul of the rich Glutton
which was tormented in Hell Flames after it left the Body, Luke xvi. 22, 23.
And Judas was struck into his own Place, Acts i. 25.

3 Very gross and absurd are the Errors which Papists have framed against this
Doctrine, who (albeit the holy Scripture does not acknowledge any other Place
than Heaven and Hell for Souls, departed from their Bodies) yet have devised
other four besides these two; viz. Limbus Patrum, Limbus Infantum, a most
pleasant Meadow, and Purgatory.

1. Limbus Patrum, in which (say they) the faithful who died before Christ's
Passion have been shut up as in a dark Prison under Ground, and being without
Torment, and for the Time without Happiness, have been kept close there until
Christ's Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven. In Answer hereto, we should
remember what is already noted from Heb. xii. 22, 23. To which we may add, that
the Virtue of Christ's Sacrifice did no less extend it self to Believers under
the old Testament, than the new. We are told, Rev. xiii 8. All that dwell upon
the Earth shall worship him, whose Names are not written in the Book of the
Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World. And the Example of Enoch, and
Moses, and Elias, which two before the Passion of Christ were seen upon the
Mount with him, Luke ix. 30, 31. is a Confutation of this wild Fancy, even to a
Demonstration.

2. Their Limbus Infantum has no better Ground to support it, than their
Limbus Patrum, because the Covenant belongs to the Children of Believers though
not baptized: In which Covenant, Glory and Life eternal are promised. Acts ii.
39. For the Promise is unto you, and to your Children, and to all that are afar
off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Likewise our compassionate
Redeemer declared, that the Kingdom of Heaven belonged to little Children,
though not baptized. Mat. xix. 14. And the Infants of the Israelites dying
before the eighth Day, were not shut up in Limbus Infantum, as the Adversaries
themselves confess. But the Nature and Essence of Baptism, under the new
Testament, and the Nature and Essence of Circumcision under the old, are the
same, according to the Apostle's Reasoning, Colos. ii. 11, 12.

3. The third Device, is almost pleasant Meadow; in which (say they) as in a
royal or senatorian Prison, the Souls that are in it want Happiness, yet suffer
no Punishment of Sense, except what arises from the Delay of Happiness, but
only of Loss. This Place seems to be the Elisian Fields, taken out of the sixth
Book of Virgil's AEneids. The Folly of this idle Fancy is made evident by the
Answer to the first Objection. And methinks the very Hearing or Reading of it
will carry its own Confutation, yea Condemnation with it, to every thinking and
judicious Christian.

4. Lastly. Purgatory. The Notion of Purgatory, devised by the popish Church,
is built upon the tottering Foundation of Venial Sin. But there is no such
Thing as Venial Sin, as it is explained by the Papists themselves. Romans vi. 23.
And the Apostle Paul assures us that temporal Punishments do not extend
themselves beyond this Life. Romans viii. 18. 2 Cor. iv. 17, 18. For in this Life
only the Godly receive their evil Things, as the Wicked receive their good
Things, Luke xvi. 25. They that die in the Lord, rest from their Labors, Rev.
xiv. 13. And Christ's Satisfaction for the Sins of Believers, is most full,
complete and perfect, and does not need our imperfect Satisfactions, whether
for the Fault or the Punishment. Isai. liii. Chap. 1 John i. 7. And the Blood
of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin.

USE 2. Be persuaded to employ your Thoughts and best Care, to be always ready
to give up your Account to him that is ready to judge the Quick and the Dead
Knowing the Terrors of the Lord, we persuade Men, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. v.
11. We believing and being fully persuaded that there shall be such a great and
terrible Day of the Lord, when there shall be such a narrow inquiry and Search
into whatsoever Men have though it spoke or done in the Flesh. We persuade Men to
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and to walk according to the Rule of the
Gospel, to avoid every dishonest and unwarrantable Behavior amongst Men, to
decline not only openly dishonest Actions, but every secret and hidden
dishonest Behavior. There are those, who though they make a splendid Profession
of Christianity, and behave themselves very speciously in their more external
Conversation, yet it were a Shame to speak of the Things that are done of them
in Secret; but yet in the Presence of God their Judge, who will e're long
undoubtedly call them to an Account, to which Period, truly all of us are
hastening. Man is like to Vanity, his Days are as a Shadow that passes away,
Psalm cxliv. 5. And therefore Men ought to employ and improve all their Powers,
Talents, Time, Means and Seasons of Grace, all that they have, and all
Occasions for this very great Purpose, namely, to prepare for Death, and the
Judgment that immediately follows after it: Blessed is that Servant, whom his
Lord when he comes shall find so doing, Mat. xxiv. 46. And the present
melancholy Occasion should profitably be improved by every one of us; we are
not to be Spectators only, but Mourners on many Accounts, which I cannot now
stand to enumerate. We are to be warned and admonished, the poor Criminal in
his Chains, is a Monitor to us all. This House of Prayer and Praise, is now
turned into an House of Mourning. Ye are anon to be Witnesses of a very
affecting Tragedy, Death indeed is the End of Men, and who can be so Hardy as
not to receive some Impressions from the natural and timely Death of others:
But more especially from the untimely End which some unhappily bring upon
themselves, (as in the Case of this unhappy young Man, in his twenty-ninth
Year,) who finds by sad Experience that there is no Discharge in that War, and
that Wickedness shall not deliver those that are given to it, Eccl. viii. 8 Oh,
that the Day of his Death, may prove better to him than the Day of his Birth!
and that every Soul in this Assembly may find that Saying of the wise Man,
experimentally accomplished in himself, viz. that it is better to go to the
House of Mourning, than to the House of Feasting; for that is the End of all
Men, and the Living will lay it to his Heart, Eccles. vii. 2.

Was the poor Spectacle before us, (I mean the Prisoner) now to speak to you,
doubtless he would address you to this Effect: Take Warning by me every one of
you, more especially young Men: Behold the woeful Fruits of bad Courses,
Disobedience to those that had the Care of my Education, and perhaps their
sinful Neglect, Contempt of the Word and Sacraments, and of the Ministry, and
Worship of God, Profanation of the Lord's Day, taking the Name of the glorious
Jehovah often in vain, Idleness, Drunkenness, and Rioting, Lying, Stealing, and
wasting of my Neighbor's Goods, whose Good and Quiet, I ought to tender and
regard as my own. I have tasted the Pleasures of Sin, but now I drink deep of
the bitter Fruits of it. My Companions in my ill Courses, have often (at the
Cost of our innocent Neighbors) put a Cup of Pleasure, sweetened Draughts into
my Hand, but mixed with the Poison of Sin, which now is become a Cup of Shame
and Bitterness unto me. Oh! Pity me, and pity your selves, by guarding betimes
against an ignorant and ill spent Life. And pray earnestly to be protected by
divine Mercy from coming to my sad Case, and so shameful an End as I have
brought my sinful Life to. To think that this poor Object suffers only for the
Sin of Burglary is impertinent: No, his many other Enormities, were as so many
Ingredients in the Provocation given to a just God, to leave him to perpetrate
the last Act upon which his Conviction is grounded, and by which his Measure is
filled up. May all of you then be careful to shun sinful and vicious Courses,
which sooner or later will bring Shame, and make so good Improvement of this
Occasion, as to induce you to beg of God daily in the Style of holy David,
Psalm cxix. 133. Order my Steps in thy Word, and let not any Iniquity have
Dominion over me.

I have already hinted at sundry Motives to engage Men to study to be always in
a Readiness to give up their Account unto God, which is to be done by them
immediately after Death. As to the Certainty of the Account to be given, it is
very extensive, it will be impartial and critical, it may be very sudden and
unexpected: Endless Joy and Comfort shall be to those that are found ready, but
endless Sorrow and Misery to such as are found unprepared, and the Sentence
that is passed upon every Man at Death, will be decisive and irrevocable.
Moreover, there are many special Advantages and Privileges which does
undoubtedly redound to those that are constant and faithful in the Prosecution
of this necessary Work; Glory, Honor and Peace to every Man that works good,
says the Apostle, Romans ii. 10. The Word Peace, according to the usual
Acceptance of it amongst the Hebrews, is comprehensive of all Good and
Happiness, both here and hereafter. But Time would fail me, if I should attempt
to give a List of Particulars here. I have therefore fixed upon three general
Heads, under which (I think) they are all couched. As

1. (...) an Evidence of their Title to the Privileges of God's Children. Yea,
they are truly such, (as far as we can and ought to judge.) The Tree is known
by his Fruit, says our Savior, Mat. xii. 33. If the Fruit be good, the Tree
must be good. And the Branch cannot bear Fruit, except it be in the Vine, John
xv. 4 God graciously gives unto such a Place and a Name better than of Sons
and Daughters; he will give them an everlasting Name that shall not be cut off.
This shall be the high Privilege, most excellent Dignity and Advantage of all
those that choose the Things that please him, and take hold of his Covenant;
yea, all those that join themselves to the Lord to serve him, and to love him,
shall in their Persons and Services be accepted with him; he will bring them to
his holy Mountain, and make them joyful in his House of Prayer, Isai. lvi. 4,
to 8. Doubtless the Lord God is their Father, and they the Tribes of his
Inheritance, and the People of his Holiness, Isai. lxiii. 16, 17, 18.

2. If they are the Children of God, they are Christ's near Relatives, they are
his Brethren. If Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with
Christ; united to him by Faith and Holiness. And there is no Condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus; for the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus has made them free from the Law of Sin and Death. So great and
inconceivable are their Advantages and Privileges, that the Tongue of the
eloquent, evangelical Prophet could not express them. Isai. lxiv. 4. Since the
beginning of the World, Men have not heard, not perceived by the Ear, neither
has the Eye seen, O God besides thee, what he has prepared for him that
waits for him The Apostle Paul cites this Text, Romans ii. 9. And shows in the
8th Verse, what is meant by the Things prepared for them that wait for and love
God, namely, Christ and his Benefits, which are set out as Things not obvious
to Sense, and not to be comprehended by Reason. It could never have entered into
the Heart of Man to conceive, that God should give his only begotten Son out of
his eternal Bosom, to take upon him the Nature of Man, and to die upon the
Cross: or, that Christ should so far humble himself and become obedient unto
Death, to redeem and rescue lost Man, from eternal Death, reconcile him to his
eternal Father, and by the Sacrifice of himself secure his Happiness, and
Glory. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to
the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City, Rev. xxii.
14. Thus,

3. They are begotten unto a lively Hope, to an Inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for them. He that does
the Will of God abides for ever, 1 John ii. 17. He that unites himself with
the supreme eternal Good, by a Will that is guided by and conformed to the
divine Will, abides for ever, partakes of a Felicity Coeternal with the
Object and Rule upon which his Heart was set, and which it was guided by. They
shall walk with God their Savior in white, be clothed in white Raiment, be
Pillars in the Temple of the living God; yea, they shall be continually before
the Throne of God, and serve him Day and Night in his Temple. And he that
fitteth on the Throne shall dwell among them, they shall hunger no more, nor
thirst any more; neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any Heat* for the
Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and God shall wipe
away all Tears from their Eyes, Rev vii. 9. 13, to 18 Surely such excellent
Privileges and Advantages are not to be slighted, but industriously and
constantly to be sought for, with Perseverance in the Work to the End.

It might be proper here to add some Directions, but I must refer you in this
Matter to the Answer given to the first Question, under the second Branch of
the Doctrine, and hasten to say a few Words to the distressed Prisoner. Poor
Man, We pity you, and we have frequently and fervently prayed to God for Mercy
to your immortal Soul: And I hope that our Prayers and Labors have not been in
vain. I trust that you remember that I have heretofore directed you in public
and private, as to the Nature of Gospel Faith, and Repentance, and that God is
ready to show Mercy to penitent believing Sinners I hope I need not insist at
this Time upon these Points. Now, now, is the only Time left you to improve
these special Graces with the greatest Importunity. Nor do I think it
convenient at this critical Hour to load you with Variety of Matter or Phrases;
but very affectionately move you to the following Meditation and Inquiry with
your self.

1. Consider, That you are in a few Minutes to give an Account to him that is
ready to judge the Quick and the Dead. Behold, the Judge stands before the
Door. Your Case is as it were called, and the Sentence preparing ready to be
pronounced upon you this, Give an Account of your Stewardship, for thou shall
be no longer Steward.

2. Consider, the present State of your Soul How you are furnished to receive
and entertain the righteous Sentence to be pronounced upon you at the Tribunal
of God, at the Expiration of a few Moments. What are your Convictions? What are
your Supports and Comforts? Has the Spirit of God by its inward Influence upon
your Heart, so convinced you of Sin, in not believing in Christ, that you now
believe in him to the saving of your Soul? If so, you very sensibly feel these
two Effects of it. One, a godly Sorrow of Heart for Sin, as it is displeasing
to a holy God, judging and condemning thy self before God. Are you ready to say
with the Thief on the Cross, that you receive the due Reward of your Deeds?
Luke xxiii. 41. Most earnestly beseeching the almighty Creator of all Persons
and Things, which made Waters flow out of the Rock to smite thy flinty Heart,
to take thy stony Heart out of thy Body, to open thy Heart as he did Lydia's,
to put a new Spirit within thy Bowels, to anoint thine Eyes with Eye Salve,
that so thou may now see and feel thine own Wretchedness, and may
feelingly acknowledge with Paul, Rom vii. 18 That in thy Flesh there dwells no
good Thing. With holy David, Psalm xxxviii. 4 That thine Iniquities are as a
weighty Burden unto thee, yea too heavy for thee. With Jacob, That thou art
less than the least of God's Mercies. With Daniel, That open Shame belongs
unto thee. With Job, That thou can not answer for one of a thousand, Chap.
ix. 3 That so thou may have, (if it were possible) a Glimpse of that woeful
Score, which the Lord has against thee in this thy Day of Reckoning The other
is a justifying of God now, under the manifest Effects of his holy and just
Displeasure against thy Sins; saying in Humility and Sincerity of thy Soul, O
Lord thou art just in all that is brought upon me, for thou have done right,
but I have done wickedly, Neh ix 33. Thus will the Mercy of God be sweet unto
thee, when thou feel the intolerable Burden of a wounded Spirit; thy Soul
will thirst after Righteousness, and all Things will be as Dung to thee; that
thou may win Christ, and obtain the Favor of God through him. The Tidings
of Christ in the Sequel of the Discourse, will make thy very Heart to leap
within thee, as the Salutation of Mary did the Babe in the Womb of Elisabeth:
They will come down upon thy perplexed Soul, like the Rain upon the mown Grass,
and as the Showers that water the Earth, Psalm lxxi. 6 And this leads to the
next Meditation and Inquiry viz.

2. What are your Supports? Where do you find Comfort? Do you find them wholly
in Christ? Can you with Humility, and most sincere Affection take your good
Deeds, and your bad Deeds, and lay them all in a Heap at the Feet of a glorious
Christ, and say in the Warmth and Ardour of your Soul, Blessed Jesus, in thee
alone I find Rest, Comfort and Support* Lord, there is no Salvation in any
other, Acts iv 12. In the Lord have I Righteousness and Strength. The
Righteousness which God has set forth for Justification is not my own, but a
Righteousness which is of God, Phil iii. 9, 10. Of God's appointing, and of
God's performing; appointed by the Father who is God, and performed by the Son,
who is one with the Father, a Righteousness infinitely excelling that of all
the glorious Angels, since it is an unchangeable Righteousness which can never
fail, Dan iv. 24. A Righteousness wherein the Holiness of God can acquiesce, as
considered in it self, because it is a Righteousness of one equal with God Know
this then, that the holiest Man on Earth, highly dishonours the divine Majesty,
when he insists upon his own imperfect and impure Righteousness for his
Justification, as if a mortal Man were as just as God, and a Man as pure as his
Maker, Job iv 17. So then you highly honor the Purity of God's Nature, when
you charge your self with Folly, acknowledge your self unclean, and accept of
that Righteousness which alone gives a full contentment to God's Infinite
Purity, even the Righteousness of Jesus Christ in whom all the Promises of God,
are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us. 2 Cor. i. 20. Who is
able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them. Heb. vii. 25. And who of God is made unto
every one that believes, (and so to you, if now without any reserve you clasp
about Him with the arms of a lively active Faith, and can with Peter appeal
to him, saying, Lord, thou know all things; thou know that I love thee.
Joh. xxi. 17) wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and eternal Redemption.
Well then, hoping the best, (as in Charity it behooves me) of you. I now bid
you farewell, with my earnest wish, and fervent prayer to God for you, in the
language, and manner of the apostle Peter, 2 Pet. i. 2, 3, 4. 11. Grace and
peace be multiplied unto you through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our
Lord, According as his divine power has given unto us all Things that pertain
unto life and godliness: Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
promises; that by these you might be partaker of the divine nature. And so an
entrance be ministered to you abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To whom be glory for ever. Amen.

THE END.
The Confession and Dying Warning of Hugh Henderson, Signed by him in the
Presence of four of the Ministers, the Morning of the Day of his Execution.
I Hugh Henderson otherwise through my Wickedness called John Hamilton, of
about 28 or 29 Years of Age, was born in Armagh in the Kingdom of Ireland,
received Baptism in the Manner of the Presbyterians, and was brought up by my
Uncle, who was obliged to give me suitable Learning, but did not; which
Neglect, together with my own neglect of learning the Word of God afterward,
was a great Reason of my taking to such wicked Courses as have brought me to my
unhappy* untimely End.

I began with smaller Sins while I was Young; with but stealing Pins; against
which I received Warning oftentimes, but persisted in it, and was very
disobedient, till I increased further in Sin.

I came into this Country about nine Years ago, and presently took to Drinking;
and when I had been about a Year here, I took to Stealing, which I have
followed from that Time, except too or three Years intermission; and have lived
in profane Cursing, Swearing, and Lying, and breaking the Sabbath, and Gameing,
especially whilst I was in Rhode Island Government; to which I have added
Whoreing also: So that my Sins have been very many and heinous in the Sight of
God and Man; but particularly I confess my House-breaking, for which I must
justly die, and am righteously exposed to the Wrath of God for ever.

But I have my Hope and Dependence upon the Lord Jesus Christ for the Pardon of
my many and great Sins, and for eternal Salvation: For He has come into the
World to bear the Sins of Men, has suffered upon the Cross, and made Atonement
by his Blood: In Him I desire to believe with my whole Soul, repenting bitterly
of all my Sins, and forsaking and renouncing them all; begging and hoping for
Pardon at the Hands of God only for the sake of Jesus Christ

I also entreat Forgiveness of all Persons whom I have wronged and injured by
my Acts of Unrighteousness and Violence, or other Wickedness.

I desire to bless God he has given me such a Sight and Sense of my Sins, and
has granted me such a Space for my repenting, and affording me the precious
Means of Grace, when he might have justly cut me off suddenly in the midst of
my Wickedness.

I thank God also for the many Favors and Kindnesses of his People and
Ministers, and the Helps and Assistances afforded me during my Imprisonment.

I thank his Excellency the Governor for his Compassion toward me in granting
me a Reprieve, and am sorry that I have not improved the whole Time of it
better than I have; but trust it has been a Mercy to my Soul.

And being that my Sins have brought me to these miserable Sufferings, I would
solemnly Warn all Persons in General that they beware of sinning against an
holy God as I have done; and I pray God to keep them from the Sins I have been
guilty of; from Whoring and Drinking, breaking the Sabbath, Cursing and
Swearing, and Lying and Gaming; and from Stealing especially.

I would particularly warn all Parents and Heads of Families that they neglect
not Prayer in their Houses, and that they do not fail to bring up the Children
under their Care in suitable Learning, and in the Knowledge and Fear of God and
Practice of Religion, that they may not fall into such pernicious Courses as I
have done.

I would solemnly Warn all Children and Servants that they be sure to be
obedient to their Parents, and Masters and Mistressess: Disobedience being a
dangerous Inlet to much other Wickedness

And I solemnly warn all Young Persons that they especially beware of the
forementioned heinous Sins, and they do not by any Means neglect the Care of
their Souls, but see that they be busy with God in their Youth, acquaint
themselves with Christ and the way to Salvation by Him, accept of Him, and rely
upon Him for eternal Happiness.

I would earnestly Warn and Charge all Tavern Keepers that they mind and give
good Weight and Measure, there being much Iniquity through the neglect thereof,
and see that they keep good Orders, and do not let Persons have too much Drink,
being that by those Means they become in a great Measure chargeable with the
Sins which others commit when deprived of their Senses thereby. I pray the
Tavern Keepers of this Town of Worcester that they would beware of suffering
any Disorders in their Houses, letting the young Persons, or the younger or
elder Persons of the Place continue in their evil Practices of drinking to
Excess.

And while I remember what passed with me in Rhode Island Government, I cannot
but warn them against their rudeness, viciousness, irreligiousness, and
breaking the Lord's Day.

Having given this Warning, I desire to commend my self to the Charity and
Prayers of all God's People for me, and that you would lift up your Hearts to
God for me, for the Pardon of my Sins, an Interest in Christ, and that I may be
sanctified by the Spirit of God: But above all I commend my self to the
infinite Mercy of God, in my dear Redeemer, begging and beseeching that through
the Merits of his Blood I may this Day be with Him in Paradise.

Hugh Henderson.
Signed with his Mark. A true Copy Examined, Per E. PARKMAN.

FINIS.

