When the Godly cease, and Faithful fail; we must seek to GOD for Help.

A SERMON Preached at Cambridge, Upon the DEATH of the Reverend Mr. Benjamin
Wadsworth, President of Harvard College. Who Deceased, March 16th. 1736, 7.
Aetatis Suae 68.

By Joseph Sewall, D. D. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright: for the End of that
Man is Peace.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhill.
MDCCXXXVII.

When the Godly cease, We must seek to GOD for Help.
PSALM. XII. I. Help Lord, for the godly Man cease; for the faithful fail from
among the Children of Men.


IN this Psalm, David under an afflicting Sense of the Degeneracy of the Times,
it is supposed under Readiness Government, cries to God for Help. Help Lord, or
save: For the godly Man cease. -- They were put out of Place, or taken away
by a violent, or natural Death; and there did not appear others of like Piety
and Faithfulness to fill their Places, and make good their Ground. Iniquity
abounded, and the Love of m^^y toward God, their Neighbor, and the best
Interest of their People, waxed cold. Now such a degener^^^ Day must be a time
of Danger and Distress. 2 T^^ 3.1, 2. -- Perilous Times shall come: for Men
shall be Lovers of their own selves, -- ver. 5. Having a Form of Godliness; but
denying the Power thereof. Accordingly, in this Day of Darkness and Gloominess,
the Psalmist flies to God's Name as to his strong Tower; to the Lord, to
Jehovah, the self-existing and eternal God, who is the Hope of Israel, the
Savior thereof in Time of Trouble. Let us then hear the Voice of God's Word
and Providence in the following Doctrine.

DOCT. When the Godly cease, and Faithful fail from among the Children of Men;
it is our Duty to cry to GOD for Help.

1. Who are intended by the Godly and Faithful? 2. Show that these may cease
and fail. 3. That when it is thus, we must cry to GOD for Help.
1. Who are intended by the Godly and Faithful?

The Children and true People of God are set before us in sacred Writ, under a
Variety of endearing Characters, which declare their real Excellency, and the
high Esteem which God the Fountain of Honor has for them.

Here we have them called the Godly and Faithful Godly. The Word signifies, as
a learned Man observes, A sacred Affection of Mercy, Piety, Grace, Benignity,
and bountiful Good Will toward any, without Respect of Merit. It is
translated, Pious, Merciful Vid. Moman. (...) Calv.
. Faithful. The Word signifies true, believing; all Manner of Faith and
Faithfulness". Men of Integrity etc. A full and distinct Consideration of these
Characters would open a large Field of Discourse; but I shall in answer to the
Inquiry, only say:

1. They are Godly, who have the Image of God restored to them.

The Godly are God-like, they resemble God in his communicable Attributes and
imitable Perfections. Some of the divine Attributes are said to be
incommunicable, as God's Immensity, Unchangeableness etc. And it would be high
Presumption to pretend to resemble God in them. Others communicable; because
his intelligent Creatures may bear some Likeness and Resemblance to their
Creator in them, as in his Wisdom, Goodness etc. However, we must always
remember that the One is infinite, the other finite. Math. 19.17. There is none
good but One, that is God. None essentially, originally, infinitely Good. Now,
Man was at first created in this Image of God. Genesis 1.26. And God said, Let us
make Man in our Image, after our Likeness. And this was, not only as God, the
infinite and eternal Spirit, breathed into Man the breath of Life, and gave him
a living Soul endowed with Understanding, Will, and Affections; but in an
especial Manner is he said to be made in the Image of God upon the account of
the moral Rectitude of his Nature, whereby he was fitted to imitate and serve
his Maker. Eccl. 7.29. -- God made Man upright, Right, conformable to his
Nature and Will, which is the Rule of Right, after his own Likeness,
Understanding, Holy, and every way Good Vid. Pool in loc.
. But, how is the Gold become dim! how is the most fine Gold changed! Man being
in Honor, abode not; he soon fell from his original Purity, forfeited and lost
the Image of God, for himself and his Posterity. The Crown is fallen from our
Head; woe to us that we have sinned. For as Adam was the Root and Parent from
whom we all sprang in the way of ordinary Generation; so it pleased God to
appoint him the legal Head and Representative of his Posterity in the first
Covenant: And accordingly "we sinned in him, and fell with him in his first
Transgression". Romans 5.12. By one Man Sin entered in the World, and Death by
Sin. ver. 19. By one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners. All the World
is become guilty before God, Romans 3.19. And we have a corrupt Nature derived to
us from him. Who can bring a clean Thing out of an unclean? not one, Job 14.4.

However, the Light of Revelation shows us that this great Loss of the Image of
God is not irreperable. In the Scriptures, that God, who dwells in the Light
which no Man can approach unto, declares that there are Three that bear record
in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these Three are One, 1 John 5.7. That God the Father has sent forth his Son made of a Woman; in whom,
being God-Man in one Person, we behold the Glory of the divine Nature, and
humane Nature in its highest Perfection. And the same Word declares that our
Lord Jesus being in the Form of God, took upon him the Form of a Servant, and
became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, that he might redeem
his People from the Curse of the Law, and give them power to become the Sons of
God; and that they, together with the Privilege of Adoption, might have the
Image of God restored to them, being born of God, Joh. 1.12, 13. Here we are
also taught that in order to their being made Partakers of the divine Nature,
"not by Communication of the divine Essence to them; but by God's impressing
upon them Qualities and Dispositions which resemble the Perfections of God": I
say, that in order to this, the Son of God has purchased and received the Gift
of the Holy Ghost, who by his Office renews his People after the Image of God,
when they are born of him; and so enableth them to put off the old Man which is
corrupt; and to put on the new Man which after God is created in Righteousness,
and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.22,-24. Now these are called Godly in Scripture; for
they resemble God in Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness, in Goodness and
Truth, Grace and Mercy, according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ; though
not in sinless Perfection. And even in this Life, beholding as in a Glass the
Glory of the Lord, they are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, by
the Spirit of the Lord: And they shall be perfectly transformed into his
Likeness when they shall see him as he is in the Light of Heaven. Psalm. 17.15.
As for me, I will behold thy Face in Righteousness: I shall be satisfied, when
I awake, with thy Likeness.

2. The Godly imitate the blessed God.

And this naturally follows: Having the Image of God restored, they obey that
Word, Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye Followers (or Imitators) of God, as dear Children. The
Graces of the Spirit are active Principles of spiritual Operations. Is God
bound for his own Glory, as the highest and most worthy End? The Godly observe
that Command, 1 Cor. 10.31. -- Do all to the Glory of God. It is their sincere
Endeavor that in this, their Tho'ts Words and Actions, may unite and center.
And when they consider his infinite Glory, and how far they fall short of
giving him the Honor due to his Name, even in their best Duties, they say with
Job, Chap. 42. 5, 6. -- Now mine Eye sees thee; wherefore I abhor my self, and
repent in Dust and Ashes. They fly (...) the Righteousness of God provided in
his Son for their Justification, and say with the Apostle Paul, Phil. 3.8, 9.
-- I count all Things but Loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the Loss of all Things, and do count
them but Dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own
Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. Again, as God is righteous
in all his Ways, and holy in all his Works; they endeavor to serve him in
Holiness and Righteousness before him, all the Days of their Life; and thus to
obey that Word, 1 Pet. 1.15. As (...) which has called you is holy, so be ye
Holy in all Manner of Conversation. They present their Bodies a living
Sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is their reasonable Service. They
separate themselves from Sin, denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts; And they
consecrate their Powers and Talents to the Service of God. It is their
endeavor that Holiness to the Lord may be written upon all.

Again, As the blessed God is good to all, and in a peculiar Manner good to
Israel; so that Law is written on their Hearts, Gal. 6.10. As we have therefore
Opportunity, let us do good unto all Me^, especially unto them who are of the
Household of Faith. According to their Ability they do Good, yea are rich in
good Works, being desirous that others beholding them may glorify their
heavenly Father, and that they may approve themselves his genuine Offspring.
And as God is good to the Unthankful and Evil, they strive in this also to
follow him, observing their Lord's Command, Mat. 5.44, 5. Love your Enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which despitefully use you, and persecute you: That ye may be the Children of
your Father which is in Heaven, for he makes his Sun to rise on the Evil and
on the Good, and sends Rain on the just and on the unjust. They are inwardly
touched with a feeling of the Miseries of others, and inclined to show
Compassion in Obedience to God's Word. Luke 6.36. Be ye merciful, as your
Father also is merciful. They are of a forbearing forgiving Spirit, in some
Measure as God is.

And then, they behave with becoming Reverence and Subjection, with relation to
the incommunicable Perfections of God. As God is infinite in his Being, and all
his divine Excellencies, they bow down before Him in religious Adoration, and
pay Him divine Honor. As He is God most High, they walk humbly with him;
resign themselves, and all their Concerns to his sovereign Will. If God call
them to deny themselves, and take up their Cross, they learn of Christ to say,
O my Father, not as I will, but as thou will. Is God Omnipresent? They take
care to Walk before Him, and be perfect. Is God Eternal and Unchangeable? they
rest upon Him as the Rock of Ages, under the Changes of this Life; they trust
not in the uncertain perishing Enjoyments of this passing World; but in the
living God, who is the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever.

3. The Godly and Faithful are true and upright in the Covenant of their God,
and in their Behavior toward Him.

They believe that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently
seek him. They receive his Word as the Word of God that cannot Lie; and in
Obedience to it, give up themselves to the only true and living God, who is the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, in the New and Everlasting Covenant,
to be for Him and no other. And this they do in the Exercise of true
Repentance, unfeigned Faith, and Love without Dissimulation. They cleave to God
with purpose of Heart, observing that first and great Commandment, Thou shall
Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all
thy Mind, Mat. 22.37, 8. And having Sworn with all the Heart, they resolve,
with an entire Dependence on the Grace of God, as Psalm. 119.106 I have sworn,
and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments. As the Lord is
the true and faithful God, who keeps Covenant, so these abhor the Hypocrisy
mentioned, Psalm. 78.36, 7. -- They did flatter him with their Mouth, and lied
to him with their Tongues. It is true, they are not altogether without Guile in
this Life, as the Man Christ Jesus was. They know but in Part, and are
sanctified in Part; however, they serve God with a perfect Heart in
Gospel-sincerity, having Respect to all his Commandments, and hating every
false Way. And they mourn for the remaining Hypocrisy of their Hearts, with
that godly Sorrow which works Repentance. They are not of double Heart,
pretending to have an Heart for God, and yet retaining an Heart for the World.
They realize what our Lord declares, Mat. 6.24. No Man can serve two Masters:
for either he will hate the one and love the other; or else he will hold to the
one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. And act
accordingly, renouncing the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Their secret Sins
are their burden, and they bewail them before God; even those evil Thoughts and
Inclinations which never appear before Men in overt Acts. They set themselves
against all Sin, sensible that such as willingly offend in one Point, are
guilty of all. Yea, in faithfulness to God, and their Covenant Engagements,
they cut off the right Hand, and pluck out the right Eye, which offend them,
seeking the Destruction of those Lusts which have been most near and dear to
them. They sincerely endeavor to lay aside the Sin which most easily besets
them, and can in some true Measure say, as Psalm. 18.23. I was upright before
him; and I kept my self from mine Iniquity. However, finding Sin still cleaving
to them and defiling them, they cry out, as Romans 7.24. O wretched Man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this Death! But though they complain
with the Apostle Paul, I find a Law that when I would do Good, Evil is present
with me; yet they can say also with him, I delight in the Law of God, after the
inner Man.

Again, they worship God, who is a Spirit, in Spirit and Truth. They attend
secret Duties in sincerity; Secret Prayer, Self-Examination etc; and this not
merely to still the clamours of an accusing Conscience; but that they may walk
with that God who is and sees in Secret, and maintain intimate Communion with
him. And when they attend the public Worship, they are not as those, Jer.
12.2. Thou art near in their Mouths, and far from their Reins; for they believe
those Words of their Lord, Rev. 2.23. All the Churches shall know that I am ^e
which searches the Reins and Hearts: and I will give unto every one of you
according to your Works. And then, they endeavor to keep the Ordinances of
divine Worship pure, without corrupting them with humane Inventions; and also
to walk in them all blameless. Upon the whole, they abhor the baseness of
serving the faithful God with a false Heart; and are also sensible of the high
Presumption of attempting this, considering that all Things are open and naked
before Him: And therefore breathe out that Prayer, Psalm. 26.1, 2. Judge me, O
Lord, for I have walked in my integrity: I have trusted also in the Lord:
therefore I shall not slide. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my Reins and
my Heart. They do not take up their Religion to serve worldly Views and
Interests, and go so far only in it as will suit the Times; but labor to
approve themselves Faithful to their great Lord and Master whatever it cost
them. In a Word, Herein do they Exercise themselves to have always a Conscience
void of Offense toward God, and toward Men. They abide in the Calling wherein
they are calle'd, faithfully discharging the Duties of it, and improving their
Talents in the Service of their Lord: And when proved by fiery Trials, they
imitate faithful Abraham, who when tried, offered up Isaac, Heb. 11.17. And
thus do they continue Faithful unto Death.

4. The Godly and Faithful, are Men of Integrity and Honesty with regard to
their Neighbor.

Our Lord teaches us that the second is like to the first and great
Commandment -- Thou shall Love thy Neighbor as thy self, Mat. 22.39. And the
Faithful have accordingly a sincere Regard to this Command of the Law. They
love their Brother not in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth.
They do not speak Vanity with flattering Lips and a double Heart; but putting
away Lying, speak every Man Truth with his Neighbor. You may depend upon their
Word, their Promises, and their Professions of Friendship. You have their
Character drawn to the Life, in the Description which the royal Psalmist gives
of a Citizen of Zion, Psalm. 15.2, 3, 4, 5. He that walks uprightly, and
works Righteousness, and speaks the Truth in his Heart. He that backbiteth
not with his Tongue, nor does Evil to his Neighbor, nor takes up a Reproach
against his Neighbor. In whose Eyes a vile Person is contemned; but he
honors them that fears the Lord: he that swears to his own Hurt, and
changes not. He that puts not out his Money to Usury, nor takes Reward
against the Innocent. They seek not their own only; but also their Neighbor's
Wealth; and endeavor in sincerity to observe that golden Rule laid down by
Christ, Mat. 7.12. Therefore all Things whatsoever ye would that Men should do
to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets. Their
Regard to their Neighbor's Welfare is sincere, as to their own; not equal in
Degree, but alike for Kind. And they endeavor that their Love may bear a just
Proportion to the nearness of the Relation they stand in to him. They bear an
hearty Good Will to their Neighbor respecting the great Concerns of his Soul,
and express it in their faithful Counsels, Reproofs etc. as they have Ability
and Opportunity. They will rather hazard their Neighbor's Displeasure, than
suffer Sin upon him. Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine
Heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon
him. At the same time, they are tender of his good Name, and will not seek to
blast his Reputation, and hurt his Usefulness, by Backbiting and Defaming him.
And then, in their Trade and Commerce, they observe the Warning given, I These.
4.6. That no Man go beyond and defraud his Brother in any matter: because that
the Lord is the Avenger of all such. And if in any Instance they have injured
him, when they return to themselves, they will be ready to confess their Sin
before God, and to give proper Satisfaction to their Neighbor, for the wrong
done him.

In a Word, If they undertake any weighty Affair, they will rather expose
themselves to Hardships, then betray a Trust committed to them, or not answer
the just Expectation of those that Employ them. They prefer the public Weal,
the Peace of Jerusalem, before their own private secular Interests; and
accordingly, lay out themselves to serve their People, in the Places in which
divine Providence has set them.

Thus I have in some imperfect Manner given you the Character of the Godly and
Faithful.

We proceed to say,

II. The Godly may cease, and the Faithful fail from among the Children of Men.

This may be said of them, when through the Corruption of the Times, they are
hindered from serving God, and their Generation. Prove 28.12. -- When the Wicked
rise, a Man is hidden. And this may be one Thing intended in that prophetical
Description, which we have of the slaying of the Witnesses, Rev. 11. While some
are in a literal Sense slain for the Testimony of Jesus; others may be slain
politically and civilly; deposed, silenced, imprisoned, and laid aside as
useless and dead. And in this sense some of the Godly might cease and fail
under Readiness Maladministration; as others were put to Death. 1 Samuel 22.18.
But that which I would briefly consider at this Time is, Their ceasing and
failing by a natural Death. The Godly and Faithful must dye out of this World,
as well as others. In this respect, there is one Event to the Righteous, and the
Wicked. The Godly have sinned, and must therefore taste of Death, and through
this dark Valley follow their Lord to Glory. And when they die, their
Opportunities of serving God and his People in this Life, fail and cease.
Agreably, when that good King Hezekiah had received the Sentence of Death, he
lamented and said, as Isai. 38.11. I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in
the Land of the Living: I shall behold Man no more with the Inhabitants of the
World. And we have that Exhortation, Luke 16.9. Make to your selves Friends of
the Mammon of Unrighteousness; that when ye fail, they may receive you into
everlasting Habitations. At Death, Flesh and Heart fail, Friends, Estates, and
all earthly Comforts fail. As we brought nothing into this World with us, so it
is certain we can carry nothing out. Yea, the faithful Servants of God are
bereaved of their present Advantages of glorifying God, and promoting the Good
of his People. This made the Apostle Paul say, Phil. 1.23, 4. I am in a strait
betwixt two, having a Desire to depart and ^e with Christ; which is far better:
Nevertheless, to abide in the Flesh, is more needful for you. The good and
faithful Servants, as well as the wicked and slothful, are called to give up an
Account, Mat. 25.19, -- 30. Though the Manner and Event of their doing this, are
vastly distant: The faithful Servant does it with Joy unspeakable and glorious;
the Wicked with unutterable Grief and Confusion. However, they are dismissed
from their Work, one as well as the other. Dan. 12.13. Go thou thy way, for
thou shall Rest. The Godly are called off from the toilsome Labors and
Sufferings of this Life, and taken up to the more excellent Work, and to the
glorious Rewards of Heaven. Thus Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, is Dead,
and the Prophets. Indeed by Faith in Christ, the Godly are delivered from Sin,
the Sting of Death; and they shall obtain a complete Victory over this last
Enemy at the Resurrection of the Just, when the Dominion which Death has had
from Adam, will give a joyful Occasion to our Lord, for the Manifestation of
His divine Knowledge, Power, Wisdom and Goodness, in gathering their scattered
Dust, forming their Bodies anew out of it, and fashioning them like to his own
glorious Body. But the Time would fail me to enter into a particular
Consideration of the Reasons why the Godly die as well as others.

III. When the Godly thus cease, and Faithful fail; it is our Duty to Cry to
GOD for Help.

When the Godly are taken away, we must repair to God for Help, who made them
what they were to his People. Is any Afflicted? Let him Pray. Such a calamitous
Time calls for Humiliation, and earnest Prayer. T^us this Psalm begins, Help
Lord! As God in his Word and by his Providence, at such a Time, cries in our
Ears, All Flesh is Grass; so He calls aloud to us to cease from Man whose
Breath is in his Nostrils, and to put our Trust in the living God. When such as
^ad the Presence of God eminently with them are removed, we should look up to
the Lord, whose Years fail not, and whose Hand is not shortened that it cannot
save. As Elisha, 2 King. 2.14. Where is the Lord God of Elijah? For it is He
alone who can say to Survivours as to Joshua, Chapter 1.5. I will not fail thee,
not forsake thee. Which particular Promise we have applied to God's People for
their Comfort, Heb. 13.5, 6 -- He has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my Helper, and I will not
fear what Man shall do unto me. And here, there is a vehement Negation, by a
Multiplication of negative Particles. And the Design, says an excellent
Expositor, "is to obviate all Objections which Fear and Unbelief might raise".
And indeed the gracious Presence of God, and his divine Assistance are all in
all. When the Cisterns are broken, this Fountain abides the same, to supply the
Wants of God's People from it is inexhaustible Fullness. The living and true God
has infinite Knowledge and Wisdom to direct his People in the darkest Times,
and to lead them in a plain Path under the most perplexing Difficulties, when
they know not what to do, and lift up their Eyes to Him. The Lord is wonderful
in Counsel, and excellent in Working, Isai. 28.29. Yea, There is no Wisdom nor
Understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord, Prove 21.30. None that can prevail
against him. This God is also of infinite Power; there is nothing impossible
with him, nothing hard or difficult to him. If he please to work out the
Salvation of his People, none can hinder him. Mountains shall become a Plain,
and crooked Things Straight. And then, under the sorrowful Changes which pass
over his People, He abides the same. Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not:
therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed. And this God proclaims his Name
before his People, The Lord, the Lord God Merciful and Gracious, abundant in
Goodness and Truth; and has given us the highest Testimony of this, in that He
has not spared his own Son, but delivered him, up for us all; and (...) shall
he not with him freely give us all Things? As the Apostle argues, Romans 8.32.
He has not said to the Seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain. Our Fathers cried to
Him, and were Delivered; they trusted in Him, and were not Confounded. And He
gives out his Command to us with a gracious Promise, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me
in the Day of Trouble; and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And
when the Faithful fail, there is this great Encouragement to seek to God for
Help, that the Residue of the Spirit is with Him to form Instruments, and
qualify them, as the Day calls for them. Thus God raised M^ses to lead his
ancient People out of Egypt, and through the Wilderness: And then Joshua, in Name
and Office a Type of Christ, to conduct them into Canaan. God chose David his
Servant, and bro't him to seed Jacob his People; yea, enabled him to Feed them
according to the Integrity of his Heart, and to guide them by the Skilfulness
of his Hands. When Elijah was Translated, the Spirit rested on Elisha. God said
to his People of old, Amos 2 11. I raised up of your Sons for Prophets, and of
your young Men for Nazarites. And when our Savior ascended on High, He
received Gifts for Men, in that great and comprehensive Gift of the Holy Ghost;
and he gave Apostles etc. Pastors and Teachers; and endowed them with Power
from on High, according to the Services to which they were called. God is able
therefore to be the Repairer of all our Breaches.

And when his People grow degenerate, and are fallen by their Iniquities; God
is able to Exalt them by Righteousness, and to revive his Work in every Order
and Degree of Persons among them, by pouring out his Spirit upon them. Isai.
32.15, -- 18. Until the Spirit be poured upon us from on High -- Then Judgment
shall dwell in the Wilderness, and Righteousness remain in the fruitful Field.
And the Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the Effect of Righteousness,
Quietness and Assurance for ever. Ezekiel. 36.25, -- 28 Then will I sprinkle clean
Water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your Filthiness, and from all
your Idols will I cleanse you. A new Heart also will I give you, and a new
Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony Heart out of your
Flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh. And I will put my Spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments, and
do them. And ye shall dwell in the Land that I gave to your Fathers, and ye
shall be my People, and I will be your God. And it is added, ver. 37. -- I will
for this be enquired of by the House of Israel --

Upon the whole, we here see that it is our Duty to make known our Requests to
God, and cry to Him for Help, when the Godly cease, and Faithful fail from
among us. When we have sorrowful Occasion to take up those Words, Zech. 1.5.
Your Fathers, where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for ever? We must
go to that God with whom the Fatherless find Mercy, and encourage our selve^ in
this way to wait for his Salvation, who is the God that hears Prayer. And the
Promises of God's Word should excite us to lift up the Hands which hang down,
when we may be ready to faint, and wax weary in our Minds. And when the Sense
of our Unworthiness may be apt to dishearten us, then should we look to Jesus,
who ever lives to make Intercession; and take care to ask in his Name, who has
said, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. Let
us then pray without ceasing to that God who is a present Help to his People in
their Times of Trouble. Psalm. 62 8. Trust in him at all Times, ye People, pour
out your Heart before him: God is a Refuge for us.

APPLICATION.
USE. I. From the Character given of the Godly and Faithful, we learn, that
they are truly Excellent, and worthy of our high Esteem.

The Psalmist speaking of the Saints, calls them the Excellent in whom was all
his Delight, Psalm 16.3. This is indeed the chief Glory of Man, to imitate God
in his imitable Perfections and Actions; and to be conformed to the Image of
his Son, who is the first born among many Brethren. To fear God, and keep his
Commandments is the whole Duty of Man, Eccl. 12.13. The whole of Man. "His
whole Work and Business, his whole Perfection and Happiness". The Ornaments of
true Grace are of great Price in the Sight of God, whose Judgment must be
right. And accordingly, the Word of God assures us, that his Countenance
beholds the Upright. i. e. with Approbation and Delight, Psalm. 11.7. And that
the Lord has set apart him that is Godly for himself, Psalm. 4.3. These
faithful Servants are indeed the Friends of our Lord Jesus Christ. Joh. 15.15.
-- I have called you Friends. Now, what shall be done to these Men whom this
King of Glory delights to Honor? Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither
have entered into the Heart of Man, the Things which God has prepared for them
that love him, 1 Cor. 29. How wonderful is that Expression! above our Thoughts
as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, Luke 12.37. He (the Lord) shall gird
himself, and make them to sit down to Meat, and will come forth and serve them.
They are Vessels unto Honor in this Life, sanctified and meet for the Maste^'s
Use; and the Lord will make known the Riches of his Glory on them another Day.
They Honor God by their faithful Obedience, and He has said, Them that Honor
me, I will Honor. Let us then Honor them that Fear the Lord, while with us;
and let their Memory be precious to us, when they are taken from us by Death.
Prove. 10.7. The Memory of the Just is blessed.

2. By what has been said of the Character of the Godly and Faithful; We may
Examine our selves, whether we are of their Number.

We have that Command in God's Word, 2 Cor. 13 5. Examine your selves -- prove
your own selves --. And it is a Matter of great Concern that we obey it, l^st in
the most weighty Affair that can be, we deceive our selves. Let us then make a
strict and impartial Inquiry, whether the Image of God be drawn upon our Souls,
and whether we are faithful to God and our Neighbor, in the Course of our
Lives, without governing Fraud and Deceit. And whereas God's Word, which is
Truth, assures us that the Heart is deceitful above all Things, let us, after
our best Endeavors used to know our selves, make that Prayer to Him who
searches the Heart, Psalm. 139.23, 24. Search me, O God, and know my Heart: try
me, and know my Thoughts, and see if there be any wicked Way in me, and lead me
in the Way everlasting. Let us beseech the Lord to shine upon his own Work, if
he has wrought it in us; and to give us his Spirit, to bear Witness with our
Spirits, that we are the Children of God. Thus we shall have the Peace of the
Upright, and shall be animated to press toward the Mark, for the Prize of the
high Calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us also Pray, that if a deceived Heart
has turned us aside, we may know it while the Day of Grace is continued to us;
that being moved with Fear of having our portion with Hypocrites, we may be
quickened to seek of God a perfect Heart. Which leads me to say,

3. Let us in the diligent use of Means, Seek the excellent Graces, and holy
Dispositions, which constitute the Character of the Godly and Faithful.

We are required to covet earnestly the best Gifts, 1 Cor. 12.31. The Word
signifies to be zealously affected toward a Thing, so as to pursue it with
fervency of Spirit. And thus we should, according to the Ability and Advantages
God affords us, endeavor to accomplish our selves with all useful Knowledge,
whereby we may be fitted to serve God and our Generation. Prove. 18.1. Through
Desire a Man having separated himself, seeks and intermedleth with all
Wisdom. But then, we must heedfully observe what follows in the last Clause of
1 Cor. 12.31. forementioned -- And yet show I unto you a more excellent Way.
And then the Apostle declares in the 13th. Chapter ver. 1, 2. Though I speak with the
Tongue of Men, and of Angels, and have not Charity, I am become as ^ounding
Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal And though I have the Gifts of Prophecy, and
understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge; and though I have all Faith, so
that I could remove Mountains, and have not Charity, I am nothing. Now, the
Love here described and commended, is the fulfilling of the Law, the Sum of
true Godliness. Or in other Words, which signify much the same in Scripture
Language. This is that Fear of the Lord which is the beginning of Wisdom: "The
Introduction to it, or chief Part of it"; and therefore that Advice is
faithful, and worthy of all Acceptance. Prove. 4.7. -- Get Wisdom; and with all
thy getting, get Understanding. Without this, whatever Knowledge we may obtain,
we must die without Wisdom; and perish in that Folly which ends in blackness of
Darkness for ever.

I would therefore, in a particular. Manner, direct this Exhortation to the
Students of the College. Be earnest with God to give you Truth in the inward
Parts; and that in the hidden Part, He would* make you to know Wisdom. Thus
Solomon while Young, asked Wisdom. 1 King. 3.9. Give thy Servant an
understanding Heart --. i. e. says a worthy Expositor, "whereby I may clearly
discern, and faithfully perform all the Parts of my Duty". God highly approved
the Choice, gave him his Request, and together with it, ^^at which he had not
asked, Riches and Honor. And a greater than Solomon, even the Great God our
Savior, says to you, Mat. 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, and all these Things shall be added unto you, O be persuaded
then, sensible of the deep Corruption of your Hearts, and of the great Folly
bound up in them since the Fall, to ask this Wisdom of God, who gives
liberally, and upbraideth not. Obey that Command, Mat. 6 6. Enter into thy
Cl^set, and when thou have shut thy Door, pray to thy Father, which is in
secret --. And in Prayer, beseech the Lord to give you a wise and understanding
Heart, that you may make haste to keep his Commandments. Take the Wings of the
Morning, and fly to Jesus Christ: Seek a saving Interest in Him without delay,
in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, and who speaks to
you, as Prove. 8.17. I Love them that Love me, and tbose that seek me Early
shall find me. Search the Scriptures, in which you have the Doctrine according
to Godliness, and make them your daily Study and Meditation. Labor to know
them from your Childhood; for they are able to make wise unto Salvation,
through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. And of these sacred Writings the
Apostle gives us that Encomium, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. All Scripture is given by
Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness: That the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good Work. But then, you must remember
that the natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God: for they
are foolishness unto him; neither can ^e know them, because they art
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. You need the Spirit of God, who inspired
those holy Men that delivered God's Word unto us, to give you the saving
Knowledge of it. Great is the Mystery of Godliness. And therefore you must
pray, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, would give
unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, in the Knowledge of him: The Eyes
of your Understanding being enlightened. Ask the Spirit then, that you may know
the Truth as it is in Jesus Seek that you may receive the Anointing which
teaches you of all Things. Be earnestly concerned for the fulfillment of that
precious Promise to you, Jer. 31.33. -- I will put my Law in their inward
Parts, and write it in their Hearts; that you may he declared to be the Epistle
of Christ, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in
Tables of Stone, but in fleshly Tables of the Heart.

Attend the religious Exercises of the Hall with great Diligence and Reverence.
And hearken to the Instructions of your Teachers, obeying them in the Lord. For
to whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required, Luke 12.48. And
therefore if you would hope to receive the Reward of faithful Servants, you
must with your five Talents, gain other five. Keep the Lord's Day with great
strictness. Do not spend any Part of this holy Time in Vanity; no, nor in the
study of humane Learning, for which you m^st diligently Labor on other Days.
Wait at the Posts of Wisdoms Doors, and let your Seat in the public Assembly
never be empty, but when Necessity requires it. Take heed how you Hear God's
Word; for Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word. Be not ashamed of
Christ; but openly Profess his Name, by a regular Attendance on all the
Ordinances of his House, considering what your Lord and Judge has said, Mat.
10.32, 3. Whosoever therefore shall c^nfess me before Men, him will I confess
also before my Father which is in Heaven. But, whosoever shall deny me before
Men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven: Flee youthful
Lusts, which greatly defile; and if indulged, though in a more covert Way, may
provoke God to leave you to such open and great Transgressions, as shall
obstruct your future Usefulness. Remember Onan's Sin and untimely Death, and
abhor all secret Filthiness. Receive that Exhortation, Tit. 26 Young Men Exhort
to be s^ber-minded. Moderate your Appetites and Passions by the Rules of God's
Word, avoiding all Excess. And are you desirous to escape the Corruption that
is in the World through Lust? Shun Evil C^mpany, Prove. 13 20. He that walks
with wise Men shall be wise: but a Companion of Fo^ls shall be destroyed.
Cleanse your Way, by taking head thereto according to God's Word; and follow
that most perfect Example which the Son of God in our Nature has set before
you; who did no Evil, nor was Guile found in his Mouth. Imitate the holy Child
Jesus, in whom alone we behold a Pattern of Godliness adequate to the
strictness and purity of God's Law. Follow Christ Adoring and Worshipping, in a
strict and proper Sense; for He is God manifest in the Flesh.

And after Him, the present mournful Season gives me Advantage to set before
you that excellent Example of godly Sincerity, in which your deceased Master
and Father was enabled, by the Grace of Christ, to go before you. Of him a
Reverend Person acquainted with him from his Youth, testifies, "That in his
early Youth he was singularly ^rave but Affable, Meek but Manly, reverent to
his Superiors, courteous to his Juniors, prudent in all his Behavior; a hard
Student, a good Scholar, and ever esteemed to be sincerely Pious." Now then,
that God has taken him from your Heads, let it be your earnest Prayer, that a
double Portion of his Spirit may be upon you. And now, that Providence calls
you to serious Reflection, and deep Humiliation; Consider your Ways and turn at
God's Reproof. Remember how you have received and heard the wise Counsels, and
pious Ex^ortations of this Man of God. O that they may be as G^^ds, and as
Nails fastened, being impressed on your Minds by that divine Teacher, who can
speak to the Heart! And who knows, but this may be the Day of Salvation, in
which God will make it appear that he has heard the Cries of his Servant for
you, when he travailed in Birth, that Christ might be formed in you. O that you
may be his Crown and Joy in the Day of the Lord's Appearing! And further to
move you; awfully consider, that if you should go on to Abuse the Riches of
God's Goodness, after an hard and impenitent Heart; he must rise up in the
Judgment as a Witness against you. To Day then hear God's Voice, and harden not
your Hearts. Now that God has opened the Grave in an Instance of Mortality
which should deeply affect you, O be wise to consider your latter End! for the
Land of Darkness is without Order; you may go next, for ought you know. Watch
therefore, for you know not what Hour your Lord does come. Consider also, that
if you Live, as I pray God you may, the Affairs of Christ's Kingdom will
probably, in a considerable Measure, be devolved on you; a great and weighty
Charge indeed; to betray which, will expose you to a most amazing Doom. As, on
the contrary, if you faithfully keep that which shall be committed to your
Trust, you will receive a great Reward. Seek therefore an Heart after God's own
Heart, that you may be prepared to serve your Generation according to his Will.
And the Lord our God be with you, as he was with our Fathers: Let him not leave
you, nor forsake you.

But to return. -- Let us all follow after Holiness, and godly Sincerity. And
under an afflicting Sense of our Impotency to that which is spiritually Good;
yea, of the Enmity of our carnal Mihds, against God and his Law: Let us pray,
as Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me a clean Heart, O God; and renew a right Spirit
within me. Let us ask a new Heart, and a new Spirit. And then let us Exercise
our selves unto Godliness. For bodily Exercise profits little: but Godliness
is profitable unto all Things, having promise of the Life that now is, and of
that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Blessed are the undefiled in the Way; for
the Lord God will be a Sun and a Shield unto them: the Lord will give Grace and
Glory: no good Thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Indeed, it
would be high Presumption to imagine that we can merit of God by our good
Works. But this we know from the infallible Oracles of God, that if we sow in
Righteousness, we shall reap in Mercy. The Psalmist could say, Psalm. 18. 20.
The Lord rewarded me according to my Righteousness, according to the cleanness
of my Hands has he recompensed me. All Things shall work together for their
Good. Light shall arise to them under Darkness, and their Path shall be as the
shining Light that shines more and more to the perfect Day. Integrity and
Uprightness shall preserve them. They may now say, as 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had
our Conversation in the World. And when they fail, they shall be received into
Everlasting Habitations. When the Godly rest from their Labors, their Works
follow them. Their departed Spirits enter into the Joy of their Lord; and wait
in a sure and certain Hope, for the Redemption of their Bodies. They shall
stand in the Congregation of the Righteous, at the Great Day. And when God
shall judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel; then
will he bring forth their Righteousness as the Light, and their Judgment as the
Noonday. Their Lord and Judge will confess them before his Father, and Reward
them openly. Such Motives as these the Scripture gives us to enforce this
Exhortation. The Lord impress them on our Minds, that we may give Diligence in
seeking the excellent Graces and holy Dispositions, which constitute the
Character of the Godly and Faithful.

4. Must these cease, and fail by Death; Learn, the deadly Evil of Sin. It
slays, and causes to Perish, not only the Wicked, but the Righteous; yea, those
Good Men of whom the Apostle speaks, Romans 5. 7. Peradventure for a good Man
some would even dare to dye. Death, which entered into the World by Sin, pours
out the most valuable Lives, as Water spilt on the Ground; and removes them
that stood in the Gap before God for the Land, that he should not destroy it.
Let us know therefore and see, that it is an Evil and bitter Thing, that we have
forsaken the Lord our God by Sin; let there be a great Mourning upon the
account of this Evil; and let Christ be most precious to us, because He saves
his People from their Sins.

5. Must the Godly cease, and Faithful fail; Let this quicken them to do all
the Good they can; and excite us to be getting Good from them, in the present
Life.

Let this Mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus. Joh. 9. 4. I must
work the Works of him that sent me, while it is Day: the Night comes when no
Man can work. And go about doing Good, in some Measure as he did. Discharge the
Duties of your general, and particular Calling, mindful of that Word, Romans 12.
11. Not slothful in Business, fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. Let your
Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and glorify your
Father which is in Heaven. Study, and use your best Endeavors, to be Blessings
in your Families, in the Church and common Wealth. Consider the Talents which
God has put into your Hands, and occupy with them; always bearing in Mind the
Account which you must give to God. Sow bountifully, that you may reap
bountifully. Exercise the Charity, or Love, which never fails. And remember
to improve those Graces which must cease, as to their present Exercise; though in
their Habit, they shall abide for ever. Faith, as it is the Evidence of Things
not seen, shall be perfected in Vision; Hope in full Enjoyment of the Good
hoped for. Live then, and Well by Faith now; and put on for an Helmet, the Hope
of Salvation. Godly Sorrow, Patience, and Self-Denial, will cease ^s to their
Operations, in that blessed World, where Sin and Misery have no Place. Now
then, let these excellent Graces have their perfect Work; and do not repine nor
faint, though God call you to the frequent Exercise of them; for our light
Affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal Weight of Glory; While we look not at the Things which are seen, but at
the Things which are not seen: for the Things which are seen are temporal; but
the Things which are not seen, are eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18.

Again, Let this Consideration excite us to be getting Good by the Faithful,
while they are continued with us. Let us hearken to their Counsels, and follow
their Examples, so far as they follow Jesus Christ. Let their Presence with us
be valued as a Blessing; and their Departure be duly resented as a Loss, by
which God calls us to Weeping and Mourning. And this brings me to the last Use.

6. When the Godly cease, and Faithful fail by Death; It is our Duty to lay it
to Heart, to humble our selves under the mighty Hand of God, and to Cry to Him
for Help.

The Words of our Text, were written for our Learning; and we have here the
Example of the inspired Psalmist set before us, for our Imitation. And indeed
we might well look upon it as an ill-boding Symptom, if none should lay it to
Heart, when the Godly are removed by Death. Isai. 57. 1. The Righteous
perishes, and no Man lays it to Heart; and merciful Men are taken away, none
considering that the Righteous is taken away from the Evil to come.

Let us then bear our Part in the Sorrows of this mournful Day, in which the
godly Man cease, and the Faithful fail from among the Children of Men, in the
Death of the Reverend and Excellent: Mr. BENJAMIN WADSWORTH, our Honored
President; who after a long Course of Labors and Sufferings, had the Shadows
of Death turned, in a good Measure, into the Light of the Morning, by God's
Countenance shining upon him. Mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright: for
the End of that Man is Peace.

He was descended from worthy Parents. His Father was Slain, with Others, on
the high Places of the Field, bravely Fighting, at the Head of his Company,
against the Indian Enemy. This his seventh Son was put to the College some time
after his Father's Death. And as he had been favored with a liberal Education,
was a Person considerable for substantial and useful Learning. His favorite
Study was Divinity: And it must be acknowledged that he was an orthodox and
judicious Divine, well accomplished and spirited for the Work of the Ministry.
This, his Labors with his beloved Flock He was Ordained a Pastor of the first
Church in Boston, September 8th. ^696.
, and his printed Works testify. His Prayers were devout and fervent. His
Sermons were delivered from a strong and faithful Memory; and often with that
Affection, which had an happy tendency, by God's Blessing, to enkindle the like
Flame in the Hearts of his Hearers. His Preaching was plain and practical,
scriptural and powerful. In Doctrine, He showed Uncorruptness, Gravity,
Sincerity, sound Speech that cannot be condemned. And If you consider him as a
Textuary, I suppose it will be granted, that he was second to few, if any;
having laid up God's Word in his Heart, and being able to bring forth out of
this good Treasure, in a rich abundance. He was diligent to know the State of
his Flock, and looked well to them, feeding both the Sheep and Lambs, from Love
to Christ. He taught publicly, and from House to House. He visited the
Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction; and was ready to show his pious and
charitable Compassions, to the Souls and Bodies of Men, as their Circumstances
called for it. And in other Instances of pure and undefiled Religion, was it
his Care to live as well as preach the Gospel, being an excellent Christian. He
might with Propriety use those Words, Be ye followers of me, even as I also am
of Christ. Being an Example of the Believers, in Word, in Conversation, in
Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity.

Nor were his Cares and Labors confined to his own Flock: The Care of other
Churches came upon him; and he was ready, as there was Occasion, to show his
zealous Affection for the Interests of Christ's Kingdom among us. Yea, His
Heart was much engaged in sending the Gospel to dark Places, destitute of so
great a Blessing; and he employed an active Hand, in that excellent Work.

He was held in Esteem for his prudent and faithful Advice, in Cases of
Conscience See his Guide to the Doubting -- with the Preface.
, and other difficult Matters. And we may now justly take up that Lamentation,
Isai. 3.1, 2. Behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts does take away -- the Prophet
and the Prudent, and the Ancient --.

His Translation to the President's Chair in the College Anno 1725.
, was in the decline of Life: And it is though it, that then entering upon a Work
new and difficult, with too intense Labor and close Application, He broke his
Constitution. However, under this great disadvantage, his Zeal for the Glory of
God, and great Regard to the Welfare of the College, carried him almost beyond
himself; so that I think I may say, that to his Power, yea and beyond his
Power, he was willing to spend and be spent, in the Service of that Society. He
was constant, when the state of his Health would in any Measure allow of it, in
performing the religious Exercises of the Hall; and laborious in them, often
expounding the Scriptures. And how careful and concerned was he that the
College might receive Damage in none of its Interests! How unwearied in
attending the Business of it, even when his bodily Infirmities urged him to
spare himself! For the Proof of these Things, I might appeal to Witnesses here
present, and to the Books and Records of the College, where, if I mistake not,
stand some peculiar Monuments of his laborious Diligence. Indeed, I cannot but
apprehend that the Power of God was magnified in his Weakness; in that, under
such frequent Returns of Pain, he was so far strengthened and spirited to his
Work; particularly, in the extreme Cold of the last Winter.

Thus did this faithful Servant follow his Lord in active and passive
Obedience. And his bountiful Master gave him some Earnests of his Reward before
his Departure: And now, we have abundant Reason to believe that his Rest is
glorious in the heavenly Paradise, where God wipes away all Tears from the Eyes
of his People; and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying,
neither shall there be any more Pain: for the farmer Things are passed away.

And being dead, he yet speaks; and as it were calls to us not to be offended
in Christ, because of the Cross; for there is a Reward for the Righteous, and
his Expectation shall not be cut off; no, it is ^^t done, while God Rewards
according to his Riches in Glory by Jesus Christ. Let us then ascribe the Glory
of all to God; and encourage our selves to be Followers of them, who through
Faith and Patience inherit the Promises.

Let the mournful Relatives sorrow not, as others which have no Hope. For if we
believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which Sleep in Jesus
will God bring with him. And their perfected Spirits shall re-enter these vile
Bodies, which shall then be changed and fashioned like to Christ's glorious
Body; that they may receive their full Reward, and ever be with the Lord.
Comfort your selves therefore, and one another with these Words.

To conclude, The Duty which remains to us, is to regard the Operation of God's
Hand, and to make a wise Improvement of his holy Providence. Let us then cry
after this Servant of God, as 2 Kin. 2 12. My Father, my Father, the Chariot of
Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. For know it, such Persons, though we here
behold the Infirmities of their Flesh, are no small Part of the Strength and
Beauty, Defense and Glory of our Israel.

And then, let us beseech the Lord to find a Man to stand in the Gap. May the
Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning,
shine upon the School of the Prophets in this dark Day.

May those to whom is committed the Instruction and Government of the Youth,
faithfully and successfully attend that excellent Work. May the Sons of the
Prophets receive the Unction of the Holy One. May the Candidates for the
Evangelical Ministry determine not to know any Thing, save Jesus Christ, and
him Crucified. May all their Gifts be sanctified by His Spirit, and consecrated
to his Service. And may they follow that Prince of Shepherds, in His Zeal for
the House of God, and Love to the Souls of Men. May the God of the Sprits of
all Flesh, repair the Breach which he has made, in great Favor to the
College, to our Churches, and this Land. And may this Society live before God,
and flourish under his peculiar Care and Blessing, till the second Coming of
our Lord. I conclude with those Words, Joh. 12.26. If any Man serve me, let him
follow me; and where I am, there shall also my Servant be: If any Man serve me,
him will my Father honor. Rev. 2. 10. Fear none of those Things which thou
shall suffer --: Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of
Life.

THE END.
N. B. Some Paragraphs omitted in Preaching are inserted in the foregoing
Sermon.

ERRATA.
Page 7. line 6. dele most high, read irfinitely above ^s. p 8. l. 8. after
sanctified in Part, add in every Power indeed, but not in legal Perfection.

The comfortable Reflections, and glorious Prospects of a distinguished Saint,
at the Approach of Death.

Exhibited in a SERMON Preached March 27. 1737.

Being the Lord's Day after the FUNERAL Of that worthy and faithful Servant of
CHRIST Mr. Benjamin Wadsworth, President of Harvard College.

By Nathanael Appleton, A. M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Cambridge.

Isaiah xxxii. 17. And the Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the Effect
of Righteousness Quietness and Assurance for ever. Numb. xxiii. 10. -- Let me
die the Death of the Righteous, and let my last End be like his. BOSTON:
Printed for D. HENCHMAN. 1737.

Reviving Thoughts in a Dying Hour.
2 Timothy IV. 6, 7, 8. For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my
Departure is at Hand.

I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith.

Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that Day: and not to me only, but unto all
them that love his Appearing.


THIS Epistle of the blessed Apostle Paul, (in which he gives such an agreeable
Account of himself) all agree was written from Rome to Timothy his beloved Son
in the Faith. But whether it was the first, or the second Time of his going
thither, and appearing before Caesar, is not so certain. A learned Expositor has
in his Preface to this Epistle Dr. Hammond.
, offered many considerable Arguments to prove that this was the first time of
his being at Rome. But the Verses that I have now read, and some other Verses
in this Epistle together with the Postscript, have induced the ^^^erality of
learned Men to conclude that it was ^^^tten the last time he came thither, and
when he had the near and certain Prospect of his Death.

But when this Epistle was written is not so much my present Purpose, as the
Things which are contained in the Verses now before us. And I think they may
all be reduced to these three general Heads, viz.

I. The Apostles Apprehension of himself with respect to his present State,
namely that he was now upon the very brink of Death, expressed in those Words,
I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my Departure is at Hand. II. His
peaceful, and comfortable Reflection upon the past Conduct of himself in the
Course of his Life, in those Words, I have fought a good Fight, I have finished
my Course, I have kept the Faith. III. His pleasing Prospect, and joyful
Expectation of what he and other Saints should meet with hereafter. --
Thenceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that Day: and not to me only, but unto all
them also that love his Appearing.
And these are accordingly the three general Heads, which I propose for the
Subject of our serious Meditation at this time.

I. I shall consider the Apostle's Apprehension of himself with respect to his
present State, namely that he was now upon the very brink of Death. -- I am now
ready to he offered, and the time of my Departure is at Hand.

And as the Apostle is here plainly speaking of his Death; so what I would
observe under this general Head, is,

1. The Account he gives of Death, or the Manner in which he describes it, viz
as an OFFERING, and a DEPARTURE.

2. The full Apprehension he had of the near Approach of his Death, or
Departure; that he looked upon it to be at Hand, ready even then to come upon
him.

3. The Calmness, the Easiness, and Freedom, with which he seems to speak or
write of if.

4. Let us consider the Account the Apostle gives of Death, or the Manner in
which he describes it, viz. as an Offering, and a departure.

I am ready to be Offered, and my Departure; -- which refer to his Death. So
then,

1. He calls it an Offering, or pouring out; for so it is in the Original, I am
now already poured out gap DESC="foreign"
. It is observed to be the same Word that is used, for the Drink Offerings
under the Law, which were will not to be poured out. Hence the Word, in the
Septuagint or Greek Translation for Drink Offering; is derived from the same
Word that the Apostle here uses Numb 28.7.
. And the Apostle, if he apprehended with what Death he should glorify God,
might consider it as a sort of Sacrifice, not by way of Expiation or Atonement;
(for there was a sufficiency of that for the greatest Sins, in the Sacrifice
that Christ once made of himself) but in confirmation of the Truth of the
Gospel which he bore Testimony to, and was now about to Seal with his Blood.
Hence the Word is observed to refer to such Offerings as were for the
Confirmation of some Covenant Vid. Leigh, Cri. Sac.
. And the Apostle speaks in the same Dialect concerning his Death, to the
Philippians, Chapter 2.17. If I be offered (the same Word) upon the Sacrifice and
Service of your Faith. Thus the Apostle, we may suppose, looks upon his Death
in this View, even as an offering up of his Life to God; and that he does this
very freely and readily, considering what a Testimony he should hereby give,
and what a Confirmation it would be of the Truth of the Gospel, that new
Covenant of Grace, which he had been preaching to the World, ever since his
Conversion to the christian Faith.

But then, if we consider the Word, according to the literal Meaning of it,
viz. a pouring forth; it may serve to give us some Idea of Death, which is the
pouring forth of Life. For the Life goes forth at Death; and in a sudden and
violent Death, it may be said to be poured out, in a full continued Stream; and
not by Drops, as in a lingering Death. Thus the Blood, which is called the Life
of the Beast, was to be poured out Deuteronomy. xii 16.
; when the Beast was killed for Sacrifice, or for Food. And it was prophesyed
concerning Christ, that he should pour out his Soul unto Death Isaiah liii 12.
. But then,

2. The Apostle according to the common Translation, here speaks of Death as a
DIPARTURE. My Departure is at Hand.

And Death may very properly be called a Departure. For at Death the Soul
departs; it departs from the Body, and takes its leave of it for the present.
Moreover, Life, Sense, and Motion, all depart from the Body; and leave it a
lifeless senseless Carcass, at Death. Nay the Body it self departs at Death.
The present Form and Visage of the Face depart, then his Beauty consumes away
like a Moth Psalm xxxix. 11.
; ^^a his Countenance is changed, and he is sent away Job 14. 20.
. And the Body becomes such a loathsome Spectacle, that the dearest Friends are
concerned to have it removed and burled out of their Sight, not to appear any
more till the Resurrection. It is a Departure, as the Man at Death departs from
his present House and Home to the Grave, that House appointed for all the
Living. For the Wind passes over him and he is gone, and the Places that knew
him shall know him no more Psalm ciii. 16.
. At Death the Man departs from his present Friends and Company, and instead of
being among the Living to Praise God, he is gone to the Congregation of the
Dead. He departs also from the present Business and Employments of Life, to the
Place of Silence and Inactivity; from the Hurries and Cares and Labors of this
Life, to the Grave, where there is no Work, no. Device, nor Knowledge, nor
Wisdom. Furthermore, he departs from his present Possessions and Enjoyments;
for at Death we leave all behind us, to those that come after us. Naked came we
out of our Mother's Womb, and naked shall we return thither Job i. 21.
. Moreover, he departs from his present Sorrows and Sufferings; and if he be a
good Man, to that Place where the Wicked cease from troubling, and where the
Weary be at rest; where he rests from his Labors, and his Works follow him. In
a Word, He departs out of this World; for as our Birth is our Entry into it, so
our Death is the Going out of it, so as to have no more to do with it. We go
off the Stage, we make our Exit, and appear no more to act any other Part upon
it. Thus Death is a Departure.

But then the Word (...)
translated a Departure is observed to signify more properly a Dissolution. And
this will serve to give us a further Notion of Death; for it may truly be said
of Death that it is a Dissolution. It dissolves the vital Union of Soul and
Body. That close and intimate Union that there has been of the essential Parts
of our Constitution is broken by Death, so that their Relation to, and
Dependence upon each other, for their Sensations or Perceptions, are entirely
over for the present. One Part is returned or returning to the Dust as it was,
while the other is gone to God that gave it.

Moreover, If we consider the Body by it self, Death is the Dissolution of it.
For in Life there is a close and regular Connection of the several Parts of the
Body, whereby they have a near Relation to, and a Dependence and Influence upon
each other, which Conjunction, and Connection of the Parts is in the Time of
Life preserved by the Laws of Adhesion and Attraction, or some other Way of the
Creator that we know nothing about; which at Death begins to dissolve. Then the
wonderful Structure of the humane Body begins to fall to pieces, and this
Masterpiece of the lower Creation, even all the Members and Organs of the Body
that were so curiously wrought in the lowest Parts if the Earth, loose their
Form, Situation and Contexture, and dissolve at length into the same kind of
Dust out of which Man was formed at first, without any more Form, Connection or
Dependence one upon another, than the common Sand or Dust with which it is
intermingled. Dust thou art, and unto Dust shall thou return, Genesis iii. 19.

2. I come now to consider, The full Apprehension the Apostle had of the near
Approach of his Death, or Departure; that he looked upon it to be just at Hand,
and ready even then to come upon him.

I am now ready to be offered, and my Departure is at Hand. What particular
Reason the Apostle had to think so, we are not told. An ecclesiastical
Historian Echard
tells us from the Fathers, that God revealed to him, that his Death was
approaching, some Time before this; and that he should suffer Martyrdom at
Rome, which caused him to hasten with Joy to the Place. And considering that
the Holy Ghost witnessed in every City, of the Bonds and Afflictions that he
should meet with Acts xx. 23.
; it is no Wonder if he should give him some Notice of his Death, that
finishing Stroke of his Sufferings, some Time beforehand. But whether this be
so or no, yet if this was the last Time of his being at Rome, he was in close
Imprisonment, and he might at the Time of his Writing this Epistle be under a
Sentence of Death, at least within himself, which he might argue from the
Cruelty and Rage of that bloody Tyrant Nero, the roman Emperor, and the fierce
Persecution he was now engaged in against the Christians; and so it proved, for
in that Persecution, and toward the latter End of that Reign, he was beheaded,
and Peter crucified in Rome; and as is generally agreed, on the same Day.

And as the blessed Apostle had Notice and Warning of his Death, some how or
other, beforehand, so it has been with others, they have had some Revelation or
Intimations of their Death, some Time before it has come upon them. Thus Aaron
had express Notice of his Death, when Moses was ordered to take him, and
Eliezer his Son to Mount Hor; and told him that Aaron should he gathered unto
his People, and die there Numb. xx. 25, 26.
. And Moses himself had it revealed unto him, that he should go up and die at
Mount Nebo Deuteronomy. xxxii. 49.
. And Elijah's Translation was revealed beforehand, not only to him, but to
Elisha, and to the Sons of the Prophets, who asked Elisha whether he knew that
the Lord would take away his Master from his Head that Day? To which he
replies, that he knew it 2 Kings ii. 3.
.

And although these are extraordinary Instances, and the most common Case is that
of good old Isaac, who knew not the Day of his Death. That is, not the very
Day, nor particular Time that Life will come to an End; yet God in his
Providence oftentimes gives fair Intimations to Men that their Departure is at
Hand. This is the Case of those that are of an advanced Age, and have the
Decays of Nature growing apace upon them. This is also the Case of such as are
seized with mortal Sicknesses, and under uncontrollable Languishments; for when
such Distempers prevail, notwithstanding all the Means used for the Removal of
them; they give fair Intimations that our Dissolution approaches, and that the
Time of our Departure is at hand.

3. What I proposed further to observe under this first general Head was, The
Calmness, Easiness and Freedom with which he speaks of his Death or Departure,
which he apprehended to be at hand.

And by what follows in my Text it appears that he was not under any Ruffle or
Perplexity of Mind, at his Thinking or Writing of his Death. The realizing
Thought of Death, or of its being just at hand, was no Surprise to him. He had
been in Deaths often, yea he as it were died daily; he had been expecting and
waiting for it, and the News of its Approach instead of stirring up any Fear or
Terror, it afforded Matter of Rejoicing to him, and he was ready to bid it
welcome. He tells us in his Epistle to the Philippians, Chap. i. 23. That he
had a Desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which was far better than to be
here. And he heid steady of the same Mind, now he saw Death approaching, and
coming in good earnest. The Jeopardy he was in every Hour, had made Death very
familiar to him; and it seemed to be no more to him than to fall asleep; for so
he calls it, a Sleep in Jesus. And as to what followed after Death, that was a
Joy rather than any Fear to him, considering the Promises and the Prospects
which the Gospel afforded him.

And now this is the happy Privilege of some others of the eminent Saints and
faithful Servants of Jesus Christ; that Death ceases to be the King of Terrors
unto them, and the near, yea the immediate Prospects of it, are no Surprise to
them. Nay, some who through fear of Death have all their Life time been subject
to Bondage, yet when Death has actually drawn near, and they have seen
themselves a going, all their Fears have been scattered, and they have been
able to say with the Psalmist, Psalm xxiii. 4. Yea, though I walk through the
Valley of the Shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil, for thou art with me; thy
rod and thy Staff they comfort me.

But now, what was it that afforded such Calmness and Comfort to the Apostle
under the Apprehensions of Death? Why, it was the Reflection he had upon his
past Conduct; and so the lively Views and certain Prospect of the Glory and
Happiness that follow after Death and the Judgment. Which leads me to the other
general Heads I proposed to consider, and which lie so obvious in my Text. So
then,

II. Let us consider, The peaceful and comfortable Reflection of the Apostle
upon his Conduct, in the Time past of his Life; especially since he was
converted to the Faith of Christ; Namely, That he had fought the good Fight,
that he had finished his Course, and kept the Faith.

The holy Apostle being come to the Close of Life; he looks back upon what was
past, to see how he had managed, and behaved himself in the World.

And what can be more proper, than for a Man when he is just finishing the
Scene of Life, to take a Review of the several Parts of it, and see how he has
managed himself: Whether he has answered the great End of Living, or frustrated
the grand Design of his Being? Whether his Life has been to any good Purpose,
to the Honor of God and for the Good of others, as well as for the furthering
his own Salvation? Whether he has lived as the Grace of God has taught him?
This is necessary for a Man in order to the removing his Fears of Death, and
settling his Hopes and Expectations of a future Glory upon a good Foundation.
For as we have behaved our selves in this World, so may we expect it will fare
with us in the World that is to come. For here we stand Probationers for the
eternal State, and we shall receive of our righteous Judge according to the
things done in the Body, whether they have been good, or whether they have been
evil, 2 Cor. viii. 10.

And now the Apostle upon a serious, thorough and impartial Review of his past
Life, was able to give a good Account of it, which gave him such a Calm in the
near Prospect, and such Courage in the very Hour of Death, He had this for his
Rejoicing, even the Testimony of his Conscience that he had fought the good
Fight, that he had finished his Course, and that he had kept the Faith.

I. He had fought the good Fight.

Here is an Allusion (as is supposed) to the grecian or roman Games, in which
there were Fightings, as well as Wrestlings and Racings; and so he had engaged
in the christian Combat: He had listed under Christ's Banner, and waged War
with the Enemies and Opposers of Christianity; and had fought manfully under
the Captain of his Salvation; had endured Hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus
Christ: He conflicted with great Difficulties, and patiently suffered the
sharpest Persecutions, and all Manner of Hardships, short of Death, and now was
going to suffer that, for the Cause of Christ and of his Gospel. And what a
long Catalogue of his Sufferings does he give us in 2 Cor. xi. 23, -- 27. In
Labors mere abundant, in Stripes above measure, in Prisons more frequent, in
Deaths often, in Perils of Waters, in Perils of Robbers, in Perils by my own
Countrymen, in Perils by the Heathen, in Perils in the City, in Perils in the
Wilderness, in Perils in the Sea, in Perils among false Brethren; in Weariness
and Painfulness, in Watchings often, in Hunger and Thirst, in Fastings often,
in Cold and Nakedness. But he surmounted these Difficulties, overcame all these
Oppositions; and came off a Conqueror, yea, more than a Conqueror, through
Christ that loved him.

And now, although we have not is all Respects the same Enemies to fight against,
not such Difficulties and Dangers to encounter, no such fierce Oppositions and
Persections from the civil Power, who were at that Time the professed Enemies
of Christ; yet there is, as we are told, Job vii. 1. according to the marginal
Reading, a Warfare to Man upon Earth; and a good Fight which we must be able to
say we have fought, if we would have Peace and Comfort in a dying Hour. There
are spiritual, and fleshly, and worldly Lusts, (all which war against the Soul)
for us to fight with. There are also the Examples of the Wicked, the
Enticements of Sinners, and the corrupt Customs of the World, and our own evil
Habits, to oppose and conquer; and last of all, there is our Adversary the
Devil, who as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour.

And we must be able to say that we have waged and carried on a War with these
our Enemies, that we have been fighting with them, that we have resisted and
overcome them. We must be able to say, that by the Grace of Christ, we have
crucified the Flesh, with all it is Affections and Lusts; that we have watched
and guarded against the Snares of the World, and have by Faith gained the
Victory over it, so as in a good Measure to get above the Hopes or Fears, the
Frowns or Flatteries of it. And that we resist the Devil, so as to cause him to
flee from us. In a Word, We are so to fight and struggle with our Lusts, and
all our spiritual Enemies, as to come to such a Pass, that no Iniquity has the
Dominion over us.

But then,

2. The Apostle finished his Course, or run his Race. Alluding still to the
Isthmian and Olympic Games. And what he here informs us concerning himself
was, that notwithstanding all the Difficulties and Dangers, and Oppositions in
his Way; yet he kept on his Course, diligently, steddily, vigorously and
perseveringly, even unto the End.

The Holy Ghost had witnessed in every City, that Bonds and Afflictions waited
for him; but says he, with a noble Courage and Resolution, becoming an Apostle,
None of these Things move me, neither count I my Life dear unto my self, so
that I might finish my Course with Joy, and the Ministry I have received of the
Lord Jesus, Acts xx. 23, 24.

The Apostle had a Race to run, as a Christian, and as a Minister; and in both
these Respects he finished his Course; that is, he faithfully discharged the
Duties which the Gospel required of him, as a Christian, and as an Apostle. He
had the Testimony of his Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity,
not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, he had his Conversation in
the World; and that he had exercised himself to have a Conscience void of
Offense, toward God and toward Men; carefully attending all the Duties of the
christian Life.

And then as an Apostle he went abroad faithfully publishing the Gospel of
Christ, from City to City, and from one Country to another People, even to
every Plate that the Holy Ghost signified to him that he should go unto. And a
great Race indeed in this Respect did he run; and it would take a longer Time,
than I have at present, only to reckon up the Voyages and Travels of this great
Apostle. And although he speaks humbly of himself, as the least of the Apostles,
and not meet to he called an Apostle, because be persecuted the Church of God;
yet he declares at the same time, that he labored more abundantly than they
all, by the Grace of God that was with him I Cor. xv. 9, 10.
. And by his abundant Labors, and by his superior Learning, and extraordinary
Gifts, there was a universal Resort to him; in so much, that as he says, The
Care of all the Churches came upon him daily 2 Cor. xi. 28.
. And notwithstanding that Thorn in the Flesh, which is supposed by many, to be
some bodily Weakness; yet he went on steddily, through the whole Course of his
Ministry and Service, preaching Christ warning and teaching every Man, --
striving according to his Working, which wrought in him mightily Col. i. 28, 29.
. And agreeable ^ this, he appeals to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, when
he took his Leave of them, for his Fidelity, Constancy and Diligence in the
Service of Christ, and of their Souls. Acts xx. 18,-27. Ye know after what
Manner I have been with you at all Seasons, serving the Lord with all Humility
of Mind, and with many Tears and temptations, -- and how I kept back nothing
that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have taught you
publicly, and from House to House, testifying both to the Jews, and also to
the Greeks, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
Wherefore I take you to record this Day, that I am pure from the Blood of all
Men; for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the Counsel of God.

And as the blessed Apostle, so every Christian has a Race to run, a Course to
finish, if he would finish his Life with Peace, and receive a Crown hereafter.
There are all the Duties of the christian Life, even those of Piety, Justice
and Charity, which may be considered as the christian Race; so that for us to
run the christian Race, is to live as the Gospel, and the Grace of God teaches
us, which is to deny Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts; and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in the present World Heh. xii ^
. And to finish this Course, is to persevere in Welldoing to the End, to
continue Faithful unto the Death. It is as the Apostle expresses it, Tit. ii.
11, 12.
to run with Patience, or Perseverance, the Race that is sot before us.

In short, for I can only hint at Things, to run our Race, and finish our
Course, is to set out in the Ways of Christianity; to consider the Duties of
every Station and Relation, of every Circumstance and Condition of Life; and to
go on in the sincere, diligent and steady Practice of them. It is to run the
Way of God's Commandments, and not suffer our selves to be diverted out of it,
or hindered from going on in it. It is to run without being Weary, to walk
without Fainting. It is to hold on our Way, yea, and to wax stronger and
stronger. In a Word, It is to be always abounding in the Work of the Lord.

3. The Apostle had this Testimony, that he had kept the Faith.

Which intends either,

1. That he kept the Profession of his Faith.

He was not so terrified by the Enemies of Christ, nor at the Rage and Fury of
his cruel Persecutors; but that in the midst of Danger, and Death, he openly
and courageously professed Christ, and his holy Religion. And notwithstanding
the Contempt and Reproaches that were cast upon Christ, and even the Scandal of
the Cross; yet he was not ashamed to own him before Men. And although the Cross,
that is the Sufferings and ignominious Death of Christ were to the Jews a
Stumbling Block, and to the Greeks Foolishness; yet he glories in nothing more
than in the Cross of Christ, he being to them who are called the Power of God,
and the Wisdom of God 1 Cor* i. 23, 24.
. And amidst all the Trials and Temptations to the contrary, he held fast the
Profession of his Faith, without Wavering. Or,

2. It may intend his keeping the Doctrine of Faith, or of the Gospel.

And this he kept, as he constantly maintained the Truth of it against all
Gainsayers. And as he propagated the Gospel, by his Preaching, and by his
Epistles; so he confirmed the same, not only with the strongest Reasonings; but
by diverse Signs and Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost. He made full Proof
of his Ministry, preaching the Word in Demonstration of the Spirit, and with
Power.

But then,

3. Some understand the Grace of Faith here.

And so he kept the Faith, as he continued his Faith and Trust in God, and in
the Lord Jesus Christ. He believed on him with all his Heart. He accepted of
Christ as his only Savior, and looked for Deliverance from all Condemnation
only in and through him; believing as he said, That there is no Condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus. He looked for Justification, not from his own
Righteousness; but from the free Grace of God, through the Redemption that is
in Jesus Christ. He depended also upon him, for all Grace and spiritual
Strength, that he stood in need of; acknowledging that it was through Christ
strengthening him, he could do all Things; and that of himself he was not
sufficient so much as for a good Thought. In a Word, he gives this Account of
himself, Gal. ii. 20. I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the Life
which I now live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved
me, and gave himself for me.

And he kept this Faith, continued in it firm and steady to the End; and he
grew strong in it, whereby he gave Glory to God, and gained a Victory over the
World; and when Death it self approached, it did by no Means fail; but he
triumphed over all the Pears and Terrors of it, knowing in whom he had believed.

And now we must thus keep the Faith. We must continue in our Profession of
Christ, and of his Gospel. We must continue in a firm and unshaken Belief of
the Gospel, the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints. And we must, as we
believe in God, believe also in Christ. And we must watch and pray, that our
Faith fail not; and must resolve that nothing shall discourage, or break us off
from our Faith in him; that although he slay us, yet we will trust in him. We
must trust in him at all Times, and in the Shadow of his Wings, we must make
our Refuge. We must trust to the Merits of his Obedience and Death, to the
Prevalency of his Intercession, to the Richness and Freeness of divine Grace;
and we must be influenced by such a Faith, to all Love, Holiness and Obedience;
and must continue in such a Faith, even unto the Death, if we would receive the
End of our Faith, the Salvation of our Souls.

And thus I have gone through the second general Head, even the Apostle's
Reflection upon the past Conduct of himself, in the Course of his Life; and
happy he, and happy every Man, that upon an impartial Review of his Life, is
able to give such a Testimony of it; That he has fought the good Fight,
finished his Course, and kept the Faith.

III. I proceed to consider the last general Head, viz. The joyful Expectation
which the Apostle had of what he should meet with hereafter, viz A Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge would give him at that Day;
and not to him only, but to them also that love his Appearing.

The Apostle was upon the Brink of both Worlds. He had passed through this World,
and was leaving it; and was just entering upon the Borders of the other. And as
with one Eye, he looks back to see what he had done, how he had behaved in his
past Life; so with the other, he looks forward to see what he was to receive in
the future. And as he had the Testimony of his Conscience, as to his past Life;
so he had most joyful Expectations in the Life that was to come. Henceforth
there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, etc. He argues with himself,
that since he had fought the good Fight, and finished his Course so well; all
which remained now, was to receive the Crown of Righteousness. Here he seems to
carry on the Allusion to the ancient Games, and proceeds in the agonistick
Style. For as the Victors, in those Combats or Racings, received a Laurel, a
Crown upon their Winning it, according to the Rules of those Games; which was
given to them by one appointed to judge and determine whether they had won it,
or no: So the Apostle having fought the Good Fight, and run his Race, he is
assured, that there is a glorious Crown laid up for him, which the righteous
Judge would give him at that Day, and not to him only, but to them also that
love his Appearing. He had the Testimony of his Conscience, that he had acted
his Part well; and so doubted not, but that he had the Approbation of his
Judge; and all he expected now was to receive the Token of it, in the glorious
Crown before him. Here are several Things proper to be taken notice of, with
some Enlargement, was there Time for it.

As,

1. The Name he gives to that Reward, he says was laid up for him, viz. A Crown
of Righteousness.

Crowns are set upon the Heads of Emperors and Kings in Token of their regal
Dignity, and Power, and Glory; accordingly a Crown is an Emblem or Token of
very high Honor and Dignity; so that when the Apostle says, there was laid up
for him a Crown, it was as much as to say, that he had by a patient Continuance
in Well-doing, been seeking for Glory, Honor and Immortality. He believed it
was laid up for him, and that he should receive it. He expected all those Marks
of Honor and Glory which would be conferred upon such whom the King of Heaven
delighted to honor. And hence, sometimes it is called a Crown of Glory, and a
Crown of Life 1 P^t^r v. 4. James i 12.
. But here he calls it, a Crown of Righteousness. By which we are to
understand, either,

1. That Righteousness would be his Crown.

And as Righteousness and true Holiness was the Glory with which our Nature was
crowned, and adorned at first; (this being a great Part of the Image of God
upon the Soul of Man) so it will most certainly be the special and peculiar
Glory of the Saints in Heaven; that they are made perfect in Holiness. Or,

2. By a Crown of Righteousness may be intended, a Crown purchased and procured
by the Righteousness of Jesus Christ; even by his Obedience and Death, which
has unbarred the Gates of Heaven, and opened all the Glory and Happiness
thereof unto us, and made Way for our obtaining it, by Virtue thereof. Or,

3. The Rewards of Righteousness.

A Reward to be bestowed upon righteous Men. For as the Psalmist says, Psalm.
lviii. 11. Verily, there is a Reward for the Righteous. And that in keeping the
Commandments, there is a great Reward, Psalm xix. 11. Which Reward is not to be
reckoned of Debt, but of Grace. Or,

4. By the Crown's being called a Crown of Righteousness, we may understand,
that Glory and Happiness which of Right belongs to all the Saints, according to
the Tenor of the Gospel Covenant.

For although it be a Reward not of Debt, but of free Grace; yet by Virtue of the
Covenant, and Promises of the Gospel, to which the Saints are entitled; it may
be called a Reward, or a Crown of Righteousness. For God of his free Grace, has
by his Word and Promise, transferred a Right to them. Hence it is said to the
Apostle John, Rev. xxii. 14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that
they may have Right to the Tree of Life.

But which Way soever we understand the Apostle, it comes to the same Thing;
for that which is intended by it, is the Glory and the Happiness of the other
World, that will be conferred upon all the sincere Saints, and faithful
Servants of Jesus Christ.

2. It is worthy of our Remark, from whom the Apostle expected to receive this
Reward, this Crown of Righteousness; namely, from the Lord, the righteous Judge.

That is the Lord Jesus Christ, who is constituted the Judge of the World; the
Son of God, to whom the Father has given Authority to execute Judgment,
because he is the Son of Man John v. 27.
. And he is a righteous Judge: For unto the Son, he says, Thy Throne, O God,
is for ever and ever; a Scepter of Righteousness, is the Scepter of thy Kingdom
Heb. i. 8.
.

And this was he whom the Apostle believed in with all his Heart, had preached
to the World, had faithfully served; and laid himself out with most
indefatigable Diligence, to promote his Interest, and advance his Honor. From
him, I say, it was that the Apostle expected to receive a glorious Reward.

And how great and glorious a Crown may we suppose him to expect from such a
plentiful Rewarder; considering how ardently he loved him, how faithfully he
served him, how much he denied himself for his Sake, what Sufferings he had
already endured, and considering that he was now about to lay down his Life in
his Cause?

3. We may consider the Manner in which he expected to receive this Crown, viz.
By Way of Gift. Which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me.

Although he had been so faithfully serving Christ, and was now ready to die for
him, rather than deny him. And although he expected a very glorious Reward, yet
he has no Apprehension of Merit in all this. He don't look upon himself as
having merited the least of what he expected. For if he was a distinguished
Saint, yet he knew who it was that made him to differ; and that it was by the
Grace of God that he was what he was: and that if he labored more abundantly
than the other Apostles, it was not HE, but the Grace of God that was with him
1 Cor. xv. 10.
. And as he looked upon all he had already, as what he had received freely from
God; so what he expected further, he looked upon as a free Gift; not what he
had merited by all his Services and Sufferings, but what would be freely given
him. Indeed he looks for it, as what was promised and secured to him by the
Gospel Covenant; but not as what his Services had merited. And so the Apostle
distinguishes between the Rewards of Sin, and the Rewards of Righteousness:
One he calls Wages, the other a Gift. The Wages of Sin is Death: but the Gift
of God is eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord Romans vi. 23.
.

4. We may observe the Time when he expected to receive this Crown, viz. At
that Day; which is the Day of Judgment.

For although the Apostle in other Places speaks of his being present with the
Lord, when absent from the Body 2 Cor. v. 8.
and of his desiring to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better Phil
i. 23.
than to be here: Yet the Crown of Righteousness, the Completion of his
Happiness, which he expects from the righteous Judge, is at that Day; viz. that
Day when the righteous Judge shall appear to judge the World. We are told, Acts
xvii. 31. That God has appointed A DAY in which he will judge the World in
Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained. And it is called that Day 2 Timothy i. 12.
; and the Judgment of the great Day Jade 6
. Accordingly that is the Time represented in Scripture, when the Rewards of
Glory shall be given to the Saints. This the Apostle Peter, to encourage the
Elders to be faithful in feeding the Flock of God, assures them; that when the
chief Shepherd shall appear, that is at the Judgment, they should receive a
Crown of Glory that fades not away 1 Pet. v 4
. So that it is when the chief Shepherd and Judge shall appear to judge the
World, that Peter and Paul, and all the Apostles expected to receive a Crown of
Righteousness, and a Crown of Glory. He was full in the Belief of the
Resurrection of the Body, of the Judgment to come, and of the future State; and
died in the confident Expectation hereof; believing there was a Crown laid up
for him, which at the Resurrection of the Just and the Judgment that follows
upon it, he should receive. And this Faith, in some good Degree, have all the
Saints. And this leads me,

5. To observe, The full Persuasion and confident Expectation the Apostle had
of receiving this glorious Crown.

He speaks of it with an Assurance; Henceforth, there IS laid up for me a Crown
of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge WILL give me. He was fully
persuaded of this, there was no Doubt or Uncertainty remaining in his Mind
about the Matter; but he seems to be well assured of it, as the Racers were of
the Laurel, or the Crown they saw hung up at the End of the Race. And with such
sure and certain Hopes, with such strong and lively Prospects of a glorious
Crown; he is enabled to receive the Massages of Death with all Calmness and
Courage, has all his natural Fears of Death scattered, and with Pleasure thinks
of his Departure, which was so near at Hand.

And this is the happy Privilege of some of God's eminent Saints and Servants:
They have such clear Evidences of their being in a State of Grace, and such
Assurances of there being a Crown of Glory laid up for them; that they can, not
only die in Peace, but are able even to rejoice at such a Time, in Hope of that
Glory there is now reserved in Heaven for them, and shall in due Time be
revealed in them.

6 Let me further observe, The pleasing Thought the Apostle had at this Time,
with Respect to the Salvation and Happiness of others, as well as his own.

Was he so Selfish as to think and please himself with the Thoughts of a Crown
of Righteousness and Glory far none but himself? Was he for monopolizing the
Glory and Happiness of Heaven, as some Men would the Riches and Honors of the
present World? No, but pleased himself with the Thought that this World would
be the happy Lot and Portion of all true Believers, as well as of himself. And
not to me only, but to them also that love his Appearing. He did not look upon
the Crown as belonging only to him, or as if he was the only one that should
receive a Reward; but that others, even all that loved the Appearance of
Christ, should be Partakers with him in the future Glory and Felicity.

And here is the Difference between those that run the christian Race, and the
Racers among the Grecians or Romans: For in their Racings, there was but one
that gained the Prize; although many ran, and strove for it. Know ye not that
they which run in a Race, run all, but one receives the Prize 1 Cor ix. 24.
? Whereas in the christian Race, all that run with Patience and Perseverance,
shall obtain the Prize, the Crown of eternal Life. And this Thought, instead of
being any Abatement of his Pleasure, was a great Addition to it: It pleased him
that others should be as surely, and as gloriously rewarded as he; according to
their Services and Faith.

He had his Soul enlarged in Love to his Fellow Creatures; he wished, and
prayed, and longed, and laid himself out to the utmost, for their Conversion
and Salvation. He tells us, Romans x. 1. That it was his Heart's Desire and
Prayer to God for Israel, that they might be saved. And so earnest and ardent
were his Desires for the Salvation of his People, as to carry him beyond
Bounds, and to express himself in such an hyperbolical Manner, (as is thought)
in Romans ix. 3. I could wish that my self were accursed, or separated, from
Christ, for my Brethren my Kinsmen according to the Flesh. And how sollicitous
was he, that they and others, might believe and be saved? In so much, that he
even travailed in Birth that Christ might be formed in them Gal. 4.19.
. He preached, he taught, he warned, he exhorted every Man, in all Wisdom,
laboring and striving according to the Power and Grace of God given to him;
and what was it for? but that he might present every Man perfect in Christ
Jesus Col. i. 28.
. And well might he think of it with Pleasure; that not only he, but that all
true Believers should receive such unfading Crowns of Glory from the Lord their
righteous Judge.

And this is the Temper of every true Saint: Their Souls are not only elevated
into a supreme Love of God, but enlarged in a sincere and fervent Charity to
all the Saints; and it will please every Saint to think that others will, as
well as they receive those Marks of divine Honor, and Favor; and that they
shall join together, even innumerable Companies of Saints and Angels, in
shouting forth the Praises of God, and the Lamb for ever and ever.

7. I have but one Word more to add here; and that is, the Apostle's
Description of those for whom this Crown of Righteousness was laid up, as well
as for himself, viz. Such as love his Appearing.

There is the Appearing of the Lord, the righte-Judge, before mentioned. So
that one Part of the Character of a true Christian, of one that is entitled to
a Crown, is that he loves the Appearance of Jesus Christ to Judgment. As for
the Hypocrite, and the Sinner, he dreads the Appearance of him. What a Terror
is it to such to think of Appearing before him, whose Eyes are as a Flame of
Fire, who searches the Hearts, and tries the Reins of the Children of Men, that
he may render to every Man according to his Works; before whom all Things are
open and naked, and who will judge the Secrets of Men. For such cannot but be
apprehensive of the Shame and Confusion that will cover them when they appear
before his enlightened Tribunal, and shall have all their Sins, even their most
secret Wickedness, laid open to the World; and they shall have the Reward of
their Deeds rendered to them.

But now the real Christian whose Conscience can ^^^tify for him with the
blessed Apostle, that he had fought the good Fight, etc. or can appeal to God
with good Hezekiah, saying, Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in
Truth, and with a perfect Heart, and done that which is good in thy Sight 2
Kings xx. 3.
. I say such will love and rejoice at the Appearing of Jesus Christ. He will be
glad there i^ a Day coming wherein he may give up his Account to God, if his
Conscience tells him, that he has glorified God on Earth, and finished the Work
that he had given him to do. Glad that there will be an Opportunity to
vindicate himself of the ill Thoughts, the hard Speeches and Reproaches that
have been cast upon him; to have his Sincerity and Uprightness, his Fidelity
and Diligence in the Service of Christ, acknowleged and approved by his Judge;
and to receive the blessed Euge to his immortal Honor before the World.

Thus every true Christian has Reason to love the Appearing of Jesus Christ;
for when he who is their Life shall appear, they also shall appear with him in
Glory Col. iii. 4.
.

And thus I have hastily gone over my Text, and the Subject was too large and
copious to do any thing more than hint at Things, in the Compass of Time
allowed me. And what I now hasten to is the

IMPROVEMENT.
And here I shall only mention two or three Inferences, that are the most
obvious, and will be most agreeable to the present Occasion.

Infer. I. What an unspeakable Mercy is it, since there is a Necessity of
Dying; that there is any thing to support and comfort us under the certain
Prospects and near Approaches of it.

Death in it self considered is an awful Change, and carries a great deal of
Terror along with it. Nature abhors and relucts at a Dissolution. It is a very
affecting Thing to go off the Stage of Life, and pass into a State of Silence,
and Inactivity. It is a very melancholy Thing to take the final Leave of our
Families and Friends, our Possessions, and Enjoyments; and to leave the Places
that now know us, to know us no more forever.

And if we are utterly in the Dark as to our future State, it must needs be
very perplexing to the Mind. But, O what Distress must the Man be in, who has
no better a Prospect before him, but that of a miserable Eternity! That when
Death approaches, and when all worldly Prospects fail; that there should
nothing remain to him, but a fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery
Indignation to devour him!

But now what an unspeakable Mercy do the Saints enjoy; that they have such
Cordials, such Supports and Comforts, at the Approaches of Death, as the
Testimony of their Consciences, the Witness of God's Spirit, the Light of his
Countenance, and the Joy of his Salvation? Such sure and certain Prospects of a
blessed Eternity, that instead of being surprised or terrified at Death, it is
Matter of Joy to them, and instead of shrinking back at the Approach of it,
they are able to welcome the King of Terrors, and in holy Triumph, to say with
the Apostle, 1 Cor. xv. 55, 56. O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is
thy Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin; and the Strength of Sin is the Law. But
Thanks be to God, which gives us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Infer. II. We learn, That it is the Testimony of a good Conscience, with
Respect to our past Carriage and Conduct in the World, that will afford solid
Comfort in a dying Hour.

It was this that enabled the Apostle, to think, and speak, and write so calmly
of Death; and to please himself with the confident Expectation of a future
Reward. And it is only such a Testimony of Conscience for us, that will take
away the Terror, and the Sting of Death: And truly without this, it is
impossible for us to have any Peace at the Approach of Death. What Peace or
Comfort can that Man have who is conscious to himself, that he has lived in the
Neglect of God, and of his Duty to him, of his being unjust in his Dealings,
unfaithful to his Trust, unkind, unchaste or intemperate in his Life? How will
such a guilty Soul be filled with Distress and Terror at the Approach of Death,
knowing that this will open the Scene of eternal Woe and Misery unto him?

Whereas such as upon the closest, and most impartial Reflection upon
themselves, can say they have fought the good Fight; that they have waged War
with all their spiritual Enemies; and have through the Grace and Strength of
Christ gotten the Mastery of them; that they have run their christian Race with
Patience; that they hold fast the Profession, and the Exercise of their Faith
without Wavering, they will have a sure foundation for Peace and Comfort in the
Hour of Death. For what can do a Man any Hurt that is in such a Case? God and
Christ are for him; the Gospel, and all the exceeding great and precious
Promises thereof, are on his Side; and then, who or what can be against him.

So that it is according as our Consciences testify for, or against us; that we
shall have Hope or Fear, Joy or Sorrow, in a dying Hour. For if our Hearts
condemn us, God is greater than our Heart, and knows all Things. But if our
Heart condemn us not, then may we have Confidence toward God 1 John iii. 20,
21.
.

Infer. III. How safe and happy must the true Christian needs be in Death;
since there is a Crown of Righteousness laid up for him, which the Lord the
righteous Judge will give him at the Day of his Appearing.

Well might the Apostle say, that to die was Gain Phil i. 21
, since that was the Way to a glorious Crown; and it is through the dark Valley
of the Shadow of Death, that all the Saints do ascend to Glory. That Man who
while he lives, lives to the Lord, and when he dies, dies in the Lord; who can
take away his Crown? It is secured to him by the Power, and by the Promises of
God, all which are in Christ yea, and in him Amen. Wherefore we may all write,
as in Rev. xiv. 13. Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord from henceforth,
yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works
do follow them.

And now, this we have Reason to think was the happy Case of an aged Saint
among us, who was the last Night interred, w^ose Temper and Carriage in his
private Station in the World was such, as gives us good Ground to hope, there
was a Crown of Righteousness laid up for him Mr John Dickson.
.

But what abundant Reason have we to think so, with Respect to the worthy and
honorable, good and faithful PRESIDENT of the College; who has lately taken
his Departure from us by Death?

His Life and Conversation from his Youth up, have been a constant Testimony
for him, to all that knew him, of the excellent good Dispositions of his Mind,
and of the gracious Impressions upon his Heart from his tender Years. He like
King Josiah, while he was yet young, began to seek and serve the God of his
Fathers.

He was favored with a liberal Education at the College, (over which he was
afterward called to preside): And when a Student there, he behaved himself
with so much Inoffensiveness, Dutifulness, and Diligence, as not only to gain
the Love and Good Will of all, but their Respect and Esteem as a good
Proficient in the Learning of that Day.

Since which he has been employing his natural and acquired Accomplishments,
with a Diligence, Constancy and Fidelity, that was uncommon.

But few Men had more useful Talents, or Accomplishments better fitted for
doing Service in the World, than he.

He had a calm and moderate Temper, and had a great Government of his Passions;
but with all, had strong and steady Spirits, which would prompt him to
undertake, and would carry him through many difficult Labors, without Fainting
or giving over. He was very meek and peaceable, humble, condescending and
familiar to all. He was not of a hasty Spirit, that would precipitate him to
any rash or unadvised Actions; but in all Affairs, especially those that were
difficult and doubtful, he acted with great Caution.

And although where his Conscience was concerned, (which he always appeared to be
under the Government of,) he would steddily and courageously abide by the
Dictates thereof, whether he pleased or displeased Men; for this was his
governing Principle, to manage in all his Affairs, not as pleasing Men but God,
that tries the Hearts.

And yet in other Cases, no Man more careful not to displease or offend.
Accordingly in his Discourses, whether private or public, he for the most part
avoided controversial Points, and Matters of doubtful Disputation; choosing
rather to press those practical Duties that were not disputed, than spend his
Time in speculative Controversies. He was a Lover, and a Counselor of Peace;
and studied the Things that made for Peace, and whereby one might edify another.

He spent about thirty Years of his Life in the public Ministry at Boston,
where he was happy in the hearty Love and Respects of his People; and where he
diligently, and I believe successfully laid himself out for the good of Souls,
in his pastoral Visits, as well as in his public Preaching; and showed himself
a Pattern of good Works, readily distributing the Tenth of all his Income to
pious and charitable Uses, whereby he could with greater Courage and Confidence
call upon others for their Charities; and did by his own Example provoke them
to Love and to good Works.

Furthermore, He endeavored that his public Ministry should be of more
extensive Service; by the many Sermons, and other Discourses which he
published; in all of which he used great Plainness of Speech, levelled to the
lowest Capacities, more ambitious to instruct and quicken others, than to gain
Applause to himself; in which Writings, although he be dead, yet he speaks to us;
and as they have been, so I doubt not, but that they will be a Guide and
Comfort to many Souls.

It is now almost twelve Years since he was chosen into the Presidentship, and
accepted the Care and Burden of that important Office; not for the Honor, or
the Profit of the Place; but as he has often declared, from a self-denying
Spirit, and in Obedience to what he apprehended to be the Call of God unto him.

And as he came hither for the Good of the College; so he laid himself out very
^^ligently, and laboriously for that End; endeavoring to train up the Youth in
such a Way, as he apprehended would render them most Serviceable in their Day;
being concerned to rectify their Morals, to reform their Disorders; and to
promote true substantial Piety, as well as the most useful Learning, among them.

And although he has for the greatest Part of his Presidentship been afflicted
and sore broken; yet it has been wonderful to us all, to observe, not only with
what Patience he endured his Pains; (which for Years together, except when in
Bed, were almost constant upon him.) But with what Diligence and Care he
applied himself to the Business of the College, under so much bodily Weakness.
For although this Weakness grew upon him, yet he held out, in the constant
Service of his Place, even almost unto the very last. So that I have often
thought, that many other Men, for the same Degree of Pain and Weakness, would
keep their Chamber, if not their Bed; when he would go forth to College, and
carry on the Worship of the Hall.

In a Word, and to sum up all; He was one of the brightest Examples of
Diligence, Constancy and Fidelity.

And when he apprehended his Departure to be at Hand, he was in the same happy
Frame with the blessed Apostle. He had his Conscience witnessing for him, that
he had fought the good Fight, finished his Course, and kept the Faith; which
gave him a Calm and Quietness of Mind; yea, and filled him with joyful
Expectations of a Crown of Righteousness; and with admiring and adoring
Thankfulness to God, for his abundant Mercy through Christ, in begetting such
lively Hopes within him; telling me at one Time, how deeply and frequently he
was affected with those Words of the Apostle, 1 Peter i. 3, -- 9. saying,
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant Mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively Hope, by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the Dead, to an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled,
and that fades not away reserved, in Heaven for you, etc.

And now, who is there that has seen and known his Manner of Life among us, his
Doctrine, Purpose, Long-suffering, Charity, Patience, and are Witnesses how
^^lily, justly and unblameably he behaved himself; that can possibly doubt of
there being a Crown of Glory laid up for him? If we may judge of the Tree by
its Fruit, we must thus judge of him: He was a good and holy Man; for he had
his Fruit unto Holiness, and the End is eternal Life. He is gone, with the
Apostle, to be with Christ for the present, and his Rest is glorious in him;
and there is undoubtedly a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous
Judge will give him, at the Day of his Appearing.

And now what remains, but that we duly resent this bereaving Stroke of divine
Providence, and make a wise Improvement of it?

And in a particular Manner, let the College be deeply affected with the Breach
that God in his holy and sovereign Providence has made upon it.

May Those who have the immediate Instruction and Government of that Society,
be excited and quickened to be more and more imitating their Master that is
taken from their Head, in Diligence, Constancy and Fidelity; aspiring after a
double Portion of that good Spirit that was in him.

And may the Students, the Sons of the Prophets, call to mind the solemn,
earnest and affectionate Counsels, Exhortations and Warnings, that you have
heard from his Mouth; and may his Prayers and Tears upon your Account, which
you have seen and heard, come into your more serious Remembrance. And let the
bright Example of shining but unaffected Piety and Goodness, be ever before you
as a Pattern to follow.

May the bereaved Family be supported under this heavy Loss, and have it
sanctified unto them. May the Widow have the Consolations of God which are not
small, and rejoice in having the Lord her Maker for her Husband.

May the Servants of the House, so remember the Counsels and Warnings of their
deceased Master, as to approve themselves the Servants of Jesus Christ.

May mourning Friends and Relatives be comforted to think of the happy Exchange
it has proved to him.

May the Poor of this Place, and elsewhere, who have been relieved and
refreshed by his Charities; be duly affected with the Loss of such a kind
Benefactor; and be pleased with the Thought, that by his Acts of Piety and
Charity, he has made to himself Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that
now receive him into everlasting Habitations.

And may all of us in the Neighborhood, be suitably affected with the Loss of
so good a Neighbor, such a faithful Friend, and Father.

And may the whole Town mourn the Loss of this and other Saints, and Servants
of Jesus Christ; and when our Glory is thinning after such a Manner, may we cry
unto God, as in Psalm xii. 1. Help, Lord, for the godly Man cease; and the
faithful fail from among the Children of Men.

Finally, Let us earnestly pray for the plentiful Out-pourings of the divine
Spirit upon those of us that survive; that the Breaches may be repaired, and
their Ground made good who have gone off the Stage. Let us be Imitators of them
who are gone before in all that was Good and Excellent; and especially, let us
aspire after the same Mind, and Spirit that was in Christ. And as the Apostle
advises, with whose Words, I now conclude, Heb. vi. 12. that ye be not
slothful, but Followers of them who through Faith and Patience, inherit the
Promises.

AMEN.
A Faithful Servant of CHRIST, Described and Rewarded.

A SERMON Preached at the Tuesday Lecture IN HARVARD COLLEGE, After the FUNERAL
of the Reverend Mr. Benjamin Wadsworth, President of the said College. Who
departed this Life March 16th. 1736, 7. Aetat. Suae 68.

By Edward Wigglesworth, D.D. And Hollisian Professor of Divinity.

Mat. xxiv 45, 46. Who then is a faithful and wise Servant, whom his Lord has
made Ruler over his Household, to give them Meat in due Season?

Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

BOSTON: Printed for D HEMCHMAN. 1737.

A Faithful Servant of CHRIST, Described and Rewarded.
MATTHEW XXV. 21. HIS Lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful
Servant; thou have been faithful over a few Things; I will make thee Ruler over
many Things: Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.
THESE Words are Part of a Parable spoken by our blessed Savior to his
Disciples, when the Time of his Departure from this World, and of his Ascension
to his Father began to draw near.

The Design of the Parable seems to be to set forth the different Demeanor of
those, who bear the Name of the Servants of Christ, and receive valuable
Betrustments from him, in this World; and the suitable Difference he will make
in his Treatment of them; when he shall come in his Glory, at the Day of
Judgment, and all the holy Angels with him. It will then be found, that some of
the Servants of Christ have well improved the Talents he delivered to them; and
these he will both commend and reward: While others who have been his Servants
by Vocation, external Profession, and special Designation as well as they; will
nevertheless appear to have made an ill Use of their Lord's Goods; or at least
not to have improved them to any valuable Purpose: And these he will censure as
Wicked and Slothful, and doom them to outer Darkness, where shall be weeping
and gnashing of Teeth.

My Text contains the Words of our Lord to a Servant of the first Sort, who was
able to give a good and a joyful Account of himself, and of what his Lord had
delivered to him. Lord, says he, Thou deliveredst unto me five Talents; behold,
I have gained besides them five Talents more. He humbly acknowleges that he had
improved nothing, but what he had received from Christ his Lord. Though his Stock
had been large, compared with that of his Fellow Servants; yet it was not his
own, but Christ's. Thine the Talents were, and thou honouredst me by committing
them to my Trust. And then he appeals to Christ as a Witness of his Diligence,
Faithfulness and Success in improving them. That as he had received much, so he
had been careful to return the more; and to make his Improvements
proportionable to his Receivings: Behold, I have gained besides them five
Talents more.

Nor is it a foolish Confidence of Boasting, but the Testimony of a good
Conscience, that he had obtained Mercy to be faithful, which gives him this
Boldness in the Day of Judgment; for Christ himself admits the Truth of his
Account, and applauds and rewards his Faithfulness and Diligence; saying unto
him as in my Text, well done, thou good and faithful Servant; thou have been
faithful other a few Things, I will make thee Ruler over many Things: Enter
thou into the Joy of thy Lord. Upon which we may observe this Doctrine,

That these Servants of Christ, who have faithfully improved the Talents he
delivered to them, shall be highly applauded, and gloriously rewarded by him.

For the Illustration of this Truth, I shall do four Things: viz.

1. I shall consider what may be meant by the Talents delivered to the Servants
of Christ. 2. I shall show, that it is Christ who delivers these Talents to his
Servants. 3. That those Servants who improve them faithfully, shall be highly
applauded. And, 4. That they shall be gloriously rewarded by him.
I. I am to consider, what may be meant by the Talents delivered to the
Servants of Christ.

And here I may say in general, That every Thing improveable by them to the
Honor of God, or to the Good of others, or of their own Souls is a Talent. It
is a valuable Treasure, which if the Fault be not their own, may become of
inestimable Advantage to them; for as much as by a right Use of it, they may be
laying up in Store for themselves a good Foundation against the Time to come,
that they may lay hold on eternal Life Tim vi. 19
. In this View we may consider, the Endowments of their Minds; the Health and
Strength and Vigor of their Bodies; their worldly Enjoyments, Estate,
Education, Credit, Interest, Power, Preferments; the Word and Ordinances of
God, and Motions of the good Spirit of Grace; and all the Opportunities, or
even Occasions of doing or receiving spiritual Good; as so many Talents
committed to their Trust. By a right Use of any of these, they may be doing
acceptable Service to God; and by a Misimprovement, at a bare Neglect of them,
they may incur the Guilt of Sloth and Wickedness.

How much then does it concern us all, to walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but
as Wise; since there is hardly any Thing can occur to us so indifferent in its
own Nature, but that it may minister an Occasion of doing, what may recommend
us to the Favor, or ex^^^^ us to the Displeasure of God, and so may affect our
eternal Interests? -- It is just Matter of Rejoicing to consider, that the most
Common of our outward Enjoyments may be so ordered, as to be of everlasting
Advantage to us: That our very Food and Drink may be received in such a Manner,
as that God will account himself glorified thereby. But then we have Reason to
rejoice with Trembling, when we take a Prospect of the Danger on the other
Side: How that by any Misimprovement of these Things, or only by neglecting to
glorify God with them, we shall incur his Displeasure, and treasure up Wrath to
our selves. Since then we have such an Advantage, and such a Danger continually
before us; how tho'tful and vigilant ought we always to be? And what Manner of
Persons in all holy Conversation and Godliness? Especially if we consider, what
I am to say,

II. That it is Christ who delivers to his Servants all the Talents they are
betrusted with.

The Truth of this is fairly hinted in the Parable now before us; the ver 14
first Verse of which, I think, ought to be read, not as in our English
Translation, The Kingdom of Heaven is; but, The Son of Man is as a Man
traveling into a far Country, who called his own Servants, and delivered unto
them his Goods. And unto one he gave five Talents, to another two, etc.

When our blessed Lord ascended up on high, he received Gifts for Men; had all
Things put under his Feet; and was made to be the Head over all Things to the
Church Psalm lxviii. 18. Ephesians. i. 22.
. The Administration therefore of the Kingdom of Providence and of Grace, is
now in his Hand. So that we are to look upon all the Abilities, Advantages,
Occasions and Opportunities we have of doing or receiving Good, as so many
Talents committed to our Trust by him, who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous
of good Works Tirus ii. 14.
: By him, who will call us to an Account in the great Day of Reckoning, and be
our Judge to determine our everlasting State, according as we have made a good
or bad Use of these Talents of Trust and Confidence reposed in us.

Let us then consider seriously with what Strictness and Exactness, and tender
Resentments, we may well expect he will take an Account of the Number and the
Nature and the Degree of the good Things which be himself has committed to us.
-- As he was the Bestower of them, he cannot but know exactly what they were.
And as they were Part of the Purchase of his Blood, and of the Reward of his
Obedience unto Death, and were committed by him to us as Marks of Honor and
Confidence, to be improved for our eternal Benefit, he cannot but be most
tenderly affected with the Use we make of them. With what Pleasure and
Satisfaction must he look upon us, if we faithfully improve them to the blessed
Purposes for which he purchased and bestowed them. And with what Indignation,
if we neglect them as Things not worthy of our Notice or Improvement?

The Consideration of these Things should be a most powerful and prevailing
Argument with every one of us to inquire frequently with great Care and
Solicitude, into his own State and Circumstances; that he may know what is his
Duty, and what are the Expectations of his Lord from him. -- Without such an
Inquiry, we shall either not know, or at least not consider what Talents Christ
has delivered to us. And so far as we are ignorant or tho'tless of this, it is
certain we shall be scareless and slothful and wicked Servants; and have but a
wretched Account to give up to our Master at the Day of Reckoning. And as our
Circumstances are often varying, so our Opportunities and Advantages for doing
Honor to God, and Service to our Generation, are often changing with them,
which makes it needful that our Inquiries should be frequent: And very
sollicitous we have all the Reason in the World to be, to obtain a good
Understanding in these Things; because our Usefulness in this World, and our
Happiness in the next, so much depend upon our Knowledge of them; and because
our Lord himself will take such an exact Account of his own Gifts, as well as
of our Improvements.

Let us then be persuaded to inquire frequently and with great Attention; what
Services for God and our Generation the natural Abilities which our Lord has
given (...), tender us most fit for? An Inquiry this, of great Importance to
such as (like many of you) have their Course of Life yet to choose; that they
may determine upon such a one, as they will be most likely to act in with
Pleasure and Satisfaction to themselves, and Usefulness to others.

Again, Let us inquire, what Duties God calls us to from time to time in his
Providence; by presenting Opportunities and Advantages, and laying Inducements
before us? What Opportunities and Occasions arise out of our present State of
Life, to testify our Fear of God, and Regard to his Servants? What to be
getting Good to our selves now, and what to be laying a Foundation for
Usefulness to others hereafter? What Benefits or Advantages are derived to us
from the respective Relations or Capacities in which we are placed? What
Incitements to a vigorous Application arise from our outward Circumstances, and
future Hopes and Prospects? In fine, and above all, how many spiritual
Advantages we enjoy in common with our Fellow Servants by the external Means of
Grace? And how many peculiar to our selves by the inward Convictions,
Restraints, Assistances of that good Spirit which our departed Lord sends to
us? By frequent Inquiries of this sort, we shall become more and more sensible
what Talents our Lord is committing to our Trust; and of consequence what we
have to Improve here, and what to Account for hereafter. And a serious
Consideration of these Things will have a happy Tendency to work us up to a
fervor of Spirit in the Service of our Lord, and so prepare us for those
Applauses and Rewards which the Good and Faithful may expect from him.

And so it may do also, to remember them who have had the Rule over us, who
have spoken unto us the Word of God, and whose Faith it concerns us to fellow,
considering the End of their Conversation. For every Benefit we have had
Opportunity to receive by their Means, ought to be considered by us as a
Talent, which we must give an Account of to Christ at his second Coming. And
all their Abilities and Opportunities to do Service to us or others: And their
Fidelity in improving them, ought thankfully to be acknowledged to the Honor
of Him, who is Head over all Things to the Church; and who gives such Gifts to
Men, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the Body of Christ.

And this brings me to pay Part of that Tribute which is due to the Memory of
our late Reverend and worthy President, who may justly be considered, if we
compare his Opportunities and Abilities together, as one of those Servants whom
our Lord honors with the Care of five Talents, a large Stock in comparison of
what is trusted with many others.

He had his Education in this House, where I hope without Flattery it may be
said, that those who are disposed wisely to improve them, enjoy at least as
many Advantages to accomplish themselves for the Service of their Generation,
as are to be met with in our own Country. When he proceeded to settle in the
Gospel Ministry, the Holy Ghost made him Overseer of a numerous Flock in the
Metropolis of the Province, in the generality of whose Affections he was
blessed with a very great Interest. And as this gave him a singular Advantage
to promote the Good of their Souls; so it evidences the Truth of their
Christian Self-denial and public Spirit (which ought always to be remembered,
and spoken of with Honor) in Consenting to the Removal of One so dear to them,
to what they apprehended a Station of more general Usefulness and Service. And
so at length by the sovereign Disposal of our ascended Lord, he was set at the
Head of this Society, in whose Welfare and Prosperity, both the civil and
religious Interests of the People of God in this Land are so much concerned
that hardly any Place can be though it of, in which a Servant of Christ has
Opportunity to be a more extensive Blessing.

And to render him such a one in every Station, the glorious Head of the Church
had given him a very capacious and faithful Memory, a sound Understanding, a
clear Apprehension, and an uncommon Faculty of making religious Truths plain to
the meanest Capacities. But to crown all, our Savior Jesus Christ had taken an
early Possession of the Heart of this his Servant for himself; had impressed it
with a most affectionate Concern for the Souls of Men, and had given him an
indefatigable Spirit to pursue their Interests.

These are some of the Talents with which our blessed Lord betrusted his
deceased Servant. But how diligently and faithfully he occupied them I shall
have a more proper Occasion to say under another Head. I must now proceed
therefore to say,

III. That those Servants of Christ who have faithfully improved the Talents he
delivered to them, shall be highly applauded by him.

And here I shall endeavor two Things; viz.

1. To describe the faithful Servants of Christ; or show, what Manner of
Persons they are who faithfully improve the Talents he has delivered to them.
And 2. To prove the Truth of the Proposition; or show, that such Servants shall
be highly applauded by him.
Here then,

1. Who is the faithful Servant of Christ? What is his Character? Or what
Manner of Person is the Man who faithfully improves the Talents which Christ
has delivered to him?

To which I may say,

1. That he is one whose Heart is full of Affection and Devotion to his Master.
He considers that he is not his own, but is bought with a Price: and that not
of corruptible Things, as Silver and Gold; but with the precious Blood of
Christ. And therefore he loves the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, who has
first loved him, and given himself an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for him.
If other Lords have had Dominion over him, the faithful Servant of Christ
heartily repents his past Subjection to them. He renounces the Service of the
Flesh, the World and the Devil; breaks their Bands asunder, and casts their
Cords away from him. He unfeignedly acknowleges the Right of Christ to rule
over him, and devotes himself entirely and forever to his Service; saying as in
Psalm cxvi. 16. Oh Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, and the Son
of thine Handmaid. Thy Servant who is devoted to thy Fear, Psalm cxix. 38.

From this Spirit of Affection and Devotion to him, the faithful Servant of
Christ becomes highly concerned for his Master's Interest and Honor,
sollicitous above all Things, that whether present or absent, he may be
accepted of him; and he can take no rest under the least Sense or Doubt of his
Displeasure. It is his earnest Desire and Study to know the Will of Christ in
the utmost Latitude of it, and especially with Respect to the Duties of his own
Station in particular. His great Inquiry is, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? And his servent Prayer, Teach me thy Statutes. I am thy Servant give me
Understanding that I may know thy Testimonies. And it is his fixed Resolution
(through Christ strengthening him) carefully to perform whatsoever he does
know, or shall know to be his Duty Without such a Temper of Mind as this, no
Man will faithfully improve the Talents which Christ has delivered to him, but
will be habitually disobedient, and unto every good Work reprohate.

2. A faithful Servant of Christ is one who endeavors to extend his Obedience
to the whole Compass of his Duty. It is not Faithfulness, but some other and
some unworthy Principle which actuates the Man, who pretends a Zeal for Christ
in some Points of Duty, and yet is knowingly Remiss and Negligent in others:
Such a Man seeks his own, not the Things which are Jesus Christ's. For a
sincere Regard to the Interest and Honor and Will of Christ, must be operative
and influencial in one Instance as well as in another. And therefore, though the
faithful Servant of Christ, through humane Infirmity, offends and falls short of
his Duty in many Things, yet it is his Grief and Lamentation that he does so,
and he always labors fervently that be may stand perfect and complete in all
the Will of God. And then only will he not be ashamed, when he has a Respect
unto all his Commandments.

3. The faithful Servant of Christ is peculiarly mindful of the Duties of the
Station and Relations in which his Lord has set him. These are emphatically
his own Business and he studies to do it, being always tho'tful of that
Precept, I Cor. vii. 17. As God has distributed to every Man, as the Lord has
called every one, so let him walk. And for the same Reason, he will also
carefully lay hold of every Opportunity, Advantage or Occasion arising from the
Circumstances in which his Lord shall at any Time place him, to promote his
Master's Interest and Honor, get good to his own Soul, or do good to others.
For he looks upon every Opportunity and Advantage for these Things, as a Call
from Christ to arise and do them. And he thinks it impossible for any Man to be
a faithful Servant of Christ, and yet regardless of his Master's Calls to Duty.

4. The faithful Servant of Christ is a diligent and laborious Servant. He
abhors the Character, and dreads the Curse of him, who does the Work of the
Lord negligently. And therefore whatsoever his Hand finds to do, he does it
with his Might. He is not slothful in Business; but servent in Spirit serving
the Lord.

5. He is full of Patience and Resignation to his Master's Will under all the
Afflictions with which he thinks fit in his holy Providence to exercise him.
The faithful Servant of Christ don't consider Affliction as coming forth out of
the Dust, or Trouble as springing out of the Ground; but as sent by him, who is
given of God to be Head over all Things to the Church; by him who loved the
Church, and gave himself for it: who therefore cannot be supposed to afflict
willingly, or grieve any of his faithful Servants, whom he has redeemed with
his Blood; but rather to chasten them for their Profit, that they may be
Partakers of his Holiness. That therefore, though no Chastening for the present
seems to be joyous but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yields the
peaceable Fruit of Righteousness, unto them that are exercised thereby. Upon
which Account he considers every Fight of Affliction as a Talent, the right
Improvement of which, will work for him a far more exceeding, and eternal
Weight of Glory. And this may well make him patient in Tribulation. For he
reckons that the Sufferings of the present Time are not worthy to be compared
with the Glory which shall be revealed in us.

Moreover, The faithful Servant of Christ looks unto Jesus the Author and
finisher of his Faith; who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the Shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of
God. And considering him that endured such Contradiction of Sinners against
himself; and also, that Christ suffered for us, leaving us an Example that we
should follow his Steps; he is not wearied, neither does he faint in his Mind;
but is ready to deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow his Master, not
thinking any Thing too much to suffer from a Sense of Gratitude, and a
Principle of Love and Subjection to him, who his own self bear our Sins in his
own Body on the Tree, and has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being
made a Curse for us.

In fine, The faithful Servant of Christ is persuaded, that it is only if need
be, that he is now in Heaviness for a Season through manifold Temptations. He can
truly say with the Psalmist, Psalm cxix. 75. I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments
are right, and that thou in Faithfulness have afflicted me. And therefore
instead of murmuring at his Master, or envying his Fellow Servants, who seem
through less Tribulation than he, to be entering into the Kingdom of God; he
kisses the Rod, and blesses him that appointed it; knowing that Tribulation
works Patience; and Patience, Experience; and Experience, Hope; and Hope
makes not ashamed, because the Love of God is shed abroad in his Heart, by the
Holy Ghost which is given unto him.

6. The faithful Servant of Christ perseveres in his Duty with an unbroken
Resolution as long as he lives. He remembers the Faithfulness of his blessed
Lord to the Interest of miserable Sinners, when for their Sakes, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. He
remembers that one great End of this was, that we being delivered out of the
Hands of our Enemies, might serve him without Fear, in Holiness and
Righteousness before him, all the Days of our Life. He considers that his Lord
has promised to ^ender eternal Life, only to them, who seek for Glory, and
Honor, and Immortality, by patient Continuance in Well-doing; But that, if any
Man draw back, his Soul will have no Pleasure in him. And upon such
Considerations as these, the faithful Servant of Christ can say, I have
inclined mine Heart to perform thy Statutes always even unto the End. I have
sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments. All the
while my Breath is in me, and the Spirit of God is in my Nostrils, I will not
forget thee, neither will I deal falsely in thy Covenant. My Heart shall not
turn back, nor my Steps decline from thy Ways. And having once framed such holy
and vigorous Resolutions, he earnestly endeavors to hold them fast; and
through the Supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; he becomes Steadfast,
Unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord. But these Things may
suffice for the main Strokes in the Character of the faithful Servants of
Christ. It only remains under this Head, that I proceed to say,

2. That such Servants as these, shall he highly applauded by their Master. He
knows all Things, he knows that they love him. He knows their Works, their
Labor, and their Patience. He looks down from Heaven with Approbation and
Pleasure upon them now. And he is not unrighteou^ to forget their Work, and
Labor of Love, which they have showed to his Name: But when he shall come in
his Glory, and ^ll the holy Angels with him, and shall sit upon the Throne of
his Glory, he will call them good and faithful Servants, the blessed of his
Father: he will approve and applaud their Faithfulness and Obedience, and
publish to their everlasting Honor, their pious and charitable Works in the
Presence of the whole Assembly of Men and Angels, who shall be gathered before
him at that Day; saying, I was an hungered and ye gave me Meat, I was thirsty
and ye gave me Drink, etc. Thus their Faithfulness shall be found unto Praise,
and Honor, and Glory at the Appearing of Jesus Christ. And not only so, but as
I am to say,

IV. It shall be gloriously rewarded by him also. Their Reward hereafter shall
be vastly greater than their Improvements have been here; and they shall have
Comfort and Peace, and unspeakable Rejoicing evermore in the Possession of it.
For they shall be made Rulers over many Things, and shall enter into the Joy of
their Lord.

1. They shall be made Rulers over many Things. This is spoken after the Manner
of earthly Princes. For as they, if they be good and wise, will advance those
Servants to higher Offices, whom they have found faithful in lower, so will
Christ do also. He will make all his faithful Servants Kings and Priests unto
God, and his Father. He will give them a Crown of Righteousness. He will grant
to them to sit with him in his Throne; and to inherit the Kingdom prepared for
them from the Foundation of the World Rev. i. 6.2. Tim. iv. 8. Rev. iii. 21.
Marth. xxv. 34.
. What a Disproportion is here between the Work and the Reward of a faithful
Servant? He is faithful over a few Things, and he is rewarded for it with a
Crown, a Throne, a Kingdom! Verily, Not by Works of Righteousness which we have
done; but according to his Mercy he saves and rewards us!

2. They shall enter into the Joy of their Lord. Sorrow and Sighing shall now
flee away for ever, and all Tears shall be wiped from their Eyes. All the
Springs of Joy and Gladness shall be opened unto them; for they shall see God
Face to Face, and shall be made like unto him by seeing him as he is. In his
Presence they shall find their Joys to be full, and their Pleasures
everlasting. Then shall be verified that Word of their Lord, the Glory which
thou gave me, I have given them. Father, I will that they also whom thou have
given me, be with me, where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have
given me. And that beholding cannot mean a merely contemplative, but a fruitive
Intuition. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
^gether, Romans viii. 17.

I might now proceed to infer from what you have heard, How blessed a Thing it
is to be a faithful Servant of Christ? How easily we may account for it, why
our Lord suffers his most faithful Servants to undergo so much Tribulation in
this World? How unreasonable it would be, either to forsake the Service of such
a Master, or to go on dejectedly in it, because of the Difficulties which may
sometimes attend it? How foolish and wicked a Thing it is to refuse this
Service, or despise those who are faithful in it; or to do any thing which may
tend to render the Labors of any faithful Servant of Christ less successful,
than otherwise they might have been? In fine, How much the condition of the
Generality of Mankind is to be lamented, who instead of devoting themselves to
the Service of Christ, make themselves Slaves to the worst of Masters? But
these, and many other useful Reflections, which might be made upon what has
been discoursed at this Time, I must leave to be enlarged upon in your private
Meditations and may only add,

That from the Description which has been given of a good and faithful
Servant, I think we may well conclude, that the Servant of Christ lately taken
from our Head was such a one. Indeed his Character has been already drawn so
well, by much better Hands than mine, that there is no Occasion for my
attempting that. I shall therefore only go on to observe such Things concerning
him, as my Subject naturally leads me to consider.

Under a former Head we have taken a View of some of those Talents which his
Lord delivered to him; and here we may turn our Thoughts with Pleasure and
Advantage upon his Faithfulness in improving them to his Master's Honor, and
the Service of his Generation.

If we consider, how short a Time he spent in this Society when a young Man, in
Comparison of what many have done of later Years; how long he was removed from
it; what weighty Cares were upon him, during the Time of his Removal; and yet
when he returned to it, what a considerable Acquaintance he retained with the
learned Languages, and other Parts of Learning also, according to the State of
them with us in his younger Time; and how laudably, and to what general
Acceptance he presided at the first anniversary Solemnity after his Return,
before he began to be broken with bodily Pains and Weakness; we may very
reasonably conclude, that he faithfully improved the Advantage of an academical
Education by hard Study in his Youth.

Again, How diligent, how constant, how laborious he was in the Discharge of
all the Duties of the pastoral Office while he stood in that Relation, you have
already been informed by those who had sufficient Opportunity to observe that
Part of his Life and Character.

And how great his Faithfulness was in the Duties of the honorable Relation
which he bore to this Society in his last Years, you need not that any should
inform you. Ye are all Witnesses, and God also, how holily, and justly, and
unblameably he behaved himself among you. Ye are all Witnesses of his servent
Affection and Devotion to his Master; of his exemplary Patience and Resignation
to his Will under sore Pains, and of long Continuance; of his tender Concern
for the Interest of this Society, and the best Good of all it is Members; and of
his unwearied Application to all the Duties of his Office, in which he always
seemed to go to the utmost of his Ability, and many Times almost beyond it.
Sure I am, that some of us have spent whole Days in the Business of this
Society with him, when it has been a continual Uneasiness to us to see that he
could take no Rest in any Posture, by Reason of his distressing Pains; and yet
have not heard one Complaint come out of his Mouth, no observed any Token of
his being disposed to have the Business of the Day hurried over; but as long as
there was any Business to be done, or any Day left to do it in, he has always
appeared as willing and patient, as those who were most at Ease and in Health,
to attend upon it, And so he continued without fainting in his Mind, faithful
to the Death.

And now, we may very well refresh our selves with the Thought, that the
Applauses and Rewards of a good and faithful Servant are become his Portion and
Inheritance forever. And God grant that none of us may be slothful; but
followers of him who through Faith and Patience inherits the Promises.

FINIS.
Oration Funebris in Obitum Reverendi Domini Benjaminis Wadsworth, Jamdudum
Collegii Harvardini Praesidis, qui e Vita mortali in immortalem migravit, Die
Martii Decimo Sexto, Anno MDCCXXXVII.

Habita in Aula Academiae, Ab Henrico Flynt, Collegii Harvardini Socio.

BOSTONI in NOV-ANGLIA, Excusum, MDCCXXXVII.

Domini Curatores, Honorabiles, ac Reverendi, Senatores Academiae, Professores,
et Tutores, reliquaque celeberrima Corona.
EX animo confiteor, me ad munus hujus diei obeundum, et ad fungendum officium
oratoris funeralis, nimis, immo et omnino ineptum esse, atque imparem. Officium
quidem non lectum, fed coactum, non optatum, fed praeter voluntatem impositum.
At cum alius nemo inventus fuerit, qui parts, hujus provinciae tristiffimae,
in se susciperet, humilis, et permoestus assurgo, ad plorandam mortem
luctiferam, Domini, Benjaminis Wadsworth, jamdudum hujus academiae praesidis
doctissimi, prudentissimi, pientissimi, ac plurimum reverendi.

Hic dies (domini auditores) est ater et lugubris, ut verbis prophetae utar est
dies tenebrarum, et caliginis, dies nubis, et obscuritatis.

Vos omnes alloquitur moesta, et orbata academia, sicut olim Jeremias propheta,
in lamentationibus suis. Ego ille sum, qui experitur afflictionem, virga
furoris Domini, me ducit et cogit in tenebras, non autem in lucem. Nihilne ad
vos (O viatores omnes!) intuemini, et videte, an sit dolor, par dolori meo, quo
me affecit Dominus, die aestus irae suae ferocissimae.

Sed quo nos fert, et quem ad finem sese extendit, gravitas nostri moeroris?
Decet nos dicere Deo, castigationem passi sumus, at non amplius offendemus,
quicquid ignoramus, tu Domine nos doceto, et si peccaverimus, non pergemus
ulterius. Quapropter Jehovam versus speculabor, Deum salutis meae praestolabor,
et Deus meus me exaudiet. Ne laetator de me, O mi inimice! quum cccidero, tum
resurgam, quum sedero obvolutus tenebris, Dominus illucescet mihi. Iram Domini
feram, quoniam peccavi in cum, usquedum causam meam agat, et pro me judicium
exerceat, producens me in lucem, ut fruar justitia ejus. Scimus Harvardinates,
probe scimus, quod Dominus Deus, magistrum nostrum, a capite nostro, hodie
assumpsit, et decet nos tacere, et non aperire os nostrum, quoniam Deus hoc
illud secit. Sed quis potest linguam suam continere? Cum eum curru quasi
sidereo, et fulgenti, in Coelum ascendentem, intuemur; quin cum propheta
exclamet, Mi pater! mi pater! currus Israelis et equites ipsius! Jam vero,
nobis quaerendum est, non laenam, seu mantelam, sed potius pictatem, et
spiritum hujus nostrae Eliae ascendentis. Immo nostrum est diligenter curare,
et cavere, ne illo anobis discedente jacturam quoque divinae praesentiae
aliquatenus faciamus ideoque precibus ardentibus Deum implorare, et solicit
inquirendo, cum propheta conclamare, Ubi est DOMINUS DEUS ELIJAe.

Fuit ille praeses defunctus, ah! suit, decus, et fortitudines Ecclesiae
Novanglicanae, et academiae Harvardinae, dum in hac vita commoratus est. Jam
eum non amplius videmus, in hoc orb terrarum. Ast illum stantem super terram,
cum redemptore suo, et nostro, supremo die, oculis intuebimur. Concedat Deus,
ut cum illo ipso compareamus, stantes ad dextram salvatoris nostri, Jesu
Christi quando caetu angelorum gloriaque paterna, ultimo venturus est et nos
omnes, in extremum judicium vivorum, et mortuorum vocaturus.

Interea sanctus ille vir, cum aliis sanctis usque ad resurrectionem sepulchro
condormit, anima vero conditur in coelis, sinu Christi salvatoris soaviter
complexa in eternum. Nos autem in terris reliquir, sicut silios parente
studioso, solicito, et prudenti orbatos. Cura enim sua, et consilio, doctrina
et exemplo, patientia et prudentia nos optime praeivit, in viam pacis, ordinis
et sanctitatis, nos sedulo duxit, et direxit.

Hic nunc manemus, ejus cura et precibus enixissimis, monitis, consiliis, et
pientissimi exempli lumine privati, ac destituti.

Gratia autem suit, et indulgentia coeli, quod precibus, curis, et laboribus
fidelissimis, tam diuturne fructi fuerimus, quum sub salutari lenique ejus
umbra conse derimus, plorimis deliciis, et pari emolumento.

Atqui vero propter peccata nostra, et delicta, a societate nostra, nimis
indigna separatus et disjunctus in perpetuum evasit.

Hoc est opus Dei, in omnibus dominantis, cujus providentiae potenti, et
sapienti humiliter nobis est submittendum. Hoc nostrum est grave infortunium,
ejus autem solamen, et gaudium sempiternum; abiit enim ad coelum usque
supremum, ad Deum omnium judicem, ad Jesum mediatorem, ad myriadas angelorum,
et spritus justorum consummatorum, praemium laboris et sidelitatis, patientiae
et forticudinis, in omnibus officiis, aerumnis, et tentationibus largum, et
infinitum ex miserecordia divina sola recepturus. Audivit sanctus praeses, jam
nunc audivit vocem salvatoris benignam, ei dicentem, Euge, serve bone et
fidelis, ingredere in gaudium Domini tui. Adesdum, patris mei benedicte,
possideto regnum, tibi paratum, a jacto mundi fundamento. Nonne etiam in hac
re, vocem Spiritus Sancti, nos omnes quoque audimus? Beati ab hoc tempore,
mortui ii, qui in Domino moriuntur, immo, dicit Spiritus, ut a laboribus suis
requiescant, et eos eorum opera sequuntur.

Jam tandem ut spero, mihi vitio non vertetur, si de vita et actionibus
reverendi praesidis, aliquantum enarrarem. Dignissimis ille vir, natus suit in
oppido Miltoniae, seu potius Dorcestriae, at eo tempore vocabatur, silius
ordine septimus, digni viri D. ducis Samuelis Wadsworth, qui occisus est
praelio, manibus Indorum barbarorum, vitas et fortunas pa^^^^ suae, et
patriotarum, defendendo, pro aris et focis, fortiter dimicando; quinetiam in
campo praelii, aut ab eo prope, apud silvas Sudburienses, nunc jacet sepultus,
et in cujus reliquias, hic ejus filius pietate erga patrem commotus, monumentum
erexit.

Reverendus praeses pietatem et religionem a pueritia coluit, et indicavit.
Quae cum eo crescebat, usque dum togam acceperit, virilem; ab ineunte aetate,
et deinde per totum vitae cursum, se Christo et ejus servitio sancte dicavit et
consecravit. Sitiens scientiae et peritiae, in linguis literatis, artibusque
liberaribus, Concessit Cantabrigiam ad capiendumingenii cultum. Hic studiis se
sedulo applicabat, et omnimodam liceraturam, hisce musarum sedibus, venebatur.
Ita ut cum in hac academia, una alumni fuerimus, facile memini, hujus viri
notabilem innocentiam, et morum integritatem, cum laudato in studiis progressu
conjunctam. Tandem se addixit studiis theologicis, in qua disciplina, caeteris
omnibus superiori, multum prosecit; consque, ut ad docendum in ecclesia et ad
praedicandum eternum Christi evangelium, aptus promptusque evasit.

Postea ad pastorale officium, a prima ecclesia Bostoniensi, electus est; atque
in sacro isto officio, et gravi plurimum vitae suae consumpsit, ad gloriam
Christi, et salutem animarum immortalium, omni auro pretiosiorum, promovendam,
totis viribus, omnibusque nervis, contendit. Exemplum, beati Jesu salvatoris
imitando, et homines cujuscunque generis, praesertim pauperes, pluribus
beneficiis afficiendo, operaque Dei, qui illum misit, operando, urbe et rure
commeavit.

Testes suae charitatis, et h^ ^ilitatis, apud nos plurimos reliquit. At quot
suerunt vera et felicia, ministerii sui sigilla, et quantus interni cordis suit
labor, et luctatio, in animabus Christo lucrifaciendis, Deus, cui diu
integreque servivit, in evangelio filii sui, est testis solus et fidelis.
Posthac, et in progressu temporis, placuit Deo optimo et maximo, omnium rerum
in terra coeloque dispensatori, hanc societatem, eo infelicem, suo capite et
principali, honorabili nimirum, et reverendo D. Johanne Leveretto, subito
private, qui dum apud nos vitam egit, lumen fuit et columen, decus et
ornamentum hujus ostrae academiae, multa passi sumus, multumqu amisimus, morte
repentina hujus viri generosi, docti, et pluribus nominibus honorandi. Nostrum
autem damnum, fuit ejus lucrum, et emolumentum eternum. Ibat enim ad astra
poli, usque ad coelum supremum, empyraeumque, praemium laborum, victori dandum,
a manibus Dei gratiosissimis, accepturus; et Jesum Christum, delicias sui
patris, angelorum, et hominum, apertis oculis, et facie ad faciem int^^turus;
et in ejus imaginem, ex gloria, in gloriam, sicut Spiritu Domini,
transformandus. De illo viro ampsissimo, et doctissimo, ^uovis excellenti
genio, dici potest, ut olim, a long quor, vestigia s^ per adorans. Inscribere
convenit, in ejus monumento, quod Aristoteles Philosophus, long ab hinc, in
sepulchro magistri sui Platonis divini, exarari voluit, nimirum, hic jacet
homo, quem non licet, nec decet, impiis vel ignorantibus laudare.

Sed ut ad propositum redeamus, eadem divina providentia, in omnibus veneranda,
quae tunc temporis, subitanea morte praesidis, constitutionem collegii valde
dirupit, et in nos fecit incursionem, plurium aquarum inundationi aequalem,
immo et majorem, nobis tandem rempublicam literariam, seliciter et gratiose
restituit. Quaesivit enim, et invenit hominem, qui sepem obduceret, et in
irruptione coram Deo consisteret, pro nostra academia, ne ea omnino
everteretur. Quamobrem, conjunctis vocibus honorabilium, et reverendorum
curatorum, atque senatus academiae honoraudi, reverendus dominus Wadsworth ad
implendum latum hoc intervallum, vocatus est. Et nemo nescit, qua humilitate,
et suiipsius suarumque rerum abnegatione, quinetiam erga divinam voluntatem
submissione, officium praesidis, grave et momentosum, in se suscepit. Porro
autem, nobis omnibus facile notum est, qua fidelitate, et constantia, ad
officium suum obeundum, sese contulit; idque sub multis infirmitatibus, et
corporis languoribus, quod exercitium fidei, et patientiae fortissimae,
solidissimacque exegit.

Nullus autem est, qui non agnoscit, quod cum modice convaluerit, et sanitudo
corporis eum quodamodo permiserit, constans suit, et regularis in munere
obeundo, et in omnibus partibus officii sui persiciendis. Quinimo tanta suit in
eo propensio, ad opus proprium, et debitum absolvendum, ut vires corporales
frequenter excessit, illudque in posteriori suae vitae part, magis atque magis
constabat, adeo ut saepe audivimus, cum votum sui animi exprimentem, se labors
potius, quam rubigine, ex^lescere maluisse.

Tandem accessit fatalis dies, et mortis decretum in se susecpit, et seelix ei,
maximeque beatum suit, quod tempore anteacto, et per totam sui vitam didicisser
non sibi ^psi, nee ullis aliis creaturis contidere, sed soli Deo omnipotenti,
fideli, et mortuos resuscitanti.

Jam hic vir sanctus, si quispiam aliu^^^^um Jesu Christo salvatore ovare
potuit, Ego te glorificavi in terra, opus quod mihi dedisti ut facerem,
consummavi, nuno igitur glorifica me; tu pater, gloria tua sempiterna. Et cum
beato apostolo exultante, Ego jam lib^^^, et pracstitutum tompus meae
dimissionis nuno instat, certamen illud praeclarum decertavi, cursum peregi,
fidem servavi quod reliquum est, reponitur mihi justitiae ^^r^na, quam reddet
mihi Dominus illo die, justus ille ^^lex, non solum autem mihi, sed et omnibus,
qui illustrem illum ipsius adventum expetivirint.

O vos musis dicatil hujus academiae alumni! quoties ejus pieces ardentes
audivistis? Lachrymasque vidistis teneras? Quoties ejus consilia, monita,
hortatus fidelissimos recipistis? Ejus laborem, patientiam, charitatem penitus
cognovistis. Deus autem plus novit de ejus tacito, secreto, et cordato zelo,
cura, et solicitudine pro vestrum omnium salute; et quomodo, vos sui filiolos,
sicut apostolus, iterum parturivit, ut Christus in vobis formetur. Adhuc etiam,
ut nobis videtur, nunc temporis, illum audim^s, vos omnes alloquentem, et
hortantem. O mi discipuli! Literis incumbite; addicite vos studiis, adeo ut
prosectus vester manisestus, clarusque evadat; pietatem, pacem, justitiam,
charitatem, et ^mnimodam vitae sanctimoniam consequimini; sic itur ad astra.
Legibus, ac statutis collegii, vos religiose subjicite; praesertim Deum
precando, vos diligenter (...) constanter exercete, magna enim et mirabilia
pr^^^^us ad Doum ferventibus efficiuntur. Hoc agendo, Deus vobis benedicet, et
reddet vos communia et publica beneficia, virosque bonos, honestos, et (...),
^cipublicae, c^m civili, t^m ecclesiassicae egregic lauteque benefacturos.

Axioma est in philosophia morali positum, et comprobatum, videlicet Qualis
vita fuit, talis mors sutura est, cui quod est consentaneum, legimus in
scripturis, observa integrum, et aspice rectum, finem istius viri esse pacem.
Defunctus pracses hujus observationis exemplar clarum extitit et
evidentissimum. Integer vitae fuit, scelerisque purus, in omnibus Deo et
hominibus fidelis, unoquoque officio, ut sungeretu^ fideliter curavit; ne
multa, vixit Christo, placuit Deo, generationi ministravit, et oneribus
justitiae, miserecordiae, et pietatis, omnem sui vitam consumpsit. Jam exitum
audite; nam, ut dicitur, exitus acta prohabit, finis hujus viri fidelis et
sancti, omnibus consentientibus, fuit pax, solamen, et altissima tranquilitas,
fides ejus et spes, et firma in Domino confidentia, vel articulo mortis viguit,
et ad vitae extremum inconcussa manebat.

Nec timuit mortem, aculeo cassam, sed cupivit, nec tremuit a diabolo, cujusvis
morientis inimico, sed quiet et placide in Christo dormivit, et in sinum
beatum Jesu redemptoris, ipsius procul dubio amantissimi, suam sanctam tandem
efflavit animam. Requies denique, hujus viri sancti est in Domino gloriosa, et
veritate^^ istins, prophetae, documenti expertus est, Justitiae opus est pax,
et effectus justitiae est tranquilitas et securitas in eternum. Istius quoque
apo^^oli in mortem triumphantis, O mors ubi est aculeus? O sepulohrum ubi
victoria tua? aculeus vero mortis est peccatum, vis autem peccati est lex; at
Deo habetor gratia qui dat n^bis viot riam, per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum.
Itaque fratres mei dilecti stabiles estote, immoti, in opere Domini semper
eminentes, quum sciatis laborem vestrum non futurum esse in Domino inanem.

Tandem aliquando, ad inspectores, et rectores hujus collegii se convertit
oration. Vestrum est virl honorabiles, et reverendi, curare et providere ut
praeses succedaneus legatur et designetur, qui sepem ruptam instauret, et in
diruptione, pro academia nostra, coram Deo, consistat; qui polleat doctrina,
prudentia, et pietate, et almam matrem nostram, cum sui ipsius filiis, bonis
rectisque viis manuducat; qui non sua quaeritet, sed multorum commoda, ut piis
principiis, bona literatura, et omnigena virtute vitae et actionum instruantur.
Adeoque ut temporis progressu, et favore divino, fiant servi Christi boni,
fortes, fideles, et literati, reipublicae et ecclesiae maximum emolumentum
prolaturi.

Quod reliquum est, recipiat Deus optimus maximus, hanc academiam, sub nube et
tutamine benignae suae providentiae; dona et charismata sancti sui Spiritus in
cordibus omnium nostrum diffundat, et mentes nostras illuminare dignetur,
salvifica cogniti^ne soilus very Dei, et filii sui Jesu Christi, quem probe et
vere cognoscere, ita ut ei, ejusque beato evangelio fideliter obsequamur, vita
erit, gloriaque perennis et sempiterna.

FINIS.

