An ESSAY, Concerning Silver and Paper CURRENCIES.

More especially with Regard to the British Colonies in NEW ENGLAND.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queen Street over
against the Prison.

An Essay, concerning Silver and Paper Currency.
PAPER Currency at a great Discount, has prevailed for several Years in many of
our Colonies, and by Advocates for it both in Conversation and Print, deluding
the People with false Appearances and Representations; it is likely to continue
and multiply amongst us to greater Disadvantages than ever: As appears by the
late large laboring Emission of 90,000 l. in Maryland, the enacted but not as
yet current Emission of 48,300 l. in New York, the printed Projection for 180
000 l. in this Province, and by the Apprehensions we are under of a further
Rhode Island Emission.

In Affairs of this Nature, a true historical Account of Facts and their
Consequences, is called political Experience; and as Things are more naturally
understood by their Eff^cts, than by their Principles: I shall endeavor, by
relating bare historical Facts, concerning Currencies, with some short Remarks
upon the same; to set our Plantation Paper Currencies, more especially with
Regard to this Province, in a true Light.

Silver being a staple Merchandise all over the World, as well as an adequate
Pledge, did naturally, and by the Consent of all trading Nations, become the
universal Currency or Medium, by which Goods are bartered and Contracts m^de:
Therefore Silver (ascertained in Weight and Fineness) Coin ought to be the only
legal Tender in the Trade (...) all Countries. The Varieties of computative or
nummary Denominations of different Countries, are no Hindrance; they are
reconciled or adjusted by, what is called, the Par of Exchange.

Par of Exchange, is the intrinsic Value (in Weight and Fineness) of the
Silver Coin or Denominations of one Country, reduced to the like Value of
Denominations of another Country. Sir Isaac Newton's Table of the Assays,
Weights, and sterling Values of foreign Coins, published by Dr. Arbuthnot, A
1727, is a proper Standard. From this no Country swerves, excepting by a small
Variation, called, the Difference of Exchange.

Difference of Exchange, is a small Premium allowed for the Trouble and Risque
of having Silver (that universal Staple and Medium of Trade) remitted to answer
the Balance of Trade; according as the Imports and Exports of Countries in
other Goods, do exceed one the other. The printed Prices current of several
trading Towns, from Time to Time informs us of this.

Originally the nummary Denomination of Silver, seems to have been the same as
its Weight or ponderal Denomination It would have been happy and facile for the
World, if it had so continued; but from the corrupt civil Administrations (not
from the Balance of Trade) from Time to Time, in all Countries, the Value of
the Nummary from that of the ponderal Denomination has been altered, to Defraud
Creditors, and more especially to cheat the Creditors of the public.

In England for many Ages before the 14th Century, the nummary Pound was the
same with the Pound weight of Silver (this was in a proper Sense the natural
Pound) that is a computative Pound Sterling was 12 Oz of Silver, a Mark, or 13
s. 4 d. ^^s 8 Oz of Silver. Iniquitous Administrations since the Beginning of
the 14 th Century, have from Time to Time, reduced the nummary Denominations to
a less Value than its Weight, and cheated Creditors of some Part of their just
Dues and Demands: For the Space of about 250 Years the Weight of Silver in the
several nummary Denominations, has at Times, been lessened (that is the nummary
Denominations depreciated) excepting in the Minority of Henry VI. when the
Denomination called a Shilling rose from 142 Gr to 176 Gr. of fine Silver; but
during the Confusions occasioned by the hot Disputes, between the Families of
Y^rk and Lancaster, it fell again to 142 Gr (...) it continued until the
arbitrary Reign of Henry VIII, it fell more and more, and A 1546 it was only 40
Gr; A 1551 by the bad Administration of the Duke of Somerset Lord Protector in
the Minority of Edward VI. it was reduced to 20 Gr. but immediately after the
Duke of Somerset's being beheaded, it rose to 88 Gr. and remained so, until A.
1601 it suffered a small Reduction to 86 Gr. where it continues to this Day.
Thus our present nummary Pound contains only about 4 Oz. of Silver, that is
only one Third of what it originally contained.

In all other Nations the like has been done in bad Administrations. The Dutch
Pond Ulams (6 Guilders) which originally contained 12 Oz Silver, at present is
2 Oz Silver. The French Livre originally was a Pound or 12 Oz. Silver, at
present it is reduced to 4 Penny weight of Silver.

These almost incredible Depravations of the several nummary Denominations, had
not the least Relation to the Balance of Trade, and the most considerable of
them happened in Times prior to their several Nations being much concerned in
Trade; excepting what happened in France in the End of Lewis XIV. and Beginning
of Lewis XV. Reigns; Silver from a Mark or 8 Oz at 27 Livres was at length A.
1719 imposed upon the People at 120 Livres: The Iniquity of the Administration,
not the Balance of Trade was the Cause. Trade has quite a different Operation,
and in Fact ever since Trade became extensive in England, that is, in the last
180 Years, the nummary Denominations have lost only 2 in 88 Gr. The Credit of
Merchants in the commercial World is become more sacred, than the Probity of
Ministers in the civil Administration, and is a Check upon them Ever since the
French began to have Commerce truly at Heart, which at present they seem to
have as much, if not more, than their Neighbors; that is, ever since the
Beginning of Cardinal Fleuri's Administration, there has been no Alteration in
their Coin and Denominations.

In Europe all Nations have had the Balance of Trade sometimes in their
Favor, sometimes against them; and each of them more or less at different
Times; foreign Wars, civil Wars, Loss of Trade, Increase in Trade; without
altering the Value of their nummary Denominations in Respect of standard Silver.

In all the American Colonies at their first Settling, and from some Years
thereafter, their Currency was the same, with that of their Mother Country: But
by the Iniquity of some Administrations, all of them have cheated their
Creditors at Home, in lessening the Value of their nummary Denominations: Thus
the Dutch Colonies have cheated 20 per Cent a Holland Guilder passes with them
for 24 Stivers: The French Settlements, have defrauded their Principles at Home
50 per Cent.

In the British Plantations originally an English Crown was 5 s. Denomination;
in Process of Time, they remitted to their Creditors at Home a Piece of Eight,
which is only 4 s. 4 d. Sterling, at the Rate of 5 s.; some Time after that in
most of our Colonies this Piece of Eight was paid away to their Creditors at 6
s. and would have gone further, by Persons in Debt getting into the
Administration or Power of defrauding their Creditors; if the Merchants at Home
had not procured an Act of Parliament called the Plantation Act, whereby a
Piece of Eight in all our Colonies was fixed at 6 s. for 6 s. 10 d., per Oz.
Silver: In these Colonies, who upon this Act passed their Silver by Weight only
as a Currency ( Barbados, Bermudas, etc.) it continues so to this Day, being 33
per Cent. Exchange: But in some of the Colonies (Leeward West India Islands,
New York, New England) not using Weight, they continue to carry on the Cheat by
passing a light clipped Piece of Eight for 6 s. which is about 8 s. per Oz
Silver; there being no Bounds to their Clipping, they were obliged to come into
the Use of Weights, but continued the Ounce of Silver at 8 s. Denomination, is
50 per Cent Exchange. In many of our Colonies they have gone greater Lengths,
and by Floods of provincial Paper Credit or Money, they have made vile Work of
it; so that Exchange with Sterling is at present in Jersies and Pensilvania 60
or 70 per Cent. Advance; Maryland 100 per Cent.; the New England Colonies and
Nova Scotia 400 per Cent: South Carolina, 700 per Cent; and North Carolina
still worse. (Virginia have gone astray the least, being at present only 25 per
Cent. worse than Sterling) thus that salutary Proclamation Act was frustrated:
seeing the late Instruction relating to this Affair, to his Governors is not
regarded, we could not complain if the British Parliament should take
Cognizance of the same. This leads me to the Article of Paper Currency.

Because in common Equity, nothing ought to be a Tender in Trade in any
particular Country, but what is a general Tender all over the commercial World,
Transfers in the Bank of Amsterdam are an Exception, because of their universal
commercial Credit, and their being better than common Currency) the Wisdom of
the British Legislature, have not thought it convenient to make our Paper
Effects; that is Bank, East India and South Sea Transfers; Bank Notes, East
India and South Sea Company Bonds, a legal Tender: Notwithstanding of their
being better than Silver, being at any Time reducable to Silver; so that they
are as Cash bearing Interest (Bank Notes excepted) which Silver Cash does not:
Hence it is that in Exchange for (Silver) Currency they bear a Premium.

I shall, here give some Instances of the bad Effects of Paper Currency made a
legal Tender. The Arbitrary Government of France, after much Damage done to the
Subjects in depreciating their nummary Denominations by recoinages; did A.
1719, to complete their Misery, embrace Mr. Law's Project of a Paper Currency;
Silver was banished by severe Penalties, Paper was made the only legal Tender.
The Operation was; the Nation reduced to the utmost Confusion, Mr. Law and his
Abettor Mr. D'Argenson were disgraced; Silver again introduced as a Currency,
and the only legal Tender.

Baron Gortz about 20 Years ago, had reduced Sweden to extreme Misery, by
imposing Government Notes instead of Specie. Upon the King of Sweden's Death,
the Baron suffered capital Punishment, this being one of the principal Crimes
alleged against him. The Paper Currency was called in; the Silver and Copper
Currency was restored, upon the same footing as before Charles XII. Accession.

We have a very good Instance in one of our own Colonies. Barbados A. 1702
emitted 16,000 l. Bills of Credit on Funds, to be brought in again by a Tax of
3 s. 9 d. on Negroes: At first they passed at a Discount, but no more being
then emitted, and the Time of the coming in being at Hand, they rose again to
near Par. Encouraged by this, they made a large Emission of 30,000 l. Bills on
Land security at 4 per Cent. payable after 5 Years: These Bills immediately
fell to 40 per Cent. below Silver; but by an Order from Home they were all
called in soon, and their Currency became Silver Value as before. Balance of
Trade had not the least Concern here.

A Paper Credit well founded and under good Regulations, and not larger than
what the Silver Specie Currency will bear; has been found to be a very good
Expedient in Business, and it leaves the Silver Species at more Liberty to be
used as Merchandise, and for petty Occasions. In Holland all large Transactions
are in Bank Transfers of Amsterdam, their Credit being better than that of the
Government, and their Bank Money 3 a 5 per Cent. better than the common
Currency. The Use and Credit of the Bank Notes in England we all know, their
Fund being a valuable Depositum, a Call upon Occasion on the Proprietors, and
about Ten Millions Sterling in the Government's Hands; yet their Notes are no
legal Tender. If Paper Credit exceeds a certain Proportion of the concomitant
Silver Currency, its Effects are bad, and ruinous; by its precarious Loss of
Value. The Bank of Venice was originally two Millions of Ducats given in, and
Bills to a limited Sum given out, upon the Security of the same: This Scheme
was so good that their Bank Money became 28 per Cent. better than common
Currency: from this good Success the Government allowed them to issue out more
Bills, only to the Value of 300,000 Ducats; this small Addition brought down
their Bills to 20 per Cent. Advance. N. B. By continued Additions they might
have brought them down to Par, and from thence to a Discount, even so low as
400 per Cent, as is our Case at present.

Our Province Bills from the various Operations of frequent large Emissions,
distant Periods, and Periods postpon'd; are become 400 per Cent. worse than
Sterling, and above 200 per Cent. worse than themselves 25 Years ago.

All well regulated Corporations are restricted, to issue Bills or Notes not
exceeding a certain Value: Thus it is with English Bank Notes, East India and
South Sea Companies Bonds; lest by too large Emissions, they might depreciate
their Notes and Bonds, to the Damage of the Society itself, and Creditors. The
King by an Instruction to his Governor of this Province, limits us to 30,000
l. per Ann. (to be understood Proclamation Money or its Value) for
extraordinary Charges of Government.

The principal Design of a Currency or Medium of Trade, is to avoid the
Inconveniences of Barter: Paper Currency in large Quantities does not answer
this End; because of its Fluctuation, or rather progressive less Value; which
obliges the Merchant at length to return to Barter again, as being safe and
better. In South Carolina, the Quantity of Paper Currency has so depreciated
itself, that all considerable Contracts, are made, not in Province Bills, but
in their Produce Rice. In North Carolina their Produce, they call Specie, is 50
to 100 per Cent. better than their Paper Currency.

Silver is a staple Merchandise, an adequate Pledge, and an universal
commercial Medium. Our Province Bills have no intrinsic Value, and as a
Depositum, are no better than waste Paper; they are no exportable Merchandise,
and receivable no where but in New England, being only an ill contrived
provincial or municipal Medium. Barter is Merchandise (not so staple, and more
bulky and perishing than Silver) exportable, and upon that Account preferable
to Province Bills as a Medium.

In Virginia, Tobacco is their Medium, and answers better than Paper, because
it is an exportable staple Merchandise. Let us suppose, that at any Time it
should become (as are our Bills) not exportable, and that Laws should be made
there from Time to Time, for planting of greater Quantities, to increase their
Medium; it would become in Course such a Drug, that more and more of it would
be given, for a certain Quantity of Silver or any other Goods, and at length be
of no Value; but if their Government being sensible of their Error, should
forbid planting above such a Quantity, their Medium would become good as before.

As to the Quantity of Paper Currency which the Silver Currency will bear,
without depreciating its Denominations; it is only to be learnt by Experience.
In New England we found that A. 1713 there were 194,000 l. in Province Bills at
Par with Silver at 8 s. per Oz. When we began to exceed that Sum, our Paper
began to loose of its Value: Here we ought to have stopped and kept within that
Sum in our future Emissions. New York never exceed 40,000 l. in Province Bills
(at present only about 37,000 l.) and so kept up their Value at 8 s. per Oz.
Silver.

The larger the Paper Currency of any Country, the more it labors, and is
circulated to the greater Disadvantage. The greatest Quantity of Exchequer
Bills in England (never were made a legal Tender but in Taxes) at one Time
extant was A. 1716, being a 4,596,184 l. Debt, much of it contracted in the bad
Administrations of the latter End of Queen Ann's Reign; Notwithstanding of
their being above one Fourth of the Nation's Currency their being receivable in
Taxes and all Treasury Affairs, and bearing Interest 3 per Cent. per Annum;
they began to depreciate, and the Government was obliged to allow the Bank an
Annuity to cancel Two Millions Sterling Value of them, and 3 per Cent. Premium
to circulate, and specify the Remainder while above One Million, and afterward
only 1 per Cent. Premium. Anno 1702 there were extant Two Millions Sterling
Value in Exchequer Notes, the Government allows the Bank 3 per Cent. to
circulate them while above One Million, and 1 per Cent. when not exceeding One
Million. Since that Time, if Exchequer Notes are at any Time used toward
defraying the Charges of Government, they are honestly paid off next Sessions
of Parliament. The last Emission of Exchequer Notes was A 1730, being 510,000
l. toward the Charges of that Year, and were paid off A. 1731, the Year
following.

If Paper Credit upon future Taxes or upon Loan, would answer as a Medium; how
is it that the Governments in Europe, find it so intricate an Affair to raise
Money for public Charges in Time of War,or other extraordinary Occasions? When
attempted by arbitrary Governments, they always tend to the Ruin of the
Subject: The State Bills of France in King Lewis XIV. last War, were sold at 50
or 60 per Cent. Discount. Baron Gorz's State Bills in Sweden were Part of the
Crimes for which he suffered Death.

Upon any extraordinary Emergency or Charge incurred by the Government (we were
by the King's Instruction allowed to emit, not exceeding 30,000 l. Proclamation
Value per Ann.) it may be proper to satisfy it, by public Bills of Credit, to
be received again next Year in Taxes. This is only good Economy, to lay Part
of the extraordinary Charge of a preceding Year, upon the Taxes of the Year
following; they will be as good as Silver Cash, or better, if the Circulation
is encouraged by a 5 per Cent. Premium or advance Allowance in the Treasury. By
this good Management of cancelling the Bills in a Year or two, we kept up their
Credit till A 1713.

To emit large Sums of Paper Money, upon Funds of Taxes payable after many
Years; or upon Loans not to be paid in until after 10, 20, or 45 Years, as are
the last Payments in Maryland, is leaving a heavy Debt of Funds and Loans,
contracted by our own Extravagancies and perverse Humors; as a Burden, to be
discharged by the succeeding Generation. As it is a natural Instinct in Animals
to provide for Posterity, it must be deemed very unnatural and wicked in us,
instead of doing so, to contribute to their future Misery.

So much Paper as is current in a Province, so much really is that Province in
Debt; for the Funds Part, the Public is in Debt; for the Loans Part, private
Persons are in Debt: It is a Contradiction co assert that a Country my grow
rich by (Paper Money) running in Debt? As neither Public nor Private are now
ashamed to continue in Debt, we may say of those Paper-Money Countries, with
Regard to their Mother Country; what is commonly said, and is in Fact true of
many of our Shopkeepers with Regard to the Merchants; if they would be rich
they must run boldly in Debt, and not be ashamed of being dunn'd.

If a private Man's Notes or Bonds are negotiated at a Discount, he is deemed a
Bankrupt capable of paying only -- in the Pound. So it may be said of our
Colonies, with Paper Currencies at a great Discount; and the Discount
increasing daily, they are in a State of lawless Bankrupcy.

Private Credit or Notes on a good solid Foundation, are better than public
Bills; the former cannot, impune, break their Faith; they are under Coercion:
The public is the Dernier resort and in bad Administrations frequently break
their public Faith. Hence, the Credit of a well regulated Commerce or
Corporation, is better than that of the civil Administration; the Bank Money of
Venice is 20 per Cent. of Hamburg 12 per Cent. of Holland 5 per Cent. better
than common Currency.

This private commercial Credit in all polite Nations, is so sacred at present,
that the civil Government stand corrected by it. The Generality of the united
Provinces did A 1693 coin alloy'd Pieces called quaad Schellings at 6 Stivers,
being near 10 per Cent. above their intrinsic Value. The Bank retained their
Integrity, and it again rose to 13 or 15 per Cent. this obliged the Government
to reduce these Schellings to 5 and an Half Stivers their intrinsic Value, and
have continued so ever since, and the Agio of the Bank fell to 3 or 5 per Cent.
as formerly. A 1720, France being in the most dismal Confusion, by their Paper
Currency, their Court was obliged to apply to the Merchants and Bankers for
their Advice, concerning a Method to be used to find out the natural Proportion
between public Bills and Silver Species, and to limit their Paper Effects to a
certain Sum.

A plain Illustration, that Private is better than public Credit, we have
amongst ourselves. Our Merchant's Notes, so called, being well founded, were 11
and an Half per Cent. in December 1737, will be 18 per Cent. in December. 1738, 12
and an Half per Cent. (3 7ths of them then paid off) in December. 1739, 19 and an
Half per Cent. in December. 1740, 26 and an Half per Cent. in December 1741, and 34
per Cent. in December 1742, better than the present Value of our Province Bills
at 27 per Cent.; because they are continually growing better, until they come
to their fixed Value, at which they are to be paid off.

The Scheme for emitting of 60,000 l. Bills of the new Tenor, equal to is
180,000 l of the common New England Bills, by Undertakers or Subscribers,
probably will drop, and therefore requires no Disquisition: Only we may observe
1 st. The Emission is too large, and the Periods too distant. 2 dly. The
Subscribers or Circulators require a good Premium; because if let go, at the
Rate of 27 s. per Oz. Silver, the present Value of our Currency, and it is paid
in again 1 10th yearly, at 20 s. per Oz. Value, allowing for their Profits by
Interest; every 1000 l. new Tenor, that is 3000 l. common Currency, will loose
262 l. 10 s.: If Silver rise higher, as it naturally does upon all large Paper
Emissions, the Loss will be proportionably greater, after the Rate of 150 l for
every Shilling advance upon the Ounce of Silver. 3 dly. If the Assembly our
Legislature, being under no Coercion as private Banks are, should postpone the
Periods of paying the Possessor; the Value of these Bills will further
depreciate very much. 4 thly. The grand Deformity of the Scheme is; that this
Money shall answer all Specialties, past, present, and to come: The like was
never imposed (seeing it is ordered to be printed, it may with Freedom be
canvassed) upon the Subject, by the most arbitrary and iniquitous Governments
in the World; particularly it is equivalent to a Bill of Attainder, against
every one of the Committee or Subscribers of the Merchant's Notes.

The Uncertainty and Confusion of Paper Currency in our several Colonies, and
in the same Colony at different Times; might be illustrated by the History of
the various Paper Currencies of our Colonies; but to avoid Prolixity* we shall
only observe, That Massachusetts Bay in New England led the Way, by an Act of
Assembly in December. 1690, emitting a small Sum in Province Bills or Debentures,
to satisfy some extraordinary Charges incurred by the expensive and fruitless
Expedition to Canada that Year; afterward more were issued toward the Charges
of the succeeding Years: But were no legal Tender, only receivable for Taxes,
and cancelled after a Year or two: Thus they kept up their Credit, and were at
Par with Silver until A. 1713: From that Time, by Funds and Loans in large Sums
they lost their Credit, and are at present 27 s. the Ounce of Silver.

Barbados followed our Example A. 1702, and by a large Emission upon Loan they
run into Confusion; but by an Order from England they were cancelled, and the
Island came immediately to rights again. South Carolina upon their Expedition
against St. Augustine, A. 1702, began to issue Paper Money; by their subsequent
large Emissions on Funds and Loans, and by their vile Breach of public Faith
in Postponings, have arrived to 42 s. 6 d. per Oz. Connecticut in New England,
their first Emission was A. 1709. Rhode Island in New England, came into it A.
1710, as did New Hampshire in New England, about the same Time; they are all
over New England 27 s. per Oz. Silver. New-York's first Emission was A. 1734,
as their present Currency does not exceed 37,000 l., Silver with them is only 8
s. or 8 s. 6 d. per Oz. Jersey's Bills are at the same Price. Pensylvania begun
A. 1723, but do not exceed 69,000 l. and are at 8 s. 6 d to 9 s. per Oz of
Silver. Maryland's first Emission A. 1754, was of 90,000 l. at long Periods,
and are at 10 s. to 11 s. per Oz of Silver.

A Glut of this Provincial confused Paper Currency, by frequent and large
Emissions, did naturally make it a Drug, and cheaper than Silver the general
Standard of Merchandise: So that the Merchant was obliged to advance upon his
Goods, bought for Silver, and sold for this Paper; and in Consequence the
Consumer of them obliged to raise the Price of his Labor and Country Produe,
paid in Paper.

When Paper Money is in a continued Course of depreciating, all Debts and other
Contracts are paid in a less Value than they are contracted for; which is an
unjust but natural Operation of this false Medium; the generous foreign
Adventurer or Merchant, and consequently Trade in its genuine Sense, is hurt;
the Gainers are the Shopkeepers and Merchant Hucksters, who have a long Credit
from their Merchant, and abuse this Credit.

Large Emissions of Paper Currency, have encouraged the unwary Merchant at Home
to send large Quantities of Goods, supposing our Money to be good: And
therefore has a natural Tendency to make the Balance of Trade against us, by
increasing our Imports

A large Emission of public Paper Credit on Loan, to be paid at a distant
Period or long Credit; gives the desperate and unthinking Borrowers or
Subscribers, an Opportunity of ruining themselves, by taking up this Money and
spending it extravagantly: Industry and Frugality (the only Means of becoming
rich) are turned aside* In Place of being industrious, our young Men called
Gentlemen, follow no other Business but Drinking and G^ming; many in Quality of
Shopkeepers become (...) Tradesmen of all Occupations in Boston, loi^er away
much of their Time; the Husbandmen in the Country spend many idle Days in their
little Rum Taverns. Frugality is superseeded by Prodigality and Extravagance,
as is too aparent in our fine Houses and Furniture, Chaises and other
Equipages, Velvets and Scarlets, rich Silks and Laces, etc. The Parliament of
Bretagne in France, in their Remonstrance to the Court of France, A. 1719, say,
That many of their Families are ruined by Paper Money, it gives an unbounded
Loose to Excess in Apparel and other Extravagancies This is the natural
Consequence of large Quantities of Paper Credit in all Countries.

These Extravagancies the Consequencies of our Paper Currency, hurt us as to
the Balance of Trade in both Respects: They encourage a Consumption of foreign
Commodities, that is, they increase our Imports; instead of employing our Paper
Credit to procure Exports, and to set up Manufactures and other Improvements;
it is expended in fine Houses, Equipages, and Apparel, or to pay Debts
contracted by a long Credit: The Hands employed in fitting out these
Extravagancies, would have been more profitably employed, about Things for
Exports, or in manufacturing such Things, as would have lessened our Imports.

This leads us, to an Argument much used by some, in Favor of Paper Credit*
viz. The fine Figure Boston now makes, in Houses, Equipages, etc. is owing to
it. This is Truth, but not to be boasted of, no Man is the richer for these
Extravagancies, he thereby starves his Trade, and disappoints his Merchants and
other Creditors: We are not to judge by Appearances only; Boston never was more
extravagant and gay than at present, but never were more in Debt, never more
incapable and backward in paying Debts. From the repeated large Emissions of
Paper Credit, the Value of our nummary Denominations did continually become
less, and the Merchants at Home were from Time to Time paid a less Value than
they contracted for; thus, for a Debt contracted 25 Years ago, he now receives
only 7 s. in the Pound, that is the Debtor (defrauds) retains 13 s. in the
Pound of the Merchant's Money, and with this he builds fine Houses, makes
Purchases, etc.: Let us not boast of these Things, lest it may be said of our
Posterity, and of those who are to enjoy them: Happy is the Child whose Father
(...) to the Devil

Seeing then a Creditor paid in these depreciating Denominations, does not
receive the Value he contracted for: is it possible that any Man (if in his
right Senses) of a monied Estate, that is, in Cash, or out upon Bond or any
other kind of Debt, can desire such a Moth of a Currency. Every Act for
Emissions of large Sums of Paper Credit, unless upon a solid Fund, or to be
cancelled in a Year or two by Taxes; may properly be called An Act for the
Relief of insolvent Debtors; or rather, An Act to encourage and enable Debtors
to defraud their Creditors, by com^^unding at -- Shillings in the Pound, and
every Creditor looses thereby a certain Portion of his Estate. This is one of
the most pernicious Operations of this Paper Credit, viz. That all who have the
Art and Assurance of running in Debt, and postponing Payments from Time to
Time, are in a certain Way of getting an Estate; to the Damage, or Ruin of
their Creditors and Benefactors

In all Countries where there have been several sorts of Currencies at a Time;
the basest only remains for common Currency: In Holland, quaad Schellings are
now their common Currency. In our Leeward-Islands are two Currencies* viz
Silver and Gold, upon unequal footing; Silver being upon the best footing is
shipped off, Gold remains; and in changing of Gold for Silver, there is an
Advance upon the Silver. Where there have been good and bad Currencies ^n the
same Place; all the good, if (...) as is Silver and Gold; if not Merchandise,
but upon a fixed Foundation as to Value and Period of Specification or Payment,
they are hoarded up, because daily growing better as these Periods approach; as
is the Case of our Merchant's Notes.

We have no Reason to fear Want of a Medium, if the Grievance of public Paper
Credit were gradually removed. Trade will find its own natural proper Medium,
viz. Silver and Gold: They are imported here from Time to Time; when we have no
other Cash, the Merchant must retain some of it to serve as Cash; Cash is a
Merchant's Tool or Instrument of Trade, by which he carries on his Trade and
Business; and therefore will require no Laws, to hinder its Exportation.

Our Government of Massachusetts Bay in New England, from the Inconveniences,
in their own Experience, and from the notorious bad Consequences of the like
Practices in other Colonies; are now beginning to reform this Error of a vague
Paper Currency, by reducing it to a certain Silver Standard and Fund. Upon this
Occasion I beg Leave to observe; that in our Bills of the new Tenor, if Gold
had been put at 5 l. (instead of 4 l. 18 s.) per Oz. it would have been nearer
at Par with Silver at 6 s. 8 d. per Oz.; and the Gold Penny-weight, being thus
at 5 s, would have been without a Fraction, as is the Silver Penny-weight at 4
d. The Leeward Islands and New York, have erred on the other Side, viz. Silver
at 8 s. per Oz., and a Pistole at 28 s.

Some harsh sounding Words, are not designed as a Reflection upon this Country
in general (the Country is not without its Merit, and their People in their
natural Genius do excel) the Errors of all Countries in bad Administrations,
are to be imputed, to the Iniquity of Administration, but not to the People in
general.

There has lately appeared here in print a small Piece ( Some Observations,
etc.) in Favor of a Paper Currency: But unluckily for the Author and his
Cause, most of his Arguments, when cleared of unnatural Encumbrances, recoil
upon himself, and they point out the many Inconveniences which attend a large
public Paper Credit. As it seems designed for the Vulgar great and small;
notwithstanding, what I have already related, is a full Answer to the whole; I
must by a closer Application, retort his Arguments. I shall forbear any idle
Criticism upon his Calculations, Figures, and technical commercial Words, as
being out of the Question. Here I cannot but observe, that in all his spacious
Calculations, he is obliged to make Use of Silver at a certain Value, and
receivable at certain Periods, as a Basis; neglecting his darling Paper
Currency's Uncertainties, as not qualified for a proper Foundation.

He introduces these Words, Balance of Trade, upon all Occasions, with no true
Meaning and Application.

Balance of Trade is Cash (Silver and Gold) imported to, or exported from a
Country, according as the general Exports or Imports of Merchandise exceed one
the other. The Silver and Gold which we send to England, are no Part of the
Balance of Trade against us, being truly, as Merchandise only. England
sometimes exports Two Millions Sterling Value of Silver and Gold per Ann. to
Holland, East Indies, etc. by way of Merchandise; the Balance of Trade
continuing in Favor of England notwithstanding. Balance of Trade is also
against a Country, not only when they export their Medium, but also when the
Country runs in Debt, by expending in fine Houses, Apparel, etc that which
ought to have purchased Exports; this is our present Case.

The whole of his Book may be summed up in this Sentence, The sinking Value of
our Bills is from and in Proportion to the Balance of Trade being against us.
Is it possible that a Country should continue to trade, or be capable of
trading, when by the Balance of Trade being against them, should merely upon
that Account in 25 Years Time, loose two Thirds of their Substance, as our
Bills have lost above two Thirds of their Value. In any Country if the Balance
of Trade, is very much against them for a Series of Years; their Merchants
naturally become Bankrupts, to the Damage of their foreign Creditors; the
Country looses its Credit, and is no more a Place of Trade. Paper Money cannot
satisfy a Balance of Trade, it is not exportable or to be negotiated abroad.

If we find that in all our Colonies where is no Paper Credit, that, the Value
of their nummary Denominations, continues the same; and in all Colonies where
Paper Currencies has prevailed, their Denominations have depreciated; Hand in
Hand with their repeated Paper Emissions, ought we to have Recourse to any
other Conceit (as Balance of Trade) for its Cause, but only to the Operation
of these Bills, would he not be reckoned a wrong Head, who should asign any
other Regulator of the Tides but the Moon, seeing at all Times and every where
they vary pari passu, Barbados h^s had its Visicitudes of good and bad Crops;
their Planters sometimes rich, sometimes much in Debt: But having no Paper
Credit, their nummary Denominations are constantly of the same Value.
Pensylvania (I mean the three upper Counties) has ever been in a progressive
growing Condition: Their nummary Denominations continue of the same fixed (
Proclamation 6 s 10 d. halfpenny per Oz) Value; until their Emissions and
Re-emissions of Paper Money A. 1723, 1724, 1726, and 1729, raised Silver to 9
s. per Oz., though at present their whole Paper Currency does not exceed 69,000
l. Maryland the last of our Colonies, that has fallen into this Expedient of
Debtors cheating their Creditors (a Debt of 100 Weight of Tobacco, 10 s.
Denomination before, is now paid by 10 s. Denomination of this Paper, which
purchases only, and consequently is worth no more that 50 Weight of Tobacco) A.
1734 they emitted 90 000 l. on a Silver, or Proclamation Bottom; but the
Emission being too large, and the Payments to the Possessors at too distant
Periods (15, 30, and 45 Years) not being receivable in the Proprietors
Quit-Rents, nor in Taxes, and being made a legal Tender; Exchange rose directly
from 33 to 100 per Cent. Where the natural Causes of this Rise are so plain, is
it reasonable to introduce some chimaerical invisible Balance of Trade,
opperating so suddenly and so violently, while their Trade (Imports and
Exports) in Appearance is still the same. In New England, by unlucky incident,
in the Fall A. 1733 Massachusetts Bay emitted 70,000 l. Rhode Island 104 000
l., Connecticut 50,000 l.: The Operation of these Emissions was exactly the
same; Exchange rose from 275 to 440 per Cent. Imports exceeding the Exports in
Trade, is therefore not the true adequate Cause of the Minoration of the Value
of our nummary Denominations. In South Carolina where the Paper Credit is the
lowest, 42 s. 6 d. per Oz Silver; their Rice and Deer-Skins or Exports are of
much greater Value than their Imports, being now fully stockt with Negroes.

He says, That Province Bills ought to be emitted from Time to Time, and
postponed; until the Quantity exceeds the Demand. This is impracticable in the
Nature of the Currency: By Experience we find, that the more Emissions from
Time to Time, the Value of these Bills is the less, and consequently the
greater Quantity of them is required (that is the Demand is the greater) to
carry on the same Business. A 1713, when our Bills began to depreciate, there
was current in all New England 194,000 l. in public Bills of Bredit, at 8 s.
per Oz. (the Value at that Time) is 485,000 Ounces Silver Value, besides a
considerable concomitant Silver Currency: Our Paper Currency at present
(Merchant's Notes not included) is about 580,000 l. (triple the former) at 27
s. per Oz. Silver Value, is only 429,629 Oz. without any concomitant Silver
Currency; so that our real Medium of Trade or Currency is considerably less at
present, than it was A. 1713; notwithstanding the emitted large Sums, of this
imaginary fallacious nominal Currency. This is the certain and constant
Operation of a public Paper Currency in large Quantities, over all our
Colonies; that is, when it exceeds a certain Proportion; the more that is
emitted the more it depreciates, and by continued multiplied Emissions, at
length, Province Bills may become in Value equal to Waste Paper.

He says, A 20 s. Bill is the natural Pound of New England. This ought to be
understood no otherways, than as a Banter upon our public Bills, because they
are continually fluctuating; and may be compared to the Inscription, semper
eadem upon a Vane in Camb^^dige, in the Time of the Administration latter End
of Queen Ann's Reign. Or in a more familiar Comparison, of the Loads of Hay
brought to Boston, which originally were designed and understood to be 20 Hund.
With. or a Tun, at present if a Country Man's Load is reduced to a Standard
Weight, and found to be only 12 Hund. With.; would it satisfy the Buyer of this
Load or Tun of Hay, the Country Man's saying, it is all right, this is my
natural Tun or Load: This is what our Author in another Place says, that every
Man may have his own natural Pound: Which cannot possibly be, until Society is
dissolved.

' Silver falling in infinitum, and Bills growing better in infinitum' This is
a Delirium, without any Connection or Meaning; as are sundry other Passages in
tha^ Book, which I do not understand, and therefore cannot presume to explain.

' The Balance of Debt against us, will fall our Bills ad infinitum.' I
suppose he means not below the Value of Waste Paper. Where is then the Value of
these Bills? Is it not a Burlesque upon us, to call a 20 Shilling Bill not
fixed, but left free to its Course in the Marker, and at length become equal to
Nothing; New England's natural Pound Value? Are those natural Pounds in any
Country, which in the Space of 25 Years have fluctuated or rather sunk from 50
per Cent. Exchange to 400 per Cent, and may still sink in infinitum?

What he calls Buying with our Bills Silver at a Market Price; is, in a
mercantile Phrase, discounting our Bills at a Market Price, with Silver, which
is the fixed universal commercial Medium; thus he endeavors to persuade us,
that our Bills are of a fixed Value, and that Silver fluctuates; after this
same Manner, as if aboard of a coasting Vessel under Sail or fluctuating, he
should endeavor to persuade Passengers, that the Ship stands still, and the
Land fluctuates or alters: He might perhaps from Appearances persuade one who
had not the right Use of his Reason. To say this Bill shall be in Value equal
to Money without fixing any standard Value, is only saying, Valeat quantum
valera potest. Qui vult decipi, decipiatur

Of the same Nature is his Assertion, That when Goods rise or fall in our
Market, the Change must be in our Goods, but not in Paper Credit. Whereas in
Fact Goods and Produce in this Place, communibus annis, have nearly retained
the same Price (or rather of late are cheaper) for many Years, with Regard to
Silver the universal commercial Medium: That is, the same Quantity of Silver
will buy the same Quantity of Cloth, Woollens and Linnens of any particular
Sort, and build the same Tunnage of Vessels (when Silver was at 8 s. per Oz
Ships from 200 to 300 Tun to the Builder, cost about 4 l per Tun, and 10 s. for
Extras as was the Custom at that Time; at present 15 l. per Tun, Extras
included.) Labor is rather cheaper, a Ship-Carpenter when Silver was 8 s., had
5 s. a Day, or 5 8ths of an Oz; at present he has only 12 s. a Day, which is
not Half an Oz. at 27 s. per Oz

The Author is a Stranger to the Affairs of Exchange-Alley in London. He
compares the continued great Falls of our Province Bills from 50 to 400 per
Cent. (I suppose he means the Bubles A 1720) to the Changes in the Stocks
negotiated there, which is only a small Fluctuation, proceeding not from
Balance of Trade, or Variations in nummary Denominations, or Addition of more
Stock on the same Fund; but from some St^ck jabbing little Arts or Tricks. He
is not acquainted with the Nature of East India Bonds: He says they are not fit
for a Market, because they promise Money only at a distant Time, and a supposed
Interest of 6 per Cent. Whereas the Possessor or Bond-Holder may demand at
Pleasure (or be allowed in any of their Sales as ready Money) but the
East India Company cannot oblige the Bond-Holder to quit (have it discharged)
his Bond, but at half Years Notice. Hence it is, that they bear an Interest
lower than the common Interest (3 or 3 and an Half per Cent.) and sell for a
Premium; because they are as Cash bearing Interest, which Silver Cash does not.

' Paper Money not being emitted in Quantities, is the Reason why the natural
Interest amongst us rises.' This unnatural Medium in Quantities, has a quite
different Operation; from that of the natural Medium Silver in Plenty, which
effectually lowers the Interest of Money. The Quantity of Paper Credit sinks
the Value of the Principal, and the Lender to save himself, is obliged to lay
the growing Loss of the Principal, upon the Interest. Rhode Island who have
much exceeded us in their Emissions, have for some Time rose their Rate of
Interest to 10 or 12 per Cent and give this very Reason for so doing.

' No Man can say, but that his Money will now bring him in, as much Interest
as ever.' The Matter of Fact is, 100 l. in Province Bills 25 Years ago, brought
in 15 Oz. of Silver per Ann.; the same 100^ l, at present does not bring in 5
Oz, is 5 equal to 15, or 1 to 3.

His tacit Consent of the Multitude to the Schemes of Paper Money; is a weak
Argument in its Favor. I remember some Years ago, when we had got into the
Humor of Lotteries: Notwithstanding the Discount upon the benefit Tickets for
Charges, and other great Frauds ( v. g. in one of the First of these Lotteries,
a House was set at 1600 l, the Proprietors of this benefit Ticket, after this
House had been upon Sale many Months, could get no more than 100^ (for it,
which is a Discount of 37 per Cent.) yet without Imputation of Knavery on the
one Side, or Folly on the other; People did continue in subsequent Lotteries to
sink their Substance, and would have continued longer in the same Manner; if
the Wisdom of our Legislature had not put a Stop to it.

He alleges that long Credit (our great Grievance) is from the Scarcity of
Paper Money. No. It is from too great Imports, encouraged by large Emissions.
The Merchant or Factor cannot dispose of so much, at a reasonable ready-money
Price, and therefore, that their Goods may not lay long upon Hand, are obliged
to give a long Credit.

I cannot avoid, by way of Digression, to make some Remarks on long Credit. It
makes the Unthinking buy profusely. Whereas ready Money, or a short Credit,
would not allow a Man to buy and spend more, than his present Earning could
afford, consequently he would live frugally, and keep clear of Debt: Foreign
Commodities would not be imported in such Quantities, because they could not be
consumed faster than our Earnings (our Returns) would admit of; and would
answer the Intention of sumptuary Laws, which our stated Dependence on a
trading Mother Country cannot allow of. Ready Money or a short Credit, makes a
quick Circulation; the quicker the Circulation, the less Quantity of a Currency
or Medium is required to carry on any Trade and Business. This would be an
effectual Method, and equivalent to enlarging our Currency.

He alleges also, that Shop Notes (another great Grievance) were introduced
from the Scarcity of Paper Currency. This is ill judged. Because the Merchant
to procure a greater Advantage upon his Goods, than if sold for Cash;
contracted with the Shopkeeper, to take it out in his Way by Tradesmen's
Notes: The Shopkeeper by imposing upon the Tradesmen and Laborers, Possessors
of these Notes, found their Profit in it; this made the Shop keepers choose to
buy, to be drawn out in Notes. The Factor also found his Advantage in it, by
dazzling his Employer with a large Account of Sales, and by increasing his
Commissions. This is become an Iniquity as it were by compact.

He encourages the Rhode Islanders to more Emissions of Bills, ' And they will
find their Account in it, if they go on to emit a sufficient Quantity of
Bills.' He advises this Province to follow their Example, in emitting a great
Quantity before it be too late. He does not consider that if this Province were
to emit a Quantity of Bills in proportion to what Rhode Island have emitted, (
Massachusetts Bay Colony being to that of Rhode Island nearly as 6 is to 1) they
would be so depreciated by their Quantity, as not to answer the End of a
Currency, and oblige us to a Truck Trade; as in North Carolina, where their
Truck called Specie, passes at a great Advance above their Province Bills; and
in South Carolina, by reason of their large Emissions, all considerable
Contracts are made in their Produce Rice, not in Bills. A Man of a landed
Estate persuades some Merchants his Neighbors and and Friends to accept his
Notes for Goods and other Necessaries payable after 10 or 20 Years, and to
circulate them all that Time without any Premium: And this Man a trading with
these Goods to his own private Profit. It is scarce credible that there could
be such Infatuation on the one Side, and such bare faced Imposition on the
Other. This is the very Case between this Province and Rhode Island. It is in
vain to think, that we may follow their Example; it is impracticable so to
multiply Bills to our Advantage, unless we could persuade (it is Folly to
imagine it) all our Continent Plantations, to circulate them; Rhode Island
bears no greater a Proportion to this Province, than this Province does to all
our other Colonies upon this Continent.

He is an inexorable Enemy to Silver, for the following Reasons, as he says.

Silver has been and may be greatly depreciated by the Excess of its Quantity.
Silver is of so universal Demand all over the World; that the continued
Additions to it is like throwing of Water into the Ocean, making no sensible
Alteration: But a continued Emission of any peculiar provincial Paper Money,
above a certain Sum, is like continued Pourings of Liquor into a Cask, which is
soon full, runs over, and the Additions are lost. In Fact, the computative or
nummary Denominations, instead of containing more Silver, as it might be
imagined from its Excess, do contain considerably less, v. g in England instead
of 12 Oz to a Pound Sterling, as it was when Silver was scarce, it is at
present only 4 Oz when Silver abounds: But, as we have already proved, this
proceeds from none of the Qualities of Silver; it is merely from the Iniquity
of civil Administrations. The Silver Mines of Potsio are said to have been
first discovered A. 1545, the nummary Denominations, as to Quantity of Silver,
varied much before that Time, and since Anno 1552 (prior to this our Import of
Silver was inconsiderable) in England they have altered or varied only Two, in
Eighty Eight.

Bills are a Commodity, not as a Pledge given but as Value paid, and therefore
preferable to Silver. Is it not more natural to say, Silver is as a certain
Value paid, as a Pledge, and as Returns or Merchandise; therefore it is
preferable to public Bills, which are only as a precarious Value paid, but no
Pledge, and no Returns or Merchandise.

Bills are less bulky and more handy than Silver. Is a Shop-keeper's (whose
Notes are already at a great Discount) promisary Note of Hand, better than a
Bag of Silver.

Notes on a fixed real Fund, are worse than Notes that have no such Fund;
because the former cannot grow better beyond that fixed Standard: But the
others being bad, may grow better in infinitum. This is ludicrous. I can answer
only by a like Story: A certain Quack in the Cure of a sick Person, being told
that by his Management, the Patient did grow worse and worse: So much the
better, answered the Quack, because when Things are come to the worst, then
they will mend. The Truth of the Case is, the first can be no worse, than the
just Discount for the Distance of the Time of Payment; but the Others may grow
worse and worse, in infinitum.

If we make Bills promising Silver or any Thing of a certain Value, it will
occasion their being hoarded up. It will be so, where there are also current
Bills, promising a precarious or no Value; because such will be hoarded up by
no Body, but be gladly parted with, even at a Discount, and Discount upon
Discount, until we discount near the whole, that is until they are of no
further Currency or Value: Accordingly in this Province, we are now arrived to
a Discount of more than two Thirds of what these Bills were first emitted for.
That a Bill without Limitation of Value or Period, and continually growing
worse, should be preferable to a Bill with the Advantage of Period, and Value
certain, and yearly meliorating, as are Bills on a fixed Silver Bottom; is a
strange Paradox. Some keep up the Massachusetts Bills and pass away the
Rhode Island Bills; are the Rhode Island Bills therefore better than the
Massachusetts? Amongst our present public Bills, what are tore and defaced, or
suspectted, are passed away first; are they therefore a better Currency, than a
good fair Bill?

There ought to be no Silver Fund for Bills, because it will rise the Price of
Silver, to make good this Fund. That is, all our Banks in Europe are ill
founded, both Public and Private; because they are all upon a Silver Bottom.

To pay Contracts according to a fixed Weight of Silver; would have an
unavoidable Tendency to raise the Price of it. It does not happen so in Europe,
where Silver is their only legal Tender. In New England, paying of Contracts in
Province Bills, does not rise the Price of them.

Our Bills are better than Silver, because they are by our Acts of Assembly a
Tender, and consequently must pass: Silver passes only by Consent, which may be
withdrawn. That is, a forced provincial Tender, passable no where else, is
better than a natural, universal, and legal ( Proclamation Act) Tender, from
which no trading Consent ever was or will be withdrawn: And 27 s. in Bills the
present Value of One Ounce of Silver, is better than 27 s. which was the Value
of Three Ounces and an Half Silver Twenty Five Years ago; or in plain Words,
One is more than Three.

The following Clauses in his Book I cannot understand, viz. Province Bills may
be fixed to an assigned Interest, and so be made a just Measure or Standard of
the Value of all Things bought or sold, which Silver cannot be. -- When Silver
falls the Government may stop it at any fixed Rate, and make that the Silver
Pound or legal Tender. Why not also when Silver rises if it were practicable.
-- Lowering the Price of Silver in England, where the nummary Denomination
continues of the same Weight in our Coin, it is a Contradiction in itself. --
By Means of a Paper Currency, to introduce Silver to pass current.

He concludes thus. That he might now show, how the Bills of the old Tenor,
might be qualified, for the true Ends and Uses thereof; and the like of private
Notes of the same Nature, but having exceeded the Bounds of a Letter, he must
forbear. Cui bono is the whole, since he concludes without entering upon the
main and only Affair?

Most political Affairs have some Resemblance, to natural oscillatory Motions,
when got to their Extent on the one Side; they must return gradually and in the
same Path to the other Side. Large Emissions of a bad Currency, long Credit,
Insensibility of Discredit, Idleness, Extravigance, and Intemprance, have
carried us to the Extent of bad Circumstances: We must return by gradually
cancelling our bad Medium, by shortning our Credit, by being more upon the
Punctos of Honor and Honesty, by being more industrious, by being more Frugal,
and by abandoning the plentiful Use of Rum, that execrable Bane of all our
Plantations, and perniciously recommended by some of our Practitioners in
Physic, as more wholesome than Wine.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 4. Line 20. for for, read or. p. 11. l. 25. for 1734 r. 1714. do. l. 31.
f. 1754. r. 1734. do. l. 38. f. Produe r. Produce. p. 19. l. 25. f. 1000 r.
100. do. l. 35. f. 100 l. r. 1000 l. p. 20. l. 12. f. stated r. State of. p.
21. l. 35. f. Potsio, r. Potosi.


