Mr. Dexter's Century Sermon, ON THE Public Thanksgiving November 23. 1738.

Our Fathers GOD, the HOPE of Posterity.

Some serious Thoughts ON THE Foundation, Rise and Growth Of the Settlements IN
NEW ENGLAND; With a View to the Edification of the Present, and the
Instruction, and Admonition of Future Generations. A DISCOURSE Delivered at
Dedham, on the Day of Public Thanksgiving, Nov. 23. 1738. Upon the Conclusion
of the first CENTURY, since a Church of CHRIST was Gathered in that Place.

By Samuel Dexter, V.D.M.

Psalm cvii. 8. -- O that Men would Praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for
his wonderful Works to the Children of Men!

Deuteronomy. vi. 7. -- And thou shall teach them diligently to thy Children, etc.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queenstreet over
against the Prison, 1738.

TO The Beloved People of my Charge.
Much Respected Friends,
THE ensuing Discourse, as it was prepared and delivered at the more immediate
Instance of some of you, -- so now it sees the Light by the Press, upon the
urgent Desire of many more; and it is hoped may prove of real Advantage to you,
and to your Children, not only for your Information in some Things worthy to be
remembered, but also, and more especially, in quickening a holy Emulation and
commendable Zeal in following the Example of our VENERABLE FORE FATHERS in
every Thing that was Virtuous, Praise worthy, and of good Report in them.

Some (though not many) Alterations have been made in transcribing for the Press,
and a few short Additions, which I hope, will by no Means, balk your
Expectations, but minister to your Edification.

BRETHREN, My Heart's Desire, and earnest Prayer for you and yours is, that
you may be saved -- O that you may be an Honor to the Religion which you
profess, by walking worthy of the Lord unto all well pleasing, in every
Station, Relation, and Condition of Life, in the vigorous exercise of all
Christian Graces, and in the due and faithful Discharge of all Christian Duties
toward God and Men, maintaining the Unity of the Spirit in the Bonds of Peace,
which (blessed be GOD) we now enjoy, after a long dark Night of Trouble and
Confusion.

I entreat you to remember your unworthy Pastor and his Family, in your solemn
Addresses to GOD, when nearest the Throne. You know what Breaches a Sovereign
and Holy GOD has made upon us -- Pray for the Remnant that are left, that they
may live in GOD's Sight, and prove an instructed and godly Seed.

That we may all have the exceeding great Joy to see our Children walking in
the Truth; -- and in order thereto, that we may have the Wisdom and the Grace
to walk in our Houses with a perfect Heart, and in a perfect Way, and carefully
to transmit that holy Religion, which was the Beauty and Glory of our
Forefathers pure and undefiled to our Posterity.

And that we together, being each others Joy and Crown, may be received to the
Rewards of Grace in the Kingdom of our Father; are (I hope) the sincere and
hearty Wishes of, DEARLY BELOVED,

Your affectionate Pastor, and Servant for JESUS Sake, Samuel Dexter.
Dedham, December 23d. 1738.
Our Fathers GOD, the HOPE of Posterity.
PSALM LXXVIII. from Ver. 1 -- 8. 1 Give Ear, O my People, to my Law: Incline
your Ears to the Words of my Mouth.

2 I will open my Mouth in a Parable: I will utter dark Sayings of old.

3 Which we have heard, and known, and our Fathers have told us.

4 We will not hide them from iheir Children, showing to the Generation to
come, the Praises of the Lord: And his Strength, and his wonderful Works that
he has done.

5 For he established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel:
which he commanded our Fathers, that they should make them known to their
Children.

6 That the Generations to come might know them, even the Children which should
be born: Who should arise and declare them to their Children.

7 That they might set their Hope in God, and not forget the Works of God, but
keep his Commandments.

8 And might not be as their Fathers, a stubborn and rebellious Generation: A
Generation that set not their Heart aright, and whose Spirit was not steadfast
with God.


MY BRETHREN,
WE are Now, through the Sparing, Upholding, and Supplying Mercy of our God,
arrived to the Expiration of our FIRST CENTURY, since, the glorious Head of the
Church, has had a Church in this Place.

And seeing that our Anniversary Solemnity of THANKSGIVING, happens near upon
the Conclusion of such a Period; I hope that it may prove both acceptable and
profitable, to essay some religious Improvement of both in a Discourse from the
Words now read.

You may not expect a large and particular Account of our Foundation, Rise, and
Growth; for to do this, would be to give you a History, more proper for your
Entertainment at other Times, than such as are consecrated to God's solemn
Worship, and for other Places than from the Pulpit.

Neither will my Acquaintance either by private Records, or particular
traditional Accounts, with the special Circumstances of the Original and
Progress of this TOWN and CHURCH, furnish me with Matter for such an Undertaking

Nothing further therefore than some brief Hints shall be attempted; by all
which I Desire and Hope, that GOD may have the Glory of His Wisdom, Power,
Goodness, and Faithfulness, in what He has done for Us; in raising from small
Beginnings such Enlargements as at this Day: In appearing for us in our Mount
of Difficulty; In supplying us so bountifully all along from the rich Treasures
of his Goodness: And in bestowing so many valuable and munificent Favors upon
us, (...) and our Fathers have experienced in so long a Course.

And more especially for his renewed Mercies in the last Year; upon which
Account, to celebrate God's Praises, we are in a more particular Manner, called
together this Day.

I would also have this special View in the whole, to inform and instruct our
Children, the Generation of our Hopes; and to raise in their Minds, s^^^^ble
Dispositions of Piety, and Resolutions of Godliness, to honor the God of their
Fathers, and to cleave to him with full Purpose of Heart, who did such great
Things for our Forefathers, and therein also, for us and them; that with Souls
full of Love and Zeal and Gratitude, they may say and resolve, He is our God,
and we will praise him; he was our Fathers God, and we will exalt him: This God
shall be our God for ever and ever; we will set our Hope in him, and not forget
his Works, but keep his Commandments

The Foundation of our Discourse in the several Verses, now read, is so large
and copious that the Time will little more than allow me to divide the Text
into it is several obvious Branches; to collect the plain and evident Doctrines
therein contained, and to draw the natural and necessary Uses to be made
therefrom; which I shall attempt (by divine Help) in as familiar and concise a
Method, as I can: And therefore in the Words we may observe,

I. A general and pathetical Call given to the People of God, to hearken to his
Law, his Will and his Word. And

II. The Reasons given to urge the People's Duty upon them, in attending to the
Instructions, that were to be given to them in God's Name.

We are to observe,

I. A general and pathetical Call given to the People of God, to hearken to his
Law, his Will and his Word. Give Ear O my People to my Law, incline your Ears
to the Words of my Mouth.

This Psalm of which our Text is a Part, is Historical, Mr. Henry.
it is a Narrative of the great Mercies which God had bestowed upon Israel; the
great Sins with which they had provoked him, and the many Tokens of divine
Displeasure which they had been under therefore.

In the foregoing Psalm, the holy Prophet had been relating God's Wonders of
old, for his own Encouragement in a difficult Time. In this he resumes the
Subject for the Edification of the Church, and enlarges much upon it; showing
not only how good God had been to them, which was an Earnest of further
finishing Mercy; but how basely they had carried themselves to God, which
justified him in correcting them, as he did at this Time, and forbad all their
Complaints.

Our Text is a Preface to this Piece of Church History, commanding the
Attention of the then present Age, and recommending it to the Study of the
Generations to come.

And in the Front of this Preface, the holy Psalmist demands Attention to what
he was about to deliver. The People of God are called upon to hearken to God's
Law, his Will and Word: Give Ear, O my People, to my Law. Some make these the
Psalmist's Words; David as a King, or Asaph in his Name, as his Secratary of
State, or Scribe to the sweet Singer of Israel, here calls upon the People as
his People, committed to his Charge, to give Ear to his Law: He calls his
Instructions his Law or Edict. Such was their commanding Force in themselves;
every good Truth received in the Light and Love of it, will have the Power of a
Law upon the Conscience.

From this Example of the royal Psalmist we may note; That those that are in
civil Authority, would do well, as far as is consistent with that Liberty in
which Christ has made us free, to interpose their Power for the Edification of
the People of God. Or the Psalmist being a Prophet speaks as God's Mouth, and
so calls them his People, and demands Subjection to what was said, as to a Law.
Let him that has an Ear, thus hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches

Hence we may observe this Note of DOCTRINE, viz.

That the Ministers of Christ ought in his Name to call upon the People of God,
committed to their Charge, to hearken to his Law, his Will and his Word. God's
Law is his Will, revealed in his Word; to this God's People ought to hearken;
that is, to submit to the Power and Authority of it, and to yield a cheerful
Obedience to it. And to this Exercise of Godliness, the Ministers of Christ
ought to quicken and stir up the People of God under their Care and Watch: To
this we are directed by the Example in our Text; for what was written before
Time was written for our Instruction and Admonition: The Writings of the Old
and New Testament were given by Inspiration of God, and that for our Learning;
For they are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, and
Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto every good Work. And agreeably says the Apostle James 5.10.
Take my Brethren, the Prophets who have spoken in the Name of the Lord, for an
Example: And this we should do, not only in their Sufferings, and in their
Patience, but also in their holy Living, their examplary Conversation, and
imitable Services to the People of God, in the fulfillment of their Commission.
We should be Followers of them, wherein they have been Examples of the Things
which are Virtuous and Praise worthy and of good Report; of Holiness of Life,
of Purity of Doctrine Zeal for God, and Faithfulness in fulfilling the Ministry
committed to them, and in Discharge of their Office as Watchmen upon the Wall.

And as the Minister's Duty is herein declared with respect to those under his
Watch; viz. To admonish and quicken them to receive the Instructions of Wisdom,
and to hearken diligently to the Words of God's Mouth; so is the Peoples Duty
also herein, very plainly and fully intimated to them, namely their Subjection
and Obedience. If we are in Christ's Name to call upon God's People to hearken
to the Words of his Mouth, the Obligation is as strong on you to attend, to
give earnest heed to those Things that are spoken lost at any Time you let them
slip, and to submit to the Force and Power of that Authority, who enjoins our
Observation of his Will, for he is our God, our Maker, our Preserver, our
Lawgiver, and our Judge; he has an undoubted Propriety in us, and an
indisputable Right to dispose of us, and his Will ought to be our Rule.

Hence then by Way of Application,

1 We see the necessary and incumbent Duty both of Ministers and People.
Ministers are to call upon those under their Care and Charge, to give Ear to
God's Law, and to incline their Ears to the Words of his Mouth; to know and to
do that which is right, and that which the Lord their God requires of them. And
the People are not at their Liberty whether they will hear, or whether they
will forbear: Their absolute Duty lying upon them to receive Instruction, and
to hearken to the Counsels of God. Hence.

2 Those Ministers are chargeable with Unfaithfulness, who neglect thus to
address their People; and those under their Care who refuse to hearken when
thus addressed, are guilty of a shameful Disregard of God, his Will and Law.
Ministers are to do more than entertain their People with Speculations, and
preach to them the doctrinal Articles of Faith; there is the Rule of Duty, the
Precepts of Holiness, which they are to urge and press with all Seriousness and
Cogency, and they cannot be faithful without so doing; they a^^ to reprove,
rebuke, and exhort with all Long suffering, and Doctrine: And if their People
refuse to hear and obey, the Word of God thus delivered to them in his Name,
and according to his Direction; they disregard God himself, his Authority, and
Will; for they that receive Christ's Messengers, receive Him, and they that
receive their Messages which are agreeable to the Analogy of Faith, and the
Doctrines of Godliness, receive his; and they that reject them, reject him,
they despise not Men, but God; and if they reject Christ and receive not his
Words, they have one that will judge them, the Word that he has spoken, the
same shall judge them in the last Day Wherefore,

3. Let us now, in God's Name and Fear, apply ourselves to that which the Lord
our God requires of us, in our respective Characters. And now; may the glorious
Head of the Church, abundantly furnish me with his Word, from Time to Time,
agreeable to your more special Circumstances, a Word of Instruction, Reproof,
Exhortation, and Counsel: and having God's Word may I be enabled to speak his
Word in the Demonstration of the Spirit and with Power, agreeable to the lively
Oracles, with Seriousness, Gravity, and Solemnity, and with special and
pertinent Application to the State and Condition of your Souls, seeking your
Good, your spiritual Profit and Advantage, your Edification and Salvation, and
not any vain Glory or Applause of Men; you also being my Helpers, by your
fervent Addresses to God for me, that I may obtain Grace to be faithful, and
find Mercy of the Lord to be successful. Thus to serve you and yours (by the
Help of God) is my earnest Desire, in what may be attempted, in the following
Articles of Discourse, upon this Occasion, that God's Name may be glorified,
and our Souls nourished by the sincere Milk of the Word.

Wherefore to proceed -- Let me observe,

II The Reasons given by the holy Prophet in our Text, to urge the Peoples Duty
upon them, in attending to the Instructions and Admonitions he was about to
deliver to them in God's Name.

And these were Three, viz.

1. That the Things to be discoursed of were weighty.

2 That they were Things of an ancient Date. And

3. That they were Things in which Posterity were concerned. All which render
them worthy of Regard and Attention.

1. The first Reason given in our Text, by the inspired Messenger of God, to
urge the Peoples Duty upon them, in attending to the Instructions, and
Admonitions which he was about to give them in God's Name, is, that the Things
to be discoursed of were weighty, and therefore deserve Consideration I will
open my Mouth in a Parable, in that which is sublime and uncommon Mr. Henry.
but very excellent and well worthy your Attention: I will utter dark Sayings,
which challenge your most serious Regards. These are called dark Sayings, not
because they are hard to be understood, but because they are greatly to be
admired, and carefully to be looked into: This is said to be fulfilled in the
Parables which our Savior put forth, Matt. 13 35. which were (as this)
Representations of the State of the Kingdom of God among Men. The Passages of
this subsequent Narrative, which the Psalmist would utter with all Freedom and
Plainness are styled Parables Mr. Pool.
and dark Sayings, not from their Unintelligibleness, but by Reason of their
Gravity and Weight, and being of great Moment for the Peoples Instruction and
Advantage; and because the Things contained in them, concerning God's
transcendent Goodness to an unworthy People; and their unparrallel'd
Ingratitude for, and Abuse of, such eminent Favors, and their stupid Ignorance
and Insensibleness, under such excellent and constant Teachings of God's Word
and Works, are indeed prodigious and hard to be believed.

Hence we may observe this Note of Doctrine, viz.

That God's Word and Providence, the Ordinances, Commandments, and Laws of his
Kingdom, both of Nature and Grace, are Things of infinite Moment and Concern to
us. Herein is contained the Whole of Man, respecting his present useful Being,
and his future Comfort and Happiness. God's Word contains all Things necessary
for him to know, believe, and practice, in order to his Fruition of the best
Good, which will never end, after a Period is put to his short Abode in this
World. God's Providence are Discoveries of his Wisdom and Power, and of his
Kindness and Favor in upholding all Things, and in their universal Government,
wherein he many Times shows himself strong, on the Behalf of them that fear
him; and sometimes for their Instruction and Admonition; and to vindicate the
Honor of his own Holiness and Justice, he displays his Indignation in the
Executions of his Wrath upon bold and incorrigible Sinners.

And in all this, wherein the Ordinances, Commandments, and Laws, of the
Kingdom of Nature and Grace are exhibited and displayed to us, there are Things
of infinite Moment and Concern to us; Things great and weighty and worthy of
our Consideration and utmost diligent Attention: For what can concern us more,
than to know God and ourselves, our Duty and our Happiness. More particularly,

1. God's Word and Providence are weighty Things, and will appear to be of
infinite Moment and Concern to us, if we consider their glorious Author, THE
ETERNAL GOD.

He rules in the Kingdom of Providence and Grace: He utters his Voice, and lo!
a mighty Voice, and a gracious Voice, in his providential Dispensations, and in
his holy Word.

The Instructions, Precepts, Promises, and Threatenings of the Word of God, are
all a Copy of his adoreable Perfections, who is infinite in Wisdom, Holiness,
Justice, Goodness, and Truth.

God's Works of Creation, Providence, and Grace, they are holy, though wonderful,
and to be sought into, though unsearchable, and his Ways righteous, though
mysterious, and past finding out.

Wherefore we should consider with whom it is we have to do, and remember that
we cannot by Searching find out God, that we cannot find out the Almighty unto
Perfection. Secret Thing belong to God; but those that are revealed, to us and
to our Children, that we may do all the Words of his Law.

2. God's Word and Providence are weighty Things, and will appear to be of
infinite Moment and Concern to us, if we consider their important Design, to
instruct and direct, rule and govern us, according to his holy and sovereign
Will.

All that the glorious God says and does in his Word and in his Works, is
agreeable to the Perfection of his Nature: And so far forth as they refer to us,
they are for our Instruction and Direction, Rule and Government; that we may
know God and our Duty, and be kept from the abominable Things which his Soul
hates, and be preserved in his Love and Favor; which must needs render these
Things of infinite Moment to us. But in a Word, for I can but just mention what
might be enlarged upon,

3. These Things are of the last Concern to us, and will appear to be so, if we
consider their End; the Glory of God, our Comfort here, and our Eternal
Happiness hereafter.

This is the grand End, which the great God proposes in all the Exertments of
himself, viz. his own Glory, He made all Things, he upholds all Things, he
orders and disposes of all Things as he pleases, and all for the Advancement of
his own Honor; and the Revelation which he has made of himself in his written
Word, is in the first Place for the same glorious Purpose, for God can have no
higher End than himself, who is the first and the last, the beginning and the
End. And subordinately he proposes the Good of his Creatures, and will make
every Thing to work together for the Good of his Chosen. They shall conspire
for their Advancement in Grace, and to prepare them for the Life of Glory,
which he will bestow upon all such, who by patient Continuance in Ways of
Well-doing, seek for Glory, Honor and Immortality. God's Word and his
providential Dispensations have all a Tendency to this, with respect to those
who make a right Improvement of them; wherefore they must needs be of infinite
Moment and Concern to us, and upon that Account demand our most careful and
diligent Attention: These Things are Weighty, and deserve our Consideration God
's Word is so, his Works are so, and diligently to be sought out of all them
that take Pleasure in them

Hence we Infer,

1. How reasonable it is, that we yield Obedience to the Demands of God, in
giving the most earnest Heed to the Instructions and Admonitions, given us from
his Word and Works.

This is consistent with the highest Reason, and we can have nothing to object
against it. We are dependent Creatures, and accountable Creatures, and our
chiefest Interests are much concerned in our yielding such Obedience. Wherefore
it is highly reasonable that we should so do.

2 Hence how pleasant and delightful should it be to us to give such Attention
to the Instructions and Admonitions of God's Word and Works

We should do it with all Cheerfulness and readiness of Mind. Our Submission to
the glorious God in such an important Article, should be the Joy and Rejoicing
of our Hearts, for in nothing can we take wiser Measures, nor more directly
consult our own present Comfort and future Peace

3. Hence how profitable such an Attention to the Word and Works of God would
be to us.

This is the Way to engage the favorable Presence of God with us, in which
alone our Safety, Comfort, and Success is comprehended; and this is the Way to
be received to the Rewards of Grace, in which is the Life of our Souls, and the
Happiness of Eternity: See the Reasonableness, Pleasure, and Profit of
Obedience.

4 Hence also the Folly and Absurdity of disregarding the Calls of God from his
Word and Works.

Folly is bound up in the Hearts of such as do so they take the most direct
Steps to their own Ruin. Madness is in their Hearts while they live, and after
that they go to the Dead, and to the Damned.

In a Word.

5 How just is the Ruin, and how dreadful will the Destruction be of such as
refuse Attention to the Calls of God, from his Word and Works, in which are
contained Things of such Weight, and of the last Moment and Importance to them.

Such cast the Counsel of God behind their Backs; and such may justly expect,
that because they regard not the Works of the Lord, and the Operations of his
Hands; He will destroy them, and not build them up; and that because they
refuse to hearken to his Calls, that he will laugh at their Calamity, when
Snares, Fire and Brimstone, shall be made the Portion of their Cup; for on such
Wicked, God will rain a most horrible Tempest And concerning such his Enemies,
he will say, bring them hither and slay them before me. And Oh! who can stand
before his Indignation, who can abide the Fierceness of his Anger. ^hen his
Fury shall be poured out like Fire.

Pase we to

2 Another Reason given in our Text to urge the Peoples Duty upon them, in
attending to the Instructions and Admonitions which were to be given to them in
God's Name, viz That the Things which were to be discoursed of, were of ancient
Date.

They were the Monuments of Antiquity, dark Sayings of old, which we have heard
and known, and which our Fathers have told us They are Things of undoubted
certainty, We have heard them and known them; and there is no Room left to
question the Truth of them.

The Gospel of Luke is called a Declaration of the Things which are most surely
believed among us, Luke 1.1, so were the Things which the Psalmist was about to
relate.

The Honor we owe to our Parents and Ancestors, obliges us to attend to that
which our Fathers have told us, and as far as it appears to be true and good,
to receive it with so much the more Reverence and Regard. There is both Profit
and Pleasure in being informed of Things of ancient Date, that are of undoubted
Verity, and of Moment and Importance.

Hence we may observe this Note of Doctrine, viz.

That it is a very agreeable and useful entertainment to refresh our Minds with
the Remembrance of what God has done for us in our Day, and with his Dealings
toward our Ancestors, which were performed in the Days of old; in the Times of
ancient Generations.

It is exceeding pleasant to ingenious and inquisitive Minds to reflect upon
the Observables of divine Providence, within the Compass of their own
Knowledge; and also to be entertained with those of ancient Date, which were
remarked in the Days of their Fore Fathers.

I shall not say any Thing to demonstrate the Pleasure that there is herein,
the bare repeating the Text carries its own Evidence along with it to all such
whose Minds are of this Stamp; and Herculean Labor would be but Labor lost,
to endeavor to form a relishing Idea thereof in the Minds of such as are of
another Mould.

Wherefore I pass to say, that it may be a very useful and profitable
Entertainment to relish our Minds with what God has done for us in our Day, and
with his Dealings toward our Ancestors, which were performed in the Days of
old; and to show that in several Ways, and for several Ends and Purposes it may
be so.

Particularly,

1. To fix in our Minds a just Remembrance of the great and good Things, God
has done for us, and for our Progenitors.

Thus says the inspired Penman in our Text, ver 4. Showing to the Generation to
come, the Praises of the Lord, and his Strength, and the wonderful Works that
he has done. We should not presently forget the merciful Appearances of God
for us, or ours, it is an Argument of Ingratitude if we do; neither should we
soon let slip the awful Tokens of God's Displeasure in any Instance, by Means
of which our Flesh has been made to tremble; but we should lay up the
remarkable Occurrences of divine Providence for future Improvement; and
frequently to renew the Idea of them in our Minds, cannot but have a Tendency to
fix them in the Thoughts of the Imagination of our Hearts.

Again

2 To stir up in us a holy Fear of God and a Dread of his Wrath

Among the Purposes of Heaven in the Discoveries of the divine Displeasure, in
the Executions of Vengeance, this is one, that others may hear and fear, may
thereby be admonished and take Warning. We ought to fear that holy and dreadful
Name, the LORD OUR GOD. We should have such an Aw of the Majesty of Heaven* and
such a Dread of his Wrath, as to make us very cautious of doing any Thing to
provoke him to come forth against us in Anger Now a serious Reflection upon
what God has done, either in our own Day, or in ancienter Times, to punish his
People for their Rebellions against him, may have, and surely it ought to have
this Influence and Effect upon us, through a holy Fear of God, to avoid those
Ways and Practices which were so provoking to the God of Heaven, that for the
Honor of his great Name, he has visited his People with sore Judgments and
Calamities. This is particularly intimated to us in our Text, ver. 8. -- and
might not be as their Fathers, a stubborn and rebellious Generation, a
Generation that set not their Heart aright, and whose Spirit was not steadfast
with God. Further,

3. This may be of Use and Service to excite our Love, and increase our
Gratitude to the ever blessed God

The many kind Things that Heaven has done for us and for our Fathers, should
influence us to love our most gracious and bountiful Benefactor, and should
enlarge our Hearts in Gratitude to him Every Day is a Witness for God that he
is good, and does good; and calls for our constant and persevering Returns of
Love and Gratitude. But there are some remarkable Interpositions of Favor and
Goodness which demand our most special and peculiar Notice; eminent and signed
Appearances of divine Favor, call for more peculiar and enlarged Returns: And
many such there have been, if we did but duly attend to them in our own (...)
and in the Days of our Fathers, which are very loud Calls to us, to love the
Lord our Preserver and Benefactor, and to render to him, our grateful
Acknowledgments, according to the Benefits done unto us And a due Reflection
upon these Things may have a special Tendency to stir us up to our Duty herein,
and thereby greatly turn to our Advantage. Ver. 4 We will not bide them from
their Children showing to the Generation to come the Praises of the Lord, etc.

Again,

2 To encourage us to put our Trust in God, and to make him our Hope and
Confidence at all Times.

He that has delivered can deliver, and if our Ways please him he will yet
deliver He has been, and is, the Hope of his Israel, and their Savior in Times
of Trouble; great and mavelous have been his Works of Salvation; and the Lord
Jehovah is still an inexhaustible Fountain of Goodness, and in him there is
everlasting Strength. And this is one End of such a Reflection, particularly
pointed at in our Text, ver. 7. That we might set our Hope in God. If we make
God's Commandments our Rule, we may make his Covenant our Stay, for he is never
unmindful thereof.

Further,

5 Such a Reflection may be of great Use and Service, to awaken in us a
suitable Care, to conform our Tempers and Manners to the holy Will and Law of
God, that we may engage his gracious Presence with us, and obtain his Blessing
upon us.

This has been God's Manner, he will be with his People in a Way of Mercy and
Blessing, while they adhere to him in a Way of Duty and Obedience. This we are
assured of, from the Declarations of God's Word, and from the History and
Method of his providential Dispensations: thus we read, 2 Chronicles. 15 1, 2. And
the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the Son of Obed, and he went out to meet
Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin, the Lord is
with you while you be with him, and if you seek him, he will be found of you.
Wherefore if we regard the Favor of Heaven, and in that our own Interest, such
a serious Reflection will have a Tendency to engage our Regards to the Will and
Law of God, agreeable to which are those Passages in our Text, v. 5.6. and 7.
For he established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which
he commanded our Fathers, that they should make them known to their Children.
That the Generation to come might know them, even the Children which should be
born: Who should arise and declare them to their Children. That they might set
their Hope in God, and not forget the Works of God; but keep his Commandments.

In a Word.

6. A suitable Review of the great and good Things which the ever blessed God
has done in our Day, and in the Days of our Fathers, may be of Use and Benefit
to our Posterity, that they may informed of the Works of God, and called upon,
not to forget the Hope of their Fathers, nor be unmindful of his Law; which for
Encouragement duly to observe, he has so signally appeared in Ways of Mercy;
and for the Breach of which, he has come forth in Anger, and marched through the
midst of his People in Indignation.

But this Advantage of a due Notice of the Remarkables of Providence, is to be
the Subject of a distinct Head, and therefore may be more particularly
considered by and by.

I shall therefore only add here, upon the whole of what has been offered under
this Note of Doctrine, That for such sacred Purposes as the Instruction and
Admonition of the present and succeeding Generations, in the Fear, and Love of
God, and Obedience to his Law; we have many Instances in our Bibles, of
Rehearsing the wonderful Works of God both present and former.

If I should pretend to give you the Narratives at large, they would stretch my
Discourse beyond due Bounds: I shall therefore, only direct you to the
Passages, and desire that you would read and peruse them at your Leisure.

To this Purpose is Moses's divine Song, Exodus 15. when Israel triumphed over
their Enemies who were drowned in the Red Sea. And a great Part of the Book of
Duteronomy is taken up with such Accounts, and with solemn Calls and
Exhortations there from to Obedience, particularly the 3d, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11 and
29th Chapters, and to the same End is the Song of Moses in the 32 Chap. which
sets forth God's Mercy and Vengeance, and concludes with this Exhortation,
Set your Hearts unto all the Words which I testify among you this Day, which ye
shall command your Children to observe and do, all the Words of this Law: For
it is not a vain Thing for you because it is your Life, and through this Thing ye
shall prolong your Days in the Land whether ye go over Jordan to possess it.
With the same pious Design, Joshua the Captain and Leader of Israel, exhorting
the People of God before his Death, and gave them a Narrative of God's Dealings
with them. See Josh. 23 and 24 Chap This also is the Run and this the Intention
of the Testimony of Samuel the Lord's Prophet, against Israel, after they had
asked a King. See 1 Samuel 12* Chap. And many other Instances of the like Nature
we have in the Book of Psalms: Thus the Psalm of which our Text is a Part, and
to which Piece of Church History it is a solemn Preface: And so Psalm. 105. in
which we are directed to praise God for his special Favors to his Church, an
Enumeration of which is therein given; and to the same Purpose is Psalm. 136.

In the New Testament also such useful Narratives are not wanting; you remember
Stephen the Proto-Martyr's Defense, when accused of Blasphemy, Acts 7. And the
Apostle Paul in the 11 Chap* to the Hebrews, relates the Wonders of Faith which
the ancient Fathers and People of God were Instances of, and as a Consequence
there from, begins his 12 Chapter with (...) seeing we also are compossed about
with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, let us lay aside every Weight, and the Sin
that does so easily beset us, and let us run with Patience, the Race that is
set before us.

Thus I have endeavored doctrinally to show you the Profit and Advantage of a
serious Reflection on the great and good Things which the glorious God has
done, in the Course of his Providence, whether formerly or more lately.

And now by Way of Application,

1. We hence see both the Necessity and Expediency of a serious Reflection and
Meditation upon God's Providential Dispensations, whether of later or ancienter
Date.

If there be so much Profit and Advantage in it, surely then it is both
necessary and expedient. It is necessary, for it is our Duty with Regard to
God, that we may give him the Glory that is due to his Name. And with Regard to
ourselves, that we may behave and conduct ourselves in a becoming Manner,
agreeable to our Character as the People of God, who own their Dependence upon
him and acknowledge his Propriety in them, and their Obligations to him, who
have their Hope in him, and their Expectations from him. And it is expedient,
for the Pleasure and the Advantage of it, renders it highly so. If we consult
our own Interest, we shall thus regard the Works of the Lord and consider the
Operations of his Hands.

2. According to our Doctrine, and agreeable to the Examples of such a Practice,
which have been produced; and with a sincere View to the same good Purposes.
Let us look back and consider the Works of the Lord, and the Wonders which he
has done in our Day and in the Days of our Fathers. But it must be in a few
general brief Hints, for a large Volume would not more than suffice to contain
the Particulars.

And here allow me,

1. To give you some short Account of our Foundation, Rise, and Growth, with
some Remarkable of Providence, worthy to be taken Notice of, in such a Relation.

And then,

2. Briefly to hint, what Influence these Things should have upon us.

In the first Place,

1 I am to give you some short Account of our Foundation, Rise and Growth, with
some Remarkables of Providence, worthy to be taken Notice of in such a Relation.

The Rev. Dr. Colman, in his Preface to Mr Penhallow's History of the Indian
War.
"From the Days of Moses, who wrote the first History, the Beginning of the
World and of Israel, The Wise and Pious among Men have scarce known a more
sacred Pleasure, nor found a more profitable Entertainment, than in Tracing the
Footsteps, and Windings of divine Providence, in the Planting of Colonies and
Churches, here and there through the Earth.

"Nor let it seem vain in me to say (says the same great Man) that in the
Settlement of the New England Churches and Provinces, there have been some
Circumstances so like unto those of Israel of old (after their Entrance into
Canaan) that I am persuaded no People of God under Heaven, can sing of his
Mercies and Judgments, in the inspired Phrase, with more direct and Pertinent
Self Application than we can do.

The Rev. and Excellent Mr. Pemberton, in a brief Account of the State of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, Civil and Ecclesiastical.
"It was not long after the Beginning of the former Century, that a considerable
Number of the Subjects of the Crown of England, by the Allowance, and under the
Countenance and Protection of the supreme Authority, did transplant themselves,
Families and Estates into the remote Regions of AMERICA

Our New England Chronology says The Rev. Mr. Prince
"That it was on the 9th of Nov. in the Year 1620. that they made the Land,
after long beating the Sea; and on the 31st of December. the same Year, they kept
their first Sabbath on the Main Land, at the Place now well known by the Name
of Plymouth; from which Time therefore the Rev. Mr. Prince fixes the ERA of
their Settlement.

"These first Planters were known to be Persons, not only of approved Piety to
God, but of exemplary Loyalty to the Throne and Government they belonged to;
and brought these Principles of Affection and Duty to their Prince into these
his distant Dominions; and their Care was to transmit the same loyal Principles
and Spirit to their Posterity.

"To encourage and strengthen them to submit to the many Toils, Hazards and
vast Expense in subduing and planting a Wilderness, they were favored with the
Royal Grant of a CHARTER by which they were vested with several Powers,
Liberties, and Privileges for their good Order and Government.

"Under the Protection of the Royal Charter in which they entirely confided,
for the Security of the Liberties therein granted, they were animated
cheerfully to undergo unknown Perils and Hardships, which were unavoidable in
their first Plantations, by which a valuable Accession has been made to the
British Dominions, and the Commerce of GREAT BRITAIN enlarged, without any
Charge to the Crown.

In the latter End of the Reign of King CHARLES the Second, this Charter was
vacated by a Judgment of the High Court of Chancery, which Judgment was
Respited, 'till the Reign of King JAMES the Second, when this Corporation was
disfranchised and actually divested of all the Powers, Liberties, and
Privileges that had been granted to them.

"After the happy Revolution, those glorious Princes King WILLIAM and Queen
MARY, of immortal Memory, were pleased in their Princely Wisdom and Grace, by
their Royal Charter to unite and erect into one Province, the Colonies of the
Massachusetts Bay, New Plymouth etc by the Name of the Province of the
MASSACHUSETTS BAY in NEW ENGLAND, which was to be governed by a Governor,
Council and Assembly.

"By this Royal Charter many valuable Privileges, and Immunities are vested in
the Body of the People inhabiting habiting the said Province, their Properties
secured, and all the Immunities and Liberties of natural Subjects born in the
Realm of England, are granted and affirmed to them.

"The Inhabitants of this Province have always had a just Value for their civil
Liberties, but the free and secure Enjoyment of their religious Privileges, has
ever been most dear to them, and esteemed a plentiful Reward of all the Dangers
and Difficulties they have been struggling with, from their first Plantation to
this Day.

"The first Planters of these His Majesty's Territories, were as to their
Persuasion in Religion, such as in the English Nation were called PURITANS, who
desired and sought what was in their Apprehension, a further Reformation in
Point of Discipline and Worship.

"That they and their Posterity after them might enjoy the Liberty of their
Consciences in these Points, and worship God according to their best Light,
with less Hazard to themselves* and less Offense to others, they sought a Place
of Rest in these remote Regions.

"By the Care and Zeal of these first Planters, the Kingdom of CHRIST was first
planted in these his Majesty's distant Dominions Churches erected in their
several Towns, and Plantations in which the Gospel is dispensed, and the
Ordinances of God's House administered, without any Terms of Communion, but what
according to their best Light, were plainly prescribed in the Word of God.

"The DOCTRINES of Faith professed in these Churches are entirely Protestant,
most agreeable to the doctrinal Articles and Homilies of the Church of England,
and to the Confessions of the Reformed Churches abroad.

"The Churches in Point of Discipline and Mode of Worship are mainly
Congregational and Presbyterian, of one Profession and Principle, with the
united Brethren, the Protestant Dissenters in South Britain

"Through the Blessing of Heaven these Churches under their persent Securities
have greatly flourished and increased."

Our merciful and glorious God did in a wonderful Manner cast out the Heathen
before our Fathers, and planted them; He prepared also a Room before them, and
caused them to take deep Root, and to fill the Land, so that the Vine has sent
out her Boughs unto the Sea, and her Branches upon the River* We have heard
with our Ears, O God, our Fathers have told us, what Work thou did in their
Days, in the Times of old How thou did drive out the Heathen with thy Hand,
and plantedst them; how thou did afflict the People and cast them out; for
they got not the Land in Possession by their own Sword, neither did their own
Arm save them; but thy right Hand, and thine Arm, and the Light of thy
Countenance, because thou had a Favor unto them Very remarakable was the
Hand of Heaven in a mortal Contagion that swept away Multitudes of the
Aborigines, just before the Arrival of the first English Settlers. And as
evident an Interposition of Providence was the extraordinary Restraints laid
upon those that survived, that were disposed to do Hurt to God's little Flock
in the Wilderness: And also the amicable Temper which some of them discovered,
in their Inclinations to show Kindness to, and do Service for the infant
Plantations


Very various have been the divine Dispensations toward our Fathers, and
toward us, as their and our Ways have pleased the Lord; sometimes the bright
Shines of Prosperity in our civil and religious Interests have surrounded us;
and sometimes our Prospects have been dark and gloomy: And many have been the
almost insuperable Difficulties that we have passed through, from the Tongues and
the Pens of false Brethren, and from the Arrows, Guns, and Hatchets, of a
barbarous Enemy. Very threatening the Time when our Charter was taken from us
and the Government dissolved, The first Charter taken away 1685. The old
Government dissolved in May 1686. Sir Edmund Andross arrived Governor Dec 1686
The Rev. Dr Increase Mather went Agent to England in the Spring 1688.
and very distressing the Administration of Government from that Time to the
happy Revolution, In England, Nov. 1688. In New England April 1689. The present
Charter granted 1691. Sir William Phipps arrived Governor May 1692.
Very dark the Time when the Land and Churches were filled with Perplexity and
Concern from what happened by the righteous Permission of Heaven, from the
Spirits of Darkness In the Year 1692.
and very grievous the Things that have fallen out from the Divisions and
Animosities which have embarras'd our Affairs, both civil and religious at one
Time and another. And in a Word, very surprising and shocking the Prospects,
when a righteous and holy God has many a Time threatened us with impoverishing
and desolating Judgments for our Sins; and sometimes caused us to taste the
bitter Fruits of our Impieties and Irregularities. Nevertheless through the
Patience of Heaven we are continued a People and are still in the Enjoyment of
very valuable Privileges, and from small Beginnings are become Great See this
set in a very good Light, in a Sermon preached upon the like Occasion by the
Rev. Mr. Foxcroft of Boston, from Matt 13.31, 32. Aug. 23 1730.


But I leave these Things of a general Purport, and pass to consider some
Things more immediately referring to ourselves.

According to the Account which I have received, The Town of DEDHAM was the
16th or 18th Settlement from the first Beginning of the Country.

It was petitioned for as a Township in 1636, and desired that it might be
called CONTENTMENT, which Name I doubt not was asked for some special Reason,
and likely enough to denote the Temper and Disposition of the then Inhabitants.
However when the Grant was made, it was called by its present Name.

Our Church Records say, "The Township of Dedham consisting of about 30
Families, residing there 1637, being come together by divine Providence from
several Parts of England; few of them known to one another before."

And being thus incorporated into a civil Society, and invested with the same
Privileges that others enjoyed, they soon bethought themselves about a Church
State, for it was that, that their Hearts were principally upon.

Agreably it is added in our ancient Records.

"It was thought meet and agreed upon, that all the Inhabitants that affected
Church Communion, or pleased to come, should meet every 5th Day of the Week at
several Houses, in order lovingly to discourse and consult together of such
Questions as might further tend to stablish a peaceable and comfortable civil
Society; and prepare for spiritual Communion in a Church State. Partly that we
might be further acquainted with the Tempers, Spirits and Gifts of one another;
and partly that we might gain further Light in the Ways of Christ's Kingdom,
and the Government of his Church." etc.

And in the Pursuit of this Method, they prepared for, and at length came into
a Church State in a very serious and solemn Manner.

A particular Account of the Measures taken and of the Manner of their
Combination is preserved to us by the Care and Pains of that Rev. and venerable
Genleman Mr. JOHN ALLIN, your first Pastor: And whoever reads it, must allow,
that there is in it a full Discovery of a sincere Regard to the Glory of God,
and to their own spiritual Edification in the Ways of God, (according to a
Judgment of Charity) a strict Regard to Holiness of Life, and a great Care to
maintain the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. That there was much of
the Presence of God with them, and that having their Hearts enlarged with the
Consolations of God, they ran in the Ways of his Commandments with Cheerfulness
and Constancy, and held fast their Integrity.

This Church being the 14th that was embodied in the Country Johnson's History.
was gathered on the 8th Day of Nov. 1638. by making a solemn Profession of
their Faith, and entering into Covenant with the Lord, and one with another,
consisting of 8 Persons Viz John Allin, Ralph Wheelock, Edward Allin, John
Luson, John Hunting, John Frayry, Eleazer Lusher, and Robert Hinsdall
to whom several others were added before the Church was completed with
Officers Viz. Henry Phillips, John Dwight, Robert Kempe, and Daniel Fisher,
with several Women.
which was on April 24. 1639. See ancient Church Records. The Deacons Office
excepted, which was not filled for many Years; for I find such a Memorandum as
this, in our Church Records, viz. The Choice and Ordination of Deacons, being
long left unperfected; sometimes by Reason of different Apprehensions in the
Church, and sometimes by Reason of Brother Chickering's Delays of Acceptance in
Regard of his Relation and Affections to Mr. Phillips in England; it pleased
God that after long Experience, the Church had of Brother Henry Chickering and
Nathan Aldis in the Work of Deacons, the Church with a general Vote (some few
only suspending) called them to that Office, and agreed they should be ordained
thereunto the next Sabbath, being elected upon the 23d of the 4th Month 1650.
So that this Church was without Deacons 11 Years,
when the Rev. Mr. JOHN ALLIN was ordained to the Pastoral Office, who through
Help received from God, continued in his Work, 'till the Year 1671, when on the
26th of Aug. he fell asleep in the Lord, "having continued (says our Church
History) the Rev. and dearly beloved Pastor to the Church of Christ in Dedham,
after Ordination 32 Years, and died in the 75th Year of his Age.

After whose Death, this Church was destitute of a Pastor two Years and about 4
Months, when this Breach was greatly made up in the happy Settlement of the
Rev. Mr WILLIAM ADAMS, who was ordained to the Pastoral Office Dec 3d. 1673.
and carried on the Work of the Lord among his People here, through the
Assistances of the glorious Head of the Church, for 12 Years and 8 Months, and
ceased from his Labors, exchanging (we trust) Earth for Heaven, on Aug. the
17th, in the Year of our Lord 1685

After whose Decease, this Church was destitute and in a broken State for 8
Years, when to their great Joy, the Repairer of Breaches supplied the Vacancy
with a Pastor (we trust) after his own Heart, in the Rev. Mr JOSEPH BELCHER,
who was ordained to the Pastoral Office in this Place, on Nov 29th. in the Year
1693, and was made a great Blessing to this People, in whose Light they
rejoiced till April 27th 1723, when he was not suffered to continue any longer
by reason of Death. He lived much desired and died greatly lamented, in the 53d
Year of his Age, and in the 30th of his Pastorate.

After which this Church was destitute one Year, which brings down the Time to
the present Settlement.

I shall add, that besides those in the Ministry this Church and Town have been
favored with very valuable and worthy Men, some in the Magistracy* and others
in a more private Sphere. A LUSHER Of whom it is thus recorded in our Church
Book "Major Eleazer Lusher, a Man sound in the Faith, of great Holiness and
heavenly Mindedness, who was of the first Foundation of this Church, and had
been of great Use (as in the Commonwealth so) in the Church, especially after
the Death of the Rev. Pastor thereof, Mr. John Allin; departed this Life, Nov.
13 1672.
, a FISHER Mr. Daniel Fisher, a Gentleman learned in the Law, and a Magistrate
for the Colony.
, a DWIGHT Timothy Dwight, Esquire a Gentleman truly serious and godly, one of an
excellent Spirit, peaceable, generous, charitable, and a great Promoter of the
true Interests both of the Church and Town; dyed Jan. 31. 1717, 18. Aetat. 83.
and buried on the same Day with his sixth Consort.
have been among our Men of Renown; and many others truly serious, godly, and
useful Men, who being dead, have their Names and Memories, yet alive among us,
for their worthy Deeds done to and for this People, and for their heavenly
Conversation who herein have left us an Example worthy of Imitation.

And blessed be God, that we have some, we hope, yet surviving, that are not
destitute of the Principles and Zeal of their Forefathers.

I need not acquaint you that within the Limits that were first Dedham, whose
Number of Inhabitants in the Year 1637 were 30 Families, there are now 6
Townships, viz. MEDFIELD made a Township* Jan. 1650, 1 whereof the Rev. Mr
Joseph Baxter is the present Pastor

WRENTHAM set off from Dedham March 27 1661. Confirmed by the General Court
October 1673. The Rev. Messi. Henry Messenger, and Elias Haven, Pastors of the
two distinct Parishes in the Town.

NEEDHAM set off from Dedham, May 28th 1711. Confirmed by the General Court
Nov. 1711. The Rev. Mr. Jonathan Townsend the Pastor.

BELLINGHAM set off from Dedham May 11th 1719

WALPOLE set off from Dedham May 15th 1724, and confirmed at the Fall Sessions.
The Rev. Mr. Phillips Payson their Pastor.


and some considerable Part of a 7th, viz NATICK, where there is a Church of
our Lord Jesus, consisting partly of English and partly of Indians. The Rev.
Mr. Oliver Peabody their Pastor.
there are 9 Parishes, and as many gathered Churches, viz 1 in Medfield 2 in
Wrentham, 1 in Needham, 1 in Bellingham, 1 in Walpole, and 3 in Dedham, viz.
The Old Parish, the South Parish, set off from the Town Sept. 2. 1728.
Confirmed by the General Court Nov. 1730. The Church gathered by there June 23d
1736, and the Rev. Mr. Thomas Balch ordained their Pastor, June 30 1736. The
other Parish is distinguished by the Name of the Clapboard Trees; where a
Church was gathered, and the Rev. Mr. Josiah Dwight (formerly of Woodstock)
Installed their Pastor June 4. 1735. And they were made a distinct Parish by
the General Court Jan. 10th 1736

N. B. Where I say, confirmed by the General Court, November. it is to be
understood, some Time, in the Fall Sessions.


with Pastors, one only excepted; viz Bellingham, who are now destitute of a
settled Minister viz Jan. 25. 1738, 9.
with a considerable Number to make a 10th viz. At a Part of the Town known by
the Name of Springfield.
when they shall judge their Circumstances agreeable.

There are ten Trained Companies, with a Troop of Horse, and a very
considerable Part of another.

Within our present Limits are three Parishes, three Churches, and three
Trained Companies.

I don't mention these Things for Ostentation, but that we may see and consider
how great has been our Increase from small Beginnings; and be induced to give
God the Glory of his Power and Goodness.

As to the Births and Deaths, the Admissions into Church Fellowship, and the
Removals from it Marriages, etc. I cannot pretend to compute and affirm the
Number. Yet we may in our own Minds be led (it is possible) to some juster and
more enlarged Conceptions thereof, than at first we are ready to imagine, from
the following Account, which begins with my Settlement, on the 6th of May 1724,
since which Time, according to the best Calculation that I can make, which is
something above 14 Years; There has died and been buried in this Place and
Neighborhood, who congregate with us three hundred and sixty nine; Infants
baptized four hundred forty seven; Adults baptized thirty five; Admitted into
Church Fellowship one hundred seventy one; Dismissed to us nine; Dismissed from
us thirty three; Laid hold of the Covenant forty four; besides the Baptisms,
Admissions etc that have been in the other Churches. And the Number of
Marriages have been one hundred and four; besides those that have been joined
in holy Wedlock, belonging to this Town, by other Officers. And if these Things
have been within a little more than the Space of 14 Years, what has been done
in the Course of an Hundred?

As the People of God in this Place have been Sharers in the common Smiles of
Heaven with other Places, so they have been in public Frowns and Calamities,
such as Sicknesses and Wars, Scarcities, and the like. But I do not find any
distinguishing Calamity brought upon them since their first Settlement.

Of late Years, God's People in this Land, and we in this Place, have been
under a Variety of providential Dispensations, and have Reason to sing both of
Mercy and of Judgment.

Many have been the Frowns of Heaven, and great the divine Threatenings in the
Wars with the Indian Savages; by Earthquakes, Storms and Sicknesses, such as
the Small Pox, and the Throat Distemper, by which such vast Numbers of our
Children and Youth in one Place and in another, have been removed to the silent
House appointed for all Living. Death having obtained Commission to come up
into our Windows, and to enter into our Dwellings, to cut off the Children from
without, and the Young Men and Women from the Streets, many Hundreds, if not
Thousands, have fallen an easy Prey. Also in the Threatenings of Scarcity, and
in the Deaths of great and good Men, both in the Magistracy and in the Ministry.

And great has been the Kindness and Favor of the blessed God to us; as in the
Continuance of our precious Privileges both civil and sacred; so in our special
Salvations, Protections and Provisions: In our Successes against the Indian
Enemy in the last War, though with the Loss of much Treasure, and many a valuable
Life: In the Peace that we have of late Years enjoyed: In the Salvations that
we have hitherto been favored withal from threatened Ruin and Destruction. And
in the Fruits of the Earth, which beyond Expectation, we have been blessed
with, for the Supply of the Necessities of Life, and sometimes in great Plenty.

And in a particular Manner, great and kind have been the Bounties of Heaven
with which the Year past has been brightned and blessed in the plentiful
Harvests both former and latter. In the general Health of the Land, though some
Places have been sorely and distressingly visited with the Throat Distemper;
Ma^den, Andover, etc.
with whom we would sympathize, and for whom we would constantly pour out a
Prayer to the God of our Lives and Hopes, Remembering those that are in Bonds,
as bound with them; and they that suffer Affliction, as being ourselves also in
the Body; and not knowing how soon it may be our melancholy Lot; who have at
this Day special Reason to take Notice of the Goodness of God to us, in the
Health that we have been favored withal in the Year past, in which we have had
fewer Deaths in Proportion than in any one Year since my Settlement. We should
also take a thankful Notice that we yet enjoy Peace, notwithstanding the
threatening Prospects of War betwixt ENGLAND and SPAIN; which if there should
be, we must expect not only to hear of the confused Noise of War, and Garments
rolled in Blood, but also to taste, and it may be drink deep, of that bitter
Cup.

Thus I have given you some short Account of our Foundation, Rise and Growth,
with some Remarkables of divine Providence, worthy to be taken Notice of, in
such a Relation.

I come now in the second Place as was proposed.

2. Briefly to hint what Influence these Things should have upon us

And in the first Place,

1. Our Increases and Enlargements, with the Continuance of our invaluable
Privileges, should excite us to give God the Glory of his infinite Wisdom,
almighty Power, and inexhaustible Goodness.

An infinite Fullness hereof there is in the ever blessed God; and very
wonderful and even astonishing have been the Displays thereof, in the
Foundation, Rise and Growth of these Colonies and Churches, and of this Place
in particular, which a little above an hundred Years ago, was a howling
Wilderness the Regions of Death, and the Habitations of Ignorance, Idolatry,
Barbarism, and Inhumanity; but now a Land of Light, and a Valley of Vision,
wherein the true God is feared and worshipped, with as much Light, Affection,
Zeal, and Purity, as upon any Spot of Earth through the known World. O that Men
would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful Works to the
Children of Men.

2 The Spirit, Life, Zeal and Power of Godliness which was the Glory of our
Forefathers; ministers Occasion of Humiliation to us, their degenerate
Offspring.

Where is that Holiness and Love, that Purity and Faith, which the first
Planters of these New English Settlements were eminent for? Our Fathers where
are they? And the Prophets do they live for ever? Verily, we are risen up in
the Room of our Fathers, a Generation which do not know, love, fear and obey
the blessed God, with that Fervency and Life, and Strictness as they did. We
are fallen from their first Love, and we do not do the first Works. May not the
Lamentation over, and the Expostulation with God's Israel of old, which we have
recorded, Jer. 2 2, and on, be justly improved with respect to us in the
present Day of our Declensions -- Go and cry in the Ears of Jerusalem, saying,
Thus says the Lord, I remember thee, the Kindness of thy Youth, the Love of
thine Espousaly, when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a Land that
was not sown. Israel was Holiness to the Lord, and the first Fruits of his
Increase: All that devour him shall offend, Evil shall come upon them, says
the Lord. -- Hear the Word of the Lord, O House of Jacob, and all the Families
of the House of Israel. Thus says the Lord, What Iniquity have your Fathers
found on me, that they are gone far from me, and have walk^d after Vanity, and
are become vain -- Neither said they where is the Lord, that brought us up out
of the Land of Egypt, that led us through the Wilderness, through a Land of Deserts
and of Pits, through a Land of Drought, and of the Shadow of Death, through a Land
that no Man passed through, and where no Man dwelt? And I brought you into a
plentiful Country, to eat the Fruit thereof, and the Goodness thereof. But when
ye entered, ye defiled my Land, and made mine Heritage an Abomination; (for are
there not among us, even among us, wicked Ways and Practices to be found?) the
Priests said not, where is the Lord? and they that handle the Law, knew me not;
the Pastors also transgressed against me; and the Prophets prophesied by Baal,
and walked after Things that do not profit; wherefore I will yet plead with
you, says the Lord, and with your Children's Children will I plead. O! that we
were more sincerely sensible of our Declensions, and humble for our Apostacies,
and penitent for our Backslidings; that we might reform every Thing that is
amiss, and return to Him from whom we have revolted, that Iniquity may not
prove our Ruin. And from the Examples of our pious Fathers, may we be quickened
to a laudable Ambition and Emulation, that the Things which are virtuous and
praiseworthy, and of good Report, may be our adorning, as they were their's.
Here are two or three Paragraphs added, which were not delivered when the
Sermon was Preached.


Suffer me (my Brethren) to put you in Mind of the Regard which they showed to
necessary and useful Learning; from a Value to which, in the Days of their
Weakness, Burdens and Impoverishments, they laid the Foundation of that
SEMINARY, Sept 1636, the General Court voted 400 l toward building the College
at Cambridge.
which has been such a great Blessing to the Land, and the Churches. And let
this shame us out of our Regardlessness to that which is better than Money and
Farms.

Is not the Disesteem of Learning too evident in a prevailing Temper (was it
not for the Law of the Province) to be wholly without a Grammar School? Don't
we see too much of this, in the Negligence of Parents and Masters, in sending
their Children, and those under their Care and Charge to School, when we have
One.

My Brethren, What will the next, or succeeding Generations be, in our Country
Towns, unless a Love to, a Value for, and Esteem of Learning, revive? Must not
we send abroad for Men to do our public Business for us? I think it is beyond
all Dispute, a rare Thing to find among us, Men of a common Character, that can
use their Pens as many, many, of our Fathers could.

I entreat you to bear with my Plainness and Freedom of Speech; and suffer me
to add, O let us endeavor to recover that Spirit of Family Government and
Authority which our Fathers had: They ruled their Houses well, and had their
Households in good Subjection; Children and Servants knew their Places, and kept
their Distances: But how is it now? Verily in Family Government is the
Foundation laid for good Order, Peace, and a regular Conduct, in Church and
State. O let us command our Children and Households, that they fear God, and
honor the King; that they reverence their Superiors, and behave with all
suitable Decorum toward every one. And I hope, without Offense, I may subjoin,
for I have no particular References, How much is it to be wished, that our
School Masters would show all good Fidelity in that Betrustment, and let their
little Nurseries be the Schools neither of Tyrannus nor of Gallio, but that
they use their best Endeavors to instill good Knowledge, Virtue and Religion
into the Minds and Hearts of Children, that they may give a good Account of
their Stewardship.

And O let us every one in our respective Spheres and Characters, endeavor to
shine in the Gifts and Graces with which our Forefathers were endowed and
brightned.

And as I have taken up the Mantles, so, O that through Grace, I might inherit a
double Portion of that excellent Spirit, which rested upon my ascended Fathers,
who ministered at the Lord's Altar in this Place. I don't pretend to have
attained, but I desire to follow on; LORD quicken my Pace, and increase the
Fruits of thy Spirit in my weak and feeble Essays, for the Glory of thy Name,
and the Good of precious Souls; and O that we might be so happy as to be the
Crowns of each other's Joy in the Day of Christ's appearing.

And ( my dear Charge) I beseech you to imitate the Zeal, the Love, the Faith,
the Purity, the Holiness, the Charity and Liberality of your pious Ancestors;
And let this Day, or this Season of the Year, witness for you, that you are
Followers, as well as Descendants from them, who through Faith and Patience are
inheriting the Promises, in your liberal Communications to those that stand in
need; such you have with you, and you will always have with you; don't forget
them. The blessed God has given bountifully into your Hands this Year, and
they that reap bountifully should sow bountifully, and that is the Way for
another good Crop, and a further plentiful Harvest. Of this, some of you are
not unmindful: God's Poor; and his unworthy Servant speaking, most commend your
Acts of Kindness. The Lord reward your Bounty in the Gifts of his Providence,
and in the Fruits of his Grace, to you and to your Children forever.

3. From what we have heard, let us be excited to rejoice in the Goodness of
God, and to make the Joy of the Lord our Strength; and let us raise those Notes
of Triumph, Psalm 105 begin O give Thanks unto the Lord, call upon his Name,
make known his Deeds among the People; sing unto him* sing Psalms unto him talk
of all his wondrous Works; Glory ye in his holy Name; let the Heart of them
rejoice that seek the Lord See also Psalm. 106 begin. Praise ye the Lord, O give
Thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his Mercy endures forever. Who can
utter the mighty Acts of the Lord? Who can show forth all his Praise? Blessed
are they that keep Judgment, and he that does Righteousness at all Times.
Remember me, O Lord, with the Favor that thou bear unto thy People; O visit
me with thy Salvation, that I may see the Good of thy Chosen, that I may
rejoice in the Gladness of thy Nation, that I may glory with thine Inheritance.
And in the 107th Psalm. begin. O give Thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for
his Mercy endures forever; let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has
redeemed from the Hand of the Enemy, and gathered them out of the Lands, from
the East and from the West, from the North and from the South. They wandered in
the Wilderness, in a solitary Way, they found no City to dwell in, hungry and
thirsty, their Soul fainted in them; then they cried to the Lord in their
Trouble, and he delivered them out of their Distresses, and he led them forth
by the right Way, that they might go to a City of Habibitation. O that Men
would praise the Lord for his Goodnest, and for his wonderful Works to the
Children of Men

4 What we have heard should encourage us to trust in God, to hope in his
Mercy, and to pray for his special Presence, and peculiar Blessings,
particularly the outpourings of his Spirit.

The ever blessed God has done great and good Things for us, and he is the
only adequate Object of our Trust and Hope; and he that has done can still do:
To him therefore let us, with Humility, and in Faith, with Fervency, commit our
Cause, who is God performing all Things for us; and in a particular Manner, let
us cry mightily, that the Spirit may be poured down from on high upon us, that
the Hearts of the Fathers may be turned to the Children, and the Disobedient to
the Wisdom of the Just, that we may become a holy People; that God would pardon
our Iniquities, heal our Backslidings, receive us graciously and love us
freely, and make us a peculiar People to himself, zealous of good Works.

5 From what we have heard, let us be quickened to bless and magnify the
glorious God, for the former and later Manifestations of his Goodness and
Grace, Bounty and Kindness.

We should abundantly utter the Memory of God's great Goodness, and sing of his
Loving kindness. We should mention the Loving kindness of the Lord, and the
Praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord has bestowed on us; and
his great Goodness toward the House of his New English Israel, which he has
bestowed on them according to his Mercies, and according to the Multitude of
his Loving kindnesses.

But in a Word,

6 The great Goodness of God toward our Fathers and toward us should animate
us to use our utmost Endeavors, that our Children may be suitably affected
with these Things.

But this brings me

3 To consider the third and last Reason given in our Text, to urge the
People's Duty upon them in attending to the Instructions, and Admonitions that
were to be given to them in God's Name, viz. That they were Things in which
Posterity was concerned.

Verse 4th and on of our Text, We will not hide them from their Children,
showing to the Generation to come, the Praises of the Lord, and his Strength,
and his wonderful Works that he has done; for he established a Testimony in
Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our Fathers, that they
should make them known to their Children, that the Generation to come might
know them, even the Children which should be born, who should arise and declare
them to their Children, that they might set their Hope in God, and not forget
the Works of God, but keep his Commandments, and not be as their Fathers, a
stubborn and rebellious Generation, a Generation that set not their Heart
aright, and whose Spirit was not steadfast with God.

The Things which the Prophet was about to Discourse of, as they were Things
weighty, and the Monuments of Antiquity, so they were to be transmitted to
Posterity; Mr. Henry.
and it lies as a Charge upon us, carefully to hand them down. Because our
Fathers told them us, we will not hide them from their Children: Our Children
are called their's, for they were in Care for their Seed's Seed, and looked
upon them as their's. And in teaching our Children the Knowledge of God, we
repay to our Parents some of that Debt owe to them for teaching us. Nay if we
have no Children of our own, we must declare the Things of God to their
Children, the Children of others; our Care must be for Posterity in general,
and not only for our own Posterity. And for the Generation to come hereafter,
the Children that shall be born, as well as the Generation that is next rising
up, and the Children that are born. That which we are to transmit to our
Children, is not only the Knowledge of Languages, Arts, and Sciences, their
Liberty and Property; but especially the Praises of the Lord, and his Strength
appearing in the wonderful Works that he has done. Our great Care must be to
lodge our Religion, that great Depositum, pure and entire in the Hands of those
that succeed us.

Hence we may observe this Note of DOCTRINE, viz.

That we ought to do all that is in our Power, to have the Souls of our
Children impressed with suitable Apprehensions of God, his Will and Law, and
their Duty; to effect which, the Rehearsal of, and acquainting them with, God's
memorable providential Dispensations, whether of ancienter or later Date, may
have an agreeable Tendency.

Here let it be said,

1. We should use our utmost Endeavor, that our Children may be suitably
affected with the Law of God, his Will, and their Duty.

He established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he
commanded our Fathers, that they should make them known to their Children, v.
5. The Law of God was given to his People, with a particular Charge, that it
should be taught diligently to their Children. He established a Testimony or
Covenant, and erected a Law in Jacob and Israel; gave them Precepts and
Promises, which he commanded them to make known to their Children. See Deuteronomy.
6.7. And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of
them when thou sit in thine House, and when thou walk by the Way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. See also Verse 20, and on. And
when thy Son asks thee in Time to come, saying, What mean the Testimonies,
and the Statutes, and the Judgments which the Lord our God has commanded you;
then shall thou say unto thy Son, We were Pharaoh's Bonamen in Egypt, and the
Lord brought us out of Egypt with a mighty Hand, and the Lord showed Signs and
Wonders, great and sore upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his Household,
before our Eyes; and he brought us out from thence, that he might bring us in,
to give us the Land which he swear unto our Fathers. And the Lord commanded us
to do all these Statutes, to fear the Lord our God, for our Good always, that
he might preserve us alive, as it is at this Day; and it shall be our
Righteousness, if we observe to do all these Commandments, before the Lord our
God, as he has commanded us.

The Church of God, as the Historian says of the Roman Commonwealth, was not
to be Res unius aetatis, a Business of one Age, but was to be kept up, from one
Generation to another. And therefore, as God provided for a Succession of
Ministers in the Tribe of Levi, and the House of Aaron, so he appointed that
Parents should train up their Children in the Knowledge of his Law; and when
they are grown up, they must arise and declare them to their Children; that as
one Generation of God's Servants and Worshippers passes away, another
Generation may come, and the Church, as the Earth, may abide forever. And thus
GOD's Name among Men may be as the Days of Heaven. And then,

2 The Rehearsal of God's memorable providential Dispensations to our Children,
and suitably acquainting them therewithal, may have a happy Tendency thus to
impress the Law of God upon them. His Providence both of Mercy and Judgment.

It is requisite that God's Works should be made known to Posterity, together
with his Laws; the fulfilling of his Promises made to the Obedient, and his
Threatenings denounced against the Disobedient: Let these be told to our
Children, and to our Children's Children.

And hence they may take Encouragement, to conform themselves to the Will of
God, that not forgetting the Works of God wrought in former Days, or later
Times, they may set their Hope in God, and keep his Commandments, may make his
Command their Rule, and his Covenant their Stay. And those only may with
Confidence hope for God's Salvation, that make Conscience of doing his
Commandments. The Works of God, duly considered, will very much strengthen our
Resolution, both to set our Hope in him, and to keep his Commandments.

And then, hence may Children take Warning, to conform to those Examples of
their Fathers which have not been good, and for which God has visited them
with his sore Rebukes, that they might not be as their Fathers, a stubborn and
rebellious Generation.

When the Character of Fathers is, that they are stubborn and rebellious, that
they walk contrary unto God, who though they profess Relation to him, yet do not
set their Hearts aright; are not cordial in their Engagements to God, nor
inward with him in their Worship of him, and therefore their Spirits are not
steadfast with him, but upon every Occasion fly from him: Children should take
Warning not to follow their Examples.

And verily those that are descended from wicked and ungodly Ancestors, if they
will but consider the Word and Works of God, will see Reason enough not to
tread in their Steps: 'Twill be no Excuse for a vain Conversation, that it was
received by Tradition from our Fathers, for what we know of them that was ill,
and the Punishments that they received therefore, should be an Admonition to us,
that we dread that which was so pernicious to them.

In fine. Such an Acquaintance with the Dealings of Heaven, may have a Tendency
to fill our Children with an holy Awe and Reverence of the divine Majesty; with
a cheerful Hope and Confidence in him; with earnest Desires and a steady Care
to please him. by obeying his Will; with awful Fears of offending him, by any
Instances of Disobedience; and in a Word, this may instruct and quicken them to
fear, love, serve, and worship that God who was their Father's God, and is
their God, and who they desire may be the God of their's after them.

Hence by Way of Application.

1. We learn the Duty of Parents to instruct their Children in the knowledge of
God's Word and Works; of His Law and Providence.

We should teach them diligently to our Children: We should talk of them when
we sit in the House, when we walk by the Way, when we lie down and when we rise
up. We should acquaint our Children with what God has done for his People, for
his Churches, for our Families, for ourselves, and for them. What Sense they
should have of divine Mercies, and how they should resent the Tokens of divine
Displeasure. What Improvement they should make of such Things to stir them up
to Holiness of Life, and to direct their Hearts into the Love of God, and a
patient Waiting for the Mercy of God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Hence we learn the Duty of Children to hearken to and receive Inctructions;
to regard God's Works and obey his Will. And to lay up such Things as a sacred
Depositum to be transmitted down to their Posterity; and to have their own
Hearts suitably impressed, and their Lives influenced to an agreeable
Conversation by the Examples of God's Mercies, and Judgments. His Smiles upon
Religion and Virtue, and his Frowns upon Impiety and Dishonesty.

In a Word,

3. Let what has been offered upon this Subject, have this Influence and Effect
upon us; to quicken us to regard the Works of the Lord, and to consider the
Operation of his Hands in the Methods of his Providence toward us, and toward
our Venerable and Renowned Forefathers For I am humbly of Opinion, that the
Principles from which sprang their Remove into these uncultivated Regions; the
Views and Aims, they had therein, the Perils and Fatigues they underwent and
endured, and the Magnanimity, Patience, and Self-denial with which they bore
the same: And his Sake, his Honor and Glory, for whom they suffered all,
justly entitle them to the Regards of Hero's, Martyrs, Confessors, etc. in our
Esteem, and in the Annals of Time.
-- That our Hope may be set in God, and that we may not forget his Works, but
keep his Commandments. Let the Thought of their being weighty Things, ancient
Things, and Things in which Posterity is concerned, prove a Motive to us
hereunto.

But it is Time to draw to a Close. Wherefore upon the whole, and to conclude:
So copious is our present Theme, and so many incidental Articles which require
our Notice, and so narrow the Limits of Time to mention them all; that renders
it exceeding difficult to keep proper Measures, and to preserve a natural,
clear and unconfused Method. And how defective soever the present Discourse
has been in these Respects; yet let us endeavor to answer the grand Design
and Intention of it, which is the noble and excellent End of Preaching, viz To
Profit.

Wherefore I shall conclude with a few brief Hints of Exhortation

1. Upon such a Reflection as we have now made, let us be filled with humble
and holy Admiration.

LORD! What is Man that thou art thus mindful of him, and the Children of Men
that thou should thus visit them? Who are we, or what are our Houses, that
thou have brought us hitherto? Again,

2. Let us utter the Memory of God's great Goodness, and of his wonderful
Works, with sincere Views that his Name may be thereby glorified.

Let us with our whole Souls, bless God for preserving our Fathers from the
Perils of the Sea, in crossing the great Ocean to settle themselves in this
Land. And for protecting them from the Dangers that they were in from the
Savage Inhabitants upon their Arrival: For his casting out the Heathen from
before them, and giving them this good Land for an Inheritance: For smiling
upon them, and prospering them in their Settlements: For his propitious Aids,
Direction and Influence in their civil and religious Interests: For continuing
to us our precious Privileges to this Day. And that now through the Indulgence of
Heaven, we enjoy a wise and gracious Prince upon the Throne, for whom we pray
that his Life may be long and his Reign prosperous: And in the Increase of the
Royal Family in the Birth of his Highness Prince GEORGE, His Highness Prince
GEORGE, born May 24 1738.
and that we have the hopeful Prospects of a Succession in the Protestant Line
in the Illustrious House of HANOVER, to the End of Time. And that we in this
Land are favored with good Rulers, and from among ourselves, such as are
accepted of the Multitude of their Brethren, seeking the Wealth of their
People, and speaking Peace to all their Seed; for whom we give Thanks, and pray
that under their wise and just Administration, we may lead Lives in all
Godliness and Honesty.

In a Word, We should bless God for the Bounties and Benignities of the Year
past in particular, and be above every Thing solicitous what we shall render
for the Benefits done unto us. Bless the Lord, O our Souls, and all that is
within us, bless his holy Name.

3. Let us fear and reverence that great and dreadful Name, THE LORD OUR GOD.

His Works of Wonder, of Power, of Wisdom, of Goodness and Faithfulness, should
have such an Influence upon us. Again,

4 Let us not dare to go on in a Course of Rebellion against God.

It will be the vilest Ingratitude, if we do; and we may justly expect, if we
do, that the Profusion of Goodness which we have experienced, will be
concluded; and the Treasures of Wrath will be opened, to vindicate the Honor
of incensed Justice, and of abused Love and Patience. But let us remember from
whence we have fallen, and repent, and do the first Works, that God may go on
to own us for his People. The two following Paragraphs are added since the
Sermon was preached, from the Rev. Mr. Foxcroft's Century Sermon, page 44, 45.


"Let us be sollicitous to do all we can to secure the Continuance of the
gracious Presence of God among us. To this End, let us be concerned to get
every provoking Evil reformed: Let us be inquisitive into the Causes of the
present Decay of Piety, and Unsuccessfulness of the Gospel; labor to repair
all our Defects, rectify all our Mismanagements, and retrieve our Characters
Let us unite all our Endeavors, Cares and Prayers, for the Recovery of
languishing Religion, for the building up Christ's Kingdom, and carrying on the
Work of the Lord, that we may see the Return of good Days. That Is the Call of
Christ to his People here, Rev 3 2, 3. Be watchful, and strengthen the Things
which remain that are ready to dye, for I have not found thy Works perfect
before God, remember therefore how thou have received, and heard, and hold
fast, and repent. And as in Verse 11. Behold I come quickly, hold that fast
which thou have, that no Man take thy Crown. He that has an Ear, let him hear,
what the Spirit says unto the Churches."

"Let us often recollect the Errand of our Forefathers into this Land, and
pursue that great Interest, which brought them hither, when it was a Land not
sown, an inhospitable Wilderness, where (as they were wont to say) they
esteemed Brown Bread and the Gospel good Fare. Let us be mindful of the holy
Covenant, wherein they have bound us to be the Lord's; and teach it our
Children, who shall tell it to the Generation to come, that they also may set
their Hope in the Lord. And that our little Ones may know the Covenant Care and
Faithfulness of the God of Israel, under whose Wings their Forefathers came
hither to dwell in Safety. Let us attend to the Words of David's dying Charge
to the Rulers and People of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 28.8. Now therefore in the Sight
of all Israel the Congregation of the Lord, and in the Audience of our God,
keep and seek for all the Commandments of the Lord your God: that ye may
possess this good Land, and leave it for an Inheritance for your Children after
you for ever"

Further,

5. Let us charge our Children and Households to keep the right Ways of the
Lord, to do Judgment and Justice, and let us set them an Example of it in our
own holy, humble, thankful and obedient Lives; that in so doing we may inherit
the Blessings, and avoid the Threatenings recorded, Isa. 1.19, 20 If ye be
willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land. But if ye refuse and
rebel, ye shall be devoured with the Sword (of divine Justice): For the Mouth
of the Lord has spoken it.

In a word* Let this Day and the Sacrifices of it, come up for a Memorial
before GOD, of our holy Joy in Him, and of our hearty Love, and humble
Gratitude, and of our steady and fixed Resolutions, by the Help of his Grace,
to walk worthy of the Lord unto all well pleasing. And when we have eaten and
are full, let us bless God for the good Land which he has given to us; and be
careful that whether we eat or drink, or whatever we do, that we may do all to
the Glory of God

To GOD, only wise, bountiful, and gracious, be all Honor and Glory, for Ever
and Ever,

AMEN.
AN APPENDIX.
IT is thought proper, not so much for the Gratification of the Curious, as for
the Quickening of the Serious, and Admonition of the Unthoughtful, That the
Covenant of Association, which the first Settlers of this Town entered into in
their Infant State; and upon the Signing of which they admitted others to
Incorporate with them, should be published, by Way of Appendix.

And also the solemn Covenant of God, which our Fathers entered into when they
gave themselves up to the glorious Jesus, to be his People in Church Communion.

Here follows,

I. The SOCIETY COVENANT in these Terms, viz.

1. We whose Names are hereunto subscribed, do in the Fear and Reverence of our
Almighty God, mutually and severally promise amongst ourselves and each to
other, to profess and practice one Faith, according to that most perfect Rule,
the Foundation whereof is everlasting Love.

2. That we shall by all Means labor to keep off from us, all such as are
contrary Minded; and receive only such unto us, as be such, as may be propably
of one Heart with us; as that we either know, or may well and truly be informed
to walk in a peaceable Conversation with all Meekness of Spirit, for the
Edification of each other in the Knowledge and Faith of the Lord Jesus; and the
mutual Encouragement unto all temporal Comforts in all Things; seeking the Good
of each other, out of all which may be derived true Peace.

3. That if at any Time Difference shall arise between Parties of our said
Town, that then such Party and Parties, shall presently refer all such
Difference unto some one two, or three others of our said Society, to be fully
accorded and determined, without any further Delay, if it possibly may be.

4 That every Man that now, or any Time hereafter, shall have Lotts in our said
Town, shall pay his Share in all such Rates of Money and Charges as shall be
imposed upon him rateably in Proportion with other Men, as also become freely
subject unto all such Orders and Constitutions, as shall be necessarily had or
made, now or at any Time hereafter from this Day forward, as well for loving
and comfortable Society in our said Town, as also for the prosperous and
thriving Condition of our said Fellowship, especially respecting the Fear of
God, in which we desire to begin and continue, whatsoever we shall by his
loving Favor take in Hand.

5 And for the better Manifestation of our true Resolution herein, every Man so
received, to subscribe hereunto his Name, thereby obliging both himself, and
his Successors after him for ever as we have done.

This Covenant is subscribed by 126.

This Association Compact, plainly shows, that the Truth and Ways of God,
mutual Assistance and brotherly Love were Things much regarded by the first
Setlers of this Town; and sure I am, that they are worthy of the Notice of
their Posterity.

Now follows

II. THE CHURCH COVENANT, in these Terms, viz.

"We whose Names are subscribed, having found by woeful Experience, the
Unstedfastness of our Hearts with God, and Proneness to go astray from his
Ways, (for which we desire to abase and humble ourselves in his Presence) and
desiring to be joined forever to the Lord, and to cleave together in spiritual
Love and Communion, according to his holy Institutions, that we might enjoy in
his Name such holy Helps as the Lord Jesus in Wisdom and Compassion has
ordained in his Gospel for his People, thereby to let out himself unto them,
and to build them up in Faith and Holiness, 'till he have prepared them for
everlasting Communion with himself.

We do therefore, in the Name and Presence of God, and of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and before his People here assembled, solemnly enter into Covenant with
the Lord our God professing and acknowledging the Lord Jesus, our blessed
Redeemer, to be the only Priest, Prophet, and King of his Church, and (through
the Help of his Grace) his only Merit we rest upon for our Pardon and Peace
with the Father, his only Teaching and righteous Government, with all the
blessed Ordinances of his Kingdom. We do embrace and submit unto in all Things,
as the only Rule of our Lives; renouncing all our own Righteousness, with all
the Doctrines, Devices, and Commandments of Men, not agreeing with his holy
Word; especially all the superstitious and tyrannous Commands of Antichrist,
and his Adherents, wherein we have in any kind been entangled; professing and
promising (through the Help of his rich and free Grace) henceforth not to live
unto ourselves, but unto the Lord Jesus, who has bought us with his Blood,
avoiding carefully all such Things as be offensive to his Majesty, and
dishonorable to our Profession of his Name, with all such dangerous
Temptations as our sinful Hearts are wont to be drawn aside withal, in special,
the inordinate Cares of, and Entanglements in, the Affairs of this Life:
Promising and professing also, through the Help of the Lord, to live together in
this our holy Fellowship, according to the Rule of Love, in all holy
Watchfulness over each other, and faithful mutual Helpfulness in the Ways of
God, for the spiritual and temporal Comfort and Good of one another in the
Lord; and all to the setting forth of the Praise of his rich Grace in Christ*
who has called us, in his abundant Mercy, to this holy Fellowship with his
Majesty, and one with another."

Nov. 8. 1638.

N. B. In the Time of the Rev. Mr. Adams, upon the 23d Day of May 1683, the
Church solemnly renewed their Covenant, and in the doing of it, they made some
very necessary and weighty Additions to the former.

The Renewal of Covenant is thus Prefac'd.

"We who through the exceeding Riches of the Grace and Patience of God, do yet
continue Members of this Church, being now assembled in the holy Presence, and
in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, after humble Confession of our manifold
Breaches of Covenant before the Lord our God, and earnest Supplication for
pardoning Mercy, through the Blood of Christ, and due Acknowledgment of our great
Unworthiness to be owned as the Lord's Covenant People, also acknowledging our
Inability to keep Covenant with God, or to perform any spiritual Duty, unless
the Lord Jesus do enable us thereunto, by his Spirit dwelling in us. And being
awfully sensible that it is a dreadful Thing for sinful Dust and Ashes
personally to transact with the infinitely glorious Majesty of Heaven and
Earth; We do in humble Confidence of his gracious Assistance and Acceptance
through Christ, each one of us, for ourselves, and jointly as a Church of the
living God, explicitly renew our Covenant with God, and one with another, in
Manner and Form following."

Then follows the Form of Covenant before written; to which is added the
following Paragraphs, viz.

"And whereas there are many Evils that are grown too common in this Land; so
far as we or any of us have been guilty of any of them, we desire from our
Hearts to bewail it before the Lord, and humbly to entreat for pardoning Mercy,
for the sake of the Blood of the everlasting Covenant. And as an expedient unto
Reformation, of whatever Evils have provoked the Eyes of God's Glory among us,
We do subjoin unto our Church Covenant, a further Engagement, whereby we do in
the Presence of God promise" --

"That we will (by the Help of Christ) endeavor every one of us to reform his
own Heart and Life, by seeking to mortify all our Sins, and endeavoring to
walk closely with God, to uphold the Power of Godliness, to keep holy the
Lord's Day, and reverently and carefully to attend upon the Dispensation of the
Word and Ordinances of Christ, and all Parts of his Worship (whether public or
private) according as in the Word of God it is required of us to do."

"We promise also (by the Help of Christ) to walk before God in our Houses with
an upright Heart, taking Care that God be constantly called upon by Prayer, and
that the Scriptures be frequently read in them, and that we will endeavor to
perform all Duties required of us toward our Children, for their spiritual
Good, both by our Example, Instruction, and Government, and Prayers for them."

"We do further engage (the Lord helping of us) to endeavor that we may be
pure from the Sins of the Times, such as neglect or Profanation of the Worship
and Institutions of Christ, Sabbath-breaking, vain and sinful Company-keeping,
mispending of Time, excessive Drinking, wanton and loose Behavior, failing in
Truth, uncharitable and unrighteous Censuring, sinful Tale-bearing, corrupt
Communication, Pride, Covetousness, and the like; and in our Places to
endeavor the suppression of them. And that we will make Conscience to walk so,
as that we may not give Occasion to others to Sin, or to speak evil of our holy
Profession.

"Now that we may observe and keep this sacred Covenant, and all the Branches
of it inviolable for ever, we desire to deny ourselves, and to depend wholly
upon the eternal Spirit of Grace, and upon the free Mercy of GOD, and the Merit
of JESUS CHRIST, and when we shall fail, there to wait upon the Lord Jesus for
Pardon and for Acceptance, and for Healing, for his Name Sake."

It is added,

"This Form of Covenant being made openly in the Congregation after Sermon and
Prayers in the Forenoon, the Brethren of the Church testified their Consent
thereto by lifting up the Hands, and the Sisters by arising up from their
Seats."

And now (my dearly beloved Brethren) Let us remember the Vows of God that are
upon us: Let us often read over, and seriously reflect upon our Covenant
Engagements: Let us humbly lament before God all that Breach of Covenant, which
we are chargeable withal, and cry mightily for pardoning Mercy through the Blood
of the everlasting Covenant. And that the holy God, would not avenge upon us
the Quarrel of his broken Covenant. And, O that for the Time to come we might
have a more constant and steady Regard to our Covenant-Engagements, and walk
worthy of the Lord unto all well pleasing. Unto which let this Covenant (now in
our Hands, and O that it was written on our Hearts) be a constant and continual
MONITOR.

Let not the LORD our GOD abhor us to destroy us, but remember the Covenant of
our Ancestors -- Having entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of our
Fathers, with all our Heart, and with all our Soul; let us in the most solemn
Manner renew the Bonds with which we have bound our Souls, and like the Men of
Judah, rejoice at the Oath: Having sworn with all our Heart, let us seek God
with our whole Desire.

And let us be careful to bring our Children under the Wing of the Covenant,
and the Bonds of the Covenant, that we may plead Covenant Mercy for them, and
have a Covenant-Hope for our Offspring.

And for our Encouragement, let us remember, that all the Paths of the Lord are
Mercy and Truth unto such as keep his Covenant, and his Testimonies -- The
Mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him,
and his Righteousness unto Children's Children; to such as keep his Covenant,
and to those that remember his Commandments to do them.

Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord; he is their Help and their Shield.
The Lord has been mindful of us, he will bless us, he will bless the House of
Israel, he will bless the House of Aaron, he will bless them that fear the
Lord, both small and great. -- The Lord shall increase you more and more, you
and your Children -- You are the blessed of the Lord that made Heaven and
Earth; the Heaven, even the Heavens are the Lord's, but the Earth has he given
to the Children of Men.

We will bless the Lord from this Time forth and for ever more. AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
T^^ (...) ^^^rteous Reader is desired to correct with his Pen (...) ^^llowing
Escapes from the Press.

Page 1 in the Text, v 4 line 1. for their, r. their. p. 6. l. 24. for Their r.
There, and is before absolute. p. 11. l. 32. for is comprehended, r. are. p 12.
l. 22. for Pase, r. Pass. p. 13. l. 16. for Text. r. Fact. ibid. l. 23. for
relish r. refresh. p. 15. l. 14. for 2 r. 4. l ult. for Obed r Oded. p. 17. l
20. for exhorting r. exhorted. p. 18. l. 5. r. Advantage. p. 44. l, 23. dele
the first and. p. 47. l. 26. r. dishonorable;


