Well-accomplish'd Soldiers, a Glory to their King, and Defense to their
Country.

A SERMON Preached at Hingham, On a Training-day there, May 10. 1738. In the
Audience of Four Military Companies; And now published, at the Desire of their
Officers.

By Ebenezer Gay, V. D. M.

Judge. 3.2. Only that the Generations of the Children of Israel might know to
teach them War, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof.

1 Chronicles. 7.40. -- And the Number throughout the Genealogy of them that were
apt to the War, and to Battle, was twenty and six thousand Men.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for DANIEL HENCHMAN, over against the Brick
Meeting House in Cornhill. 1738.

A Military SERMON.
2 Chronicles. 17.18. And next him was Jehozabad, and with him an hundred and
fourscore thousand, ready prepared for the War.


IT was a part of the Priest's Duty, under the Mosaic Dispensation, to hearten
and incite the Armies of Israel to fight the Lord's Battles, with Intrepidity
and undaunted Courage. Deuteronomy. 20.2, 3, 4. It shall be when ye are come nigh unto
the Battle, that the Priest shall approach, and speak unto the People, and
shall say unto them, Hear, O Israel, ye approach this day unto battle against
your Enemies: let not your heart faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither
be ye terrified because of them. For the Lord your God is he that goes with
you, to fight for you against your Enemies, to save you. As the Priest was to
speak thus, and animate the Soldiers to a valiant Behavior in the Day of
Battle, so questionless, he was before it, to exhort them, as there was need,
to be in a readiness, duly prepared for it. That there was such a number of
well-disciplined Men with Jehozabad, might be partly a good Effect of the
Priests and Levites faithful teaching throughout all the Cities of Judah, of
which the Context speaks. And what the Ministers of the Lord then did, may be
now equally incumbent on the Preachers of the Gospel of Peace. It is therefore
(as I apprehend and undertake it) the Duty of my Post, to be a Monitor unto
Soldiers; who, by coming at this time into the House of the Lord, seem to
demand of me, as the Soldiers did of John Baptist, Luke 3.14. And what shall we
do? And though he is the least of Christ's Ministers, at whose Mouth they seek
the Law; yet while I declare to them the Counsel of God, I may expect that they
will TAKE HEED.

With this Chapter begins the History of Jehoshaphat's glorious and happy Reign
over the Kingdom of Judah. He was the Son and Successor of a good King, and
walked in the first ways of his Father Asa, as well as of David. His Wisdom in
ordering his Military Affairs, to his own Establishment in the Throne, and the
Peace and Welfare of his Subjects, is the only Thing in his Character and
Administration, which I shall now remark to you, as what may afford us some
seasonable Instruction.

Of this we have an Account in the beginning, and from v. 12. to the End of the
Chapter. Upon his Accession to the Throne, he strengthened himself against
Israel. And he placed Forces in all the fenced Cities of Judah, and set
Garrisons in the Land of Judah, and in the Cities of Ephraim, which Asa his
Father had taken. In the latter Days of Asa, which were not so pious and
prosperous as his first, there was War between the Kingdom of Israel and of
Judah: So that the first Thing which Jehoshaphat, after he came to the Crown,
had to do, was to fortify against so near and formidable an Enemy. Which he did
so effectually, that (...), King of Israel, instead of pushing on the War
against him, soon courted his Alliance and Assistance. Jehoshaphat strengthened
himself, not as his Father did, by a League with the King of Syria, but by
building Garrisons on his Frontiers, and well-manning of them. On which lawful
Methods of Defense, he might expect God's Blessing, and in the use of which
proper Means he trusted in God. And Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly, and he
built in Judah Castles and Cities of Stone: in which he had plenty of Arms,
Ammunition, and Victuals. And he had much Business in the Cities of Judah,
which he did not through Indolence and Luxury, neglect; but did a great deal in
repairing and fortifying the Cities of Judah, and furnishing them with
necessary Provisions, as well as in purging them from the Relics of Idolatry
and Injustice. And the Men of War, mighty Men of Valor, were in Jerusalem.
Jerusalem being the Metropolis of the Kingdom, and the Thrones of the House of
David being set there, the principal of the Military Forces were placed in it:
or at least, the Generals and Chief Captains, with some Companies of their
Soldiers, attended the King there. And these are the Numbers of them, according
to the House of their Fathers: Of Judah, the Captains of Thousands; Adnah, the
Chief, and with him mighty Men of Valor, three hundred thousand. And next to
him was Jehohanan the Captain, and with him two hundred and fourscore thousand.
And next to him was Amasiah the Son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself
unto the Lord; and with him two hundred thousand mighty Men of Valor. And of
Benjamin; Eliada a mighty Man of Valor, and with him armed Men with Bow and
Shield, two hundred thousand. And next him was Jehozabad, and with him an
hundred and fourscore thousand, ready prepared for the War: These waited on the
King, besides those whom the King put in the fenced Cities throughout all
Judah. The Sum total of the Soldiers under these five Captains, was Eleven
Hundred and Sixty Thousand Men. It may seem incredible, that so vast an Army
should be raised and maintained out of the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin:
Especially since in the preceding Reign, Asa could not bring into the Field Six
hundred thousand Men. Chap. 14. 8. It is probable, as some conceive, that
Jehoshaphat had not all these at one time, but successively: The Train'd-Bands
of Judah being first under the Command of Adnah; and after his Death, under the
Command of Jehohanan; and afterward of Amasiah. And the Train'd-Bands of
Benjamin, first under the Command of Eliada, and then of Jehozabad. Or, as
others conceive, that this numerous Host, almost Twelve Hundred Thousand, in
the Reign of Jehoshaphat, who was under a special Blessing of God, and waxed
great exceedingly, as in Riches and Honors, so likewise in Military Strength,
was dispersed all the Country over, each Man residing, for the most part, on
his own Estate, only appeared on Days of Muster to be trained; and were ready,
whenever there was Occasion, to go forth to War; but the Commanders, with a
suitable Lifeguard, waited on the King at Jerusalem. These, says Mr. Pool,
were the Trained-Bands or Auxiliaries, whose Chief Officers waited upon the
King to receive his Commands, and to raise and bring in all or part of their
Forces to the Service of the King and Kingdom, as Need required. -- From the
Connection of the Text and the Character given in it of the Soldiers under the
Command of General Jehozabad, I may observe to you this Doctrine, viz.

Doct. That it is the Honor of a Prince, and Safety of a People, to have a
competent Number of Men, ready prepared for War.

The Glory of Jehoshaphat's Reign, and the Felicity of his People under it,
consisted partly in the good Order of the Militia; that there was a sufficient
Number of Trained Bands in a readiness for any Expedition, thoroughly fitted for
the War, that either was or might arise in his Time. And this is the Honor of
any Prince, and Strength of any People.

Perhaps some will desire to hear proved, what is in this Doctrine supposed,
That War is lawful. If it be not so in any Case, the Doctrine is false. It is
no Credit to a King, nor advantage to his Subjects, but the reverse, for them
to be wise to do evil, and prepared for a bad Work. If War be always in it self
sinful, then all Dispositions to it, and Preparations for it, are so likewise.
And Sin is the Reproach of any King and People: It stains all their Glory,
weakens their Strength, and lays them open to Dangers and Miseries. But that
War in some Cases, and with some Restrictions, is lawful and expedient, the
Light of Reason and of Scripture plainly discovers. Though the Cause of it is
always bad, and the Effects of it woeful: Though it comes from Men's Lusts, and
spreads Desolation and Death on the Face of the Earth; yet sometimes People
have a Call to engage in it, and their shedding the Blood of War, may not be a
transgression of the Divine Law, Thou shall not kill. If it be possible, we
should live peaceably with all Men: But sometimes it is not so; and then War on
their Side, who used their best Endeavors for the preservation of Peace, is
lawful and warrantable, is necessary and unavoidable. "Together with Life, and
a natural Love of it, and Means to support it, God has imparted to every Man a
Right to defend it, with its necessary Supports, against unjust, extreme and
inevitable Violence upon it, or them", and to repel Force with Force. The Law
of Self-preservation, which is the Law of God and Nature, obliges Men to fight
in Defense of their Lives and Liberties, when violently assaulted and invaded;
and, if other Means will not prevail, to maintain, or recover their Rights by
the Sword of War. The Law of Humanity, which is also the Law of Christianity,
binds Men in this way to assist their Neighbors against unjust Invasions and
Encroachments; and to deliver them from cruel Oppressions and Captivities. When
Abram heard that his Brother Lot was taken Captive, he armed his trained
Servants, born in his own House, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued the
Enemies, and smote them: and brought back the Captives, and all their Goods
Genesis 14. 14.
Melchizedeck, King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God, met him, and
royally entertained him, and blessed him; thereby approving and applauding what
Abram had done, in the Slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and the Kings that were with
him: And the New Testament describing the Greatness of Melchizedeck, mentions
this Action of his, Heb. 7.1. If War had been in all Cases unlawful, there
would not have been such Permission and Encouragement given to it, as there was
in the Jewish Polity, which was of Divine Institution: And the Battles which
God's People fought against their Enemies, would not be called the Lord's
Battles. If the Employment of Soldiers had been illegal and unwarrantable, John
the Baptist would not have prescribed moral Rules to be observed by them in it
Luke 3.14.
, but advised them to quit it, and betake themselves to another Course of Life.
The Centurion's Faith would not have been so highly commended by our Savior
Mat. 8.10.
, nor Cornelius's Prayers and Alms accepted by God Mat. 8.10.
, if their Calling (which for all that appears they continued in) had been
unlawful. Though the Gospel dissallows of private Revenge Mat. 5.39.
, yet it forbids not our seeking for public Justice, in Case of insufferable
Wrong: For the Civil Magistrate is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute
Wrath upon him that does Evil Romans 13.4.
. But his Power, which is over his own People only, extends not to the
redressing of Injuries that are done to them by another Nation. And in such
Cases there may be a warlike Process by an Appeal to the Lord of Hosts, the
great Patron of Right, and Dispenser of Success. -- Indeed it is foretold, Isa.
2.4. that in the last Days, the Days of Gospel Light and Peace, the Nations
shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks:
that Nation shall not list up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn
War any more. But this Prophecy shows, that the Design of the Gospel is to
introduce and establish a universal Peace, and good Will among Men on Earth;
and in those on whom it has its proper Effect, it mortifies those Lusts, from
whence come Wars and Fightings. But since the Gospel is so far from being
embraced by all Nations; and they who profess it, are so far from living up to
the Rules and Precepts of it, the Time is not yet arrived for the full
accomplishment of this Prediction and Promise. And till then, we may, by reason
of Men's corrupt Interests and Lusts, which the Gospel opposes, expect to see
those Words of the Prince of Peace verified, Mat. 10.34. Think not that I am
come to send Peace on Earth; I came not to send Peace but a Sword. And while
accidentally, through the Corruptions of Men's Hearts, and the prevalence of
their Lusts, the Consequent of our Lord's coming, and setting up his Kingdom is
War, the prosecution of it on one side, may be what the Gospel allows, yea
requires, But though War is sometimes lawful and expedient, yet it should be made
with good Advice, and only in Case of great Necessity should People engage in,
and pursue it. After all amicable Means of adjusting Differences between Nation
and Nation, prove ineffectual, then, and not before, may they be referred to
this Divine Arbitrament. And I cannot think, but that Soldiers, who are pressed
into a War, should be convinced of the lawfulness of it: and should not be
obliged to engage in it, on a blind presumption that there are good Reasons for
it, though they must not know them. All that are killed by them in an unjust War,
are murdered; and the Cry of Blood is louder than the confused Noise, which
there is in every Battle of the Warrior. And will the Blood unjustly shed in
this manner, cry only against the Prince, by whose Authority the War is levied?
Will the whole Blame fall upon him? If so, then Subjects may innocently abet
the Lusts, the Ambition, the Avarice, and Bloodthistiness of a King. If the
Sovereign Power be the absolute and only Judge whether the Soldier's Cause and
Call be good, then the Subjects of the Grand Turk may be excused and justified
in the Slaughter of Christians: And the Subjects of Popish Princes in the
Massacre of Protestants: And the Roman Soldiers did not amiss in apprehending
and crucifying our Lord, when their Superiors commanded them: And that
Soldier, which is said to have told Caesar, in his first Expedition against
Rome, that in Obedience to his Commands, he would not refuse to sheath his
Sword in the Breast of his Brother, or in the Throat of his aged Father, or in
the Bowels of his pregnant Mother, was not to be deteited for his unnatural
Barbarity, but commended for his loyal Affection to his General. Which
Consequences are very shocking.

Though it is sit, that the great and difficult Affair of War, should be
entrusted with the Prince and Councils of a Nation, yet Soldiers that would
keep their Consciences and Hands pure from the Guilt and Stain of Blood, should
modestly enquire into the Merits of the Cause in which they fight; and
reasonable Satisfaction should be given them that the War is lawful, and the
Cause better than their Lives, which they venture for it. The Manifestos of
Kings, setting forth the Grounds and Reasons of their proclaiming War, need be
clear and full, as their Commands, requiring their Subjects to engage in it,
are plain and peremptory. Soldiers are to fight as rational and moral Agents,
and not go forth to the War, as the Horse, which has no Understanding, rusheth
into the Battle.

It may seem as if I had made a long Digression at the very Entrance of my
Discourse: But to prove that War may be lawful, was necessary, and much more is
not so, to the evincing the Truth of this Proposition, viz. That it is the
Honor of a Prince, and Safety of a People, to have a competent Number of
Soldiers, ready prepared for War. -- In handling which Point I shall endeavor,
I. To show what Men are ready prepared for War. II. That such are an Honor to
their King, and Defense to their Country.


I. To show what Men are ready prepared for War.

That they are the able-bodied, the bold-spirited, the compleatly-armed, and
well-disciplined.

I. The Men who are prepared for War are able-bodied. Such only are fit for
War, as are endued with Strength and Agility of Body. Jehoshaphat's Men of War,
are in the Context styled, Mighty Men: They were mighty and strong Men for the
War: Mighty in regard of bodily Strength. Soldiers were anciently termed, the
Chosen Men. In the Choice that was made of them, respect was doubtless had to
this necessary Qualification. Good Soldiers are such as can endure hardness;
the Fatigues of long Marches, tedious Watchings, and hot Combats. Their
Employment is laborious, attended with many Hardships, which the Weaklings and
Invalids cannot undergo. Such are unable to sustain the Brunts of Martial
Conflict, and to repel the Assaults of potent Adversaries. There must be
Strength given unto them, that turn the Battle to the Gate. And no
Fortifications are made so impregnable by Nature, or Art, or both, as that the
Blind and the Lame are sufficient to maintain 'em against a power Assailant: I
allude, you know, to the Jebusites vain Confidence in the Strength of their
Fort, and scoffing Defiance of David and his Forces, 2 Samuel 5, 6, 7. -- Which
spoke unto David, saying, except thou take away the Blind and the Lame, thou
shall not come in hither: thinking David cannot come in hither. Nevertheless,
David took the Strong Hold of Zion. Weak and wounded Men will not ordinarily
serve to take a City, or to beat back the Besiegers Jer. 37.10.
. The Lord in an extraordinary manner defends the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
when he that is feeble among them is as David Zech. 12.18.
. Saul and Jonathan were thus celebrated as Men of War; 2 Samuel 1.23. They were
swifter than Eagles; they were stronger than Lions.

2. The Men which are ready prepared for War, are bold-spirited. Fortitude of
Mind is as necessary a Qualification in Soldiers, as Strength of Body. Without
this, when there is the greatest Occasion for the other, the Men of Might
cannot find their Hands. Strength without Courage, is as vain and
insignificant, as Anger without Strength. Those under the Command of Amasiah,
are said to be mighty Men of Valor v. 16.
And such were those mentioned in the Text, or it would not have been said of
them, that they were ready prepared for the War. The dastardly and
pusillanimous are most unfit for this Employment. It was therefore one of the
Martial Laws God gave his People, Deuteronomy. 20.8. The Officers shall speak further
unto the People: and they shall say, what Man is there that is fearful and
faint-hearted? let him go and return unto his House, lest his Brethren's Heart
faint as well as his Heart. Cowards betray the Cause in which they are engaged;
discourage the Hearts, and endanger the Lives, of those with whom they are
listed; and embolden their Enemies, not much less timorous than themselves. A
few such may let in Ruin upon a whole Army. And that is commonly verified in
them, which Christ says, Joh. 12.25. He that loves his Life, shall lose it.
They cast away their own Lives, which they are so fond of saving; and bring
swift Destruction on themselves, by flying from it: For as great Cowards as
themselves, will eagerly pursue Fugitives, and dare run them through, or shoot
them behind. "Such as shun Death, meet it oftener than they that seek it".
Gusta. Aloph.
Julius Casar was never wounded in Battle, though he ever fought in the foremost
Ranks of his Troops. -- The Heathen Moralists reckoned Bravery in War the
highest Expression of Courage: And that the Soldier had the greatest
Opportunity to show this Virtue, because Life, the dearest Thing to a Man in
this World, is risqued in War. And it is certain, that he is not fit for War,
that is afraid to die. Soldiers therefore need make their Peace with God, that
they may be prepared for War; and be sure of the Goodness of their State, as
well as Cause, that they may be ready to march into the Mouth of Danger, and
meet the King of Terrors in the Field of Battle. If they are Enemies to God,
and in a State of Condemnation, their Valor is Vainglory, rather than true
Courage. Pagan Philosophers taught, that Fortitude is always accompanied with
Justice and Truth. Christians may further add, that it is joined with Piety and
Faith. The Wicked often fear where no Fear is; and are most likely to be
dispirited, to be afraid with great Amazement, when they shall hear the Alarm
of War, and be called out to Action, in which they must jeopard their Lives.
Psalm. 28.1. The wicked flee, when no Man pursues: but the righteous are bold
as a Lion. These have good Reason to be so, for God's Providence is engaged
with them, and for them: And the Helmet of Salvation, which is the Hope of
Eternal Life, may well make them to hold up their Heads in the midst of
Dangers, and to set Death at Defiance. Though they are not sure of a Victory on
Earth, yet they may be of a Triumph in Heaven. If they prevail against their
Enemies, they are apparent Conquerors; if they fall before them, they die in
Peace with God, and shall be happy for ever. No Attempts of Pagan Heroes are so
gallant, no Exploits so illustrious, as those of God's Worthies. Their Faith
made them valorous and victorious. -- Through Faith they subdued Kingdoms --
escaped the Edge of the Sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant
in Fight, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens Heb. 11, 33, 34.


3. The Men who are ready prepared for War, are compleatly-armed. The first
Inventer of Weapons to fight with, was probably Tubal-Cain, whom Zillab bare to
Lamech: He is said to be an Instructor of every Artificer in Brass and Iron,
Genesis 4.22. For this he was Deify'd by Men; this gained him a high Place among
the Gods of the Nations, under the Name of Vulcan.

Instruments of Death are necessary and useful in War. If fewer Lives would be
destroyed, more Cripples, it is likely, would be made, by fighting without them.
Men would act greater Cruelties upon one another, and the Controversy not be so
soon decided. If War therefore be just, it may lawfully be managed with armed
Violence; and the Mischiefs of it may be less, than if it were prosecuted by
naked Combatants. -- Various have been the Weapons of War, which the different
contending Nations of the Earth have invented and used against one another.
Guns and Swords are now the most common. And they who are not furnished
therewith, are not fitted for War. Strength and Courage are not sufficient
without Armor of Proof. To the best natural Accomplishments for War, there
must be added Military Equipments. The mighty Men of Valor under Jebozabad,
were, like those under Eliada, armed with Bow and Shield: Weapons, offensive
and defensive: or it would not have been said, that they were ready prepared
for the War. The People were destitute of such Soldiers, and were in a
distressed Case when War was in the Gates; and there was not a Shield or Spear
to be found among Forty thousand in Israel, Judge. 5.8. Either their Oppressors
had disarmed them; or their Weapons, through their own Sloth and Negligence,
had been so long disused, that the Rust had spoiled them. And in Readiness Time,
there was no Smith found throughout all the Land of Israel: (for the
Philistines said, lest the Hebrews make them Swords or Spears) 1 Samuel 13.19. So
it came to pass in the Day of Battle, that there was neither Sword nor Spear
found in the Hand of any of the People that were with Saul and Jonathan, Verse.
22. The Philistines were very politic in depriving the Israelites of Smiths,
lest they should make for themselves Instruments of War. But very impolitick
and mean were the Israelites in suffering the Philistines thus to impose upon
them. And though God took occasion from their being so ill-provided for War, to
glorify his Power in the Discomfiture and Destruction of their Enemies, yet
this was inexcusable Negligence in them. Although the Lord saves not with Sword
and Spear 1 Samuel 17.47.
, though he sometimes gives Success to those who are destitute of suitable
Weapons of War, to show that the Battle is his; yet they have no regular Trust
in him, who take no Care to furnish themselves with the same. Though Soldiers
take to themselves the Shield of Faith, yet they must have material Instruments
of War that they may be prepared for it. David went forth in the Name of the
Lord of Hosts to fight Goliath, yet he took his Sling in his Hand, and chose him
five smooth Stones out of the Brook, 1 Samuel 17.40. He put off Readiness Armor,
because it did not fit him, he had not proved it; he had not then much
Experience of such Weapons, which the King would have had him made use of. He
was better accoutred with his Sling, and the small Stones he picked out of the
Brook. He preferred these Weapons, how contemptible soever in the Eyes of
others, because he had been accustomed to them. And they were indeed the
fittest for his purpose. A little Stone from his Sling was a proper Instrument
to lay the Gigantick Foe on the Ground; and then there was no Sword like
Goliab's own, wherewith to give the finishing Stroke, and complete the Victory,
by cutting off his Head.

4. The Men who are ready prepared for War, are well-disciplined. This
comprizeth two necessary and excellent Qualifications of Soldiers; that they be
skilful and governable.

1. Well-disciplin'd Men are trained up to military Exercises. Are expert in
War; are instructed in the Arts of it; acquainted with the Methods of Fighting.
They are such, to whom the Beat of the Drum, and Sound of the Trumpet, are not
uncertain and strange: to whom the Words of Command are familiar, and easy to
be executed. That understand the Business of their respective Posts; the part
which every one is to perform: That can readily take their Places, and keep
their Ranks: That know the various Marches, Facings and Postures, to receive an
Attack from, and make an Assault on their Enemies; how to Charge and Retreat:
And that can dexterously handle their Arms: As the Gadites, who separated
themselves unto David, Men of War, fit for the Battle, that could handle Shield
and Buckler 1 Chronicles. 12.8.
. -- As God does instruct the prudent Husbandman to discretion, and teach him:
so he does likewise the expert Soldier. David, who excelled in martial
Knowledge, gave God the Glory of it. Psalm. 144.1. Blessed be the Lord, my
Strength, which teaches my Hands to War, and my Fingers to fight. Military
Skill is to be obtained from the Lord of Hosts, in the use of proper Means; and
not to be expected by extraordinary Instruction or immediate Infusion. Though it
is a good Gift that comes down from the Father of Lights, yet it is an
acquired Endowment. By Study and Exercise, Men are to learn War. David bad them
teach the Children of Judah the use of the Bow, 2 Samuel 1.18. God, by Men and
Means teaches the Hands of Soldiers to War. Military Skill is a requisite
Preparation for War. Without it, Strength cannot be exerted nor Courage showed,
nor Weapons handled, to good purpose. Eccl. 8.18. Wisdom (of which Military
Skill is one Branch) it better than Weapons of War. They who are destitute of
it, will be more likely to hurt themselves than their Enemies, with their own
Weapons. A few trained Bands usually do greater Exploits than Armies of
unskilful Soliders Vastly numerous Hosts have been routed and put to Flight by
a few regular Troops; and large Kingdoms overturned by the small Force of
expert Warriors. Abraham's three hundred and eighteen Men, with which he
pursued and smote four potent and victorious Kings, were his trained Servants
Genesis 14.14.
: Such as he had well instructed in the Military Art: and with which he
prudently attacked a numerous Army, coming upon them from several Quarters,
that he might strike them with the greater Terror. Skill in War often defeats
the Enemy's Strength; and it helps the Soldier to make the best use of his own.
Psalm. 18.34. He teaches my Hands to War, so that a Bow of Steel is broken by
mine Arms. Wonderful Feats could David perform with Hands that were so well
taught. His breaking a Bow of Steel was the Effect of his Skill, rather than of
his Strength. He did it, not so much by main Force, as by slight of Hand. And
his killing Goliath was not purely miraculous, nor merely accidental. Though the
Finger of God is not to be excluded from, yet David's Skill was improved in
that remarkable Action. It was indeed by God's Providence, but not without
David's Art, that the Stone was directed to such a Place, and came with such
Force, as to cast down the mighty Champion. David did not use his Sling, as the
Man, who smote Ahab through the Joints of his Harness, drew a Bow at a venture
1 Kin. 22.34.
, when he smote the Philistine in the Forehead, that the Stone sunk thereinto,
and he fell upon his Face to the Earth 1 Samuel 17.49.
. To show his Contempt of David, Goliath might come negligently toward, and in
his scornful Rage turn back his Helmet, and expose his naked Forehead to so
inferior a Combatant. One of the Rabbis supposes, that when Goliath said to
David, Come to me, and I will give thy Flesh unto the Fowls of the Air, he
threw up his Head in Disdain so hastily, that his Helmet fell off, and so left
his broad Forehead a fair Mark for David's Sling. But if Goliath kept on that
piece of his Armor, yet David might level so right, as to hit the Place which
was left open for his Adversary's Eyes. Is it not probable, that he was as good
a Mark's. Man as the Seven hundred Left Handed Benjamites we read of in Judge.
20.16. Every one of whom could sling Stones at an Hair's breadth, and not miss.

2. Well-disciplin'd Men are subject to Martial Orders. Are not only trained up
to Military Exercises, but inured to the observance of Established Laws of
Arms. That are obedient to their Commanders in all things, consistent with
their Obedience to God: like the Men of Issachar that were ready armed to the
War, and came with the other Tribes of Israel to David to Hebron, to turn the
Kingdom of Saul to him; who are thus described, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. Men that had
Understanding of the Times, to know what Israel ought to do: the Heads of them
were two hundred, and all their Brethren were at their Commanament. The Princes
of Issachar knew how to rule, and the Commonalty of that Tribe were disposed to
obey: The Leaders were intelligent and judicious, and the Soldiers modest and
obsequious. Out of the high Esteem they had of their Commander's Wisdom and
Prudence, they were at their Beek; willing to be directed and ordered by them.
The Centurion had a well-disciplin'd Band, who said to Christ, in Mat. 8.9. I
am a Man under Authority, having Soldiers under me: And I say to this Man, Go,
and be goes: and to another, Come, and be comes: and to my Servant, Do this,
and he does it. Good Order is the Beauty and Strength of an Army, as well as of
any other Society: And it consists in the prudent Conduct of Officers, and
obsequious Carriage of Soldiers. If Men will not observe the Rules of Military
Order, they are not prepared for War, how well soever they may in other
Respects be accomplished for it. Their Strength, and Courage, and Weapons, and
Skill, do only fit them to do more Mischief to their King and Country, than
their Enemies can. Mutinous, seditious, disobedient Soldiers overthrow the
Commonwealth, and betray the Cause which they should maintain. A discontented,
murmuring Spirit in an Army, is like a Fever in the Body; or Fire in a City. A
mutinous Army is the nearest Resemblance of Hell; and next to Hell, the worst
Place for any Man to be in. They are not well-disciplin'd therefore, and
prepared for War, who are not governable, and subject to Martial Order. --
"Marlius Forquatus (a Roman Commander) put his own Son to Death, because he
fought contrary to his Directions, though he proved victorious. A French General
once Knighted a Soldier, because he was the first Man that climbed the Bulwark
of a besieged Fort, whereupon ensued the gaining of it, and then hanged him
within an Hour after, because he did it without Command. Julius Caesar was of
another Temper; for when he saw that Scava, one of his Soldiers transgressed in
Discipline in Battle against the Britains, but behaved himself with singular
Valor, he preferred him to a Centurion's Place". I do not approve the Severity
of the two first Instances, nor the mildness of the last: A middle way betwixt
both seems most eligible, and might serve to make Solders careful, that they do
not transgress the Rules of Order, and violate the established Laws of Arms.

Having thus considered what Men are ready prepared for War, I am next to show,

II. That it is the Honor of a Prince, and Safety of a People, to have a
competent Number of such.

The Glory of Kings, and Welfare of their Subjects, are not to be separated,
but may be distinguished; and a sufficient Number of able-bodied, courageous,
well-arm'd and disciplined Soldiers, contributes not a little to both.

1. It is for a Prince's Honor, to have a suitable Number of Men, ready
prepared for War.

God, the great King of Heaven and Earth, is glorious, as he is the Lord of
Hosts. This is one of his magnificient Titles: The Lord of Hosts is his Name.
All his Works, in all Places of his universal Dominion, are his Hosts: so that
there is not any Number of his Armies. All his Creatures are ranged by him in a
goodly and convenient Order. Like an Army marshalled to Battle, or marching in
Array, they are under his Conduct, ready pressed for his Service, and when he
speaks, or only beckens to them, or hisseth for any of them, they immediately
engage in his Quarrel. Isa. 40.26. Lift up your Eyes on high, and behold who
has created these Things, that brings out their Host by Number; he calls
them all by Names, by the greatness of his Might, for that he is strong in
Power, not one fails. When he calls them by their Names, they readily
answer, Here we are Job 38.35.
. He orders his Creatures as a General mustereth his Troops, and draws out
the Squadrons of his Army; and he has a Magazine and Treasury, out of which to
supply any of his Hosts, which he sends forth on an Expedition. Have thou
entered into the Treasure: of the Snow? or have thou seen the Treasures of the
Hail, which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the Day of
Battle and War Verse. 22, 23.
. -- God, it is true, needs no Host to guard his Life, to support his Dignity
and Government, and to fight his Battles. But that we may have some Conception
of his Majesty, and Glory, and Power, he is represented as a mighty General,
that has numberless Legions under his Command. The Lord of Hosts he is the
King of Glory. Selab. And an earthly King, who is a visible God, a
Representative and Vicegerent, of the invisible, eternal King, as in other
Respects he resembles him, so in this he is like him, when he has a puissant
Host, a well-modelled Army, a competent Number of Soldiers, ready prepared for
War. This is a very considerable part of a Prince's Grandeur, and a necessary
Defense upon all his other Glory. Prove. 14.28. In the multitude of People is
the King's Honor: but in the want of People is the Destruction of the Prince.
His Honor being opposed to his Destruction, among the multitude of People in
which his Honor is, there must be a sufficient Number of good Soldiers; for in
the want of such, how numerous soever his People be, is his Destruction. --
Much of the Honor of Kings is borrowed from their Subjects, and depends upon
them; and from which of their Subjects does more Honor ordinarily accrue to
them, than from their brave, expert and victorious Soldiers, and on which is it
more dependant? Where we have an Account of David's Greatness, we have a
Catalogue of his mighty Men, 1 Chronicles. 11.9, 10. David waxed greater and
greater: for the Lord of Hosts was with him. These also are the Chief of the
mighty Men whom David had. The Presence of the Lord of Hosts made him great,
but this it did by Men and Means. It was his Greatness, Reputation and Honor
to be attended and served by such mighty Men of Valor. -- In having a
well-ordered Militia, a sufficient Number of Soldiers, ready prepared for War,
a Christian King gives Proof of his Wisdom and Faithfulness, as he is
constituted by God, the Parent and Guardian of his Country, a Protector of the
Church, and Patron of Religion. He manifests a generous Concern to defend his
People from foreign Injuries and Invasions, and to secure them from intestine
Broils and Factions; that under his Shadow they may enjoy Safety and Quiet, may
reap the Fruits of their Industry, and not be disturbed in the Practice of
Godliness and Virtue: and therefore it is his Honor.

2. The Safety of a People requires, that they should have among them a
competent Number of Soldiers, ready prepared for War. The Honor of a Prince is
the Happiness of his People: What conduces to his Glory, does so to their
Felicity. His Hononr is founded in those good Qualities and Deeds, which tend
to their Advantage. He does not acquire Honor without their Aid and
Concurrence: nor could he retain it without their Support: which they cannot
afford him, unless they are protected in the Enjoyment of their Lives and
Properties. As therefore a competent Number of Soldiers, thoroughly fitted for
War, adds much to his Glory; so it is by necessary Consequence at parant, that
the Safety of his People lies very much therein.

A Militia put into and kept in good Posture, is the Safety of a People, as it
detereth and discourageth Enemies from making War upon them. It is said in our
Context, That the Fear of the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the Land that
were round about Judah, so that they made no War against Jehoshaphat. His vast
Army of Men, so well prepared for War, and his Forts and fenced Cities, in
Conjunction with his eminent Piety, (of which we read in this Chapter) struck a
Terror upon the neighbor Nations, which had before forely vexed the Kingdom of
Judah, so that they did not for some time attempt any thing against it. But if
a People are destitute of Men prepared for War, their Carelessness about their
own Defense encourages, yea invites, aforeign Invasion. A monitory Example we
have of this in Judge. 18. The Spies whom the Danites sent to look out a more
commodious Place for them to dwell in, came to Laish, and saw the People that
were therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet
and secure: That the City was unfortified and the Men unarmed and
undisciplined; not being apprehensive of any Danger, because they had perhaps
enjoyed a long Peace. The Spies returning, spoke thus to their Brethren, Arise,
that we may go up against them. -- Ye shall come to a People secure -- for God
has given it into your Hand. And the Children of Dan encouraged by this
Report, came unto Laish, unto a People that were at Quiet, and secure, and they
smote them with the Edge of the Sword, and burnt the City with Fire. Six
hundred Men with Weapons of War, obtained an easy and entire Conquest over that
People, which dwelt in a large Land, because they were so unprepared to resist
an Enemy. -- A well-instructed Militia is the Safety of a People, as such is
most likely to stop their invading Foes, and turn the Battle to the Gate of
their Enemies. They should not indeed boast of the Strength and Bravery of
their Soldiers, nor confide in the best military Provisions for their Defense:
For the Battle is not always to the Strong; and God, in whom we should trust,
can save a People, and destroy their Enemies, by the weakest and most
improbable Means. He can make a little Barley-Cake to strike and overturn a
Midianitish Tent: And three hundred Men, with no other Weapons than Trumpets,
earthen Pitchers, and Lamps, to confound and scatter a huge Host Judge. 7.
He can demolish the strongest Walls, with the Blast of Rams-Horns, and the
Noise of People shouting, as easily as with battering Rams, or roaring Cannons,
and massy Bombs. But if People pretend to rely on God to save them from their
Enemies, and fight their Battles, while they are not careful to provide for
their own Defense, they tempt him rather than trust in him. The Sword of the
Lord, and of Gideon, Judge. 7. 8. "The Sword of the Lord is all in all to the
Success of the Sword of Gideon, yet the Sword of Gideon must be employed. Men
the Instruments, and God the principal Agent, must both be considered in their
Places". When Joshua was going to dispossess the Canaanites, he was assured of
God's Presence with him, yet was enjoined to be strong, and very courageous. We
should do our utmost toward our own Preservation and Success against our
Enemies, while we trust in God therefore. It was a brave Speech which Joab made
at the Head of his Army, when the Front of the Battle was against him both
before and behind, 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good Courage, and let us play the Men
for our People, and for the Cities of our God: and the Lord do that which
seems him good. God can save without Means, or by Means least fitted to the
End: But it is his ordinary way to work by Means, and to work most by the aptest
Means. A suitable Number therefore of Men, ready prepared for War, are the
visible Strength and Safety of a People, as well as the Honor of their Prince.

APPLICATION.
1. We may from bence infer, that if a Prince and People consult their own
Honor and Safety, they will be careful to have always a sufficient Number of
Men, ready prepared for War. They will encourage a Martial Spirit, and do what
is respectively incumbent on them, to promote Military Skill and good Order;
that the Commonwealth may not be destitute of able and expert Soldiers, who are
its Beauty and Defense. There was no War against Jeboshaphat, when he took such
Care, and his People concurred with him in it, to have the Militia in a good
Posture, -- so many thousand mighty Men of Valor, well-arm'd and disciplined,
ready for Service, whenever there should be Occasion. And his Father Asa, in
whose Days the Land had Quiet Ten Years, called upon his People to join with
him in making a good Use of the Peace they enjoyed, by fortifying their Cities,
arming and training their Soldiers: The Number of which out of Judah, that bare
Targets and Spears, were three bundred thousand; and out of Benjamin, that bare
Shields, and drew Bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand: All these were
mighty Men of Valor 2 Chrou. 14.
And they found the Benefit of having a well-equip'd and powerful Army; for by
it, under God, was discomfited and destroyed an Host of a thousand Thousand,
and three hundred Chariots, of the Ethiopians, that came against them. Prudent
States, wise Kings and Nations, when they sheath the Sword, take up the Trowel;
and in Time of Peace, prepare for War. In the Country of Laish, where the
People dwelt careless and secure, till a small Regiment of Danites smote them
with the Edge of the Sword, there was no Magistrate that might put them to
Shame in any thing Judge. 18.7.
. The. People were stupidly regardless of their own Safety, and their
Magistrates (if they had any) indulged and countenanced them, as in other
Faults, so also in their wretched Security: did nothing to make 'em sensible
and ashamed of their Nakedness. A neglect of warlike Preparations for their own
Defense, is shameful both in Magistrates and People, and often proves the Ruin
of both.

Though there has been of late more of a Martial Spirit to be observed among us,
than was formerly; and something has been done in many Places toward the
Recovery of Martial Skill, which was almost lost; yet it might be humbly asked,
whether the Government be not wanting to their own Honor, and the People's
Safety, in not providing Laws, guarded with severer Penalties than those we
have at present, to oblige Soldiers to attend the Exercises, which are
necessary to sit them for War? And whether People are not defective in
furnishing their Young Men with proper Weapons of War, and encouraging them to
learn the dextrous Use of them? And whether that Respect is paid to those, who
by a laudable Care and Diligence, have acquired Martial Knowledge, do excel in
it, and endeavor to propagate it, which is due to Men, who desire in this Way
to honor their King, and serve their Country?

2. We may hence infer the Duty of Soldiers, to be ready prepared for War.
Since their being so, is the Honor of their Prince, and Safety of their
People, their Obligation thereunto is apparent, strong and sacred. They should
faithfully endeavor to be so, for Conscience sake twards God, who requires
them, and every other Order of Men, to honor the King, and seek the public
Safety and Welfare, in which the Glory of God is so much interested. It Is said
of Amasiah, one of the brave Generals, in our Context, that he willingly
offered himself unto the Lord. And thus should every Commander, and private
Sentinel, in the Militia do, should offer himself, not only to his King, to
serve him, and his People; but to the Lord, to glorify him, in the Calling of a
Soldier. That his Strength, and Skill, and Courage, and Weapons of War; all his
Military Accomplishments and Achievements, may be HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD OF
HOSTS. This, according to the Prophecy of Zechariah, Chap. 14. Verse. 20. was to
be the Inscription upon the Bells of the Horses, in the Day of Gospel Light. It
should be written on the Furniture of War-Horses, and would be the greatest
Ornament to them, and Honor to those who ride upon them. Soldiers should
piously design the Honor of God, in all that they undertake, for the Honor of
the King; and aim to serve God, in serving their Country: GOD, THE KING, AND
OUR COUNTRY, should be the Soldiers MOTTO, and animating Word. If Soldiers are
endued with a true Principle of Obedience to God, of Loyalty to their Prince,
and Love to the Commonwealth, they will conscientiously endeavor to be ready
prepared for War. Wherefore, I beseech you, Brethren, who this Day appear in
Arms, and all of your Order here preseat, suffer the Word of Exhortatio;; which
may be addressed, 1. To military Officers. 2. To private Soldiers.


1. Let military Officers, of every Rank and Denomination, faithfully endeavor
that they themselves, and all under them, may be ready prepared for War.
Acquaint your selves with the Business of your respective Posts, and diligently
attend the same. It Is reasonably expected that you, of whom others are to learn
War, should be expert in it your selves: thoroughly skilled in all the Exercises
of the Military Art. It is a great Reproach to an Instructor in any Art, when
it may be justly said unto him, Thou therefore which teach another,
teaches;t thou not thy self? It Is a Disgrace to the Militia, when the LEADER of
a Company, is fit only to be a BRINGER-UP OF THE FRONT-HALF-FILES. Superior
Skill is requisite for them that are not appointed to teach others. And they
should study, and take Pains, that they may be well-accomplish'd Commanders. --
When you muster and embattail your Troops, let it not be to make a Show only;
or merely to divert your selves and others, and beat the Air with Trumpets,
Drums and Guns: But let all those Exercises be performed, which are necessary
and useful to instill and increase Military Knowledge, and make expert and
brave Soldiers. The Four Days in a Year allotted for Trainings, may well be
spared from other Employments, by those who are good Husbands of their time;
and it would be very unreasonable and absurd in them that are Prodigals of
their Time, to complain of this Expense: But it is Pity, that those Days should
be Days of Vanity, and be wasted (as they too often are) to little or no good
Purpose.

With manly Courage and Prudence exercise that Authority which, in the several
fit Degrees of Subordination under the CAPTAIN GENERAL, you are clothed with.
This is necessary for the preservation of good Order, and the promoting of
Martial Skill and Valor among the Soldiers. And by a grave Deportment, a
steady Conduct, and singular Expertness in Warlike Exercises and Affairs,
you will better maintain your Authority, support the Dignity of your Posts, and
engage the dutiful Respects of those under your Command, than you can do by a
strutting Gate, big Looks, and domineering Words; yea, than by the greatest
Severity of Discipline, or Expense of Military Treats.

2. Let private Soldiers get ready prepared for War. Do not through Pride, or
Sloth, or Worldliness, or Dissatisfaction, neglect a Duty, which you owe unto
God, to your King, and to your Country. The Constraint of Conscience (without
the Coertion of humane Laws) should be effectual, to make you appear at your
Colors, on appointed Days of Muster, and attend the Exercises, which may fit
you for public Service. -- Guard against every Thing which may hinder your
profiting by such Means of Instruction, and defeat the good End of Trainings.
Let there be no Murmurings against Officers, nor Quarrels among
Fellow Soldiers. Keep your Hearts with Diligence; watch your Spirits, that you
be not, by the fair Pretenses of the envious Sowers of Discord, and by slight
Provocations from any, enflamed into Discontent, Wrath and Wrangling. If you
would be thought mighty Men of Valor, betray not such Weakness, as to be
easily conquered by your own Passions. They that are ungovernable, mutinous,
and soon angry, may have little of true martial Fire in them. Good Soldiers
have "warm Hearts, and cool Heads. -- Take heed unto your selves, lest at any
time, (and especially when you appear in Arms) your Hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and Drunkenness. If the Grecian Combatants to prepare themselves for
Running or Cuffing, were temperate in all things 1 Cor. 9.25.
; ought not Christian Soldiers much more to be so, that they may be prepared
for War? It is a great Prejudice to Military Improvements, as well as Reproach
to the Christian Name, that Training-Days are so often followed with disorderly
revelling Nights: with Rioting and Drunkenness, Chambering and Wantonness,
Strife and Fighting. For Whoredom and Wine, and new Wine take away the Heart
Hos. 4.11.
. By serving their Lusts and Pleasures, Men consume their Strength of Body and
Mind, and disqualify themselves for the Service of their King and Country.
Playing the Fool unfits you to play the Men for your People, and the Cities of
our God. After you have been in the Field displaying your Martial Strength and
Skill, and brandishing the Weapons of War, to show with what Bravery you will,
if there shall be Occasion, employ the same against our Enemies, to be so soon
conquered, cast down wounded, and led away Captives, by fleshly and base Lusts,
how inglorious, how shameful is it! Too often has this been told in Gath, and
published in the Streets of Ashkelon, to make the uncircumcised Enemies, that
war against our Souls, rejoice. -- But, Brethren, I hope better Things of you,
though I thus speak. -- I speak not these Things to shame you, but as my beloved
Sons I warn you. -- Remember this and show your selves Men. -- Be ambitious and
industrious to excel in Martial Knowledge and Valor. Addict your selves to all
those Exercises, which may render you well-accomplish'd Soldiers. And so you
may be an Honor to your King, and Blessing to the Land; and we may glory in
you as one part of the Beauty and Strength of our Israel.

Suffer me one Word to this whole Assembly. -- O prepare for the War, in which
there is no Discharge.

I have exhorted those of the Military Order to be ready prepared for War, from
which the Land has these many Years, through the Favor of God, had Rest; and
which we pray it always might (though we are far from presuming it always will)
have: Let me exhort Persons of every Order, and Age, and Condition, and Sex, to
be also ready for a War, that is certain and unavoidable. -- A War from which
no Release can be obtained; no Exemption for Men, nor Women; for the Righteous,
nor the Wicked; for the High, nor the Low; for the Rich, nor the Poor; nor the
Strong, nor the Weak; for the Old, nor the Young; for the most buisy; the
new-married; nor the faint-hearted. -- The War was proclaimed in Paradise; it
began at the Fall of Adam, and will continue to the End of the World. It has
raged in every Land; and the Deselations made by it, O how sad and rueful! You
know what I mean. -- The War is betwixt Mankind and Death. -- We are all of us
pressed into it, and must soon be actually engaged in it, to fight the decisive
Battle for an eternal Kingdom. -- The Trumpet now sounds a Preparative to it:
ARM. ARM. ARM. The Enemy is within our Gates, and is laying Siege to the Fort
of our Life. Have we our Armor ready? have we proved it? -- Put on the whole
Armor of God. Stand in a continual Readiness for the Assault: Having your
Loins girt about with Truth, and having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness,
and your Feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace. Above all,
taking the Shield of Faith, and take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of
the Spirit, which is the Word of God: Praying always with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance Ephesians. 6.
. Being armed with these Divine Graces, and Christian Virtues, we shall be
prepared for the terrible Conflict: Be valiant and victorious in the last
Battle. Through Christ, the glorious Captain of our Salvation, be more than
Conquerors over the all-conquering Champion, Death. -- As Jehoshaphat's Army
went forth against the Children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, (a very
formidable Host that came against Judab) with Singers, to Charge in the Front
with that Doxology, Praise the Lord, for his Mercy endures for ever 2 Chronicles.
20.21.
: So we may be able to meet the last Enemy, the King of Terrors, with that Song
of Triumph in our Mouths, O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy
Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law. But
thanks be to God, which gives us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ 1
Cor. 15.55.
.

AMEN.

