Mr. RUGGLES' s Sermon ON THE Usefulness and Expedience of SOLDIERS.

THE Usefulness and Expedience OF SOLDIERS AS DISCOVERED By Reason and
Experience, AND Countenanced and Supported by the GOSPEL. A SERMON Preached TO
AN Artillery-Company At Guilford, May 25. 1736. On the Day of their first
Choosing Their OFFICERS. And now made Public at their Earnest Desire and
Charge.

By Thomas Ruggles, A. M. Pastor of the First Church There.

N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. GREEN, 1737.

THE Usefulness and Expedience OF SOLDIERS.
LUKE III. 14. And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying. And what
shall we do?
THE Usefulness of Soldiers in this present world of Sin and Lusts, Together
with the Honor and Dignity of that Employment, is a thing almost all Nations
Acknowledge and Approve. But then by how much the more Nations are Civilized and
become Polite, by so much the more is the Martial Art Improved and Advanced:
And by Consequence, becomes so much the more Honorable and Useful; Improves
and Enobles the Minds of men: And therefore as its Improvements and Use is of
great Advantage to mankind, so it is both Reasonable and Laudable for men to
Endeavor to Accomplish themselves with Military Knowledge and Skill.

DAVID that man after God's own heart, As he confesses, Psalm. CXLIV 1. God had
taught his hands to War, and his fingers to fight; So has be made and Dedicated
one of his best Poems, To and upon, Military Employment; I mean that which is
usually styled David's Elegy, or Mourning over the Death of Saul and Jonathan,
Recorded II Samuel, Chap. I.

The Poem (as one The Rev. Mr. Symmes, in his Lovel Lamented.
Expresses it) is a Martial Poem; It Is written with a truly Martial spirit and
life; The Subject is entirely Military; And as it discovers the Greatness of
David' s spirit; so no words can more Commend the true Grandeur of a Military
Life, or set forth the Honor of those that Excel in Martial Knowledge; such as
Saul and Jonathan were.

Nor is the Business of a Soldier Inconsistent with the Life or Character of a
Christian; Those that are the professed Subjects of the Kingdom of Peace; yet
are many times called forth into the Field to hear the Confused noise of Battle
and have their Garments Rolled in blood. God has not therefore been unmindful
of them; Such is the Excellency and Comprehensive Nature of God's Word, that
therein even a Soldier may learn much of his Duty; and how to Conduct himself
as to be Approved of GOD and be Acceptable in the midst of his Brethren.

A Soldier is not a person Exempted from the Laws of Reason or Religion; nor
left to live at an Ungoverned and Lawless manner; (Though too often they give
themselves too large a Liberty in this Respect.) But the Laws of Honor,
Justice and Sobriety are Equally obliging upon them, as on other men. God has
therefore Taught them what he Requires of them, and what it is they ought to
Do. Our Text and Context, has an Immediate and Direct relation hereunto; They
Demand, What shall we do? And John gives them a brief, but very Comprehensive
Direction what their Duty is; Thus, The Soldiers also Demanded, And what shall
we Do?

I shall not at this time trouble you with any Critical Observations upon the
Text; Either who these Soldiers I am sensible by Soldiers here. Expositors in
general (...) of the Roman Militia left and kept to (...) the Country in Quiet.
But as we Read, Luke XXII 52. of the Captains of the Temple; and as it is
Evident there were some of the Priests or Levites, whose Employment was to be a
Guard upon the Temple, etc. And as John' s as well as our SAVIOUR' s Ministry,
seems to be much Confined to the Lost Sheep of the House of Israel; It may not
seem altogether Improbable these Soldiers were of this sort. But of which
Number soever (Either Jews or Romans) they were, seems of no great moment to
our present purpose.
were; or concerning the Person of whom the Demand is made, who was John
Baptist, the forerunner of Christ; It may suffice in General to say, That among
the many that came to hear John's Ministry, and Enquire their Duty, the
Soldiers came also to him and Demanded of him, What shall we do? The whole of
the Account is perfectly Souldier-like; The Enquiry is expressed with the very
Air and spirit of a Soldier in it; They Demanded; They speak as men of true
Greatness of mind, as persons who were not accustomed to be Demed. It Is
Recorded of the other persons, that came before to John, that they Asked, --
But the Soldiers Demanded, And what shall we Do? And by John's gentle and
pious Answer and Directions to them, It Is abundantly plain, that as he no ways
Disapproved of their Calling, so a Soldier may be Taught what he should do
from the Laws of Religion.

From whence in general we may make these Two Remarks.

1. Remark, That the Employment of a Soldier is what both GOD and the Gospel,
do Allow, Countenance and Approve of.

2. Remark, A Preacher of Christ, may without going beyond the bounds of his
Duty, Preach to and Instruct Soldiers in their Duty.

But what I shall at this time Insist upon and speak unto from the words, I
shall cast into this method, under Three Doctrinal Propositions, viz.

I. It Is a Duty, and what a People of God should take care of, That there be
among them those Trained up in the Knowledge and Business of Soldiers; as that
they may become Valiant Soldiers to fight the Lord's Battles, and be
Courageous for themselves, for their Land and for their Families.

II. Consider what Influence and Countenance the Word of God does afford, to
Excite and move persons to faithful and sincere endeavors to Accomplish
themselves as good Soldiers.

III. Both Reason and Experience discover it is the Duty of Soldiers to
Endeavor especially to become Skilful, in those Methods of Martial Knowledge,
as may furnish them to be, and in the best manner make them a Defense to their
Country and answer the Ends of Soldiers.

We begin with Considering,

PROP. I. It Is a Duty, and what a People of God should take special care of,
that there be among them those Trained up in the Knowledge and Business of
Soldiers, as that they may become Valiant Soldiers, to fight the Lord's
Battles, and be Courageous for themselves, for their Land and for their
Families.

That the Employment and Business of Soldiers is Countenanced and Approved,
even under the Gospel, seems to me plain from our Text. Had it been against the
mind of God, that men should have been thus Employed in this Business,
doubtless John, whose ministry was that of Repentance, would have roughly and
severely Reproved them and forbidden it.

And both the voice of Experience and Reason, which in this case is the voice
of God, discover the Necessity thereof, and plainly dictate how much it is a
Duty for men to become Expert and Valiant Soldiers: that they may be able to
answer that noble Exhortation of Joab to the Soldiers of Judah, 2 Samuel X 12.
That they be of good Courage and play the men for their People and for the
Cities of their God.

I am not come up into the Pulpit to teach the Arts of War. This is not the
business of a Minister of the Kingdom of Peace. But as Soldiers may demand of
such, And what shall we do: So as the Gospel descends to consider men in every
Condition and Station they are placed in Providence. As it Instructs them to be
Faithful in the Calling in which they are, so it abundantly Countenances and
Encourages persons being Trained up in Martial Knowledge; and that those that
have Abilities therefore, endeavor to furnish and accomplish themselves as good
Soldiers.

Whatsoever may hereafter be in the world, as yet we know and see the Time is
not come, that men beat their Swords into Plough shares, or their Spears into
Pruning Hooks; that Nation should not rise up against Nation, nor the people
learn War any more. And however Peaceable the principles and designs of
Religion may be, yet they don't Conquer men to an entire Subjection to them, So
but that a people are sometimes Called to the Sword, even to Defend the
Enjoyment of the Privileges of the Gospel. And so it is likely that Wars and
Fightings will be, as long as Satan's Malice and Men's Lusts are so Powerful in
the world. Nor is a Martial spirit Inconsistent with the Profession of
Religion, The best of (...) left on Sacred Record, have their Names Extolled
for their Valor in the Exercise and Arts of War, as I may show hereafter. Nor
is it the Design of Religion, nor does it ever (...) to take away from men, or
deprive them of the necessary or prudent means of Self-preservation and
Self-defence, or Safety of their Families or Country.

This Land of Christians has in a peculiar manner found the Advantage thereof.
Under GOD, our Lives, our Religion, our Liberties are owing to the Valiant and
Martial Achievements of those of our Forefathers, who were mighty in Battle.
Else to all Humane probability, they would have been swallowed up at once, as
it were, by the Vast Numbers of their Indian Enemies, whose tender mercies are
Cruelty.

I know the Commonplace Objections against Military Exercise; Why our Enemies
are all Destroyed, It don't look likely we shall ever be engaged in War.
Besides, we live in a corner of the world, as it were, and none will concern
themselves about us. The World seems to be also all at Peace; and it is needless
and unnecessary to trouble our selves in this Matter. (...) Earnest, are these
Objections? Are our Enemies all Destroyed? Whence then of late Years, have we
those of our Young men called forth into the high places of Battle? And what
Numbers of Enemies are round about us on our Borders, which if permitted by
God, like Locusts could and would come up and cover our Land. They are prone to
Cruelty and Revenge of themselves, which the Popish Incendiaries from pretenses
of Religion, cease not to stir up their savage minds to Cruelty and Bloodshed.

The French (if the Judgment of a late Ingenious Mr. Addison.
Author may be relied upon) are the most Inveterate and Dangerous Enemies to
the English Nation. These are they that nearly Border upon; yea, in some sense
Compass us round about. Who both by Interest, and more especially the
Prejudices of their Religion, are set against us; so that perhaps, no People
are more Envied and hated by their Neighbors. And should Wars break forth
among the Nations, which may be sooner than our Expectations, we can expect no
other but there would be those who would Endeavor and use all their Power to
swallow us up.

The Great GOD holds the Supreme Dominion over all Worlds and all Things; He
Reigns in Heaven, Thrones and Dominions, Principalities and Powers being
Subject to him: His Dominion Extends over all the Children of men. As by him
Kings Reign, so he cuts in sunder the spirits of Princes, scatters their
Counsels, and disappoints their wisest Measures, and overturns the most
peaceable and prudent Measures; so that whatever fair prospects of Peace may
seem to appear, through the wise and prudent Counsels of our Gracious KING, yet
what Changes may be in the Right Hand of GOD Most High, none can say; and all
Endeavors for Peace be blasted and disappointed; and we called to hear the
Alarm of the Trumpet, and the Noise and confused Sound of Battle --.

NEW ENGLAND has been famous for men of Military genius and Courage for
Soldiers, Valiant in fight. Of which we in this Government, have not (perhaps)
been a whit behind the very Chiefest of all, I cannot look back upon the Great
Major Mason, in the Pequod War, without a peculiar Regard and Honor to his
memory. Nor are the Succeeding Worthies in after Times of Trouble to be
Neglected or forgotten, Who Signalized themselves in Valor and Success;
Especially the principal snare our Forces under their Great Commanders bore in
the Success against the Nanhagansit Indians and Fort. Having such Examples,
methinks we should be ashamed to come Behind Them.
But it is Lamentable how much a true Martial spirit is laid aside; And men are
not only Careless and unconcerned about it; -- as if they had no Business, --
As if they had no Lives, worth Fighting for, -- No Country* worth a Saving. But
speak of it and too often Treat it with Contempt. And thus by weakening the
Hands of their Neighbors, they discourage all becoming and Honorable
Endeavors to attain the Skill. Shall we thus lose our Name, and Expose all
that is Dear and Valuable together! Ignorance in Military affairs is the Mother
of Cowardice, and tends to make men of a Little and fearful spirit and Soul.
Men indeed may Talk very High, and vent themselves in Big swelling Words before
hand; and make a great pretense and fair Show: But certainly a person of Reason
and Consideration, who comes into the Field ignorant of Military Exercise, must
feel something (though with a much worse spirit) like David, in an Armor he had
not proved.

Knowledge and Experience makes men Hardy and inspires with Courage --. Both the
Ignorance and consequent ill Effects thereof, are therefore left as an Eternal
Reproach upon Laish, Judge. XVIII. 27. They lived at Ease and Secure, and so
became an easy Prey to a Handful of men.

Besides, Were not these things so; Yet there is so much true Manliness and
Grandeur in Military Exercise: It inspires the Mind with such Just, Honorable
and Exalted Notions and dispositions: It so much tends to banish Littleness and
meanness, and fill men with Greatness of spirit. (For, a truly Valiant Soldier
would disdain to Kill even his Enemy in a little Underhand and sneaking
manner.) I say, were it upon these Considerations only, Every person who has
any Relish for what is Just, Manly and Honorable, would labor to maintain it
for the good of Mankind. Its observable of the old Romans, as a martial spirit
Decayed among them, in proportion Luxury prevailed; and consequently Effeminacy
and a Train of Vices overspread them, Which as it sunk their Reputation, so by
degrees Ended in the Ruin of their Country. And it is usually found True, where
a Generous and Military spirit sinks and Decays, Luxury -- and Wickedness that
brings a people Low, overflows as a Flood, Even against the Restraints and
under all the Advantages of Religion.


War is one of the Heavy Judgments wherewith God punishes a wicked and
Backsliding People. And when we Consider our many Crying Sins; so provoking to
Heaven and defiling our Land: When we consider the Impudence we are grown up to
in Sin; the Ingratitude and Decay of Religion that is pure and undefiled before
God; When we consider how little of a spirit of Repentance and Amendment is to
be found among us, after so many repeated Threatenings and Warnings from GOD in
his Word, -- From His Ministers, the Watchmen of this his Jerusalem, -- And by
his Judgments. Can we expect any other but that he will Judge us for these
things, and Avenge his Soul on such a People, whom in a special sense He has
Known above all the Families of the Earth, By sending the Sword to Devour, as
well as other Judgments to Consume and Destroy us.

But thus much may serve to Illustrate and Confirm the first Truth proposed. I
shall therefore now proceed briefly to Consider,

PROP. II. What Influence and Countenance the Word of God does afford to Excite
and move persons to faithful and sincere Endeavors, to Accomplish themselves
as good Soldiers.

And here I might begin and tell you, It Is the Title and Character the Great
GOD takes to Himself, That he is the LORD of Hosts, the GOD of Armies. And
still more to the purpose; Moses in the first Song Recorded in Scripture, thus
speaks of him, The LORD is a Man of War* the LORD is his Name, Exodus XV. 3
Which, perhaps, is the boldest Metaphor made use of to represent the Most High
GOD in his Word. Now, as we would be like this our Great LORD and Governor,
should we also herein Endeavor to imitate him*

I might also add, It Is the Style and Character wherein our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
the Captain of our Salvation Represents himself, The Captain of the Host of the
Lord, Josh. V. 14. The Angels are his Host. Michael, i. e. Christ, ^ought (...)
his Angels, Rev XII. 7.

It may be observed also, Satan is a skilful Warrior, and has Slain his Ten
Thousands: And that in order to oppose him Successfully, To Engage against
Principalities and Powers and the Rulers of the darkness of this world, against
wicked Spirits in high places, which is the business of Christians; it may be
of good Advantage for men to Know something of the business of Warring.

I might also reckon up and set before you a Catalogue of those Worthies which
in sacred Scripture are Renowned for their Martial Skill, as well as Singular
Piety. What a Name did Abraham the Father of the Faithful gain to himself by
his Val^rous overthrow of the Four Kings, as Recorded, Gen XIV. -- And that
with the Trained Soldiers of his own House?

David that Excellent King, the man after God's own Heart, was also Remarkable
for his Military Skill and Warlike Actions; and that not only in his Younger
years, when he slew the Phil^^^ian Champion Goliath; but also afterward, when
God Raised and set him at the Head of his Espoused Israel. It would be too
Tedious to reckon up and tell you of Gideon, Jephtha and Sampson, of Joshua and
the Judges, of Jehoshaphat, Afa, Hezekiah, and the good King Josiah, who was
Slain and lost his Life in Battle

I might add in the last place, The Life of a Christian is called a Warfare. As
such we are to put on the whole Armor of God, To fight the good fight, -- To
endure Hardness as good Soldiers; So says the Apostle Paul, Fight I not as one
that beats the Air, I Cor. IX. 26. So the Church of Christ in her greatest
present Glory, is Compared unto and Represented by, An Army with Banners. Which
all are borrowed Similitudes from the business of Soldiers.

But what I shall principally Insist upon, shall be under these Three things.

1. Military Skill and Knowledge is what the Bible does Direct and Require we
should labor to Attain. That this is Countenanced and Approved in God's Word,
I have before observed to you; and that in our Text --. But still this is what
we are therein Directed and required unto --. This I gather from that noble
Martial Poem of David' s, upon the Death of Saul and Jonathan, Wherein we find
he left this Command. 2 Samuel l. 18 To Teach, the Children of Israel the use of
the Bow. The Bow is here Expressed by being the chief Warlike Instrument then
in use: Especially that wherein the Philistines, their then present and most
terrible Enemies, were Expert in the use of, I forbear mentioning here, that
well known place, Romans XIII. 1. The Powers that be are of God. Since it may,
perhaps be thought a stretching the Apostle's sense too far --: But when we
Consider, The general Latitude of the Expression. The Powers that be. When also
we Consider, The Roman Emperors Borrowed this Name from the Army, as Chief
General; perhaps the Apostle's Expression may fairly enough Extend to Military
Officers, -- or Powers; as well as Civil Power properly so called.


Now I cannot but consider this Command as still in Force among God's Spiritual
Judah. Martial Knowledge being still as necessary, and as useful, as it was in
David' s time: And where the Reason and Nature of things continue the same, our
Obligation thereunto seems also to be binding upon us.

And from this Example of David, to me it appears, Our chief Military Officers
should see to it, and use all proper Endeavors, that Military Skill and
Knowledge should be Encouraged and promoted.

2. Again, That Military Employ is Countenanced in God's Word, appears from the
many grand and distinguishing Characters that are given to Soldiers that are
Valiant and Expert. Thus they are called, The Excellency or Beauty -- The Glory
of a People. When therefore David Employs his pen in that noble manner to
Lament Saul and Jonathan, He begins and ends his Poem, thus; The Beauty of
Israel is slain, -- How are the Mighty fallen! -- And can words be thought of
more strongly, -- or more greatly to describe the Excellency and Glory of
Valiant Soldiers? -- They were stronger than Lions -- They were swifter than
Eagles. Saul, though perhaps he was a wicked man, yet was a noble Soldier; God
gave him another Heart, the Heart or spirit of a Soldier.

3. Valiant Soldiers, are under GOD, the supreme Refuge and Defense, the
Security and Safety of a People. Upon such does very much the Earthly Security,
Peace and Happiness of a People depend: As they are an Awe and Guard against
Encroaching Enemies; or a Defense against those that Invade and Spoil them. A
People or Land without such men, is in some sort like the Vineyard of God --
Whose Hedge is taken away, and its Stone-wall and Tower, broken down, and lies
open a Prey for the wild Beasts of the wilderness to devour and destroy it.
David therefore who well knew the Safety of making God his Trust, and that this
was his principal Defense; yet blesses God who taught his Hands to fight and
his Fingers to war.

And to Represent this safety and Defense to us, the Church, under Christ, is
thus described, Cant III. 7, 8 Behold, his bed, which is Solomon's: Threescore
valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel They all hold Swords being
expert in War: Every man has his Sword upon his thigh, --

But I proceed briefly to say;

PROP III. Both Reason and Experience discover it is the duty of Soldiers, to
Endeavor, especially to become Skilful in those methods of Martial Knowledge,
as may furnish them to be, and in the best manner make them, a Defense to their
Country, and answer the End of Soldiers.

I need, and shall say little under this Head. The Proposition being Evident
from those that are foregoing, and the End and Design of Soldiers. Let me just
Observe to you; Almost every Country have their differing ways of making War
upon their Neighbors. And almost every Country, or Age, makes some alterations
in the Instruments of Methods of War. The present is very Different from the
former Age, and that from the ancient ways of Warring. Besides, there are many
Stratagems and Methods of making War that are very useful and necessary to be
Known by Soldiers --: Now then as the Business, End and Design of Soldiers
principally, is to be a Defense and Safety to their Country, it highly becomes
such, especially those that would be Expert, and in the best manner answer the
End thereof, to labor to Know and understand every thing that may Enable them
in the best manner to Attack and Oppose Battle, and Vanquish the Enemies they
are or may be called to Encounter.

But I hasten to make some brief IMPROVEMENT.

And here in the first place,

USE, I. Is it as we have heard? Then we may Infer, The Art Military is what
every Person should Labor to Encourage and Countenace. I would not here be
understood, nor do I mean, That every man should himself labor to be a
Soldier. God has distributed his Gifts to men Variously, as pleases Him. One
is a good Tradesman --, Another is Skilful in Mechanics --; On another has he
bestowed the spirit of a Soldier, etc. Such then should Endeavor to
Accomplish themselves for that Business; And all should promote and Encourage
it.

And this should be the Rule for Soldiers in Choosing, or others whose business
it is in Appointing and Commissionating of Military Officers, Even those that
are most Expert and Valiant and furnished with a Martial spirit. Every good man
is not necessarily a good Soldier, or qualified for Military Posts and Power.

I know it is too much the Humor of people not to Regard this very much; -- And
if men Labor to furnish themselves with Military Knowledge; Presently, He is an
Ambitious and aspiring man, -- He shall not be promoted to any place. An unjust
and shameful Principle where it prevails.

As those that are most knowing and Skilful, are the properest persons for such
Employ, so such Industry and Endeavors should be Encouraged and Rewarded, by
the proper Honors that belong thereunto.

USE II. Is it so --? Then hence, Soldiers should Endeavor by all proper and
necessary Methods to gain and furnish themselves with the Knowledge of every
part of Military Skill. It is not Enough, That they Understand the Business of
the Training Field, the Exercise of the Gun, or Spear, or other Military
Instruments, to Brandish the Sword, and conduct themselves gracefully in every
part of Exercise; It Is not eno', That they understand the words of Command, and
know how to March Regularly; Keep their Ranks and Files; That they are
acquainted with the proper Facings, and make good their Ground.

But they should Obey the Commands of their Officers Cheerfully, and understand
the several beats of the Drum, that great Warlike Instrument; They should learn
the reviving and animating Sound of the shrill Trumpet, that noble and reviving
Sound; The Trumpet, that great Resemblance of the Alarm to the final Judgment.

They should also learn how to Charge their Enemies Successfully; How to make
Choice of the most Advantageous Ground; when to Advance; and how to make a
regular, safe and Advantageous Retreat.

Moreover, It becomes them to Endeavor to learn the Art of Encamping --, How
to Defend themselves by Entrenchments and the methods of Circumvallation --:
How to Fortify and Defend our Coasts, or Borders, by Castles, Forts and
Garrisons; How to Besiege our Enemies; to Batter down or Scale their Walls;
Break their Ramparts, and force them to Surrender.

How also to pursue a Victory Successfully when it is gained, And all such
Stratagems and ways in use in Times of War and which Accomplish a Soldier.

In a word, How to be and how to Endure Hardness as good Soldiers.

Besides, I cannot but think it part of the Business of Soldiers, to understand
the ways of Fighting by Sea; in which so much of the English Strength lies; and
in which they have been so Superior and Successful. That they be not Strangers
to the various ways of Engaging in such Battles; Boarding their Enemies, and
Mastering their Opposers. Together with heaving of Bombs, those terrible
Instruments of Destruction; and all other parts of that way of Warring.

I might add, It Is a Soldiers Duty and Business, To see to it and take special
care their Arms be kept in good Order, and themselves well furnished with
Armory, and they ever fit for Service. And be sure never enter into or appear
in the Field, unless in every part they are Accomplished and Furnished for
Soldiers.

How Ridiculous does a man appear in Public, when but Half Dressed? Or like
David' s Messengers, with their Beards half Shaved; or their Garments cut off
by their Skirts?

As much Ridiculous and Unseemly is it, for a Soldier to appear in the Field
without every part of his Armor well Ordered. And I think Officers should be
both Exemplary and very Careful in this point. But I proceed to say,

USE, III. Is it as we have heard? Then we may also learn, It Is a Laudable and
Worthy Undertaking when men lay themselves out and Endeavor to make themselves
Accomplished Soldiers, and gain all the necessary Knowledge and Skill therefore.
When their Martial spirit is warmed and takes fire; and their hearts are
animated to Endeavor to Acquire that Martial Knowledge as may fit them to serve
GOD and their Country* Its certainly a Glory to a People; and then a Defense
upon all that glory, when a Country has many men Skilful in War. And to me, it
appears a Reproachful Negligence that Military Knowledge and affairs are so much
neglected and Disregarded; Especially by those of the Military Order: That Guns
and Swords must lie and be Eaten up with the Rust --; Or what is worse, Men
have none at all. And Soldiers appear, Rather as if they were going to some
mean and sneaking Employ, they are ashamed of, than into the Field.

If pride and Gay Attire is any where Tolerable, or may be Allowed, it seems to
be in Soldiers: And without something of this, the Employ and the Persons
become Contemptible and mean.

I would more Especially Direct my self ^^der this Use, to You, SIRS, at whose
Desire I appear in the Pulpit at this Time; who have Demanded of me, And what
shall we do.

From what I have said, You are sensible, how Honorable, Useful, Beneficial
and Manly a thing Soldiery is to the World; And how much it is the Duty of all
who have a Martial spirit, to Accomplish themselves with Martial Knowledge.

I trust it is with a Design for GOD's glory, and a View of rendering your
selves Useful in your generation, you now undertake this Business; and not with
a Vain spirit, seeking only Applause from men and to make a show, --

Let me then press you to Consider, You are under the Eye of GOD Almighty; And
He expects whatsoever we do, we do it faithfully. Engage then in it as your
Duty, and steadfastly pursue your Designs. Believe, Military Skill is not Born
with men; nor is it a Reproach for men to lay out themselves to Acquire it:
(...) is Manly, Honorable and Useful.

Study then to Accomplish your selves with all the parts of Military Knowledge
and Exercise: Give Diligence and application thereunto; and let your profiting
appear to all. Don't become like a man going about to build a Tower, but ere he
has gone through is unable to go any further; and men begin to mock him. Count up
the Cost: and be faithful in this Calling.

You should ever Consider, GENTLEMEN, You are Volunteers; and the World expects
it is from a Love to the Art Military --, and a Design to render your selves
Capable and Useful, you undertake this --. May the GOD of Armies, the LORD of
Hosts, both Encourage your Hearts --, and Teach your Fingers to War.

To conclude, in a Use to all.

USE, IV. Let us Each one labor to Endure Hardness as good Soldiers of JESUS
CHRIST: Let us List under his Banner; and take to our selves the whole Armor
of GOD, that we may be able both to withstand and to stand in the Evil Day. He
is our Captain and our King --; Our Life as Christians is a Warfare: We wrestle
not only with flesh and blood, but against Principalities and Powers --,
against the Rulers of the Darkness of this world, against spiritual Wickedness
in high Places. We must therefore Fight, or we shall never Overcome. Death our
last Great Enemy is approaching; and there is no Discharge in this War. With
respect to this there is neither Jew nor Greek, Male nor Female, Bond nor Free;
but all must Engage in the Battle, All must fall by its prevailing Power; For
its appointed for man once to Die. Let us then so Live, that in that dark hour,
we may sing that Song of Triumph, Oh! Death, where is thy Sting? Oh! Grave,
where is thy Victory? Let us so war a good Warfare, and fight the good fight of
Faith, as to Overcome by the blood of the Lamb --: and become more than
Conquerors. That as CHRIST has Overcome and is sat down with his Father on his
Throne, we may Overcome and sit down with CHRIST, and Reign with him for ever.

FINIS.

