A Letter to the Author of the ANSWER to the Hampshire Narrative.

A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR OF THE PAMPHLET Called AN ANSWEER to the Hampshire
Narrative.

Prove. XXX. xxxii. If thou have done foolishly in lifting up thy self, if thou
have thought evil, lay thine Hand upon thy Mouth. BOSTON: Printed in the Year
1737.

THE PREFACE
THE Publication of a Pamphlet called An Answer to the Hampshire Narrative,
having been the Means to keep up the Clamor that has been raised against us
who disapproved of Mr. Breck's Settlement at Springfield, we have for some
Months been silent, promising our selves this Advantage thereby, That those
whose Spirits have been heated, being by this Time cooled, and Prejudices on
all sides much abated, every body will be more ready to consider the Matter
with coolness and sedateness, and be under Advantage to look on the Case as it
really is, and allow arguments their proper Force. The Author of the Pamphlet
which we endeavor to answer, having let us know by several Passages in the
Book, viz. in Page 53, 54, 55, 56, etc. That he is a Minister, was one of the
Council, and one that came from Boston, we have thought best, by directing a
Letter to him, to address ourselves to all the Gentlemen who were concerned in
the Council with him.

A LETTER, etc.
Reverend Sir,
WE your Brethren, in the calling of Jesus Christ; and Ministry of his Gospel,
of the County of Hampshire, who from the Beginning of your acting in the
Springfield Affair, have been looked upon, and treated by you, as especially,
and above all others obnoxious. And in all your Proceedings, from first to
last, have been the Butt of your Resentment and Obloquy, and especially in your
Book called An Answer to the Hampshire Narrative, have been treated with
Indignity and Contempt, and represented with a great Manifestation of Disdain
and Insult as a Set of wicked, contemptible Men, looking upon it that you have
gone out of the Way of your Duty, and acted much against the Honor of Christ,
and the Interest of Christianity, and to the Prejudice of the ministerial
Character, do think ourselves obliged, as we are your fellow Christians and
Brethren in the Ministry, not only to vindicate ourselves, but to labor to
lead you to a Sense of your Error, which though we have reason to fear, from the
Temper and Prejudice you have discovered in your Answer, is not very likely to
be successful; yet leaving the Event with GOD, we think ourselves bound to
endeavor. And would observe in general, That you have almost wholly overlooked
the Merits of the Cause in Dispute between us, and instead of that, have been
pleased to divert your Readers with such ludicrous and unfriendly Reflections
on our Narrative and Conduct, as you have though it fit, for Reasons best known to
yourself. And therefore, for our own Vindication and your Conviction, we have
though it it necessary to remark and reply to some of the exceptional Passages in
it.

In Page 1 and 2, where you distinguish those who disapproved of Mr. Breck's
Settlement at Springfield, and sent their Protest against it, from those that
were called to judge in the Affair, speaking of the Letter, you say, of which
Number were the eldest Ministers in their own County, whereby it is insinuated,
that the eldest Ministers in the County acted, when you know that the true
State of the Case was thus, That the eldest Minister of all in the County, and
the eldest in the Province but one, was one that disapproved and protested; the
two next acted: the four next disapproved; and the next acted: Which three were
all in the County that acted. Now, Sir, the Case being thus, was not this that
you gave an unfair Representation: We appeal to all your Readers that had their
Information only from your Book, whether they have not been led by it, to
apprehend the Case quite different from what we have now represented. In the
same Place you blame us that we did not leave those eldest Ministers that acted
with others, to act according to their own Light. And why, Reverend Sir, could
not you, the Ministers that come from Boston, leave them to act according to
their own Light, without taking such abundant Pains in urging them to act
against what they of themselves were inclined to, as you know you did the
Reverend Mr. Chauncey, the eldest that acted, who has often declared, in the
hearing of some of us, that had he not been exceedingly importuned, he would
not have acted, and that he long resisted and opposed, but that you overcame
him, at both times of the Council's meeting. And the Reverend Mr. Devotion,
before the Council came up, did sufficiently declare in our hearing, his
Disinclination to act in the Case: And there are many other concurring
Evidences, that he would not have acted had not you sent to him, urging him to
it.

In Page 2, you boldly charge us with running this Controversy into the public
Prints. Certainly you ought not thus to have declared this to the World before
you knew it; and yet afterward, before you get to the Bottom of the Page, you
implicitly confess, that you don't know it; for you speak of the two Letters in
the Boston Journal, as published by us, or somebody that undertook our
Vindication: If it was only somebody that undertook our Vindication, how does
it thence follow, as you say, that we not being content that the Matter should
remain the Subject of Conversation only, run it into the public Prints: And
yet afterward again, in the Margin, you charge the publishing these Letters at
such a Time, on us, as an Instance of our unfair Way of managing. Indeed, we
none of us had any hand in publishing either of those Letters, and knew not
that any such Letters were published, or like to be published, or were in
Being, 'till we saw them in the public Prints: And if they had been published
by us, it would have been very injuriously said, that it was before any thing
was published on the other side: Whereas you very well know, the Complaint of
Springfield Church to the General Assembly, was published in the Boston
Gazette, and the Letters referred to in your Answer, we suppose, were occasioned
by that Publication, and a stolen Letter that was written on this Affair, was
before this exposed in the public Prints, with ludicrous Reflections, to
render the Author, and the Cause he appeared in, ridiculous in the Eyes of the
World.

Thus, Sir, instead of our running our own Writings first into Print, those of
your Party stole 'em, and exposed 'em, and ridiculed 'em in the public Prints.
And then you write again* crying down both the Ministers and Magistrates of the
County, before ever we published any thing at all: And this after you had, in a
great Measure filled the Country with Reproaches of us, and raised a general
Cry against us, as a set of ambitious, arbitrary, and unjust Usurpers, in the
principal Part of the Country, where we, by ^^ason of our Distance, have no
other Way to speak for ourselves but by the Press: And then after all cry out
of us for running the Matter into the public Prints.

As to the Things insisted on, Page 3, 4, and 5. we shall have Occasion to
speak afterward. In Page 5,and6, after you had for two or three Pages been
ridiculing our Association, and its Acts and Pretentions, you say, And when
they ( i. e. Associations) come ex-officio, to administer Oaths, it seems also
to entrench upon the Authority of the civil Magistrate; and then in the Margin
you say to the World, The Form of an Oath, or Declaration taken by a particular
Minister, by Order of an Association, may be seen in the Narrative Page 49, the
first, we suppose, of the Kind that has been given to the Public, and
therefore worthy of special Notice. The Thing referred to in the Narrative,.
is, that a particular Minister in Connecticut took the Evidence of certain
Persons, in order to be sent to Springfield, at the Time of the sitting of the
Council there; and they in giving their Evidence declared before GOD the
Searcher of all Hearts, that their Evidence was the Truth, the whole Truth, and
nothing but, the Truth.

Now, Reverend Sir, suppose this were indeed a proper Oath, and this Minister
had been appointed to take it by the Association to which he belonged, What is
that to us that an Association in Connecticut remote from us did so? As it is
beside our Intention to say any thing on Defense of the Association of the
County of Windham, so we are well assured, that those* Gentlemen are well able
to defend themselves, when it shall be needful for them to free themselves from
Apprehensions of the civil Magistrate in their own Colony, who have often heard
of such kind of Oaths or Declarations, without any Suspicion of the Ministers
intrenching upon their Office. And we are very sorry that the Reverend Council
have never heard of nor seen any such kind of Oath or Declaration in all the
Discipline of the Church of England, and of Scotland or other reformed Churches
abroad, which, if they had, it seems strange that they should think there was
so much Occasion to put the Civil Magistrate upon drawing his Sword upon
Associations for presuming to do it.

In Page 9, after mentioning some Things in the Narrative that you say are low
and trifling, you say. Another pretty Tale we are entertained with, in Page 63,
there they tell us, that Mr. Breck, preaching from those Words, Many are the
Afflictions of the Righteous, compared himself to David, Mordicai, and other
good Men, and those who opposed him to Haman, etc.. May Not your Reader have
just Ground to suspect that this is but a Specimen of your Way of judging and
estimating Things relating to Mr. B -- k, in calling it a pretty Tale, and
putting of it into the Catalogue of Things that you call low and trifling, when
it is related, That he that was so young, and not yet ordained, should in the
Pulpit, not only compare himself to David and Mordicai, and the neighboring
Ministers, that had been long settled and accepted in that Work, and are old
eno' to be his Fathers, to Haman? And may we not take it as a Specimen of your
Impartiality? We would pray you, Sir, to consider what you would think or say
of any of us that are not so much younger than you, if we should in our
Pulpits, compare ourselves to Mordicai and you to Haman his cruel Persecutor;
would it be a pretty Tale then? Would it not be horrid Profaneness, and many
other Things as bad? And we would pray you also to consider how vehemently you
have inveighed against us in your Book for saying Things of you that are far
less than this. And though it be a low and trifling Thing, not worthy to be
mentioned for Mr. Breck to say this of his Fathers in the Pulpit, yet if they
do but relate a Testimony publicly given by others, wherein there is something
against Mr. Breck, How far is this from being a trifling Matter? Instead of
which they are ranked by you among those whose tender Mercies are Cruelty; and
you cry out, What can be more cruel, barbarous, more contrary to Humanity as
well as Christianity? What a Spirit does this discover? You say, in Page 10,
This is not true, And he did not make such a Declaration as we speak of, and
call GOD to witness that he was innocent of the Thing; laid to his Charge; but
though you positively deny it, yet Col. Dwight of Brookfield, and several others
that were present and heard him, have taken their Oath to (...) before the
Justices of the County.

In Page 13, you say, That what we have written discovers an evil and bitter,
an uncharitable and unchristian Temper and Spirit. What Occasion for this
heaping of hard Words? Was it from a christian and charitable Frame of Spirit
in you? Don't it favor of what you charge us with Page 8, viz a Disposition to
lay on all the Load that you could. The first Thing you mention as an Evidence
of our showing of such a Spirit is, That we relate Things that don't enter into
the Merits of the Cause; and that therefore the whole Design of them must be
only to fix, as far as we could do it a Mark of Dishonor and Disgrace where we
would have it worn. Will you allow that, if this holds good, and is just
arguing in our Case, so it also is in your own in a like Case? That if you
insist on many Things to our Reproach, that don't in the least enter into the
Merits of the Cause, that then we may justly argue, That it must be only to
fix, as far as you could do it, a Mark of Dishonor and Disgrace where you
would have it worn? And that therefore it discovers in you an evil and bitter,
an uncharitable and unchristian Temper and Spirit? And pray Sir, consider how
much it touched the Merits of the Cause, for you so much to insist upon the
Bulk of our Book, with so much Scoff and Jeer; repeating it over and ever so
often, and declaring how it contained seven Sheets (though yours contained no
less) and that it was mounted to Four Shillings and Six Pence Price (though
yours was no less costly than ours) And how much did it concern the Merits of
the Cause, for you, repeatedly and in a derisory Manner, to mention it that we
say on the Title Page of our Book WRITTEN BY THEMSELVES? And how much does it
concern the Merits of the Cause, to insist, with so much Ridicule, on our mean
Method of writing? That we have thrust into the World a remarkable Piece, and
that we don't appear to keep any Order or Method throughout our whole Book,
that Things are oddly mixed and scattered, that to trace our Footsteps, by
following us from Page to Page, would be little better than a Goose Chase, and
that our Book is a large Bundle of Confusion, and that, we repeat Things in a
Manner that is perfectly troublesome and nauseous; which Observation you very
often repeat, though we think there is no Repetition that you mention but what
may be vindicated from being impertinent, and that we also could show that
there is no less of Repetition in your Book than in our's, were it worth the
while to enter upon so trifling and childish a Controversy.

Supposing it be so indeed, that we cannot write so correctly and methodically
as you can, or supposing you could make it manifest, that we did not know how
to write well eno' to appear in Print, yet how does that alter the State of the
Argument, with Regard to the Merits of the Cause? And what other End could you
have in insisting on it, than to fix that Mark of Dishonor and Disgrace upon
us, that we have written in a weak and ridiculous manner?

You sarcastically say, Page 8, That our Repetitions are not vain, but serve
mighty well to answer the very christian Design of our Performance: We would
pray you to consider what very christian Design you could have in these Things.
Is there any thing in the Manner of our saying these Things, that you say don't
enter into the Merits of the Cause, that shows that the whole Design of them
must be to fix a Mark of Dishonor and Disgrace, and are from an evil and
bitter Spirit, etc? And pray Sir, let your own Conscience speak, whether we
said any of those Things, in such a contemptuous Manner, and in such bitter and
opprobious Language, as you have said those Things of us. And certainly, seeing
you saw such a hatefulness and Vileness in our doing as you say we did, and
manifest such an Abomination of it when you speak of it, you ought to have been
so much further from it yourself.

In Page 14, after mentioning our Pretenses of tenderness to Mr. Breck, you say
Yet it seems they so far forgot their own Cautions, that as soon as Mr. B -- k
left Springfield the first time, they let the Papers from Connecticut go about
the Parish, when he was not there to make any Answer for himself. In which you
deal unjustly by us. Those Papers from Connecticut were lodged in Mr. Hopkins's
Hands, and when the Parish had chosen a Committee to ask the Advice of the
Ministers of the County, whether they should again make Application to Mr. B --
k, that Committee went to Mr. Hopkins, and desired that they might have those
Papers to carry them to the Ministers in the upper Part of the County (whose
Advice they intended first to ask) giving this as a Reason for it, viz. That
those Gentlemen had heard the Papers but once, and might be the better able to
give Advice, if they had a second View of them, Mr. Hopkins therefore (after
cautioning them not to make any ill Use of them) gave them the Papers, and they
being Mr. Breck's Friends, he had no Suspicion that they would use them to his
Damage, nor have we any Reason to think they did: It is true they kept them
much longer in their Hands than was expected, and where they went we know not,
but if they went about the Parish to Mr. Breck's Damage, Mr. Breck's Friends
are to blame for it, and not the Ministers of the County: And we assure you
that they never went about the Parish any time, except while they were in the
keeping of his Friends of that Parish.

And then you proceed, in Page 14, 15, 16 and 17. to raise an exceeding Outcry
against us, as cruel, barbarous, unchristian and inhumane, and those whose
tender Mercies are Cruelty, for publishing Mr. Clap's Testimony, in which he
declared wherein he supposed Mr. Breck had been wanting to the Truth, in
denying his stealing Books in College, because herein is contained a Mention of
that Crime, that he was then guilty of when he was so young, etc. Though herein
you represent us as a most vile Parcel of Men, and worthy of the utmost
Detestation, yet we pray you with a little Seriousness to consider whether or
no your Treatment of us, with Respect to that Matter, be right in the Sight of
GOD, and whether it han't been, on the contrary, exceeding unjust: What is it
that we did, that we should be thus set forth as so exceeding black and vile?
Our professed Design in writing our Book was to give the World a Narrative or
History of our Proceedings in Mr. Breck's Affair; being, as we thought, obliged
thereto by the Clamor that the Country was filled with against us, as having
been intolerably injurious in that Affair: And in order to this, we gave an
Account of and recite at large, that Information or Testimony that we received
from the Reverend Mr. Clap that was the Occasion and main Foundation of those
our Proceedings: And how was it possible for us to give the World a Narrative
of our Proceedings, and not give an Account of that? For all our Proceedings
were upon those Testimonies that were sent: How can any Judicature, or any that
act publicly in a Cause, when they are complained of for Maladministration
or Injustice, vindicate themselves without giving an Account of those
Informations or Testimonies on which they proceeded; and when they do so in
their own necessary Vindication, is it just to cry out of them as the most
monstrous and barbarous Wretches for so doing?

The Association, while the Affair was in their Hands, never had proceeded any
further than only to insist on a particular Hearing of the Case, Mr. Breck and
the Witnesses being Face to Face, in order to our concurring in his Settlement
at Springfield: And this you know is what we were especially cried out against
for, that we would not accept of his Vindication, or account of himself in an
Examination without this. We judged that the Information we had had against his
Principles and Morals rendered such a particular Enquiry necessary, and this we
were concerned to show to the World for our Vindication, and how could we
possibly do it without letting the World know what these Informations or
Testimonies were? It was necessary that we should relate those Testimonies as
they were, if we had published only a Part and concealed a Part, should we not
have given a handle to those who stand ready to reproach us? Could we have
expected any other from your self, who are so ready to take all Advantages
against us, than that you would cry out that our Testimonies, on which we
proceeded, were such as we durst not let the World see? And it was especially
necessary that that Part of the Information that respected his Veracity should
be declared, for it was particularly on the Account of this that we think
ourselves to be vindicated, for not accepting what he should say of himself
without hearing him and the Witnesses Face to Face, which was the Thing we were
especially condemned for: And we were brought to this Necessity of giving this
Narrative very much by Mr. Breck's own Reproaches and Revilings of us, of which
his comparing us to Haman in the Pulpit, which you call a pretty Tale, is a
Specimen: This we think would have justified us in publishing that Testimony,
though this Matter, which one Thing testified has a Reference to, had been of
that Nature as would have greatly wronged his Reputation; but you yourself seem
to speak as though it had very little of that Tendency. -- That we must by no
Means be allowed to speak of Mr. Breck's former Faults, or so much as give an
Account of Testimonies that contain a Reference to them, though laid under never
so great Necessity by him himself, by his Reproaches of us, and though our Names
never so much suffered in the Country by them, and though these Faults being
published tend very little to his Discredit, (as by your own arguing they do)
comes to this, that we ought to be vastly more tender of Mr. Breck's Credit
than our own, even to that Degree that we are obliged to yield up our
Reputation a Sacrifice to his Revilings, and to be at his Mercy rather than
vindicate ourselves in the least to the wrong of his Reputation. What we do is
barely to recite Mr. Clap's Testimony, wherein Mr. Breck's stealing Books is
referred to, without one Reflection on that Particular, or any Hint as though we
made any Use of that Crime, or any thing said about it throughout the whole
Book, nor was that thing ever insisted upon by us, among ourselves, or even
mentioned by us, as any Article against him, in this Controversy; and the only
Reason why it appeared in our Book, was because Mr. Clap's Information, which
contained a Reference to it, could not be published without it: And yet you
charge us, ourselves, with fastening this Charge upon him: Is our giving an
historical Account of Another's Testimony, wherein he had occasional Reference
to a Fault committed, without saying a Word before or after about it, our
fastening a Charge of that Fault upon him? Yea, you charge us with being the
Contrivers of it, and tell the World for what End we contrived it, in saying
that for fear the Truth of the Story should be questioned, we take Care to
direct all that desire to be confirmed to enquire of such and such Persons.
Please, Sir, to suffer your own Conscience to make its own Reflections upon
this.

In Page 16, and 17, you cast some Reflections upon Mr. Clap, upon this
Account; and say, Perhaps it may be said Mr. Clap made the Enquiry with a
charitable Hope the Story was not true, and a kind Design to contradict it,
when he heard it mentioned. And then you add, Whether it was just or not, there
is some Reason to doubt, when he could write to a Minister in Boston, to desire
him to make Enquiry into Mr. Breck's Conduct, etc.

The Reason of Mr. Clap's informing Mr. Breck of that Story, was because he was
often enquired of by the People of Windham, and he knowing nothing about it
though it it proper to give Mr. Breck an Opportunity to vindicate himself. And when
he had absolutely denied the Truth of the Story, many suspected his Veracity;
and others, who pretended to be his peculiar Friends, supposed that the Story
was absolutely false and scandalous, and therefore earnestly solicited Mr.
Clap to write a Letter to some Gentleman, who was acquainted with him, to know
the Truth of the Story; that so if he were innocent he might be vindicated, or
if otherwise he might be made sensible of his Fault in denying of it. And
accordingly Mr. Clap was prevailed upon to write a Letter for that End. And,
Sir, what Color is there for any Reflection upon Mr. Clap on this Account?
Will you say it was an unchristian or impertinent Thing in Mr. Clap, to act
such a christian Part, as to inform a Gentleman of an ill Report which there
was about him, that so he might have Opportunity to vindicate himself, and that
he might be in a better Capacity of vindicating of him, and to comply with the
Importunity of his Friends to write a Letter for that End? Or if Mr Clap began
afterward to suspect that the Story was true, and so that Mr. Breck was not a
Man of Truth in denying of it, must it then be a Fault in Mr. Clap, to desire
to be satisfied in that Point, when there was some Probability that he might be
settled over Part of his Church.

In Page 18, you charge Mr. Williams of Long-Meadow with being the Means that
the Contents of the Reverend Dr. Colman's Letter, was spread about Springfield
before it reached where it was directed. How did you know that it was before it
had reached where it was directed? Have you not ventured positively to assert
this before the World on mere Conjecture? For what is asserted is contrary to
Fact, for the Letter was sent from Brookfield to the Rev. Mr. Williams of
Hatfield, to whom it was directed, by his Daughter, and reached to him the same
Day that Mr. Williams of Long-Meadow got Home himself.

Again, It Is there represented as though the Author of that Letter had written to
Mr. Williams, manifesting his Dislike of letting the Contents of that Letter be
known; which is quite wrong. The Words of the Doctor's Letter are these, Mr.
Cooper tells me of my Letter's being put into the Hands of a mean Person, I
think a Shoe maker, who carried it from House to House. The Reverend Doctor
never blamed Mr. Williams for letting the Contents of the Letter be known, nor
did Mr. Williams go about to excuse himself for so doing; but to let the Doctor
know that the Report was not true which the Rev. Mr. Cooper had told him, of
his doing so ungentlemanly a Thing, as to put a Letter of his, that was
committed to his Care, into the Hands of a Shoemaker, to be carried from House
to House.

At the Bottom of the same Page, you tell the World, That our Book abounds with
Misrepresentations and Untruths; and elsewhere are often charging us with vile
and wilful Misrepresentations; yea, you represent us as Persons so guilty in
this Matter, that our Word is of no Significancy, or is not to be taken; your
Words are, Page 58, And how should such Men be credited in their
Representations of other Matters.

Mr. Cooper, in his Letter to Mr. Hopkins, which he wrote to him after our Book
had been published so long that we may well conclude he had seen it, expresses
Charity for us all with Respect to our Varacity: His Words are these, I thank
GOD, my Charity is not so shocked, with respect to Brother Hopkins, or any of
the Ministers of Hampshire, as to suspect them, after all the Stories I have
heard, to be guilty of wilful Departure from Truth and Fact. Mr. Cooper knows
whether he had any Hand in writing this Book; if he had, and believed in his
Heart, as he says to Mr. Hopkins, certainly it was very injurious in him, so
abundantly to represent to the World, as if we so abounded in Lying, as that
there was no Trust to be put in our Words, so publicly to wound our
Reputation, contrary to what he thought in his own Heart, or at the same Time,
that he believed that we were Men of Truth, so as not so much as to suspect
that we were otherwise, and to thank GOD that he had so much Charity for us.

The first Instance you mention of a Misrepresentation, wherein you say, our
Haste and Warmth probably carried us beyond our Evidence, is in saying that the
Ministers that came from Boston had joined in giving Mr. Breck a Certificate of
his Orthodoxy, when but one of them had signed it: And though you find this
Mistake corrected in the End of the Book, yet you say it was done by a
Gentleman in Boston, that looked over that Half Sheet: You repeat this Matter
again, Page 36, you say if you mistake not it was so; but why, Rev. Sir, will
you thus treat your Brethren in the Ministry, to publish such a Thing to
disparage us, and render us vile in the Sight of the World on a mere
Conjecture; when indeed your Guess is entirely wrong, for the Error was
corrected by the same Person that made it, and it is mentioned as an Erratum in
the End of the Book, in his own Words, as he sent them down in a Letter to the
Printer; and if you don't believe it we desire you would enquire of the Printer.

Certainly, Sir, when you was blaming us for going beyond our Evidence, it did
not become you in the very same Instance you produce to prove it, to do the
same Thing! We leave it with you to consider what Decency or Ingenuity there is
in thus insisting on a Thing that comes corrected, repeating it in different
Parts of your Book, only on a groundless Guess, that not we, but somebody else
corrected it: Don't this again show that you endeavored to lay on all the Load
you possibly could, and that you was greedy of Instances of Untruth and
Misrepresentation in us; otherwise why would not such a Multitude of other
Instances, that you pretend you have found, that ben't mentioned as Errata,
suffice you?

In Answer to our first Argument to prove that those that sat at Springfield,
and took upon them to sit there as Judges of that Case, were not regularly
called thereto, viz Because the prevailing Part of them were not of
neighboring Churches, but fetched from remote Parts of the Country, in neglect
of the Churches of the Neighborhood, and in Opposition to the Body of
neighboring Ministers, you say, first, that it was because one of the Churches
of the Neighborhood that was sent for would not come, that it was so that the
prevailing Part was of remote Churches: And if you had told the whole Truth,
would you not have said too that but one of the Churches of the County would
have come, if you that came from Boston had let them alone? You speak of the
Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield, his refusing to come, as a Thing that
strengthened your Warrant to act; but it seems to us, that considering his Age,
and that he was the principal Person of all that Springfield applied to, his
refusing to come, as discountenancing the Method of proceeding, should' have
rather made you more slow in Acting, especially when he not only refused to
come, but entered his solemn Protest against your Proceedings.

Then you proceed to reply to what we produce from the Platform: And in the
first Place, you declare to the World, that we said that which we never did
say* Your Words are, Are Churches in the Calling of Councils limited to the
Vicinity, so that it is an Irregularity and Offense to them if they don't take
the next neighboring Churches, and no other? This is what those Gentlemen
assert; and they deliver it not only as their own Opinion, but say it was
evidently the Mind of the Composers of the Platform. Our Words are, It appears
evidently reasonable in itself, that Churches that are by Providence planted
together, and must dwell together, so as necessarily, above all others, to be
concerned in each other's Affairs, and will be continually and unavoidably in
the Way of mutual Intercourse, and mutually Interested in each other's Welfare,
should be jointly concerned in their religious Affairs, and not be neglected or
set aside one by another, wherein other Churches are to have Influence in their
Affairs, but should principally be regarded; so this was evidently the Mind of
the Composers of the Platform. Why, Sir, would you so abuse us, and strain the
Matter so much higher than we had done, and express a Thing that is so diverse
from our Words, and opposite to the plain Import of them, and then say that
this is what we assert? And again, lower down the same Page, you cite our Words
wrong, and represent us as saying what we never said, that you may have
Opportunity to ridicule us: Your Words are, 'If they had, they never would have
asserted that (and then the following Words are in another Character, as being
cited from us) as often as it directs to a particular Church to apply to other
Churches* it specifies neighbor Churches.' Our Words are, They, when they
direct to, or mention any Application to be made by a particular Church to
other Churches, from Time to Time specify neighbor Churches. Perhaps you will
say this is the same Sense, though not the same Words; but if it be the very same
Sense, Why did you not mention the same Words, seeing you plainly mention them
as a Citation? But we apprehend there is indeed a great Difference in the
Sense: Cannot the Platform from Time to Time specify neighbor Churches, when
they mention any Application to be made to other Churches, and yet not do it
every Time?

Our Words, as we conceive, imply thus much, and no more, viz That when the
Platform directs a Church to apply to other Churches, it does from Time to Time
specify what Churches should be applied to, and that wherever it does so, it
specifies neighbor Churches, and that it never specifies any other; of which
the World have good Evidence from this, that you can find no other specified in
it, who have doubtless thereby searched the Platform to this End.

And to what Purpose is that Passage that you cite from the Platform, wherein
it says, That all Churches ought to preserve Communion one with another? We can
conceive of nothing that you can intend by it, unless it be this, viz. That
because the Platform says, That all Churches ought to hold Communion, that
therefore they ought to exercise that Communion in every Thing that is an Act
of Communion; but if this be what you mean, then it will follow, That all the
Churches in the World ought to be consociated; for the Synod in 1662 mentions
Consociation of Churches as one Way of exercising the Communion of Churches;
however, they have expressly limited that Exercise of Communion to Churches in a
convenient Vicinity: Or else you must mean, That because the Platform says all
Churches should hold Communion, and one Way of Communion there mentioned is to
consult other Churches, that therefore a particular Church ought to consult all
other Churches. -- But it is ridiculous to infer any other from what the
Platform says, than this, viz. That every Church ought to be ready to exercise
Communion with all other Churches in all those Ways, as the Disposals of
Providence, in the Circumstances and Occasions of Churches shall open a Door
for it and call to it. And to what Purpose are those other Passages that you
cite, where the Platform says a particular Church ought to consult OTHER
CHURCHES? Which you seem to think should be taken so much Notice of, and
observe that it is said other Churches at large; does it thence follow, That
the Platform neither does, nor can Design that Churches should be especially
limited to neighbor Churches? What sort of arguing is this. The Platform says,
Churches should consult other Churches, therefore it no where especially limits
them to neighbor Churches! Cannot the Platform tell us that we must consult
other Churches, and then afterward tell us what other Churches? Cannot a Parent
advise a Child under Difficulties to consult others, and then in the same
Discourse tell him who? And after he has told him, must the Child, because his
Father first said others, still look upon himself on more directed by his
Father to one than another? The Platform does indeed sometimes say other
Churches, but then in other Places, from Time to Time, both before and after,
tells what Churches, viz. neighbor Churches; it specifies them without any
Conjunction; and therefore for any to suppose that the Composers of the
Platform did not by this intend to direct Churches where to go when they
consulted other Churches, is to reflect upon them as though they were ignorant of
the Nature of Language, and did not understand what they said. -- But then you
add further, that We cannot suppose that the Compilers of the Platform always
meant by neighbor Churches those that were situated next to one another, but
Churches in Communion one with another, by professing the same Faith and Order
of the Gospel, so situated that they could and would afford Assistance to one
another, as the same should be needed and desired. This we conceive is a
Signification of the Expression of neighbor Churches of your own finding out:
If we should speak of a Family and neighboring Families, or an House and
neighboring Houses, would it be agreeable to the common Use of such Phrases,
to mean a House in the Middle of Boston and a Parcel of Houses in Cambridge?
And what English would it be, if we should speak of a certain Town and the
neighboring Towns thereof, to mean Springfield and the Towns in the County of
Suffolk? The Legislators of the Province have often Occasion to speak of
neighboring Towns, and did they understand themselves, or does any Body else
understand them, in such a Kind of Sense as this? They speak sometimes of the
Advice of neighboring Ministers, as in Case of improving a School Master, and
other Cases. And did ever any Lawyer plead that they were to be understood in
such a Sense as this? We read in our Translation of the Bible, that GOD
overthrew Sodom and the neighbor Cities thereof; the Translators certainly
should have used some other Word, if this don't determine but that Sodom was at
one End of the Land of Canaan and the other Cities intended at the other; for
this is doubtless quite diverse from the Mind of the Original.

You suppose that what we plead for is directly contrary to congregational
Principles, in that it renders the Government of our Churches not
Congregational but Classical; but we think that it is no more Classical or
contrary to the congregational Scheme, than the Consociation of Churches is,
which the Synod speaks of as what the Word of GOD commands: You cite their
Words, as supposing that they will justify what you have done; they say, Though
in this there should be special Reference to those Churches that are planted in
a convenient Vicinity, yet there should be Liberty without Offense, to make Use
of others, as the Nature of the Case and the Advantage of Opportunity may lead
thereto. But, Sir, we apprehend that you pervert those Words to a Purpose that
is quite beside the Design of them: There is nothing in the Words that in the
least imports that the neighbor Churches should ever be set aside, in order to
the making Use of others; but that there should ever be a special Reference to
them; though sometimes there should be Liberty as the Nature of the Case and
Advantage of Opportunity should lead thereto, to join others with them: But it
seems plain to us that the Synod had no Thought of setting aside neighbor
Churches, as being unfit to be concerned, but that there should still be a
special Reference to them, and the Management of such Affairs should especially
be left in their Hands, though there might be Liberty without Offense, to join
some others upon particular Occasions: This seems evident, because 1 st. The
Synod, by their Manner of expressing themselves, seem to direct to have a
special Reference to neighbor Churches, in the same Affair, and at the same
time that they make Use of other Churches; the latter therefore is plainly
mentioned not as that which sets the former aside, but what may consist with it.

We the Ministers of this Neighborhood never refused to consent that two or
three others should be joined with our Association, in this Affair of Mr.
Breck: This is what we proposed once and again to Mr. Breck, another Time to
the Church of Springfield, another Time to Mr. Cooper; but were always refused,
as we shall fully show afterward.

There is no Doubt to be made but that the Synod in 1662, would have utterly
condemned doing as Springfield Church have done, setting aside all the Churches
but one, in that lower Part of the County (a putting the Affair mainly into the
Hands of others, is inconsistent with having a special Reference to them, which
the Synod directed to, at the same Time that others are made Use of) and doing
as you have done, in Opposition to the Body of neighboring Ministers, as
supposing them prejudiced and unfit Persons. The Churches of this County have,
from their Beginning till now, gone on in a Practice that is agreeable to the
Advice of this Synod: -- We are much separated from other Parts of the
Province, having comparitively but little Intercourse with them: Divine
Providence, by our Situation, has as it were made us one Society, so as that we
are very much united, and unavoidably in a great Degree mutually influenced in
our religious Affairs.

We have from the Beginning till now, always managed our ecclesiastical Affairs
within our selves; it is the Way which the County from its Infancy has gone on
in, by the practical Agreement of all, and the Way in which our Peace has ever
been maintained; so that we suppose we have been the freest by far of any Part
of the Land from unhappy Contentions in our ecclesiastical and religious
Concerns, 'till you have overthrown our Peace, and put us into the utmost
Confusion, by coming from abroad, and intermeddling in our Affairs: Yea this
Way of managing our ecclesiastical Affairs, has not only been established by
long continued practical Agreement, but also by the explicit and publicly
declared Consent of many of the Churches: In the Year 1714 the Rev. Mr. Brewer
of Springfield, with others, did at a Meeting of Ministers at Northampton,
agree to this, That they judged it to be their Duty to be subject to a Council
of the Churches of the County, until there should be some superior Council set
up in the Province to which they might appeal; and agreed to make the Proposals
to their respective Churches: To which Judgment and Determination they set
their Hands, as it is found on the Church Records of Northampton: None can
remember that ever they heard of Springfield Churches refusing; indeed Mr.
Brewer kept no Church Record, and none can be found there that by their Memory
can determine one way or other; which seems to be an Argument that it was
consented to; for if it had been proposed, and opposed, and rejected, they
would be much more likely to remember that, than if it was only proposed and
readily agreed to, without ado: And besides, Mr. Williams soon after settling
at Long Meadow, Mr. Brewer furnished him with a Copy of those Votes, in order
to their being passed by his new gathered Church.

This that we plead for is also most evidently agreeable to the famous Thirty
Cases. Case 15, touching the Power of choosing a Pastor, it is said, Ministers
and Messengers of neighboring Churches have Power to except against any
Election of a Pastor, who by Errors or Scandals may be rendered unfit for the
common Service of the Gospel. By Power here no Body will be so ridiculous as to
understand, merely that they have natural Ability to except against it, so that
they can if they try; but that they have Right. Again, Ibid. Churches may
suffer their Elections to be directed, yea, and be diverted by Considerations
which they owe to others in the Vicinity, without surrendering their Liberties
to be smothered by any that would unjustly impose thereon. Which is contrary to
what you suppose Page 26, 27. That there should be stated Associations of
Ministers, that should choose a Moderator, that should be addressed to, and
advised withal, by bereaved Churches in their Vicinity, for their Direction, in
order to the Supply of the Vacancy made, and otherwise to be subservient to
ecclesiastical Discipline in their Churches, is what seems to be much approved
by the Rev. Dr. Cotton Mather, in his Ratio Discipline, Page 179, 180, 181,
183, 184: and particularly the Method of Associations in Connecticut, Page 184.
The same Reverend Author mentions it as a Saying of the Great Hocker, about a
Week before he fell sick of his last Sickness, Page 58, of his V th Book of
Church History, We must agree upon constant Meetings of Ministers, and settle
the Consociation of Churches, or else we are utterly undone.

You say our Scheme is such as will destroy the Congregational Scheme, because
the Platform says, the Government of the Church, since the Coming of CHRIST, is
not National, Provincial, nor Classical, but Congregational only: But, Sir,
will not it hence follow, on the other Hand, that your Principles are subversive
of the congregational Scheme, by insisting that we are under a provincial
ecclesiastical Constitution, as you seem to do? In Page 5, you say, in a Word,
we don't look upon them (i. e. Associations) to be any Part of the Constitution
of these Churches: Page 35, you speak of Mr. Breck's choosing a Method more
agreeable to our Constitution; and Page 95, you say your Proceedings are to be
justified on the Principles of Liberty, and the Constitution: Now, Sir, How do
these Things consist together, that the Government of our Churches should be
only Congregational, but the Constitution of Government that they are subject
to Provincial? If the Constitution of Government established by Churches be
extended beyond the Limits of particular Churches, in that very Thing the
ecclesiastical Government they are subject to is extended beyond those Limits;
for certainly the making a Constitution of Government for particular Churches
to be subject to, is itself an Act of Government if any Thing is. It seems to
us that a Number of Churches, limited by the Bounds of a Province, united in
and subject to an ecclesiastical Constitution, that is Provincial, is ipso
facto a provincial Church; unless the Word Constitution has one Signification
in New England and a quite different in other Parts of the World: The Notion of
a Constitution is not mere Advice that is left with every ones Arbitrament and
Pleasure, whether he will follow or not, but something of the Nature of a Rule
established by Authority. There can be but these two Ways whereby any Method or
Form of Church Discipline, can take Place in a Country or Province, either by a
constituting Authority, or voluntary Agreement; if it be only by voluntary
Agreement, then it in no wise reaches any more than them that do voluntarily
agree, and cannot, without a great Abuse of Language, be called a Constitution:
A Constitution of ecclesiastical Government can extend no farther than
constituting Authority extends; but by the Platform itself, that you call the
Constitution, Church Authority don't extend beyond the Limits of a particular
Congregation, Chap XVI. Sect. IV. It belongs to Synods and Councils, not to
exercise Church Censures in Way of Discipline, NOR ANY OTHER ACT OF CHURCH
AUTHORITY or Jurisdiction.

The famous Mr. Norton, in a Passage cited in the Appendix to the Platform,
reprinted for the first Church in Boston, mentions the Platform of Church
Discipline as only given in Way of Counsel: And if it be only in Way of Counsel
or Advice, we would pray you, Sir, to remember your own Words, concerning the
Nature of Advice, Page 33, We think there is a gross Absurdity in calling of it
Advice, and yet making it binding and obligatory, and that the very Notion of
asking Advice supposes a Capacity and Right in them that ask it, to judge at
last for themselves; if it must be followed, however unsuitable in the Judgment
of those to whom it is given, call it not Advice, but by its proper Name, Law,
or Command. (or Constitution, as you do the Advice of the Synod in 1649.)
Whence does this arise, that you that are so zealous for congregational
Principles, do overturn the very lowest Foundation of the congregational
Scheme? Here, Sir, again remember your own Words, Page 4, We are perfectly at a
Loss by what Law or Rule they make the Churches to follow the civil Districts;
the Towns in the Province we know are by legislative Power laid out into
Counties, but we did not know that the Churches were. So we say, we know that
the Country was laid out into Provinces, but we did not know that the Churches
were; and ^e are perfectly at a Loss by what Law or Rule you mike the Churches
to follow the civil Districts.

If the major Part of the Churches in the County have voted to come into a
certain Method of Government, why may not it, by your own Ways of arguing, be a
Constitution for the County, as well as the Vote of the major Part of the
Churches of the Province be a Constitution for the Province. Give us leave, on
this Occasion, to recite to you the Words of one of the Elders of your own
Council at Springfield, (and one of you that came from far, and was very active
in Mr. Breck's Favor) which he has published in a small Pamphlet of his
concerning Ruling Elders, Page 10, 11. Upon the prophetic Spirit that our
Author, all on a sudden seems to be inspired with, when he tells us that the
Non-conformist's Cause in this Country depends entirely, under GOD, upon our
Adherence to the Platform or the congregational Principles; which is just like
the other popular Cries we have heard of late, These, O Churches of the
Massachusetts are your great and distinguishing Privileges, etc. -- the dying
Testimony of some of the worthy Fathers in some of their last Lecture Sermons
to our Platform; and the like: All calculated for no other Design than to hurry
the unthinking Part of the World, into Bigotry and blind Zeal, the Result of
which will be to throw all into Confusion; and it is well if some that are
active in it have not this secret Design. And much is there to the same Purpose

In Page 26, in Reply to what we object concerning the Council, that they were
called in this Business in Opposition to the Body of neighboring Ministers;
you mention there being but a small Majority of this Body, and say that at best
Things lay at sixes and sevens among us: But if what was acted cannot be looked
upon, as the Act of the Body of neighboring Ministers, because there was but a
small Majority; w^y then is what was voted in the House of Representatives
called by you the Vote of the representative Body of the Country, as it is in
Page 20, and made much of as such, in which there was a far less Majority, in
Proportion to the whole Number than in our Association?

In Page 26, 27, you cry out against what we plead for, as intolerably
arbitrary, and say, And a fine Scheme it is, to setter and enslave the
Churches, and have Things carried according to the Will, Humor, Prejudice and
arbitrary Disposition of a particular Set of Ministers. And you represent it as
insufferably tyrannical, especially on that Account, that it admits of no
Appeal. Here in the first Place, we observe, That we are injuriously
represented in this Supposition of yours; we are far from thinking that there
ought not to be Appeals from Churches of a particular Neighborhood, to a
bigger and superior Council; as a particular Member ought to be subject to the
Body; and that because, though we think the ecclesiastical Concerns of a
particular Neighborhood, or Member of the Body, belongs to them, rather than
to any other particular Neighborhood, because they do much more nearly concern
that Member, than any other coordinate Member; yet the whole Body must be
looked upon as having a greater Concern in the Interest of all the Members,
than any such particular Member: And when we speak of such Affairs, belonging
to such a Neighborhood, and not to others, we intended no other, and think,
could fairly be understood no otherwise, than that they did not belong to other
Neighbourhoods, and other Churches coordinate with them: When it is said that
such an Office or Work belongs to such a Member and not to others, it must be
understood of other particular Members and not the whole Body, of which both
that and others are a Part. But, Sir, will you allow your own arguing to be
good, in which you take Occasion reproachfully to represent us as a Set of
Ministers of an arbitrary Disposition, that endeavor to setter and enslave the
Churches, and carry all Things according to our own Will, Humor and Prejudice,
and arbitrary Disposition? Will you allow this Argument of yours conclusive,
that our Scheme is arbitrary because it don't admit of Appeals? Then, Sir, What
will follow concerning your own Scheme, by which a Person can demand no Appeal
from the Judgment of a particular Congregation? What Appeal are the poor
aggrieved Brethren at Springfield allowed, in that Cause that has been agitated
between them and their Brethren, that so nearly concerned the eternal Welfare
of their own Souls, and the Souls of their Children? They would gladly appeal
to some other Judicature if it might be allowed.

In answer to our second Reason, to show that this Affair was not in a regular
Manner put into your Hands, viz. That it was in a disorderly Manner taken out
of the Hands of the Association of the Ministers of the County, after it had
been referred to them by the first Church in Springfield themselves, and by Mr.
Breck, you say that we took the Matter into our Hands before we were desired;
and then follows a Detail of Particulars to prove it, and insist on it with an
Air of Triumph, as if this were sufficient for our utter and shameful
Confusion; and therefore have it over in various Parts of your Book, as Page 3,
4, and p. 28, 29, 30, 31, and also p. 77: Concerning which, we would, First,
enquire, What this is to the Argument in Hand? Supposing it was so, that we
first took the Matter into our own Hands before Mr. Breck and the Church of
Springfield referred it, does it thence follow that they never did refer it to
us? Or if it evidently appears by our Actions, that we thought we had the
Affair in our Hands before we had, because before Mr. Breck and Springfield
Church had put it into our Hands, does it thence follow that we had it not in
our Hands, after they had indeed put it into our Hands? Does it follow, that we
were mistaken still, in thinking we had it in our Hands because we were
mistaken before? And, Secondly, As to those Particulars that you mention, to
prove that we took this Matter into our own Hands, and our saying, in the
Narrative, that we were obliged, both by our Situation and Office, to act in
the Affair; which you relate as a Thing whereby Tyranny and Usurpation are
proved upon us, out of our own Mouths, and which is one Thing on which you
build your great Triumph, Page 82; we would entreat you, though you have treated
us with so much Reproach and Insult, with respect to this Matter, yet now at
length to look over those Particulars that you have mentioned, of our acting in
this Affair, before it was referred to us, and ask yourself, in real Soberness,
whether any of these Things were more than we ought to have done as Ministers
of Christ, and christian Friends and Neighbors, to the Brethren of Springfield
Church.

The first Thing you mention is, That Mr. Williams of Springfield received a
Letter from his Brother of Mansfield, informing that there were material
Objections against Mr. Breck's Principles and Morals, that the Ministers of
that Neighborhood could inform of. Was this going too far, that Mr. Williams
should receive, and read a Letter from his Brother? Was this taking the Matter
into his own Hands? The next Particular is, That Mr. Williams, at Westfield
Lecture, showed this Letter to the other Ministers that were there: And was
this an Instance of Usurpation, when the Contents of the Letter show plainly
the Author designed it should be communicated to them? The next Particular you
mention is, That they advised that Mr. Breck should see the Letter: And was
this a taking the Matter into our Hands, and an Instance of our Injuriousness,
that we let Mr. Breck know what was suggested against him? The next Particular
was, That the Ministers of Windham County were desired to let us know what it
was that they had to object against Mr. Breck; and nextly, That when those
Objections were sent to us, we read them: Now, What was there in this more than
what would have been prudent for Ministers, of either presbyterian or
congregational Principles, to have done? As we were the neighboring Ministers,
so might we not well think it probable, That at least some of us should be
called to act in Mr. Breck's Settlement? Was it not therefore Prudence for us,
when it had been signified to us by Persons so considerable, that there were
material Objections of such a Nature, for us to desire to be informed what they
were, in order to know how to conduct ourselves? Yea, was it not both our
Prudence and our Duty, on another Account also, viz. That in case the
Objections appeared to be material, we might inform the People of Springfield
of it, that they might not act blindfold, in a Matter that did so greatly
concern their own and their Children's eternal Good? If any one has been
informed that that which his Neighbor is laying up for his Food or Drink, is
deadly Poison, and is sensible that his Neighbor is wholly ignorant of it, and
upon this, out of Concern for the Life of his Neighbor, makes some Enquiry,
and upon finding of it to be so indeed, as a Neighbor and christian Brother,
gives him Notice of it, is he therefore chargeable with Tyranny and Usurpation,
in invading his Brother's Right, that he has to judge and choose for himself,
with respect to his own Meat and Drink, and taking it into his own Hands, to
judge for him, before he referred it to him? Does not the Situation of
Christians that dwell near one to another, whereby they have Opportunity to
discern the Danger of each Other's Circumstances, and to inform one another,
oblige 'em to such Acts of Kindness as these? And whether we, by our Office,
have any proper Authority out of the Limits of our own Congregations or no, yet
we suppose, no Christians, of any Mode of Discipline will deny, but that by
Virtue of our being Officers in Christ's visible Kingdom, and set apart and
devoted to be Ministers of his holy Religion, we are under peculiar Obligations
to seek the Advancement of his Honor and Glory, and to prevent whatever tends
to overthrow it every where, as we have Opportunity in those Ways that imply no
Exercise of Authority.

Suppose, Rev. Sir, that you that are the Ministers of Boston, or of that
Neighborhood, had it credibly signified to you, by the Ministers of some
distant Place, that there was a Design of introducing Popery into some one of
your Congregations, by a popish Priest, that lately went from them in the
Disguise of a Protestant Minister, (for it concerns not the present Argument
whether Popery ben't worse than what Mr. Breck was charged with) and you were
sensible that this Congregation were led on in the blind, and knew nothing of
it, and one of you that had received this Information in a Letter, should show
it to the rest of the Ministers, would this be Usurpation and Tyranny? And
would you not look on your selves obliged, as christian Neighbors, and
especially as neighboring Ministers, to act in this Affair, so far as to make
a particular Enquiry, to see whether it were so or not, and if you found it to
be so indeed, to inform that Congregation, to prevent their undoing, and to
prevent the bringing in such an Infection into the Neighborhood? Would you do
any more than your Prudence and Duty in this Matter? And would you deserve at
all to be reproached, derided, and insulted, as insufferable Tyrants and
Usurpers on this Account?

You intimate to the World that though Springfield People did ask our Advice, yet
that they never put the Matter into our Hands as Judges, and therefore deride
us for our notable arguing upon such a Supposition; But however, it is evident
that they referred it to the Association, under no other Notion than of their
being Judges in it, and issuing of it, as appears by Mr. Breck's own Words, in
his Letter to Mr Clap, which we will repeat again, If you have any Thing
further to object, I suppose, if you please, you may be heard at Springfield,
on the 8th Day of April next, when and where the Matter will be issued.

In Page 32, you say, That our Argument is so pleasant that you will give it
the Reader in our own Words, by transcribing the whole 'Paragraph that contains
it, which when you have done, you cry out, What can be finer! And so go on, in
the next Page, with Banter and Derision: But, Sir, Ridicule is cheaper than
solid Argument, though much less worthy of a gospel Minister; it is easier to
laugh at Arguments than to answer them: The Sum of what you pretend as an
Answer is, that the Notion of asking Advice, is to ask other's Judgment to be
directed no otherwise than to be assisted in making a Judgment for themselves:
And what then? If it be so, does it thence follow, that it is not as we say,
That it is impossible, and self contradictory, that any one should ask Judgment
to be directed, (even in this Sense that you speak of) that is already fully
determined, that let the Judgment be which way it will, he will go no other Way
than this. Is it not self contradictory, to ask Judgment to be directed in
making a Judgment for himself, that has already so made his Judgment, that he
is resolved he will act no other Way than according to that Judgment, let the
Advice be what it will? Is not this Children's Play? And is it a decent and
orderly Way of treating the Body of neighboring Ministers? And did not the
Conduct of Springfield People plainly carry this in it, in that after they had
had a Society-meeting, and by the Vote thereof, had referred the Matter to us,
and had chosen a Committee on purpose, who came with Mr. Breck, to seek the
Judgment of the Ministers, and then after they had put the Ministers to the
Trouble of a Consideration of the Matter, took it out of their Hands again,
before ever they had Opportunity to make any Judgment, and in treating them
with the greatest Contempt, because that they advised that Mr. Breck and the
Witnesses should be heard Face to Face, that they might be capable of judging?
Is there any need of looking into the Platform, in order to know whether such a
Behavior ben't irregular and absurd, and that all those that have been the
Encouragers of that People in such a Method of proceeding, may be justly looked
upon as the Abertors of Disorder and Confusion? Such a Conduct is not only what
common Sense knows to be absurd and disorderly, but is so by the known
Principles, both of Congregationalists and Presbyterians; for Springfield
Church and Mr. Breck, in the Method they began with, viz in referring the
Matter to the Judgment and Advice of neighboring Ministers, did but act in
pursuance of those Principles in which both congregational and presbyterian
Churches agree, (however you suggest as if it were not agreeable to our
Constitution) and this is evident by the Heads of Agreement assented to by the
united Ministers, formerly called Presbyterian and Congregational, Chap. II. of
the Ministry, Sect. IV. That in so great and weighty a Matter as the calling
and choosing a Pastor, we judge it ordinarily requisite, that every such Church
consult and advise with the Pastors of neighboring Congregations. This
supposes that the neighboring Pastors ought to enquire and use all proper
Means, to enable them to pass a Judgment and to give Advice.

But you think that the Church of Springfield had sufficient Reason for doing
thus, because Mr Breck objected against one of the Committee as a Person
prejudiced, and the Association would not take him off; and the Reason we give
for it is, That Mr. Breck did not pretend to offer any Reason why he thought
Mr. Williams prejudiced, and we knew nothing of ourselves that should incline
us to think Mr. Williams an unfit Person; and we did not think it fit, without
some weighty Reason, to exclude the Ministers of the Town, who were next
Neighbors, and were above all others nearly concerned to have an orthodox
Minister settled there. But you say that was Reason enough, it was sufficient
for him to say he looked upon him prejudiced, upon this Mr. Williams ought
immediately to have excused himself, and all other Judicatures would have taken
him of^. But we conceive that you are mistaken in this Matter, and that no
other Judicature would have allowed it as sufficient without some Pretense of
Reason why he thought so; and we think your own Council to be an Instance of a
Judicature that would not allow such a Reason to be sufficient; for when you
sat in Judgment on Mr Breck's Affair, that Part of the Church that were
Complainants objected against you as partial and prejudiced, and not only so
but backed it with several Reasons why they feared it; and therefore insisted
on it as most reasonable, that they should be allowed to have their Case heard
by Judges mutually chosen, but could not be heard by you; you did not show so
much Regard to their Objections as to try 'em with any further Proposals, as we
did Mr. Breck, who when he showed his Dislike of the Committee, offered him
that his Case might be heard before the whole Association, and when this was
refused, it was offered him, by his own Desire, that he might join two or three
others with the Association, but these Proposals were rejected by him: You say,
if the Moderator did consent to this, others did not, and therefore there is a
Fallacy in what we say that tends to impose on the World, because that when the
same Proposal was made by others in Mr. Breck's Name, and at his Desire, you
know several of those Gentlemen manifested their Dislike of it, and would not
give their Consent. But though you say you know it, yet that there was no such
Thing, that never any such Proposal was made to us afterward by others in Mr.
Breck's Name, nor any such Proposal rejected by us, is what we shall make
abundently evident hereafter, when we come to speak concerning the Rev. Mr.
Cooper's Letter to the Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield, wherein you say this
Proposal was made. And how could a Person be treated with greater fairness? And
how unreasonable is it after all to charge the Association once and again, as
you do, with unreasonable Stiffness in this Matter?

With respect to our third Reason, viz. That those three Elders that belong to
this County, that sat in Council as Judges of this Case, they each of them had
once before, openly in Association given their Judgment, and upon a formal
Consideration, and where the Matter was particularly discussed and debated,
declared it to be their Judgment that Mr. Breck stood already sufficiently
clear, with regard to those Things that had been alleged against him; and that
all the neighboring Ministers that had suspended their Judgment, were set
aside as prejudiced, and those only that had actually given their Judgment
already were employed because free from Prejudice. This is the certain plain
Truth, of which the World have this very good Evidence, that you don't pretend
to deny it, nor can it be denied; nor do you pretend to show how it is
agreeable to common Sense, that such should sit as Judges again in the same
Case, which is also impossible for you to do; but only pretend with huge
Triumph that you have caught us in a Self contradiction, because we said but
the Page before, that the Matter was taken out of our Hands before ever we had
Opportunity to give our Judgments, because it was before we had Opportunity to
hear Mr. Breck and the Witnesses Face to Face: But you make a Contradiction
where there is none; for what was the Matter that was expressly signify was
particularly discussed and debated, but this, viz. Whether or no Mr. Breck
stood already sufficiently clear with regard to those Things that had been
alleged against him, whether what had been offered already, viz. Mr. Breck's
Vindication, etc was sufficient for us to clear him? The one Part determined
that it was, and the other judged it was not, because they thought it
insufficient to give any Judgment upon, but that it was necessary that we
should hear the Witnesses and him Face to Face, before we could give any
Judgment one Way or the other, or that it was necessary that Judgment should be
suspended till that Time: And this every one that was there present knows to be
the Truth. And pray Sir, judge your self, which acted the most like Friends of
Justice and Truth, and the least like prejudiced Persons,

We desire that what you say of us, Page 36, may be compared with our Words,
You say, We say, p.83. The Ministers of their own County being thus
disqualified, they go on to tell of something that as much disqualified those
that came from Boston. -- And so had at least much more to prejudice them than
the neighboring Ministers, that were set aside as prejudiced and unfit Persons.

But of this Matter we shall speak more particularly afterward.

With respect to our fourth Reason, viz. That all the Council were chosen by
those that were a Party in the Case: The Sum of your Answer is, that it is a
new Thing that so great a Majority of a Church are called a Party, on which you
make a great Harrangue. Here we would observe, the whole Argument that you
pretend to answer is entirely slipped over, and not in the least touched, and
only a vain Dispute raised that don't concern the Argument at all, about the
proper Application of the Word Party: When we say they had made themselves a
Party with Mr. Breck in the Case; the plain and obvious Meaning of it is, that
they had so sided and united themselves to Mr. Breck, that they were become one
with him in this Cause, or that his Cause was become their Cause; so that they
became one Side concerned in the Cause that was to be judged, or one of those
two Sides or Parts that you undertook to judge between: The minor Part of the
Church had Articles of Charge to exhibit against the major Part, as they
declared to you in their Letter, Page 45 of the Narrative. Commonly when there
is a Cause to be judged between two, either Persons or Companies, we say they
are the two Parties concerned* and when it is so, and the Judicature is
elective, we still say it is contrary to the Light of Nature, that one Party or
Side should choose all the Judges: And it is perfectly wide from the Business,
whether you allow the Word Party to be proper or no, if they being one of those
two Sides between whom Judgment is to be made, if they choose all the Judges,
the other Side, equally concerned with themselves, though they are smaller and
weaker, are oppressed and deprived of their Right; and if any Scheme of
Discipline gives them Power to choose all the Judges, we still say, and every
one must say, that it is built on the Ruins of the common Rights of Mankind.

You appeared there in a two fold Capacity; you did not appear only as
Ordainers, but as Judges of a particular Cause depending between the major Part
of the Church and the Minor: You yourself declare, Page 47, that this was the
Business you came upon, to hear and judge of what might be objected: And how
much soever the Part you suppose that called you was the major Part, and how
much Power soever you suppose the major Part to have over the Minor, it don't
alter the Force of the Argument.

At the Bottom of Page 38, you say, -- But if this be the Right of one or two
dissenting Brethren in a a Church. In the foregoing Page you observed there
were but four that dissented: What need is there now of bringing the Number
down to one or two?

With respect to our fifth Reason, viz That the major Part of the Council was
chosen by Mr. Breck himself: and that it is contrary to the Light and Sense of
all Mankind, that a Man should choose his own Judges, because this is in effect
to give him Liberty to choose his own Judgment In answer to this you say, it is
true the Church gave Mr. Breck Liberty to nominate some of ^he Churches, and
say that Dr. Cotton Mather in his Ratio Disciplinae, mentions it as the Custom
of the Churches to agree with the Candidate what Churches to send to in
Ordination. He has there no Manner of Respect to the judging a Complaint
exhibited against a Minister or Candidate; (as has been already observed you
appeared there not only as Ordainers but Judges of such a Complaint, and you
was chosen by the Defendant;) and if he had, it would not make for you, but
against you; for the Church of Springfield never agreed with Mr. Breck what
Churches should be sent for: Mr. Breck never so much as nominated the Churches
till after the Church-meeting was over, and his Nomination was never brought to
the Church to see whether they would agree to it or not.

You next proceed to consider our sixth Reason, viz. That the major Part of the
Council were not regularly called, even according to your own Principles, and
that because the Churches you belonged to were never applied to by Springfield
Church. Here you allow the Consequence to be good, and say, If this was so we
might well say you intermeddled in an Affair that did not belong to you, and
pronounce all your Acts to be null and void; and acknowledge your very Being as
a Council, and, consequently the Validity of your Proceedings, depends upon the
Call of the first Church in Springfield: But you deny the Premises, and say,
that to let the World see that you did not run before you were called, you will
give a Copy of one of the Letters missive: And there we have a Copy signed with
five Men's Names, and said to be in the Name of the rest; and then in the next
Page, you give a Copy of these Votes of the Church, which are all the Votes of
the Church that there ever was respecting this Matter, and there being in them
only four Churches mentioned, viz. Those in this County, and not any Mention of
one of your Churches, that came from far, and no Vote respecting you but only
this, Mr. John Burt chosen to go to Boston, as a Messenger to the Elders that
Mr. Breck should choose to ordain him. You excuse their Vote's not being more
methodical and expressive with that, that the Church had not a Pastor at their
Head to guide them, (as if it were usual for Churches to have Pastors to guide
them in such Cases:) But you say, the Church chose four of the Elders, and the
naming of the other four was left with Mr. Breck, and chose a Committee to
manage the Affairs respecting the Ordination, and that one necessary Affair for
which they were chosen was to sign Letters to the several Churches. But what
does all this signify, as long as it is as plain as it is possible any Thing
should be, by public Records, that not one of your Churches were ever so much
as mentioned in any Vote of the Church, either before Mr. Breck's Nomination or
in Consequence of it, neither expressly nor implicitly, neither in Method nor
out of Method, neither in any Direction given to the Committee chosen to manage
the Affairs of the Ordination nor to the Messenger that was to go to them, nor
any other Way? If there was any such Vote, Why is it not produced? Or was there
ever any Pretense that there was any Vote that, through Carlessness, was not
recorded, or that there was ever any other Church meeting, wherein there was
any such Vote, or indeed wherein this Affair was ever agitated, or that there
ever was so much as any open Mention, in any Church meeting, of your particular
Churches,; being designed to be sent for? If there was any of these Things, why
are we not told of them? Or can you find out any Way in which you might truly
be applied to and called by Springfield Church without any, either express or
implicit Mention of you, in any Vote of the Church, and without the Churches
knowing, when together, or in the Time of any public Church Act, what Churches
were to be applied to? And is the Form of the Letter missive barely considered,
sufficient Proof that you was chosen by the Church, against the most authentic
Accounts of Facts, public Records of Votes of the Church, confirmed by every
one's Memory, and all other collateral Evidences? But you say, The Church chose
a Committee to manage the Affairs respecting the Ordination, and that one
necessary Affair for which they were chosen was to sign Letters to the several
Churches, of which those Elders were the Pastors. Of which, First, we would
enquire, how you know that this is one Affair for which they were chosen? There
is no Account or Hint of any such thing in their Votes. Secondly, If the Church
did choose them to sign Letters, they chose 'em to sign Letters without any
Direction who to sign them to; for the Churches were not chosen by the Church
meeting: And if you say that the Church meant to give this Committee Power to
choose for 'em; for the present we will suppose they did mean to give 'em this
Power. This, we humbly conceive, by congregational Principles, is what they
could not do: A Church indeed may choose a Committee to consider Things, and
make Report; but their Determinations are not Acts of the Church till reported
to the Church and made their own by themselves: A Church may also choose a
Committee to execute their Acts, as to sign Letters in the Name of the Church;
but then it must first be the Act of the Church, before they can execute it:
The Business of a Committee is not to make Acts themselves, and when they have
done execute their own Acts, that never have been passed by the Church. The
Church by congregational Principles, we conceive, cannot so give up their Power
of Election in any one Instance, into the Hands of particular Persons, therein
constituting them their Officers, to exercise for 'em a Power that is
originally in themselves; and that because (...) Part of their Power of
Privilege, which by congregational Principles they ought to stand fast in and
in no Instance to give up to others: The Power of Privilege and the Power of
Office, both, by congregational Principles, are originally in the Brotherhood,
but with this Difference, that Christ has given them the Power of Office, not
to be exercised by themselves, but to be exercised by some particular Member,
to whom they shall commit their Power, so constituting him their Officer, to
exercise this Power for them: But the Power of Privilege is so given them by
Christ to be in them formally and immediately so as it may be exercised by
themselves, as is evident by the Platform, Chap. V. Sect. II. But when once
they have given it away, though it be but in one Instance, it ceases to be in
them, in that Instance formally and immediately, it is in them no otherwise than
the Power of Office, and cannot be exercised immediately by themselves. This
Power of Privilege therefore can never, in any Part of it, be given up to
particular Persons, but ever remains with the Brotherhood; which further
appears by the Platform, Chap. X. Sect. XI. From the Premises, viz That the
ordinary Power of Government belonging only to the Elders, Power of Privilege
REMAINS with the Brotherhood, as the Power of Judgment in Matters of Censure,
and Powers of Liberty in Matters of Liberty. And then this is against the Power
of Privileges, for a Church thus to give up their Power of Election in any
Instance to particular Persons another Way; for it is a Power of Privilege that
is vested in every Brother to have a Hand in the Election, and one Way wherein
they have a Right to have a Hand in it is, to have Liberty of offering their
Objections to the rest of their Brethren, against those that are nominated
before they are chosen: But if the Church don't choose at all, but give away
their Power to particular Persons, they will have no Opportunity for this: As
in this Case there was no Mention made in the Church-meeting, who were to be
chosen; and those who would have objected had no Opportunity for it. But then,
Thirdly, Nothing can be more plain and manifest, than that it never was what
the Church meant, to give that Committee Power to choose for them; it is utterly
inconsistent with their own Votes; because it is most plainly implied in those
Votes, that they give that Power to some Body else that did not yet belong to
their Church, viz to Mr. Breck: for though there is nothing in their Votes
mentioned about the Committee's choosing Churches, yet there is this Vote
relating to Mr. Breck, that we will repeat again Mr. John Burt chosen to go to
Boston as a Messenger to the Elders that Mr. Breck shall choose to ordain him.

Now, Sir, we would ask you whether or no this does not fully and plainly
imply, that the Church left it with Mr. Breck to choose the Elders out of the
County that were to ordain him? And whether therefore this Vote did not limit
the Committee to Mr. Breck's Choice? And whether their being limited to the
Choice of another, is not inconsistent with its being left to their Choice? And
whether it being so that the Church never chose you themselves, nor ever gave
the Committee Power to choose you in their Names, that it will not follow that
the Church never chose you in any Sense whatsoever? The Matter is so plain that
it seems to be mere Waste of Words to dispute about it, and would be so indeed,
were the Obstacles, in the Way of Conviction, but ordinary. If there be any
other Way of a Churches choosing, besides doing it by themselves, it must be
choosing by a Committee that they have empowered to choose for them, and in their
Names; but neither of these, we have now shown, ever was in this Case, unless
Mr. Breck was their Committee, which you strenuously deny, Page 41, and bring
Arguments to prove that he was not, which you suppose in Opposition to us, just
as if we, when we said they made Mr. Breck their Committee, intended that the
Church had formally passed a Vote, wherein they had used the Expression, and
had in Terms voted that he should be their Committee. We don't deny but that
Mr. Breck's nominating your Churches, might have been consistent with your
being chosen by the Church, if he had only nominated to the Church, and the
Church had then voted according to his Nominations; but instead of this he was
left to nominate and choose too; his Nomination (if you will so call it) was
after the Church-meeting was broke up, and was never brought to any
Church-meeting at all, to see whether the Church would vote it or not: So that
you was not chosen by the Church before you came, and therefore run before you
was called; and you strenuously deny, yourself, Page 43, that you was accepted
as a Council, by any Vote of the Church after you came. You make a Spposition,
Page 44, that Springfield Church had only desired the Assistance of certain
Elders, and these Elders had, with the Consent of their Churches, come to them;
and think this would have been sufficient; but as to you the Elders that came
from out of this County, the Church of Springfield never sent either to your
Churches, or to you their Elders.

To what Purpose is it to tell of Springfield Churches failing in the
methodicalness of Expression; whether their Votes were more or less methodical
it signifies nothing, as long as it is as plain as the Sun in the midst of a
clear Firmament, that you was never chosen at all by Springfield Church by any
Expression or Act at all, either methodical or immethodical. You say the true
Intent and Meaning of their Vote is very plain, to any one that has a Mind to
understand them, and no Design to pervert them: So it is indeed as plain as
Words can make them; it is plain that they had a Meaning, utterly inconsistent
with congregational Principles, viz. not to choose the Churches that were to be
applied to, out of the County, themselves, but to leave that Matter wholly with
Mr. Breck; and so it is plain, that according to their Meaning, you were not
chosen by the Church themselves, but only by Mr. Breck: And you must stretch
the Meaning of their Votes very far, not only to make them have Respect to, but
not positively exclude Mr. Cook of Sudbury: The Messenger was directed in the
Vote to go to Boston to the Elders that Mr. Breck should choose to ordain him;
not a Word of Sudbury: It Is not easy, but hard to understand their Meaning, if
by Boston they meant Boston and all the Towns twenty Miles round: But whether
it was in Boston or out, it is certain that Mr. B -- k's Choice was all the
Warrant you had to come; and so, by your own Confession, Page 40, we might well
say you intermeddled with an Affair that did not belong to you, and pronounce
all your Acts to be null and void To use your own Words, Page 37, to whom did
it belong to choose what Churches should be applied to but the Church itself? So
that by your own Principles you were evidently a Company of Busy-bodies; (though
you make it an intolerable Crime in us, to say that which implied it in our
Protestation;) and if it be so, will it not follow that you have been the
blameable Causes of all the Mischief, and Confusion, and Wounds to Religion,
that have attended this Case. You often, with an Air of Triumph, mention it as
an Instance of our doing what was none of our Business, that we took the Case
into our own Hands before it was referred to us by Springfield Church: We have
already shown the Groundlessness and Injustice of such a Charge; but your
Injuriousness in it does more abundantly appear by this, that what you charge
us with is so manifestly and certainly, the very Thing you did yourself, and
not only so, but came an hundred Miles twice, in order to it, and once in the
very Depth of Winter.

With respect to our saying that the Church never voted, to desire the
Assistance of any Church at all, but only certain Presbyters by Name; you say
they chose four of the Elders, that with the Churches, they desired to assist,
thinking the Churches were sufficiently distinguished by naming their Elders.
What we argue from is what was publicly acted, voted, and recorded; but what
you argue from is what they thought in the secret Closet of their Hearts: If
that be according to congregational Principles, to make a Churches undeclared
Thoughts the Foundation of other Churches Acts, we confess it is as you say,
Page 44, 45, That we have no thorough Acquaintance with congregational
Principles: What is most probable is, that the Church, being ignorant of
congregational Principles, thought nothing about applying to any Churches, and
did not know that there was any Need of it: And though you say it shows our
Ignorance of those Principles, if we suppose, that in case Springfield Church
had only desired the Assistance of certain Elders by Name, and those Elders
with the Consent of their Churches, had come to ordain, it would not have been
agreeable to those Principles: but in this Matter, Rev. Sir, we humbly think we
understand congregational Principles better than you, or are more willing
fairly to represent them: By those Principles an Elder can act nothing in
another Church but by Virtue of a Mission from his Church, but his Church has
no Power to concern themselves in the Affairs of another Church, or to give any
one a Mission to act in them, till applied to by that Church: All the Acts of
other Churches, as well as Persons, as concerning themselves in the Affairs of
that Church, are, by the Tenor of your own Words null and void, if not applied
to, and called by that Church: An Application to a particular Person don't give
a Church Authority to act; the Delegate goes as the Churches Representative,
and all that he acts is in the Name of his Church, and not by any Power of his
Office as an Elder, which extends not beyond the Limits of his own
Congregation; in his coming the Church comes, and therefore, however he has
been called personally, yet if the Church han't been applied to, the Church
comes uncalled: It 'don't at all follow that it is not so, because the Platform
says they may improve Elders of other Churches, as you mention; there the
Platform meddles not with the Way of their being called; the Platform supposes
that to be determined elsewhere. So that we still say there was not one Soul of
that Council called according to congregational Principles: But yet there is
vastly the most notorious Defect with respect to the Manner of your being
called that came from far.

You say, Page 45, concerning a certain Minister in this County, that only
certain Elders by Name were appointed to carry on his Ordination, and these
never so much as chosen by the Church he was ordained to, if you are rightly
informed. But why will you venture to publish Things to prejudice the Country
against the County of Hampshire, and the Memory of the late venerable Mr.
Stoddard, only on uncertain Information, which is indeed contrary to Fact; for
the Elders were chosen by public Vote of the Church.

With regard to that Objection that we make against the Method taken by
Springfield Church, and their Council, viz That it makes void all Endeavors
any Ministers can use to hinder the settling of heterdox Ministers, and to
prevent the Growth of Error in the Country; and that it opens a Door for the
letting in of Error into the Country, because if there be any Objection against
a Candidate, or like to be any Difficulty on any such Account, he can go where
he will for his Judges: In answer to it you say, you are persuaded that the
Care of Councils, respecting this Matter, is like to be as thorough and
effectual as that of Associations. Just as if you supposed, that the Thing in
Dispute was, which was most likely to take thorough Care, Councils or
Associations; whereas we don't so much as mention it, nor has this the least
Relation to the Objection we make, which is exceeding fully and plainly
declared to be this, that the giving a Man this Liberty of going where he will
for his Judges, opens a Door for the letting in of Error, which is so plain
that it needs no arguing upon to prove it; you and every Body must know it to
be so at first Sight: And what is it to the Purpose to say, in answer to this
Objection, as you do once and again, Page 46, and Page 96, that you have taken
thorough Care, and if other Councils will take as much Care as you have done,
there will be no such Door opened? Does it follow, that because, in a
particular Instance, a Council chosen agreeable to such a Custom, have been
faithful, that therefore the Custom it self opens no Door to Error: If it were
the Custom to allow Persons accused of Theft to choose their own Judges, would
it follow, that this Custom don't open a Door for the Increase of Theft and
Robbery, because it has once so happend that Judges Chosen by a Person accused
of such a Crime, but was indeed innocent (as you suppose in this Case) have
been faithful and upright in their Judgment.

With respect to what is related in the Narrative, Page 33, 34, of what the
Rev. Mr. Allis said, you think you have Authority to contradict us before the
World, as having given an Account that is not true, because Mr. Allis don't
remember it; but if you have, it is because his negative Testimony alone,
against the positive Testimonies of three that heard him, gives you Authority
so to do.

In Page 48, you take Notice of our charging some of the Council with laying
out themselves to be the Persons that must be the Judges in this Case
beforehand; and particularly the Reverend Moderator of the Council, which we
say is evident by a Letter he sent to the Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield, to get
us willing that he should come upon that Business, pretending to be unwilling
to come without our Consent; but when he failed of obtaining that, he appeared
resolved to come nevertheless. Herein you say we have doubly abused Mr. Cooper,
and basely misrepresented his Letter; and that because, you say, the Design of
that was not to ask the Consent of any of us to his coming up upon a Council,
but to be present when Mr. Breck' s Matters were fully heard before the
Association. But not withstanding this bitter Charge, we will show that it was
impossible for us to understand Mr. Cooper otherwise than we represented him,
and that it is most clearly evident that we understood him right and
represented him right, viz that the Design of his Letter was to ask our Consent
to come up upon a Council, and as sent by his Church. Mr. Williams of
Long-Meadow, upon his being shown that Letter by Mr. Williams of Hatfield,
wrote a large Letter to Mr. Cooper (which Mr. Cooper, in his Answer to it says*
seemed designed as an Answer to his, to the Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield,
referring to Mr. Breck's Case) in which Mr. Williams endeavored to represent
to Mr. Cooper the melancholy Circumstances of the first Parish in Springfield,
and the Confusion they were like to be brought into by the Measures Mr. Breck
and his Adherents were taking, desiring his Help in so difficult an Affair, and
manifested it as his Desire and Entreaty, that he would come up, not (in the
Way which seemed to be proposed, viz.) as sent by his Church; but that he, with
some others, would come and join with the Association in hearing Mr. Breck's
Case, and as Peacemakers: As particularly in these Passages of his Letter, If
the Charges against Mr Breck were fairly heard before our whole Association to
whom they were sent; yea if you your self, and one more Gentleman of a cool
Temper were added to them, and he were acquitted by them, I believe things
would be like to be easy: I believe the Association would willingly hear any
Reason Mr. Breck can have against my sitting with them, or any Reason any
Person should offer against any other Members sitting with them: for my Part, I
should ^^^^ingly withdraw upon any Intimation from the Association; it is
nothing but Order, Justice, Truth and Peace, I have desired. And again, I will
venture still to propose to yourself, since you manifest a Desire to visit us,
in this Part of the Province, that you, with some other prudent Minister, would
be so good as to come up among us, not as sent by your Churches, and endeavor
to be Peacemakers among us; that you may be entitled to that Blessing in
Matthew. 5. 9. This Letter was dated August 8 1735* when it was known certainly
that there was no Design, or Thought of the Matter's being further heard in the
Association, as you pretend and express, Page 48: The Church-meeting to choose
Elders was August 4. 1735. See Narrative Page 33; and the Letter to the fourth
Church in Boston is dated August 5th. Page 40 of your Answer; and the Rev. Mr.
Williams of Hatfield now knew by current Report that went about, that it was
resolved at Springfield that the Ordination Council should be the Determiners
of this Case, and not the Association or any other Council or Ministers; yea
his Answer was dated the same Day that Springfield Church chose Elders to
ordain. And besides the Rev. Mr. Cooper must see Mr. Williams of Springfield's
Letter (that he says himself he took to be designed as an Answer to his Letter)
that he understood his Proposal of his coming up as sent by his Church: In his
Answer he don't say that by Mr. Williams mistook his Meaning, but plainly
manifests that it was not what he had proposed to come without being sent by
his Church: for when Mr. Williams, in his Reply to his Proposal, intreates that
he would so come, he is far from falling in with it, as being the Thing he
meant, but rejects it: His Words are, You express a Desire that I, and some
others may come up, but not as sent by our Churches, and endeavor to be Peace
makers; why we may not do that, and yet be sent by our Churches, I don't see.
And this Letter was written not a great while after Mr. Cooper's to Mr.
Williams of Hatfield, his being dated July, 1735, and this August ^th, and was
sent before Mr. Williams of Hatfield's Answer, and how could we think that Mr B
-- k intended to have his Matters further heard in the Association, when we
knew other Measures were then determined upon at Springfield. These Things
being so* we must of Necessity understand that Expression in Mr. Cooper's
Letter Page 50. It is therefore his present Intention (as I understand from
himself) to ask them so far to favor him as to give him Liberty to invite two
or three other Ministers, when his Affairs are further proceeded in. that he
meant he would ask the People, who are mentioned in the foregoing Sentence, so
to favor him; Mr. Breck was got past asking any Favor of the Association long
before that; and both he and the People had fully determined upon other Things;
yea and Mr. Cooper himself too, as appears by what has been already said.
Nothing can be more plain than that neither Mr B -- k, nor Springfield Church,
nor Mr. Cooper, had a Thought of putting the Affair on the Foot of any such
Proposal, as joining some others to the Association; for as to Springfield
Church, and Mr. Breck, other Things were plainly resolved before Mr. Cooper's
Proposal was made; nor did they in the least suspend the Matter to see whether
any Proposal of joining others to the Association, would be complied with; for
as has been already observed, though Mr. Williams of Hatfield, his Answer was not
delayed but written with convenient Speed, yet the Church met to choose
Ordainers that same Day that he wrote his Answer; and Mr. Cooper himself as
soon as ever he receives that which he himself took for an Answer to his
Proposal, wherein that very Thing of joining others to us, was earnestly
desired of him, he immediately rejects it as not being the Thing that was
agreeable to his Mind: So that the whole Face of the Affair, as it then stood
on all Sides, rendered it impossible that that Proposal of Mr. Cooper's should
be understood otherwise than as we understood it. Hence it appears that we
never rejected any Proposal of joining two or three more with the Association,
as you say you know we did: Indeed we ever insisted on a Proposal that it might
be so, and made the Proposal once and again, after we saw that Mr. Breck would
not submit his Case to us alone. Hence also it is evident, though you do so load
us with Reproach about this Matter, charging us, Page 35, with Fallacy that
tends to impose on the World, and with a double Abuse and Misrepresentation,
Page 48, and with setting this Matter in a wrong Light on purpose, and therein
treating Mr. Cooper in a very disingenious and injurious Manner; that yet our
Charge is just, and our Witness demonstratively true in this Matter, and that
Mr. Cooper did indeed, before he was sent to, lay out himself to be a Judge in
this Case; and that you yourself have mistaken Mr. Cooper's Proposal, and if
you understood it in the Time of it, must needs have forgotten and be strangely
lost and confounded in your: Thoughts about it since. Hence also it is evident
that the Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield, in his Answer to Mr. Cooper's Letter,
nor his Amanuensis, did not mistake his Proposal.

And what, Rev. Sir, can be your Design in suggesting that Mr. W -- ms of
Hatfield ignorantly signed to a Letter drawn up by some Body else, and so that
the Mistake that it went upon was none of his, though he signed it; but the
Mistake of his Amanuensis; and telling that the Body of the Letter is written
by another Hand, and only signed with his own, and superscribed by Mr. Williams
of Long-Meadow, unless it be to insinuate that the Letter was none of his, and
that other People that got about him dealt with him as a Child, and drew up a
Letter, out of their own Heads, and persuaded him to subscribe it, that it
might be honored with his Name, without his knowing what it was? And is this
your rising up before the hoary Head, as you profess to do in your Letter to
the same reverend and aged Gentleman, Page 56? Mr. Williams of Hatfield wrote
that Letter with his own Hand, before ever Mr. Williams of Long-Meadow saw Mr.
Cooper's Letter to him, and got it transcribed, it being very difficult to r^^d
his Writing; the Letter lay by him waiting for an Opportunity to be sent; Mr.
Williams of Long-Meadow informed him that there would be an Opportunity to send
from Springfield in a few Days; he sealed it and delivered it to him to
superscribe, and send it along.

In our Defense, Page 79, we signify that we think that we have Reason to
complain, that in an Affair wherein our Interest is so much concerned, and
yours so little, you would resolutely proceed, without giving any Heed to our
earnest Remonstrances, and stand aloof from us when you come into the County,
and never so much as friendly enquire of us, or give us any fair Opportunity to
speak for our selves; and Page 90, 91, we say you did in this contrary to what
you gave Reason to expect, who assured the Rev. Dr. Colman, that when you came
you would, before you proceeded, visit us, and not act without us, much less
against us: We say that indeed you proposed that the Association should be
called together at Springfield, when you came up, to give you their Reasons,
etc. but that it would in our Judgment have made an odd Appearance for the
Association to be called together to appear before you, to give an Account of
ourselves, submitting our own Conduct as well as Mr. Breck's Case to your
Judgment. This (you say.) contains a complicated Charge, in which there is a
Complication of vile Misrepresentations, and that you call them so because they
must needs be wilful ones. With respect to your visiting us before you
proceeded agreeable to your Promise to the Rev. Dr. Colman, you say* Page 57,
Could they imagine that we should go from one Part of the County to another, to
meet with them singly, when they live so remote one from another. We answer,
that considering your Promise, which you don't deny, we might well imagine,
that you would go to more than one of our Houses, which you did not; we might
well imagine, that seeing all the Ministers in the County that joined with you
were visited, and much Time spent with them, and even Mr. Rand, though about
thirty Miles from Springfield, that you would have visited some of us who were
nearer than any of them; we might well imagine that you would have visited the
Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield at least, seeing one of you twice came within a
Mile and an half of his House, in your Visit to the Rev. Mr. Chauncey, and went
seven Miles beyond it in your Visit to the Rev Mr Rand; we might well imagine
you would have visited Mr Hopkins, seeing you was in Springfield from Wednesday
Night to the Tuesday following, before the Council sat, and his House was but
two Miles from your Lodgings: we might well imagine, that when you came to our
Door, you would not refuse to go in, as some of you did when you was at Mr.
Hopkins's Door; and might we not well imagine, and say, considering these
Things, that you stood aloof from us, without vile and wilful
Misrepresentation. The Reason you give why you did not visit the Rev. Mr.
Williams of Hatfield, is, that he seemed to think himself ill treated in your
Letter, that you say was drawn up in as respectful Terms as you could do it;
and therefore you dispair'd of his thinking himself well treated by you in a
Visit. That is plainly, that you found Mr. Williams so touchy and waspish that
there was no coming nigh him, or having any Thing to do with him: But with
respect to that Clause of Mr. Williams's Letter, he declares that he had no
respect at all to your Manner of writing in your Letter to him, and that there
were more Terms of Respect in it than he desired; but that what he had
Reference to, was your showing so little Regard to his repeated Instances and
Representations in this Matter, and that you do in that Letter so groundlesly
suggest, that what we in this Affair were contending for, was the Rights of
Associations in Opposition to the Liberty of particular Churches, in calling
and ordaining their Pastors.

But then you say, the Truth of the Case is, we stood aloof from you: And what
if we did, does that prove that you did not do as we assert, viz. stand aloof
from us; or did we ever pass our Word, and assure any Body that we would not
stand aloof from you? But in this you charge us very wrong: You say, Page 53,
that we would not give you that Opportunity to confer and consult with you that
you earnestly desired and requested of us: But, Sir, with your Leave, we will
put you in mind of what you know (as to the Substance of it) we did do; and we
would pray you, with some Impartiality to compare it with this that you
publicly assert of us: Though the Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield was not there,
yet all the rest of u^, excepting Mr. Edwards, who was not then in New England,
came to Springfield the first Day of the Council's sitting, seeking an
Opportunity to confer with the Council, and first drew up the Grounds of our
Dissatisfaction in Writing, and sent them in to the Council, concluding (as
well we might) that the Council would take some Notice of it, and send to us
again, and so that it would lead the Way to a Conference; and when no Word came
from the Council, after we had waited a While, we went all together to the
House where the Council was sitting, to seek an Opportunity of conferring with
them, and spoke to the Rev. Mr. Mather, and Mr. Halsey, and expressed this our
Desire to them; but were told that the Council were busy; and there we waited
about an Hour and an Half; but the Council not vouchsafing to take any Notice
of us, we withdrew, and some of us went to our own Homes: In this Manner were
we refused an Opportunity of speaking with the Council when we came to 'em, and
waited upon them on the Spot: They would not so much as speak to us to tell us
why we could not be admitted, or how long it would be before they should be at
Leisure, nor when would be a more convenient Time, but only that they were
busy; nor ever did they make a Word of Reply to the Paper we sent them: And yet
how are we cried out of, that we would not condescend to give you the
Opportunity to confer and consult with us, which you so earnestly requested and
desired, and when you came with Hearts so full of Respect to us; And for vile
and wilful Misrepresentation, in saying that you stood aloof from us! We beg
Leave of you Rev. Sir, for your own sake, as well as for our's, seriously to
consider how you have treated us in this Matter. And as to your saying, Page
57, that we met for several Days successively with the dissatisfied, there is
no other Foundation for it than only this, that some of the dissatisfied did
sometimes come to the Tavern where we were entertained, and were seen there
with us.

In Page 58, you charge us with treating you in a most unjust and injurious
Manner, in those Words in our Defense, Indeed they proposed that the
Association should be called together at Springfield. when they came up, to
give them their Reasons, etc. And then saying this upon it, But this, in our
Judgment, would have made an odd Appearance, for our Association to be called
together from all Parts of the County to appear before them, to give an Account
of ourselves to them, submitting our own Conduct as well as Mr Breck's Case to
their Judgment. All the Representation that we here make of what you did is in
these Words, Indeed they proposed that the Association should be called
together when they came up to give them their Reasons, etc And what follows is
plainly expressed, not as what you said, but as of our Sense what our complying
with your Proposal would be in effect; and we think still that our Sense of the
Matter was right, not withstanding your Letter's being writ in respectful
Terms, which we don't deny. We say nothing of your writing in an assuming Way
as you express, nor do we in any wise represent you as so writing, unless
giving an Account of our Sense (not of the Way of proposing) but of the Thing
proposed, be to represent you as writing in an assuming Way: The Thing proposed
might be assuming, though not the Way of proposing; you might have said you would
rise up before the hoary Head, and used many other respectful Terms, if you had
writ to Mr. Williams of Hatfield to come down to Springfield to do the meanest
Office for you: But we think our Sense of your Proposal was right; if we had
answered your Desire we must have come to you not as being Judges ourselves,
but to appear before them that were so; you did not propose that we should have
any Hand in the Judgment; and therefore what could we have to do, who had
ourselves been before concerned in the Case, and had had it referred to us, and
had acted and taken some Steps as Judges in it, but only to give an Account of
Things relating to the Case before you as the final Judges? And this, whatever
soft Terms you may put it in, would have been in effect to appear before you,
submitting our own Conduct to your Judgment: How is it possible it should be
otherwise? How can it be but that Judges that have been concerned and have
acted in a Cause, and then have the Caus^ taken from them, under a Notion of
their being unjust Judges, and referred to other Judges, if they appear before
these superior Judges to give an Account of the Cause to them, but that it
must be in effect to have their own Conduct wherein they acted as Judges, tried
and judged? And that this was what you designed in your Proposal, seems to
appear by your treating us with such Neglect and Contempt, when we sought an
Opportunity of conferring with you, not coming in the Way you had proposed, in
the Form of an Association with our Moderator at our Head.

In Page 58, etc. you endeavor to excuse yourself from the Charge of Violence
and Driving in your Proceedings, which we say showed your Prejudice, by
relating particularly how long it was after the sending forth the Letters
missive, before you went on the Business to Springfield; and having then met
with an unusual Interposition that hindered your proceeding at the Time
appointed, it was more than three Months longer before you actually ordained
Mr. Breck. But what does it signify how many Months it was after the Letters
missive were sent forth, before you actually came, as long as it was
immediately determined by you upon your Receipt of the Letters missive, that you
would come? When once you was sent to, the Matter was not suspended at all; and
it appeared by all your Letters and Replys, that you was immovable in your
Resolutions to come, though you were so much, and often desired to suspend such a
Resolution, by earnest Remonstrances from the Rev. Mr. W -- ms of Hatfield, the
senior Minister in the County, and from another of us that formerly had been
treated as a particular Friend of the Rev. Mr. Cooper, and also from the Rev.
Dr. Colman, the senior Minister among you: It evidently appeared that nothing
would prevail with you to reconsider the Matter; nothing would stop or alter
you. It was earnestly desired of you* as we signify in our Words that are cited
by you, Page 58, that there might be further Time of Consideration, and that
you would wait for Things to get into a better Posture, before you finally
resolved; and how your immediately resolving, without any further
Consideration, or at all waiting to see if Things would get into a better
Posture, and your delaying two Months on purpose that there might be
Opportunity for Consideration, and Things got into a better Posture (as you say
you did, Page 59.) do consist together, we don't know: How could it be expected
that Things should get into a better Posture, when the contending Parties see
that the Matter was already determined and resolved, past Hopes of Alteration,
by the Judges that one of the Parties only had chosen, that they would come and
be the sole Judges of the Case? And though you came to Springfield some Days
before the Day appointed for Ordination, yet your Driving and Violence, and not
your Moderation appeared in the Manner of your improving that Time; for though
you say, Page 59, We went to Springfield a Week before the Time for the Session
of the Council, and let the Gentlemen there know that we should do so that so
we might have Opportunity to confer and consult with them. How that consists
with the Facts already related, we leave you to judge. And to what Purpose is
it to tell the World, as a further Instance of your Moderation and waiting,
that you delayed three Months after the first Time of your coming to
Springfield, before you ordained Mr. Breck? When though you did not actually
ordain him, yet you came to a Result, which was drawn up and read in Public,
wherein Mr. B -- was justified, and his Party advised to stick by him: It Is
your Driving and Violence as Judges of this Cause, that we speak of in our
Defense.

As to what you say, Page 61, That while Mr. Clap was reading his Papers, there
came a Messenger on Horseback to speak with him, who having finished his
private Message to Mr. Clap, rode away with convenient speed, it is not
unlikely, to inform those that sent him, how to time the next Messenger or
Message.

In this and the preceding Page you refer six or seven Times to Mr. Clap's
reading sundry large Papers, and several remarkable Incidents thereupon:
Whereas four of us then present well remember, that Mr. Clap did not read one
of those Papers, but they were all read by the Scribe of the Council, as they
were severally given in by the Witnesses; and therefore it is impossible any
Message should be done to him while he was reading those Papers. And we suppose
that the Message that was done to him, was before the Scribe began to read
them: But let the Time of the Message be when it will, the Suggestion that you
add upon it, viz. That the Messenger came to know when would be the best Time
to apprehend Mr. Breck, is wholly false and groundless; for the Messenger said
nothing of such a Design, but his Message was of another Nature.

You misrepresent and very much diminish the Matter of your insisting on
hearing and trying this Cause of such public Concern in private: You say, the
Weather was too cold to allow the Door to stand open, but it was not kept shut
to keep out any that we desired might be present: But this you know to be true,
that You allowed none but Witnesses to be present: It Is true you allowed some
Thing that was desired, viz. That the Ministers of the County that were
Witnesses might be present, which was desired, after it was seen that nothing
else could be obtained; but was far from being all that was desired. The Door
was kept fast shut and locked (instead of just shut and latch'd, as it is
through the Error of the Press in the Narrative:) The Hearing was as private as
possible, for none were allowed to be present but the Witnesses that were to be
heard: So private were you, that when one of the Ministers of the County, viz.
the Rev. Mr. Allis, came and stood in the Chamber, it was carefully enquired by
the Scribe of the Council, whether he was a Witness, and when it was answered
that he was not, he was desired to withdraw. This is not only contrary to
Reason, and the Custom of all Nations, for Judicatures to try Causes, and
especially Causes of so public a Concern, in such a strict Privacy, but it is
also contrary to congregational Principles, as appears by the Rev. Dr. Cotton
Mather, in his Ratio Disciplinae, that you your self cite as an authentic
Witness in such Affairs, Page 160, The Council coming on the Spot, first choose
their Moderator, and use all other necessary Preliminaries, whereupon they
proceed into as public a Hearing as they can have, ( viz. in the
Meeting House) of the Things that are to come under Examination. And Page 165,
"When the Council arrives, they first more privately form themselves into
Order, by choosing a Moderator, and speaking with all Persons concerned, so far
as they count it needful, by Way of Preparation for their Business, then they
pass into the Meeting House, where being first conveniently seated, all Persons
that will may see and hear all that is done." Here the Dr. is speaking of this
very Case, of the Trial of an offending Pastor. And what Shadow of Reason is
there in that Excuse you offer for this Privacy, viz That the only Reason why
you did not go into a public Hearing was, because the Dissatisfied declared
they would not submit their Matters to you as a Council, as long as you would,
and did, not with standing take the Matter into your Hands as a Council, to try
the Cause, finally to determine and issue it, and act and execute according to
your own Judgment, whether they would or no? And therefore how does this alter
the Case as to the Reason why it should be public? If a Criminal should be
arraigned before a Court of civil Judicature, and should plead against the
Jurisdiction of the Court, and refuses, as far as in him lies, to submit his
Cause to them, but his Plea is altogether disallowed, and they, not with
standing, resolutely go on, and hear Witnesses, and judge him, and pass
Sentence upon him, and execute him, would that be a sufficient Reason why the
Trial must be in strict Privacy, and he and others must be shut out from
hearing of it? Would not the World cry out of such an Appearance of Injustice,
that he must be executed on a Judgment found against him, he, and the World
must not know how?

As to your appearing Mr. Breck's Advocates in the Court, before you came to a
Result, we ever thought it to be very improper for those that are called to be
Judges in a Cause, to appear to be Advocates for the Person that is to be tried
any where at all; and that for this plain Reason, because acting as a Man's
Advocate, and being engaged in pleading his Cause, naturally tends to give a
Biass to his Mind in his Favor.

With Respect to our saying that the reading Declarations on Horse back in the
Street, in the midst of a Multitude of People, to represent Mr. Kirtland and
Mr. Clap to be Liars, we presume was of the Council's ordering, because done so
publicly under their Window: You sarcastically say, Here our Reason is
admirably strong! Certainly as strong as yours is, Page 79, where only from
our being entertained at the Tavern where the Justices kept, and knowing of
their Design, you don't only say you presume, but venture boldly to assert, not
only that we approved of it, but called in their Help, and GOT 'em to
interpose; and much stronger, for the People that especially did this, under
your Window, were and had been at the House, as waiting on you, in an Affair,
wherein it is notorious, they were wholly under your Direction* But however,

In Page 67, 68, you most strenuously assert, that this was without your
Ordering or Knowledge; We will therefore let you know what Reason we have to
think that what we have supposed of you in this Matter is the Truth* and first,
we have the following Testimony of a Person that is of neither of the Parties
concerned, for he don't belong to the Precinct.

These may certify, that I the Subscriber, on the ninth Day of October 1735,
being at the House of Mr. John Worthengton in Springfield, in Company with
Ensign Ebenezer Warriner and others, I well remember there came in a Person of
that Precinct, and desire^ the People to go ^p to Madam Brewer's: I asked the
Person, who desired them to go up there? The Person replied, the Gentlemen of
the Council. I further asked him whether the People universally, or only of
that Precinct were desired? The Person replied, any Body and every Body that
would: But I remember I thought the Person was mistaken* and told my Company I
would not go; but I told Ensign Warriner he might, for he belonged to the
Precinct, to which I thought the Invitation was confined: He replied he had no
Business there, and would not go up: But I observed many People, upon the
Invitation did leave the House in order to go there: Soon after which I went
down Street, when I came in sight of Madam Brewer's House, I saw a Concourse of
People before the Door. This is the Truth, according to the best of my
Remembrance.

Jonathan Stebbins.
I the Subscriber being at the House of Mr. John Worthenton, in Company with
the above Subscriber, Jonathan Stebbins, well remember the Things as above
related.

Ebenezer Warriner.



And besides, one of your own Party, or on Mr. Breck's Side, being one of the
Persons t^^t came up from Windham, to testify for Mr. B --, and one of them
whose Testimonies were at that Time so publicly read, and was therefore
admitted amongst you to know your private Consultations and Conclusions,
declares as follows.

When I was at Springfield in October 1735, the ordination Council then being
there; the Evening after Mr. Breck was apprehended, I, and the other Witnesses,
who went to testify in Mr. Breck's Favor, were desired by the Council to write
our Evidences that Night; and produce them before the Council the next Morning,
which we did, and carried them to the Council; the Rev. Messi* Kirtland and
Clap, and the other Witnesses, having that Morning taken away the Papers they
delivered to the Council the Day before; the Rev Moderator Mr Cooper, told us
that he though it it not proper that our Evidences should be given into the
Council; but thought it best they should be read before the Church; not where
the Council were sitting, but in some other Room. Before we were gone out of
the Chamber, some Body said to the Moderator, I believe there are others who
would be glad to hear them; would it not be best to stay till Notice may be
given them? The Moderator answered, very well; I believe it would be best; it
is no Matter how many hear them. The Man went away immediately, I suppose to
give Notice, and while they waited for the coming of the People, some Body said
in the Council Chamber, there will not be Room in the other Chamber for the
People that will come, would it not be best to read them first in the other
Chamber to the Church; and to read them abroad to the People when they are
gathered together? Mr. Cooper answered, very well, I believe it will be best to
do so. Accordingly they were read in the other Chamber to the Church, and after
the People came they were read before the Door, as the Hampshire Narrative sets
it forth.

Ezra Kingsley.

Whether you ordered that Circumstance of the reading those Testimonies, viz.
its being done on Horseback or no, yet by this, the reading of them in so
public a Manner, as that it should be done before both the Church and others,
was by your Advice. But you say you can assure us, if we will give Credit to
you, that let it be done where it would, it was not only without the Council's
Order but without their Knowledge. Here you assert, that not only the Place of
the Thing, but the very Thing itself, let the Place be where it would, was
without your Ordering, or your Knowledge. Here we leave it with yourself to
make Reflections; We don't desire that any Body should put a worse Construction
on this, than the best that the Case will allow: You probably had something
when you wrote this, with which you might solve the Matter with your own
Conscience; it may be, that in giving this Advice you did not formally act as a
Council, and so could assert that it was not the of Council's Ordering or
Knowledge: What your subterfuge is, we know not, but leave it with you to
consider, whether if the Case was as this Friend of yours represents, there
could be any* that could be honorable or warrantable?

And we would also entreat you to consider the Nature of the Thing itself, viz.
your advising to the public reading of those Testimonies, in order to
represent those Gentlemen to be Liars; it is true the Manner of its being done,
viz. on Horseback was odd, but its being done so publicly, without any
Opportunity given to the Gentlemen to be present to speak for themselves, is
all that is of Consequence in the Affair, whether on Horseback or on Foot.

And besides, in Page 82, you your self allow two of those Gentlemen to be
Ministers of the Gospel, of an established Character and Reputation, and say
you gave Credit to their Testimonies as such, and yet advise to the public
reading of Declarations of some Persons, to represent them to be Liars: What
End could you have in this? Is it becoming of Ministers of Jesus Christ,
gathered together in his Name, to promote the Peace and Holiness of his
Kingdom, openly to represent to the Multitude concerning Ministers of the
Gospel, that they are Liars, and yet at the same Time own 'em to be Men of
Honor and Fidelity, and that their Testimonies are good, and declare that you
allowed them to be so! By your own Account, your End could not be to weaken or
invalidate their Testimonies in this Affair (and indeed you expressly say it,
Page 83,) or in any wise to help Mr. Breck's Cause; for you say you allowed
their Testimonies to be good in that Cause, and did lay all the Weight upon 'em
that was due to such Testimonies.

You say, Page 69, that it makes it look still worse in us, that we should
mention this young Gentleman's reading those Testimonies, to represent Mr.
Kirtland and Mr. Clap to be Liars, that these Gentlemen notwithstanding, a Week
or two after, assisted in his Ordination. It Is true, those reverend Ministers,
though so abused by this young Gentleman, did exercise an admirable Spirit of
Meekness in this Affair; for some of the People that he was settling amongst
were exceedingly disgusted at it. And had Mr. Clap been disposed to recant he
could have hurt his Interest there; but on the contrary he labored very much
to quiet the People's Minds, and to pacify them toward him. And when he was
discoursed with about it he did not justify what he had done; and those
Gentlemen assisted in his Ordination. And we cannot see that their Moderation
and good Temper in so easily passing over the Injury, can reflect any Blame
upon us, for reciting a Fact so publicly transacted.

Whereas we speak of it, in our Defense, as a Thing that shows the Prejudice
and Violence of the Gentlemen of that Party, that they intercepted, broke open,
and published in the Gazette, a private Letter of a Person of Distinction to
his Friend (meaning a Letter of the Rev. Rector of Yale College to Mr. W -- ms
of Long Meadow) you say that this needs want, as many of our Stories unhappily
do, the needful Circumstances of Truth because none of you of the Council ever
intercepted it, or broke it open; but if it be so, is that an Evidence that
none of the Party did it.

We used the Word Party here, and not Council, for that very End that it might
take in, both the Intercepter and the Publisher. You say you had not the least
Thought of its being intercepted or broken open, till the Narrative told you of
it: If it be so, it is very strange; you were long before that told of it in the
Boston Gazette of December. I. wherein the Injuriousness of exposing a Letter so
stolen, was insisted on. But if it was so, and was as you solemnly declare,
that not one of you knew from whom nor by whom it came, certainly then you
ought not to have exposed it as the Rector's, to his Reproach; for if the Case
was so, you knew not but that it was a mere Forgery. Why would you suffer your
Hands to touch Goods that were brought to you after such a Manner, that you
knew were none of your own, but saw that they came with another Man's Mark upon
them, as the original Owner, and knew not how they were gotten from him? Was it
worthy of a Minister of the Gospel, under such Circumstances, before ever he
knew, or had made any Enquiry, to take them into his House, and into his own
Possession, and improve them to his own Purposes, and to the Prejudice of the
original Owner? Is this, Rev. Sir, becoming of your Office and Character? But
you say that you never published it, and then, to prove it, you insert an
Extract of that Part of the Boston Gazette that was referred to, whereby it
appears that only some Parts of the Letter were published, with Interspersed
Reflections, publicly to ridicule it: But is not this a miserable Foundation
to cry out of Untruth upon? It Is true you did not till now publish the whole
Letter, but have not you exposed the Letter, and abused the Author in Public in a
greater Degree, than if you had merely done that? You have picked out some
particular Parts of the Letter, that you supposed most for your Purpose of
rendering the Author ridiculous in the Eye of the World, and have not only
published, but in a fleering insulting Manner, derided and discanted on those
Passages: The Fact that you have been guilty of, is the same in Kind and
Denomination with what we have charged you with; those of that Party han't only
intercepted and broke open, but also published in the Gazette. If a Company or
Set of Men, made up of some that had stolen a Parcel of Goods, and others that
were Partakers with them, should be discovered in selling of them, and some
Body should say the Company were guilty, not only of stealing but selling the
stolen Goods, would it not be thought ridiculous in them, to cry out of Slander
and a Breach of the ninth Commandment, on no better Pretense than only that
they had not yet sold 'em all? You seem to desire that it should be much taken
Notice of by your Readers, that we say that therein the Gentlemen of the Party
have done that in the Face of the World as glorying in it, which common Knaves
and Russians, when they do, do privately, and keep secret, as being ashamed of
it: As we said then, so we say now, and appeal to all Gentlemen and all
Christians, whether or no it be any Thing more than a just Reflection? Or,
whether the Expressions are at all harsh for such an Act? You yourself
acknowledge such an Act deserves to be had in Detestation and Abhorrence: And
though we did not charge it on any of the Council then, yet while you are
declaming against us for charging you with it, you immediately show us and the
World, that you are not afraid nor ashamed to have it true of you; but do it in
the Face of the World, and glory in it now, when you do fully know it to be a
stolen Letter. You seem to pretend that you publish it in your own Vindication,
to show the World that all of it was not contained in the Gazette, wherein we
say it was published; and may perhaps be ready to justify yourself with that,
viz. That we, by abusively representing that you had published the Letter, made
it needful for you to publish it, to show that you had not: But supposing we
have herein abused you, does that give you Warrant so greatly to abuse another
Man, that was not concerned in that Abuse? Supposing the Author of that Letter
himself, had by some injurious Reproaches cast on you, rendered it needful that
the Letter should be published in your Vindication, though to his Disgrace; yet,
will your taking this Advantage agree with your severe and bitter Charges of us
for publishing Mr. Clap's Testimony, that was not stolen, but our own (wherein
was something to Mr. B -- k's Discredit) which was done upon a like Reason?

But the Misrepresentation and Abuse you pretend, that you publish the Letter
to vindicate yourself from, is ours and not his, which renders the Thing much
more aggravated: You own that the intercepting and opening a private Letter is
a detestable Thing; but certainly the publishing such a Letter to the World,
when you know it to be such a one, is more detestable: Wherein consists the
Dishonesty of a Person's breaking such a Letter open, but that thereby he makes
it known to one that had no Right to know it, and that the Author did not
design should know it? But he that publishes it, don't only make it known to
one that had no Right to know it, but to Hundreds, he exposes it to the World.

And besides, you say, Page 70, That every Man of you do solemnly declare, to
all that will give you the Credit of Men of common Honesty and Truth, that a
Copy of a certain Letter was brought to Boston, but not one of you knows from
whom, or by whom it came: So that you knew not who took the Copy, whether he
was a faithful Person or no, and how often it was transcribed, nor how much it
was altered and corrupted, nor how much the Author is abused in the Copy; and
yet you venture to publish it as his, on purpose to render him contemptible,
introducing it with such a Flear as this, as they say it came from a Person of
Distinction, so we judge it to be a Letter of Distinction: And indeed the
Author is exceedingly abused in the Copy, it being false in no less than
thirteen Places; and there are some very great Errors in it: If you exercised
Reason, you could not but be sensible that it was not a true Copy; for though you
often Laugh at our calling the Author a Person of Distinction, yet you must
think that he knows how to write better English than that Copy, which in some
Part of it is gross Nonsense.

Thus, Rev. Sir, you are pleased to vaunt yourself, and glory before the World,
in such an Abuse of your fellow Creatures and Brethren, and Violation of all
Honor and Justice, that you may have the Glory of striking the hardest Blows.

In Page 75, 76, you say, with Respect to this Rev. Gentleman that you have so
abused, if neither his being there (at Springfield) nor his Conduct there,
needs an Excuse, why do these Gentlemen go about to make one for him? Wherein
lies your Argument here? Is it not this, viz. That if the Rector's being there,
nor his Conduct there, was indeed not blameable, why do we, when we heard he
was blamed, go to show that he was not blameable? But then in the following
Lines of the 76th Page, you undertake to show wherein it was blameable; and in
order to that you say, in Line 5, 6, and 7, He might, and no Doubt did, make a
Visit to his Rev. Father at Hatfield, but we know great Part of his Time was
spent at Northampton and Springfield. Here it is insinuated, that he spent
considerable Time at Northampton with the Justices: We suppose you ventured
upon this on mere Conjecture; for in truth he rarely has spent so little Time
among his Relations at Northampton when he came into this Part of the Country,
and saw but one of the Justices, viz his Uncle Stoddard, with whom he spent but
about half an Hour. In Line 7, and 8, you say, Especially at the latter Place,
where he was more than once. And why is this put in among the rest of your
Arguments to prove the Rector to be blameable, unless it be to insinuate to
your Readers that are ignorant of the Situation of the Towns here (which are
far the greater Part of your Readers) that he came to Springfield more than
once to concern himself in this Business, whereas a Person cannot come from
New Haven to Hatfield, in the common Road, and return again, without being more
than once at Springfield, the Road being through Springfield. You say, Line 10,
11, 12, We can hardly think he came as other Gentlemen do to an Ordination,
when the Week before, he could confidently give out at Springfield, there would
be no Ordination, or there should be none. This we suppose is said on mere
hearsay, and without any Manner of Foundation in fact; the Person that you thus
charge declares, that he only rode through the Town, and called at no House,
and spoke with no Person from Mr. Willliams's of Long-Meadow, till he got to
the Tavern at Chikopee, six Miles above the Town, where he called to Oat his
Horse, and spoke with no Person there but a little Girl that was in the House:
and declares furthermore, that he not only gave out no such Thing as you charge
him with, viz. That there would be no Ordination, but did not so much as think
so; but on the contrary, that he supposed no other, but that you would ordain
Mr. B -- as you intended. Line 12, 13, 14, you say, Some others of Connecticut
that were with him there, could give out the same. Whereas there was no Body
with him at that Time, but only his Son that came to wait upon him. In Line 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, you say, And whether he did not urge the serving the Warrant
upon that Part of the Council that did not belong to the County, let the
Gentleman who refused to consent to it is being served, be enquired of. Here
again we suppose nothing but Conjecture is your Foundation; the Rev. Rector
declares that there was no such Thing in Fact, and the Gentleman you direct to
enquire of declares himself abused, and that he has given no Foundation for you
to insinuate as if there was. In Line 23, etc. you proceed, When Mr. Breck was
taken from the Council into the public Townhouse, and treated after the
Manner he was, did not Mr. Rector W -- ms sit there with a singular Air of
Pleasure in his Countenance. When Persons are publicly reproached for the Air
of their Countenance, the Charge is of such a Nature, that let it be never so
groundless, no Man living is under Capacity to vindicate himself from it; it
depending on the Eye and Judgment (and oftentimes the Disposition) of
Spectators, what an Air a Man appears with: But others that saw the Rector,
observed no Manner of Ground for such a Reproach to be cast upon him. Line 28,
etc. you say, And did he not faithfully attend at Springfield till the Business
was so far over, that the Warrant was signed to send him to Connecticut, then
he rode away a little before, no doubt to prepare him a suitable Reception in
that Colony, and to do, as that Person of Distinction did, who wrote the Letter
from N -- H -- to L -- g M -- d -- w. Here it is implied that the Rector went to
Connecticut before Mr. B --, and what a dark Hint is here, as though you know of
something that he did going before Mr. B -- k to Connecticut, to prepare him a
Reception in that Government, that you forbear to tell the World! When indeed
you have ventured upon all this Reproach of this Gentleman, whom you by Way of
Mockery call a Person of Distinction, wholly upon a mere Guess of your own,
that he did go to Connecticut before Mr. B --, and that he might probably do
something there that he might be ashamed of; when indeed he did not go to
Connecticut before Mr. Breck, he never went out of Town that Night, but lodged
at Mr. Williams's of Long-Meadow: so many Things have you asserted and
insinuated that are contrary to Fact, in this one Page! On this Occasion we
would again pray you to reflect on what you said of us Page 13, 14, where
charging us with an evil and bitter, an uncharitable and unchristian Temper and
Spirit, you say, Such a Spirit sufficiently discovers itself in many Passages
of their Book, and in diverse of the Stories they tell -- of particular Persons,
-- which, if they had more of Truth in them, yet don't enter into the Merits of
the Cause, and the whole Design of them must be only to fix, as far as they
could do it, a Mark of Dishonor and Disgrace where they would have it worn.
How do these Stories, which you with so much Triumphing and Insult tell about
the Rector, enter into the Merits of the Cause in Dispute between us, when you
own at the Bottom of the Page, we ben'^ concerned in them, and say, Page 75,
That you never blamed us for his being there, nor so much as heard us blamed?
You have conjectured that the Rector urged the serving a Warrant upon you, and
we would desire you to consider whether you have not allowed and manifested in
your Book, a great Spirit of Revenge toward him for it.

Having, for a little while, done with the Rector, you in the next Place fall
upon us, and blame us again for refusing to give you a friendly meeting, and
standing aloof from you when you came into the County, though so contrary to
Fact, as we have already shown; and then you undertake to show how we have set
up a Jurisdiction over the first Church in Springfield, and have invaded the
Rights of a congregational Church, and are chargeable with no small Degree of
Injuriousness, Usurpation, and Tyranny. And here in the first Place, as a Proof
of this, you charge us again with taking the Affair of Springfield into our own
Hands, without it is being referred to us by that Church; which we have
particularly answered already: And nextly you say, we endeavored to keep the
Case in the Hands of the Association, and bring the Church at Springfield under
a Necessity to submit to our Judgment: To prove this you rehearse Part of a
Letter, sent from one of us to the Rev. Mr. Cooper: And we beg of you, Sir,
with some Seriousness, to consider how you have abused the Association and the
Author, in your Citation of that Letter: That you may so do we will now set
before your Eyes, your Citation and the Original together, where the Words you
have suppressed in the Original are distinguished by an Italian Character.

Your Citation. The Original. It is an odd Thing that the Case of a Candidate,
brought before an ASSOCIATION, should be wrested out of their Hands, (nam sub
Judice lis erat) under a Notion of the Privilege that the Churches have, to
choose their own Officers, or of the Liberty to choose whom they will to ordain.
If the Charges against Mr. Breck were fairly heard before our whole
Association, to whom they were sent, (yea, if you yourself, and one more
Gentleman of a cool Temper, were added to them,) and he were acquitted by them,
I believe Things would be like to be easy. I cannot but think it an odd Thing
that the Case of a Candidate brought before an Association, should be wrested
out of their Hands (nam sub Judice lis erat) under the Notion of the Privilege
the Churches have to choose their own Officers, ( which no Minister in this
County I believe ever thought of infringing them of,) or of their Liberty to
choose whom they will to ordain. If the Charges against Mr. Breck were heard by
our whole ASSOCIATION, and he was cleared by them, Things would be like to be
easy. -- I will venture still to propose to your self, (since you manifest a
Desire to visit us in this Part of the Province) that you, with some other
prudent Minister would be so good as to come up among us (not as sent by your
Churches) and endeavor to be Peacemakers among us, that you may be entitled
to that Blessing in Matthew. 5. 9.

Now is one of these Columns a fair Representation of the other? Is there as
much of an Appearance of the Thing that you brought it as a Proof of, ( viz.
That we endeavored to keep the Case in the Hands of the Association, and bring
the Church of Springfield under a Necessity to submit to our Judgment) in the
one as in the other? Does the Spirit of Tyranny and Usurpation appear on the
right Hand as it does on the left? You have not only suppressed whole Sentences
that were against your Purpose, but some Parts of Sentences are left out that
you knew, if you had put in, would have defeated the Design of your Citation,
and to conceal the Fraud, there is not so much as a Mark or Stroke with your
Pen, to signify that any thing is wanting, and the following Words are joined
with nothing but a Comma between to make your Readers believe tha^ the Words
are contained as in the Original. In such a Way as this do you lay the
Foundation for your great Triumph in Page 82.: If you had put in these Words
that you have left out, you could not say with so good a Grace as you do, Risum
teneatis amici: Is this, Rev. Sir, doing to others as you would that they
should do to you?

The next Proof of our Usurpation and Tyranny that you bring is, that we say in
our Protestation, As to your selves interposing in the Affair, it seems to be a
Breach of that Rule I Pet. 4. 15. and properly Allotrio Episcopein, which
according to the Translation in our Bibles, is to be Busy-bodies in other Men's
Matters. To which we say, That we don't think it any Evidence of Tyranny and
Usurpation in us, to say that of you that is so manifestly and certainly true
of you, as we have already shown this to be: Was it not the Part of Busy-bodies
for you to lay your selves out to be the Persons that must be the Judges in
this Case, before ever there was any Meeting of the Church to apply to any
Body, and when others were possessed of it, by being submitted voluntarily to
'em, by all Parties concerned? Was it not the Part of Busy bodies, even by your
own Principles and frequent Assertions, for you to thrust your selves into an
Affair, in a Part of the Country an hundred Miles off from you, without ever
being applied to at all by Springfield Church, under a Notion of your being fit
Persons, and our being unfit? Was it not the Part of a Busy-body in one of you,
to come fourscore Miles to be a Judge in this Affair, that was not only never
chosen by the Church, but actually shut out by their Votes? And is it any
Usurpation and Tyranny to tell such Busy-bodies that they are so?

But the last Proof of our Usurpation* which you most insist upon and glory in
is, that we called in the Help of some Justices to interpose in this Matter: To
which we answer, First, If it were so indeed, that we called in the Help of the
Justices and got 'em to interpose, as you say this would show nothing of
Usurpation, if it be as we think we have proved, that even by congregational
Principles, you had no Business there; for if so, their restraining you was not
in Opposition to congregational Principles, but in Defense of them, and also in
Defense of the public Peace, that (it will inevitably follow) you were the
Disturbers of; and therefore the Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield speaking long
after with Approbation of it, in that Passage of a Letter of his to Mr. Cooper,
which you cite Page 81, proves no Spirit of Usurpation in him. Secondly, If
some particular Ministers of the County had called in the Help of the Justices,
and it were an Act of Usurpation in them so to do, how does that answer our
Challenge, which was to show wherein the Association had manifested Usurpation
in any of their Acts? for we in the same Place distinguish between what was
done in Association and what was done out of Association, by particular
Persons? Thirdly, If all those Facts that you mention of us were true, how do
they prove that we called in the Help of the Justices? You say you know that we
came to Springfield: It Is true we did come: And have you not abundantly
insisted on it in your Book, how much you desired us to come to have a
Conference with you: We came according to your Desire, and came to the House
where you were sitting, and much sought for an Opportunity of conferring with
you; but could have no other Answer from you but that you was busy; and yet
this is now brought as an Evidence of our Tyranny! And supposing it were as you
add, that we came to Town when the Justices did, and that we were in
Conversation with them from Day to Day, and that it be manifest by Mr
Williams's Letter, that he knew of the Design of the Justices, and that these
Things were indeed said, that you say were said by one and another of us, Page
81, what do all these Things prove if true, but that when we knew of the Design
of the Justices, we manifested an Approbation of it? which is all you your self
pretend to prove by them, when you come to draw your Consequence: But is this
the same Thing with getting some in civil Authority to interpose, as you
positively charge us, Page 82. Fourthly, Those Facts you mention are not true:
You say we came to Springfield when the Justices did. This is a Mistake, for we
did not come there the same Day: You add further, that we were in Conversation,
if not in Consuls with them, and the dissatisfied Party from Day to Day. And
all the Foundation there is for this is, that while we were in Town, both we
and the Justices kept together at the public Tavern, where Strangers used to
keep that had not Friends in Town to entertain them.

You say, Page 81, that one of us said the Evening before, Tomorrow is
Wednesday, and mark my Words, the Town of Springfield will be in the greatest
Convulsion it was ever in since it was a Town. This we are all of us ignorant
of: Indeed there was something said that we are ready to suppose the Story
might arise from; but if so, it is exceedingly altered and added to. In the
following Sentence you say, The same Gentleman, when the coming up of the
Council the second Time was mentioned in Conversation, said, if they do, the
Jail is the fittest Place for them, if you are not misinformed. This it seems
you have charged on mere Hearsay, and the Report is without any Manner of
Foundation in Fact that any of us know of And another Thing in the following
Sentence you say you know, that another of us, soon after the taking of Mr
Breck, could go where a Number that had been engaged in the Affair were
together, and say* Well Gentlemen, we have had a fine Ordination to Day! But
how, Sir, did you know it: There has been such a Report amongst th^se of your
Party of Mr. W -- ms of Long-Meadow; but he declares he knows nothing of it,
and is as well satisfied that he never said any such Thing, or any Thing of
such a Nature or Look, as he can be of a Negative: The Rev. Mr. Reynolds, that
was with him at the Time when it is reported he said this, says also that he is
confident there was no such Thing said, for he knows Mr. W -- ms at that Time,
in all he said and did, appeared exceeding remote from any such Thing; and
besides, particular Enquiry has been made of the Gentlemen that were present,
and none of them can remember any Thing of that Nature. But how injurious is it
in you. Sir, to labor to render our Names a Reproach* by publishing such
Things to the World, on no other Foundation than mere Hearsay? Have not you lived
long enough in the World to know that common Fame and flying Report is a most
uncertain Thing? And would not you look upon that Minister very much to blame,
that did not reprove the spreading abroad in a Neighborhood, ill Reports that
he hears of a Neighbor, only on such a Foundation? And surely then, Ministers
of the Gospel themselves should not print and publish ill Reports, and that of
Ministers of the Gospel, to render 'em ridiculous, on no other Ground! The
injuriousness of it further appears by this, that a Man has no Way to defend
himself from Hearsay and flying Report, let him be never so innocent, it is
like the Wind, he knows not where to find the Source of it, and it is in vain to
fight against it. And how do you exclaim against us, Page 19, for publishing
Things without sufficient Evidence? And say our Haste and Warmth carried us
beyond it. Such a Course do you take to answer our Challenge, to show wherein
our Association has usurped, and manifest that you think you do it so
effectually, as to be enough to set your Readers into an incontinent Laughter!

Fifthly, You have not only not proved that we got the Justices to interpose,
but in Fact we did not; we never put any such Thing into their Heads; it was no
Proposal, or Invention, or Thought of ours, nor of any one of us, nor was any
Thing acted by them as being moved or put forward by any of us: Yea several of
us disliked it, and particularly Mr Williams of Long-Meadow, that you do more
abundantly load with Charges of the contrary, and say you know he said as in
Page 81, We have had a fine Ordination to Day! He was known to dislike such a
Method, insomuch that the Party that opposed Mr. Breck were shy of acquainting
him with their Designs in this Matter.

Besides the Arguments of the Usurpation of our Association here, there is
another Thing you mention Page 4, as an Argument of it you say, We find
frequent mention in their Narrative, of their Association, its Meetings,
breaking up, Committee, Votes, and Doings. What can you mean by this? Is it an
Argument of Usurpation in us, that we call our selves an Association? As if
congregational Divines were Strangers to such a Term, when Dr. Cotton Mather,
whom you cite as such an one, often uses the Term in his Ratio Disciplinae, and
approves the Thing as here practiced, as has been already shown; and you your
selves in Boston call your selves so, as you have given an Account, Page 87.
And is it any Argument of Usurpation that we meet, and when we have met break
up again? Or that we have Doings, and don't do nothing when we meet? Or that we
signify our Minds by Votes? Or that we have in some Cases chosen a Committee?
As if any voluntary Society may not choose a Committee to serve the rest and act
for their Benefit!

In Page 82, 83, you say, That Mr. Lasel declares that when Mr. Clap came to
him to get his Testimony, he would have had it run in such Terms as he could
not in Conscience subscribe to; and when he told him how his Evidence must run,
if he gave one at all, then his Evidence was no longer desired. We have
inquired of Mr. Clap about this Matter, and he informs us that he never went to
Mr. Lasel to get him to give in any Evidence at all, and that the only Paper he
desired him to subscribe, was a Paper containing his Discourse with Mr. Manning
and others, when the said Lasel was present, of which there is some Account in
our Narrative Page 60, 65.

You nextly proceed to declare the Grounds on which you proceeded to the
Ordination of Mr. B --; and to that End, in Page 85, 86, you publish the Result
of your Council at its first setting, in which you say of Mr. B -- k, -- Nor
are we sensible of any Thing respecting his Morals, which disqualifies him for
the Gospel Ministry; inasmuch as those Persons who have thought themselves
aspersed by him, have had an Opportunity to bring in their Complaints to this
Council and yet have not done it; and to one of them particularly, he has given
what we think a sufficient Satisfaction, according to the Rules of the Gospel
Wherein you refer to that Confession that Mr. B -- sent to Mr. C --, Page 19,
20, of the Narrative, and particularly these Words of it (as you explain your
self, Page 94, 95.) And so far as I have in any of these Things, or in my
Discourse with you upon the Account of them, been faulty, or have failed in
showing that Respect which was due to you, or of that Meekness that becomes a
Christian, I ask christian Forgiveness. This shows how ignorant the Council was
of the State of Facts relating to the Case that they judged upon, for the
Defect in Mr. Breck's Morals, consisting in the Aspersion that he cost on those
Gentlemen which you refer to, as is evident by Page 94, 95, was his
representing them abroad to be Liars, which this Passage in his Letter to Mr.
Clap has no Manner of Referrence to, but to another Matter, viz. Mr. Breck's
indecent Talk to Mr Clap's Face, as is evident by the Words themselves, -- And
so far as I have in my Discourse with you, been faulty, or have failed of
showing that Respect. When Mr. Breck had been down to Mr. Clap's on the Affair
in which Messi. Williams and Eliot of Lebanon were concerned, which is
mentioned a little before in that Letter of Mr. Breck's, he told Mr. Clap he
would sue him at the common Law, and treated him with other indecent Language:
This Mr. Williams of Hatfield, who drew that Confession for Mr. Breck, had been
informed of by Mr. Williams of Lebanon, in a Letter, and therefore he inserted
those Words in that Confession; but Mr. Williams of Hatfield never heard of Mr.
Breck's charging Mr. Clap with Lying, till afterward, as appears by Mr.
Williams's own Words, in the following Page of the Narrative; he gives his not
then knowing of it, as a Reason why (when he understood it) he judged the
Confession which he himself drew to be insufficient. And besides Mr. Breck
persisted in those Things after his Confession; yet you declare this as one
Ground of the Result you came to. Ought you not, before you came to a Result on
such a Ground, more fully to have enquired, and known what your Ground was?

You moreover mention the Judgment given in favor of Mr. B --, with Respect to
his Orthodoxy, by some Ministers in Boston, of which the Rev. Mr. Cooper was
one, before he was come as a Judge in this Case, as one Ground of your Result.
Before this, you speak in Page 36, as though it were very strange that any should
think that the Judgment then given should disqualify the Persons that gave it
from sitting as Judges in this Case, representing as though that Judgment no Way
concerned the present Case; but now it so much concerns the present Case, as
justly to be made one Ground of a Judgment in the Case; which was the very
Thing on the Account of which we objected against it, viz That Judges that have
given their Judgment before, in an Affair that so nearly concern the Case,
will not be likely to be impartial, but to be influenced by their former Judgment,
and now it proves so in Fact by your own Confession; in so much that you
publicly declare that that very Judgment was one Thing that you even founded
your Judgment upon sitting in Council in this Case, and as such insert it in
your very Result, and insist upon it afterward as a very good Ground too.

But then as a further and a more abundantly satisfactory Ground of your
Proceedings, you produce his Confession of Faith, and then when you have done,
cry out of us, It is very strange those disapproving Gentlemen should say in
their Defense, that the Council declare in their Result, there was nothing in
the Way of his Ordination, without his ever openly making any Recantation, or
any Reflection on himself, for the Errors he had vented. How he should make
open Reflections on himself for Errors he has vented, without ever openly
owning that he had ever held any Errors, is what we cannot understand; this he
never did at Springfield, nor in his Letter to Mr. Clap, nor any other Way that
ever appeared: He indeed says, in his Letter to Mr. Clap, that though he had
preached Errors, yet says at the same Time he did not believe them; and yet
makes no Reflections on himself, for delivering in the Name of GOD, what he did
not believe. But you speak as if his Confession of Faith abundantly answered
all Ends, and call it a public Recantation, and wonder that we should go to
say he made no public Recantation: But according to what Language merely an
orthodox Confession of Faith is a Recantation of Errors formerly maintained and
preached, we don't know: A Recantation of Errors, as we (and suppose all the
World except your self) understand it, ever implies these two things, First. An
Acknowledgment that such Errors were formerly held; and, Secondly, That now
there is an Alteration, that they are no longer held but renounced. We are well
satisfied the Rev. Mr. Cooper, would think himself greatly injured if such a
Construction were out upon the Confession of Faith which he made at his own
Ordination And we think that more than merely a Confession of Faith was
necessary in this Case, upon two Accounts, 1st. Because all the Hindrance or
Block that was in the Way of Mr. Breck's Improvement in the Ministry, was not
an Incapacity in him to be a Teacher of Truth, by Reason of his not receiving
the Truth, but maintaining Error; but also there was public and open Dishonor
to Christ and his holy Doctrines, that was to be removed: GOD is openly sinned
against, and thereby a great Wound given to Religion, that is to be healed. You
yourself allow, Page 84, that the Things objected against Mr. Breck are of no
small and trifling Nature, but on the contrary that you think them of very
great Importance, and suppose you lay as much Stress upon them as we do: And it
abundantly appears by the Testimonies that you yourself allow to be good, that
he did, after he was a Communicant and a Preacher of the Gospel, and a little
before he came to Springfield, very frequently and openly treat some of the
most fundamental Doctrines of Christianity with great Contempt, in a haughty
and proud Manner, asserting the contrary Errors, preaching them from Time to
Time, and in various Pulpits, and that he persisted in it, with abundant
Obstinacy, after many gentle Means and Endeavors to reclaim him, or persuade
him to desist, and thereby greatly stumbled many People: And is there nothing
of the Nature of Scandal in all this? Is not here a Wound to Religion, that
does properly call for some open self Reflections, in order to its being
healed? Supposing it had been some open Immorality by which Mr. B --, or any
Body else, had wounded Religion, and laid a stumbling Block before others,
would it be sufficient to remove it and heal the Wound, merely for him to draw
up a Catalogue of moral Duties, and say he owns these to be Duties, and intends
to practice 'em, without so much as owning that he had ever violated one of
them? If a Man only treat his Neighbor with public and open Reviling and
Contempt, he is guilty of that, which by gospel Rules debars him from Communion
in Christian Ordinances, 1 Cor. 5. 11 and 6. 10, And will it be sufficient to
remove this Offense, and open his Way again to Communion, for him only to
acknowledge his Duty, and profess a Purpose of performing it in the several
Branches of it, and those of Love and Honor to his Neighbors among others,
without making any Reflections on himself for his Sin, and Wrong to his
Neighbor among others, without making any Reflections on himself for his Sin
and Wrong to his Neighbor in this Particular, or so much as owning it? If you
say though Mr. B -- did cast open Contempt on the Holy Doctrines of Christ; yet
it was not as such, because he did not then suppose 'em to be such: However
should not a Man in such a Case, when he comes to see that they were indeed
holy Doctrines of Christ, be greatly humbled to think that he has so vilified
them, and be ready to show his Abhorrence of himself for it to all the World?
Did it not become those Jews that vilified Christ, thinking him an Impostor,
greatly to reflect on themselves before all for so doing, after they came to be
convinced who the Person was that they had thus treated? This is not only
highly agreeable to Reason* but we think agreeable to the Practice of all
orthodox Churches, who ever were wont to require more than an orthodox
Confession of Faith in such Cases; and agreeable to the Practice of the Church
of England itself, before it was over run with Arminianism; of which we have an
Instance in Mr. Barret, who having preached Doctrines far less corrupt than Mr.
Breck's, at St. Mary's in Cambridge. Anno 1595, was obliged by the Governors of
that University, particularly to recite over every Error, and acknowledge that
he had ve^^ted these Errors, and then renounce them, and expressly declare his
Sorrow and Humiliation; as we have the Account in Prynne's Anti-Arminianism.

2 dly. Another Reason why we think that more than merely a Confession of Faith
was necessary, and that he also should make some open Reflections on himself,
is that this was necessary as an Evidence of his Sincerity in his orthodox
Confession: Having done as before related, we think that if he was sincere, and
was now really convinced of his great Error and Folly in so doing, that he
would now readily and joyfully do it. For a Man in such a Case, instead of
reflecting on himself, to blacken the Witnesses, that are Men and Ministers of
an established Character, (as you own) and to represent them as common Liars,
don't seem to us to be any good Sign of Sincerity. But that we might well
desire and insist on some further Evidence of his Sincerity, than merely his
now saying other Things than he did before, we think, comparing Mr. B -- k's
own Words in his Vindication offered to the Association, with the Testimonies,
might convince you, particularly those that follow.

His Vindication before the Association, Nar. p. 24.

Now Gentlemen, I never had a Thought that the Heathen doing what they could
would entitle them to Salvation, far be it from me to imagine any such Thing!
Page 25, -- But this I can truly say, That I never did believe that Faith was
not necessary to Salvation.

Let these Words of Mr. B -- in his own Vindication be compared with the
following Testimonies.

Mr. Nathaniel Huntington's Testimony, Narrative Page 54. I well remember that
I asked Mr. B -- whether he really believed ^^at those that were bo^n and
brought up in a Country where they never heard of the Gospel, and know nothing
of Christ, and had no Faith in him, could be saved; and he said he did not
doubt but they would, if they lived up to the Light of Nature, and did all that
was in their Power to do. And I several Times discoursed with Mr. B -- about
these Things, and he oftentimes said that the Heathen that lived up to the
Light of Nature, should be saved without Faith in Christ, or any knowledge of
him. In the Discourse, I said to him, I thought he held that all Men might be
saved if they will; and he said yes, to be sure! All Men may be saved if they
will; and it is very harsh, (and I think he said) unjust in GOD, to punish any
Man for not doing what was not in his Power to do.

The Rev. Mr. Kirtland's and Mr. Isaac Lawrence's Testimony together, Page 62,
63, Then Mr. Kirtland asked him to Instance, if he could, in any Articles of
Faith that were not contained in the Scriptures: His Answer was in these Words,
The Salvation of the Heathen that live up to the Light of Nature, is an Article
of my Faith or my Belief, call it which you will; and that it would be
ridiculous in GOD, to require Men to do what was not in their Power, for
nothing could be our Duty but what was in our Power.

Mr. Timothy Allin's Testimony, Page 45, When Mr. Robert B -- preached at
Scotland, he delivered, in his Sermon, these Words, as near as I can remember;
-- For my Part I look upon it to be a hard and harsh Doctrine, to suppose that
the Heathen that lived up to the Light of Nature shall be damned, merely for
not believing in Christ, whom they never had Opportunity to know.

Mr. Peter Robinson testifies to the same Words in his preaching, Page 51, of
the Narrative. The Rev Mr. Clap testifies to the same Words that he read in his
Notes Page 58.

Mr. Peter Robinson's Testimony, Page 51, 52, And Mr. B -- said that none
should perish for Want of the Knowledge of the Gospel, and that every Man that
lived up to the Light of Nature, or to the best Light he had should be saved;
and said he, to what Purpose is it to believe that Christ came into the World
and died for Sinners, and the like, for a Man may be saved without knowing or
believing any of these Things; and several Times said to this effect, that
Faith in Christ was not necessary in order to Salvation; and more to the same
Purpose.

The Rev. Mr. Clap's Testimony, Page 55, 56, About the 20th of January, I
happened to be in Company with Mr. Breck, and he said to me these Words, viz. I
made some of the People angry at what I preached the other Day: I replied what
was that? He said, I preached that the Heathen that lived up to the Light of
Nature should be saved without Faith in Christ: And on Mr. Clap's Objecting
against his preaching so, Mr. Clap testifies, that he said, why would you not
have me preach up the Truth. Mr. Breck said he would preach People out of those
false and stingy Notions which they have been taught in; that the common People
out of Pride and Self-conceit, confined Salvation only to themselves: but I
will have them to know that the Heathen may be saved as well as they can; and
more to the same Purpose. Page 58, Mr. B -- said, Faith in Christ was not in
its own Nature necessary to Salvation; and that all that was necessary in order
to that End, was that Men should forsake Sin and lead moral Lives; and this Men
might do merely out of Love to Virtue itself; and if Men did but attain the
End, it was no Matter what Motive they acted upon; and said he, Master Chubb
brings a very ingenious Comparison to illustrate it; and he took down the Book
and turned the Place to me, and I read the Comparison, which was after this
Manner; Suppose there were a Company of Men in a House, and some Person should
come in and tell them that this House would fall in two Hours, and that they
should be all killed if they did not go out of it; now it may be some might
believe what this Man said; and yet for some Reasons might stay in the House:
Others might not believe what the Man said; and yet for some Reasons might go
out of the House: And suppose that the House should fall at the two Hours End,
it would not be their believing what this Man said that would save their Lives,
but their going out of the House, and if they went out of the House their Lives
would be saved, whether they believed what this Man said or no, so ( Chubb
said) it was not Men's believing any Thing Christ or his Apostles said that
would save them, but their living moral Lives; for if they did so the whole End
and Design of Christ's coming into the World would be answered; and they should
be saved whether ever they heard or believed any Thing about Christ or not.

Messi Nathaniel Wales, Jonathan Bingham, Ralph Wheelock, Jabez Huntington, and
John Bachus, jun. all jointly testified, Page 48, That they heard Mr. B -- in
depreciating Faith in Christ, and saying that GOD was not pleased nor
displeased with any Man for believing or disbelieving, deliver the same
Comparison in Mr. Clap's Pulpit, which he showed to Mr Clap in Chubb, which he
mentioned there as what he took out of an ingenious Author.

We don't mention these Passages of these Gentlemen's Testimonies, as
containing the whole Errors that were testified against Mr. Breck, but that
they might be compared with the above mentioned Words of Mr. B --. You allow
the Testimonies to be good, and say you improved them as such: But if so, and
their Testimonies, even as to the Main, ben't false, what shall we make of Mr.
Breck's asserting that he can truly say that be never did believe that Faith
was not necessary to Salvation, and that he never had a Thought that the
Heathen doing what they could would entitle 'em to Salvation; far be it from me
to imagine any such Thing! Shall we charitably think that Mr. Breck has forgot
all this? Certainly this at least might well make us cautious inproceeding, and
desire to have some thorough Evidence of an Alteration in him!

You say, Page 92, if it be said there should be a Time of Probation; this
there was in his Case: For he had been preaching at Springfield, after he lest
Connecticut, more than a Year and an Half, and approved himself orthodox, by
the Tenor of his Conversation and Preaching there. In this you are mistaken,
for he still persisted in some of the sam-erroneous Opinions; and particularly
that, that the Heathen might he saved without Faith in Christ, Nar. Page 7, 8.
He told Mr. Clap that he dissented from the Westminster Confession of Faith,
though in so little a while after, when he thought it needful to serve his Turn,
he on a very strict Examination (as you say it was) consents to that same
Confession of Faith, as you have declared, Page 86, 87. And he told one of us,
viz Mr. Hopkins, that he did not depart from any thing that ever he had
preached at Windham; as is related Page 15 of the Narrative: And this he held
till he see it would not do to hold it any longer, and then at last pretends
that he has received better Light than he had at Windham.

In Page 94, you misrepresent what he said before the Association, about his
charging Mr Clap with lying, viz. That he said he was very sorry he expressed
himself in so hasty and indecent a Manner; but he must insist upon it that in
what Mr Clap said of him he was wronged. You was not there as we were: What he
indeed said there was this, viz. That he might have used other Terms, but the
Thing that he asserted was true.

In the Conclusion of your Book, you put up a very solemn Prayer to GOD,
wherein you make use of the Words of Christ just before his Crucifixion, that
we may be all united in Love and Peace: With respect to which we would pray you
to consider how that Prayer suits with your Treatment of your Brethren in the
Ministry, and others, and particularly in that Book. Certainly it is not very
decent for a Man while he is trampling on his Neighbor, with flearing Taunts
and Derision, at the same Time to put up a Prayer to GOD, in the most solemn
Expressions, that he and that Man may be united in Love and christian Charity.
We would pray you to take a little Notice of the following Specimen of your
Treatment of us, and your Prayer for Union with us, together;

And because vis unita fortior, it is said in the Title Page to be written by
themselves. We cannot help expressing ourselves something surprised to see a
Combination of so many able Heads and Pens, to convey so trivial Matters to the
World, who would have believed it if they had not told us they were WRITTEN BY
THEMSELVES? To track their Footsteps from Page to Page, would be little better
than a Goose Chase. And indeed make the Answer as large a Bundle of Confusion
as their Narrative and Defense. They are not vain Repetitions, but serve mighty
well to answer the very christian Design of their Performance. Another pretty
Tale we are entertained with. The Argument here is so pleasant we will give it
the Reader in their own Words, by transcribing the whole Paragraph that
contains it. What can be finer. Your mocking us so often in calling the Rector
a Person of Distinction Our Thought was, that the Person to whom it was sent
thinking it must have great Influence in coming from a Person of such
Distinction. They say it came from a Person of Distinction, so we think it to
be a Letter of Distinction To do as that Person of Distinction did Mr. Bull and
Mr. Ashly and a Person of Distinction from Connecticut. Risum Teneatis Amici.
'We would take the Liberty to close this Vindication, as the Sermon at the
Ordination concluded with a humble Prayer. -- That the GOD of Love would unite
his Ministers and Churches in Love to Christ and one another, till we shall all
come to that blessed World where no Offense shall arise, where there shall be
no Jarr, no Contention, but perfect Love, and Peace, and Charity shall reign
for ever and ever; where that Prayer of our Savior for his Church and People,
will have its full and everlasting Accomplishment, That they may be all one, as
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they may be one in us. AMEN.

And what do you think, Rev. Sir, do these two Columns together make a decent
and honorable Appearance for a Man of GOD? And do you think that this Prayer
was acceptable to GOD, as it came out of your Hands, tacked to such fleering
Language, and made just as you took off your Pen from such Scoffs and Taunts,
and sent them forth into the World to do their Work, the rendering ridiculous in
the Eyes of Mankind your Brethren in the Ministry, that you pray for such holy
Union with?

Thus, Rev. Sir, we have endeavored to vindicate ourselves from your
Reproaches, and to lay Matter of Conviction before you, that you have
exceedingly gone out of the Way, and how greatly you have abused us, both in
what you have done and written: We cannot tell what Entertainment it will meet
with from you, or with what Frame you will receive it: We earnestly entreat
that you would not suffer Resentment to prevail so far, but that there may at
least be some serious Consideration. You say some serious considerate
Christians have been a little surprised at our confident appealing to GOD as
our Judge in this Case; which was not, as you injuriously represent, that we
have been sinless and perfect in all that we have done in it; but with regard
to the goodness of our Cause. and (as we in Words express it) with respect to
our uprightness in this Affair: And let who will be surprised at it we
confidently do it still: We pray GOD to judge between us and you. Though now
possibly your Heat of Spirit, and Contempt of us, may forbid any
Self-reflections; yet will it always be a Comfort to you, to think that you
have obtained the Victory and got your Will in this Case, and have been the
Instrument of rendering the religious State of this County, that before always
flourished in an undisturbed and happy Union, our religious Affairs being, with
Peace and Love, and general Consent, managed within ourselves? Will you always
be glad that you have broke up that Order that has hither to been maintained
amongst the Ministers of the County, for the Preservation of the Purity of
Doctrine among us, and have laid us under an Incapacity for defending ourselves
any more from incroaching Error, by opening a Door that Candidates for the
Ministry amongst us may go where they will for their Judges and Approvers? Our
only Hope is that GOD himself, who has lately so wonderfully poured out his
Spirit, and wrought in this County, will again appear for the upholding his own
Interest among us, and that he has suffered our Hands to be thus weakened, to
prepare the Way for the greater Glory to his Power, by carrying on his Work in
our Weakness, by his own immediate Hand. If you think it not your Duty to
repair the Injuries you have done us, we desire you for your own sake, that you
would not go on to injure us by vilifying and misrepresenting us more. If you
write again we have these Requests to make to you, with respect to the Manner
of writing, First, If you suppose that Reason and found Argument will support
your Cause, that you would look upon Banter and Ridicule and sarcastical
Reflection to be as needless, and not so becoming a Minister, and so let it
alone. Don't let us, Rev. Sir, try who can conquer at Scoff and Jeer, but let
our Arguments fight it out; not that we glory in the Strength of our own
Reason, but we glory in the Goodness of our Cause, which, we humbly conceive
affords good Argument, and therefore such as are not liable to a just Answer.
Secondly, If you think you have Arguments from the Nature of the Case,
sufficient of themselves to support your Cause, we would pray you not to insist
on the Vote of the House of Representatives, or the Judgment of any Persons or
Number of Persons whatsoever: We hope we don't fail of any due Honor to the
honorable House of Representatives; but might have many Things to say
concerning that Vote, if it were to the Purpose for us to enter into Debate
about it. Thirdly, If you pretend to give an Answer to the Arguments we in this
Letter have insisted on, we would pray you not to slide over and pass by that
which we evidently intend as the main Force and Spirit of the Argument; but
meet the Argument in its proper Course, and encounter it there where we
evidently lay the greatest Stress. Fourthly, That you would not publish Things
to the World to do same us, and render us odious and contemptible, on no other
Foundation than Hearsay and flying Report. Fifthly, If you don't see Cause to
answer these foregoing Requests, that you would at least show wherein they are
not reasonable, or what we may justly make and expect your Compliance with.

We leave it with you, Rev. Sir, to judge whether these Requests are reasonable
or not; and are willing to leave the whole Affair to your own Conscience, if
you will let it speak its own Words: and leaving what we have now written for
you to consider of, and begging of GOD that he would assist both you and us to
what is our Duty to do.

We remain, Rev. Sir, your Brethren in the same great and sacred Work, that we
are called to by the same Lord Jesus, the Lamb of GOD.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2 line 12. for exceptional Passages, r exceptionable P^ssa^^^, p. 16. 1.
8. for thereby, r. thoroughly. p. 18. 1. 37. (...) p. 37. about the middle for
Power of Privileges, r. Power of Privilege. p. 44 1. 25. r. see by. 1. 29. dele
by. p. 48. 1. 8. for our Door, r. our Doors p 58.1.38. for recant, r. ^^^sent
it. p. 59.1.13. dele needs, and for want, r. wants. p. 67 for contained, r.
continued. p 69 1. ^^. for is confident, r. thinks. p ^5. 1. 21, 22, 23. dele
the following Words, among others, without any Reflections on himself for his
Sin, and wrong to his Neighbor. p. 79.1.22. for whole Errors, r. worst Errors
p 82. 1. 31. for rendering, r. rending. p. 83. 1. 22. for good Argument, r. good
Arguments.


