Dr. Colman's SERMON To the Honorable Artillery Company.

June 5. 1738.

CHRIST standing for an ENSIGN of the People. A SERMON preached to the
Honorable and Ancient ARTILLERY COMPANY in Boston, June 5. 1738. Being the Day
of the Finishing their first Century. By Benjamin Colman, D. D. Published at
the Desire of many of the Hearers.

Exodus xvii. 15. The LORD my Banner. BOSTON: Printed by J. DRAPER, for J.
EDWARDS and S. ELIOT in Cornhill. 1738.

CHRIST standing for an ENSIGN of the People!
Isaiah xi. 10. And in that Day there shall be a Root of Jesse, which shall
stand for an Ensign of the People; to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his Rest
shall be glorious.
THE whole Chapter is a most noble and illustrious Prophecy of the wise and
peaceful, victorious and triumphant Reign of the Messiah. It is the Person of
JESUS, the Son of David, the Son of Jesse, in the Offices and Benefits of our
Lord Redeemer, that is here displayed under the Similitude of an Ensign,
Standard and Banner, unto them that fear him and because of the Truth.

HE, the The two Subjects of the public Sermons, preached the Week before, to
the Convention of Ministers by the Rev. Mr. Barnard, and to the General Court
by Mr. Webb.
Head of the Body, the Church, who also bears on his Shoulders The two Subjects
of the public Sermons, preached the Week before, to the Convention of Ministers
by the Rev. Mr. Barnard, and to the General Court by Mr. Webb.
the Government of the whole World, is the Rod from the Stem of Jesse, v. 1.
and also the Root of Jesse, which is the greater Dignity, born in my Text. He
is both the Root and Offspring of David: Rev. xxii. 16. In his Divine Nature
the Root, in his Humane the Branch or Offspring; Immanuel, God with us; "in two
distinct Natures and one Person for ever.

In the second Verse of the Chapter his Glory is displayed as the ANOINTED;
anointed with the HOLY SPIRIT in his unmeasurable Gifts and Graces; The Spirit
of the Lord shall rest upon Him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the
Spirit of Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge and of the Fear of the
Lord; and shall make Him of quick Understanding therein, -- which is the
highest Accomplishment of every Prince, or Commander in Chief or Subordinate;
for then " Righteousness will be the Girdle of their Loins, and Peace the
Blessing of their Rule and Command; which is the Abstract of my Context.

You see then, my Fathers and Brethren, Fellow Soldiers under the one Ensign
and Standard of CHRIST, Whom we Gentiles are to be looking, seeking and
gathering unto; that his Rest may be glorious in us as a part of his Church,
and ours in Him, whose Banner over us is Love. Cant. ii. 4. You see your King
and General, the Captain of your Salvation, and are now in his Presence, to
behold his Glory, to hear his Word of Command, and to seek his Favor and
Protection. The Armies of Heaven follow Him, and bless Him all ye his Hosts, ye
Ministers of his that do his Pleasure; with all his Works, in all Places of his
Dominion; bless the LORD O our Souls Rev. xix. 14. Psalm ciii. 20, 21, 22.
!

Could I possibly bring You, our Honored Commanders, a more charming or more
awful Sight of our LORD and of his Church; to constrain your Duty to Him and
his People! Look only with his Eyes upon the Part of his Church put under your
Watch and Protection, and you will be constrained to take up his Words of
Transport and Rapture; Cant. vi. 4, 10, 13. Thou art beautiful, O my Love, as
Tirzah; comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an Army with Banners! turn away thine
Eyes from me, for they have overcome me! -- Who is She that looks forth as
the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an Army with
Banners? -- Or ever I was aware, my Soul made me like the Chariots of
Ammi-nadib. Return, return, O Shulamite, that we may look upon thee! What will
ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the Company of two Armies: Mahanaim; the
two Hosts of Angels guarding the Church in Jacob's House; or rather Jews and
Gentiles united under the Banner of Christ, a Vision but little lower than that
of Angels.

Forgive me this Excursion in the beginning of my Discourse, my Reverend
Hearers; and You Gentlemen in Arms, who have on a sudden pressed me to speak my
last to you, when others have failed you.

It is now almost forty Years ago that I spoke to your Fathers in this Place,
and on this Solemnity; and I then led em to JESUS; to the Faith in Him, whereby
the heroic Saints of old Time subdued Kingdoms Heb. xi. 33. Anno 1702. Primitia
Juventutis, et Senectutis Fructus Psalm lxxi. 17, 18. xcii. 14, 15.
, wro't Righteousness, obtained Promises, out of Weakness were made Strong,
waxed valiant in Fight, and turned to Flight the Armies of the Aliens. It is
the Will of Christ, my Brethren, that They without Us should not be made
perfect; and therefore I would now finish as I began, and lead you again to
your standing Colors, CHRIST your Ensign; (the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning
and the Ending, the first and the last; which is, and which was, and which is
to come, the Almighty! the same yesterday, to Day and for ever:) And I doubt
not but you will gladly be led again and again to Him, the glorious Object of
your saving Faith, the Author and the Finisher thereof.

Now then, my Brethren, To your Leader and Standard! to your Ensign and Banner!
to your Lord and Savior, to whom the Apostle (after David Psalm xx and xxi.
and Isaiah) directs your Hearts and Eyes, repeating my Text, Romans xv 10 11,
12. Rejoice ye Gentiles with his People! praise the Lord ye Gentiles, and laud
him all ye People! as Esaias says, There shall be a Root of Jesse, and He
shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in Him shall the Gentiles trust.

See then your present pleasurable Work, my happy Hearers! it is to contemplate
your SAVIOR under this Similitude and Comparison, the ENSIGN for your Souls to
gather to.

It is no empty Flourish you are invited to! it is JESUS in his saving Offices
and Benefits you are come forth to see! " behold Him, behold Him! red in his
Apparel, with died Garments from Bozrah! traveling in the Greatness of his
Strength! speaking in Righteousness and mighty to save! "Look to Him and be
saved, all the Ends of the Earth Isaiah lxiii. 1, 2. xlv. 22.
!

1. He is the Ensign and Standard set up from Everlasting, in the eternal
Counsel and Decree of God; from the Beginning or ever the Earth was; the
FATHERS everlasting Delight and rejoicing in the habitable Parts of the Earth;
these Parts of it, which He then saw and ordained to be inhabited by our
Fathers. Prove. viii. 23, 31.

And this royal Standard of Heaven was first displayed on Earth, to the
Confusion of Devils and the everlasting Wonder and Praises of Angels and Men,
in that glorious Revelation and Promise to our first Parents, Genesis iii. 15. " A
SEED of the Woman to break the Serpents Head, with his bruised Heel.

Heaven then held out the Flag of sovereign Grace, with these Words written on
it; this Figure drawn thereon, "A Serpent peircing the Heel of a Godlike Man,
but his Head crushed by it. The Standard bore the Image of God's dear Son in
our Nature, treading the Dragon, the Devil and Satan, into Hell: from off that
Pust, where it had crawled and reared its poisnous Head.

Indeed our Savior is the Ensign lift up through the whole written Word, and
displayed from Sabbath to Sabbath, in the preached Gospel He is lifted up on
high by Moses and the Prophets, and by the inspired Apostles of the New
Testament; and after them, all the Ministers of Christ in all his Churches,
through the whole Earth and to the End of Time, are Standard-bearers; to bear his
Name and Truth, his Law and Covenant, his Promises and Threatenings, unto all
People. We preach Christ crucified, buried, risen, ascended and reigning at the
Fathers right Hand, and coming again in the Clouds of Heaven. He was lift up as
an Ensign on the Cross, and from the Grave in his Resurrection, and yet more in
his Exaltation to the right Hand of Power! Christ the Power of God and the
Wisdom of God, and the Righteousness of God for us.

2. An Ensign is a conspicuous thing; to be looked on, seen, beheld and
considered; and such is Christ.

This is the gracious Evangelical Phrase, "Looking to Jesus Heb. xii. 2. Isai.
lxv. 1. Zech. xii. 10.
! the gracious Gospel Precept, "behold me, behold me! and the gracious
constraining Promise, "they shall look upon Him whom they have pierced.

Strong is the Eye of Faith, and the Hand of Prayer, to reach the highest
Heaven, and bring down Salvation from the exalted Jesus. We must look and
admire, look and love, look and ascend to Him on the Wings of strong Desire and
unfailing Faith. He has said, John xii 32. " And I, if I be lifted up from the
Earth, will draw all Men to me. Amen, Glorious LORD!

From Heaven we also look for Him again, in Power and great Glory. The Angels
of Jesus bid the Disciples do so in the Hour of his Ascension: Acts i 11. Ye
Men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? this same Jesus which is
taken up into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go into
Heaven.

Without Controversy great is this Mystery of Godliness, the Visions of the Son
of Man as in the Glories of the Only begotten of the Father: 1 Timothy iii. 16. God
was manifest in the Flesh justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached to
the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up to Glory.

3. The Standard is set up, and the Ensign displayed, for People to gather
unto, and such is Christ. To Him shall the Gentiles seek; says my Text, and
after it the Prophet goes on, He shall set up an Ensign to the Nations, and
gather the dispersed of Judah, and assemble the Outcasts of Israel.

This was the Ancient and famous Promise, in the Prophecy concerning Judah, and
the Blessing wherewith his Father blessed him! Genesis xiix. The Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet, until Shiloh come; and
unto Him shall the Gathering of the People be.

This is the first Meaning and Use of the Standard, for summoning and inviting
Persons to inlist themselves, and for the assembling of the inlisted. The
Tribes of Israel, in their Incampments and Marches through the Wilderness, had
each their own Standard, and they pitched about their own Ensign; Numb ii. 2
Every one by his own Standard, with the Ensign of their Fathers House. This
made their Camp look beauteous and yet terrible in their Order and Array: "How
goodly were thy Tents, O Jacob! as the Vall^^ were they spread forth, and as
Gardens by the River side: He couched, he lay down as a Lion, and who dare stir
him up? Numb. xxiv. 5, 9.

The Spirit of Prophecy in after Times speaks of this Use of the Ensign Isai.
v. 26, 27. xiii. 2, 3.
, to call the Nations from far, and to hiss to em from the Ends of the Earth;
to come with speed swiftly, with their Loins girt! And thus runs the Burden of
Babylon; "Lift ye up the Banner upon the high Mountain, exalt the Voice to 'em,
and shake the Hand, to go up to her Gates: "I have commanded my sanctified
Ones, I have called my mighty Ones, etc.

The Gospel is preached to the Nations for this very End, to enter them in a
War against Sin and Satan, and for the Defense and Support of the Kingdom of
Christ, his Truths and Ways, People and Worship. We gather to Him as our Ensign
by our Profession of Faith in his Name, by our assembling to Worship from one
Lord's Day unto another, in his appointed Ways. Of Him the whole Family in
Heaven and Earth are named. To his one Altar the Tribes go up, to give Thanks
to his Name, to Worship the Lord in the Beauties of Holiness. -- So the
Tabernacle of the Lord stood in the midst of the encamped Tribes, and marched
in the midst of them. The Cloud, the Glory and Shechinah was their Standard;
when that went they did, when that stood they rested round about it. Christ was
there with his shining Hosts of Angels, their Guard and Conductors. There were
their holy Convocations, there was the holy Law deposited in the sacred Ark,
and there stood the Altars of Burnt-Offering and Incense: There stood the
golden Table with the Shewbread, and there hung the golden Candlestick, with
the burning Lights. All was but a Figure of Christ in the Flesh, enlightening
the Multitudes in the Mount with his heavenly Doctrine, feeding them with the
Bread of Life, and then offering Himself a Sacrifice on the Tree. The Day of
Pentecost was the famous Time of the Ingathering of Jews and Gentiles together:
Christ was the Ensign lifted up in the rushing Wind, and cloven Tongues, and
the Thousands of Converts; the Tongues were for gathering in the Nations to
him. Acts. ii. 32. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are Witnesses!
therefore being by the right Hand of God exalted, and having received of the
Father the Gift of the Holy Ghost, he has shed abroad this which ye see and
hear: As it is written by David, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou at my
right Hand until I make thy Foes thy Footstool: Therefore let all the House of
Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus, whom ye have
crucified both Lord and Christ This pricked 'em to Heart, and made 'em come in;
'Men and Brethren, what shall we do? In all Christ was the Ensign, to gather in
Souls to Himself.

4. The Standard and Ensign is for Union, for the gathered People to unite
under; to unite in Affection and to join their Strength: and such is Christ to
his Church.

There is one Lord, and one Body; one Faith and one Baptism. All Christians
declare themselves to be as one, and bind themselves to be so. They lift in one
Cause, and engage in one Design, which is Christ's. John xi. 52. That he should
gather together in One the Children of God which are scattered abroad. They
gather to Him as their common Lord and General, to his Colors; or if you will
into his Fold; for there is one Fold and one Shepherd. One is the Head, Christ,
and the many Members are one Body; animated by one Spirit, and having the same
Care one of another Ephesians. iv. 5. i. 10. 1 Cor. xii. 13. x. 17. Gal. iii. 28.
John x. 16. Col. i. 18. 1 Cor. xii. 25. John xvii. 21.
. Christ is the Center of Unity to his People; the Faith and Love in Him is the
Band and Means of it. What He asked of the Father for his Chosen, that his
Apostle declares to be granted, and true in fact: He prayed for them, " That
they may be One, one in Us, as Thou Father art in Me and I in Thee: This the
Apostle affirms of true Believers, " Ye are all One in Christ Jesus As we read
of the Multitude of the first Believers, that they were of one Heart and of one
Soul. Acts iv. 32. So Soldiers are one, an Army is one; and their Unity like
the Form of a Phalanx, is their Force and Strength; to hear down all before
them.

5. The Standard, Ensign and Flag of the King or State is for the Protection of
the Subject; and such is Christ to his Church, its almighty Protector and
Defense. We repair to Him for Salvation, and nothing less; we flee to Him and
are safe. He is our King, and shall save us. His Name is Jehovah-nissi, the
Lord our Banner! the Lord our Righteousness. Write this on our One Altar and
Sacrifice. This Name of our God and Savior defend us! send us Help from his
Sanctuary, and strengthen us out of Si^n! we will rejoice in his Salvation, and
set up our Banners! Some trust in Chariots and some in Horses, but we will
remember the Name of the Lord our God! Save Lord, let the King hear us when we
call! Be thou exalted, Lord in in thy own Strength; so will we sing and praise
thy Power. Psalm xx and xxi.

David, the valiant and the warlike Prince, had all his Courage and Conduct
inspired from on High; and to God alone he looks and ascribes, and relies in
Raptures of Faith and Devotion. Psalm xviii. I will love thee, O Lord my
Strength; my Rock, my Fortress, my Deliverer! my God, my Strength, in whom I
will trust; my Buckler, and the Horn of my Salvation, and my high Tower! I will
call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised, so shall I be saved from my
Enemies. Psalm. xliv. 4, -- 8 Thou art my King, O God; command Deliverances for
Jacob: through Thee will we push down our Enemies, through thy Name will we tread
them under that rise up against us: For I will not trust in my Bow, nor shall
my Sword save me: But Thou have saved us from our Enemies, and have put them to
shame that hated us: In God we boast all the Day long, and Praise thy Name for
ever. Psalm. lxii. 5, -- 8. My Soul wait thou only upon God, for all my
Expectation is from Him: He only is my Rock and my Salvation, He is my Defense,
I shall not be moved: In God is my Salvation and my Glory, the Rock of my
Strength, and my Refuge is in God: Trust in Him at all times ye People, pour
out your Hearts before Him, God is a Refuge for us. Thus David, the Man after
the Heart of God, the Hero of the Church; in all his Wars, from his first
facing the Giant Goliath, to his putting on the Crown of the King of Rabbah,
dwelt ever in the Secret of the Most High, and abode under the Shadow of the
Almighty, and said of the Lord, "He is my Refuge and Fortress; his Truth shall
be my Shield and Buckler. Psalm. xci. 1, 4. So the Ensign is for the safety of
the Subject; and happy the true Subjects and Soldiers of the merciful and
faithful Savior.

6. And lastly, The Standard and Ensign are more especially for a Declaration
of War, a Defiance of Enemies, the Conquest of them and Triumph over them

Christ has his Enemies, and Souls have theirs. His Enemies are ours, and the
Enemies of our Souls are his. Against these the Spirit of the Lord prepared and
raised a victorious Standard in the Body of Jesus, our atoning Sacrifice Psalm.
xl. 6. Heb. x. 5. Col. ii. 15. Luke x. 18.
He triumphed over them on his Cross, spoiling Principalities and Powers, and
making a show of them openly. Satan like Lightning fell from Heaven, the Prince
of this World was cast out.

We are all listed in this spiritual Warfare, and must be good Soldiers,
fighting the good Fight, and resisting unto Blood, in striving against Sin 1 Timothy i. 18. 2. ii. 3. 4. 1. vi. 12. 1. Cor. ix. 26. 2 Cor. x. 4. Heb. xii. 4.
Ephesians. Vi^. 12.
. We had need be strong in the Lord and in the Power of his Might; and put on
the whole Armor of God, that we may be able to stand against the Wiles of the
Devil. For we wrestle not only against Flesh and Blood, but against
Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this
World, against spiritual Wickednesses in high Places. Strength, Armor and
Courage is provided for us, to put on, prove, wear and use. "Wherefore (as the
Holy Ghost says) take to you the Armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil Day. Stand therefore having your Loins girt about with
Truth, and having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and your Feet shod with
the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace: Above all taking the Shield of Faith,
the Helmet of Salvation and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God;
and praying always with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit. Good Armor
truly for our own Day of Rebuke and Blasphemy, from the Infidelity of the
Enemies of Christianity, who like Rabshakey reproach the Living God: Eno' to
make us cry out with the mourning Prophet, My Bowels, my Bowels! I am pained at
my Heart! because thou have heard, O my Soul, this Alarm of War. We must
heartily offer, and engage on the Side of Truth and Holiness. The Lord has
sworn, that He will have War with Amalec for ever. Our Lusts, and their
Confederates, the World and Devil, are this Amalec. The War is for Life, and
the Lord will fight for us. More are with us than with them. We go forth in the
Name of the Lord of Hosts, whom they defy. His Ensign is displayed against
Error and Vice, Profaness and Impiety, our own and others Sins. Jer. ^^. 25.
Behold I am against thee, O thou that destroyest the Earth! Set ye up the
Standard blow the Trumpet, prepare the Nations, and Babylon shall be a
Desolation.

The Ensign is of various Use in War: to strike the Enemy with Terror, to
animate and inspire Courage, and to lead on to Victory and Triumph.

1. The Ensign is to terrify the Enemy. The Army in Array is made terrible by
their flying Colors. They are defying and threatening Signs. They threaten
Death and Slaughter, Destruction and Desolation. The Flag of Christ from
Heaven, is a bloody Flag to all his impenitent Enemies. It is the Flag of
Death; the second Death is written on it in black Capitals; Death spiritual and
eternal! Death and Hell following it. Rev. vi. 8.

We read of the Garments of Vengeance for Clothing, which the Redeemer puts
on, when he repays Fury to his Adversaries; and this is the Standard lift up
against the Enemy, when he comes in like a Flood Isal. lix. 17, 19. So St John
saw the Heavens opened, Rev. xix. 11. and behold a white Horse, and He that sat
on it was called Faithful and True, and in Righteousness he makes War: His Eyes
are as a Flame of Fire, and on his Head are many Crowns, and he is clothed with
a Vesture dipped in Blood, and his Name is called, " The Word of God; and out of
his Mouth goes a sharp Sword to smite the Nations, and He treads the
Winepress of the Fierceness and Wrath of Almighty God: -- and with a loud Voice
he calls all the Fowls of Heaven, to eat the Flesh of Kings, of Captains and of
Mighty Men. This is the Ensign to strike the Enemy with Terror.

2. The Ensign inspires Courage and animates the Host to Battle The (...)
Colors put Life into the Soldier, and lead him on intrepid. It bespeaks the
Host and says, as our Lord does to us, Look on me and do likewise! Come on
without Fear! Have not I commanded thee? be strong and of a good Courage: be
not afraid or dismayed, for the Lord thy God is with thee Josh. i. 6, 7, 9.
Judges vii. 17.
.

Christ can inspire Fortitude and Strength, to endure Hardness, to resist unto
Blood, to be steadfast and immovable, and not draw the Hand back that stretches
out the Spear. Jesus can make Joshuas, and strengthen with all Might in the
inner-man; yea out of Weakness he makes Strong. Luke x. 19 Behold I give unto
you Power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and over all the Power of the
Enemy. Accordingly read the Confidence and Defiance of Faith in Him: Rom viii.
37. ^8. Nay in all these things we are more than Conquerors through Him that
loved us: for I am persuaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities nor Powers, nor things present nor things to come, nor Height
nor Depth, nor any Creature, shall be able to separate us from the Love of God,
which is in Jesus Christ our Lord.

3. Here then is Victory and Triumph in the Highest, to the utmost, under our
conquering Ensign, CHRIST JESUS.

1. Victory. We have a Standard that can never fall Heaven and Earth shall pass
away, but not a tittle of his Word. The everlasting God faints not, neither
is weary. A Sampson may faint for Thirst, and one of the three mighty Men with
David smote the Philistines till his Hand was weary, and clave to his Sword; "
benumbed with holding it so long and fast Clarke on 2 Samuel xxiii. 10. Isai. xl.
28. 1 John v. 4. Romans xvi. 20. Psalm. lxxiv. 4. Jam. iv. 7. 1 John iv. 4.
but they that war under Christ shall renew their Strength. He it is that
brings forth Judgment unto Victory. He came and overcame, and in his Strength
we conquer our Selves, the World and Devil The Victory that overcomes them all
is our Faith. The God of Grace, says the Apostle, shall brui^^ Satan under your
Feet shortly. The Enemy may sometimes roar in the midst of the Congregation,
and set up his Ensign in Assurance of Victory; he may prevail over a Peter in
an Assault, but not in the War; No, Jesus has prayed for him that his Faith
fail not, and he returns to his Colors. Keep to your Ensign and you fright
away the Enemy; resist the Devil and he shall flee before you. Greater is He
that is in you, than he that is in the World. What says the SPIRIT to the
Churches, through the second and third Chapters of the Revelations of JESUS
CHRIST? He speaks of all the Saints as Overcomers and Triumphers; -- To Him
that overcomes will I grant -- every high Honor and Glory that our immortal
Souls can possibly aspire after or receive.

2. On Victory follows Triumph: Triumph for every one that overcomes The
Apostle therefore gives the Honor and Joy as common to all; 2 Cor. ii. 14. Now
Thanks be unto God, which always causes us to triumph in Christ. Ministers
triumph in the Success of their Ministry, and the People with them; they
triumph now together, and will much more hereafter. When the Lamb opened the
first Seal, John heard a Voice saying to him, Come and see! and behold a white
Horse, and He that sat on him had a Bow, and a Crown was given him, and he went
forth conquering and to conquer. The Conquerors keep the Field with their
displayed Ensigns. There is an eternal Triumph before every good Soldier of
Jesus Christ. HE is triumphing at the Right Hand of the FATHER, and all his
Enemies are made his Footstool. He wills that they also whom the Father has
given him, be with Him where He is, to behold his Glory. He has promised them a
Share in it; Rev. iii. 21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit down with
me on my Throne, as I also overcame and am set down with my Father on his
Throne.

The Generals among the Romans had Triumphs decreed them by the Senate, after
Wars and Battles of singular Renown and Profit to the Commonwealth. These were
Spectacles of high Pleasure both to Small and Great among them The Multitudes
triumphed in and with their Generals, rending the Skies with their
Acclamations. But O how poor and low were these Earthly Triumphs, to those of
Heaven, which the least Believers in Christ hope to share in! Rev. vii. 9, 10.
And lo a great Multitude which no Man can number, of all Nations and Kindreds,
People and Tongues, stood before the Throne of the Lamb, clothed with white
Robes and Palms in their Hands; and they cried with a loud Voice, saying,
Salvation to our God, which sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb. Again, hear
the Shout of Triumph on the Dragons Fall Rev xii 10 Now is come Salvation and
Strength, the Kingdom of our God and the Power of his Christ! and they overcame
by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony! Wherefore rejoice
ye Heavens, and they that dwell therein.

Thus the Standard of War and the Banner of Love are in the End one. Our
Savior subdues us to Himself, and captivates us by his Grace, that we may
triumph in his Love, over all his and our Enemies. And thus it has been from
the beginning of Revenges on the Enemy. Jer. l. 2. Declare ye among the Nations
and publish, and set up a Standard; Babylon is taken, Bell is confounded.

And thus have we seen, in many Respects, our glorious SAVIOR standing for an
Ensign of the People.

Every Similitude whereby He pleases to represent Himself, his Offices and
^^^fits to us, is beautiful and pleasant, teaching and very instructive,
affecting and very moving, elegant and charming, endearing, awful and reverend.

You will own, my Honored Brethren, Professors and Students in Arms, that this
Vision of the Son of Man, the Lord of Glory, which has been passing before you,
is most proper to your Selves, and the Occasion before us. And now learn You of
Joshua, the best of Captains under JESUS, and prostrate your Selves, and
worship the Lamb of God, to Whom you have consecrated your Selves and your
Arms. Josh. v. 13, 14, 15. And it came to pass when Joshua was by Jerico, that
he lift up his Eves and looked; and behold there stood a Man over against him,
with his Sword drawn in his Hand: And Joshua went to him and said, Art thou for
us, or for our Adversaries? And he said, Nay, but as Captain of the Host of the
Lord am I now come. And Joshua fell on his Face to the Earth and did worship;
and said, What says my Lord unto his Servant? And the Captain of the Lords
Host said to Joshua, Loose thy Shoe from off thy Feet, for the Place whereon
thou stand is holy: and Joshua did so.

Imagine, if you please, my Brethren, your own Ensign to Day bearing before
You, your professed Devotion to the Lamb in the midst of the Throne, as it had
been stain; Or if you please, to the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: They are both
One, and alike reverend and holy to You; alike formidable to Sinners and
pleasurable to Saints.

Let CHRIST be great and good and glorious in your Eyes; the chiefest of ten
Thousands and altogether lovely. Be You as the valiant of Israel about his Bed*
they all hold Swords, and are expert in War, every Man has his Sword upon his
Thigh, because of Fear in the Night. You watch for Christ's Church, its
Preservation and Safety; He wakes for it and you. Let Faith make your Necks
like the Tower of David, built for an Armoury, whereon there hang a thousand
Bucklers, all Shields of mighty Men. Cant. iii. 7, 8. Such you will become by
Faith in your Savior, and Obedience to Him; and he that is feeble shall be as
David, and the House of David as the Angel of God.

See, my Brethren, your Need of Christ, and your God your Glory. See your
Danger by Distance from Him and Enmity against Him. Mourn all your Desertions
from Him and Rebellions against Him. Never be it said of any One here present,
" This my Enemy that would not have Me to reign over him! Ever may the Lord be
able to say of us, as the Centurion did to Him of the Soldiers under him, "I
say unto one, Go, and be goes, and to another, Come, and be comes. Take the
Sacrament of Fidelity to your General and King; (for the Word meant at first
the Oath of Soldiers to their General.) You know who it is has said, and sworn
by Himself, " Unto Me every Knee shall bow, and every Tongue shall swear!
Surely shall one say, In the LORD have I Righteousness and Strength! to Him
shall Men come, and all that are incensed against Him shall be ashamed; in the
LORD shall all the Seed of Israel be justified and shall glory. Isa. xlv. 23,
24, 25.

In this Address to You, my Fellow Soldiers in the Kingdom and Patience of
Jesus Christ Meaning the whole Assembly, and not the Company in Arms only; and
so in many Parts of my following Address, and sometimes the whole Body of this
People, had they been within hearing.
, I am persuaded you will think I act as becomes my Age In my 65th Year.
. What else were worthy of your Souls and mine! Or were any of our deceased
Fathers The finished Century directing my Tho'ts.
to return and speak to You to Day, what else would They think worth saying to
you! They that have finished the War, and see the Face of the Lamb, and know
the Price of Souls, and of his Blood! -- But Woe to all his Enemies both now and
another Day! whom do they fight against, and whom do they defy! under what
Ensign do they war, and whose Cause do they Support? you read -- " The Dragon
fought and his Angels! He is your Captain and your King, if you fight against
Christ. But he can never prevail, though the Kings of the Earth should
confederate with him, and the Rulers take Counsel together, against the Lord
and his Anointed, saying, (Psalm. ii. 3, 4, 5) " Let us break their Bands
asunder, and cast away their Cords from us! He that sits in the Heavens
shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in Derision! He shall speak to them in
his Wrath, and vex 'em in his sore Displeasure! -- I have set my King upon my
holy Hill of Sion! "Thou art my SON, this Day have I begotten thee! Ask of me,
and I will give Thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts
of the Earth for thy Possession.

It must be owned, with Shame and Sorrow, that little of Religion, but
Abundance of Impiety, is found among the Men of Arms, by Land or Sea, in Camps
or Navies: The SAVIOR and his Blood is blasphemed outrageously! Yet such vile
Arms have been often used by the King of the Church for its Defense and
Service; for He makes even Devils to serve Him. And no wonder then to find
Armies given up in the Great Day of the Lord for a Prey to Satan, or cast with
Devils into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone: Rev. vi. 12, etc. And I beheld when
he had opened Sixth Seal, and -- the Sun became black as Sackcloth of Hair, and
the Moon became as Blood, and the Heaven departed as a Scrowl, when it is
rolled together. -- And the Kings of the Earth, and the great Men, and the rich
Men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty Men, and every bondsman man and
every freeman, hid themselves in the Dens and in the Rocks of the Mountains;
and said to the Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the Face of
Him that sits on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb! for the great
Day of his Wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?

And now Christians, whose Soldiers will you be! choose you this Day and come,
subscribe Isai. xliv. 5. 1 Chronicles. xii. 18, Psalm. xlv. 3, 4. cx. 3. 4.
with your Hand to the LORD; Thine are we David, and on thy Side thou Son of
Jesse! Peace, Peace be to all thy Helpers! -- Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O
most Mighty, with thy Glory and thy Majesty; and in thy Majesty ride
prosperously, because of Truth and Meekness and Righteousness; and thy Right
Hand shall teach thee terrible things. Thine Arrows are sharp in the Heart of
the Kings Enemies, (to terrify, convert or slay) either way the People fall
under Thee: Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; the Scepter of thy Kingdom
is a right Scepter. -- The Lord shall send the Rod of thy Strength out of Zion;
rule Thou in the midst of thy Enemies! thy People shall be willing in the Day
of thy Power, in the Beauties of Holiness, from the Womb of the Morning (from
the Day of Pentecost, the Dawning of the Gospel) Thou have the Dew of thy
Youth; thy early Converts, numerous as the Dew, and gently softened by the
descending Doctrines of a Savior, as Showers upon the Grass.

Gentlemen in Arms, Let this be your first Character, that You are of this
blessed Company and Number: Christ has called You to be his Soldiers, like the
trained Family of Abraham I humbly hope the Company were never before addressed
with a more cordial Respect, or more seriously.
, whose Blessing is come upon you by Faith, who also saw Christ's Day and was
glad. The Heroic Patriarch at the Head of his small victorious Host, paid his
grateful Tithes to this King of Glory, the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord
mighty in Battle, the King and Priest of the Most High God; and He blessed
Abraham in that High Name. The King of Salem, the Prince of Peace, brought
forth Bread and Wine to the valiant Father of the Faithful, and blessed the
most High God who had delivered his Enemies into his Hand. Just so, the LORD
your Banner displays Himself, his Grace and Benefits to You and to all of us,
in his Gospel-Feast; to whom You have there lift up your Hands, with your
Hearts, that the King of Glory might come in. If You, my Brethren, in your
Places, and under your Colors, are faithful to Christ, your King and Country,
You also shall be blessed of the Most High God.

Your Earthly Captain General Governor BELCHER.
is here present to go before You. And I doubt not but He will gladly lead You
toward a better World. I am persuaded He has chosen the LORD to serve Him in
the Way of these Churches; and that many of You also have given your Hearts
with your Names to Christ How then should it be though it I mean any thing
disparaging to such personally, in any thing hereafter said?
. May you all be found Chosen and Called and Faithful. Such are They that truly
war under the LAMB, who is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. Rev. xvii. 14.

Your Fathers had the Honor to be enrolled Soldiers on the Lord's Side The
Completion of your Century led me into the large Consideration of the Piety and
Fortitude of our Fathers.
. They had a sure Prospect of enduring Hardship for His Truths and Ways. Like
Peter they walked to Him on the Sea, and their Feet did not sink. To Perils by
Water succeeded new Dangers and Fatigues on Shore. A wild Desert, and many
barbarous Salvages, was to be subdued by their Arms. Their Zeal for Christ,
whose Cause they had at Heart, animated them for the Labor and Encounter.
After the manner of Christian Men they fought here with Beasts 2 Timothy ii 3
Matthew. xiv. 30. 2 Cor. xi. 26. 1 Cor xv. 32. Mark x. 28, 29. Psalm lxi. 5.
cxix. 111. Romans (...) 17. Psalm cxi. 5, 6, 7.
, in Hope of a better World, the Heavenly. They trusted in God, and from Time
to Time had the Evidences of his Presence with them. " They got not the Land in
Possession by their own Sword, neither did their own Arm save them; but thy
right Hand and thy Arm, O LORD, and the Light of thy Countenance, because Thou
had a Favor unto them. What got they in Temporals for themselves? or rather
what Loss for Christ's sake did they not suffer? leaving all to follow Him! but
for spiritual and eternal Gains. -- What have they not left to us their
Children? a most pleasant and goodly Heritage on temporal Accounts, as we must
acknowledge who have seen other (and the better) Parts of the World: But above
all, they sought for us, and have bequeathed unto us, " the Heritage of those
that fear Gods Name! Purity of Worship and Liberty of Conscience; a valuable
Portion, for the Purchase whereof they counted no Travel or Expense too much:
That Kingdom of God, which is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace
and Joy in the Holy Ghost God gave 'em the Heritage of the Heathen, and Meat,
being ever mindful of his Covenant, and showed them the Power of his Works;
which are all Verity and Judgment, all his Commandments are sure.

God gave 'em Valor and Conduct; for Wisdom and Strength are His. He said, and
spoke effectually unto them, as He had done to Joshua when he was entering
Canaan, "Only be thou strong and very courageous, to observe to do according to
all my Law. Josh. i. 7. They were inspired accordingly to act a brave and
Christian Part, for the Law of their God and the saving Good of their Posterity.

Religion and Learning, Churches and Schools were their first Care; and for
these they laid a wise and strong Foundation, while they might seem but weak
and feeble for it, to propagate a well instructed and a godly Seed. They
proposed nobly and great, and projected wisely the surest Means, beginning
humbly and creeping alone in their Infant-State.

Only in respect of Arms they commeno'd Men at once; sought their own and the
Natives Peace, did all they could to teach and win and save 'em: But when
Hatred was returned for their Love and Enmity for their offered Friendship,
they resolutely defended themselves, and pursued their Invaders. God sent his
Fear before them, and one as it were chased a Thousand. The Plague also had
made Room for them, and set 'em in a large Place. This Settlement on religious
Principles and Motives prosper'd, while others on worldly Motives failed. Our
Founders died in Faith, and dead call us to Prudence, Meekness, Devotion,
Courage and Love.

They prayed and wro't and sought; plowed and built, with their Guns and Swords
by their Side, like Nehemiah and the Remnant in his Day. How ardent were they
on their Sabbaths, how diligent and frugal all the Week long. Only their
Training-days, and Days for Electing their Civil Rulers, were those of their
Show and Pride. Then they took State upon 'em, and made an Appearance; to
express their Thankfulness to God their Trust, and to inspire their Sons with
Reverence of God and Government, and with a Zeal to maintain and preserve what
They had so worthily acquired for them, by the Blessing of God. Just as Moses
and Joshua did, for their Learning, in the Minority of Israel.

ORDER was their Aim. This was sacred to 'em, as it is through the Creation of
God. A just Rule and Liberty they sought, in State, in Church, in Families and
Schools. They put great Honor on their Officers, who were ambitious to deserve
their Titles and command Respect. A Corporal looked as great as a Captain now,
and set more by his Office, being much set by. This was not Vanity but true
Wisdom; for by their looking great, and acting so, we soon grew great among the
Provinces. Governors shone with their hundred a Year, and none durst despise
them. The Majors were then Colonels, and the Captains were more than Roman
Centurions, without any of their Usurpation or Ostentation.

See your Original, our present Honored Commanders, and write fair after your
Copy. Look to the Rock from whence you were dug, and read these things
graven on it as with the Point of a Diamond. They are not worn out to this Day,
though more than a hundred Years past. Remember the Days of old, the Years of
ancient Times, when the Most High divided to You your present Inheritances and
Honors.

This Day is your Jubilee, Gentlemen of the Artillery, your second Jubilee; for
You are a hundred Years old. Where is your Jubilee-Trumpet, the Thunder of the
Captains and the Shouting! "GOD is gone up with a Shout (the LORD GOD of your
Fathers) sing Praises to Him, sing Praises; and do it with Understanding: (...)
Shields of the Earth belong to God, He is greatly exalted.

You tell me that your complete Age this Day has partly led you to apply to me.
I would not damp your Joy of coming at Age, by looking back with Tears, as the
Fathers at Jerusalem, did on our first Love, Virtue and Fortitude. We are risen
up in our Fathers stead an Inferior Generation, except in Numbers, or at least
in Proportion to our Numbers, as in respect of Religion, so also of Arms.

Our Scarlet annd Crimson A very proper Dress for Officers and others in the
Militia, in my Eye; for I think Soldiers should array themselves in a
distinguishing Habit on their Days of Training, if they can well afford it; and
so far as I can remember, or have been informed, our Fathers did so: so that I
could not mean any Reflection on the present Dress of the Gentlemen in Arms, as
some have been ready to take the Words. And as to the present Expense, I know
not whether it be much more than our Fathers Buff and Ribbands were in their
Day. And if it be, I suppose the present Officers and Soldiers have as good
Estates to bear it, and many of them much greater; though the Land is poor and in
Distress through want of a Medium for Trade.
can boast no proved Valor This also can by no means (...) any Reflection on
the Valor of the present Officers or Soldiers, because the divine Providence
not made our Day a Time of War; and (...) not called us, as it did our Fathers,
to jeopard our Lives in the Fields of the Wood, or rather in the Thickets and
Swamps of it.

If there were now the like Lurkings of the bloody Salvages about our Villages,
or the like breaking in and carrying forth on our Borders, as were in our
Fathers Days and in some of our own Times; I doubt not but there would be found
Those of the present Generation, who by the Help of God, and in his Fear, would
seek the Enemy in their hiding-places, as in the Close of the late War many did
with great Boldness and Success; and their Praise has been in our Pulpits and
from our Press.

Nor ought I to omit the proved Valor of Captain Lyman, with two or three more
Volunteers in his Youth, who penetrated far into our Woods to seek out the
Enemy; and by cutting off a single Family (as I am told) they struck such a
Terror into a Clan who were advantageously posting themselves for a ready and
easy Descent upon our several Previnces, by our three grand Rivers; that
finding the English had got so nigh to the fine Interval Land they had chosen,
they were intimidated and hasted away. Such Attempts may look small to some,
and be little remembered by most with Thankfulness to God and to the just Honor
of the Persons that serve under his Influence; but who can tell the Favor of
God and Benefit to a Country by them?


equal to their hardy Buff. Our Children it may be would be frighted to see the
Dress and Aspect of one of their Great Grandfathers on such a Day as this. They
put on Courage and it clothed them, and they took on 'em an Authority, which
together with their Righteousness was their Crown and Diadem. The Captains awed
their Families and Neighbors As also it must be acknowledged, to the Glory of
God, that not a few of our present Commanders do at this Day; being bright
Examples of Virtue and Devotion, Generosity, Gravity and Wisdom, and justly
esteemed by all that know them.
by their Gravity and Piety, as well as frighted their Enemies by their
Boldness and Fierceness. The Natives trembled when they law them train, and old
as well as young stood still and reverenced 'em, as they passed along in
Martial Order. A valiant Church Afterward Col. Church of Little-Compton.
could jump down a kind of Precipice, amidst a Score or two of Counselors and
Attendants about their Sachem, meditating War upon us, and take him away, to
answer to our Governor. Fuit, fuit ista quondam in hac Republica Virtus, ut
Viri fortes --.

And very precious is the Promise in the Book of God. " Instead of the Fathers
shall be the Children, whom thou may make Princes in all the Earth. Psalm.
xlv. 16. I thank God that we have seen, and still see, many of the Sons of
New England shining in the Virtues, filling well the Places, and adorning the
Names of their Ancestors.

Such was our late Honorable Agent QUINCY, at the Head of his Regiment; in his
Seat at the Council Board, and on the Bench of Judgment. Gentlemen of the
Artillery, You will give me leave to mourn before you the lamented Death of
such a Captain. He was an Honor to his Commission, loved and feared by all
under him. -- We read o the Meekness of Wisdom; This he had, and also the
Mildness of Courage. May our Country ever be blessed with Men of like Modesty,
Constancy and Fortitude. All he did was from Conscience toward God, and in his
Fear. Had he lived in the Days of our Fathers, I truly think he would have been
esteemed a very perfect Pattern by them. There was a Treasure of Piety,
Prudence and Integrity in that Earthen Vessel; and such Men should be prized
while they live, and mourned when they die; as no small Part of the peculiar
Treasure of the Provinces.

The Residue of the Spirit is with GOD; and down to our Days he takes of the
Spirit that was on Moses, and puts it on Rulers here and there; and also
Joshua's Spirit on Commanders in Chief and Subordinate. God has many a David in
store for his Church, in Times long to come, to serve their own Generation,
after his own Heart, in Integrity and Uprightness: And then how easy is it for
'em to fall asleep, and be gathered to their Fathers? Acts xiii. 36.

But should an Angel of the Lord now appear to such a One yet alive among us,
finding him we will suppose in his Threshing-floor or by his Cyderpress Or in
his Storehouse or Shop.
and salute him, saying, " The LORD is with thee, thou Man of Valor! would he
not be ready to answer in Gideon's Words, " O my Lord, if the LORD be with us,
why then is it thus? why are Things with us as they are? and where be all the
Tokens of his Presence among us, as in the Days of our Fathers? what is become
of that generous noble public Spirit of Piety and Prudence, Gravity and
Authority, Courage and Command, All Orders and Degrees are you see put
together, and the lowest taken in.
Subjection and Obedience, Reverence of God and Government, Temperance and
Frugality, Godliness and Honesty, which our Fathers were famous for? -- The
LORD look on every One disposed to speak after this Manner, and say unto Them
chat spiriting Word, Judges vi. 14. Go thou, in this thy Might, and help to
save my People out of their present Weakness and Feebleness, Folly and
Impoverishment, the Poverty that is come upon them as an armed Men.

Do we a^k what has bro't on us this Want, as one that (...)? Prove. vi. 11, It
is easy to answer, -- Our Wordliness, and Pride, Sensuality, Vain glory,
Fl^^^ries and profuse Expense in Dress and Furniture; which have naturally led
into Unrighteousness and Dishonesty: These have bro't us low, and will bring us
lower it not amended, and lay our Honor in the Dust.

Neither the Christian, nor the Roman Spirit can subsist long under our profuse
Expenses, in the Furniture of our Houses, the rich Dresses of our Families, our
Silks and China and empty Pockets I think it is as plain as the Light, to them
that will not shut their Eyes through Prejudice of Vanity or Gain, that our
living beyond our selves in rich Attire and Equipage, within Doors and without,
has bro't us into our Debts to our Mother Country, and hereby into those
Straits and Difficulties, for want of a Silver Currency, and by Reason of the
depreciating the Bills of our Provinces, which every Body complains of, and
none can tell how to remedy. There is in my Opinion but one possible Cure, and
that is (as a People) to repent of and reform our Expenses and Extravagances.

But can any one think this Censure of our Silks and China, with Want of Money,
meant to the Gentlemen of the Militia in particular, because this public
Occasion was taken to mention the common Calamity upon us, upon the comparing
our Day and State with that of our Fathers? By no means. The Complaint has no
Relation to the Soldiery in particular, unless you would run it in the wise
Comparison of Solomon. "Thy Want as an armed Man; i. e. "unexpected,
irresistible and most destructive. -- I though it the Silks and China were the
Gentlewomens ware and I know a great deal of this faulty Indulgence in their
Families who never trained in their Lives, and next to nothing of it in theirs
who were in Arms before me. It should grieve us however, to see we cannot hear
to have our Sore touched, when i^ pains us so much and is ready to break, and
the kindest thing any one can do is to lance and open it. -- I acknowledge
however the Omission of two Lines, which were not so properly placed in the
Discourse, and so might be liable to some Exception.


. Within another Century, our present Way continuing, to what are our Numbers
like to be reduced? as those in our Books to a Multitude of Noughts, which we
call so many hundreds and thousands; so the Numbers of our People to a
Multitude of Debtors and Starvelings, the Property of Them who now feed our
insatiable Vanity, to whom we are selling our Families as fast as we can for a
little Dress.

Where then is our Courage, or rather where our Shame! can we bear this? then
fold up your Ensign, and hush your Drum, put off your Scarlet, and lay down
your Arms; and let me leave the Desk, with that first of Lamentations over
Judah, when she had destroyed her self; " She that was Princess among the
Provinces, how is she become tributary?

But let us recover our Arms? CHRIST our King and Captain lives! Of Him it is
testified, that He lives. He can humble and reform us; respirit, revive and
restore us. Of his Fullness we may receive, and Grace for Grace. Whatsoever we
ask of the Father in his Name, He will do it. One Day is with Him as a thousand
Years, and a thousand Years as one Day, Our Centuries pass quick, and how
Sovereign is the Rise and Fall of Families, Cities, Provinces and Kingdoms in
every Century almost! but Thou art the same, and thy Years shall not fail. Heb.
i. 12.

One Generation goes and another comes, but the Word of the Lord endures for
ever; the same to every Generation. This Word which by the Gospel is preached
to us, was also to our Fathers, and received by Them with Love, Fear and
Reverence. The LORD has commanded it to a thousand Generations. We will not
hide it from our Children, but show to the Generations to come the Praises of
the Lord and his Strength.

Know therefore, that the Lord thy God, He is GOD; the faithful God, which
keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love Him, to a thousand Generations;
and repayeth them that hate Him to their Face, to destroy them. He is the Lord
our God, his Judgments are in all the Earth. Seek the Lord and his Strength,
seek his Face evermore; glory ye in his holy Name. Return unto Me, says the
Lord, and I will return unto you. Let our Souls answer, with the lamenting
Church, "Turn thou us and we shall be turned; renew our Days as of old. Will thou not revive us again, that thy People may rejoice in Thee! show us thy
Mercy, O Lord, and grant us thy Salvation.

If CHRIST in the Cloud of Glory will cover our Camp, and dwell in our
Churches, we shall yet be safe and flourishing. But else in vain is Salvation
hoped for from the Hills and Mountains. Worthy is the LAMB to receive Power and
Riches, and Wisdom and Strength, and Honor and Glory and Blessing! JESUS has
sent his Angel to testify of Him in his Churches; HE is the Root and Offspring
of David, and the bright and Morning Star.

FINIS.

