A faithful NARRATIVE OF GOD's gracious Dealings WITH A Person lately recovered
FROM THE Dangerous Errors of Arminius.
1 Cor. ii. 14. But the natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of
God: for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned

Psalm. xciv. 12. Blessed is the Man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach
him out of thy Law.


I Must acknowledge, with grief of Soul, that by reading Arminian Books, and
some of the Writings of such as are called Free-Thinkers, I came to be so
stumbled at the Doctrine of Election, that I could not hear it preached without
being very uneasy. Still I read, and was mightily pleased in reading what so
much exalts Man, and nourishes the natural bent and biass we have to set up
Self, and a dreadful lothness to be at God's disposal: that it should be at his
sovereign Will whether we should be converted and saved, or left to perish in
our Sin and Unbelief; and that the Lord should give this as the Reason why he
would have Mercy on some, and not on others; even because it is his Will, and
because it seems good in his Sight.

About the same Time, I fell into the Company of some Men of Wit and Learning,
whose Discourse was much upon the same Strain. All seemed to agree in this,
that our Doctrine of Election could not consist with the Truth, Justice, and
Mercy of God.

Thus I was led on in the Way of free Will, as it stands in opposition to free
Grace; quite beside and contrary to the way of Salvation. But my Conscience
would often check me for hankering after and listening to those Doctrines;
whilst I was even bewitched away from the Truth as it is in Jesus, and carried
further into plausible and pleasing, but dangerous Errors; till it pleased God
(I hope in everlasting Mercy to my Soul) to visit me with very great and sore
outward Afflictions, which brought on darkness and distress of Mind and
Conscience, to a great Degree; and it seemed as if I had but a little while to
live; so I spent almost whole Days alone, meditating Terror; and in the Night,
sleep departed from mine Eyes.

In this doleful Condition, which I cannot set forth to the full, I remembered
the mighty Convictions I had been under in my youthful Time; and how, then I
had pleaded God's free and everlasting Love to the vilest of Sinners; and how
sweet the Doctrine of Election was then, and how relieving, whilst I was
constrained to plead Guilty; and had Nothing, no not so much as one good
Desire, that I could possibly raise in my self, which might recommend me to the
favor of God. -- I though it I must take the same Course now, in hope that God had
loved me with an everlasting Love, and that therefore with loving Kindness he
would draw me.

But how did my Conscience fly in my Face: -- How should I think on that for my
relief in my Distress, which I had so quarreled against? Then I cried to God to
forgive me all my hard and murmuring Thoughts against the Doctrine of Election,
and the Preachers of it. And when I had freely, and, I hope, humbly and
penitently confessed my serpentine opposition to the Truth; (for I believe it
was from the subtle and venomous old Serpent) then I could find some relief in
thinking of electing Love from all Eternity; and I was bro't to see, how that
at first, we had a sufficient Stock in Adam (had we improved it) to secure our
everlasting Happiness; but we foolishly and wilfully embezeled it away; and the
first Man, with his whole Race, had been irrecoverably lost; as the Angels who
kept not their first Estate, are reserved in Chains to the Judgment of the
great Day; had not God chosen a Remnant in Christ, the second Adam: So that all
our Hope, now, must be in Christ, and in God's electing Love through him: who is
pleased to send the Spirit to bring home to the elect Soul the Father's
everlasting Love, and the Son's eternal Redemption by effectual Application.

Here I had relief; and on this Foundation I desire to build my Hope; which
Hope, cast within the Vail, is a sure Anchor. So I was brought to bless God for
Election; had it not been for which, there would have been no more Hope for
fallen Man than for fallen Angels.

After I had penned down these my Temptations, I had great struglings within,
whether I should impart such Things to any one in the World. I had not, as yet,
discovered any thing, unless by dark and short hints, to a bosom Friend.
Sometimes I should think it best to conceal them; then it would run thus in my
Mind; If you disclose and make them known (without discovering your self to the
World) how know you but that some poor straggling Sheep of Christ, lost in the
Wilderness, and ready to be torn in pieces by Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, shall
be found out by these very Means, and brought home to Christ? Then what cause
of Joy would there be! So I thought it might be a Sin in me not to make known
what God had done for my Soul, and how narrowly I escaped.

I know not how it may be with others; but as for poor me (one of the chief of
Sinners and the least of Believers: So foolish have I been, and ignorant! -- O
Fool that I am, and slow of Heart to believe) -- I am now resolved, God helping
me, to lie at the foot of divine Sovereignty, putting my Mouth in the Dust, if
so be there may be Hope. And if Christ should, after all, reject me and cast me
off for ever, he can do me no wrong. I am utterly lost in the first Adam, whose
Sin is justly imputed to me; and I have so wretchedly opposed the second Adam,
who came to seek and save that which was lost, that I cannot but know, if I
perish, my Ruin will be of my self. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self; but
in me is thy Help.

I have nothing to depend on but electing Love, redeeming Mercy, and renewing
Grace; all infinitely free! And if any wicked Thoughts arise, at any time, in
my foolish, blind and perverse Heart, contrary to what I here declare and
profess, I must cast them away with abhorrence. And whatever become of me, its
a pleaing thought to me, that Others may take warning, and Ministers may be
emboldened to preach up the Doctrine of free sovereign Grace, in every Branch
of it, and not spare.

But to go on; I was, as I said, brought to submit to the righteous Sovereignty
of the Lord, whose Name is Holy. And in pleading God's everlasting Love, I
seemed to have fresh experience of the Love of Christ; and the Lord seemed to
smile on me in his Providence, in the midst of frowning Dispensations -- I
could give particular Instances of it; but I forbear. --

Now, in the multitude of my Thoughts, it came into my Mind to renew my
Covenant with God; and I did it in a solemn Manner, and as composedly as could
be, under such distressing and almost distracting Trouble: Outward and inward
Sorrows, like two Seas, meeting together. -- And it was my purpose to renew my
Covenant every Day; still pleading for Mercy, free Mercy to the very chief of
Sinners; giving thanks to the Lord, that yet there should be a remnant
according to the Election of Grace. Lord! thou have chosen some to Salvation,
through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth: and I know not
but I am one of them. -- The Offers of Grace are without Exception. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the
World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief. I saw plainly that by all that I had
done or could do, I could not deserve so much as a crumb of Bread, or a drop of
Water. I saw, at the same Time, that there was enough in Christ to justify,
sanctify, and save eternally, the worst Sinner in the World: and I desire to
have my entire dependence on Him still, daily renewing my Covenant; that I may
maintain a close Walk with God, and be fortifyed against new Temptations.

About this Time, I went into a Stationer's Shop, as I used frequently to do;
and there I espied some of the Arminian Books; such as I had read but too much
in; and the Bookseller told me, of what esteem they were in England. -- But
they appeared to me as a fiery Serpent, by which I had been mortally stung; and
had I not looked to Christ, as the Israelites did to the brazen Serpent, my
Soul must have died of the Wound.

And I suppose this to be one Reason why Election seems so sweet to me now, and
is continually running in my Mind; even because of my blasphemous quarrelling
in the Day of Temptation. Like the proud Legalists, who, while Paul was
preaching Christ and free Grace, are said to speak against those Things,
contradicting and blaspheming: But the Apostles were so far from giving over
when they were thus opposed, that it is said in the next Verse, They waxed bold
etc. and then it follows; As many as were ordained to eternal Life, believed.
-- Thus my falling out with that sweet Doctrine, has renewed and increased my
Love to it: -- And I must again express my humble Desire and Wish, that
Ministers might be moved, -- But I forbear. -- I have opposed and slighted them
in the cloudy and dark Day of Temptation, and am not worthy to speak to them:
-- Yet may I speak to God for them, and desire their Prayers, and the Prayers
of all the Lord's chosen and called, -- who may come to know my Case, still
continuing gloomy; neither so dark as it has been, nor so light as I hope in
God's Time it may be.


