Mr. Adams's SERMON Preached on the occasion of the Execution of Katherine
Garret.

A SERMON Preached on the Occasion Of the EXECUTION OF Katherine Garret, an
Indian-Servant, (Who was Condemned for the Murder of her Spurious Child,) On
May 3d. 1738.

To which is Added some short Account of her Behavior after her Condemnation.

Together with her Dying WARNING and EXHORTATION.

Left under her own Hand.

By ELIPHALET ADAMS, M. A. And Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in N. London

N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. GREEN. 1738*

A SERMON Preached on the occasion of the Execution of Katherine Garret.
PROVERBS XXVIII. 17. A man that does Violence to the blood of any person,
shall flee to the Pit, Let no man stay him.
THIS Divine Sentence in the Lips of the King, seems to be of the same Nature
with that Law which was Established presently after the flood, Genesis ix. 6.
Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.

Since the Nature of man has been corrupted by the Apostasy, persons have been
capable of all that is bad. Not only have they been filled with Hatred and
Enmity to the blessed God, which has broken out and shown it self in their
words and Actions and is Horrible to be thought upon, But they have been
Exceeding Injurious to one another;

For this Reason Government has been Instituted and Laws have been provided,
that Injuries may Either be prevented or redressed and Societies may be kept in
tolerable peace and Order. For there would be no Living in any Safety, if there
were no Restraints, laid upon peoples Evil Inclinaions, If it were free for
them, who are Viciously Disposed, to Act as they please, If there were none to
call them to an Account, or put them to Shame in any thing, or punish them for
what they do amiss.

As for Lesser Injuries which are done to our Neighbors, whither by Wronging
them in their Estates, or Hurting them in their Reputation, Depriving them of
their Liberty, or Maiming their Bodies and the like, Recompense may be made
them again, and the Laws take care about it; That it shall be done in Kind, or
in Money, which in this sense may be also said, to Answer all things, as well
as because it purchases for us all the Necessaries and Conveniences of Life

But when Life is Taken away, because that cannot be restored again to the
person slain and it is univesally preferred above all Temporal good Things,
Therefore it is fit and the Laws have provided, that Life shall go for Life, as
a punishment for the Crime, That Evil doers should be made to suffer an Equal
Disadvantage with that which they have brought upon Others, and also to be a
Warning to all the standers by, that they may hear and fear and do no more so
wickedly.

Doing Violence to the Blood of any person, is a phrase to Express the Slaying
of another with Intention and Design and without a Cause;

Such an One must flee to the Pit, i. e. the Grave, He must be put to Death and
buried out of sight, It may Intimate too, the have and Dispatch that must be
made in the Execution, He must be reprieved no longer, than some valuable End
may be served by it and particularly to give him time for repentance.

It seems to me, that this phrase, does not so much Intimate, as some would
Interpret it, that they who are guilty of Murder, will go about as Vagabonds
and Fugitives (like Cain after the Slaughter of his brother) run into
Solitudes, be perpetually haunted and affrighted with an Evil Conscience and be
ready Ever and anon to lay Violent hands upon themselves, and that none should
pity them, Comfort them or stay their hand from so Just an Execution, if it
were in their power;

But rather it shows what is fit to be Done by the Ministers of Justice, those
public Avengers of Blood, When Murder has been Committed, they should
Straitway Enquire into it, Secure the person Suspected, bring him to his Trial
as soon as may be and having sufficient proof of the Fact, Sentence the guilty
person to die the Death and see that Execution be done with all Convenient have.

Let no man Stay him. Every one in their Place should Discountenance the
Violence that has been done and rise up as with a general Consent to testify
against it, They should Contribute what is in their Power and lend an hand
toward the bringing of such offenders unto Justice; If it were in their power
to stop the prosecution, defeat the process or Elude the Sentence, they must
not do it; For such Offenders as these have forfeited their Claim to the
protection of mankind and must now be driven from among men.

In the farther speaking to these words I shall Consider. First. That when
persons have been guilty of Doing Violence to the blood of Others, too often
there are Endeavors used, to screen them from the punishment which they have
Justly Deserved. Secondly. That this is by no means fit to be done and people
should be strictly Cautioned against it. Thirdly That Death is the Just
punishment to be Inflicted upon such persons, who have been guilty of doing
Violence to the blood of others.

I. We may Consider, That when persons have been guilty of doing Violence to
the blood of Others, too often there are Endeavors used to Screen them from
the punishment which they have Justly deserved. This is supposed in the Text,
Let no man stay him, that some may be Inclined to Interpose and prevent their
fleeing to the pit, There are none so bad, but there will be some, to favor
and shelter and rescue them from the punishment which they have deserved:

But before I proceed to the farther Consideration of this head, I shall
premise two things to show what is not faulty in such cases.

1. It is no fault to have Compassion upon such malefactors and minister to
their Necessities and Comfort, during the Time they are permitted to Live.
Common Humanity will bind us, notwithstanding the Just Indignation rising in
our breasts, against the Odious crime that has been Committed, to see that
nothing be wanting for the tolerable support of Life during their Confinement.
If they should prove stubborn and hard hearted, these good Offices will indeed
be done with so much less good will;

But when they appear truly sensible of their fauls and humble under them, we
may minister to them with readiness and Delight, we must feed them when they
are Hungry, cloth them when they are Naked, see that they be not Exposed to the
cold and not suffer them to want any thing that is for their Convenience;

It is true, they are not shut up in Prison there to be pampered and seasted,
but Neither should they be unnecessarily pinched and exposed; Besides the
public allowance, there is room for private charity's to be Exercised, that
they may not suffer more than needs must, during the time they are allowed to
Live, and if they have given Evidence of their repentance and behaved
themselves like Christians, whatever persons shall bestow upon them in the name
of a Disciple and because they belong to Christ though it be but a cup of cold
water only, Verily they shall not lose their reward.

2. Much less is it a fault, to Instruct, Counsel and Pray for them, and take
what pains we can with them that they may be prepared for Death and find mercy
with God, when they must be dispatched out of this world. For we may remember
that no crimes whatever they be, do put poor Creatures out of the reach of
Divine mercy, provided they may be made sensible of them and brought to a
through repentance; Pains therefore should be taken with such people, if happily
God will please to bless those Endeavors for the opening of their Eyes, that
they may be brought to fly for refuge to lay hold of the hope that is set
before them; That since they must quickly Die they may be prepared to die well
and their spirits may be saved in the Day of the Lord;

Instructions should be given them from God's Word; The Odiousness and Evil
Desert of their Sins should be showed them, till they are brought heartily to
bewail and repent of them; The way of Salvation by Jesus Christ should be set
before them and they should be urged still to fall in therewith; and Prayers
should be put up for them Night and Day.

These things premised, I proceed to Conbder, that persons are too often faulty
in Screening those who have done Violence to the ^^lood of others from the
punishment which they have deserved; This has been attempted diverse ways.

1. Sometimes by Suppressing the Truth, when they are called to give Testimony
and Evidence of what they know in such cases. They know a great deal if they
would but speak, They could give in a full and clear Evidence in the case. But
sometimes it has been seen that Witnesses have stifled and suppressed the
truth in favor to them, that their Iniquity may not be brought to Light;

As there are false witnesses, who sometimes speak more than is true in Order to
the Condemning of the Innocent, So there are people who will not declare what
they Know when they are called to it and put upon it, in Order to the Screening
of the guilty. Or they will so soften their Testimony that there shall be no
great force in it, choosing rather to derive some guilt to themselves, than that
they should be made to flee to the pit, as they have justly Deserved. This may
be attempted,

2. Sometimes by Endeavoring to plead them off, when the matter comes before
the Cognizance of the Judges.

There have been Advocates who have used their Eloquence and skill in a
Mercenary and Unworthy manner to blanch the foulest Actions and bring off clear
such as have Justly Deserved to die:

Not but that Advocates may be justly Assigned to Criminals to set their Case
in its true light, to keep off that mischief which they have not Justly
deserved and that they may not be too much born down in the heat of the
prosecution.

But when they quite pervert things, Call evil good and put light for darkness,
and by the coloring of words and arts of Sophistry they Endeavor to make that
innocent or venial, which merits the utmost resentment, Now they may be said to
use their Endeavor to Stay them, who by the Ordinance of Justice, should be
fleing to the pit. This may be attempted,

3. Sometimes by giving in wrong Verdicts, after the Cause has been heard, or
accepting such Verdicts when they are brought in. This also has been Known
sometimes in the world; Verdicts have been given sometimes by favor, as well as
sometimes by prejudice. When this last prevails, the poor Prisoner, though he
has amply cleared himself and baffled by his Just replies all the charges and
accusations brought against him, yet has been brought in guilty, and the
Verdict has been Accepted, because he was one that had fallen under a general
Odium; So on the other hand, when the proofs have been Numerous and the
Evidences full and Unquestionable, through favor he has yet been Cleared and
the Verdict Accepted.

Thus One that should have fled to the pit, has been unjustly stopped. This has
been attempted,

4. Sometimes by gathering into parties and Defending such Malefactors by
strong hand, against those who were preparing to Call them to an account.

Jonathan's Case was indeed peculiar, when his Father told him that he should
surely Die, And the people were in no fault when they Interposed and Delivered
him out of his Hands, For the King had adjured the people rashly, Neither did
Jonathan know of the Curse which had been pronounced. 1 Samuel xiv. 45 And the
people said unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die, who has wrought this great
salvation in Israel? God forbid: as the Lord lives, there shall not one hair
of his head fall to the ground, for he has wrought with God this day.

But sometimes Numbers have gathered round a great deal worse people, Though their
Crimes were bloody and to the last Degree Infamous, Yet they have Interposed
and Desended them, against the Demands of Justice and so they have Escaped the
punishment which they deserved and such as should have fled to the pit, have
been Unjustly stopped. This has been attempted,

5. Sometimes by Assisting such Malefactors to make their Escape from Justice
and that whither before or after their being taken into Custody. They have
clandestinely Conveyed them away, into other Governments, into foreign
Countries, where they have not been Known or their Crimes heard of, where no
more Inquiry would be made after them, Or, if there were, it was presumed that
they would not be delivered up. Or they have kept them Concealed so long till
there was no more Inquiry made after them, Or they have Disguised them to that
degree, that they could not lightly be known, though they should be met with;
They have taken off their Chains and even broken Open their Prisons to set them
at Liberty; This they have thought to be a piece of Kindness and faithfulness
to one that was in Extremity.

But really it was a faulty and Injurious Screening of an Offender from
Justice, an unworthy staying of them who should have fled unto the pit. In
these and such like ways people are too often faulty, And this brings me to the
Second particular.

II. I am to Consider, That this is by no means fit to be done and people
should be strictly Cautioned against it.

So we read in the Text, Let no man stay him. No man, Let his Circumstances,
relation or Temptations, be what they will, should lend an hand to so Evil a
thing as this, Nothing will Vindicate or bear them out in this, Here we may
consider the following particulars.

1. Though they may be the Dearest friends or Nearest relations, Or their Lives
may be ever so Necessary to persons, yet no Indirect or unjust Endeavors
should be used to Screen Malefacters from the punishment which they have
Deserved.

It is indeed a trying Case when some useful Servant and much more when a
Child, or a Parent, or a Brother, or a Sister, or some dear Friend has been
less to fall into so odious a Crime as this; Nature will work; all the springs
of tenderness will be touched; They would give all the world that it were
otherwise, that they knew Nothing, That they were not obliged to speak, That
their hands might not be upon them: But yet Justice the Honor of God, the
safety of Society, should be dearer to them than the nearest Friend or the most
intimate Companion;

And though when they are called to tell their Story, it may well be supposed
that their hearts will ache and throb and their utterance be almost stopped by
floods of tears, Yet no part of the truth should be willingly suppressed. Moses
in the Law puts the Case very high with respect to the Enticers to Idolatry,
which was then by the Lord made a Capital crime, and it will hold the same
proportion with respect to any other Capital crime Deuteronomy. xiii. 6, -- 9. If thy
brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy
bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul, entire thee secretly, saying,
Let us go and serve other gods --, Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken
unto him, Neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shall thou spare, neither
shall thou conceal him, But thou shall surely kill him, Thine hand shall b^
first upon him to put him to death and afterward the hand of all the people It
may well be expected that Natural Affection will greatly work at such a time
and Interest will have a strong Influence, but neither should prevail against
the honor of God, the rules of Justice and the safety of Society.

How much to the honor of Levi, is the Zeal and Impartiality of that tribe,
mentioned by Moses, when Idolatry had been committed and a present severe
testimony was expected to be given against it, in order to the preservation of
the rest of the people. Deuteronomy xxxiii 9. Who said unto his father and unto his
mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor know
his own children: for they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant.

2. Though they may be great and Considerable persons who are guilty and they,
whose blood they have done Violence unto, may be but Comparatively mean. This
should not be so considered as to stop a prosecution, or stifle a testimony, or
favor or forward an Escape, A Barbarian is of the meanest Nation, a Servant is
of the lowest rank, an Infant is of the most imperfect age, Yet even their
blood is required by God and the Laws, when it has been unjustly shed; Rich
and great people are most Honored, Masters over Servants and Parents over
Children, may seem to have most power and authority (I say nothing now of
Princes over Subjects, that being a curious Argument and which may need very
Cautious handling) Yet even these may not be protected by their greatness,
authority or privilege, if they have done Violence to blood, If they have
defaced the Image of God in which every man is made and destroyed his
workmanship, they also must flee to the pit and none may stay them.

3. Though such Malefactors may be ready to bribe and pay well for their being
thus Screened from the hand of Justice. The Law of God is positive in that
case. Numb. xxxv. 31. Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
murderer, which is guilty of death; but he shall surely be put to death.
Wealthy persons would bribe high and be ready to give all the Substance of
their house, all that they are worth in the world might they be permitted to
Escape.

But such Crimes are not to be purged with offerings or Money, If Justice takes
place, all the Substance of their houses will be contemned. Money that is said
to answer all things, must do nothing here, The ministers of Justice must be as
resolule, as he whom Solomon speaks of, whose bed had been abused. Prove. vi.
35. He will not regard any ransom, neither will he rest content though thou
give many gifts. Were this to have any Influence, poor people would be in an
hard plight who have little or nothing to offer or buy off their punishment,
while the rich might be in Capacity to Escape, But it is certain that blood
which has been spilt can only be satisfied for by the blood of him that shed
it. Once more,

4. Though the poor Malefactors may beg and plead hard and promise ever so good
behavior for the time to come. What moving Expressions do sometimes come out
of the mouths of poor people on such Occasions! With what affecting Language
will they plead! With what Earnestness will they cry! They faint, They swoon
away under their Dismal apprehensions; The Spectators are struck with concern;
The Judges are melted into tears, Yet they must not be so mollified thereby as
to neglect Justice; With tears in their Eyes they must pronounce the righteous
Sentence and commend them to the mercy of God, who have forfeited all Claim to
be suffered any longer among men; Oh, piteous case, when the cry for Mercy,
Mercy must no longer be regarded! They must have Judgment without mercy, who
have showed no mercy. They must be suffered no longer here in this Life and it
will be well if they can so manage, as to find mercy in the Next.

No persons should stay the unhappy Malefactors from fleing to the pit, none
should lend an helping hand to assist or favor their Escape.

(1) Because in so doing they bring guilt upon themselves. This is the Language
of the action; Such persons do practically and in effect say, These Malefactors
have done well, They are innocent people and do not deserve to die; Now they
that Justify the wicked and condemn the Just, are both of them an Abomination
to the Lord; By such favor and countenance they do as it were, put themselves
in the place of the Malefactors and Kill them who have been unjustly stain over
again; If people were aware of this, they would surely have a care how they did
thus load themselves with the guilt of blood. Our own Iniquities, certainly are
not too little for us, that we should foolishly Venture to be partakers of
Other peoples sins. Why should any Contract an heavier load when they are
already so much overborn? For this reason no person should Countenance and
abet, Conceal or shelter them who have been guilty of such an Atrocious Crime
as this.

(2) Because thereby they Contribute to bring guilt upon the Land, to ripen it
for and lay it open to divine Judgments. As on the one hand the putting to
Death them that are Innocent sadly Exposes the places where it is done, So on
the other hand, the suffering them to Escape, who by their Crimes have fitted
themselves for such Destruction, it Defiles and brings guilt and lays a land
open to God's Judgments. Numb. xxxv. 33, 34. So ye shall not pollute the land
wherein ye are; for blood it defiles the land; and the land cannot be cleansed
of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it: Defile
not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I dwell; for I the Lord
dwell among the children of Israel. We all do, at least we should wish well to
the Country in which we live, that it may be a land of peace, favored from
above and shined upon by the light of God's Countenance; Wherefore we should
all be Cautious, that we do nothing of this nature to draw down God's
Displeasure upon it.

We may Remember how heavy the hand of God upon Israel was, and that many Years
after the fact was done, for the Innocent blood of the Gibeonites which King
Saul in a warm fit of false Zeal for the Children of Israel, had shed; Not was
the Lord atoned to the Land, till the blood of his posterity was shed for it,
and no less than Seven of them hanged up before the (...).

Wherefore, in a just regard to our Country we must be far from using any
attempts to stay them who by the just Judgment of God upon them, for their sins
should be fleing to the pit.

(3) To these things may be added, That if such Malefactors may be spared,
there is no Security to be bad, but that they will act the same Vile part over
again, upon other persons, upon the like or even lesser Temptations. Their
having Escaped once will Imbolden them to repeat the same Crimes, with hopes of
Impunity too, another time. Especially if they have past a trial and by any
Artifice or trick they have Come off clear; For now they may go about among men
without fearing their being again called in Question by men for this fact
Indeed if they have Escaped by flight or Concealment, such Malefactors are
daily Dogged or haunted by an Evil Conscience. They start at their own shadow,
Suspect every thing and are afraid of every one they meet; They are ready to
use Cain's Language, as they are Troubled with the like Horror, Gen iv. 14.
Behold, thou have driven me out this day from the face of the earth and from
thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth,
and it shall come to pass that every one that finds me shall slay me.

But where such Malefactors Escape in a Judicial Process, though still they may
have some racks and twinges of Conscience in their sober Intervals, Yet being
Enabled thereby to converse with their Neighbors without fear, they will be
hardened in sin and be apt to fall into new offenses of the same Kind,
especially when their former actions shall be cast into their teeth, as
sometimes they will. This way, the sparing of such Criminals will also become a
plague and mischief to mankind.

III. We may Consider, That Death is the Just punishment of such persons who
have been guilty of doing Violence to the blood of others. They must flee to
the pit; They must be Dispatched out of the world in all convenient have; There
should be no waiting till Death comes in the form of some Distemper or Accident
and does the work. We may not say of them as David did of Saul, in 1 Samuel xxvi.
10. As the Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die,
or he shall descend into battle and perish. No, Violence they have used and
with Violence they must be Dispatched out of the world, Here we may Consider
two things.

1. The Lord our God in his blessed word has all along appointed this to be
the punishment for this Crimes. Immediately after the flood this Law was given,
as was observed before. Gen ix. 6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed. The Earth had been filled with Violence before, So much
Wickedness was committed, so much Cruelty had been acted that it was Necessary
it should be purged by a flood; It was not sufficient it seems for the Lord to
set marks upon people that they might be known, pointed at and avoided, when
they had done this wickedness, as well as secured against the avenger of blood,
as was done upon Cain, and Lamech promises himself the like protection and
security, when he had Imitated this his Ancestor in his sin, Gen iv. 23, 24. I
have slain a man to my wounding and a young man to my hurt, If Cain shall be
avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold. Now the Lord makes
this Crime Capital, if we have reason to think that it had not been so by any
given Law before, Accordingly he puts it into his Judicial Law which he gave to
the people of Israel. Exodus xxi. 12. He that smites a man so that he die, shall
surely he put to death. And it held in use, we see, till Solomon's time, as
appears by the words of the Text. Nor is this Law abolished under the New
Testament, as we find, 1 Timothy i. 9. The law is not made for a righteous man,
but for -- Murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers, for man-slayers.

2. In all humane Governments, this has been agreed upon and settled, that
Death should be the punishment for this Crime. They have found it necessary for
the peace and safety of Societies to have such a Constitution and to put the
Law in Execution, as occasions should offer, that they who wittingly and
wilfully shed the blood of others, Except it be in their own Defense, in some
lawful War, or as Improved so to do by Authority as Instruments and
Executioners of Justice, Should, when the fact is proved upon them, be surely
put to death.

Accordingly there is no Well-ordered Governments in the world, where this Law
and practice does not obtain, Even Barbarous Nations have come into it; It is
not peculiar to our Nation and Country, but this is the Order and manner
throughout the whole World.

I proceed now to make some Improvement of what has been spoken.

USE, I. Should no man stay any person, who has done Violence to the blood of
another from fleing to the pit, Learn we hence what a piteous Case such persons
bring themselves into, who venture upon such acts of Violence. By this they
have forfeited all respect and put themselves out of the protection of the Laws
and Justly lose the good will of their Neighbors; No man must stand by them,
Countenance or bolster them up in what they have done; All that may be done for
them now, is to prepare them for Death; Nothing to save them from it.

Before this, they might have Expected common protection, assistance and
Countenance from all that were round about them; But after such a bloody action
committed, Every one in their places are to rise up against them and bear their
Testimony against the Violence that has been done. They are to be looked upon
and treated as the Enemies of mankind and driven out of their Society in all
convenient Have; The Dearest friends they have in the world must so stop the
current of their Affection to them, as not to Interpose between them and the
fatal stroke; They may sigh and mourn over them and their Souls may weep in
secret for the piteous plight they have bro't themselves into; But they may not
say a word or do an act that shall tend to prevent their fleeing to the pit;
None in the world with all their malice, could have bro't them into so sad and
wretched a Condition as they have bro't themselves. Here let two things be
considered.

1. It is not to be wondered at, that they who have been guilty of this Crime,
though it may be kept a while Concealed from mankind, should be perpetually
haunted by their own Consciences and made a Terror to themselves. Even Cain,
who was secured from being slain, by the particular Care and order of God,
after his bloody fact, went about as a fugitive and vagabond upon the Earth; So
do Malefactors of this kind, carry an heavy Load and burden about them, though no
man as yet knows of the Evil which they have done, it is strongly Imprinted
upon their own minds and they be not able to shake off the remembrance; Their
Consciences terrify them, They are afraid of their own Shadows, Every little
noise and Disturbance throws them into a fright and their extraordinary fears
have sometimes Discovered them against their own wills and meaning.

Nor need we wonder at this, since all people are ready to rise up against them
wherever they are Known; Yea and they naturally expect that the Judgments of
God will follow them and bring them to some Disastrous End at length, though they
may Escape for a Time; So the Barbarous people at Malta, when they saw the
Viper fasten upon Paul' s Hand, said among themselves, No Doubt this man is a
Murderer, whom though he has escaped the Sea, yet Vengeance suffers not to
live, Act. xxviii. 4.

2. It may well be expected, that persons Convicted of this Crime, if they have
any sense and Consideration left, when they come coolly to reflect, should be
Exceeding vile and Odious in their own Eyes. When they see with what abhorrence
and general consent, mankind rises up against them; How Neighbors, friends
and Acquaintance, as well as Strangers conspire together and that without any
prejudice, to bring them to Justice and none dare say a word for their being
spared any longer, This must make them little, mean and Vile in their own Eyes
too, when they think of it; Now surely whatever Pride, haughtiness or
Self-conceit they may have Indulged in times past, they must lay it aside for
the future and their high-looks will be brought down.

From this Time, surely they will put their mouths in the Dust and cry out,
Unclean, unclean; Unworthy, unworthy! One would think almost that after such an
Odious fact proved upon them, the Light would be painful unto them and the days
tedious till they were gotten Clear out of humane sight and had taken sanctuary
in the grave, Till, their Sin being pardoned by the great Mercy of God, to
which they fly, the memory of their horrid act may be buried with them in the
Dust and by Length of time come to be more and more forgotten.

II. Should no man stay any person who has done Violence to the blood of
another, from fleing to the pit, this should be a Caution and Warning to all
sorts of people to keep themselves clear from this Iniquity. Let no man take
part with Evildoers or lend an hand to obstruct public Justice; Inconsiderate
people may think perhaps that it is a good Office to relieve and rescue
Calamitous persons, though they are suffering Justly and receive no more than the
Due reward of their deeds. But they will find themselves to be quite mistaken
in their Computation; Whosoever are Instrumental to save them who are guilty of
Death and Convey them out of the reach of Justice, In the Day, when God shall
make Inquisition for blood, it will be charged to their Score and they will
have an heavy reckoning of it; They will then see that they have brought
themselves to a fine pass by their misplaced Kindness;

Whatever pity, whatever good will any man may be inclined to show to such kind
of Malefactors, Let it be in other ways than this, In Instructing, advising and
Counselling of them for the good of their Souls, praying for them, Encouraging
them to fly to and hope in God's Mercy, And (when they have truly repented and
thrown themselves at God's feet) in chearing and bearing them up against the
fears of Death, Here they may worthily busy themselves; This indeed is a good
Office; But let them not Venture to put fond Notions into their heads, or form
plots and projects for them how they may make their Escape from Justice, This
would bring dreadful guilt upon themselves, Neither would it be any Kindness in
the long run to such Malefactors; Such Over-officious people may justly fear a
worse doom upon them than that which was once pronounced against Ahab, 1 King.
XX. 42 -- Because thou have let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to
utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life.

III. Should no man stay any person, who has done Violence to the blood of
another, from fleing to the pit, however since the Occasion is awful and
melancholy it will behove all persons to behave in a proper and becoming
manner. Death when it reaches any by the hand of God, whither it be brought on
by some Distemper or by some Accident, is an affecting thing to the Spectators
and it should serve to make them grave, serious and Composed, If it happens to
any that are near us, whom we are acquainted with or related to, we can scarce
look on with Dry Eyes or without throbbing hearts; They must have divested
themselves very much of humane Nature who are not greatly moved on such an
Occasion:

But when any are found Slain by the hand of Violence, this raises grief,
Indignation and Horror in the minds of those who flock together upon the
occasion and with one Voice they Enquire, Who has been so wicked as to do
(...)?

When the matter remained uncertain and the Criminal could not be found out,
Expiations were appointed by the Law of Moses and Intercessions were to be made
that God would not Impute Innocent blood to them, by the people of such places
as were found nearest to the person slain, as you may see, Deuteronomy. xxi. 1 -- 9.
In like manner, it would be proper in our days that fervent prayers and
Supplications of this kind, should be made upon such an Incident as this.

When the Murderer is found out, Convicted, Condemned and Execution is to be
done, what more melancholy sight can there scarce be in this world? People
Crowd to the Trial with Eager have, They attend the Process with Aching hearts;
They gaze upon the poor Criminals after Condemnation, observing wistly what
Sense they have of the grievous fault which they have Committed, If they see
them Humble, penitent and sinking under the weight of it, their Compassions
work toward them: But if they are hardened and obstinate and Stupid, they have
little pity to throw away upon such abandoned Creatures. When the Day of
Execution comes, then, Multitudes, Multitudes flock together; And Oh! that it
might be to learn Wisdom, that they might hear and Fear and none of them ever
Venture any more to do so wickedly, so Presumptuously. Deuteronomy. xvii. 13. And all
the people shall hear and fear and do no more presumptuously. To the same
purpose we read, Deuteronomy xiii. 11.

Such a sad Spectacle is before us this Day; such an one as we never yet had in
this County since it was first Settled; A poor Woman is to be Dispatched out of
this world, for the Murder of her Spurious Child; The Day has been fixed, The
Time is now Come and Execution must be Done. Wherefore I would now Address my
self,

1. To the Congregation now gathered together in greater Numbers on this
Occasion. You have this Day a moving sight before your Eyes, of One fleing to
the pit and none may stay her, Because she has been wicked Overmuch, she is
now to die before her Time, Eccl vii. 17. And here I shall offer these
following particulars.

(1) Let us now think with Our selves what reason we all have to bless God,
that we have not been left to fall into the like Crimes. Our Hearts also are
bad Enough, and what is there so Vile that we are not capable of Committing, if
God should leave us to our selves; Let none of us bless our selves too much,
and say, It was Impossible for us to have done as she has done; If any of us
should find such thoughts as these rising in us and we should pretend to very
much Innocence and Integrity of heart, we may Imagine the Lord speaking to us,
as once he did to Abimelech in another case. Genesis xx. 6 -- I know that thou
did this in the integrity of thy heart, for I also witheld thee from sinning
against me. If God should take off his restraining grace and think it proper to
let us see what is in our Hearts, we should soon do as bad or worse than she
has done; We had need to pray that God would keep a Check, a Bridle still upon
us; Instead of triumphing over poor Offenders, who have indeed done very
Criminal things, Let us bless God that we are not in their places. For we have
that within us which would have prompted us to the like had not God graciously
restrained us.

(2) Let every one now he Humbled before God, for all approaches they have at
any time made toward this Crime. It may be you have not actually done Violence
to the blood of any person in the world, But let persons take a view of their
thoughts and their wishes: These may have been bloody Enough. When persons
Displeased you, when they have seemed to stand in your way When by Living still
they have kept you longer out of those Possessions which you Earnestly Craved
after, when to your thinking, they only did mischief while they lived, have You
not too often stood wishing and waiting for their Death, grudging iem their
Health, their Friends and other advantages which God was pleased to bless them
with and continue to them for a considerable time, And this notwithstanding
they were Valuable persons, nearly related, had formerly been kind and in short
had Deserved no such Usage at Your hands; The Psalmist tells us of such people
in his day, who said, Psalm. xli. 5. -- When shall he die and his name perish?
Some persons, as if they had been the Sovereign Arbiters of Life and Death,
have taken it upon them in their minds to dispose of Others and have thought
the time long that they were suffered to Live; Could men have looked into their
hearts as God Can and Does, they might have seen wild work there a doing, These
and those Stripped and reduced, mortified and Disabled and several dispatched out
of the way, upon no desert or provocation; Let Every one now be humbled before
God, for this mischievous kind of wishing, this unruly working of their tho'ts,
as far as they can find they have been guilty; Though Only God and our own
Consciences have been privy thereto and those who are about us suspect no such
thing by us, Yet it is Enough for our Conviction that God knows our hearts
and this is a trespass against the Sixth Commandment. Surely we ought to with
well to Every one that is about us and if any of them behave themselves ill or
are indeed worthy to die, we should leave them to God, who will take his time
to deal with them and call them to an account; For he has said, Vengeance is
his and he will repay it. Wherefore let none harbor the least ill will against
any in their hearts, Nay let them take heed that they do not by any unworthy
Carriage, grieve the hearts of any whom it is their Duty to love, honor and
please, lest they bring down their heads with Sorrow to the grave.

(3) Let Every one be Warned by this Example to take heed to themselves and
beware of Every thing that may tend to pave the way to this Crime. Let all be
Warned against a Loose and Disorderly way of Living, lest God be provoked to
give them up to their Own hearts Lusts and they fall into Capital Offenses;
And, Oh! that Parents and Masters would be Entreated to look well to the
Education of Children and Servants, to train them up in the way wherein they
should go, For although sometimes it happens that they who have had a good
Education and been kept under a strict Discipline, do yet break loose and fall
into Scandalous and Even Capital Crimes, through their not taking heed to the
Instructions that have been given them, Yet little better can be Expected, if
Superiors are altogether Negligent, If they wink at their Crimes and much more
if they Enco^rage and Improve them to do wicked Actions, This is to bring them
up to Ruin; Sinners begin with Lesser Crimes and then they grow worse and
worse, When once they are set Out in an ill-way, they know not to what Lengths
they may go, It is like the passage down some steep Hill, It will be difficult
stopping till they come to the bottom;

Beware of Disobedience to Parents or religions Masters, Of Sabbath-breaking,
Mispence of precious Time and such like Evils, which they that come to Untimely
Ends are wont to Warn the Survivers against and tell them aloud that these were
the things which have brought them to this.

But I would Especially Warn Persons against the Lusts of Uncleanness, those
Sins against our own bodies and which are said peculiarly to defile the Temples
of the Holy Ghost. Since they who have Committed folly of this Kind, are so
often (besides this sad Instance before us) tempted, in Order to hide their Sin
and Shame from the world, to add Murder to their former Offense.

Diverse have been found Out and brought to Condign Punishment for it both in
this Land and Elsewhere, and what great Numbers have Escaped Discovery in this
Life and are reserved to the final Judgment of God, he only Knows; Oh! Let
Every one from this Time, learn, according to the Apostle' s advice, to possess
their Vessels in Sanctification and Honor.

(4) Let Every one be moved to pity and pray for this poor Criminal, that God
would be pleased to grant her repentance and remission of Sins. That although
Justice will not suffer her longer to live, Yet that she may find Mercy in
God's sight and through the grace of Jesus Christ be made meet for the
Inheritance among the Saints in Light, That her Repentance may be sincere and
through and her heart right in the sight of God.

It will be no Difficulty to his grace to change and make a New Creature of
her, Nor any Dishonor to his Name, to pardon her when she is truly penitent,
So that there is no Bar lying in the way to discourage such our Application on
her account. She is presently going to her Execution, Let me bespeak your good
wishes and prayers for her, fervent and Devout as her Case requires; Were any
of us in the like Circumstances, what, we should desire of our Christian
Friends, do ye even the same unto her.

Wherefore Come, not only to feed your Eyes with a Strange and unusual
Spectacle or gratify your Curiosity, but to be assisting as You may, to a
person Just upon the Borders of Eternity with Your good wishes and prayers;

Let none be so Barbarous as to Insult her in this Day of her Calamity, But let
Every ones Compassions be moved and as far as you have Interest in Heaven,
Improve it Earnestly on her account, to draw down a Blessing upon her if
possible, in her last Moments; Her Condition Cries to you for this, Her
Melancholy Appearance and beseeching Air may even Extort it from You and though
she cannot Recompense you, Yet if it be performed with a truly Christian
spirit, the Lord will remember and Reward this Your Labor of Love.

2. I shall Address my self more particularly to the poor Malefactor that is
now to Suffer. We cannot help being Concerned for You as our Fellow Creature
and the more since You are become our Fellow-Christian, Having with Humble
Confession of your Sin and Serious Profession of your Faith, given up your self
in Solemn Covenant to be the Lord's and at your Earnest Request have been
Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus; as also Admitted to Sit down with us at
the Table of the Lord.

This, though it may Contribute, through the Mercy of God to the Salvation of
your Soul, if on Your part, it were done with Judgment and Sincerity, Yet it
must not by any means free you from the Execution of the Sentence that has
Justly been passed upon You; We may say in your Case, as the Apostle does in
another that is not altogether unlike. Romans viii. 10. And if Christ be in you,
the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of
righteousness. Had you been left to have been Stupid and Obstinate and
Insensible under this Sentence of Condemnation, though your Case would have been
far more Pityable, Yet in all probability you would have met with a great deal
less Compassion. But now you have made a Profession of Religion, this
Conciliates the Esteem and draws the Affection of the people of God toward
You, as far as they have ground to hope and believe that you are Upright
therein; Wherefore as to one that has Owned and Confessed our Common Lord and
Master, Jesus Christ. I would now give these few words of parting Advice.

[1] Be sure you harbor no Grudge or Animosity against any person what ever.
If Ever you took any thing hard that you have met with in the Course of your
Trial, Condemnation and Confinement, Yet now let your heart be made quite clean
from all manner of Malignant Passions, as what will not be a little mischievous
to one that is passing into Eternity and hastni^g to the Iudgment-Seat; Had any
persons really wronged you in being Instrumental to bring on this Day of
Suffering upon you, Yet it would be your Interest to let your resentment die,
before you passed into the Other world, According to the bright Example of Your
and Our blessed Lord and Master, who notwithstanding his being most Injuriously
and Inhumanely treated, Yet still bore a goodwill to Mankind and prays for his
very Persecutors. Luke xxiii. 34. Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do. But when they, who in their several places, have
appeared against you, have kept a good Conscience and only have born witness to
the Truth; when they must have brought guilt upon themselves, if they had not
testified and acted as they did, When it was with pain and Anguish of heart
that they performed this grievous part; Not the least resentment must remain in
your mind, as Ever you would hope that the Repentance you have professed,
should be Accepted in the sight of God; Wherefore, wish them all well, as you
do the best Friends that you have in the world, Pray that all manner of
Blessings, Temporal and Spiritual may remain upon them and their Posterity for
Ever; Thus, Die, I do not say, forgiving (for what of this sort have you to
forgive) but bearing an Universal goodwill to all the World, So may you the
better hope to be Accepted of your Father which is in Heaven.

[2] Go ever again and again with your work of Repentance while your time
remains and beg of God to keep you from any fatal Mistake in that matter. Though
you have had a long time to Examine it, during your Confinement and we would
hope that you have not neglected this Necessary and Important work and it has
looked well that you have been Sollicitous that you might not build upon a
Sandy Foundation, Yet now think as you can whither you have proceeded right in
that matter, Whither the ground of your Sorrow for Sin be chiefly the Shame,
the Loss and the Punishment, that it has brought you to, Or is likely farther
to Expose you unto; Or whither it be, because thereby you have Dishonored God,
broken his Holy Laws and grieved his good Spirit, If this be the Consideration
that sets you on Mourning, that is a token for good; Say unto the Lord, Oh, I
have sinned a great Sin, My Life has been filled up with folly and wickedness,
It would be Just with thee to Spurn me from thy Presence, Yet graciously please
to put away mine Iniquity that I may not Die; Beg of God to help you to Sorrow
after a godly sort and give you that Repentance that is not to be repented of;
To make your heart sound in his Statutes and so to give you a Sealed Pardon of
all your Sins; To Deliver you from Blood-guiltiness in particular, that your
Tongue may sing aloud of his Righteousness and his Mercy, in the Eternal world,
whither you are now immediately hastening.

[3] Cleave close to the Lord Jesus Christ whom you have Openly professed to
have Chosen for your Lord and Portion, as to Him that is able to Save you from
Eternal Death. He is the great Friend of the Children of Men, the Common
Benefactor who came to seek the welfare are of Mankind; This is that Name of
the Lord, which is so strong a Tower, into which the Righteous all run, and
where alone they are safe; This is he who Loved us and gave himself for us and
washes us from our Sins in his own Blood; Who remembered us in our Low Estate,
Who ransomed us when we were Perishing and sough^ us up when we were Lost and
is able to Save to the Uttermost all that Come to God by him and has Ordered
this Gospel to be preached in all the World, to Persons of Every Age, in Every
Place and of Every Condition, He that Believes and is Baptized shall be Saved.
He accounts it no Disparagement to him to Save Even the Greatest and Chiefest
of Sinners that Come unto him by Faith, His grace will be so much the more
Magnified and he means to be Admired at last in all them that do believe. Now
therefore Exert your Faith to the Uttermost and fly for refuge to lay hold of
the hope that is set before You, Put all your Concerns and Interests, the
Choicest and Dearest of them into his Hands as the appointed Mediator between
God and man.

Trust in him and be not afraid, He has never yet failed any that have put
Confidence in him in the manner that he has Directed, They have all said, that
they Knew whom they had believed and that he was able and faithful to keep that
which they had Committed to him against that Day; Keep your hold of him, what
ever happens, It is best Dying at his feet, as in the posture of that Penitent,
mentioned in the Gospel, who washed his feet with her flowing Tears and wiped
them with the hair of her head.

[4] Look well to your self when the hour of Suffering, that Critical Time,
shall by and by Come on, that You be sure to glorify God and do all that is in
your Power to promote his Fear and Honor among men. Let no Word drop from you,
no Behavior be Indulged, which may reflect the least Dishonor upon his Name
or Disgrace upon Religion; You are, now his Professed and Devoted Servant, and
you must be sure to Justify him as Righteous in all that is brought upon you;
His Providence was wise and righteous that brought your Iniquity to Light and
Kind (...) in Inspiring the hearts of your Judges to andulge you with so much
Time; And if he has Visited you also in your Prison, touched your Heart,
Opened your Eyes and given You to see the Evil of Sin, the beauty of Holiness
and the Excellency of Jesus Christ, If he has blessed the Instructions which
have been given you, heard the Praerys that have been put up for you and
brought you heartily to Close with the Offers of the Gospel, Oh, what a Mercy
is this! Better far, than to have been Left in the possession of Liberty, to
have gone on in your courses of Sin and Vanity and to have filled up the
measure of your Iniquity and Dyed in your Sins:

Give him the glory of all the good you have reason to hope has been done for
you and Warn the Survivers that they do not Venture to offend after your
Example and Sin against the Lord;

And when presently you must pass along the Dolorous way and arrive at the
Fatal Tree, may the Lord please powerfully to Support you against the Fear and
under the Shame of this Death; That as a poor unhappy Sinner you may patiently
Submit to the Justice of this Sentence, to take away by your Death the guilt of
Blood from the Land; Yet as a Believer, you may look beyond the grave to an
happy Immortality, hoping in His Mercy, who can abundantly Pardon and
Committing your Departing Soul into his Fatherly hands.

I shall Conclude with the Instance of a Malefactor, mentioned in the Gospel,
suffering for his Faults and that indeed Justly, who in that hour had
repentance unto Life, graciously given unto him; He turns his Dying Eyes to our
blessed Savior, as he hung by his side and says, Lord, Remember me when thou
Come into thy Kingdom. So do you say, Lord, Remember me now thou art in thy
Kingdom. And, Oh! May he please mercifully to say to You, as then unto him;
This Day thou shall be with Me in Paradise.

IT may Possibly be Acceptable to the Public, if some brief Account were given
of the person, on the Occasion of whose Execution the foregoing Discourse was
Delivered.
SHE was of the Pequot Tribe of Indians and Descended from one of the best
Families among them; In her Childhood she was put into the Family of the
Reverend Mr. WILLIAM WORTHINGTON, where she was taught to read well and to
write and Instructed in the principles of religion; During her Confinement she
often Lamented her neglecting to Improve the Advantages she Enjoyed, always
speaking honorably of her Master, who was frequent in giving her good
Instruction and Advice.

Having Unhappily fallen into the Sin of Fornication and being with Child, it
passed for a while without Suspicion by any in the family, at length being
Questioned about it she denied it and turned it off, assigning other causes for
the appearances that were observed, so that the suspicions about her were
thereby very much laid asleep:

When her hour was Come, she was Delivered alone by her self in the Barn; upon
search the Infant was found, with marks upon it of Violence, that had been
used, of which wounds it soon Dyed.

Upon this she was Committed to the County Goal, where she lay Confined for a
considerable time, and the longer because the Witnesses who were to give
Evidence in the case, were, by reason of Infirmity (one of them) not able to
travel so far from home to the place where the Court was to be held, to bear
their Testimony.

During this space, I have little to observe Concerning her; Only, that when
the Court for her Trial was appointed to be held at Saybrook, she seemed to
Entertain a full Expectation that she should be Cleared.

But when upon her trial, the proofs of her Guilt, appeared so plain and full
to the Jury and the Court, that she was brought in Guilty and Sentence of
Condemnation was pronounced against her, she was thrown into the utmost
Confusion and Distress, Her Expressions were rash and unguarded and she scarce
forebore throwing blame on all sorts of persons; With this Disposition of mind
(though somewhat moderated) she was remanded back to her prison.

From this time pains were Continually taken with her, not only to allay this
resentment, but to make her Sensible of the Heinousness of her Sin, of her Lost
and undone Condition by Nature and her need of an Interest in Jesus Christ,
setting forth at the same time the greatness of Gods mercy and that there is
forgiveness with him that he may be feared, which pains (together with Gods
Blessing, upon her reading the holy Scriptures and other good Books that were
put into her hands and her attendance on the Ministry of the Word, on Sabbath
and Lecture days, as well as at private Meetings from house to house in the
Neighborhood to all of which she was allowed to come) it is to be hoped were
sanctified to give her quite another sight and sense of things than she had
before: One of her Expressions were, That she seemed to have been asleep in the
former part of her Life and that things appeared to her quite other wise than
they used to do.

The Authority were so favorable to her, as to allow her Large Opportunity
(almost six Months from her Condemnation to her Execution) which Time she was
diligent to Improve in making preparation for her Death;

Having Never been Baptized, she was Earnestly Desirous of that, wherefore
pains were taken to Acquaint her with the main principles of the Christian
Religion and the Nature of the Covenant of Grace. The understanding of which
her former good Education, made more Easy to her. And after some time, upon
her making an Open Acknowledgement of her great and Crying Sins, taking shame
to her self and manifesting her Sorrow on that account; Professing the
Christian Faith and Consenting to the Covenant of grace, she was Baptized.

Soon after, She was Extremely Desirous to partake with us at the Lord's Table
before she Suffered, And upon its appearing that she understood the Nature and
Design of that Ordinance, at her request she was allowed and had the
opportunity to Communicate with us twice.

In her attendance upon the ministry of the Word her Behavior was Decent and
she ever appeared as one Exceedingly Affected, Especially when her Case was
more particularly touched upon whither in Prayers or Sermons.

When I visited her in her prison, she seldom could part with me, without
Desiring that I would Pray with her before I went, which favor she Desired of
others also, who Visited her during her Confinement.

Many of her Expressions from time to time were Valuable and worth the
Preserving.

Among other things she said, That it was a Mercy she was found out, otherwise
she might have gone on in her Course of sinning and been Eternally Lost. That
sin seemed now like poison to her and those sins in which she was wont to
delight, were now Loathsome: That she had found more pleasure in her prison,
than Ever she did in the Days of her Vanity. That she was heartily sorry for
her sin not so much for the shame and punishment that it had bro't her to, as
because thereby she had offended and dishonored God. She could submit to the
shame of her Death, It would be soon Over and then she should not know what
people talked of her. Some (she said) had reported of her things that were
false, but she heartily forgave them; She Entertained no grudge or malice
against any person on any account, for that alone, she knew, would ruin her, if
she did. The Devil was very busy, she said, to hinder her from Praying and
Reading, but she did it the more, to spite him (that was her word) and the
Temptation Vanished and she found Comfort. She often Expressed her Concern lest
she should build upon a sandy foundation. Being asked from time to time, how
Death seemed to her, the nearer it Approached. She answered, Sometimes More
Terrible, sometimes Less Terrible. And being asked at what times she Observed
it to be less Terrible, she replied, That after she had been Earnestly seeking
to God, the fear of Death very much Abated. She said, that her dependence was
upon the Righteousness of Christ for her acceptance with God and looked up on
him as a surety who had paid their debts for believers.

But I forbear gathering up any more of her Expressions, That I be not too
tedious.

The Day before her Execution she was Exceedingly Overwhelmed and cast Down, It
seemed to be the most trying time to her, during her whole Confinement, whither
it were Occasioned by the want of her taking her usual rest or food or whether
the near approach of Death were Left to be an Uncommon Terror to her.

Every one's Compassions were moved for her, and she was Visited more
frequently and by greater Numbers of persons and Prayers more fervently made on
her account. Toward the Evening her Master came from Saybrook to take his last
farewell of her, with whose presence, the Instructions and Consolations that
were given and the Prayers that were made for her, she something revived and was
Overheard in her Prayers (after the people were, many of them, gone) to bless
God who had sent his Servants that Day to Pray for, to Instruct and Comfort her
a poor Dying Creature.

On the Day of her Execution, she was more strengthened and enabled to attend
at the Sermon that was preached on that Melancholy Occasion, although with some
faintings; Upon her retiring to the Prison, when it was Over, she made apt and
pertinent remarks, upon the sight of her Cossin, the taking off of her fetters,
the putting the rope about her Neck and other such Occurrences. Then she took
her Leave of her friends thanking them for the good Offices which they had done
her (as she Ever Expressed a grateful Spirit to every one, that at any time,
had shown her any Kindness) She passed on foot in the sad procession, for about
a Mile, to the place of Execution and still went On praying.

Excepting when the Rev'd Ministers in the Neighborhood (gathered together on
the Occasion and who gave her their Company) Endeavored to fill up the time,
by ministering to her Counsels, Comforts and Encouragements, to whom she made
satisfactory replies.

When she was arrived at the place of Execution, (which was surrounded with a
Vast Circle of people, more Numerous, perhaps, than Ever was gathered together
before, On any Occasion, in this Colony,) she first Commended her self to God's
mercy. In a more set and very fervent Prayer. Though sometimes the Expressions
were more broken and Incoherent

Next Her Master, Full of Concern and Affection for her, Spread her Case before
God; Her Warning left in writing was publicly read to which she added many
Other Warnings and Counsels by word of mouth, Lifting up her Voice as she could
that she might be the farther heard; We took our Leave of her and she of us in
an Affecting Manner;

The few moments she had to live after this, she spent in warm and Devout
Addresses to her Heavenly Father, till her breath was stopped; And with her hands
lifted up, as she could, she past out of life, in the posture of one praying.

She was of a proper Stature and goodly Countenance and seemed to be Naturally
of an Ingenious Disposition;

By her good Behavior all Along she generally gained the Esteem and good will
of those that Came about her and it is Charitably hoped, that she might find
Mercy in the sight of the Lord.

May this Example be of use to all Persons in our times to keep them from
Sinning against God, that every one may hear and fear and do no more
Presumptuously

Particularly, may all her Country people, in their several Tribes, whither
round about us or farther off, hearken diligently to the Offers and Proposals
of the Gospel that are made to them! Let there be Nothing to Obstruct and
Discourage so good a work, May the Time to favor them now Come, the set time
let it Come! Amen.

THE Confession and Dying Warning of Katherine Garret.
I Katherine Garret, being Condemned to Die for the Crying Sin of Murder, Do
Own the Justice of GOD in suffering me to die this Violent Death; and also
Acknowledge the Justice of the Court who has Sentenced me to die this Death;
and I thank them who have Lengthned the Time to me, whereby I have had great
Opportunity to prepare for my Death: I thank those also who have taken pains
with me for my Soul; so that since I have been in Prison, I have had
opportunity to seek after Baptism and the Supper of the Lord and have obtained
both. I Confess my self to have been a great Sinner; a sinner by Nature, also
guilty of many Actual Transgressions, Particularly of Pride and Lying, as well
as of the Sin of destroying the Fruit of my own Body, for which latter, I am
now to Die. I thank God that I was learned to Read in my Childhood, which has
been much my Exercise since I have been in Prison, and especially since my
Condemnation. The Bible has been a precious Book to me. There I read, That
JESUS CHRIST came into the world to Save Sinners, Even the Chief of Sinners:
And that all manner of Sins shall be forgiven, One only Excepted; For His Blood
Cleanses from all Sin. And other good Books I have been favored with, by
peoples giving and lending them to me, which has been blessed to me.

I would Warn all Young People against Sinning against their own Consciences;
For there is a GOD that Knows all things. Oh! Beware of all Sin, Especially of
Fornication; for that has led me to Murder. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it
Holy. Be Sober and wise. Redeem your Time, and Improve it well.

Little Children I would Warn you to take heed of Sinning against God. Be
Dutiful to your Parents; For the Eye that Mocks at his Father and despises to
Obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the Young
Eagles shall eat it. Little Children, Learn to Pray to God, Sit still on the
Lord's Day, and Love your Books.

I would also Warn Servants, Either Whites or Blacks, to be Obedient to your
Masters and Mistresses. Be Faithful in your places and diligent: Above all Fear
God; fear to Sin against Him: He is our Great Master.

I would also Entreat Parents and Masters to set a good Example before their
Children and Servants, for You also must give an Account to God how you carry
it to them.

I desire the Prayers of all God's People for me, Private Christians, as well
as Ministers of the Gospel, that I may while I have Life Improve it aright; May
have all my Sins Pardoned and may be Accepted through CHRIST JESUS. Amen.

New* London, May 3. 1738. Katherine Garret.


