ALL SLAVE-KEEPERS That keep the Innocent in Bondage, APOSTATES

Pretending to lay Claim to the Pure and Holy Christian Religion; of what
Congregation so ever; but especially in their Ministers, by whose example the
filthy Leprosy and Apostasy is spread far and near; it is a notorious Sin,
which many of the true Friends of Christ, and his pure Truth, called Quakers,
has been for many Years, and still are concerned to write and bear Testimony
against; as a Practice so gross and hurtful to Religion, and destructive to
Government, beyond what Words can set forth, or can be declared of by Men or
Angels, and yet lived in by Ministers and Magistrates in America.

The Leaders of the People cause them to Err.

Written for a General Service, by him that truly and sincerely desires the
present and eternal Welfare and Happiness of all Mankind, all the World over,
of all Colors, and Nations, as his own Soul; BENJAMIN LAY.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed for the AUTHOR. 1737.

THE PREFACE.
Impartial Reader,
THESE Things following are so far from offending or grieving my very dear true
and tender Friends, called Quakers, who love the Truth more then all, that it
is by their request and desire that they are made public; for I can say in the
Truth before the Lord, that I love them in and for the Truths sake, and covet
their sweet Unity, and pure Fellowship in the Gospel, more than my natural
Life, and all things in the World, without it or them, my record is in Heaven.

I say for the Truth, and Friends sake, these things are exposed, and I my self
likewise, although not without some fear and trembling, for fear I should hurt
Truth's cause, which is God's cause, I being and seeing myself so very unfit
almost every way, as a Man, yet I can truly say as a Christian, I believed it
my Duty, but made not haste, for the Lord my good God, the Truth knows, that I
have prayed unto him earnestly, many Days and Nights, with great concern of
mind, that he would be pleased to raise up and concern some worthy Friend or
other, of more repute and Esteem amongst Men; for I know my self to be so very
mean and contemptible in the sight of Men, almost in every respect, so that I
might and do much question the Event, but shall leave that to the Lord, to whom
faithfulness and obedience is required; and no true Peace without it. For I
have found long ago, the saying of Truth veryfied, He that loves any thing more
than me, is not worthy of me: I have often thought of Moses's Prayer, and
Gideon's request, when the Lord was about to send them to deliver his People
from Captivity, and many other worthy Men, ay, and Women too, which are
mentioned in Holy writ, and many Thousands more no doubt, which we have no
Account of there, for it is believed, we have but a very small part of what
have been written, and yet full enough, if we will but be faithful; my dear,
tender and wellbeloved Friends, I beg, I pray, and beseech us, let us be more
faithful I entreat, in bowels of Love, let us be faithful, let us be faithful,
let us be faithful to God in all things; and then I know blessed be his pure
Name, which is the Truth, that when the Scourge shall come, he will secure us
in Life or in Death; and that will be enough for us, so be it, says my Soul,
and is in humble request.

Benjamin Lay.
Abington, Philadelphia County, in Pennsylvania, the 17 th, 9 th Mo. 1736.
ALL SLAVE-KEEPERS, etc.
Some Observations written 1718, by William Burling, now living, for aught I
know, on Long Island, concerning Slave-Keeping, taken from his Writings. [The
same Year I was convinced of the same Hellish Practice, I then living in
Barbados. Benjamin Lay.]
An Address to the Elders of the Church, upon the occasion of some Friends
compelling certain Persons, and their posterity, to serve them continually and
arbitraryly, without Regard to Equity or Right, not heeding whether they give
them any thing near so much as their Labor deserves.

MY Dear Beloved Friends, and Elder Brethren, whom as it behooves me, I would
entreat as Fathers, a weighty Concern from the Lord, is and has been at times
for many Years on my Spirit, in consideration of this unchristian Liberty,
being indulged in the Church, for it is in itself none of the least of the
World's Coruptions, [no, say I, but the greatest, that ever the Devil brought
into the Church in America;] and indeed the Lord by his Spirit, manifested the
Evil to me before I was 12 Years of Age, and since from time to time, I have
had drawings in mind to reprove and testify against it, nor have I been
altogether silent, although much discouraged by reason of it is being practiced by
so many Friends, yea Elders too, and though I have formerly thought it strange,
that the Church did not exclude it, by her discipline, and fix the Judgment of
Truth upon it, yet now I am sensible such a thing is not easily done or
accomplished, there being so strong opposition in many, that it cannot be
brought to the Test, and Judgment brought forth into Victory in the cause at
present, without danger of much ^^rife and disorder in the Church, which is
generally hurtful wherever it prevails; therefore to be carefully avoided;
however I hope we are all unanimous in our judgment, that whatever Friend has
any thing from the movings of the Spirit of Truth to communicate to his
Brethren, either by word or writing concerning this or any other matter, ought
to be allowed and received in his Testimony, and borne with by his Brethren, so
long as he keeps to the counsel and direction of the Holy Spirit, and therefore
delivers nothing but what is according to Truth, although it happens to be never
so contrary to the interest or inclinations of the Readers or Hearers.

Now I would such Friends as Practice or Plead for the abovesaid Sin, Evil or
Liberty, to consider sollidly what Hardship they impose on such as are
concerned to bear Testimony against it; for while so many Friends continues in
said Practice, no one can reprove it, and give it that deserved Character,
which is agreeable to it is nature, without implicitly condemning many of his
Brethren, [Ministers and all say I, for they are the worst Enemies in this case
the Church has to War with, or that Hell itself, or Devil can procure in this
case. (This is very pinching, B. L. can thou prove thy Allegations?) if not,
what will become of thee? Never fear, Friend; Fear suprises, thou knows who;
but the Truth is stronger than all the Powers of Hell. Blessed for ever is the
God of Truth, the Truth of God, the Truth which is God: So be it, says my Soul.

Brethren and Elder Brethren, as Transgressors in this Thing, which is very
hard to do, yet if the Lord require such a Thing or Testimony of any Friend he
is necessitated so to judge his Brethren, or quench the Spirit in its Motions,
in his own Heart; for the case admits of no medium. Again I entreat those who
slights and disregards the Testimony of any whom the Lord concerns to appear
against this fleshly Liberty, to consider whom thy oppose, and withstand; and
the inspired Apostle speaking concerning the Lord's Instruments, whom he was
pleased to make use of, says 1 Thessalonians. iv. 8. He therefore that despises,
despises not Men, but God, who has also given unto us his Holy Spirit. O!
That I could prevail so far with all my dear Brethren, that none would any more
plead for or endeavor to defend the aforesaid unjust Practice; neither
endeavor to shield it from the judgment of Truth. We may do well to remember,
the Devil is the Author of all Sin, and Sin is the Transgression of the Law.

No greater nor no better Law, say I, than to love God above all, and all our
Fellow Creatures as ourselves; these two contain Law, Prophets and Gospel, do
to all as we would be done by. No greater Sin Hell can invent, than to profane
and blaspheme the pure and Holy Truth, which is God all in all, and remove
God's Creatures made after his own Image, from all the Comforts of Life, and
their Country and procure for them, and bring them into all the miseries that
Dragons, Serpents, Devils, and Hypocrites, can procure and think of; these
things are carried on by Christians, so called, and Ministers too, in the very
greatest appearance of Demurity and Sanctity in the whole World, that ever I
read or heard of; God which is the Truth, says we shall not eat this cursed
Fruit; our Ministers say we may eat, and lawfully too; which shall we believe?

We pretend not to love fighting with carnal Weapons, nor to carry Swords by
our sides, but carry a worse thing in the Heart, as will I believe appear by
and by; what, I pray and beseech you, dear Friends, by the tender Mercies of
our God, to consider, can be greater Hypocrisy, and plainer contradiction, than
for us as a People, to ref^^e to bear Arms, or to pay them that do, and yet
purchase the Plunder, the Captives, for Slaves at a very great Price, thereby
justifying their selling of them, and the War, by which they were or are
obtained; nor does this satisfy, but their Children also are kept in Slavery,
ad infinitum; is not this plainly and substantially trampling the most Blessed
and Glorious Testimony that ever was or ever will be in the World, under our
Feet, and committing of Iniquity with, both Hands earnestly? Is this the way to
convince the poor Slaves, or our Children, or Neighbors, or the World? Is it
not the way rather to encourage and strengthen them in their Infidelity, and
Atheism, and their Hellish Practice of Fighting, Murdering, killing and
Robbing one another, to the end of the World.

My dear Friends, I beg, I would entreat, in all Humility, with all earnestness
of mind, on the bended Knees of my Body and Soul; willingly and with all
readiness, sincerely, if that would do, that you would turn to the Lord, the
Blessed Truth, in your Hearts, for Direction, for Counsel and Advice; that you
may quit your selves like Men, honorably, of this so Hellish a Practice.
Especially, you that have the Word of Reconciliation to preach to the Children
of Men; and if you have any true tenderness of the Love of God in you, as I
right well know, blessed be the Name of the Lord, all true Ministers have, you
my dear Friends, consider waightily of these important concerns, and quit
yourselves of yourselves and Slaves; for a good example in you might do a great
deal of good, as a bad one will do, and has done a very great deal of mischief
to the Truth; for the Eyes of the People are upon you, some for good, and some
for Evil.

And my Friends, you that have Saves, and do minister to others in our
Meetings, consider I entreat and beseech you concerning this thing in
particular. What Burdens and Afflictions, Bondage, and sore Captivity you
bring upon your dear and tender Friends, and keep them in, which cannot touch
with this vile and Hellish Practice, but are constrained to bear Testimony
against it, as one the greatest Sins in the World, all things considered: And
against you too in some sort, as being in the practice yourselves, of that
which is directly opposite to your own Pretensions, and a very great stumbling
Block in the way of honest, godly Inquirers, which want Peace to their Souls.

What a great Strait these tender hearted mourning Souls must needs be in,
think ye, betwixt Love and Duty; they love you dearly for the Truth sake, and
yet think it their Duty absolutely in the Fear and Love of God, to testify
against the Sin, and you for continuing in it.

Dear Friends, what Peace can you have, in thus afflicting your Fellow Members;
even the same Testimony they have with you in Meetings, where is the Blessed
Unity and Fellowship, you have been preaching so many Years, as being sensible
of one another exercises, Bearers of one another's Burdens, having a deep
sense and feeling of others infirmities, or afflictions, or troubles.

What is become of this blessed experience, my Friends? is it all lost as to
you, i^ so I must give my judgment, that you? have not your constant dwelling
in him, that was touched with a feeling of our infirmities, tempted in all
cases like unto us, yet without Sin; and so are his Saints, for they are all of
one, and they live with him Night and Day, in his blessed Kingdom, which is
within; and they love him dearly, they cannot avoid it, for he first loved them
or us, and we cannot keep back our love from him any more than we can hinder,
or stop the Rivers and Streams from running into the Ocean: For we having
received all from him, of course all return or run to him again; it is the
nature of his essence or divine being.

What from Heaven is, to Heaven tends,
That which descended, the same again ascends.
What from the Earth is, to Earth returns again.
That which from Heaven is, the Earth cannot contain.
The white Stone that has the new Name in it, is given to him that overcomes.

None can Read but he, or she that receives it.

He that overcomes, shall sit with me on my Throne, as I in my Father's Throne

He that over-cometh, shall eat of the hidden Manna.

He that overcomes, shall have right to the Tree of Life, which stands in the
midst of the Paradise of God, in the Heart.

W. B. In his Preface, mentions something of the Lord's dealing with him, when
he was about about 10 or 12 Years of Age, which I suppose is about 50 Years
ago, then there was much Discourse about many English and Dutch People, being
taken into Turkey, or by the Turks into Slavery, and sold in the Market, for
Term of Life, as Beasts in the Field. As our brave Christians so called do, and
have done for many Years in Philadelphia, and elsewhere in America, by the poor
Negroes, which is ten times worse in us; all things considered; but what
crying, wringing of Hands, what Mourning and Lamentations there was then by
their Relations, Wives for their Husbands, Parents for their Children,
Relations for their Friends, one Neighbor for another! what exclaiming against
the Turk for his Tyranny and oppression, and cruel Dealing and Treatment,
toward their Friends, and may be cursing and calling for Damnation to him and
his God too.

Well my Friends, consider of it, and make an Application suitable to the
circumstance of your own Slaves; for I do not believe in my Soul, the Turks are
so cruel to their Slaves, as many Christians, so called, are to theirs, by what
I have seen and heard of, in Barbados, and elsewhere; and I give you a reason
for it. I was near 18 Months, on board a large Vessel of 400 Tons in a Voyage
to Scanderoon in Turkey, with ^our Men that had been 17 Years Slaves in Turkey,
and I never did understand by them, that they were so badly used as the poor
Negroes are by some called Christians.

Ezra vi. 21, 22.

And the Children of Israel, which were come again out of Captivity, and all
such as had separated themselves unto them from the filthiness of the Heathen
of the Land, to seek the Lord God of Israel, did eat.

And they kept the feast seven Days with joy: For the Lord made them joyful,
that had separated from the filthiness of the Heathen.

It is like there was some, which came out of Babylon, and out of Captivity in
some sort, which nevertheless would not separate themselves from the filthiness
of the Heathen. For long custom had made it so familiar, easy and sweet unto
them, that they would not leave it, no not for the Joy of the Lord. And some of
these were Priests and Levites, for ought we know; for they loved their Heathen
Whores, I believe, and other filthiness, which the Heathens allow of, almost as
well as our Spiritual Priests and Levites, under the Gospel of Christ, do their
Slaves, it is a very plain, parallel case, when neither the one or the other
will part with them, no not for the Joy of the Lord. Then to be sure not for
the comfort and Joy of their Brethren, and Sisters, who have been in sore
Bondage, and Thraldom or Captivity, on that sinful Hellish Account,
Slave-keeping, for 50 Years and more; and that by their Brethren and Sisters,
which keeps them and will keep them, in spite of them, let them beg or pray, or
say, or do what they can or will.

And all this while Preach, as their tender Friends do; who cannot touch with
that sinful practice to gain the whole World; profess the same Pure Truth,
Gospel, Unction, Annoynting, Urim, and Thumim, Measure of the Spirit, pretend
they have received the same Manifestation and Dispensation to preach, as their
innocent Friends, Brethren, or Sisters have.

And really to give them their due, they come very near them in Words, for what
I and some others can see; for we have observed them strictly as is our duty
upon the Truths Account, which suffers so much by them, and their sinful
practice, as well as their oppressed, and greatly afflicted Brethren and
Sisters.

I say these Nocents, come very near the Innocents in Words, except here and
there, they do stretch and strain, rest, part, pervert, misconstrue, and
misapply Scripture to serve their covetous Ends, or to justify the Practice,
or to extenuate the Crime. If these things be done by them intentionally, Matt.
xxiii. 13, 14.
we may say, without Breach of Charity. They shall receive the greater
Damnation; as Christ himself said in a case almost as bad.

Many worthy Men have borne Testimony against this ^oul Sin, Slave-keeping, by
Word and Writing; some of which I have noted elsewhere; but especially Ralph
Sandiford, amongst many others, has writ excellently well, against that filthy
Sin; far beyond what I can or do pretend to, being a Man of so very mean a
capacity, and little Learning; but as I firmly believing it to be my duty, in
the sight of God; I endeavor to do what I can and leave the Event to the Lord.

And as for any Slave-keepers, who are not impartial in the case; to say that
R. S. writ in a Spirit of Bitterness, or that he did not end his Life well. As
to the first I have read his Book carefully, with Attention; and I do not
remember a Word in it contrary to Truth, or any such sharp invectives, as may
easily be found in Holy Scripture, both Old and New Testament; although I have,
it is true, because, I believe in my very Soul the cause does require it, for
the nature of those Beasts, is in those Men, which do trade in Slaves; and much
worse.

As to the second objection, that he R. S. did not end well; let such be
entreated to remember the Man of God, that was sent by the Lord, from Judah, to
declare against the Altar; or that of Bethel, and the Miracles wrought by him,
the King's Hand withering, and restored by his Prayer; the Altar spliting, and
since that his Prophesy fulfilled; of Men's Bones, being offered or Burnt
thereon.

And yet this Man of God, never came to the Supulchers of his Fathers, by
reason an old lying Prophet leading him out of the way. So was flain by a Lion*

Judah's Prophet, had but one Hypocritical lying old Prophet, that we read of,
to lead him out of the way. But R. S. had, and we now have, abundance of Old
and Young pretended Prophet's Prophets to lead us, poor Creatures, ou^ of the
way.

And so they will many, unwary Souls; except the Lord our God b^ pleased to
open our Eyes, to see the Hellish Cheat, and devilish Delusion; b^ which many
of our poor Friends have been seduced, and lead aside in the Hellish Darkness
or Smoke, of the Bottomless Pit; for whom my very Soul i^ grieved. God Almighty
is my Witness.

The 8 th Mo. 1736. Benjamin Lay.

R. S. abovementioned, was in great Perplexity of mind; and having oppression,
which makes a wise man Mad, b^ which he was brought very low, with many Bodily
Infirmities, long before he died; his Book largely set out, read (...) without
partiality or prejudice, which is always blind, or very short-sighted and you
may excellent weighy matte^^ find in it; he was a very tender hearted Man
before he came amongst Friends, as well as after, as I have heard from many
honest Friends, that had much dealing, and intimate Conversation with him, for
many Years, which are now living. But before he died, by reason of his sore
Affliction of mind, concerning Slave-keeping, as in his Book largely appear,
and Infirmity of Body, he fell into a sort of Delirium: However I do believe if
he had lived he would have overcame it; for I went to see him several times, a
little before he died; I am not ashamed, nor afraid, to write it, although I be
censured for it, as I have been with some others, for going to see him, although
in Affliction, the only time for Visiting, as I humbly conceive, if we go in a
right mind.

But O! Say the Slave-keepers, and must confess in their Hearts that Book, The
Mystery of Iniquity, as it is called, and titled; it tells Tales to the World,
sets forth to the World's People, what a Parcel of Hypocrites, and Deceivers we
are, under the greatest appearance and Pretentions to Religion and Sanctity
that ever was in the World; we'll censure him, and his Book too, into the
Bottomless Pit, if we can, though we cannot disprove a Word in it, for it is
undeniable Truth, and so unanswerable; for we never understood, that any one
ever attempted it, or so much as spoke of it; but what of that, Brethren, if it
be sinful we are in the Iniquity, in the practice of Slave-keeping; and our
Children by our means, encouragement, and appointment, not only so, but our
Fathers before us, worthy Men, in their generating Work; and some of them
Ministers and Elders, with all Men of renown. They found the sweetness of it,
and so do we, and we will continue in it; let who will or dare say nay; we'll
condemn R. in his Grave, and his Book and all that favor it, or promote its
being spread abroad, or being read, that exposes us, and we'll expose that, or
especially him that writ it, by Callumnies and Slanders, and Surmises, and by
insinuating all that ever we can hear or think of against him, now he is in his
Grave; especially we did it before, but now more safely, for he cannot
contradict or oppose us now; so that if we can but render him odious in his
Character, his Book will be invalidated in course with us that hate it, although
we cannot disprove a tittle of it, especially with our Brethren in strict
Unity, in this Iniquity, and foulest of Sins, the Negroe Trade.

If this practice can be proved to be the greatest of Sins (as may easily be
done) considering it is Root and Branch, and all the sad Fruit it brings forth;
yet we read Christ died for Sinners, and he can forgive the greatest, as well
as the least.

It is true some may say, Christ in his great Love, has forgiven Sins,
committed in time of great Darkness and Ignorance; but if we should commit the
grossest of evils now, in the clear light of this Gospel Day, continue in them,
and plead for it too, we should withstand spiritual Moses, and our Damnation
would be just.

Some indeed may insinuate this Chapter against us, Numbers xvi.
but what if Korah the Son of Izhar, did with his Company 250 withstand Moses,
they were Princes of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation, Men of renown,
as we are many of us: What if Moses did fall on his Face, and weep before the
Lord, with Aaron and others? And if the Lord threatened to to destroy the whole
Company; What of that? he did not: What if the Earth did open, and swallow up
Korah, and a Fire from the Lord consumed others; yet we may take notice, the
Congregation were not pleased; the rebellious party, for they murmured against
Moses and Aaron, saying, Ye, have killed the Lord's People, or People of the
Lord.

It is also true, there was 14700 slain by the Plague, of the Murmurers and
Rebels, beside them that died about the matter of Korah. But it is not, nor
has been so with us as yet, and we have been in this practice, that some few
poor Fellows, make such a stir about, above 50 Years; poor People which cannot
purchase them, so pretend Conscience in the case, but let them that oppose our
practice in Negroes, bring those things upon us as abovementioned; if they can,
then People may believe they are in the Right, and we in the Wrong.

But let us consider by the way, Matt. xli. xxvii, xlii, xliii.
Brethren, if we go on arguing after this manner, some may be ready to object,
that Blasphemous Saying of our Elder Brethren, concerning Christ: If he be the
King of Israel, let him now come down from the Cross, and we will believe in
him. It is true the Objection is just, and it may be a Parallel Case: But what
shall we do, for People begin to see as clearly as when the Sun is in its
Meridian Throne, young People as well as old, That this Practice of ours is as
directly opposite to our holy Principles as Light is to Darkness, Christ to
Belial, or God to the Devil.

If the Case be thus, dear Brethren, as to be sure it is, how shall we stand
our Ground? our Ground, I say. It is true we may keep our Meeting Houses for a
time, and we may join Forces with them that are in the Negro Practice; in
strict Unity among our selves, and with any other dear Friends of our own Mind,
Relations, Customers, Chapmen, Workmen, or others that we can have any
Influence over, Quakers or no Quakers, if they will but come to Meetings and do
as we do, if not, say as we say, and plead for said sad Hell-Practice; or at
least, Gentleman-like, connive, palliate and dissemble to extenuate the Crime;
and we will with all our Might, Interest and Strength, put forth, keep out, and
hinder or prevent coming into our Synagogues, any that will oppose or condemn
our Practice, or us for continuing in it. And further, as we have the Power of
Discipline, our Ministers are forced, and must of Necessity come to us for
Certificates or Letters to recommend them, which we are very ready to give if
they are fit for our Turn and Practice, and very good ones too. If they be but
very poorly qualified in Words, and worse in Conduct and Life, yet they will
serve a small Turn. When he or she have got their Passport, one or other of us,
a trusty Brother without Doors, will give them the Hint before they go forth,
that if they should chance to meet, or go on purpose where they are to be found
or heard of, any of the heavenly Party that is against our hellish Practice (or
hellish Party that is against our heavenly Practice, for it is heavenly to us,
it is Comfort and Joy to us, and we delight in it greatly and will keep in it)
and may be, My dear Friend, we will give thee a little Memorandum in thy Pocket
of Places and Persons, which will be a great Help to thee, poor dear Creature,
thy dear Mind being so much exercised about other good Things, that thou may
chance to forget some other Matters though they be weighty: And wherever thou
meets with any such as are abovementioned, when thee comes near their
Dwellings, which thee may chance to hear of by strict Inquiry, inform Friends
against them whatever thee can; though the Name of an Informer be odious, yet in
some Cases it is thought necessary, as in this: But be sure when thou comes in
thy Testimony, thresh 'em going, spare 'em not; and if any speak to thee after
Meeting about it, say, If the Coat fits thee, put it on; I had no Particular in
View. This is and has been the Practice of many worthy Friends, so they hide
themselves, and strengthen our Party bravely; so be it, say they.

Matthew. vii. 17. Every good Tree brings good Fruit, but a corrupt Tree
brings evil Fruit. Is there any eviler Fruit in the World than Slave-keeping?
any thing more devilish? it is of the very Nature of Hell itself, and is the
Belly of Hell.

Verse 18. A good Tree cannot bring forth such cursed evil Fruit as
Slave-trading, if this Practice be the worst, the greatest Sin in the World
(with what goes and grows with it) as it is, to be sure. But if any should say
that good Trees, good Men, may be in this Practice and encourage it, and if
they may bring forth such Fruit, what Fruit must evil Trees bring forth. This
will not hold by a Parity of Reason; comparing Things with Things by an
Equality, it will not hold good in any Case, much less in a religious Sense;
there it is very odious, to be sure, and is very foul in Ministers especially.
Let them keep on their Sheeps Clothing, and preach and pray as long as they
may, until their Tongues are weary, and their Hearers Ears too; they will preach
more to Hell, I firmly believe, than they will to Heaven, while they continue
in said Practice.

For Custom in Sin, hides, covers, as it were takes away the Guilt of Sin. Long
Custom, the Convenience of Slaves working for us, waiting and tending
continually on us, beside the Washing, cleaning, scouring, cooking very nicely
fine and curious, sewing, knitting, darning, almost ever at hand and Command;
and in other Places milking, churning, Cheese-making, and all the Drudgery in
Dairy and Kitchen, within doors and without. And the proud, dainty, lazy
Daughters sit with their Hands before 'em, like some of the worst idle Sort of
Gentlewomen, and if they want a Trifle, rather than rise from their Seats, call
the poor Slave from her Drudgery to come and wait upon them. These Things have
been the utter Ruin of more than a few; and yet encouraged by their own
Parents, for whom my Spirit is grieved, some of which were and are Preachers in
great Repute, as well as others.

Now, dear Friends, behold a Mystery! These Ministers that be Slave-keepers,
and are in such very great Repute, such eminent Preachers, given to
Hospitality, charitable to the Poor, loving to their Neighbors, just in their
Dealings, temperate in their Lives, visiting of the Sick, sympathising with the
Afflicted in Body or Mind, very religious seemingly, and extraordinary devout
and demure, and in short strictly exact in all their Decorums, except
Slave-keeping, these, these be the Men, and the Women too, for the Devil's
purpose, and are the choicest Treasure the Devil can or has to bring out of his
Lazaretto, to establish Slave-keeping. By these Satan works Wonders many ways.
These are the very Men, or People of both Sexes, that come the nearest the
Scribes and Pharisees of any People in the whole World, if not sincere: For the
Scribes were exact and demure seemingly in their Appearance before Men,
according to Christ's Account of them, and yet the worst Enemies the dear Lamb
had, or that the Devil could procure for or against him. And I do surely
believe that one such as these, now in this our Day, in this very Country, does
more Service for the Devil, and Hurt in the Church, in Slave-keeping, than
twenty Publicans and Harlots: For by their extraordinary Conduct, in Hypocrisy,
smooth and plausible appearance, they draw into the Snare almost insensibly,
and so beguile unstable Souls before they are aware, which is sorrowful to
consider as well as write, their Example being much more powerful than others.

And Friends, what I touched at a little before, concerning the delicate
Damsels, or fine idle Dames, it may be pretty much like it with the young Men,
and may be the old ones, that have their Negroes to Plow, sow, thresh, winnow,
split Rails, cut Wood, clear Land, make Ditches and Fences, fodder Cattle, run
and fetch up the Horses, or fine curious pacing Mares, for young Madam and Sir
to ride about on, impudently and proudly gossiping from House to House,
stuffing their lazy ungodly Bellies. Then old Sir Master calls, Negro, fetch my
best Gelding quickly, for me to ride to Meeting, to preach the Gospel of glad
Tidings to all Men, and Liberty to the Captives, and opening the Prison-Doors
to them that are bound; but I Will keep thee in Bondage nevertheless, help thy
self if thee can. I charge thee to work very hard when I am gone, and besure be
very ready to wait on me and my Children when we come home, if they come with
me, or else wait till they do come, and then take their Horses, and look well
after them; and then make haste in, all of ye, and be ready to wait upon us,
and keep good Fires above stairs or below, and mind your Business well, or I Will
take a Course with you; don't think that I Will give 70 or 80 l. apiece for you,
for nothing but to ly lazying about like Gentlemen, doing nothing, you shall
work now you are young, for when you are very old, you will not do much, I
suppose, and then you must be maintained, you and your Wives and Children and
Children's Children; and if you don't behave your selves well, you will be but
badly provided for, I believe, when you are past your Labor, whatever you are
now.

Dear Friends, these Things are true in Fact, and have been the Ruin of many,
Body and Soul, and will be of more I greatly fear; beside and above all, the
foul Stain it brings upon the pure, blessed, unchangeable TRUTH.

And my dear, my very dear Friends, I must say, I must say, and it is the
Experience and certain Knowledge of my own Soul, that except People will be
willing to come to a Separation, a Separation, a Separation, from this Thing,
to wit, Negro Practice, they never can nor will see the Evil of it, as it
really is in itself.

I say my own Experience when I lived in Barbados about 18 Years ago, where we
had much Business in Trading, and the poor Blacks would come to our Shop and
Store, hunger-starved, almost ready to perish with Hunger and Sickness, great
Numbers of them would come to trade with us, for they seemed to love and admire
us, we being pretty much alike in Stature and otherways; and my dear Wife would
often be giving them something for the Mouth, which was very engaging you that
read this may be sure, in their deplorable Condition. Oh! my Soul mourns in
contemplating their miserable, forlorn, wretched State and Condition that mine
Eyes beheld them in then, and it is the same now, and will remain except the
great almighty Being, either immediately or instrumentally shall be pleased to
put a Stop to it; for they are yearly by Shiploads poured in upon, and received
by the People, many Thousands in one Year, Year after Year, as is thought, up
and down America, besides what vast Numbers are increased by Generation daily.
O Lord God Almighty, where will this Practice lead us that are called thy
People, Dearest God, and make so great a Profession of being lead and guided by
thy eternal Spirit, which is the glorious Truth unchangeable and precious, and
without End. But I trust, dearest One, thou will be pleased to stop and end
this Practice, that is more like Hell than Heaven, to be sure.

I having made a little Digression, may resume the Matter relating to my dear
Wife, and the Negroes. She was a tenderhearted Woman, and, as I said, would be
very often giving them something or other; stinking Biscuits which sometimes we
had in abundance, bitten by the Cockroaches; or rotten Cheese, stinking Meat,
decayed Fish which we had plenty of in that hot Country; so my dear sweet
Sarah, she would hand it to them, here and there to those that she thought
wanted it most, though all wanted enough, God Almighty knows, except here and
there a favorite Slave, one of an hundred or thousand, may be, kept for their
Glory and Pride to wait on them, amongst their proud, lazy, dainty, tyrannical,
gluttonous, drunken, debauched Visitors, the Scum of the infernal Pit, a little
worse than the same that comes off their Sugar when it is boiling, which is
composed of Grease, Dirt, Dung, and other Filthiness, as, it may be Limbs,
Bowels and Excrements of the poor Slaves, and Beasts, and other Matters, but
this I say serves exceeding well to make Rum of, and Molosses, for that is the
Use it is put to, with other Ingredients pretty much like it; and these People
in the Islands may laugh at us for being ridiculously infatuated, to send away
our excellent good Provisions, and other good Things, to purchase such filthy
Stuff, which tends to the Corruption of Mankind, and may be send us some of the
worst of their Slaves, when they cannot rule them themselves, along with their
Rum, to complete the Tragedy, that is to say, to destroy the People in
Pennsylvania, and ruin the Country. Dear Friends, or any of my
Fellow Creatures, I must confess I am apt to digress, but when such dangerous
Filthiness comes in my Way, I think it my Duty to make it appear if possible to
others; for it is so to me, exceeding sinful above Measure, I will assure you,
more than what I can speak or write abundantly; if it should be so to you, I
hope you will endeavor to avoid it, and pray for Heavens Assistance, without
which all is nothing. As to what was touched on before, when my dear Sarah had
given to them what she thought fit within-doors, we have taken some more of the
same sort and thrown it into the Street, stinking as to be sure it was, yet the
poor Creatures would come running, and tearing, and rending one another, to get
a part in the scramble of that which I am sure some Dogs would not touch, much
less eat of, their poor Bellies were so empty, and so ravenous were they, that
I never saw a parcel of Hounds more eager about a dead Carcass, than they
always were. This Scramble was commonly on a First Day, before we went to
Meeting, which was their Market Day, as well as their Hallowing-Day, when they
are exempted from their Labor, they come down to Town, many Hundreds of them,
they that could get or steal any Thing, a little Sugar, or Cotton, Ginger,
Aloes, Rum, Cocoa-Nuts, Pine-Apples, Oranges, Lemmons, Citrons, old Iron, Wood
for Firing, steal any Thing out of Houses, Yards, or any where, or any Thing
that was not too hot or too heavy, and bring it to Market on a Sunday, as they
call it, to get a penny, or something for the Mouth, and they that could not
get any thing to bring to Market, they would come to Town if possibly they
could hold out and keep from falling down and fainting by the Way, being
perished with Hunger and hard Labor the Week before; I say these very
miserable Objects that could get no Truck in the Country to bring to Market,
yet they would if possible come to Town, and see what they could beg or steal
there. (Who can blame them if it was ten times worse, they being under such
unmerciful Tyrants.) These Wretches being in Town in this miserable Condition,
with not a Crum of good or bad to put into their Mouths, ready to drop as they
walked or crawled along the Streets, they many of them hearing of us, for we
were very much known amongst them, they would come to our Door, if they came
before we were gone to Meeting, and there they would stand as thick as Bees,
but much more like Pharaoh's lean Kine, and I may say their Appearance was
dismal enough to move a very hard Heart; so we used to give them a little of
something at Times, as we found some Freedom, considering our Circumstances;
But if we gave to some, and did not to all, as to be sure we could not, oh how
the poor Creatures would look. I say many Hundreds would come and flock about
us; and them that received, O how thankful, with bended Knees; but them that
did not, what Words can set forth the dejected sinking Looks that appeared in
their Countenances. Shall I ever forget them?

Many of these poor Creatures, in Town and Country, were sent to Market by
their Masters or Mistresses, at other Times, and they would come to us to lay
out their Money, if we had such Goods as they wanted, and when they came in,
seemed to rejoice to see us together, we were so very much alike; and would
lift up their Hands with Admiration, and say, That ^ittle backararar man, for
so they call white People, go all over world see for that backarar woman for
himself. But we, alas! are parted!

Here Friends you may see and understand the powerful Influence long Custom,
Convenience, Intimacy, and Profit has to insinuate itself into our Affections;
for I have often heard my dear Wife say in her Lifetime, and express the
Danger she was in when living in Barbados, of being leavened into the very
Nature of the Inhabitants, Pride and Oppression: So that dear Creature, she
seeing the Evil and the Danger, she was willing and desirous to leave the
Island, and indeed so was I.

But, my Friends, here I must come to that that is not very agreeable to Flesh
and Blood, which is Confession of Sins: For although I never was Owner of a
Slave myself, and all Friends in Barbados could never persuade me to purchase
one, I humbly bless the Lord my good God for that, and this is now my Comfort
and dear Joy and sweet Experience: Yet I must confess, and I have not full
Peace without it, yet I may say I have been sorely grieved to see and hear the
inexpressible Cruelty, Torture, and Misery, these poor Wretches were and are
put to, Night and Day, yet although, as I have said, I saw and heard of such
very great Barbarity used toward the Slaves, Night and Day, yet for want of
dwelling near enough to the blessed Truth, I was leavened too much into the
Nature of the People there which are Masters and Mistresses of Slaves, though I
never had nor would have any of my own, but by conversing, trading, and living
daily amongst them, where there is vast Numbers, abundance coming daily to buy
Goods and to beg, some to steal, we had abundance stolen from us at Times, the
worth of ten, fifteen, or near twenty Shillings at a time, come into the Shop
whole Droves together, lay the Scheme I suppose, come by Appointment; when many
are come in they seem in great haste, one would say, Serve me, another, Serve
me, serve me; come sometimes by twilight and within Night, then was their Time;
so when we were in a hurry, one would run away with one Thing, another with
another, and so on. Very much we lost to be sure. Sometimes I could catch them,
and then I would give them Stripes sometimes, but I have been sorry for it many
times, and it does grieve me to this Day, considering the extreme Cruelty and
Misery they always live under. Oh my Heart has been pained within me many
times, to see and hear; and now, now, now, it is so.

Shall we fetch and steal them out of their own Country, where God Almighty has
made them and placed them, and in taking of them murder many, very many, and
serve them that we take alive ten times worse; steal Husband from Wife, Wife
from Husband; steal the Children from their Parents, bring them here or
elsewhere amongst our extraordinary Christians, worse Thieves than the others
by far; they work 'em, whip and starve 'em almost to death, and if the poor
Wretch steal a little to satisfy Hunger, he is tormented without Mercy. Be
these Christians, and Ministers too, that encourage and plead for these Things?
It must be all a Lie, and that is of the Devil, for when he speaks a Lie, it
is of himself. Joh. viii. 44. I do believe in my Soul, if Christ was here in
that very Body, he would say as much to some Quakers as he said to the Scribes
and Pharisees in the eighth of John; if he the Devil be a Murderer and a Liar,
what are our Slave-Merchants? Is there a greater Lie in the World? 1 John ii.
4. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his Sayings, is a Liar. ver. 22. Do
not all Liars* deny the Father and Son? iv. 20. He is a Liar that says he
loves God, and hates his Brother. v. 10. He that believes not God, has made
him a Liar. What does our dear Slaves with their Slaves think of these Things:
As Solomon says, a poor Man is better than a Liar. Luke vi. 43, 44. a good
Tree bears good Fruit, and can a good Tree bear Negro-Trading for Gain?

Matthew. vii. 17, 18. A good Tree cannot bear evil Fruit.

Luke viii. 14, 15. Not many Slavek -- rs bring forth Fruit to Perfection.

Romans vii. 5. I am much afraid Sl -- e-k -- ng will bring forth Fruits to the
Death.

Romans vi. 20. Are not Sl -- e-k -- pers the Servants of Sin? 21. Are our S. K.
ashamed of their Sin? 22. Are our S. K. free from Sin? Tit. i. 9. Are S. K.
able to convince the Gainsayers? 10. Are not S. K. of the Circumcicision,
unruly vain Talkers? 11. Do not S. K. subvert whole Houses, for filthy Lucre?
12. Are not S. K. Liars, evil Beasts, slow Bellies? 13. Don't they deserve to
be rebuked sharply, as being very unsound in the Faith? 14. Don't these give
way to Jewish Fables, and turn from the Truth? What think ye, my Brethren? 15.
Unto the Pure all things are pure; if literally, then Robbing and Killing, as
well as Slave-keeping. 16. Do not these deny God in works and yet pretend to
know him? Tit. ii. 7. Have these Men sound Doctrine Gravity and Sincerity? 8.
Have not these Men of the contrary Part need to be ashamed, when we have so
many evil things to say of them, and very justly too?
Do these adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior with Slave-keeping? I think in
my very Soul, it is more agreeable to the Devil.

Prove. xxiv. 23, 24, 25, 26. He that says to such wicked ones, thou art
righteous; him shall the People curse, Nations shall abhor him. But to them
that rebuke them shall be Delight, and a good Blessing shall come upon them.

But, my Friends, you that practice Tyranny and Oppression for Slave-keeping is
such; he that assumes in arbitrary Manner, unjustly, Dominion over his
Fellow-Creature's Liberty and Property, contrary to Law, Reason or Equity, He
is a wicked sinful Tyrant, guilty of Oppression and great Iniquity: But he that
trades in Slaves and the Souls of Men, does so; therefore -- Beside, Friends,
the very Name of a Tyrant is odious, to God, to good Men, yea to bad Men too;
and the Nature and Practice is much worse.

And Friends, you that follow this forlorn filthy Practice, do you not consider
that you are opening a Door to others, or setting them an Example to do the
like by you, whenever it shall please the Almighty to suffer them to have Power
over us, as a Scourge to us for our Sins, what Reason then shall we have to
complain? If any of you ever read the History of the English Slaves in Algier,
how would you like that your selves? There was some Discourse of its being
printed in Philadelphia: I wish it might, for the sake of some. Lam. iv. 3. The
Sea Monsters draw out their Breast to their Young, but you draw out the Sword
to young and old, middle-aged and all (save what you cannot come at) or cause
it to be so done: and yet them that die by the Sword are better than them you
bring away and starve; for these pine away for want of the Fruits of the Field,
and by other Severities.

My dear Wife has often spoke of a Passage in or near Spikes's in Barbados;
going hastily into a very plain-coat outside Friend's House, there hung up*
Negro stark naked, trembling and shivering, with such a Flood of Blood under
him, that so surprised the little Woman she could scarce contain; but at last a
little recovering, she says to some in Family, What Is here to do* They began
exclaiming against the poor miserable Creature, for absconding a day or two,
may be by reason of his cruel Usage, as by this Barbarity we may imagine.

Another Piece of Barbarity, of one Richard Parrot a Cooper, which I knew; he
used to whip his Negroes on Second-day Mornings very severely, to keep them in
awe. It is usual for these miserable Slaves to get together on First-days, to
bewail and lament their forlorn Condition that they are in one to another. One
says, My Master very bad Man; another, My Mistress very bad Woman. This
Parrot's Negro, a lusty Fellow, a Cooper, and used to get his Master 7 s. 6 d.
a day, being valued at 100 l. or more; he says, My Master Parrot very bad Man
indeed, whippe whippe poor Negro evee Munne Morning for notin tall! me no bear
no longer. So he hangs himself on First Day at Night, because he would not be
whippee Munne Morning. This was while we lived in Barbados. I knew Parrot very
well, having been at his House; and abundance more of such like Things while we
abode there.

1736, the 29th of the 8th Month, this Morning between 2 and 3 this was written.

It arose in my Mind in Love of Truth, that as the blessed immaculate Lamb was
said John i. 14. to be the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace, and full
of Truth; so Slave-keeping and trading is the only Begotten of the Devil. full
of all Ungraciousness and all Untruth. The True Child and Heir of Hell, the
only begotten of the Devil, indeed, but not in Truth nor any part of it.

As it is written, Psalm. ii. 7. Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee;
so may the Devil say by Slave-keeping.

As God gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him might have
everlasting Life; so the Devil gives his only begotten Child, the Merchandise
of Slaves and Souls of Men, Rev. xviii. 13. that whosoever believes and trades
in it might have everlasting Damnation.

Again, it is written, 1 Cor. iv. 15. though you have ten thousand Instructors
in Christ, yet you have not many Fathers, I may say so, for in Christ have I
begotten you through the Gospel; so may many of our Ministers say to the
Negro-Traders and Keepers, You have we begotten through the Devil, by our Example
and Pleading for it, and by our Condemning and Disowning many worthy Friends,
of innocent Lives, for testifying against it, and against us for living and
continuing in it; but we will do it for all that. What do we care for their
Testimony? Shall we, our Wives, or Sons, or Daughters, when our
Fellow-Merchants (of Mystery Babylon the Great) come to visit us, run to wait
on them, their Horses, their Chariots and Equipage, Cooking, Sculling and
waiting? No, we despise it, and them that do it. We will have our Slaves and
Souls of Men to do it for us, as our Mother has and had in all Ages of the
World; and it was their Glory, and it is ours, and we will have it; and we, our
Wives, Sons, Daughters, Kindred, and our Fellow-Merchants, that are great and
honorable, Men of Renown, shall sit and live like Kings and Queens that know
no Sorrow.

I must confess, that as Paul had begotten one in his Bonds, for Christ's Sake
to Christ; so those abovementioned have begotten many, yea very many, in their
Bonds, for the Devil and Mammon's sake, to the Devil and his Kingdom.

We may safely say, without Breach of Charity, by these Prophets or Ministers
beforementioned, as Micajah said by Ahab's four hundred false Prophets, 1
Kings xxii. 23. that there is a Lying Spirit in the Mouths of all them that
keep or trade in Slaves, and say it is lawful in this blessed Gospel Day; let
them pretend to what they will or may; whether Hearers or Prophets, or
Preachers, although there be or should be four hundred or four thousand of
them, no matter for their great Number, the Truth is over them all; although
them that are and were out of the Truth have fallen, and may fall, by their
Means, by their lying Persuasions and lying Practice; I say their great and
lying Pretensions, have and may and will cause many more I fear, to fall, as
well as the other false Prophets did Ahab and many others, as we may read of in
Scripture and elsewhere plentifully, as in Case of Jezabel's eight hundred and
fifty false Prophets, which Elijah slew, 1 Kings xviii. 19.

Jerem. xiv. 14, 15, 16, 17. It is enough to make one tremble to think what
will become of those Prophets that prophesy Lies in the Name of the Lord, and
teach the People to keep Slaves in this pure Gospel Day; it has and does cause
the Eyes of many dear Servants and Handmaids amongst us to run down with Tears,
because of this sinful Practice.

I can truly say, I have had large and long Experience since I came into
America, that many of our Ministers and Elders are not only in the Bond of
Iniquity, but also in the Gall of Bitterness, and are as ready to smite as the
Son of Immer, although chief Governor in the House of the Lord, Jer. xx. 1, 2.
or as Zedekiah to smite Micajah on the Cheek, 1 Kings xxii. 24. Do but reprove
for these Things (Slave-Practice) and he or they will, if possible, bring you
into Bonds and Fetters, or put you into the Stocks, with or in the high Gate of
Benjamin, or some other way, although he dwells near and in the House of the
Lord.

Jerem. xxii. 13, 14, 15, 16. Woe unto him that builds his House by Iniquity,
and uses his Neighbor's Service without Wages, and gives him not for his
Work. Shall thou reign because thou enclosest thy self in Cedar?

Jerem. xxiii. 9. Is it not enough almost to break ones Heart, to see this
Practice of Slaves lived in and pleaded for by our Preachers and Elders?

ver. 14. Dear Friends, do not these greatly strengthen the Hands of Evildoers?

Ver. 15. Is not Profaneness gone forth into all the Land, by their Means?

Ver. 16. My dear and tender Friends, Should we or shall we always hearken unto
the Voice or Words of such Prophets that teach Lies in the Name of the Lord?

Deuteronomy. xxix. 18. Is not this Practice turning the Heart from the Lord to serve
the Idols of the Nations?

Then what a Root of Gall and Wormwood appears in these Negro-Keepers when they
are reproved, Ministers especially, to my certain knowledge, and long
experience.

In his excellent Song Moses lively sets forth the tender mercies of God to the
faithful; and his Vengeance against the unfaithful Slave-Keepers, all
unfaithful that profess Truth.

Deuteronomy. 32. 1. Give Ear, O Heavens, the Heavenly-minded, and I will speak.

Ver. 2. My Doctrine shall drop as the Rain, and Dew, but then it is upon the
tender Plant, not the old sturdy Oak; it will do no good there, I fear.

Ver. 6. Do ye (Slave-Keepers) thus requite the Lord, for all his Favors, O
foolish People and unwise.

Ver. 20. What shall we do, Dear Friends, if the Lord should entirely hide his
Face from us, because of this thing Slave-Keeping, and some others almost as
bad.

Ver. 30. How shall one chase a Thousand, while this Trade is practiced by us
as a People.

Ver. 31. But blessed be the pure Name of our God, the Negroe-Keeping Rock is
not our Rock, even our Enemies themselves being Judges; they are Enemies,
though called Friends.

Ver. 32. For their Vine is the Vine of Sodom, and their Fruit bitter as Gall
and Wormwood, as is very well known.

Ver. 33. Their Wine, their Pleasures, and Profit, gotten by Slave-Keeping,
will be as the Poison of Dragons, and the cruel Venom of Asps, in the end, or I
am mistaken.

Ver. 41. Will not the Lord whet his glittering Sword, and take vengeance on
such Enemies, that pretend to preach Truth, and practice a Lie, the greatest in
the World.

Job xx. 12. Though this wickedness Slave-Keeping, be sweet in the Mouth, they
can salve it with smooth Words, yet Torment is under the Tongue.

Ver. 13. Though he spare his Sin, and forsake it not; but keep it still within
his Mouth; will not confess how it is within him.

Ver. 14. Yet his Meat in his Bowels is turned, his pleasant Gain, gotten by
his Slaves, and swallowed down, it will bite as bad as the Gall of Asps and
Vipers Tongue within him, if not repented of and forsaken before Death; for
when Death approaches, Sin will sting.

Ver. 17. Such without Repentance and forsaking, shall not see the Rivers, the
Floods, the Brooks of Honey and Butter, that flow in a pure Conscience, and
Holy Souls.

Amos vi. 12. Have not some turned Judgment, in Discipline into Gall, and
Hemlock, which is bitter Poison.

Job xxi. 6, to 14. They that think they have the Blessing of God, with
Slave-Keeping, because they prosper in this World. Psa. xvii. 10, and lxxiii.
3. Let such be entreated to read these Scriptures, to the end; for says David,
I was envious at the wicked, or foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the
Wicked, and so goes on, very excellently indeed.

Habb. i. 3, 4, 16. Why do thou show me iniquity, Men are in it, therefore
wrong Judgment proceeds.

Isa. xxviii. 15, 17, 18, 19, 29, 21. You that keep Slaves, your covenant with
Death, and Hell shall be broken when the overflowing Scourge shall pass
through, then ye shall be trodden down by it; the Lord hasten the time, says
my Soul; for they lay Snares for him that reproves in the Gate.

Matt. v. 19. If they shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, that
shall break the least Commandment, and teach Men so to do; Surely they are the
greatest in the Kingdom of Hell, that break the greatest, and all of them,
them, and teach Men so to do: But Slave Trading Preachers does do so, therefore.

Matt. 21. 28, to 31. He that said he would not, and yet did the Will of his
Father was commended. But I believe these that say well sometimes in Meetings,
and do ill in Slave Trading; will come far behind Publicans and Harlots.

Luke 14. 33, 34, 35. He that forsakes not all, said blessed Jesus, cannot be
my Deisciple, Slave-Keepers covet all Body and Soul, Wives and Children of
their Neighbors; such unsavory Salt, good for neither Land or Dunghill. He
that has Ears to hear, let him hear.

9th Month, 1736, as I sat in Concord Meeting House, it was their Quarterly
Meeting; I may say it was a sweet and comfortable time to me; it came into and
arose in my mind, in Love of Truth, that if our Slave-Keepers had been, or now
would be faithful to God, the Truth, and would bring up their Negroes to some
Learning, Reading and Writing, and endeavor to the utmost of their power in
the sweet Love of Truth to instruct and teach 'em the principles of truth and
righteousness, and learn them some Honest Trade or Employment, and then set
them free; and all the time Friends are teaching of them let them know that
they intend to let them go free in a very reasonable time: and that our
Religious Principle will not allow of such Severity, as to keep them in
everlasting Bondage and Slavery.

This might according to my way of thinking, beget such Love and Tenderness in
them, toward their Masters or Mistresses, and to the blessed Truth for their
Sakes; that it might be a means to convince some of them.

And should they come to receive the pure Truth, in the Love of it; as, blessed
be the Lord, many of us have, and in that sweet Love, which is constraining,
come under a concern and necessity, to go and visit their Brethren, of their
own color, and Country, and Language, and preach the Gospel of eternal
Salvation unto them, from Sin and Captivity, both of Body and Soul, this would
be a glorious work indeed, and well worth our Friends pains, charge and time,
that they might spend about it; and the best compensation to God and Man, as I
think, that they can possibly make, for being so long in a practice that has so
much Wickedness attending of it continually.

Isa. 61. 1. As to this Chap. it is very excellently Prophesied of concerning
the true anointing, which is the Spirit, and is God, and was in Isaiah, and
filled him with Love, to preach good tidings to the Meek, and is of the same
Nature, in all People, in all colors, and Countries.

The many Hundreds of Thousands, that are now in Slavery, were they at Liberty,
as we are, had the same Education, Learning, Conversation, Books, sweet
Communion in our Religious Assemblies; I believe many of them would exceed many
of their Tyrant Masters in Piety, Virtue and Godliness; and their bright
Genius, which I know they have, would be inlivened; for I have converst with
many of them, for Liberty is Life, and Slavery is Death, nay the very thoughts
of it to a right thinking Animal, as Man or Woman.

Isa. 61. 1. Is this preaching glad tideings to the meek, as many of them are,
and ^ind up the broken hearted; to proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and
opening of the Prison, to them that are bound; and yet keep them in double
Bondage, Body and Soul, them and theirs for ever more. If there be greater
contradiction under the Sun; many dear and tender Friends are mistaken, as well
as myself.

Ver. 2. But how does Slave Merchants, proclaim the acceptable Year of the
Lord? to their Slaves the Day of Vengeance they may, and a long Day it is; but
I believe the Lord will repay it, though he suffers it long: But I pray and
beseech you; you hard-hearted Ministers, of all persuasions in Church and
State, that are Christians; how do you comfort all that mourn, and are in
Misery, as great for aught I can learn as any are that be under the very worst
of Turks, Jews or Infidels, in the known World.

But my dear and tender Friends, how does this cruelty and partiality agree
with our principles as a People, which have been preaching up Perfection in
holiness of Life, for near a Hundred Years, and the universal Love of God to
all People, of all colors and Countries, without respect of Persons: Have we
forgot this blessed Testimony for which our dear Friends suffered in Old and
New England?

The 2 d of the 9 th Mo. 1736.
IF Two-Weeks Meeting had had any thing material against me, or Monthly
Meeting; they should have appealed to Quarterly Meeting before we came away*
But some Friends have been the Instruments of the Death of my Dear Wife I
believe. Has it not been the Practice of the Nocent in all Ages, to lay Traps
and Ginns, to entangle and ensnare the Innocent? Did you not do so, two or
three of you, of the Monthly-Meetings, at the Quarterly-Meetings,
Yearly-Meetings at Philadelphia and Burlington; when I insisted of having the
Letter from Colchester read, did not you strenuously insist, that I should
consent that then the matter should be concluded in that Meeting so to go no
further; and you had got a strong Party there the same time, to conclude the
Business, according to your own minds; is not this laying a Snare? in the same
Meeting accusing me falsely, for seeking a Party to deter, any from speaking
their Minds; and opposed and hindered me from reading a Letter or two from
Colchester; which you knew you did not like to hear, because they would have
confirmed our Certificate more fully.

How did William Penn and William Mead, at their Trial, in the Old Bailey,
London, like such arbitrary Proceedings, as well as many, yea very many more of
our Dear and Worthy Friends and Elders, in the beginning, before and by wicked
unjust Judges, in Old-England and New England too, in particular, as the Book
of Sufferings largely sets forth, writ by George Bishop. But these things are
forgotten by many, that are doing the same thing themselves, according to their
power and ability: Let any Friend read G. Whitehead's Account of Friends
Sufferings, which is written in his Works. How many profuse, profligate
Creatures, have come in Servants to this Country, which have been stated not
only as Members, but Ministers in full Unity, in less time then I have been
here; is it not intolerable then, that three or four Men that has the Mark of
the Beast, and Number of his Name, Slave-Keepers, upon them in their Foreheads
should have the whole Rule of Discipline, and Govern contrary to all Justice
and Equity. Time for such old rusty Candlesticks to be moved out of their
Places, who have disowned many less Nocents then themselves; if it is not so
now, who will make me a Liar, and my Speech nothing worth. Job. 24. 2, 3, 4, 25.

ABINGTON. The 11 th of the 9 th Mo. 1736.
WHEN the strong Man armed keeps the House, his Goods are in Peace: Is not this
the Devil? is not Hell in the Soul his House? is not all his Goods Sin? is not
Slave-Keeping and Trading the greatest Sin in the World, when it is seen in the
light of Truth in all its parts? is not Truth the Light stronger then all? and
when this appears in the Heart, and shows the Creature, this Capital Sin, and
other Sins to be exceeding Sinful; does not the whole Creation, in the poor
condemned or damned Creature groan, to be delivered? then Hell Torments, the
Smoke and Darkness, of the Bottomless Pit arises and appears in the Soul; the
Creature by some Glimmering of the Light sees itself in Darkness, feels itself
in Hell tormented, then it cries to Light to appear more and more for its help,
and to bind the strong Man armed, the Devil, and cast him out and spoil his
Goods, which is Sin, and is the Devil's Furniture in Hell in the Soul, the
Devil's House, where he has had his Residence so long; so when the Devil sees
he and his Goods is discovered, which had been so long hid, and Ware appears in
the Smoke of the Bottomless Pit; and that he is like to lose one, or some of
his chief Subjects and strongest Forces; and his Kingdom, Heads, Horns and
Crowns are in danger, and all like to be lost; this puts all Hell in the Soul
in an uproar. I know what I write, blessed be the Light, the Way, and the
Truth; so here comes to be War in Heaven, Michael and his Angels fight, and the
Devil or Dragon, which is one, and his Angels fight; for the Devil, Dragon,
makes War with the Saints, and overcomes them that are not faithful, let them
have been professing and preaching Truth never so long, and never so eminent or
highly esteemed of; yet it may be said, Depart from me, I know you not, ye are
Workers of Iniquity. Hosea. 4. 1, 2 3, 7, 9. Ezekiel. 9. 4, 9. viii. 10, 11, 12.

I never read in History of the Waldenses, our first Reformers from Popery,
that they kept any Slaves; I have understood they were very temperate, not
eating Flesh, Milk or Eggs.

Something like John's Locusts and Wild Honey; and Daniel and his three Friends
Pulse and Water, Israel's 40 Years Eating Manna, and I think James our Lord's
Brother according to Josephus, ate no Flesh, and many Thousands more, I
believe, good Men and Women.

William Penn, in his No-Cross-No-Crown, that excellent Book, mentions the
Waldenses, with great esteem; as they are worthy.

Acts. 17. 26, 27, 28, 29.

I suppose the pure holy eternal Being, which made of one Blood all Nations of
Men to dwell upon the face of the Earth, did not make others to be Slaves to
us, any more then we to be so to them; if God has appointed the Bounds of their
Habitations, What Man fearing God, dare to remove or receive them when they are
removed?

How did many Dear Friends like to be banished from their Native Countries,
from Wives, Children and Friends, although but for a few Years, both from Old
and New England especially? are all these Things forgotten by us, and a
thousand times more; are the Progeny in this Age, doing the same Things
themselves, which their Progenitors so greatly complained of, and justly too;
but this Progeny have been and are acting a Thousand times worse, and more
cruelly; for our dear and worthy Friends and Progenitors were Banished from
England but for a few Years, and where they might and did Preach and help
forward the Gospel of Christ; but the poor Slaves and their Progeny, have been
Stolen, Banished, Tortured and Tormented, for ever more; to the great and
unutterable hinderance of the Blessed Gospel of Peace and Salvation, for which
our dear Progenitors, suffered so deeply by their Persecutors.

And this now is carried on, encouraged and done by them, that profess to be
lead by the same pure Holy Spirit, as their Progenitors were.

But my dear and tender Friends, you that are clear of this vile practice, I
pray and beseech you, especially that you keep so, and have no Fellowship with
such unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather, I say, rather reprove them, as
being worthy, wherever you come, for the Lord, the Truths sake.

The 22 d of the 9 th Mo.
WHEN I have mildly reasoned with some Friends concerning their Hostility, in
carrying a Person or Friend, if I may call him so, out of Meetings so often,
and keeping of him out by Constable and other ways; as at Philadelphia,
Burlington and Concord, etc. without so much as pretending they have used any
Gospel Order with him, in any Monthly or Quarterly Meeting, as a disorderly
Person.

O But say some, he is a very troublesome Person, and has been so for many
Years; and is too censorious about Trading in Slaves, or against Traders in,
and Keepers of Slavers; And positively affirms, that no Man or Woman, Lad or
Lass ought to be suffered, to pretend to Preach Truth in our Meetings, while
they live in that Practice; which is all a Lie.

And further, he boldly affirms, that no Person whatsoever has any Right, or
ought according to Truths Discipline, to be suffered to have the Rule and
Government, or any Part of it, in the Church of God, which is the Kingdom of
God, while he himself is in League with the Devil, and is managing the Affairs
of his Kingdom, which Slave Trading is, as has been proved.

But some that have not, and will not keep Negroe Slaves of their own, may say,
we must not be too censorious, for we are often at their Houses, and Eat and
Drink bravely, and have their Negroes to wait on us, our Horses, Wives and
Children.

Beside all these Things, we buy, sell, Trade, get Gain by and with them, we
must be careful how we offend our Benefactors, and Dear Friends. But here is
yet a stronger Bond than the other, Pleasure and Profit, we love to Sleep with
their Offspring, so they be but Rich; for many of us have joined Affinity with
these Ahabs (O that hard Word) and Jezabels for Gains, by marrying with their
rich Children, and if we become Prophets, and can prophesy such things as they
like, we shall be highly favored, and fed at Jezabel's Table, though we should
be twice 4500 of us.

What if he be as the Lying Spirit in the Mouth of all Ahab's Prophets, and
cause him to go up and fall at Ramah, being Damned; what if Jezebel be eaten
with Dogs, what care we for that.

What if Jezebel be eaten with Dogs, if we can get into their Estates and
Posessions; what care we? when they are dead and gone, they will not remember
our Lying Prophesies. 1 Kings 18. 40. Indeed we should be loath to be served as
Elijah did the Prophets, at the Brook Kishon.

2 Kings 10. 1, 5, 6, 7. We had rather destroy all the truly Begotten and Born
Heirs of God, and joint or equal Heirs with Christ, the Truth, which testify
against us, and our Slave-Keeping Practice.

Ver. 18 to 26. We to be sure would sooner destroy all the Royal Offspring of
Heaven, as our Elder Brethren, them wicked Elders in Ahab's time, Slew 70
Innocent Children, for fear of their own dear Lives; but John answered, and
served them accordingly: It Is true Ver. 25. and if it should be so with us, its
better to die by the Sword than by Famine, as the Scriptures speak; or
especially to be treated as many of our Brethren in this great Iniquity do
their Slaves, up and down in the World, and their Offspring, always repeated
and repeating for evermore, with all the Torture and Torments that Devil and
Dragon, Death and Hell can invent or devise, with all their Accomplices.

But although some of us, that are Negroe Masters and Traders, do allow that
the beginning of this Practice was of the Devil, and that he and we his
Instruments are now carrying of it on very powerfully, and as it had a
beginning there in Hell, so it must have an End.

Matt. 8. 28, 29. But the time is not yet come, therefore surely we may be
allowed to ask the same Question of Truth now, as two of our Elder Brethren did
formerly, which were possessed with Devils as well as we, what have we to do
with thee; Truth?

Mark. 5. 7, 10, 12. Art thou come hither to torment us before our time? and
all the Devils besought him, the Truth, saying, send us into the Swine; and
Truth gave them leave, and so he does now; for Truth had rather the Devil
should dwell in the Swine than in the Saints, for fear he should make the
Saints Swine again, as some were before they were cleansed.

Upon a time when I was reasoning with an eminent Preacher R. J. at his House
in Philadelphia, concerning that great Goliath, Negroe or Slave-keeping, which
has defied the little Army of the living God so many Years, and still
continues so to do.

He the said R. J. was pleased then and there to tell me, that I loved the
Negroes better than I did my Friends; and accused me at Stephen Jenkin's House,
before many Witnesses, of being the Death of my Dear Wife, and a Persecutor of
the Church; but before that I charged him with being instrumental of separating
my Dear Wife from me by Death, in Writing for a separate Certificate for my
Wife, to a Meeting to which we never did belong, as if he and two or three more
had a mind to separate us; which is now brought to pass.

I shall leave them to the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, if he will be
pleased to forgive them, I hope I shall in time. But these things must be borne
with I suppose, and more; when I have said to some Friends, Negroe-Keepers and
their Adherents, that it seemed a little strange or novel, that a Friend should
be hurried out of Meetings so constantly and roughly, before he be disowned, or
some way dealt with for some Disororder or other, contrary to the known and
acknowledged discipline of Friends as a People.

If thy Brother is overtaken in a Fault, go to him and tell him his fault,
between him and thee; if he hears thee thou have gained thy Brother; if he will
not hear thee, then take two or three with thee; if he will not hear them, then
take him to the Church; and if he will not hear the Church, then, not till
then, cast him forth. My Dear Friends, have any of these things been done to B.
L. and yet still continue to cast him out, cast him out, cast him out, he is a
troublesome Fellow, and has been so for many Years. Did our dear and well
beloved Friends in Boston 60 or 70 Years ago, think this a just way of
Proceeding, to be taken into Custody, put into Bridewell, Whipped severely, and
Banished the Town, time after time, without any legal Proceedings, only for
being obstinate Quakers, as they were pleased to call them; dare to come again
when they had Whipped them out of the Town so often. When I have put some Friends
in mind of this, concerning our Dear Tender Friends great Suffering in
New England, in a Book called New England Judged, some Friends have been
pleased to tell me that George Keith used to say so, or talk after that manner.
What he said I cannot tell, but by report, which is not always true; but this
of Friends Suffering in Boston is true, for I have been upon the Spot or Lot of
Ground, where the Dear Lambs were put to Death; for the Word of God and the
Testimony of Jesus Christ, the Truth.

As to G. K. he was an extraordinary Man, while he kept to the Testimony of
Truth in his own Heart; I do firmly believe, according to the Account of him by
Friends; and a great Sufferer for Truth, by Imprisonment, and other ways, and
an excellent Writer, and Minister in Defense of Truth's Principles for about 30
Years, as I remember; as many of his Books manifest, to Judgment of Men that
have read them, of right mind and good understanding in Things relating to
God's Kingdom; as his Revelation not ceased, his Way to the City of God, very
excellent indeed, and many more; while he dwelt in the Truth and walked in
Truth, he did well; but when he went from that, he was like the unsavory Salt,
good for neither Land nor Dunghill, and so it is now with some, or I am
mistaken. And so it has been with the very best of Men and Instruments that
ever were in the World, though they had been never so much enlightened or
illuminated from on High; they grow dark again, as they go from the Light, from
God, from Truth, which are one in Nature and Essence, although three Names, for
Men as Men do know that have good Natural Eyes, that the further they go from
the Light outwardly, the more they go into Darkness until at length they cannot
see any thing clearly, or at last not at all; and this comes upon Men because
they love Darkness, which is Sin, and they live in Darkness, and walk in
Darkness, and at last Darkness in Sin seems to be Light unto them. This is a
dreadful State indeed: O that it may appear so before it be too late, to some
poor Souls, is my true Desire for their eternal Welfare. Which I desire, as for
my own Soul.

B. L.

Now it is written by a Child, a Son and Heir of Light, for the Encouragement
of other Children and Heirs of Light: If you walk in the Light as he, God is
Light, and Light is God; you shall have fellowship one with another in God the
Light, and the Blood, the Life, the Light the Truth, shall cleanse from all
Sin, all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit. O blessed State indeed.

Now a certain Saint in Light, or an enlightened Saint, the same put the
Primitive Saints in Mind to stir up their Memory, and keep them in a watchful
frame of Mind; you that were once in Darkness, are now Light, in the Light, or
in the Lord, the same bids them walk as or like Children of the Light, and of
the Day, which is Light, and is to walk and work in as well as to live and
dwell in; and this is New-Jerusalem, the Church of the first or true Born with
God, the Light in Heaven, whose Gates are always open to Saints in Light, no
Night, no Darkness there, no need of Sun, Moon, Stars, Candles or Lamps, for
the Lord God, the Lamb, the Truth, the Light, is or are the Light thereof, for
evermore. Rev. 21. 2, 3.

And all that follow the Lamb, the Light, wheresoever he goes, are and shall be
the Citizens thereof forever. Now you precious Babes, Children, Sheep or Lambs
in Light, or by what ever Name you may be called, Ver. 7. yet you have but one
Name, and that is New, in the Light, and none can read and know, but them that
are in our Heavenly Father, New-Jerusalem, the Light, the Father and Mother of
us all. And you precious Favorites in or of the Light, although but very few,
a little Flock, and very obscure and hid, Rev. 9. 11. from the dark Mind, from
Darkness, the Devil, and Satan, Abaddon, Apollyon, Dragon, Serpent, Viper or
Hell, or by what ever other Name, is all the same; Truth faith, Fear not little
Flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom, the Light,
which never ends. Ver. 3. The Tabernacle of Light is with these, and in these
whether Male or Female, all one, in the Light, in the Life, in Truth forever.

You My Dear and inward Friends, have Right to feed in the green-Pastures of
Light, of Life; where none can make you afraid: No, No, there is Safety and
great Security in the Munition of Rocks, the Light, New-Jerusalem, which is
Heaven is in God, the Light, and the Light in it, Father, Word, and Spirit, the
Light, the Tree of Life in Paradise, in the Light, in God, in Heaven.

Rev. 22. And is Heaven, and Heavenly Food for Saints to feed of freely; this
is the Tree of Life, which bears twelve Manner of Fruit, and yields her Fruit
every Month, always ready, always ripe, fresh, green, pure and lovely to
behold, sweet and delicious to the Saints taste, to them that are clean, that
have been cleansed by the Light, by the Life of the Lamb, which follows him
through many Tribulations, wherever he goes and leads them until he brings them
into the Green Pastures of Life beside the still Waters of Life, of Comfort
indeed, the pure River of Water, of Life, which is with God, and is God, in his
Throne, in sanctified Hearts.

These, these blessed ones have Right to the Tree of Life, to the pure River of
Life, to Eat and Drink as much as their Vessels can hold at times, and
sometimes running over and flowing out, to them that are in the outward Court,
that is trodden by the Gentiles in this our Age; if happily they might be
entreated and prevailed with if possible, by tasting some Drops as it were
without, to turn into their own Souls, and wait there to be cleansed, that the
Fruition, the pure River, clear as Crystal, might run there freely and
sweetly, without Interruption.

If the little Touches, the earnest of this Heavenly River be so sweet and
precious, as to be sure it is, beyond all worldly Things; What must the
ever-flowing Fountain be, which springs continually in Holy Souls in eternal
Life?

O let the Inhabitants of the Tree, the River, the Rock, Sing aloud for Joy;
from henceforth for evermore: So be it, Glory, Glory, endless to the All in
All, says my Soul at times.

B. L.

The 27 th of the 9 th Mo. 1736.
THIS is Written in pure Love, concerning the Pure in Heart, of all Colors and
Countries in the whole World; these are the Dwellers in the Rock of Ages.

ABINGTON, The 7 th Month, 1736.
MY Dear and Well-beloved Friends; my Joy and the Crown of all my sweet
Delights in this World, I can truly say, is the true Unity with my true
Brethren, which are the true Church in God the Father, and he in them, ever
reigning in his own Blessed Kingdom, Body, House, Tabernacle, New-Jerusalem, or
a Tent, synonimous Terms; while Israel abode here, no Divination could prevail,
or enchantments against 'em; but when Israel, our Dear Friends, went out of
their Tent to look at, and long after the Pleasures, Pride, Profit and
Friendship of this World, then they came to be snared with this cursed Sin,
Negroe-Trading, as well as some other gross Sins, of which this is Chief,
considering the Hellish Train of Filthiness, which has, does, and ever will
attend it, and is inseparable from it; for it is granted by all sober wise Men
that truly fear God, and dearly love the Truth in Sincerity, and are well
acquainted with this foul Trade from the beginning, and in all its progressions
to this Day; I say such as have had a true Account, do know that those that are
employed in this Trade, are some of the worst of Men, and withal some of the
worst of Thieves, Pirates and Murderers, from whence our lesser Pirates have
proceeded. And many of these lesser Pirates have been punished with Death, and
some other ways; but the much greater Villains by far, not only go free but are
encouraged, and have been near 50 Years, if not more, by us as a People, by
buying of their cursed Hellish-gotten Ware, at a very great Price. And all this
Time pretending to the most holy pure Religion in the whole World, to do unto
all, as we would they should do unto us, and as James writes, to Visit the
Fatherless, and Widow, in their Afflictions, and keep ourselves unspotted from
the World; but I know no worse Engine the Devil has to make Widows and
Fatherless Children, and to bring into Affliction and Bondage, and sore
Captivity indeed, than this Hellish practice in Pennsylvania, Negroe-Keeping.

But these Hellish Miscreants, these Men-Stealers, pretend they fetch away
these poor Creatures, that they may not kill one the other, when they are the
Murderers which sets 'em to the Work (a cursed work it is) for as I have had
an Account, near 35 Years ago, when 10 or 12 Sail of Vessels come on the Coast
of Guinea, and they cannot catel Negroes enough to Freight their Vessel by the
Sea side, and in Rivers where they send their Boats in Search and Pursuit of
them, where they are acquainted; for they being used to the Business know where
to go; and to find out some old Negroes that they have been used to trade with,
which will bring off in Canoes, their Wives or Children, or their Neighbors
Wives, and Children if they can catch 'em in Woods, or any where else, so bring
'em and sell them to our brave Christians, which come there with Ships for that
purpose. -- O brave! give 30 s. for a Negroe and sell him for 30 l. or 40, 50
or 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 l. or more: Who would but be a Trader in Slaves and
Souls of Men, although he goes to Hell for it, and in the mean time intail an
Iniquity on his own, and his Neighbor's Posterity to their Destruction and the
Ruin of the whole Country beside.

Above 30 Years ago, when I was a common Sailor, I had this Account, and
likewise by some Sailors on Board Capt. Reeves, coming this Voyage to
Philadelphia, who had been at Guinea, and I suppose had been Pirates, they did
acknowledge they had been taken by them.

These vile Fellows on Board Capt. Reeves, in their Drink used to tell what
cursed Work their former Captain and Salors made with the poor Negroes in their
Passage, for their Lusts; the Captain 6 or 10 of 'em in the Cabin, and the
Sailors as many as they pleased; with much more too ^oul for me to mention, or
for chaste Ears to hear.

But I pray, I beg, and beseech you my Friends, in the pure Love and Fear of
God; consider what part have true Believers with such Infidels, or Christ with
such Belials, or our Holy pure God with such unholy impure Devils, until we can
join these together; now we can never reconcile Slave-Keeping with our
Principles; we may as well say as Solomon of an Harlot, their Steps go down to
Death and their Feet take hold on Hell.

Now my dear Friends, let us consider the matter a little further, concerning
these Men-Stealers, and weigh it in the Balance of the Sanctuary, which is
Equity and Justice. Consider I say, the different circumstances of times and
things; it may be these wicked Creatures have been unhappily brought up to the
Black Art, most of their Life time; my Soul pities them on that Account; had
they had that good Education, Conversation, Books and Mutual Love, in Holy
Illuminations, sweet Communion together in our solemn Meetings and Gatherings
together, and the Heavenly Showers which many times, yea very often and
frequent to my sure and certain Knowledge, and to the great mutual sweet and
heavenly Comfort of my poor Soul, with many more of my dear Friends; I say the
many Heavenly Showers that have dropped as the Dew, and distilled as the small
Rain, in our tender Souls immediately, many times, yea innumerable, and
instrumentally, by the Blessed Messengers of Peace and Salvation, which were
sent by the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity and dwells in Light,
who had a tender regard Blessed by his Holy Name, to those Poor Men and Women
too, that were Poor indeed, and truly contrited, and sat trembling before his
Divine and Glorious Majesty, ready to receive him that was and is the Word that
made all Things; and when they had received him, they or we, We were made to
rejoice with Joy unspeakable, being filled with him that was, and is, and ever
will be the Glory and true rejoicing of his People, and dear Children, all the
World over; that can appeal to him that knows all Things, that they love him
more then all things here below, yea than their natural Lives.

Shall we I say as People who have been Blessed with so great Privileges, and
high Favors, forsake the Holy Commandment of Loving God the Truth above all,
and turn to worship for covetous ends, the worst Idol that ever the Devil set
up in the World.

Sure those wicked Men abovementioned will rise up in Judgment against us; for
had they been so highly favored in all respects, as Friends as a People have
been, who knows but they might have been as great Saints as any in the Church
of Christ at this Day; for had Friends stood faithful in their Testimony
against this Practice from the beginning they might have convinced many, and
stopped 'em in their career; but now they may say, and that truly too, we have
been a means to encourage and strengthen them in their wicked ways; for when
they brought in a Cargo of Blacks, who more ready to purchase them, and at a
great Price, than the Saints, or them that seem so, and would be thought such.
Well my dear and tender Friends, although I touch thus close to ease my
afflicted mind, which has been tossed as with a Tempest at times, above 17
Years, on this sad Account Slave-Keeping, yet I write not this of all by no
means, I know and be-believe there is many Friends, that dare not touch with
it, for any Profit whatsoever. I do hope there is some Thousands will not bow
the Knee to this Baal, nor kiss his Lips for an Ease or Gain. It has been said,
that all do not see it so great a Sin as I and some others make it; and for
that reason with others I think it my duty to write and speak the more about it
where I come, that Friends and others may be better informed. Some have
insinuated, as if the Primitive Saints kept Captive Slaves; this is hellish
Censure indeed, to accuse the greatest of Saints with the greatest of Sins;
whose Damnation is just, and their reward shall be according to their Works;
for they were without Spot, then free from the greatest Spot; holy, as he is
holy; perfect, as he is perfect; He that Sanctifies, and they that are
Sanctified, are one-Blessing and Honor, Salvation and Glory to our God, for
evermore, Amen, says my Soul.

Cursing and Dishonor, and Damnation is to the Devil and Satan, and his
Instruments, that Preach such Doctrines; for they that are Born of God Sin not,
neither can they, for his Seed remains in them; they cannot Sin, because they
are Born of God.

And now my dear Friends and others, you that came in Servants to this Country,
and Slaves, although for a short time by your own Consent too, for you to plead
for Negroe-Keeping, is almost intolerable.

I say, you that came here poor, vile, miserable wretches, destitute and
folorn, and here you were kept to hard Labor, which was good for you, and
brought you to a sense of your filthy, abominable, undone, and woeful cursed
condition which you, many of ye had been in, then O then many of you came to
consider of your ways, and were wise in turning to the Lord, into your own
Hearts by the moving and rising of his own blessed Light, Life, Grace and pure
Love there in your own Souls, which was as a Light shining in a Dark Place,
your Hearts dark indeed, by reason of Sin, and that filthy Life which you had
lived; you came to be burdened with it, and seek relief in turning to the Lord
in your Hearts, where he was and is to be found, blessed be his pure Name which
is his Essence or divine Nature, manifest within Men; so when you came to this
good experience, you came to love the Society and follow the good example of
our worthy Elders, very commendable in you to do, which first settled in this
Country; you came to live sober lives, and by your industry, the Almighty
favoring, some attained to very large possessions here, being a large Country
and few People, but now more numerous, so no occasion for Negro-Slaves; for had
this Land been covered with 'em as it is now in some Places, and too much here
already, how would you have come to this greatness; you might have perished for
want of Business to purchase necessaries. Let it never be forgotten by you, I
beseech and pray ye for the Lord's sake, and for your own and your Childrens
sake, that are coming up in vast Numbers, as well as them that are, or may
become Servants hereafter, with many, yea very many of your own Children, which
is very likely by the wicked ^oul courses many of our Youth take, they may be
brought to the same Misery and extremity as you were, by their foolish Lusts
and vanities; my Soul mourns in contemplating of it, and is in sore distress
and misery, with many of my dear and inwardly beloved Friends, Male and Female,
on this sad Account, as well as other gross Sins, many dear tender Souls in our
Society, reproachfully called Quakers have writ and bore Testimony against this
Sin at times, near 50 Years, but were reproached for that likewise; but some
are gone to their Graves in Peace; many yet living; as in Pennsylvania, Jersey,
Long Island, Nantucket, Old England, which I have been with at their Houses,
and their Writings are extant at this time to my certain knowledge, although
many poor seeking Souls, that are bewildered by this wicked Hellish Sin in our
Ministers, Slave-Keeping, will not believe or cannot believe it, but rather
believe we approve of it as a People with one consent unanimously. When some
Friends have been reasoning with some Sober People of other professions in my
hearing, concerning the Pride and Covetousness of their hireling Preachers, and
concerning Truth's Principles, they have had nothing to say for the one, or
against the other; but whether shall we go, say they, we do not approve or like
keeping Slaves, it is not doing as we would be done by ourselves; and your
People are as greedy as any Body in keeping Negroes for their Gain, (it is too
true) but not all said I, no say they again, who shall we believe, we are sure
and do know, that your Preachers and Elders* Chief Leaders have 'em; answer was
made, not all, for some have testified against it, as a very henious Sin, for
many Years, Year after Year; and are gone to their silent Graves in Peace, and
many yet living amongst us, as above is mentioned. Why then, say they, do you
not separate. Here it is thus written, Wherefore come out from amongst them,
and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will
receive you. 2 Cor. 6. 13, 14, to 17. read the next verse with attention, in
the fear of the Lord.

I know no worse or greater stumbling Blocks the Devil has to lay in the way of
honest Inquirers, than our Ministers and Elders keeping Slaves; and by
straining and perverting Holy Scriptures, Preach more to Hell, than ever they
will bring to Heaven, by their feigned Humility and Hypocrisy.

Satan put to his last Shift, or the Devil working wonders, by a seeming Gospel
Ministry of great repute; for by their keeping of Slaves, they carry on his
Work, and uphold his Kingdom. We read, Rev. 12. 3. to the end, That the Dragon
drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and did cast them to the Earth with
his Tail, the vilest part of the Beast. Let him that reads understand; the
Stars were Men that had been enlightened, and it has been the Judgment of
worthy Men, in many Ages of the World, that a false and fallen Ministry have
been the greatest Instruments of Evil, that ever the Devil brought into the
Church of Christ, as may be seen in Eusebius's Church History, Francis Howgil's
Works, G. Fox's Journal, and in many more beside, which I have by me; does
largely set forth that false and fallen Ministers are the worst Devils, and
Dragons, and Serpents, the Woman or Church has to War with, by reason of the
Power they have with the beastly Nature, in their ignorant Hearers, and foolish
bigoted Crowd; such as have itching Ears, and shallow Crowns, carnal Minds,
and looser Lives; such being Born after the Flesh, are very ready to join with
the Serpent, to persecute him that is Born after the Spirit; it was so, it is
so, and it will be so. The Dragon, and the Beast joining Forces, have great
Power to make Rents in the outward Church, and Divisions, and sow discord
amongst weak Brethren, but the truly Wise in Heart, I know will beware.

But as to those Dragon, Slave-Keeping Preachers, that are now making War with
the Woman, these fallen Stars they say they have been enlightened, and received
part of the Ministry; we will allow it, for God Almighty has been very good and
kind to them, and is still long suffering; So Judas their elder Brother was
enlightened too, as much and more than they, for ought I know, but he repented,
and returned his cursed Gain, and made Confession of his soul Sin, which I fear
is more than they will do in haste, so much worse than Judas they are, for they
Crucify the Truth daily, and put it to open shame.

I have understood lately, that some have made their Wills when they were Sick,
to set their Negroes free at such an Age, 30 or 40, after their Death; that
will not salve the Sore, it is too deep and rotten, God will not be mocked so,
nor Wise Men neither; they rather think of the old Proverb, it may be.

When the Devil was Sick, the Devil a Monk would be,
But when the Devil was well, the Devil a Monk was he.
Acts. 2. It is written, when the time of Pentecost was fully come, there was
People of many Nations gathered together, to hear the Apostles, and all heard
in their own Tongue the wonderful Works of God. And if they were now here in
Pennsylvania, they might hear and see the wonderful Works of the Devil; Men and
Women preaching up the purest Religion in the World, and live in the greatest
of Sins at same time, the Mother of Enormities, says

B. Lay.

I do firmly believe in the Secret of my Soul, before the Lord, that
Slave-Keeping and Trading, with what has and now does daily attend and
appertain unto it, is as great a cause of the Sins of Sodom, as any thing is or
ever was in the whole World.

The 30 th of the 10 th Mo. 1736.
I DID not know but I had done Scribbling about Slave-Keeping, but this Day
calling to see our Friend J. R. at his House in Philadelphia, who was newly
arrived from Bristol, in Old-England; and he speaking of the Negroe, or Guinea
Trade, said, while he was in Bristol four or five Weeks, there was fitted out
for that Trade nine Sail; and he told me according to Account he had there,
that there goes from Bristol about 50 Sail in a Year for Negroes: And I suppose
some plain Coat-Men are concerned in it there as well as at Leverpoole,
Barbados, and elsewhere; now if each of these 50 Vessels carries 300, some
carry manymore, it comes to 15000 Souls Yearly, Stolen by BristolMen; and if
there should be four times as many Stolen by Vessels from London, Leverpoole,
North-Britain, Ireland, Barbados, Jamaica and some other Places, as I suppose
there may, it comes to 75,000 Yearly, Stolen and kept in Iron Furnaces; so that
in 50 Years and more since Friends have been concerned in this practice, beside
what has been increased by Generation, comes to 3825000. Is not this ten times
worse than the Sins of Sodom and Egypt, Turk, Jew or Infidel?

So I inquired of the Friend what they did with this or such vast Numbers of
Slaves; he said, they carried them to Jamaica generally, and sold them to the
Spaniard for the Mines, or any Body else, I suppose, that will give most for
them, although they keep them and their Posterity, in their cursed Hellish
Iron-Furnace for evermore.

O Brave Christians for the Devil, and Protestants too! is this the way to
convince Papists, Turks, Jews, and Infidels of their notorious Wickedness and
inhumanity, when we encourage them in it all we can, by supplying of them with
Slaves, for our cursed Gain.

Several eminent Friends amongst us of great Note, have boasted in my hearing
of having Servants or Slaves born in their House, alluding to Abraham, for
keeping Slaves; but I cannot find in all the Scriptures that Abraham ever had
any Slaves; Servants he might have born in his House, and bought with Money for
a time; but I do not believe that righteous, perfect good Man would keep his
fellow Creatures in Bondage, them and their Offspring, for evermore. I have a
better Opinion of that tender hearted, good virtuous Man, that was styled the
Father of the faithful, by the Lip of Truth, and that rightly too, for so he
was; but the unfaithful hypocritical Pharisees, would, for a Cloak to their
Wickedness, have him to their Father; but Truth told them, if they were
Abraham's Children they would do the Works of Abraham; but now ye are of your
Father the Devil, and his Works ye will do. May not Truth say the same thing
now, of our Preachers and Elders, Keepers and Traders in Slaves for nothing but
their ungodly Gain. But what will our wicked Slave-Keepers get by flying beyond
Gospel and Law, to Abraham, to patronise their cursed infernal practice; but
what Truth said to the Jews, it will say to them, Ye are of your Father the
Devil.

Now Friends, you that are Slave-Keepers, I pray and beseech ye, examine your
own Hearts, and see and feel too, if you have not the same answer from Truth
now within; while you Preach and exhort others to Equity, and to do Justice and
love Mercy, and to walk humbly before the Lord and his People, and you
yourselves live and act quite contrary, behave proudly, do unjustly and
unmercifully, and live in and encourage the grossest Iniquity in the whole
World. For I say, you are got beyond Gospel, Law, Abraham, Prophets,
Patriarchs, to Cain the Murderer, and beyond him too, to the Devil himself,
beyond Cain, for he Murdered but one, that we know of but you have many
Thousands, or caused 'em to be so, and for ought I know many Hundreds of
Thousands, within 50 Years. What do you think of these Things, you brave Gospel
Ministers? that keep poor Slaves to Work for you to maintain you and yours in
Pride, Pride and much Idleness or Laziness, and Fullness of Bread, the Sins of
Sodom: How do these Things become your plain Dress, Demure Appearance, feigned
Humility, all but Hypocrisy, which according to Truth's Testimony, must have
the hottest Place in Hell; to keep those miserable Creatures at hard Labor
continually, unto their old Age, in Bondage and sore Captivity, working out
their Blood and Sweat, and Bowels, youthful strength and vigor, then you drop
into your Graves, go to your Places ordained or appointed for you; so leave
these poor unhappy Creatures in their worn-out old Age, to your proud, Dainty,
Lazy, Scornful, Tyrannical, and often beggarly Children, for them to Domineer
and Tyrannize over, cursing them and you in your Graves, for working out their
youthful Blood and strength for you, and then leave 'em to be a Plague to us;
and then of the abuses, miseries and Cruelties these miserable old worn out
Slaves go through, no Tongue can express starved with Hunger, perish with Cold,
rot as they go, for want of every thing that is necessary for an Humane
Creature; so that Dogs and Cats are much better taken care ^or, and yet some
have had the Confidence, or rather Impudence, to say their Slaves or Negroes
live as well as themselves. I could almost wish such hardened, unthinking
Sinful devilish Liars were put into their Places, at least for a time, in a
very hard Service, that they might feel a little in themselves, of what they
make so light of in other People; and it would be but just upon 'em, and indeed
why should they be against it, if the Negroes live as well and better than
they; but such notorious Lies will never go down well, with any Sober right
tenderhearted People truly fearing God, and that love the Truth above all; for
such I believe firmly, when they come to see, and rightly consider the vileness
of this practice in all its parts, and the cursed Fruit it brings forth, they
will never enter into it; and if they are in, will endeavor to get out as soon
as they can; for I do believe if all the Wickedness Tyrany, oppressions and
abominable Barbarities were written concerning this Hellish Trade, it would
fill a large Volume in Folio.

Many has said, they do not see it so great an Evil or Sin, that is,
Negroe-Keeping; who so Blind as them that will not see; but them that are
willing to see, I think it my duty to inform them what I can by Word and
Writing, and then leave it to the Lord.

There has been that has reflected on me, as if I wanted a Party, and to see
what Numbers I could get on my side; the living Lord God Almighty is Witness
for me, that I desire no Party, no Number but what is on the Lords side, and
his Party, which hold the Blessed Truth in righteousness and holiness of Life,
indeed and in Truth. I must confess I rather choose that Number, though but 5,
then 500 that hold the Truth in unrighteousness and in unholiness; and though I
could get the Friendship of the World and worldly Spirits, even them amongst
ourselves and all their wealth beside; which is gotten by the iniquity of
Slave-Keeping or otherwise; my witness is in Heaven; but I must expect a great
many more Slanders than these; nevertheless, I may say as it is written, of
Slave-Keeping Ministers, unto the Wicked God says, Psalm. 50. 16, 18. to the
end. What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy Mouth; when thou saw a Thief, then thou consents with him,
and have been partaker with Adulterers. Is not this very applicable to
Men-Stealers and Receivers.

But my dear Friends, as to my own part, if the Lord have stirred you up
against me, let him accept of an offering; but if it be only Men, I don't fear
in the least; but my dearest God, whom I serve with pure Love, fervently, will
deliver me, and in his own Blessed time establish me in my Inheritance with
Saints in Light. O that the Lord my God would be pleased to raise up some
Worthies, that be Valiant for the Truth, upon Earth, and bring them forth into
open view, in Sight of all Men, for his Name sake, which is the Truth. Hebrews.
11. 33, 34.

O that we may never sell our Birthright, for a morsel of Meat or any
Advantage of this beggarly World; for Truth said of Old, and says the same
now, He that will not forsake all is not worthy of me, all for my sake, deny
himself, take up the Cross and follow me.

Does Truth lead its Ministers to keep their fellow Creatures in Bondage and
sore Captivity, and their Offspring forevermore; if it does not, but the
practice be proved by the Blessed Truth itself to be contrary and directly
opposite to its divine Nature, as to be sure it is. Why I pray and beseech you
my dear Friends, are some that seem to be Truth's Ministers, so Angry, in a
Rage, and such a Fury, as many have been, and are to my knowledge, when they
have been reproved for, or opposed in this their wicked Sin, and very great
Iniquity; for so it is proved by Truth itself, Do to all others, as you would
they should do unto you: Truth says, Whosoever is Angry with his Brother,
without just cause, is in danger of Judgment: but who dare judge a Minister, he
will be in such a Fury if he is not true or reprove him, although he pretend to
be a Servant in the Church to us all. I know what I write by large experience,
for many Years, in several Nations, where my lot has been cast; so that I am
not as one that beats the Air in this cause, as concerning false Ministers; but
as to Truth's Minister, that always dwells in Truth and follows Truth
wheresoever he goes, Truth bears witness in me, that I love them and the pure
dear sweet Testimony Truth has given us, better than all things in this vain
World; now as concerning Offerers, Truth says, If thou bring thy gift to the
Altar, and there remember, thy Brother has anght against thee, leave thy gift
at or before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and
then, not before, come and offer thy Gift. O that these Things were well
considered by all Preachers and hearers; and that no Preacher might be suffered
to appear in our Meetings, but such as were clear of this Sinful Practice,
Slave-Keeping, as well as all others; then we should have but few Preachers for
a time, I think, but much better Preaching: Dear Friends, I myself do consider
how it stands, and what I may have to encounter with; but shall leave all to my
dear sweet and forever blessed Ebenezer, which has hitherto helped, blessed be
his Pious Name, Says B. L.

Is it not the Church's Prerogative, to judge of the Ministry and Ministers,
and to call them to strict Account, concerning their Doctrine, Principles,
Practices, and manner of living?

Genesis. 25. 6. Abraham's Concubines.

2 Samuel 5. 13. David took him more Concubines and Wives.

Ver. 15, 16. Left ten Concubines, to keep his House.

1 Chronicles. 3. 9. Sons of David, beside the Sons of his Concubines.

Solomon's Song. 6. 8, 9. Queens and Concubines.

Esther. 2. 14. Which kept the Concubines.

Dan. 5. 2, 3, 23. Then they brought the Vessels taken out of the House of God;
which was at Jerusalem, and the King, his Wives and Concubines drank in them.

So that many Wives, Concubines or half Whores, and Trading in Slaves, was, and
is the Heathen Practice, although permitted to the Jews for a time for the
hardness of their Hearts, As Christ well said concerning the Divorce.

So the Pope, Papists, and may be some others called Christians, have licked up
such like Filthiness, as Keeping Slaves, giving Licenses for common Stews,
Brothell Houses, which are common Whore Houses.

These things by him that is called his Holiness, and now Protestants have
licked up some of their Filthiness.

They Marry to Divorce, and Divorce to Marry again, as Seneca well observes.

Shall we as a People, professing such Purity, touch with such Filthiness.

1 Chronicles. 7. 4. 14. 3. Many Wives, Multitude of Wives. David took many Wives.

2 Chronicles. 11. 21. Took 18 Wives, 60 Concubines. Ver. 23. Desired many Wives.

Jeremiah. 35. 8. Drink no Wine.

Judges. 8. 30, 31. Gideon had many Wives.

Deuter. 17. 17. Neither shall he multiply Wives.

But the Children of Israel and Judah would not obey the Command, as well as
others; neither their Kings or Common People.

Formerly I suppose by Scripture, they that were accounted good Men, went to
Harlots sometimes, as well as kept Slaves, by what follows.

Genesis. 38. 15, 16, 25. Judah thought her to be an Harlot, and he turned in
unto her; very severe against her, for what he had done himself. Something like
poor David, would have her Burnt.

Lev. 21. 12, 13, 14. A Priest shall not take a Divorced Woman, or an Harlot,
others may.

Josh. 11. 1, 17, 22. They came into an Harlot's House, Rahab's, and lodged
there.

Judges. 11. 1. Jeptha was a mighty Man of Valor, the Son of an Harlot.

Judges. 16. 1. Then went Sampson to Gaza, and saw an Harlot, and went in to
her.

Joel. 3. 3. They have given a Boy for an Harlot.

What condition were these People in.

1 Corin. 6. Shall I take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of
an Harlot; or keep Slaves, God forbid, Says my Soul,

B. L.

Psalm. 141. 3, 4, 5. Set a watch O Lord, before my Mouth, keep the Door of my
Lips; incline my Heart not to any evil thing, to practice^ wicked Works, with
them that work iniquity by Slave-Keeping, or otherwise? And let me not eat of
their Dainties.

Ver. 15. Let the righteous Smite me, it shall be a kindness, and let him
reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not break my Head, for
yet my Prayer shall be in their Calamity. I hope, and Sincerely desire it may
ever be so with,

B. L.

Revelation. Chap. XII.
Some Thoughts concerning it.
Writ in ABINGTON, the 7 th Mo. 1736.
Verse 1. AND there appeared a great wonder in Heaven, the Kingdom of Heaven is
within says Truth, the true Church, a Woman Clothed with the Sun, Pure, Light
and Brightness, and the Moon under her Feet, all changeable things put down,
trodden under, in the Soul, and upon her Head a Crown of 12 Stars, very bright
and beautiful to behold.

Ver. 2. And she being with Child, cried travailing in Birth, until Truth was
formed in her, you little Children for whom -- til Christ be in you, the hope
and Glory, and pained to be delivered, brought forth into Victory over all Sin.

Ver. 3. And there appeared another wonder in Heaven, in the Heart of Man, and
behold a great red Dragon, a Furious Beast, and Bloody Monster, having seven
Heads, and 10 Horns, and 7 Crowns upon his Heads, it may be he had gotten seven
Victories over the Saints, but was overcome at last.

Ver. 4. And his Tail, the beastly Nature, drew the third part of the Stars of
Heaven, bright Men, and did cast them to the Earth, enlightened Men that had
received part of the Ministry, as Judas did, yet betrayed the Truth, for Gain,
as our Slave-Keepers do now. I know what I write, and the Dragon, the Beast,
stood before the Woman, which was ready to be delivered of the Heavenly Birth,
for to devour her Child as soon as it was Born, to be sure, forfear it should
grow strong and break his Head, and take away his Crowns, and Name of
Blasphemy, which he is so proud of.

These Men, these fallen Stars have been, and are accounted the greatest of
Antichrists, and worst of Devils; the true Church has had, and has still to
encounter with wicked Spirits in high Places; as I can if it be desired,
produce many worthy Authors to justify what I write.

In almost all Ages of the World, former and latter times, as many of our
worthy Elders G. Fox and many others sets them forth, and that very justly, to
be much worse and more dangerous than the common Hirelings of the times.

Ver. 5. And she brought forth a Man Child, begotten and Born of the Truth,
which is God, that good Spirit, in the the Soul of Man, who was to rule all
Nations with a Rod of Iron; in his own time, and her Child was caught to God,
and to his Throne, preserved in safety, and gloriously exalted in the Soul, and
the Soul in him; he that Sanctifies and they that are Sanctified are one.

Ver. 6. And the Woman the true Church, fled into the Wilderness, a very
Solitary Place to weep and mourn out her Days, fearing at times her Spouse had
forsaken her altogether, and then O the the distress she was in for her
beloved; but this was but to prove her constancy, where she had a Place
prepared of God, though she knew it not for a time, that they should feed her
there 1260 Days, if in adversity yet for her advancement in the End: Glory to
the pure Spouse, forever, and to the Bride, the Lamb's, Wife for she is
Beautiful.

Ver. 7. And there was War in Heaven, what in that peaceable Place, which we
read is so glorious and full of sweet delight, Michael and his Angels fought;
what must the Saints fight then for Heaven? Yea verily, or else they never
enter, and valiantly too, against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought, and his
(Black) Angels, for his Gain, to inslave the Bodies and Souls of Men, the very
worst part of the old Whores Merchandise, nasty filthy Whore of Whores,
Babilon's Bastards.

Ver. 8. And prevailed not, neither was there Place found any more in Heaven,
in the Hearts of the faithful; after they have gained the Victory, for the
Lamb, and his true followers shall be Victorious, in due time be made more than
Conquerors.

Ver. 9. And the great Dragon was cast out, that old Serpent that has bitten so
many, called the Devil, and Satan which deceives the whole World, no doubt
because the worldly, covetous Spirit is always blind, very easy to be deceived;
he was cast out into the Earth, and his Angels were cast out with him, out of
Heavenly into earthly Minds, where he made Devilish Work no doubt and not much
to be thought strange of; but that the Saints of the most high God should lick
up what some such earthly minds, in several Professions have spued up, as being
too Hellish, and too hard for 'em to digest, or for their Stomachs to bear, to
my thinking, is almost beyond compare, Slave-Keeping.

Ver. 10. And I heard a loud Voice, saying in Heaven, Now is come Salvation and
Strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ: All this is
experienced within, when Men and Women are born again, then Truth reigns and
rules in its own Kingdom, for the accuser of our Brethren is cast down; it was
so, and I with some of my oppressed Friends do hope it will be so again; the
Devil, which accused them before our God, Day and Night, does the same to this
Day, for if you reprove or admonish one of our Preachers which keep a Slave or
Slaves, he will be in such a rage and fury, beyond that moderation I think that
becomes a meek follower of the blessed Lamb of God, which suffered, the just
for the unjust, to take away all Sin, then surely Slave-Keeping the worst of
Sins; I say reprove one of these for that wicked Practice, and see if he will
not accuse you Day and Night, from Meeting to Meeting, in Meeting and out of
Meeting, right or wrong, as he thinks fit, and set his Brethren in Iniquity,
Slave-Keeping, Preachers, and others against you, all he possibly can, and so
proceed to get you disowned if possible: As several worthy Friends have been,
for Testifying against this sinful, foul Hellish practice, the Mother of
Enormities. We may safely say as Solomon of an Whore or Harlot, that stands by
the way side to catch who she can, their Guests are in the depths of Hell.

Ver. 11. And they overcame him the accuser, by the Blood of the Lamb, blessed
dear Lamb, O that all would follow him wherever he goes, Ministers especially,
and all others; then we should never Trade in Slaves, and Souls of Men, for
cursed Gain; and by the Word of their Testimony; they kept their Testimony
clear and pure it is like, or else they had not overcame.

And they loved not their Lives unto the Death; then they were not afraid to
reprove Wicked Men, it is very evident, or worse Preachers, which are a sort of
Devils, that Preach more to Hell than they do to Heaven, and so they will do
forever, as long as they are suffered to reign in the worst, and Mother of all
Sins, Slave-Keeping.

Ver. 12. Therefore rejoice, ye Heavens, and all ye that dwell in them; they
have great cause so to do, that know their warfare to be accomplished, and Sion
in the Soul to be a quiet Habitation, free from the accuser of the Brethren,
these do no evil, commit no Sin; But Woe to the Inhabiters of the Earth, and of
the Sea, which are People, for the Devil is come down unto you, having great
Wrath, because be knows he has but a short time. Great Wrath indeed, and so
have his Ministers too, although they seem, and would be thought to be meek
followers of the Lamb, yet do but reprove 'em for their gross Sin, and tell
them they are the strongest Instruments in the Church that the Devil has to
uphold and carry on, and continue that Hellish Trading in Slaves and Souls of
Men; and let 'em know that they are the very greatest stumbling Blocks, the
Devil has to lay in the way of Honest Inquirers, and you shall soon see what
metal they are made of; yet they have cast down many wounded, yea many strong
Men it is thought have fallen by their means, as Solomon said of an Whore.

Ver. 13. And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the Earth, he
persecuted the Woman that brought forth the Man Child. When the Dragon, Beast,
Serpent, Whore, and false Prophet, all one, saw he was discovered by some
Members of the true Church, the Woman man that brings forth the Man Child the
true Heir of God and joint Heir with Truth or Christ, all one; then he shows
himself in his proper colors in his natural element, Hellish, as it is; to
persecuting of the Woman he goes, the true Church, that brings forth the Man
Child, Christ, God, and Man. Them that read, let them understand in Spirit.

Neither enter themselves, or suffer others; as Christ said of former
Hypocrites, we may safely of these latter ones.

Ver. 14. And to the Woman were given, two Wings of a great Eagle, that she
might fly into the Wilderness, into her Place; where she is to be nourished,
for a time, and times, and dividing of times, from the face of the Serpent.

Great Wings may signify swiftness and strength but where shall we fly, but to
the Lord, our Rock, for nourishment and strength; the Lord in his wisdom may
have been pleased to hide some from the face of the Serpent for some time for
Reasons best known to himself, but now I believe the time is near at hand, that
some may or must come forth of the Wilderness, yet leaning on their beloved, to
meet the Serpent, although with their lives in their Hands, not loving their
lives unto Death.

Ver. 15. And the Serpent cast Water out of his Mouth as a Flood after the
Woman; out of the soul Mouths of his Instruments, Lying, Slandering and false
accusations, persecuting with the Tongue until they have Power to proceed
further; that he might cause her, the Church to be carried away of the Flood,
of their Lies in Hypocrisy, which they are very generous of.

Ver. 16. And the Earth helped the Woman, and the Earth opened her Mouth, these
Messengers of Satan, false Ministers became so notorious wicked, in Lying,
Slandering and false accusing, and other vile Practices, that the very earthly
minded opened his Mouth, to plead for the Woman, the true Church; and swallowed
up the Flood, which the Dragon cast out of his Mouth, made it appear that those
things were false which the Serpent in his Instruments had accused her of.

Ver. 17. And the Dragon was wroth with the Woman, and went to make War with
the remnant of her Seed; very true, War is his natural element, killing and
taking the Plunder is his Hellish delight, since he was cast unto the Earth
again. Pretty much like our Slave-Traders, Killers, Stealers, Thieves and
Receivers, Cousin-germans all, the Devil's own Children. Let 'em pretend to
what they please, Preachers or Hearers, Professors or profane, all that help
forward that Work of Hell, they was wroth with the Woman, and remnant of her
Seed, which keep the Commandment of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, which always testifies against such Hellish Practices, in every
appearance, for they that worshipped the Beast or his Image, or received his
Mark or Name in his Forehead or in his Hand, the same shall Drink of the Wine
of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture, into the Cup of his
indignation; Cups are wicked Men; What does our Slave-Keeping Preachers think
of these Scriptures? Do they believe, or are they Infidels, and Atheists in
disguise? They that have this blessed experience, they Sing the Song of Moses
and the Lamb. Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11, 16. 2. 19, 20. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4.

If this, Revelation 13. should be proved applicable to our present
SLAVE-KEEPERS, what will they do, my Soul is concerned for 'em on the Truth's
Account.
Verse 1. AND I stood upon the Sand of the Sea, by the side of the Water, which
are People, and saw a Beast, the beastly Nature, rise out of the Sea, or
People, having many Horns, and Crowns, Heads, very glorious, with the Name of
Blasphemy, the beastly Nature, Blasphemies against the Divine Nature, upon his
Heads, a top of all, he is not ashamed it is like but glories in it.

Ver. 2. And the Beast that I saw was like a Leopard, full of Spots, causes me
to think of the first of Isaiah; fest like a Bear, to tear and rent, Mouth like
a Lion, roar against all that oppose 'em; and the furious Dragon gave the nasty
Beast his Power and his Seat, his Chair to sit in as Chief Judge, and great
Authority, to rule over almost all the Congregation in America.

Ver. 3. And I saw as it were one of his Heads wounded to Death, some part of
the beastly Nature subd^ed, and the deadly wound was healed, he got over his
Convictions by Custom and Covetousness, and being a little wiser than some
others, in the Wisdom that is from below, he could Preach so excellently as if
he could almost make Slave-Keeping agreeable, with the Purity and Holiness of
the Gospel of Christ Jesus, our Lord, and all the World in the fallen Nature
wondered after the Beast.

Ver. 4. And they worshipped the Dragon, and the Beast, he being very terrible
to some, if not for Love, for Fear, as I have heard some Indians do the Devil,
saying who is like unto the Beast; who is able to make War with him, that is so
strong and reigns long.

Ver. 5. And there was given him a Mouth, speaking great Things, and
Blasphemies, to be sure or else it would not do, and Power was given to
continue 42 Months; but these has been longer, counting a Year for a Month: O
faith my Soul if it were the Will of God Almighty that it might soon come to an
End.

Ver. 6. And he opened his Mouth in Blasphemy against God, to be sure, because
God's ways and doings are Equity, pure, just and true; his ways Iniquity,
filthy, unjust, a Lie; and he Blasphemed his Name and his Tabernacle, and them
that dwelt in Heaven; the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and in Men, and they
that dwell with God in a pure Heart, they dwell in Heaven, and have fellowship
with the Father, and with the Son, and with Saints, and Angels, and they know
him that is true and are in him that is true. Hebrews. 12. 22, 23, 24.

Ver. 7. The Dragon, Beast, Whore, and false Prophet don't like this Doctrine,
and it was given him to make War with the Saints, and to overcome them, for a
time, or else how came so many worthy Friends to be disowned publicly, and
more, many more privately and subtly insinuated against, for no other Reason
that I can find, but for declaring against the vilest practice that ever the
Beast brought into the Church of Christ, in these Countries, Slave-Keeping; and
power was given him over all Nations, no doubt.

Ver. 8. And all that dwell in the earthly Nature unredeem'd, shall Worship
him, whose Names are not written in the Book of Life, of the Lamb, slain from
the Foundation of the World.

Ver. 9. If any Man have an Ear, let him hear.

Ver. 10. He that leads into Captivity, shall go into Captivity: What does my
dear Friends think of this, whose Salvation I desire, as my own Soul; he that
kills with the Sword must be killed with the Sword; do not we kill, when we
receive the Plunder and send the Villains for more, who are too forward of
themselves; Dear Friends, bear with me, are we not worse than they? we appear
very Religious and Demure, Preaching against Iniquity and Vice; they appear to
be what they are, the worst of Villains, the worst of Robbers and Murderers.

Ver. 11. And I beheld another Beast coming up out of the Earth, and he had two
Horns like a Lamb, very demure seemingly, but soon angry, and he spoke as a
Dragon, if he was contradicted, like the Craftsmen at Ephesus.

Ver. 12. And he exercises all the the Power of the first Beast before him,
and causes the Earth, and them that dwell therein, earthly minded Souls to
worship the first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed, got over the Reproofs
of Instruction, which is the way to Life, so came again to worship the Beast's
Image. O sorrowful indeed it is, for many tender Souls to think of.

Ver. 13. And does great wonders, so that he makes Fire seem to come down from
Heaven on the Earth, in sight of earthly minded Men, as if the Fire, Light and
Life of the living Word, which was and is God, was with them in their Ministry,
in our Meetings.

Ver. 14. And deceives them that dwell on, or in the Earth; Beast do Miracles,
it may seem so to the Beastly-minded, the second demure Beast with his two
Horns like a Lamb, would have an Image made to the first Beast, which had a
wound by a Sword, the Word of God, but got over it and did live, the Life of
the Beast again. Let them that read understand.

Ver. 15. And he had Power to give Life to the Image of the Beast, it may seem
so to the fallen Nature, that the Image of the Beast, should both speak and
cause that as many as would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be slain
or killed; turn him out, a Persecutor of the Church, a sower of discord among
Brethren, will he not worship the Image of the Beast. I fear greatly, we have
too many such Images in our Meetings, or Devilish Covetousness in the Stealers
and else I am mistaken; O that I were. Ephesians. 4. 14.

Ver. 16. And causes all, both small and great, Rich and Poor, Bond and Free,
spares none, to receive a Mark in their right Hand, or in their Foreheads, that
he may know his own, and not join with the Lamb, his Enemy; the Holy Lamb will not
receive them into his Fold, that has the Beast Mark; pray my dear Friends, what
is more, or so much the Beast Mark, as Slave-Keeping.

Ver. 17. And that no Man might buy or sell, save he that had the Mark, or the
Name of the Beast, or the Number of his Name: Is it not so now in our Church
Discipline? How many has been opposed in Meetings of Business, which could not
receive the Beast Mark, in buying and selling Slaves and Souls of Men, the very
worst part of the Idolatry; the grand old Whore's Wares or Merchandise.

Ver. 18. Here is Wisdom. Let him that has understanding, count the Number of
the Beast; for it is the Number of a Man, and his Number is Six Hundred three
score and six; about the Age of some old Men, so many Months, all pointing to
the Beastly Nature in Man, as I humbly conceive, or the Wisdom that is from
below, which the Man of God calls earthly devilish; some Men now, as well as of
old, know nothing but what they know naturally as bruit Beasts.

Well my dear Friends, I hope, and know better Things of many of you, and
Things which accompany Salvation though I thus write, and sincerely wish it might
be so with all. Rev. 14. 9, 10. They that worship the Beast, or his Image, or
receive his Mark, must be so tormented.

Abington, the 5 th of the 7 th Mo. 1736.
IT was well said of one, Where the Truth of God suffers, there Unity is
Schism, Church Government is Tyranny, and the Church is a Rout.

Psalm. 133. A glorious and precious thing indeed, is true Unity; but I know no
stronger Bulwark the Devil has against it, in the Church of Christ, than
Slave-Keeping, and all the train of abominable Filthiness, which does and will
attend it, and is inseparable from it (especially in Ministers) who by their
foul Example have lead (I suppose) many Hundreds, if not Thousands into the
Snare, and will many, yea very many more, if there is not some more effectual
and speedy care taken to prevent, withstand and suppress so potent an Enemy as
it is, both in Church and State; what I pray and beseech you, my dear Friends,
whose Love and Unity in the Gospel Fellowship, which is sweet and precious,
pure and peaceable, easy to be entreated; this I say is what I desire more than
all the World, or a Thousand Lives, let People say what they please of me or my
Proceedings, for the Truth's sake, and all my fellow Creatures present and
eternal Welfare, my witness is in Heaven, and in many of my Truth's dear
Friends whose Unity is precious to me and sometimes overcoming, in the pure
precious Life of the Lamb; what, I say, will become of the innumerable
Offspring that is coming up, if all should have Slaves to do their Work within
Doors and without, as many has, they might or may perish for want of Business,
to get a Piece of Bread or a Coat to put on, in the next Generation, and so on
without end. O hard Lot! I have been often asked what shall we do? if it is so
hard now, what will you do when they are more increased, for they grow on us,
as in other Places.

Isa. 3. 8, 9, 16. Ezekiel. 22. 12, 13, to the end. 25. 26, 27, 28, 29.

Hebr. 13. 1, 2, 3. Some entertain Strangers, Slaves, not very much like
Angels, but after an Hellish manner; how does our Demure Slave-Keepers remember
them that are in Bonds as bound with 'em, except as Slaves are bound to them,
so they to the Devil, and stronger, for as Death loosens one, it fastens the
other in eternal Torments if not repented and forsaken.

2 Peter. 1. 5, to 10. But he that lacks these things is blind, and cannot
see a far off; what will become of Posterity, and has forgotten that he was
purged from his old Sins, and yet continues Preaching with great Demurity; O
where is these Peoples Love, for they have cast down many wounded, and drawn
many into the Snare by their bad Example, and twisting and straining Scripture,
and all to cover their Sin.

Well my dear Friends, I can truly say with great Sincerity, I write these
things, not to offend, but to inform, caution, and advise them that are
concerned, to pray to the Lord for Wisdom and Strength of Faith, to quit their
Hands of them before it is too late; a Day of Vengeance will come.

We are apt to blame Pirates for Stealing some of our Goods and Merchandise,
and it may be they have many of them been brought up and instructed in that,
that is a hundred times worse, that cursed Guinea Trade.

O! O! That my Soul could find some relief, for the distress that it has been
in, for 17 Years and more at times, on this sad Account; but if Friends will
not hear, O believe me, mine Eyes shall weep fore in Secret.

B. L.

Because the Lord's Camp is in Captivity; for they that keep Captives, are in
Captivity and Bondage, and brings many of their Friends, Male and Female into
Bondage, because of their Sin, and continuing in it.

Your Fathers have built a Wall of Iniquity, and you are daubing it with
untempered Mortar, in Keeping Slaves and pleading for it; O vile and shameless
practice, which we ought to be separated from, especially Ministers and Elders,
whose example is ten times worse than others; such worthy Friends as them! sure
I may as well as he? says the unthinking covetous Atheist, and may be some
sober minded amongst all professions. So here the Leprosy spreads, and it
spreads more and more; but dear Friends what shall we do in the end thereof,
for my dear Friends, I think it is easy to prove that there is as great
disproportion between Slave-Keeping, take it root and branch, and all the sad
Fruit it brings forth, as there is between Light and Darkness, Christ and
Belial.

2 Cor. 6. Chap. Read in the fear and love of God, our Savior.

Ezekiel. 13. 10, to the end. One Built a Wall the others daub it, wresting, and
as a Nose of Wax, perverting Scripture, to justify, excuse or connive at
Keeping Slaves; here is Work for Ministers!

Rev. 13. 1, to 11. The Beast that came up out of the Earth with two Horns like
a Lamb, very demure, speaks like a Dragon, if it is opposed; so does our
Slave-Keeping Ministers, to my certain knowledge; they cry out sadly against R.
Sandiford's Mystery of Iniquity, which he writ in the fear of God, and in the
Love of Truth and his Fellow Creatures, which has kept many out of the Damned
Snare; he that doubts is damned, what is not of Faith is Sin.

Genesis 49. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.

Genesis 13. 7, 8, 9. And Abraham said unto Lot, Let there be no strife between me
and thee, I pray thee, for we be Brethren, depart I pray thee from me; if thou will take the (...) Hand, then will I go to the right; or if thou go to the
right, then will I go to, or take the left.

Lev. 22. 1, 2, 3. Numb. 6. 1, to 3. 16. 20, to 26. 1 Kings. 8. 53. Ezra. 6.
10, 11, 12, 13. Exodus. 33. 15, 16.

How can we expect the Holy presence of our God to go with us, if we keep our
Fellow Creatures in everlasting Bondage, them and their Wives and Children.

Ezra. 9. 1, to the end. Much to the to the purpose. Nehem. 13. 3. 2 Cor. 6.
15, to the end. Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13. Many eminent Persons have been carried away
with Slave-Keeping-Preachers bad example and foul Doctrine, and many more will
I fear be so; O the Ministry, the Ministry is corrupted.

Job. 3. 1, to the end. If Job complained so heavily, well may our poor Slaves,
and their Posterity. Some Friends has argued, when a People were grown very
wicked, the Almighty was pleased to give them up, or suffer 'em to be brought
into Captivity, Bondage or Slavery, as he did his own People and others: Well
and what if it is so now, shall we join with the Heathen in Covetousness, to be
as the Rod of his wrath; but I pray what becomes of all Rods when they are done
with? burned, or some way destroyed; it may be well for us to consider it may
be our own lot, sooner than we are aware.

Isa. 62. 1, to the end. This Chapter likewise is very excellent if read with
an inlighted mind, and that is the first thing to be prayed for, in order to a
right understanding of what we read.

James. 4. 1, to 6. Then we shall know that War and Fighting, Killing and
Stealing and receiving Slaves, and Souls of Men, comes of our Lusts, which
warreth in our Members, against the pure Holy Spirit of God in our Hearts.

Phil. 3. 18. O my beloved Friends, can a Minister of the Gospel, of Jesus
Christ, which is the Power of God, keep Slaves and not be an Enemy to the Holy
Cross of Christ; my Friends, I can freely call you, that are born again, and
truly fear God, and love his pure Truth more than all, of what Nation or
Profession soever you are, you I do believe abhor this vile practice, much more
to be found in it.

Dear Friends, I have been for many Years, almost 20 before I ever saw
Pennsylvania, closely exercised, and sorely oppressed with a false and forward
Ministry, where Slave-Keeping is not permitted by Law, and has been I firmly
believe a great means of bringing in and spreading the Apostasy, and so
continues to do, by some that pretend to preach freely, as well or ill as by
the barefaced Hirelings of our time, who cannot deny but that they make a trade
of Preaching for their Bellies, but gross Apostasy by the way.

I have had it in my mind for a considerable time, to write something
concerning a false Antichristian Ministry, and a true Christian Ministry,
fitted and sent forth by the Spirit of Truth itself, in this our Day, with the
Epistles of many worthy Men, of several persuasions, on that Subject; but
fearing it will swell this Volume too large, it is thought best to be reserved
for another Impression, with something concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, or
Heavenly Kingdom, what it is, and where it is to be found, with the most ready,
sure and certain way to attain it, plainly described; for the sake of the
sincere in Heart, who are traveling toward Sion, with their Faces thitherward,
of all persuasions, whose present and eternal welfare, I wish and desire for,
as for my own Soul, of all Colors and Countries.

B. L.

As no Man or Men can set forth in Words spoken or written, the great good,
service, comfort, joy, strength and consolation, a true Ministry sent from God
has been, and is of, for the building up of the true Church in God, in their
most Holy Faith:

So no Men or Angels, nor all the Men in the World can declare to the full, the
great evil, that a false Ministry, sent from the Devil, has been, and is of,
for the Building up of the false Church in their sinful, and unholy Faith and
Practice.

I had it also much in my mind to write something concerning the Lives of the
Primitive Christians, mentioned by William Penn, in his No Cross No Crown, and
Eusebius's Ecclesiastical History, Thomas a Kempis's Christian Pattern, Michael
de Molinus's Spiritual Guide, a Book called The Apostolic Fathers, and some of
the best of the Philosophers and others, which I have by me, which might be of
Service, to them that live single Lives especially; but it must be left till
another time.

O the strict Rules of Temperance that was amongst those Quakers in
Old-England! what Persecution then was by Plundering, Robbing and ruining of
Families? What Whipping and Imprisoning, many Hundreds at a time, some
suffocated to Death, some imprisoned during Life, some Banished, and other ways
Tortured.

Then about the same in N. England, how many of our first dear and true
Friends, called Quakers, suffered there by plundering and ruining of Families,
Whipping and Banishing almost continually, with cutting of Ears, and Hanging
there was in that Day, for the sake of the Testimony of or for the pure Holy
unchangable Truth, and of good Conscience, against all Iniquity, Cruelty,
Bloodshed and Inhumanity, which was acted there, by them that had fled from
Old-England to save their Backs and their Purses, according to the Account in a
Book writby George Bishop, called New England Judged.

Much more might be writ concerning these and such like things, which might
fall many large Volumes in Folio. But this is not like Slave-Keeping; for those
were dispatched or set at Liberty, and some crime or cause pretended; but these
for no fault, so much as pretended, but only Devilish Covetousness in the
Stealers and Receivers, and then by a lingering Martyrdom from one twenty Years
to another, some above Ground and some under Ground in Caves and Dens or Mines,
are Murdered by Working hard, and Starving, Whipping, Racking, Hanging,
Burning, Scalding, Roasting, and other Hellish Torments, very sorrowful to
consider. O when will there be an end of these Things, seeing it now going on
with main strength by almost all Parties, as well as by some of those that
pretend to the most strict self-denying Doctrine in the World, that is so full
of Mercy, Compassion, Forgiveness to the very worst of Enemies, Tenderness,
Meekness, Mildness, Sweetness of Love, and Pity to all Creatures of all Kinds;
the merciful Man is merciful to his Beast, and yet some of these Pretenders to
this Purity can join with these Men-Killers and Stealers for Gain, which is
hard to write, but it is True.

But yet I do know there is a faithful Remnant amongst the People called
Quakers, in America, that are zealous against this and all other Iniquity, to
whom my Soul is nearly united in Spirit, blessed be the Lord my God, for so
great a favor for evermore. And I believe some of other Professions also, whom
I dearly love; and I have some Hope the Number of all Sorts, that truly fear
God and Love his Truth at Heart, will increase, which I should rejoice to hear
and see, although Things seem to look dark at present.

B. L.

Abington, the 3 d of the 3 d Mo. 1736, between 3 and 4 this Morning.
IT was again revived in my Mind, the Practice of Slave-keeping, and thus to
query.

Whether it is not as wicked and sinful a Practice to keep and trade in Slaves,
as to commit the following Evils and filthy Abominations, which are now in
Custom I suppose by Jew and Gentile, to whom our brave Slavekeepers allude,
Abraham and the Law. That is to say, Keeping many Wives and Harlots or
Concubines, going to and making use of Harlots when they please, and Mankind
too; and many other Things mentioned in the Old Testament, and other Histories,
and by Peter Charron in his Book of Wisdom, page 324.

The 15 th of the 1 st month, 1736/7.
JOHN MILTON wrote a Treatise concerning the likeliest Means to remove
Hirelings out of the Church, which I gave to King George the I. and to the
present King and Queen, that they might see what a Company of destructive
Vermin they had about them. And I think there is as much need now to keep such
as are of the same Spirit out of the Church, or it is in great Danger in the
Opinion of some seeing worthy Friends, who can see beyond Profession, Formality
or worldly Interest.

That Spirit has something in view; the good of the Belly, a rich Wife or
Husband, carrying on a good Trade, or to be exalted, and to get or keep up a
strong Party for some Design, base enough; and under this Cloak of Deceit,
accuse others of seeking a Party. Now when this Spirit goes forth with
Authority from the outward Church, then out Meetings are or may be sure to be
grievously pestered, with noise if not nonsense. It seems as if some o^ our
Ministers (I was going to say many) have forgot the great Benefit of Silent
Meetings, if ever they rightly knew it that they are so restless in them, and
mu^^ be hammering and hammering. The Noise of the Workman's Tool was not to be
heard in Building the outward Temple, and much less the inward, which is the
Work of God himself. Oh that the Lord would be pleased to put a Hook into the
Nose of this Leviathan!

But if the Words be never so sound and orthodox, without Life they are but as
Chaff; and what is the Chaff to the Wheat? why truly, Friends, you know the
Chaff is for the Beasts; but the blessed Wheat, with which our heavenly Father
feeds his Babes, is for the Children of the Kingdom, New Jerusalem, the Church
of the living God, his House.

But what said blessed Jesus to them that went or go without him; He that is
not with me is against me, and he that gathers not with me, scatters
abroad. Let his or her Words be ever so excellent, as if he had said.

Many worthy Friends have been burdened with this scattering Spirit for many
Years, especially its profaning if not blaspheming the sacred Name in Prayer.

When our Meetings on First-Days or others, are a little settled in Silence,
and the dren in the Kingdom in their heavenly Places, and their Father begins
to feed them, up stands may be a cracked Trumpet, with an uncertain Sound; or
peradventure an old broken Cistern, with a little thick muddy stinking Water at
bottom, kept in for the Meeting, and there thrown out among the Children, when
in Truth it is hardly fit for Swine, nay, I think I may venture to say, the
very Swine do not like it, it is so bad. Now if such filthy Stuff be
countenanced encouraged and commended by our Elders and Ministers, some of
them, what a Condition is the Church in, which should be without Spot or
Wrinkle? I leave it to the Wise in Heart to judge, to such Ministers and Elders
as rule well and are worthy of double Honor. So says B. L.

Abington, between 11 and 12, after a good Meeting at Oxford, where was 6 Males
and 4 contra.
Dear Friends,
I remember about 40 years ago I kept my elder Brother's Sheep, and the pretty
Lambs and their Dams would be quietly sweetly and prettily feeding together, a
very beautiful and comely Sight to see. But if a Stranger, my Friends, the
Stranger, came near with his Dog, (the Dog sucks the Blood which is the Life of
the Sheep) and if this Dog fell a barking yawling or howling, among the Sheep
and the pretty pretty dear Lambs, immediately they leave their Feeding, and run
for their dear Lives; so they would be scattered, and scattered, although there
was or might be a great Flock of them together. Sometimes, I must confess, I
have been a little careless and sleepy like some other Shepherds, and then the
Sheep would go wandering about over Hedge and Ditch, and get into my Neighbor's
Corn, and do Mischief; and then it was very hard for me to get them out of the
Corn and into order again. Sometimes it would cost me many Tears before I could
get them into order again. Sometimes if the Sheep and Lambs were not gathered
together before Night, in the Night in the Dark the Dog would come and bite
many of them, and suck their Blood, and some he would kill; so then that would
be a Grief to the Owner, and a Reproach to the Shepherd.

So, my very dear Friends, you that are the right true Shepherds, that love the
Sheep more than all things in this World, you can very easily make an
Application, for it is your Life and Delight to take Care of your Father's
Sheep, and his Lambs especially, and are grieved when the Dog, the Dog, the
Bloodsucker, does but bark, and hinder them from Feeding. I know what I write,
blessed be the Name of the good and great Shepherd, for evermore, who laid down
his Life for his Sheep and Lambs.

My dear faithful Friends, you are much esteemed by me, and your Unity in the
Father in his Kingdom, which is his Church, is much more desired by me than all
things in this World, I can truly say. It has been much in my Mind for a
considerable time, to lay before you my Concern for having some of our ancient
worthy Friends Epistles of Warning, Reproof, Caution, and Advice to Ministers,
collected and reprinted; apprehending it may be of some Service to have a
Collection of such as I have mentioned, or such as you shall think will be of
most Service; I earnestly desire and entreat to have your Advice and Counsel;
for I know right well that in the multitude of Counsel there is Safety,
especially with them dear Friends that know the Truth and are faithful; these
are the best Counselors in the whole World. I am your Brother and Friend in
the blessed Truth.

B. L.

Abington, the 18 th of the 2 d month, about 6 or 7 at night. Dear Friends,
AS I was at work in the Garden, it came into my Mind, that many of our
Preachers would or did make Preaching so common, that many of our young People,
and old ones too, did not much matter it; nay I believe many, yea very many,
loath it; it is fulsome and burdensome to them, instead of edifying and
strengthening; by reason of many, I fear very many, going and running in their
own Will and Time; which brings a very great Exercise, and many heavy Burdens
upon some tender dear young Ministers, and others, which are rightly concerned,
which cannot receive their chaffy Doctrine, but are almost choked with it, as
well they may, for it is very killing to sit under their dead dry noisy dark
dreaming in-and-out Harangues, with Death in the Pot, 2 Kings 4. 39, 40. which
brings Death and Darkness over our Meetings, such as may be felt, something
like that in Egypt, Ex. 10. 21. where the Tongue of the Dogs, Phil. 3. 2. was
heard, the Voice of the Stranger, John 10. 6. which darkens Counsel with or by
Words without Knowledge, Job 38. 2. being alienated from the Life of God,
indeed, through the Ignorance that is in them, because of the Blindness of
their Heart, Ephesians. 4. 18. False Ministers are working in their Hour and Power of
Darkness, Luke 22. 53. Matthew. 6. 23. if the Light that is in them be turned to
Darkness, it is very great. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. such are Wells without Water,
Clouds without Rain, wandering dark Stars. 1 Job. 1. 6. -- 2. 9, 10, 11. he that
hates his Brother is in Darkness, and walks in Darkness, Darkness has
blinded his Eyes. Mat. 23. 14. some for a Pretense make long Prayers, they
shall receive the greater Damnation. Oh that the Almighty would be pleased to
cut this Rahab and wound this Dragon, and dry up the Tongue of this Egyptian
Sea, and put an Hook in the Nose of this Leviathan, that plays and sports
himself in the mighty Waters. The People are as Waters, very unstable, and so
are ready to receive unstable and unsound Doctrine, although it may prove to
their Destruction in time, ever they are aware, and utter Ruin of the Church,
and People or Congregation. Oh that it might be prevented before it is too
late, says my poor Soul.

B. L.

Abington, the 30 th of the 2 d Month, 1737.
THIS Day as I was sitting at my Door, musing about or concerning the Miseries
or Poverty of Mankind, it came into my Mind, that it was Ignorance and
Idleness, Luxury and Pride, (not Temperance, Frugality and Industry; for with
Parsimony, as one said, a little is sufficient, without it nothing) which leads
to Covetousness, and Covetousness leads to them; the one is the Cause, and the
other the Effect. Riches, then Pride. Luxury and Pride, then Oppression and
Covetousness to maintain it.

The 1 st of the 9 th Month, 1737.
EArly this Morning it was given me to see, that all Slave-keepers and Traders
with them for Gain, were Apostates which pretended to be Christians; especially
in Ministers it is a double Crime, because of their bad Example to to their
Flock; for all such have the Mark of the Beast, Whore and False Prophet on
them, Mystery Babylon Mother of Harlots, let them preach as long as they will
or may.

Oh Israel! thy Leaders cause thee to err, by their Lies and their Lightness!
Oh how mine Eyes have seen some of the first Rank, sit and stand and laugh,
Preachers and others, when I have been speaking of the Bondage and miserable
Captivity of their poor Slaves, in as light and airy a manner as any Boy in the
Town need to do: Persons Male and Female, eminent in the Church, Friends of
Renown in their Generation and Congregation; long Custom and Covetousness
having made the Sin, although so very gross, so easy and familiar to them. Some
of which I do verily believe have known the pure Presence of the divine Lord of
Life and Glory, his holy Light and blessed Truth in their Souls; yet afterward
become vain in their Imaginations, to think Slave-Keeping was lawful; so their
foolish Hearts became darkened and hardened again worse than ever. Oh that is a
sorrowful Condition, to have the greatest Mark of the Apostasy in the World,
upon them, and not to know or believe it!

When I say All Slave-Keepers Apostates, I mean them that keep innocent Men,
Women and Children in everlasting Bondage. As to petty Criminals, that will not
or cannot make Restitution, I think, as well as many other tender Friends and
People fearing God and loving his Creation, their Fellow Creatures, although
very wicked, that they had better be kept in Bondage, Exodus 22. 3. that by hard
Labor they might be brought to Repentance and Amendment of Life, in order to a
happy Death, than to put them to Death in their Sins; for in the Grave there is
no Repentance; but hard Labor and mean Living is an Antidote to Luxury and
Idleness, and Captivity the Reverse of Nature might prevent a great deal of
Wickedness in the World, and bring many unthinking Creatures to remember and
prepare for their latter End before it be too late, which I should rejoice to
see. There is an excellent Passage quoted by R. S. page 104. from Thomas Moore
High Chancellor of England, much to the purpose. Likewise that holy Man of God
G. Fox, that faithful Servant, and indefatigable Labourer in the most high
Lord's Vineyard, who turned more Souls from Darkness to Light and from the
Power of Satan to the Power of God, than any one that England or the Dominions
thereof, has produced since the Apostles Days, I do firmly believe, as his
excellent Journal does make appear to them that can read it with the same
divine Mind in which it was written, besides the multitude of faithful
Testimonies to the Divine Power that wrought all his Works in him, and for him.
While this dear Lamb G. F. was in Darby Prison, in Persecution, he was under
great Suffering of Spirit, and under the very Sense of Death, as he writes, and
he writ to the Judges about putting People to Death for stealing Cattle or
Money, and small Matters, and thus it was.

I am moved to write unto you, to take heed of putting Men to death for
stealing Cattle or Money, etc. for the Thieves in old time were to make
Restitution, and if they had not wherewith, they were to be sold for their
Theft. Mind the Laws of God in the Scriptures and Spirit that gave them forth,
and let them be your Rule in executing Judgment, and show Mercy that you may
receive Mercy from God the Judge of all. And take heed of Gifts and Rewards,
and of Pride, for God does forbid them, and they do blind the Eyes of the Wise.
I do not write to give Liberty to Sin, God has forbidden it; but that you
should judge according to his Laws, and show mercy, for he delights in true
Judgment and in mercy. I beseech you mind these Things; and prize your Time now
you have it, and serve him, for he is a consuming Fire. So far G. F. and much
more concerning these things, when in Prison in persecuting Times. Journal,
Part I. page 98.

Abington, the 2 d of the 9 th month, between 2 and 3 in the morning.
THE Thing appeared very clearly as at other Times, that Slave-keeping, with
all its Concomitants, was the worst Idol, and one of the greatest Marks of the
Apostasy, in the whole World, and the very worst Part of the great Whore's
Merchandise, Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Whores.

At this Time also it is brought to my Remembrance, with great Thankfulness to
my dearest God and Father, Redeemer and Preserver, the great Liberty that I
with many Thousands more enjoy in this good Land, which to many wise and right
considerate People, is much more valuable than natural Life; especially our
religious Liberty; with the Plenty of all good Things needful for the Body,
which many hundreds of Thousands have been and are deprived of, by the
abovenamed vilest, grossest and blackest of all Abominations. And for this
black Scene to be acted by them that pretend to the most pure, holy, meek,
sweet and loving Principle (to all People) in the World, is to some, yea many
tender hearted People beyond compare with any thing in the World; I say, for
these People that pretend not to preach or to pray without the sweet holy
Motion or Moving of the pure holy Spirit in their Hearts, the Unction from the
Holy One, the sweet anointing Oil, the Feeling of which does unite the
Brethren, and was and is compared to the Oil that was poured upon the Head of
Aaron, God's High Priest, and ran down his Beard, so to the nethermost Skirts
of his Garment, before he was to offer an Offering on the holy Altar in the
Temple of the Lord; which outward Oil and Anointing, Priesthood, Altar,
Offerings, and Temple, were but Types and Shadows of much better Things to
come, of a much greater and more glorious heavenly and spiritual Temple, or
House; for the Glory of this latter House does far exceed the Glory of the
former, as far as Day exceeds the Night, or Heaven exceeds the Earth, as many
have come to the Experience of, blessed be the Name of the Lord Almighty, who
rules and reigns in his Temple, in sanctified Hearts, prepared by himself, to
do his Will and dwell in; Praises, Praises be given to his pure Name, for his
holy glorious and pure Presence in his holy Temple! For such Bodies and Souls
are the Temple of the Holy Ghost, the holy living God; but he or she that
defiles this Temple by Slave-keeping, him may God destroy, if not repented of
and forsaken. Can those Favorites of Heaven, so anointed and arrayed, beyond
that of Aaron more than Words can express; can these sanctified and washed
ones, that have been arrayed with the fine Linen clean and white, clean and
white indeed, which is the Righteousness of Saints; can these, with the Sow
that was washed, turn again to wallow in the Mire of that Heathen Practice,
Slave-Keeping, and worse, all things well considered; or like the Dog, a
ravenous Beast, to lick up his Vomit, the filthiest and most unnatural Part or
Sort of Excrement; and so is the Slavekeeping Practice, I am very certain.

I verily believe there are some now in the Practice of Slave-keeping, that in
the Time of their first Love and tender sweet Espousal to Christ, would have
been ready to have answered if they had been asked, as the Man did the Prophet,
Is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do such things? and yet he did them; and
so have these done, for want of Watchfulness, being led into it by the foul
Example of their Preachers and Leaders, which have caused them to err. O Lord
my good God and sweet Savior, be pleased to preserve me from this gross Sin,
and all Evil. So be it.

B. L.

Abington, the 8 th of the 10 th Month.
THis Morning very early it sprung again afresh and very lively in my Mind,
concerning Marriages made in the sweet Love, Fear, Wisdom and Counsel of the
almighty living Lord God and eternal Father in Heaven, if we want Riches and
Honor, Pleasure and Joy: What is comparable to those Marriages made only in
the Lord, in the Church, in Heaven, in the Temple; but few such Marriages I
fear are to be found now a Days, that are made by the Father in Heaven, which
is the Truth. But abundance of Marriages are made by the Father in Hell, the
Devil, which is out of the Truth: Made by the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the
Flesh, and Pride of Life, and for Covetousness to maintain them, which is all
of him that is an Enemy to all Mankind, the Devil or Satan, if we did but know
it there is no worse Devil or unclean Spirit than Self, that dwells and Rules
in poor Mankind, to their Destruction Soul and Body. Self or Covetousness, says
the Apostle, is the root of all Evil; tell me my Friends and Mortals, can there
be a worse Devil, or more unclean Spirit or Root from which all Evil grows, or
a worse Fountain than that from which all our Misery flows?

Can there, my dear and well beloved Friends, be a better God or Holy Spirit
than that, or he that leads into all Truth, which is Heaven itself, and so into
all Peace and Joy; or a worse Devil or unholy Spirit than that which leads into
all untruth, and so into all Sorrow, Destruction and Misery, which is Hell
enough in my opinion, where the Worm never dies, and the Fire goes not out, and
Torment enough for the wickedest of Men, and greater than I wish for the worst
Enemies, but rather would pray for them, that they would so live as to escape
that Place or State of Torment.

B. L.

I have had several other things of moment for a long time moving in mind,
concerning the sweet comfortable and happy Life, Mankind might live, in Joy and
if he would follow his inward true and spiritual Guide, which would never lead
him wrong if he would strictly follow its Counsel. I say I had many things in
my Mind to write, but am a little straightened at present, and must wait to see
whether this that is done may be of any Service, or in any measure well
received by my Brethren, which are begotten and born again of the immortal Seed
and Word of God, which lives and abides forever, and is God himself: Those thus
born are his Sons and Daughters, God is their own Father, and they his own dear
Children, and his Heirs, and joined or equal Heirs with Christ, in his and
their Fathers Kingdom, which is and ever will remain an eternal Kingdom of
GLORY or GLORIOUS GOVERNMENT where he the Holy One does rule and govern, which
is his Church, in his People, in his House or his Temple, in new Jerusalem, in
his Sanctuary, in his Kingdom, in himself, all one and the same eternal SANCTUM
SANCTORUM. Christ was not ashamed to call such spiritual Souls his Brethren,
which worship God in Spirit, and in his Church which is his Kingdom, saying, I
will declare thy Name unto my Brethren; and after his blessed Resurrection sent
forth a Woman Preacher the very first, to declare of it, and I believe to
preach freely as she had freely received of him; Go tell my Brethren I am
risen, and that I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.
O glorious Message! one of the best that ever was, and yet sent by a Woman! the
glad Tidings of great Joy, that their Lord was alive that they thought was
dead. They did not reject the Testimony because it came by a Woman; no more
than the Samaritans, the Woman that Jesus sent from Jacob's Well, as I can
find; but they went or ran to see for themselves.

Although I have writ thus much for Women's Preaching, yet I would have none go
before they are sent of the Lord, no more than Men; for it is alike hateful to
me, and many worthy Friends, to my certain Knowledge. I could willingly pray to
the Lord with all my Soul and Spirit, that he would be pleased to stop the
Mouths of all those Liars, who say Thus says the Lord, when he never spoke by
them. Male and Female are all one in Christ the Truth, the true Church or
Congregation which is in God, and God in his Church which is his Kingdom, where
he rules and reigns, and is blessed for evermore. So be it.

B. L.

Abington, the 22 d of the 12 th mo. 1737, 8.
THis Morning early, after five Days and Nights Fasting, I was considering the
many Calumnies which the World or People of the World, has cast upon the Saints
and Servants of the Living God, my very dear true and faithful Friends in
Christ, called Quakers, as if they kept Slaves, or encouraged and connived at
it for their Interest, Favor or Affection, or some base sinister Ends. But it
is a mere Slander, for they abhor the Practice, and dare not touch with it, as
verily believing it to be one of the grossest Sins and Iniquities (with all
Concomitants) in the whole World.

Objection. But some may and have objected in my Hearing, that some, yea many
called Quakers, and their Preachers, Elders and chief Leaders and Rulers, Men
of Renown in the Congregation, Number. 16. 1, 2, 3. and of great Repute in the
World, John 15. 18, 19. yea verily the World loves its own.

Answer. But I answer, they were not all Israel who were called Israel, Romans 9.
6, 7, 8. but some were Apostates, Vagabonds and Impostors, and they were some
of the worst Enemies, the very worst the Hebrews had, and procured their Ruin,
Overthrow and utter Destruction, as is largely set forth in the History of the
Wars of the Jews by Josephus, beside what is mentioned in holy Scripture
plentifully by the holy Prophets.

And so it was amongst the Primitive Christians, about the Time of the Ten
Persecutions, when they gat a little Ease from the Heathen Tyrants, the
apostate Christians went to the same devilish Work, of murdering and
butchering the true Christians, about their Creeds, keeping of Easter, and
other Idols, and about the Clause of one Substance and two Substances, as if
the eternal Being could be divided; But especially after Constantine the Roman
Emperor was converted to the Christian Faith, in his Zeal he gave such large
Donations and Revenues to the Church, that it is recorded, the same Day there
was a Voice heard from Heaven, crying aloud, This Day is Poison poured into the
Church! which the Event soon after verified. By an ancient Observation,
Religion brought forth Wealth, and the Daughter devoured the Mother; it is the
very same now. So when the Bishops, Preachers and Rulers grew rich and high,
they centred in Pride, Idleness, and Fullness of Bread; then they went together
by the Ears with might and main, striving who should be greatest; then to
inventing and setting forth the old, nasty, fulsome, stinking Whore's Trumpery
or Merchandise to Sale, Rev. 18. 13. 17. 5. and they that would not buy it, or
could not receive it, might expect to be sent out of the World by all the
Tortures that Wrath and Hell could invent, as they could prevail with Kings,
Rulers and Governors to assist them, by unrighteous Laws and Edicts. And when
the Magistrates were such Fools as to dance after their Call, they embrued
whole Nations and Kingdoms in Blood. These Things are largely set forth in
Eusebius's Ecclesiastical History, an excellent sweet Book it is, and I could
heartily wish all right thinking solid sober Men had one of them, especially
all Magistrates and Rulers of all Persuasions. I think I should rejoice to see
it reprinted in Pennsylvania, although I were out some Pounds toward the Charge
of it, for the good of Mankind, notwithstanding I have one by me. If the Folio
Volume cannot be printed, there is an Abridgement extant by William Caton,
which has past several Editions, being of a small Price and soon read. I could
wish likewise, that every such Person had one of those sweet edifying Books
entitled, The Spirit of Martyrs revived, by Ellis Hooks; a cheap Book and soon
read, abridged from the three large Volumes, with Variety of Collections from
Scripture and other Books, from the Beginning of the World till within a few
Years, concerning Persecution and Persecutors, with curious Remarks.

Objection carried a little further concerning some that go under the Name of
Quakers, keeping Slaves.

I answer with Romans ii. 17, 19, 21, 23, 24, 28, 29. He is not a Jew that is
one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh. But
he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart, in
the Spirit and not in the Letter, whose Praise is not of Men but of God.
Courteous and gentle Reader, please to read the whole Chapter in the Fear and
Love of God, and in the Light of Truth, and thou will find and feel excellent
Matter in it. As in the following Chapter likewise.

Rev. ix. 10, 20, 21, 22. I know the blasphemies of them that say they are
Jews, and are not, but are of the Synagogue of Satan. Rev. iii. 9, 10, 11, 12,
15, 16, 17. which say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie.

Philadelphia, the 25 th of 12 th mo. 1737, 8.
THis being the ninth Day of my Fasting, having taken nothing but a Draught of
Spring Water several times a Day, and am as well in Health as ever since I came
to Pennsylvania, which is six Years this Spring, it lies on my mind to say
something concerning Extortion, in paying or receiving Interest for Money,
which I have been under Exercise about a considerable Time; and I could be
heartily glad that our Friends as a Society would wholly set it aside, although I
have something considerable upon Interest my self, and nothing else to live on
but the Labor of my Hands, and weakly in Body, and pretty well in Years, being
near sixty.

Abington, 30 th of the 2 d month, 1738.
THis Morning, as I was preparing to go to Meeting, it was opened in me That
all the nominal Quakers, who live in Sin, which is Hell, the Devil's Kingdom
and Government, are of the same Spirit and as bad as other People in and of the
World, and some of them much worse. Such as have been enlightened, and are sunk
into the Earth again, are more dark and stupid than others; for Publicans and
Harlots stand more ready and willing to receive the Message of the Kingdom of
Heaven, which is Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost) than they;
according to Christ's Doctrine, and the Observation of the Children of God (who
dwell in his Kingdom of Righteousness, which is free from all Sin) and keeps
their Habitation in the Light.

For as dear George Fox writes, Journal, Part I. page 55, 56. he saw concerning
the Priests, that although they acted by a dark Power, and stood in the Deceit,
which they and the People were kept under, yet they were not the greatest
Deceivers spoken of in Scripture, for they were not come so far as Cain, Corah,
Dathan, Balaam, and others, to hear the Voice of God, and knew it, yet these
turned from the Spirit; such as these were and would be the greatest Deceivers,
far beyond the Priests. Likewise among Christians, such as could preach in
Christ's Name, work Miracles, cast out Devils, etc. and go as far as Cain,
Corah and Balaam in Gospel Times; such as these were and would be the greatest
Deceivers.

Page 117, 118. he advises Friends, That none appear in Words beyond what they
be in the Life that gave forth the Words, here none shall be as the untimely
Figs: Let no Image or Likeness be made, but in the Light wait, which will bring
Condemnation on that Part that would make the Images, and speaks with the
Egyptian Tongue.

Page 224, 225, 361. All Friends that speak abroad, see that it be in the Life
of God, for that begets to God; the Fruits of that shall never wither; and this
sows to the Spirit which is in Prison, and of the Spirit reaps Life (to you
this is the Word of the Lord God) and the other sows in the Flesh, and of the
Flesh reaps Corruption. There is that which makes merry over the Witness of
God; and there is that which makes merry in the Lord. Such the Lord does
beautify, whose Trust is in his Strength: But such as be from the Light, whose
Eyes be after their Abominations and Idols, their Eyes are to be blinded, and
their beautiful Idols and their Abominations to be destroyed, that nothing may
rule and reign but Power and Life it self.

W. Penn's Preface to G. Fox's Journal, p. lvi, lxi. his Counsel to Ministers.
O feel Life in the Ministry, let Life be your Commission, your Wellspring and
Treasury in all such occasions; it is not our Parts or Memory, or Repetitions
of former Openings in our will and time that will do God's Work. A dry
Doctrinal Ministry, however sound in Words, can reach but the Ear, and is but a
Dream at the best.

Page 782 to 789. 885, 6, 7. of W. Penn's Works in Folio. Vol. I. It Is the
Ignorance and Idleness of the People, that gives the Clergy an opportunity to
effect their Designs, for so mean-spirited are the People as to take all upon
trust for their Souls, that would not trust or take a Brass Shilling from an
Archbishop; it is prodigious to think what Veneration the Priesthood has raised
to themselves, by their usurpt Commission, and their Clink-Clank of
extraordinary Ordination; did the People examine their Bottom, the Grounds of
their Religion and Faith, it would not be in the Power of their Leaders to
cause them to err. What, doubt my Minister! arraign his Doctrine! put him to
proof! by no means: but the consequence of not doing of it, has been the
Introduction of much false Doctrine, Superstition and Formality, (amongst the
Quakers, as well as others) which gave just occasion for Schism; for the Word
has no hurt in itself, and implies only a Separation, which may as well be
right as wrong.

W. P. mentions two Men, Jacobus Acontius, and John Hales of Eaton, that were
of the same Mind, and does heartily beseech his Readers to be more than
ordinary intent in reading what he cites of them, they write very much of
People's Carelessness, in trusting too to much Pastors.

Wherefore J. A. says we must obey the Advice of a Poet,

Principiis obsta, sero Medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
Resist betimes, that Medicine stays too long.
Which comes when Age has made the grief too strong.
Now there is need (he says) of a double caution, viz. that there be no change
in the Doctrine when it is pure; and if any change be made, that there be
Notice taken of it.

Now forasmuch as the profit will be very small, if some private Man shall
discover or observe that an Error is introduced, unless he discover that said
Error and lay it open; now there cannot be a more fitting way than that in I
Cor. 14. he says, and abundance more very excellent. I could heartily wish The
Address to the Protestants were reprinted, for the sake of my Friends called
Quakers as well as others; I believe it might be of great Service, for I think
the matter therein contained belongs to us, as much as to any People in the
World.

E. Burroughs's Works, Fol. p. 204 to 210. 368, 9. 548, 9. To all the Children
of Light every where, be careful who ye receive as Ministers, believe not every
Spirit, for Lying Spirits may arise amongst yourselves; who are not in the
Truth, but in feignedness and Hypocrisy with false Visions and lying
Imaginations, handling the Word of God deceitfully; believe not that Spirit
which ministereth to others what it has not learned of the Father.

He advises p. 368. Be not hasty to utter Words before the Lord, but wait for
Power from on high. P. 548, 550. Meet together in the Name and fear of the
Lord, and mind the Lord's presence amongst you, mind not Words, but mind the
presence of the Lord, and feel his Power in your Hearts, and the Words that
come from the Power will refresh the Seed of God. But if any speak Words out of
the Power, the Seed of God, will be burdened, and will judge such Words.

F. Howgil's Works, Fol. p. 28, to 36. 137, to 140, 211, 369, 422, 733. To all
the Seed of Abraham, who are Jews indeed, and Israelites, in whom is no Guile;
[no Guile, observe,] whom your Brethren have cast out, and have been as a Dove
without a Mate. P. 137. God is a Spirit, his Kingdom is Spiritual, his
Habitation is suitable to his own Nature, Glorious in Holiness, Words are too
short. Colo. I. 12, 13. What, no other Kingdom but what you enjoy in this Life?
P. 139. Thus I know dark Spirits reason. The Saint looked for no other Glory,
but that which stood in eternal Life, and in the Immortal Life; they were in
him that is True, in the Father, and in the Son, all one, and he in them: O
HOLY UNION.

P. 736. The Faithful say in their Hearts, he is come, and they look not after
any other.

Stephen Crisp's Works. 423. 6. to 441. Take heed my dear Friends, in sitting
down or holding the Truth in a bare formality: O my dear Friends this is a
dangerous State, yea more dangerous than my Tongue or Pen can declare.

W. Bennit's Works. p. 100.

P. 3. of Church Government by John Milton, his Observation that Religion
brought forth Wealth, and the Daughter devoured the Mother.

W. Edmunson's Journal. p. 15. 279. 306. to 311. And sometimes the Lord's Power
and Spirit would move in me to speak a few Words in Meetings, which I did in
Fear, being under a great concern lest a wrong Spirit should get entrance and
deceive me, in the likeness of an Angel of Light, for I was sensible of my own
Weakness.

P. 279. A Letter of Examination to all, who have assumed the place of
Shepherds of People of all Sorts in Christendom, to see if your Accounts be
ready, and what order your Flocks be in, Quakers and others.

W. Edmunson's Journal. p. 306. 7. to 311. Concerning Offerings that are
offered to God, in Prayer and Supplication; the offerings that are acceptable
to God, must be offered in righteousness and with clean Heart and Lips, for the
Lord is pure and holy, and will be sanctified of all that come near him, and is
a consuming Fire, who consumed Nadah and Abihu, that offered strange Fire,
though they were of the high Priests Line.

Charles Marshal's Works. p. 100. 222. For the outward Conformity may in a
great measure be kept to, which is a cover under which the Enemy may work
undiscovered by the unwatchful.

Thomas Elwood's Life. p. 15. 367. to 386. He writes excellently concerning the
Wiles of the Enemy transforming himself into the likeness of an Angel of Light
and deceiving of him, when he was young and tender, put him upon Religious
Performances; suppose appearing in Meetings, in his own Will, Time and
Strength, (as too many now adays does in our Meetings, or else many worthy
Friends are mistaken.

Richard Hubberthorn's Works. p. 45, 6, 7, Receive nothing but that which
speaks from the eternal moving of the living God; have Salt in yourselves to
favor withal Words, you may discern which is without Life and Power, and stand
single in that which is Pure of God, all such deny to be your Teachers, which
have the Words of Truth, but live not in the Life and Power of what they say.

Roger Haydock's Works. p. 1. 162. Be watchful in your Meetings, Friends, the
Seed which God has sown is good, but if you sleep the Enemy will sow Tares,
which will grow up with it and choke it, so the Ground that affords them
Nourishment will be cursed; this is the Word of Truth unto you.

John Burnet's Works. p. 141, 2. He that continues to the end shall be saved,
and he that is faithful unto Death shall have the Crown of Life, and therefore
let a concern be always upon your minds in this weighty matter, that you may
see how it is with you.

John Crook's Works. p. 17. 258. An excellent Piece concerning Truth's Progress.

Thomas Beven's Works. p. 74. to 90. For all Prayer by or in which the Divine
Spirit is not felt to lead and influence the Soul, whether it be in Public or
Private, is of no availance in the sight of God.

I find upon the Margin of the old Bible, printed about the Year 1599, this
Note, viz. When the Mind thinks nothing, when the Soul coveteth nothing, and
when the Body acts nothing contrary to the Will of God, this (says the Note)
is perfect Sanctification. I These. 5. 23. Coll. 2. 10. 1 John 2. 5. 4. 12.

Forbidden Fruit or Tree of Knowledge, writ by August Eleutherius. p. 68. We
read Wisdom is Foolishness with God, which Form of Speech we steal from Paul,
and babble of it, when indeed we neither know our own, nor Paul's meaning
touching it; no Man renounces his own Wisdom; this forsooth Man thinks is
spoken of Turks and Infidels, hence it comes to pass that Man is deceived in
himself.

Page 93, 4. I. What is the Beast of which Daniel writes, which speaks
against the Highest, and slays the Saints of God?

II. What is the Serpent which deceived Adam and Eve?

III. What is the Tree of Knowledge of good and Evil?

IV. What is that impudent King of Antichrist of whom Daniel and Paul
speaks. I Thessal. 2.

V. What is that many headed Monster, mentioned in the Apocalypse, whom the
whole World does worship.

VI. What is Sin? What is Death? What is the Devil?

I answer, it is every Man's own carnal Wit and Reason, Righteousness and the
like, for which cause Paul calls it Death, Enmity and Foolishness unto God,
and James calls it Earthly, Human and Devilish, because these three are one,
for the Devil, Man, Adam and the Serpent are sworn Brethren, yea Brethren, yea
both one." Much more has this worthy Man writ very excellently, as p. 166, to
the End of the Book.

It is given me at this time thus to write concerning Faith.

All the Books, Bibles, and Men in the World, cannot give one Man Faith in the
Holy Ghost, or God, which is one; but the least Touch of the Holy Ghost can
give any Man Faith in God and in the Scriptures which testify of him, that has
well read them.

B. L.

The Spiritual Guide, which disintangles the Soul, and brings it by the inward
to the getting of perfect Contemplation, and the rich Treasure of Internal
Peace, Written by Dr. Michael de Molinus, Priest; I could heartily wish every
distressed Soul in America, or elsewhere had one of them.

P. 172. Concerning Ministers, he writes, those that Preach with Zeal and
Sincerity, preach for God; those that preach for themselves, feeding their
Hearers with the hurtful Subtilties, giving 'em Stones instead of Bread, Leaves
instead of Fruit, and unsavory Earth mixed with Poisoned Honey instead of Food;
these are they hunt after Honor, raising up an Idol of Reputation and
Applause, instead of seeking God's Glory and spiritual Edification of Men.

P. 175. The Study that is not ordered for God's Glory only, is but a short way
to Hell, not through the Study but the Wind of Pride that begets it.

P. 189. His mournful exclamation, O! Divine Majesty, in whose presence the
Pillars of Heaven do quake and tremble; O thou goodness more than Infinite, in
whose Love the Seraphims burn, give me leave O Lord to lament our Blindness and
Ingratitude; we all live in Mistakes, seeking the foolish World, and forsaking
Thee who art our God, we all forsake thee, thou Fountain of living Waters, for
the stinking Dirt of this World.

The Christian Pattern, by Thomas a Kempis, concerning the Doctrine of Truth.

P. 6. Happy is he whom Truth itself does Teach, not by Figures and Words that
pass away, but as it is in itself. Our Senses do often deceive us. What have we
to do with Genus and Species, the dry Notions of Logicians; he to whom the
eternal Word speaks, is delivered from a World of unnecessary Conceptions;
from that one Word are all things, and all speak that one, and this is the
beginning which also speaks unto us, no Man without that (Word) understands
or judges rightly; he to whom all things are one, he who reduces all to one,
and sees all things in one, may enjoy a quiet mind, and remain peaceable in
God: O God who art the Truth, make me one with thee in everlasting Charity. It
is tedious to me, to read and hear many things, in thee is all that I would
have and can desire; let all Doctors hold their Peace, let all Creatures be
silent in thy sight, speak thou alone unto (...).

P. 115. The Truth speaks inwardly without noise of Words.

P. 140. That the World being despised, it is a sweet thing to serve God.

O if these two Books, Spiritual Guide and Christian, were Reprinted here! but
the People are asleep in their Sins, Teachers and Hearers, in the Devil's Bosom
in Hell, and don't know it, for their Preachers cannot or dare not tell them,
for they are Blind, Dumb, Blind, Sleepy Dumb Dogs, they cannot Bark rightly,
but they can Bite; so here is something for all such to chaw upon, of all
Congregations, as much as they please, and if this be not enough, they may have
more in time.

Let such read Psalm. xxii. l. 16, 17, 18. xix. 12, 16. Isa. i. 10, 11, 12.
Philip. iii. 2, 3. Beware of Dogs. Rev. 22. 15. Men unconverted in the Nature
of Dogs, and confess they cannot cease from Sin Term of Life, yet all Sin is
the Devil's Kingdom where he reigns, and such as these are the Teachers of the
People. Oh! What will become of us.

Ensebius's Ecclesiastical History, fol. P. 1, 2, to 8. 27, to 32, 273, 326.
Constantine's Orat. P. 86, 92. The Proem of Eusebius. Successions of the Holy
Apostles, together with the Tim* from our Savior unto us, hitherto continued,
I determined to publish, will I take from the Dispensation and Divinity of our
Savior Christ, higher and deeper to be considered, than that which concerns
his Humanity, diviner than it seems to many termed Christians; p. 2. His
Generation who can declare, the Word was with God, and God was the Word. The
Prophets also which conceived of God with the cleansed Eyes of the Mind, have
known him. The Son of God, the Word, appeared to the Fathers before any Books
were written, pa. 3, 6, 7, etc. so after.

The Works of Hermes Trismegistus, p. 1, 2, 3, 33, 72 to 82, 171. I, O my Son,
write this first Book both for Humanity sake and for Piety toward God: For
there can be no Religion more true or just, than to know the Things that are,
and to acknowledge Thanks for all Things to him that made them. What then
should a Man do, O Father, to lead his Life well, seeing there is nothing here
true? Be pious and religious, O my Son, for he that does so, is the best and
highest Philosopher; and without Philosophy it is impossible ever to attain to
the height and exactness of Piety or Religion. And ^et this, O Son, be the End
of Religion and Piety whereunto thou art once arrived, thou shall both live
well and die blessedly, and this only, O Son, is the Way to the Truth which our
Progenitors traveled in; and thus it came to pass or happened unto me, which I
received from my Mind, that is, Pimander, the Lord of the World, whereby I
became inspired by God with the Truth, for which Cause with my Soul and whole
Strength I give Praise and Blessing unto God the Father. Holy is God the Father
of all Things! Holy is God, whose Will is performed and accomplished by his own
Powers! Holy is God, that determines to be known, and is known of his own, or
those that are his! Holy art thou! that by thy Word have established all
Things. Good, O Asclepius, is in nothing but in God alone, or rather, God
himself is the Good always. -- The Seeds of God are few, but great and fair and
good; Virtue and Temperance, and Piety, and the Piety is the Knowledge of God,
whom whosoever knows, being full of good Things, has divine Understanding,
and not the many. And therefore they that have that Knowledge, neither please
the Multitude, nor the Multitude them; but they seem to be mad, and move with
Laughter, hated and despised, and many times also murdered."

This Book of Mercurius is thought to have been written some Hundreds of Years
before Moses. J. F. who writes the Preface, says thus, In this Book, though so
very old, is contained more true Knowledge of God and Nature, than in all the
Books in the World beside, I except only sacred Writ. And they that shall
judiciously read it and rightly understand it, may well be excused from reading
of many Books, the Authors of which pretend so much to the Knowledge of the
Creator and Creation. If ever God appeared in any Man, he appeared in him, as
appears by this Book; that a Man that had not the Benefit of his Ancestors
Knowledge, being, as I said before, the first Inventor of the Art of
communicating Knowledge to Posterity by Writing, should be so high a Divine,
and so deep a Philosopher, seems to be a Thing more of God than of Man, and
therefore it was the Opinion of some, that he came from Heaven, not born upon
Earth. There is contained in this Book; that true Philosophy, without which it
is impossible ever to attain the height and exactness of Piety and Religion.
The Glory and Splendour of Philosophy is an endeavoring to understand the chief
Good, as the Fountain of all Good.

I have writ the more from Hermes, because of its Excellence and Scarcity,
although it is a very small Book.

As to pure divine Philosophy, the Scriptures themselves are a more excellent
System of it, witness Solomon in the Old, and Paul in the New Testament;
although we know not whether we have the hundredth, or hundred thousandth part
of what was written from the Beginning, yet Christ, the Word, the TRUTH, was
always the Instructor of good Men, to teach and write Truth, freely, as they
had freely received of him. So likewise Lucifer, the Devil and Satan, always
instructs bad Men to teach and write Lies, for Gain, Glory or Applause, like
unto the Manichces and Theologasters of our time, these shameless Devils, that
poison the World for Gain, amongst all People.

A Book called, Christ Jesus owned as he is God and Man, written by John
Whiting, concerning the Divinity, Eternity, and Omnipotency of Christ the Word,
the Truth, the true God, that made all Things, without Beginning of Days or End
of Life. See page 37 to 57. With many notable Testimonies collected from the
Works of many Men of Learning and Moderation, in the Church of England Way,
etc. in answer to a wicked cavilling Priest, one Edward Cockson.

Robert Barclay's Apology, p. 279. concerning the Call, Qualification, Work,
and Wages of a true Gospel Minister; very notable. I think the Book may be had
at B. Franklin's in Philadelphia, which I believe might give Satisfaction to
all or most impartial Readers.

William Sewel's History of the Quakers, in folio, p. 120, 176, 717. concerning
the Call, Qualifications, etc. of the true Ministers.

George Fox's Doctrinal, fol. p. 23, 27, 933, to 937, 1018, 1089, concerning
the Kingdom of Heaven, what it is, and where it is, and how to be attained,
(...) living, true, and infallible Experience, Where the holy God reigns in
Righteousness, there is his Kingdom: So where the unholy Devil reigns in Sin,
there is his Kingdom. The Kingdom of God is within you, said Christ to the
Pharisees, Luke 17. 21. Christ within, in his own Kingdom, where Truth and
Righteousness is; but where Sin is within, there Satan is, Satan within, in his
Kingdom, So all that live in Sin, the Devil lives, rules and reigns in them.

G. F's Great Mystery, p. 242, 250. concerning the Kingdom of Heaven within.

M. Fox's Writings, p. 220, 137, 509, To all the professed Teachers in the
whole World, who go under the Name of Christians, and make a Profession of
Christ, having a Form of Godliness, but deny or neglect the Power.

S. Fisher's Works, Fol. p. 23, 62, 775, 851, 856.

P. 62. A Lamentation over lost Souls, with a Word of Warning to all Kings,
Princes, Parliaments, and Powers, and People, to beware of all such Priests as
uphold the Devil's Kingdom, by pleading contrary to the Scriptures of Truth, a
Continuance of Iniquity for Term of this Life, and a necessity of Men's
Transgressing of God's Law, while they live in the World, or have any abode in
the Body.

P. 73. Likewise the Rustick's Alarm to the Rabbis, or the Country correcting
the University and Clergy, and not without good cause, contesting for the Truth
against the nursing Mothers and their Children.

Balm from Gilead, by William Smith, Fol. p. 108, 77, to 89, 109, 117, 139. A
few Words of tender Counsel unto all Born of the Spirit who walk in the way of
Life.

P. 110. A few Words concerning true Discerning and Judgment. They that have
not the Spirit of Christ are none of his, but all that receive it, and have
Unity with it, that walk not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, in which they see
the Shapes and Forms of every Likeness and Image, and Ground from whence they
do arise, and no false Birth can have an hiding Place, but from the least to
the greatest they are discovered; and the fair coverings that any have clothed
themselves withal is seen through, and all the formed likeness, they are all
seen to be of the Flesh (in what they do profess to be of God) and their Root
and Principle is of that Part and Nature that is earthly, from which no good
thing can arise, and it brings forth a Birth of its own likeness, and of its
own Nature, and though this may seem to be rash Judgment and you may call it
so, yet it will stand a Witness against all that are satisfying the Flesh, for
there is not any so hardly received as that Testimony which strikes at the Life
of another, and which deals plainly and simply with all, and desires the good
of all, that meets with the least Entertainment in the Hearts of the People;
but that which flatters and cries Peace when the Bonds of Iniquity stands, that
is pleasant to them that walk in the Flesh, but that which rips 'em up and
discovers their shame they kick against, will not receive it for Truth, for
there is no Work of the Flesh that would come under the Spirit's Judgment; so
every form and likeness would save its own Life by putting off the Judgment, as
if none could discern it; and no false Birth would have its Nakedness appear,
lest it should come to shame thereby.

Much more has dear William writ touching this matter, very excellent, and many
other things relating to the Kingdom of God, very sweetly.

Collected by Ellis Hooks. The Spirit of the Martyrs, Revived, in a Brief
Compendious Collection of the most remarkable Passages and living Testimonies
of the true Church, Seed of God, and faithful Martyrs, in all Ages from the
Creation. A little Book of great value, I could wish all well-minded People had
of them.

The Art of Happiness, Meditations, the Heavenly University, great Oracle and
Mystical Marriage, by F. Rous, Esquire; p. 489. To the Right Noble the Sons of the
most High, his Blessed Brethren by the best that is the second Birth. Truly
Honorable whose Father is God, and whose Inheritance is a Kingdom. The diverse
Sparks of Holy Fire, which issued from the Spirit that Baptizeth with Fire, I
have gathered together; by their united Heat to kindle a Flame where is none,
or to increase it where it is already kindled; this blessing must come from
God, and therefore of God have I desired it: The Glory of God by your Benefit,
is that which I seek, desiring also to be helped by you both in Prayer and
Exhortation, a great Lover of you and your Peace.

F. R.

P. 643, 4, 5. 685, 735. In his Heavenly Accademy, very excellent Advice to
Ministers indeed; in his Mystical Marriage, sweet Consolating Advice to
Heaven's Newborn Children, to the Bride the Lamb's Wife. The Soul seeks a
Husband and finds him.

F. Rous's Works. p. 643. He that will be Taught of God must come, or retire
in, diligently to his Teacher; they shall be all Taught of God and meet him
when and where he uses to Teach, know therefore thy own Insufficiency, yea,
the Insufficiency of the best Teacher in the World; for who is sufficient for
these things to teach thee inwardly except God; but that thou may not be
mistaken concerning the true Heavenly Teaching or the use of it, take with thee
some cautions; first do not mistake a Teaching of thine own for an Heavenly
Teaching, neither set thine own Imagination in the Celestial Chair; this has
mis-lead many into many and great Errors: Whiles being taught by the strength
of their own Imaginations, they have thought themselves to be taught of God;
and indeed many times, as Errors do thus come from the Strength of Humane
Apprehension so their Prosecution does savor of this strength, and shows from
whence they come, for too often Opinions are headily nursed into Schisms and
Divisions as they were headily brought forth; the same Flesh, that was the
Mother being also the Nurse.

P. 644. His Advice is very excellent agreeable to the Apostles, for none to go
beyond their bounds and measure of Faith. Romans 12. 13.

Job 42. 3. Job 40. 5. 2 Cor. 14. 30. Phil. 3, 15, 16.

George Fex the Younger's Works. P. 242. Dear Friends, when you are met
together to wait upon the Lord, O feel his living Gift in yourselves in your
Meetings, and at other times, whereby satisfaction and refreshment shall be
received unto the Seed Immortal.

So dear Hearts, let the living Measure of the eternal Father of Life, and
Power, and Wisdom be your continual stay and Habitation, that so if any shall
come among you that are out of the true savor and feeling of the Life in
themselves, and shall act or speak any thing among you, that is out of the
Life, that ye may not then be drawn out of the favor and feeling thereby, but
wait ye single in the innocent patient-long suffering of Christ, and if ye feel
the Seed burdened, wait in true Patience and fervent love to Truth, then the
Lord's Counsel you will know, and the Evil you will know that caused the
Burden, and be judged; and the Truth will be adorned, and its Enemies shall be
ashamed.

P. 453. And if any Member would act any thing that might hurt the Body or any
part of it, either through being out of the Sense, what is of Service to the
Body or otherwise, then another Member or Members be made sensible of the same,
it or they are bound in Love to the Body to seek to hinder the same. G. F.

B. L. Now I say my dear, inwardly and entirely beloved Friends, my Joy and my
Crown, and my exceeding great Reward for all my Labors, and small Sufferings,
is and I trust ever shall be your Unity, in the holy spotless eternal TRUTH,
which I prefer before all my chiefest Joys in this World, my sweet Heavenly
Father is Witness for me.

B. L.

My dearly Beloved, search and see, weigh it in the Balance of the Sanctuary,
in the Light of Truth, without which you know we cannot see clearly, nor judge
impartially.

See, I say, if there be any thing more black, more gross and dangerous or
likely to destroy the Body and Branches and lay it entirely waste; although I
know I know the root shall and will abide forever, and shall spring up
elsewhere; if all the lame, dry, withered, sickly and dead Branches should be
cut off by some Judgment from above, and the whole Body defected and Buried in
Oblivion. Which I shall pray with my whole Soul and Spirit to my Dear Dae^
(when I can) that it may be prevented for the sake of some that are living
Branches, sweet, green and fruit-bearing amongst us. Inquire strictly dear
Friends if there be any thing more likely to bring sudden Destruction upon us,
than that Satanical Practice of SLAVE-KEEPING.

Ezekiel. xiv. 3, to 7. xx. 7, to 39. Rev. iii. 15, to 19. ix. 2, 3, 21. xiii. 12,
to the end. xiv. 9, 10. xv. 2. xvi. 2, 6, 11. xviii. 4.

And a false and forward Ministry, and that dark dry earthly Spirit that gives
Life to it, and strength, and Worship the Images and Idols, that it makes and
almost the Image Makers; but they shall all have their part in the Lake, except
they repent in time, which I heartily desire they may.

P. 254. G. F. Ah Friends, the Unity, the Unity (in the Spirit) the Love, the
Love (from a pure Heart) is exceeding precious, the yearning of Bowels toward
each other (in the Lord) the Faith, the Patience, the Watching, and Breathing,
and Groaning, and Sighing, and Praying, and Crying in the Spirit and Power of
Emanuel, in able to astonish the Heathen and confound Armies and Powers that
withstand the Kingdom of Christ the Lord, and to cause Vengeance to come upon
such as will (...) repent and turn to the Lord, in the Day of their Visitation,
even in the Day of God's long Patience and Forbearance, but set and bend
themselves against the Lord, and his Anointed.

Now Friends, here is our Strength, and these are the Weapons that we must war
withal, against all Ungodliness that is come and coming up; but verily Friends
if any of your Affections be centred in Husbands, Wives, Children, or any
earthen Vessel or any visible thing whatsoever, so as that you cannot be
willing to part withal, if it be required at your Hands, then may your
Sufferings be great and dangerous unto you. G. F.

Much more the dear Lamb writ to this Purpose, but I am afraid of enlarging,
left I swell this Volume too much.

William Dewsbery's Works. p. 16, 18, 21, 23, 216, 218, 229.

Dear Friends, Servants and Children of the most High God, whom he has called
and chosen out of the World; be faithful all of you in his Counsel, wait his
Power to guide you in all your Thoughts, Words and Works, in his pure fear in
obedience, to will, I charge you in his Presence be valiant for your Freedom in
dwelling in the Power of the living God, that may arm you against the fiery
Darts of the Devil.

P. 16. Him to resist in his appearance in all his Wiles, who goes about like a
roaring Lion, to draw you every way, seeking to get your minds from the Pure to
draw your minds into the visible things, your affections there to captivate,
your Wills to satisfy, in created and perishing Objects, or the knowledge of
the Truth in your or the Fleshly Wisdom, to feed with the Swine upon the Husks,
the Form and Image of what you have enjoyed or what you see in the Vision, what
you do not enjoy in the Possession, and and speak in a drunken Spirit, Words
without knowledge, and with them sits a painted Beast, the Will at Liberty out
of the Cross, and thou whose condition this is, art the foolish Virgin turned
from pure Wisdom of God, the Light of Christ, that convinced thee of Sin, and
now appearest in the outward formality, in the sight of Men, with a Lamp like
the wise Virgin's but dwelling in the Power of God, wants the Oil of joy and
gladness, in the Power of his Love, which the wise Virgins have in their Lamps,
which excerciseth their Consciences and keeps all their Affections in order, to
the Spirit of TRUTH, which Bridles their Tongues not to utter Words before the
Lord, but in true silence, wait upon him until his Spirit moves, his mind to
declare unto your Consciences, you foolish Virgins, I speak, you are Strangers
to Life the wise Virgins enjoy, though amongst them you come, your Life is
beautifying the outside of the Lamp with Words being quickly spoken, but the
fear of God is not before your Eyes, but your wills are out of the Cross, a
false joy arises in you, speaking what you do not possess, prising and
glorying in other Men's Lines, and contending for TRUTH with that mind which is
out of the Truth, and becomes Trees Blossoming with Leaves, but bears no Fruit,
and here your Folly is made manifest, while you speak to others, yourselves are
under reproof, in you are Strangers to Life of God: I charge and command you
Silence, Silence, Flesh, and speak not before the Lord, you foolish ones, that
dare to make mention of his Name, while the worker of Iniquity reigns in you,
whom the Lord will destroy except you repent. P. 19. Dear Children of the Lord
God, be Valiant, Bold and faithful in your Measures, that in the Light, Life
and Power of God, you may stand in the Day of great Trial, which they will upon
all you that make mention of his Name, for Power will be given to the Beast his
Horn to exalt, even to the Host of Heaven, for the clearing of the Sanctuary of
the Lord, then will all foolish Virgins and painted Beast, that are Enemies to
the Cross of Christ who has defiled the Sanctuary of the living God, in coming
before him, amongst his Saints and Children, and from amongst them shall come
trembling before the Power of the Beast, when he utters his Voice, and commands
all to Worship his Image, but then shall all you Children of the most high God
whom he has called and are faithful to to him in his eternal Life rejoice, who
will you keep in that Day in rest and Peace, in the Ancient of Days, who will
sit to judge in righteousness, all that withstands the rising of his Glory and
of his Dominion there shall be no end, therefore who make mention of the Name
of the living God, examine your Hearts, and Search them, and try your ways with
the Light, so will you be preserved pure, clean and unblameable before him, and
will be fortified by his Eternal Power against all the Deceit, Subtilty,
Windings and Twistings of the Serpent within you, and without you: I charge you
all in the presence of the Lord God, to abide with God, in what he has
communicated to you, and run not from the Witness of the Eternal Spirit, that
has Sealed you up in Measure, in the Power of his Love thou do run out to
speak further than thou Witnesses; art a filthy Drunkard that lavisheth out
thy self without the fear of the Lord, and so spends and wastes upon thy Lusts,
and the plagues and Vengeance of the Lord is thy Portion, thou filthy Drunkard.
For no Drunkard or Lustful Person shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

All dear Lambs, and Children of the Lord, abide in the Witness of the Eternal
Spirit, which will pass Judgment and bruise the Head of the Serpent in you, so
will you be Armed against all the Glorious Appearances of the Serpent without
you, to keep him out of the Scriptures, and the least of you in the Truth of
God, will over-turn all Priests and the Men of the World, with their or that
dwell in their Serpentine Wisdom and makes a Trade of the Letter, speaking and
disputing of the Saints Condition, as the Devil did about the Body of Moses,
but cannot Witness the Scriptures, Sealed up to their Souls by the Eternal
Spirit.

Dear Friends, meet often together in the Name and Fear of the living God, and
take heed of Words; let us see that the Witness speak, which will cut down your
own wills, and it will minister to the Witness in others, to the slaying of
their wills; and take heed of watching over one another with an evil Eye, to
spy out one another Weakness, and declare it to others, and discover their
Nakedness thou that art here art cursed Ham, and the Wrath of will be revealed
upon thee, but watch over one another with a pure single Eye, and if thou see
the pure in Bondage in any one by the deceit, whisper thou, not behind their
Back to others, but let the Witness in thee which sees the Deceit, and suffers
with the Pure that is pressed down in it, let it declare and Witness forth the
mind of the living God, against the Deceit, and it will cut it down, and the
Pure Holy Seed will be set at Liberty, and thy Conscience will be kept clean
unto the Lord, in discharging thy Duty, and so will thy captivated Brother or
Sister be restored again forth out of the Hand of the Destroyer, and then thou will have Union together, in that which is pure forever in the Lord, and the
eternal God of Power, keep you all his dear Children in his pure Wisdom, to
walk faithfully with him and one with another, and the Blessing of the Lord God
Almighty be with you forever. Amen.

W. D.

So all Children, keep your Eye with God, and with Clearness eye him in every
Motion, in his everlasting Power, then will cause his Light to shine in the
brightness of his everlasting Glory, which will stop all forward and dry
Spirits, which is hasty to utter Words before the Lord. If any Simple Heart
should utter Words through Weakness out of the Savoury Life, in what you may,
bear it in the Meeting, and after speak to them to restore them in a Spirit of
Meekness; try all Spirits and taste the Breath from whence the Words proceed,
and not to lay your Hands hastily on any, whatever they may pretend, but in
that which tries and weighs your own Spirits in coolness and singleness of
Heart, try and taste what Spirits they are on that come amongst you, or in at
this Day wherein many come forth to the owning of the TRUTH in their Judgments,
and regulates the outward Man in some outward Gestures, like to the Children of
the TRUTH, But though they pretend zeal and obedience to God in what they do,
they being gone from the Light, they neither regard the Glory of God, nor the
Good of his People, for all that they now do is wrought in a self-serving
Spirit, where they enter in a Mysterious Working of the Deceit of their Hearts,
to set up and cover themselves with a voluntary Humility and feigned Love,
gathering all the eloquent and enticing Words of Man's Wisdom as they can, with
which they make, they make a flourish in a discoursative Spirit, speaking high
Words of that they never did know, to get entrance upon the Affections of the
tenderhearted ones, that are afraid to judge any but themselves, with others
that look more at high Words, than to feel from whence they come, or to know
the end for which they are spoken, and they seek to overcome, with their subtle
enticing Words, to carry on their own Interest, intrude into the Ministry and
runs when God never sent them, therefore they do not profit the People.

So are the Children born of the Royal Seed burdened now; all dear Children of
the Lord, Watch and Pray that you may be guided by the Power of his Spirit in
all your Ways, and be careful that none be hasty to utter Words before the
Lord, neither suffer any Sighs or Groans, or any thing to be heard to pass
through you, but you have the Seal of the Spirit of the Lord, he requires it of
you, this I am commanded to lay as a charge upon you.

The Trial of Spirits, both in Prea^hers and Hearers, by William Dell, Minister
of the Gospel, and Master of Gonvil and Cains College in Cambridge. The Epistle
Dedicatory. To all the very little Flock of Christ, the truly faithful in these
Nations, now despised and almost worn out according to the Prophesy for the
Word of God, and the Testimony which they hold. Grace be Multiplied unto you,
and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ our Head and Hope.

I could not but distinguish you thus from all the rest of the People of these
Nations, of what Condition or Quality soever, seeing God himself has first
done it, having chosen you to himself in Christ, and set you apart for himself,
as a peculiar People zealous of good Works, and I have chosen to speak this
unto you, because ye are all taught of God, and have heard and learned from
him, the TRUTH, as it is in Jesus, beside you are the Men whom God will use in
his greatest and most glorious Works which he has yet to do in the World; to
wit, in Destruction of the Kingdom of Antichrist, and the setting up and
enlarging the Kingdom of Christ, which Things are not to be done by the Might
and Power of worldly Magistrates, which may be you have not received, and if
you had it would not be helpful here, by the Spirit of the Lord, which you all
have received in some Measure; yea further, none but you will be contented to
live by Faith and to follow Christ in untrodden Paths, and to undertake
impossible Works to Flesh and Blood, and none but you will be willing to have
the residue of Christ's Life and Works, and of his Sufferings and Death, filled
up in your Mortal Bodies: Wherefore remember you that Word of the Lord, spoken
by his Angel; Rev. xiv. 9, 10. If any Man Worship the Beast and his Image and
receive, his Mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand, the same shall drink of the
Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without Mixture, into the Cup of
his Indignation; wherefore you faithful ones had need to be well advised,
seeing AntiChrist has nobody else to oppose him in all the World that dare or
know how to do it, but you; and if he can prevail with you, all the World
beside will follow him headlong, as Gadaren's Swine ran into the Sea, and were
choked; the Mystery grows more Mysterious, yet this is our Comfort, God still
causes his Light to shine proportionably to his People, to discover every new
change and form of the Mystery of Iniquity, and though it is mysterious enough
to cozen all the World of unbelievers, though never so Wise and Learned, yet it
is never able to deceive the faithful, who have sufficient Light from God to
discover and sufficient Grace to overcome it.

W. D.

The Trial of Spirits.
1. John iv. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether
they are of God; because many false Prophets are gone forth into the World.

Really they went forth betimes, no wonder there is so many now amongst all
People.

Ver. 2. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God, every Spirit that confesses that
Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God.

Come into its own Heart, the Word Christ within, the glorious Hope, or Hope of
Glory, Col. i. 27.

Ver. 3. And every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
Flesh, is not of God; and this is that Spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have
heard, that it should come, and even now already it is in the World.

Then sure there is abundance now in 1700, Satan has not been Idle, I Will say
that for him.

Ver. 4. Ye are of God, little Children, and have overcome them, because
greater is he, that is in you, than he that is in the World.

Ver. 5. They are of the World, therefore speak they of the World, and the
World hears them. The World loves it is own.

Ver. 6. We are of God, he that knows God hears us; he that is not of God,
hears not us; hereby know we the Spirit of TRUTH, and the Spirit of Error.

ABINGTON, The 18th of the 3 d Mo. 1738.
A Close Concern came in my mind early, very early this Morning, for the sake
of Mankind, and the good Welfare and Preservation of Posterity, which a right
and perfect way of Instructing and Educating Youth, would tend much, to the
Furtherance of; and I know not any better way than that which would be the most
likely and certain way to bring 'em to the knowledge of Divine Wisdom, the Work
of the Spirit in their own Hearts, which Pride and Idleness very much
obstructs, for as an excellent Author well observed, Divine Wisdom begets
Humility, but that which is acquired by the Learned begets Pride.

I say, the Humble God teaches, but rejects the Proud.

So then Divine Wisdom exceeds all Litterature and Humane Wisdom, so far as
Light excells Darkness, Heaven exceeds the Earth, and the Almighty Lord God in
Heaven, exceeds Satan in Hell; for Divine Learning and Heavenly Wisdom, brings
us to the Knowledge of our Maker, and to have sweet Common on with him, as the
Saints had, who could say their Fellowship was with the Father and with the
Son. This, this Wisdom, my Fellow Creatures of all Names, to this Learning, I
do dearly, heartily and tenderly invite you, to this Brotherhood, this
Fellowship, this Unity, Union and and Communion.

This, this is worth the denying ourselves and forsaking all things in this
World for, if there were no ear of Torment, or Hope of Joy and Bliss, when
these Bodies have changed their Form.

I say, to have this most sweet, near, inward, intimate and perfect Fellowship,
Acquaintance and Conversation Day and Night, at all times with God, and with
his dear Children born again, this is Heaven itself, the Kingdom of God is
known to be within, not known without above the Skies; in his dear Children,
new Molded, new Made, new Fashioned, and yet old Fashioned, according to Heb.
xii. 22, 23. Col. ii. 10. iv. 12. 1 John 2. 5. John vi. 56. xvii. 3. They were
in it, and it was in them, and so it is now with some.

New formed in the Heavenly Image, having the Divine Essence, no Sin, no
Deformity, as all Sin is; but Glorious and Beautiful, in the likeness, Nature
and Substance of their Father, and are perfect and complete in the whole Will
of God, and are complete in their Beloved not out of him, for without him
Mankind with all his Humane, Earthly and Worldly Wisdom, however excellent,
were it Ten Thousand times more, all such still remains in Babylon, which is in
Confusion, and in the Smoke of the Bottomless Pit, which darken their
understandings, and those are in Torment and that is Hell. Coloss. ii. 7, 8.
Now, those that like to dwell there, and will not come out, I can but pity them.

The Sins of Sodom and many other Countries, (who knows but it may on this, if
we do not repent in time) brought the firey Wrath and Indignation of the Lord
upon them, whereby they were destroyed, after his merciful long Forbearance.

Q. The Sins of Sodom, What are them, or they?

A. Pride, Fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness, and I may say earthly
Mindedness or Covetousness, that mighty, mighty, almost Almighty Monster, the
chiefest of the Seven Devils and Supreme Ruler, Head and Governor in Hell,
Babylon and Bottomless Pit. The other Six Devils have Slain their Thousands and
Tens of Thousands; but this cursed, ugly, hateful, damned piece of Deformity,
and Mother Midwife, and Nurse of Enormities, has destroyed more Millions of
Thousands, as it is thought and has been thought by discerning and observing
Men. Rev. xiii. 1, 2. For what gross Wickedness, I say, was there ever
committed in all, or any part of the World, that we have had any Account of, in
any History or Newspapers, but this Beast with his Seven Heads, Ten Horns, and
Ten Crowns, and his Name of Blasphemy, have not had a share and hand in it, so
then all Covetous Men are Beasts, Blasphemers, Liars, Thieves and Murderers as
well as Idolaters.

Psalm 49. 12, 13, 20. 1 Cor. 15, 32. Titus 1. 11, 12. 2 Pet. 2. 12.

I heartily wish we might be brought to see this Sin, as great and as dangerous
as it really is, both in Church and State, in Ministers and Hearers, that we
might with one accord by Fasting and Prayer, in Spirit and in Truth, Night and
Day, in Public and Private, seek to and beseech the Almighty Lord of Heaven
and Earth, that he would be pleased to assist us with Strength and Courage to
make War with, and engage against so Capital an Enemy that is so dishonorable
to God, and all true Religion, destructive to Government and Mankind in
general; for I do believe here is in this Land of America, as selfish, sordid,
greedy, Covetous, Earthly minded People of almost all Names, as any in the
World. Oh! that some Courageous Valiant little David's might be raised up and
furnished with their Slings, and Smooth Stones taken out of the Brook of the
Lord, the River of Life, that runs through or in the Paradise of God, which is
Heaven, and sent forth against this great Goliath, that defies the very Armies
of the living God, and bring him down, cut off his Head, and give his Carcass,
with all the uncircumcised Armies, in all Nations and Countries, to the Beasts
of the Field; the Field is the World, Satan is the Beast of the Field, his
Fowls are airy, and to the Fowls of the Air, where Satan the Prince of Darkness
Rules, there let 'em go together where they belong, Birds of a Feather let 'em
go together; if they love to live in Hell, in Sin let 'em take it, and the
Reward of it, Torment. Kites amongst Chickens, and Wolves with Lambs, come but
to devour, it is their Nature.

The People in these Countries of America, have been Blessed with a great deal
of Plenty and quiet living for many Years; it is to be feared many, yea the
greatest Number by far are grown lukewarm, as to Religion especially, and are
become careless, forgetful and negligent to make suitable returns to the
Almighty for his innumerable favors which he has been pleased to shower down
upon us continually in such abundance, both Spiritually and Temporally for Body
and Soul. I believe there was a time when many tender Souls (I hope there is
some yet left) lived in a Divine Sense of these great Blessings, and sincerely
endeavored to make suitable returns or acknowledgments to the Lord, the Giver,
for the same; by walking and living an Holy, Pious, Temperate, Righteous, Just
and a Strict self-denying Life, and and so manifested their Sincerity and Love
to the ever Blessed TRUTH, in the sight of God and Man.

By avoiding every thing that might seem to be Sin, these were without Sin, not
omitting any thing, they in the Light of TRUTH see to be their Duty. But Oh!
Oh! Oh! if such as these Chieftains turn their Backs in the Day of Battle
(against Sin and Satan.) What will become of the rest of the Army, if these
turn with, or like, the Dog to lick up his Filthiness which he had cast out,
and with the Swine that washed to wallowing again in the Mire of Sin and
Iniquity of every and any Sort. What will become of us; for old Men, may be
some middle Age too, are centred in the Earth, Greedily Grasping and Gaping
after the World.

Mamon, Mamon, Mamon, as though Satan ruled in them; for he is God of this
World, and Satan is self, self, self unmortified; no worse Devil can be found
either in under or above the Ground.

The young ones they are got into the airy Region, where the Prince of Darkness
rules in the disobedient Hearts.

Riding, Drinking and Galloping about from House to House, Smoking, Snufing,
Chawing Tobacco, and other unclean fulsom, foul, indecent and Sinful Practices;
spending their precious time in their Master (Satan's) Service, and some
wasting the Substance and Estates, which they never wrought for, live and die
miserable, and leave their poor Children Forlorn and helpless for others to
maintain, when they are gone stinking to their Graves, and have left a bad
Savor behind them, by their great Intemperance, Idleness, Carelessness and
Slothfulness or altogether, and when they have so consumed their Substance,
ride up and down to borrow of others, but take little care to pay it again.

Oh! that the poor tender young Creatures, and old too, that are still
remaining, might consider in time and turn to the Lord by unfeigned Repentance
and Amendment of Life that so those Evils and Misery, which otherwise will come
upon them, might be avoided, is the hearty desire of my mind, and that is the
end or intent of my Writing.

B. L.

As I have said, it has been in my mind a pretty many Years, something
concerning the true Reformation, Preservation and Welfare, or well being of
Mankind, especially the well educating and instructing of Youth, after the best
manner or method for the Conservation, and Happiness of Posterity. There is a
Method very excellent, called, A Reformation of Learning by William Dell,
Author of that excellent Book, called The Trial of Spirits, in Preachers and
Hearers; to which I refer my Reader, hoping it may be of Service, and then my
End will be answered entirely.

The Selling of JOSEPH, a Memorial. By the Honble. Judge Sewall, in New England.
FOR AS MUCH as LIBERTY is in real value next unto Life; None ought to part
with it themselves, or deprive others of it, but upon most mature Consideration.

The Numerousness of Slaves at this Day in the Province, and the Uneasiness of
them under their Slavery, has put many upon thinking whether the Foundation of
it be firmly and well laid; so as to sustain the Vast Weight that is built upon
it. It is most certain that all Men, as they are the Sons of Adam, are Coheirs;
and have equal Right unto Liberty, and all other outward Comforts of Life. GOD
has given the Earth [with all its Commodities] unto the Sons of Adam, Psalm.
115. 16. And has made of One Blood, all Nations of Men, for to dwell on all
the face of the Earth, and has determined the Times before appointed, and the
bounds of their Habitation: That they should seek the Lord. For as much then as
we are the Offspring of GOD, etc. Acts. 17. 26, 27, 29. Now although the Title
given by the last ADAM, does infinitely better Men's Estates, respecting GOD and
themselves; and grants them a most beneficial and inviolable Lease under the
Broad Seal of Heaven, who were before only Tenants at Will: Yet through the
Indulgence of GOD to our First Parents after the Fall, the outward Estate of
all and every of their Children, remains the same, as to one another. So that
Originally, and Naturally, there is no such thing as Slavery. Joseph was
rightfully no more a Slave to his Brethren, than they were to him; and they had
no more Authority to Sell him, than they had to Slay him. And if they had
nothing to do to Sell him; the Isbmaclites bargaining with them, and paying
down Twenty pieces of Silver, could not make a Title. Neither could P^tiphar
have any better Interest in him than the Isbmaclites had. Genesis 37, 20, 27, 28.
For he that shall in this case plead Alteration of Property, seems to have
forfeited a great part of his own claim to Humanity. There is no proportion
between Twenty Pieces of Silver, and LIBERTY. The Commodity itself is the
Claimer. If Arabian Gold be imported in any quantities, most are afraid to
meddle with it, though they might have it at easy rates; lest if it should have
been wrongfully taken from the Owners, it should kindle a fire to the
Consumption of their whole Estate. It Is pity there should be more Caution used
in buying a Horse, or a little lifeless dust; than there is in purchasing Men
and Women: Whenas they are the Offspring of GOD, and their Liberty is,

-- Auro pretiosior Omni.

And seeing GOD has said, He that Steals a Man and Sells him, or if he be
found in his Hand, he shall surely be put to Death. Exodus 21. 16. This Law
being of Everlasting Equity, wherein Man-Stealing is ranked amongst the most
atrocious of Capital Crimes: What louder Cry can there be made of that
Celebrated Warning,

Caveat Emptor!

And all things considered, it would conduce more to the Welfare of the
Province, to have White Servants for a Term of Years, than to have Slaves for
Life. Few can endure to hear of a Negro's being made free; and indeed they can
seldom use their Freedom well; yet their continual aspiring after their
forbidden Liberty, renders them Unwilling Servants. And there is such a
disparity in their Conditions, Color and Hair, that they can never embody with
us, and grow up in orderly Families, to the Peopling of the Land: but still
remain in our Body Politic as a kind of extravasat Blood. As many Negro Men as
there are among us, so many empty Places there are in our Train Bands, and the
places taken up of Men that might make Husbands for our Daughters. And the Sons
and Daughters of New England would become more like Jacob and Rachel, if this
Slavery were thrust quite out of Doors. Moreover it is too well known what
Temptations Masters are under, to connive at the Fornication of their Slaves;
lest they should be obliged to find them Wives, or pay their Fines. If seems to
be practically pleaded that they might be Lawless; it is thought much of, that
the Law should have Satisfaction for their Thefts, and other Immoralities; by
which means, Holiness to the Lord, is more rarely engraven upon this sort of
Servitude. It is likewise most lamentable to think, how in taking Negroes out
of Africa, and Selling of them here, That which GOD has joined together, Men do
boldly rend asunder; Men from their Country, Husbands from their Wives, Parents
from their Children. How horrible is the Uncleanness, Mortality, if not Murder,
that the Ships are guilty of that bring great Crowds of these miserable Men and
Women. Methinks, when we are bemoaning the barbarous Usage of our Friends and
Kinsfolk in Africa, it might not be unseasonable to enquire whether we are not
culpable in forcing the Africans to become Slaves amongst ourselves. And it may
be a question whether all the Benefit received by Negro Slaves, will balance
the Account of Cash laid out upon them; and for the Redemption of our own
enslaved Friends out of Africa. Besides all the Persons and Estates that have
perished there.

Obj. 1. These Blackamores are of the Posterity of Cham, and therefore are
under the Curse of Slavery. Genesis 9. 25, 26, 27.

Aus. Of all Offices, one would not beg this; viz. Uncalled for, to be an
Executioner of the Vindictive Wrath of God; the extent and duration of which is
to us uncertain. If this ever was a Commission; How do we know but that it is
long since out of Date? Many have found it to their Cost, that a Prophetical
Denunciation of Judgment against a Person or People, would not warrant them to
inflict that evil. If it would, Hazael might justify himself in all he did
against his Master, and the Israelites, from 2 Kings 8. 10, 12.

But it is possible that by cursory reading, this Text may have been mistaken.
For Canaan is the Person Cursed three times over, without the mentioning of
Cham. Good Expositors suppose the Curse entailed on him, and that this
Prophecy was accomplished in the Extirpation of the Canaanites, and in the
Servitude of the Gibeonites. Vide Pareum. Whereas the Blackmores are not
descended of Canaan, but of Cush. Psalm. 68. 31. Princes shall come out of Egypt
[Mizraim] Ethiopia [Cush] shall soon stretch out her Hands unto God. Under
which Names, all Africa may be comprehended; and their Promised Conversion
ought to be prayed for. Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin? This
shows that Black Men are the Posterity of Cush: Who time out of mind have been
distinguished by their Color. And for want of the true, Ovid assigns a
sabulous cause of it.

Sanguine tum credunt in corpora summa vocato
AEthiopum populos nigrum traxisse colorem.
Metamorph. lib. 2. Obj. 2. The Nigers are brought out of a Pagan Country, into
places where the Gospel is Preached.

Ans. Evil must not be done, that good may come of it. The extraordinary and
comprehensive Benefit accruing to the Church of God, and to Joseph personally,
did not rectify his Brethrens Sale of him.

Obj. 3. The Africans have Wars one with another: Our Ships bring lawful
Captives taken in those Wars.

Answ. For aught is known, their Wars are much such as were between Jacob's
Sons and their Brother Joseph. If they be between Town and Town; Provincial or
National: Every War is upon one side Unjust. An Unlawful War cannot make lawful
Captives. And by Receiving, we are in danger to promote, and partake in their
Barbarous Cruelties. I am sure, if some Gentlemen should go down to the
Brewsters to take the Air, and Fish: And a stronger Party from Hull should
surprise them, and sell them for Slaves to a Ship outward bound: they would
think themselves unjustly dealt with; both by Sellers and Buyers. And yet it is
to be feared, we have no other kind of Title to our Nigers. Therefore all
things whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them:
for this is the Law and the Prophets. Matt. 7. 12.

Obj. 4. Abraham had Servants bought with his Money, and born in his House.

Answ. Until the Circumstances of Abraham's purchase be recorded, no Argument
can be drawn from it. In the mean time, Charity obliges us to conclude, that He
knew it was lawful and good.

It is Observable that the Israelite, were strictly forbidden the buying, or
selling one another for Slaves. Levit. 25. 39, 46. Jer. 34. 8 -- 22. And GOD
gaged His Blessing in lieu of any loss they might conceit they suffered
thereby. Deuteronomy. 15. 18. And since the partition Wall is broken down, inordinate
Self-love should likewise be demolished. GOD expects that Christians should be
of a more In^enious and benign frame of Spirit. Christians should carry it to
all the World, as the Israelites were to carry it one toward another. And for
Men obstinately to persist in holding their Neighbors and Brethren under the
Rigor of perpetual Bondage, seems to be no proper way of gaining Assurance that
God has given them Spiritual Freedom. Our Blessed Savior has altered the
Measures of the ancient Love-Song, and set it to a most Excellent New-Tune,
which all ought to be ambitious of Learning. Matt. 5. 43, 44. John 13. 34.
These Ethiopians, as black as they are; seeing they are the Sons and Daughters
of the First Adam, the Brethren and Sisters of the Last ADAM, and the Offspring
of GOD; They ought to be treated with a Respect agreeable.

Servitus perfect a voluntaria, inter Christianum and Christianum, ex part
fervi patientis saepe est licita, quia est necessaria; sed ex part domini
agentis, and procurando and exercendo, vix potest esse licita; quia non
convenit regulae illi generali: Quaecunque volueritis at faciant vobis homines,
ita and vos facite eis. Matt. 7. 12.

Perfecta servitus poenae, non potest jure locum habere, nisi ex delicto gravi
quod ultimum supplicium aliquo modo meretur: quia Libertas ex naturali
aestimatione proxime accedit ad vitam ipsam, and eidem a multis praeferri
solet.

Ames. Cas. Consc. Lib. 5.

Cap. 23. These. 2, 3.

Something concerning Backbiting; that spreading foul Disease, that does so
much mischief in the World.
DEAR Friends, meet often together, in the Name and Fear of the living God, and
take heed of Words, see that the Witness speaks, which will cut down your own
Wills, and it will Minister to the witness in others, to the slaying of their
Wills; and take heed of Watching one over another with an evil Eye, to spy out
one another weakness, and declare it to others, and discover their Nakedness:
Thou that art here art cursed Ham, and the Wrath of God will be revealed upon
thee, but watch one over another with a pure single Eye, and if thou see the
pure in Bondage, in any one by the Deceit, whisper thou, not behind their Back
to others but let the witness in thee which sees the Deceit, and suffers with
the Pure that is pressed down by it, let it declare and witness forth the mind
of the living God against the Deceit, and it will cut it down, and the Pure
Holy Seed will be set at Liberty, and thy Conscience will be kept clean unto
the Lord in discharging thy Duty, and so will thy Captivated Brother or Sister
be restored again forth out of the Hand of the Destroyer, and then thou will
have Unity together, in that which is pure forever in the Lord, and the eternal
God of Power keep you all his Dear Children, in his pure Wisdom, to walk
faithfully with him and one with another, and the Blessing of the Lord God
Almighty be with you all, forever, Amen.

W. D.

An EPISTLE of William Leddra to Friends, Written by him the Day before he was
put to Death.
To the Society of the little Flock of Christ, Grace and Peace be Multiplied.
Most dear and inwardly Beloved,
THE sweet Influence of the Morning Star, like a Flood distilling into my
Innocent Habitation, has so filled me with the Joy of the Lord, in the Beauty
of Holiness, that my Spirit is as if it did not inhabit a Tabernacle of Clay
but is wholly swallowed up in the Bosom of Eternity, from whence it had its
being.

Alas, Alas, what can the Wrath and Spirit of Man, that Lusts to Envy,
aggravated by the Heat and Strength of the King of the Locusts which came out
of the Pit, do unto one that is hid in the Secret Places of the Almighty, or
unto them that are gathered under the healing Wings of the Prince of Peace,
under whose Armor of Light they shall, be able to stand in the Day of Trial,
having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness and the Sword of the Spirit, which
is their Weapon of War against Spiritual Wickedness, Principalities and Powers,
and the Rulers of the Darkness of this World both within and without. Oh! my
Beloved, I have waited as a Dove, at the Windows of the Ark, and have stood
still in that Watch, which the Master (without whom I could do nothing) did
Reward at his Coming with fullness of Love, wherein my Heart did rejoice, that I
might in the Love and Life of God, speak a few Words to you, sealed with the
Spirit of promise, that the taste thereof might be a savor of Life to your
Life, and a Testimony in you of my Innocent Death, and if I had been altogether
Silent, and the Lord had not opened my Mouth unto you, yet he would have opened
your Hearts, and there have Sealed my Innocence with the Streams of Life, by
which we were all Baptized into that Body which is in God, with whom and in
whose Presence there is Life, in which as you abide, you stand upon the Pillar
and Ground of TRUTH, for the Life being the TRUTH and the Way, go not one step
without it, least you Compass a Mountain in the Wilderness, for unto every
thing there is a Season, as the flowing of the Ocean does fill every Creek and
Branch thereof, and then retires again toward its own being and fullness, and
leaves a savor behind it, so does the Life and Virtue of God, flow into every
one of your Hearts, whom he has made partakers of his Divine Nature, and when
it withdraws but a little it leaves a sweet favor behind it, that many can say
they are made clean through the Word that he has spoken to them, in which
Innocent Condition you see what you are in the Presence of God, and what you
are without him; therefore my dear Hearts, let the enjoyment of the Life alone,
be your hope, your Joy, and Consolation, and let the Man of God flee those
things, that would lead the mind out of the Cross, for then the favor of the
Life will be Buried, and although some may speak of things that they received in
the Life, as Experiences, yet the Life being veiled, and the favor that it
left behind washed away by the fresh Floods of Temptation, the Condition that
they enjoyed in the Life, boasted of by the Airy thing, will be like the Manna
that was gathered Yesterday without any good scent or savor, for it was only
well with the Man when he was in the Life of Innocence, but being driven from
the Presence of the Lord into the Earth, what can he boast of? although you
know these things, and (many of you) much more than I can say, yet for the Love
and Zeal I bear to the TRUTH and Honor of God, and tender desire of my Soul,
to those that are young, that may read me in that from which I write, to
strengthen them against the subtle Wiles of the Serpent that beguiled Eve; I
say, stand in the Watch within, in the fear of the Lord, which is the very
entrance of Wisdom, and the State where you are ready to receive the Secrets of
the Lord: Hunger and thirst patiently, be not weary, neither doubt, stand still
and cease from thy own Working, and in due time thou shall enter into the Rest,
and thy Eves shall behold thy Salvation, whose Testimonies are sure and
righteous altogether; let them be as a Seal upon thy Arm and as Jewels about
thy Neck, that others may see what the Lord has done for your Souls; confess
him before Men, yea before his greatest Enemies, fear not what they can do unto
you, greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the World, for he will
cloth you with Humility, and the Power of his Meekness; you shall reign over
all the rage of your Enemies in the favor of God, wherein as you stand in
Faith, ye are the Salt of the Earth, for many seeing your good Works may
glorify God in the Day of their Visitation; take heed of receiving that which
you saw not in the Light, lest you give Ear to the Enemy; bring all things to
the Light that they may be proved whether they be wrought in God, the Love of
the World, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eye are without the
Light, in the World, therefore possess your Vessels in Sanctification and
Honor, and let your Eye look at the Mark. He that has called you i^ Holy; and
if there be an Eye that offends, pluck it out and cast it from you; let not a
Temptation take hold, for if you do it will keep from the favor of God, and
that will be a sad State, for without Grace possessed there is no assurance of
Salvation; by Grace you are saved, and your Witnessing of it is sufficient for
you, to which I commend you all, my dear Friends, and in it remain;

Your Brother, WILLIAM LEDDRA.
Boston Goal, the 13th of the First Month, 1660/61. But the Day before he
suffered Death.

There are several other Letters and Epistles of this dear Lamb's Writing and
some other of our Friends, that were put to Death at Boston about same time,
very weighty, with Sweet and Heavenly Advice, Caution, and Consolation and
Comfort; all well worthy to be Reprinted; (but Oh me! Ink and Paper is too
short) Written by Marmaduke Stevenson, William Robins and Mary Dyer, which were
put to Death at Boston, beside others that were Condemned, of which a large
Account is given of our Friends called Quakers Sufferings, by George Bishop, in
his Book called New England Judged, by the Spirit of the Lord.

I say, all Writing and Printing is too short, although by the directing of the
Holy Ghost, without its own Work in the Heart of Mankind, that is and ever will
be the Summum Bonum.

I should be heartily sorry (I can say) if any of our Friends called Quakers
should go about to attempt or undertake or assume to act the same things as the
Bostoneers did to their Progenitors, it would be a bad Savor for or to our
Testimony to the unchangable TRUTH which we profess, and our dear tender and
much Honorable and worthy Elders suffered so much for in Old-England, as well
as New England, and other Countries. Oh this would be sorrowful for me and many
other of my dear Friends to see or hear of, for Persecution is of the same
Nature amongst all People wherever it comes, it points to its Center Root and
Foundation, from whence it springs, and that is from the Pit, without Bottom,
no good Bottom or Foundation, but full of Smoke, and some false and foul Fire,
which does abundance of hurt sometimes, amongst Brethren and Neighbors too,
and in Kingdoms and Nations far and near; read Eusebius's Ecclesiastical
History, Josephus Wars of the Jews, History of the Waldenses, the Spirit of the
Martyrs Revived, and of latter date, the History of the Wars in England and
Ireland, and in Boston; they were going on valiantly in their Master Satan's
Service, for time I never heard or read the like of it in Story, all things
considered, and how far they would have proceeded if they had not been stopped,
no Man knows.

Q. And this Persecution began with Tongues, how so, may some say?

A. Why, there was a People raised up in Old England, whose Meat and Drink it
was to do the Will of God, were Christ's Friends and his own Brethren and
Sisters, Begotten and Born of the same Father. I say born of the same Father,
the TRUTH, which is the true God and eternal Life, these Saints hearing there
was a People Settled in America, that fled from Persecution in Old England,
which were full of Notion, and empty of the Life of True Religion (as many of
all Professions are) thought it their Duty to instruct the Ignorant, and them
that were out of the way of God, and yet may be some thought in the way they
were was right, as Man's ways are right in his own Eyes, often times when he is
wrong, as it appeared by those People in Boston.

These dear Creatures loving the Truth more than all Men, leaves their Wives,
Women their Husbands and Children, and their dear beloved inwardly Friends, and
their other outward Comforts, in a faithful obedience undertakes a long
hazardous, dangerous and chargeable Voyage to Boston, in the Love of TRUTH, to
Visit these high, yet very low, those full very full, yet empty Professors, as
high as Heaven in conceit, and as low as the Earth in Substance, as full as the
Sea in Pretention, as empty as Hell in goodness, as afterward was manifest, by
their Murdering of several of the Saints and Servants of the living God, the
Eternal TRUTH, and is the pure Holy Word, by which these Saints were Sanctified
and cleansed throughout from all Sin, as well as the Saints before of old or
since; they were and are made clean through this Word that spoke to and in
them, not in Notion but Experience, and it is the same now, where true Love,
and pure Faith unfeigned (not a sinful Faith) abounds above all, Glory, Honor
and Praise to this living Word, nothing to Man, No, No, not in the least Degree.

To these high Professors, I say, these Heavenly Messengers were sent by their
Heavenly Father, to bear their Testimony, in and for the pure TRUTH, against
all Error, Superstition, Hypocrisy, Idolatry and Formality; which I say they
were full of, I wish they were not so now, as well as in this and other Parts
of America; these clean Vessels bear a faithful Testimony, in and for this Holy
Faith that was once, is now and ever will be revealed in the Saints, from Faith
to Faith, growing and increasing, increasing and growing from small Stature to
full Strength, filled full, yea full with the pure TRUTH, then empty of all
Error to be sure, for I do know, Eternal Thanks to TRUTH, that there is a way
laid out, cast up, fenced in and eternally well secured and most, yea most
Gloriously and Beautifully adorned, and the sweetly refreshing Streams of the
River of Life for Drink, and the Tree of Life for Food, which bears twelve
manner, or all manner of good Fruit, and yields her or its Fruit every Month at
all times and Seasons, to them that are prepared, and their Vessels clean
enough to receive it, and the very Leaves of this lovely Tree, are for the
healing of the People and purging of them from all Sin, that they may have a
proper right to partake of the Fruit daily, without Money or Price, all free as
was the Hebrews Manna, but far more exceeding as Heaven is higher than the
Earth, that was for a time, this for eternity. Oh! Holy Pleasure indeed, to eat
of such Food, and drink of such Drink, and travel in such a way, and with such
Heavenly Companions and Travelers, this Blessed way, although it may seem
strait and narrow to the true Travelers in the entrance, yet in the Progress,
and middle very wide easy and delightful, but in and toward the end Glorious in
Holiness indeed; here the wayfaring Man may and can Walk and not Err, though a
Fool, yea though a Fool, the way as well as the Guide, which is one, is so
safe, secure, powerful, Holy and perfect.

But what will the Serpent, and all his Ministers and Messengers in Babylon say
to this Doctrine, who sometimes exalts Christ in Words as high as Heaven,
saying, That he is an Almighty and most merciful Savior, able and willing to
save us to the utmost from all Sin in this Life, and then presently tumble him
down again lower than Hell, and exalt Satan and his Doctrine, in his Throne,
and declare with one accord for a Necessity of of Sin, and continuing in Sin,
Term of Life, and no avoiding of it by any Power received from God, his Spirit
or from the Messiah, or any Grace from him proceeding, by us received, or any
other means whatsoever, although it be Reading or Praying, or Singing of Songs
or Psalms at home, or coming to our Warehouse of or on Sundays, where we set
forth our Ware to Sale, by the Hour, to them that bid most, whether they hear
our excellent Sermons, or fine Songs, or curious fine excellent Prayers in the
Pulpit, or at our best Customers own Houses when we go to Visit them for our
Bellies, or their being Baptized, Sprinkled, Dipped or Plunged in pure clean
Water, by or with our impure, unclean, filthy Hands, or receive the Holy
Sacrament as we call it, although we have no Scripture for it in the least, or
though they go Mourning all their Life's-time Day and Night, in true Contrition
and in never so sincere a penitential frame of mind at home or abroad, in
Fields or Woods, and desert and lonesome Places (as many has done) with
Fasting, Praying and Weeping before the Lord, that he would be pleased to pass
by and forgive them their Transgressions and Sins, and give them, I say, and
give them strength to resist and withstand their grand Enemy, and then they
would serve in sincerity and in TRUTH all the Days of their Lives after, and
the Lord have been found by such, and answered them to the Joy of their Souls,
according to his Blessed Promise of old to such, That their Sins he would Blot
out as a thick Cloud, and their Sins he would remember no more; notwithstanding
these things, or a thousand times more, and all that can be said, thought of,
or done, says these Messengers of Satan, there is no freedom from Sin in this
Life, there is none that does good, and sins not; so such make use of
Scripture to uphold their Master-Kingdom, as all Sin is, so here is the very
same Temptation wherewith the Serpent tempted Eve, you shall be as Gods, if you
do break God's command, you shall not die, but be as Gods; these say you must
sin, there is no Possibility of being free from it on this side the Grave, and
no Repentance there, and yet promise the People Heaven, here is Confusion
enough, to be seen by him that has Eyes; and thus is Satan transformed into the
likeness of an Angel of Light, by his Ministers, Servants and Children, and
exalted in his Throne above all that is called God, and showing himself that he
is God, chief Ruler there, in the Heart, as to be sure he is, so long as Men
live in Sin, for that is his Prerogative and ever will be, for these Men will
readily allow and confess, that the purest, most Holy, or unholy, Religious
Performances and Service in Worship, and Ordinances are sinful, as I have heard
it myself from the Pulpit declared (when I was a very constant hearer of them.)
O Lord forgive us the Sins of our Holy Things, say they; What greater
contradiction can be? for that which is Holy is free from Sin, as that which is
sinful or full of Sin (as their Performances are) is free from Holiness. Sure
these Men have no Faith or else it is a false and sinful Faith, such as Cain's,
Satan's, and all the false Prophets was, which is a murdering, killing, but
not a saving Faith, which is much, yea much worse than no Faith at all, and is
more offensive to God and good Men, because more mischievous in the World,
especially amongst those called Christians. Oh! Oh! that ever such as these
should be accounted of as Chief and only Persons ordained, called, prepared,
fitted and qualified, and sent forth to be the Teachers of the People, and to
be had in great Honor and exceeding high esteem for their Works sake, which
yet is altogether Sinful, or full of Sin, and all Sin is of their Father the
Devil, and his Work they do for their Bellies sake, which is their God, and for
corrupt self, which is Satan or Serpent, in Hebrew Abaddon, but in the Greek
Tongue Apollyon, in English Devil and Beast with seven Heads, ten Horns, and
ten Crowns, a little false heathenish Learning to amuse the Populace, but
stands very tottering like Crowns on the small spickiting tops of the Horns of
Beast, in great danger and likely to fall being misplaced a little; true Holy
Spirit Learning has and will before some are aware shake many Thousands of
them very easily; the Holy Spirit right well knew what he did, and said, when
he alluded to a Beast with many Heads, Horns and Crowns, when he intended to
present and set forth Antichrist, clearly to our view. For Friends, all you
that are Ministers of Antichrist, whether in Pulpits or Galleries, you that
are of the Royal Offspring, of the King of the Locusts, and are creeping out
of the Bottomless Pit a little, to see what Mischief you can do to Mankind, and
Service for your King Lucifer, who was (and is now to you) as the Son of the
Morning, and to see what good you can get for your God, your Bellies.

Friends, for so I may and will call you still, (...) then it is in the same
sense and meaning, that TRUTH spoke to Judas when he was about to Kill or
Murder him, or betray him into their Hands that should do it; and Friends you
are in the same Spirit that your Elder Brethren, Cain, Judas and the
Bostoneers, and others were that came before them, as is mentioned already, for
you are slaying and betraying the pure TRUTH, either wilfully or ignorantly or
both, for ends base enough, however though it is so in this cause, I find Freedom
to appeal to you and your earthly Learning and carnal Wisdom, for I know no
other with you, yet in this case you may be capable to Answer.

Q. Did you ever see or hear of any thing in the whole World more preposterous
than this Beast, which is metaphorically pointed to by the Holy Ghost, which is
infinite in Power and Wisdom.

For my part I never did in all my Travels, and little reading, Conversation
nor any thing like it, except it be you yourselves which comes the most near it
of any or all visibles, for aught I know, if not exceed; for Friends, for you
to pretend to attain the knowledge of Divine Wisdom by Humane Learning, or
Heavenly things by Earthly Acquirements, or to be Citizens in New-Jerusalem,
when you are Fellow Commoners in Babylon; or to attain to the True Light, or
the Light of TRUTH when you are in and delight in the Deeds of Darkness, buried
therein; or to pretend to self-denial, and to teach it to others, when you live
in gratifying of the Flesh, and cursed self, in all things, the Lust of the
Eye, and Pride of Life, and whatever in this vain World is; you pretend to be
of the Church of God, when you are Members in full Unity and Communion in the
Church of Satan, and have a Prebend there, which is Sin, which he allows in
full Freedom to all his Members as much as their Hearts Lust can desire,
without any contradiction or restraint, denial or control in the least; you
pretend to be Subjects of Christ, and yet are sworn Servants and Friends of
Antichrist; you in Words call God Father, and pretend to be his Children and
Servants, Heirs of his Kingdom, but you have no Lot or Inheritance there, for
he, the Holy-one knows, (...) so does his dear Children, that you are of your
Father the Devil, and his Work you do, so are of his sinful Kingdom, which is
full of Sin, and Torment its Reward, so his own dear choice Children, so I
acknowledge you have a right title to call him Satan, meaning Father, and he is
so and you acknowledge your descent, by confessing you cannot cease from Sin
(having Eyes full of Adultery) for indeed none of his Children can, nor ever
will cease from it, while in his Government they willingly keep, they love it
too well, and their Father also. Oh! sorrowful, to love the Father of all
mischief and the Author of all the Misery and Torment that is brought upon poor
dear Mankind both here and hereafter, for whom my Soul mourns.

Now Friends, and all that may read these Lines, consider with yourselves, you
especially that has any true regard to or desire after the Knowledge of the
Honor of God, sincere desires of attaining to the knowledge of love to his
pure TRUTH, or the present and eternal Welfare of your own Souls; I say
consider wisely and in time; can Satan bring into the World a greater and a
more Eternal Cheat than abovementioned, and any thing more likely to establish
Atheism in the World, than fallen Angels, Messengers or Ministers all one, who
once knew the mind of God, and were highly favored with the sweet enjoyment of
his Holy pure TRUTH, and had a Commission from him to Preach the Sempiternal
Gospel of Peace and Purity, and received a part of the Ministry (like Judas)
who after all betrayed his Master for thirty Pieces; but our Modern Traitors
scorn such a poor Pittance, they will have 30000 or 30 Millions if they can,
but I could wish, with many others, that they were all set aside or put out of
the way like him, or reclaimed and thoroughly purged if it be possible, which is
much to be feared, their enmity is so great to the Truth and its true Ministers
as it ever was, because they the true Ministers are under a Necessity to bear a
Testimony against them, or else they cannot be true to the trust reposited in
them, or committed to them; these fallen Angels the worst of Enemies in any
Religious Society, may well be compared to some Usurpers, that had been chief
Rulers under a King or Kings, and had Commissions from them, but for some
notorious Crimes have had their Commissions taken from them, and turned out of
their high, profitable and Honorable Office, when they being thus cashiered,
to work their revenge, and carry on their design, keeping a form and Copy of
their old Commission, perfixing to it a Counterfeit or Forged Name, Hand and
Seal; with this sham Commission, and the great Interest and Power they had
before with the Kings Subjects, as Absalom have gathered a Party, and headed
them, and usurped the Government in Discipline, etc. debauched the Kings Wives
or Wife, the Spouse, defiled the Temple, True Church, corrupted and destroyed
his Posterity, all they could catch by their Deceit, Hypocrisy and feigned
Humility, under pretense of doing more Justice than the King himself did or had
done; and so have set up themselves and their Party for a time, and dethroned
the True King, although it tended to the destruction of vast Numbers of the
People, that were unhappily led away by them, as in the case of Absalom,
Abimelech, and Haman, and abundance more, that is mentioned in Sacred Writ, as
well as other History.

Why should any be so very earnestly bent about getting Money? does any History
mention any one that was ever made good by Riches?

These things are Now, Now, Now, going on in the World in a Spiritual Sense, as
certain as ever they were acted by the forementioned, and by Persons too that
makes great appearance of Sanctity in Religious Performances, but it is Self,
whatever their demure appearance may be, and that is Satan, and for Mammon that
worst and most mischievous Devil in all the World.

These rich grown, ever poor, over wealthy, ever needy, ever grasping, never
satisfied, brim-full yet always empty, ever Laboring, yet always Idle, ever
diligent, yet always negligent, ever waking, yet eternally asleep, ever living,
panting and breathing after more, more, more, a little more, I say ever living
yet eternally Dead, and there let 'em lie and stink still, if they will not be
awakened. But I had much rather they should.

These great and high Masters of misrule, don't care to be controuled in their
way although they are ever so much out of the way, which is a very great Weakness
as well as Wickedness, that Men and Women will have their own way though to their
own and others Destruction, but the case is such, they having been so long in
Power and Repute, had in Honor, Men of renown in the Congregation, chief
Rulers in the House of the Lord, will not be contradicted, but if any should or
dare do so, let his concern be ever so great or burden weighty, he may expect
to be put in the Stocks, in the high Court of Benjamin, with little Benjamin
their Brother. Oh! how often have I heard and seen these things done
metaphorically, I am loath to say where, but if any one ask me I can tell 'em,
there is that that rules in the Church, to be seen and heard of Men, and to
show their or its Elocution, display their Eloquence, as in their Preaching so
in this, some for Mammon, some for some other ends base and vile enough.

And a few there is still left amongst us (I firmly believe) blessed be the
Lord, that have not any thing so much in view as in all sincerity, to promote
and exalt the Honor and Interest of TRUTH, the Peace and Tranquillity of the
True Church, and the present and eternal Happiness, Welfare and well-being of
Mankind, in all Nations, Colors and Countries in the World, that they might be
brought to the knowledge of the TRUTH, and be saved from Sin, yea, from all
Sin, for that is possible and so from Wrath to come; but some are, yea, very
many are pushed on, Headlong and Headstrong, with a furious raging fiery and
mad Zeal, yet blind, as in the case of Saul, before he was Paul, before he had
the new Name, with his Letters from the Chief or High Priest to persecute the
Saints at Damascus, or elsewhere (not from Colchester two Weeks Meeting, to R.
J. to Philadelphia Monthly Meeting) to separate S. and B. I pray in my Heart at
this time, they all that are living that had any hand in it, may have their
Reward according to their Intention. I think to leave 'em there with him, him,
him, himself, that is able to do all things, and so is able to produce good
Effects, from very bad causes, and say, Oh ( Deus Meus Omnia) preserve my Soul.

Oh! that all the Libertines, loose Livers, the Magdalens, the Publicans and
Harlots, the Smoking Drunkards, all unclean Persons, Thieves and Covetous,
Covetous, the Covetous Earthly minded Idolater, the Superstitious, Formal and
Nominal Christians, Preachers and Hearers, the young and old, old, the old
Hypocrites too, if possible, I say if possible might be converted, translated,
drawn out of that deep, dirty Ditch Hypocrisy.

And all the blind Zealots, and Superstitious Bigots, of all Names, their
Nature and Spirit is the same, when invested with a little imaginary Power. how
they will rage and persecute furiously them that oppose 'em, reprove 'em, and
will not submit to their Rules, Orders and Laws, though never so unjust, and
thus it happened to many of our dear Friends called Quakers, in Old as well as
New England, and elsewhere, when they went into their Synagogues, Mass-Houses,
or Idol Temples to reprove 'em, for their Hypocrisy and Wickedness, in
pretending to Worship him that laid down his Life for his Enemies, and at same
time preparing Laws to take away the Lives of his Servants, that came in his
Name, to do his Will, as he the Holy one required it at their Hands. I would
tenderly advise, and earnestly entreat all my dear Friends to be very careful
not to taste nor touch that Dust and Dirt, Persecution, which is the Serpents
Meat, and Cain's Mark, and it is Satan's Food, and his Childrens Meat and
Drink, and Life, to do the will of their Hellish Father, and Father in Hell,
that sends them and sets 'em about that, and all other unrighteousness and
Iniquity, and it is as essential to them in that State and Nature, as it was
and is to Christ's Brethren and Sisters, and all his true Friends and faithful
Followers, to do the will of their Heavenly Father, and Father which is in
Heaven, in his Holy Church, his Body, comprised of Sanctified Members, purified
Hearts and Souls, washed and cleansed from all Sin; and such as those did of
old, and now does perfectly know a new Birth, a being Born again of him, and in
him that is True and is the very TRUTH itself the very pure Verity of Verities,
the Eternal Essence in him only, not in any Book or Books, a Thousand
Ship-loads of the very best of Books will do us no good, nor the best of
Professions, Ordinances, and Humane Preachers (much less the worst) will do us
no good, except Man (Male and Female) be Born again he cannot see the Kingdom
or Government of TRUTH, or of God, which is one; this was and is and ever will
be declared of by the Eternal TRUTH, to all that had, have and shall have Eyes,
Ears and Hearts truly prepared to receive it.

And that all, for the Call is gone forth to all, might come to know this new
Birth, this being Born again of the incorruptible Seed, and the Word of TRUTH
Eternal, and be washed from all the filthiness of Flesh, as well as Spirit,
from all unrighteousness, and all self righteousness too, that very dangerous
Enemy to Man's Happiness, and that all might be redeemed and Translated out of
the Kingdom of Sin and Satan, which is Death and Darkness, Hell and Torment,
into the Kingdom of the dear Son and Power of TRUTH, which is pure
righteousness, Peace and Joy, in the Holy Ghost, in the pure Hearts and clean
Bodies of his Children and Servants he dwells, they are his Body, his Temple
and Kingdom, he Rules, Reigns and Governs, and takes delight in pure Hearts,
and the pure in Heart see him and know him, and dwell in him, the TRUTH in him,
and he in them, and his Banner over them, and Standard in them, is Faith and
pure Love, and these fits and abides under his Divine Shade with great delight,
and his Heavenly Fruit is sweet to their taste, and they are ravished with his
Beauty, and overcome with his Love at times, and their Cups do overflow, and
the Song of the Heavenly Host is known, and here the Bright and Morning Star is
seen and does remain where the Babe Immortal is Born the Proclamation is heard
great Joy to all People, Peace on Earth and good will toward all Men, and here
the sweet lovely Babe Immortal is formed in the Heavenly Womb, and does leap
for Joy at the sound of the Heavenly Salutation, and when the fullness of time
is come the Babe abovementioned will be Born in the Soul, and his Heavenly
Government will be on his Shoulders within, the Divine Essence within, in the
Soul that is made perfect through Sufferings, as Christ was; he that can
receive it let him. Oh! that this might be the Blessed experience of all
Mankind, that the Earth might become a Paradise again, to all People, as it is
to some; is the sincere and hearty desire of my Soul and Spirit, much more than
for all the Wealth in the World abundantly; the Kingdom of Heaven says TRUTH,
is within you, not known without by any Man, I can truly say.

B. L.

This Morning early it came in my mind to write something concerning the New
Birth, Resurrection and Baptism, all one.
ABINGTON, the 3 d of the 5 th Mo. 1738.
VERILY, Verily, said Truth, except a Man be Born again he cannot see or enter
into the Kingdom or Government (there be some Governments where there is no
King) of Heaven or Heavenly Government, all one, the same thing, and this is
the Holy Government of TRUTH in the Souls of the Sons and Daughters of Men, the
Government of Heaven is within, said Christ, the Truth is within, so said a
Servant of Truth; whatever is to be known of TRUTH is manifest within, I say
not without but within, greater is he, Truth, that is within us, than he that
is in the World, Satan, the Liar and God of it, and Father too, who faith in
his Children, in his Servants, in his Ministers, in his Angels, in his
Messengers, all one, That there is no Freedom from his Government, or Sin, all
one in this Life, but he Satan was a Liar from the beginning, and so remains,
who said to Eve, you shall not Die, but ^e as Gods; such Gods as himself and
his Children, which are always sinning, and will boldly confess and declare,
That they cannot cease from Sin, nor any Body else, say they, no not by any
Power of the Holy Spirit, and this is Satan's MasterPiece, to possess poor
Mankind, with such a Faith; for it is the Faith of Satan which he possesses all
that are under his Government with, that he might keep them at ease in their
Sins and be his Servants forever, and so always live in Bondage through the
fear of Death, Hell and the Grave, by reason of Sin and Iniquity that reigns in
them; so that I may ^a^ely say* although with Sorrow of Heart, without the
least, I say, without the least Breach of Charity, that all such as are firm in
this Faith are possessed of the Devil, and the Devil has them in his
Possession and Government, and he is Chief Ruler and Governor in and over them,
Preachers and Hearers of all Societies that pretend to be Christians, but the
Children of God, that are Born of TRUTH, their Heavenly Father they are in him,
in his Heavenly Government, and he the TRUTH is Chief Ruler and Governor in
them, and they have received a living strong and powerful Faith of him that
overcomes the World, and Satan the God of this World, which is Self,
unmortified Self; so in the World there is Gods many, and many Rulers, that are
Slaves to the Lust of the Flesh, with the Lust of the Eye, Eyes full of
Adultery, they cannot cease from Sin, and Pride of Life, and Covetousness, that
old, old, very old Devil and great Idol, and it must be closely minded and
worshipped to maintain the other gross Enormities or Devils, almost as bad as
Covetousness, that Father or Chief of Devils; but though it is so, yet they
that are and shall be counted worthy to know the New Birth, a being Born again
of the incorruptible Seed and Word of God, and God the Word, that made all
things, such do know a ceasing from Sin, a Death to Sin, and a Resurrection in
eternal Life, in the TRUTH in Heaven, and Heaven is in them, and have been
Baptized and Washed from all Sin, in thought, Word and Deed, such are entered
into his rest and remain in it, which no Sinner can, while he remain so and not
changed, such who are so Sanctified or Baptized, one, are Clothed with the
fine Linen, clean and white, the righteousness of Saints, such are admitted to
sit at the Lord's Table, in New-Jerusalem, and sup with him, him himself, and
he with them in his own Government or Kingdom, and this is the Supper of the
Lord, and the Fellowship and Communion of Saints, who said, Come, come and have
Fellowship with us; for Verily, Verily or truly, our Fellowship is with the
Father and the Son. Is not this Paradise itself, to Eat and Drink in the
presence of God and Angels. Heb. 12. and this is perfectly agreeable to what
TRUTH promised and said, I stand at the Door, and knock or call, if any one
will hear and regard, or obey my Voice, and open to me in all Obedience, I will
come in and sup with him, and he with me, and the Father and we will make our
abode with him. Oh holy abode! no Sin here, No, No, No, surely no, these dear
Children Worship their Father, and serve him Night and Day in his Temple with
all Alacrity; so these Heaven-Born favorites do know the Gospel and the
New Birth to be Spiritual, the Baptism, the Resurrection, and the Lord's Supper
to be Spiritual, and not carnal or natural. So they that know the New Birth,
they know all the other, for they are all one, in Essence Divine, he that has
one in possession cannot miss of all the other if he would; this is for them
that know the TRUTH, for to others they are but as Mysterious Parables, for the
Natural, Earthly, Covetous, Carnal minded Man or Woman knows not these things,
neither can they, because they are made known and manifested by the Holy Spirit
the TRUTH only, and a Hundred Thousand Ship-Loads of the best of Books, and all
the Earthly Worldly Wisdom, and Natural Learning in the whole World, either in
Preachers or Hearers, cannot make manifest the knowledge of these things; for
he that loves the World, and the things of the World, the Love of the Father is
not in him, so as to reveal the Mysteries of the Government or Kingdom of
Heaven unto him, and in him.

So that I may truly say, this Heavenly New Birth is the chiefest good to bring
us to the sure and certain knowledge of Heavenly things, and no other way,
this, this, this is the Key that opens the Mysteries of Truth's Government,
this is the Rock of Ages, and Foundation on which Truth does and ever will
build his Congregation; and Hell, Satan, Sin and Death shall never be able to
prevail against it.

ABINGTON, the 14th of the 4th Mo. this Morning before Day Light; as it now
comes in my mind.
COncerning the Living and True Vine, which never was dead nor could die, nor
ever will nor can die, but remains the same it was from and to all Eternity,
Eternal TRUTH and every True and living Branch dwells in this Vine, and this
Pure Vine dwells in, in, in them, and they in, in him, not out of him, No, No,
we are in him that is True, and we know him that is True, and is the very Truth
itself, the Holy eternal Essence which is God, the only True God, and True and
only Savior, and there is no other True God and Savior either in Heaven
above, or in the Earth beneath, or any-where else; in this eternal TRUTH the
true God is manifest to and in, in his Saints, in Sanctified Hearts, which is
his Temple, House or Body, and these dear beloved Children of his, Worship him
in this his own Temple, and he the Holy one accepts of their Worship and their
Offerings, whether Preaching, Prayer, Praises or Thanksgivings, which are
offered up to him and in him, in and by his own Spirit Life, Power and Strength
(which is himself) without any mixture of Self, striking Sparks of Fire of Man
or Woman's own kindling, such dear sweet living Branches as these that are in,
in the Holy pure living Vine, and the living Vine in them can and do, and ever
shall at times offer up high Praises, Hallelujahs and Thanksgivings to him that
was, and is and is to come, the Truth with pure Hearts, lifting up Holy Hands
without Wrath or Doubting for they or he that Doubts is Damned, as it is
Written: These Heaven-born Souls and Bodies, have the Government and Kingdom of
Heaven, the Truth, the true Christ essentially within them; the Kingdom,
Government, which is one of Heaven is within, as it is written; such as those
knows it to be so, and do not look out at the Lo here is, and Lo there is, nor
stand gazing up into the Air, looking after and for a carnal, humane, earthly,
Natural, Finite, Fleshly and Mortal Body, as the Essence of St. Mary's Body and
her Childrens was; but the Body of Christ, the Truth, a Spiritual Heavenly
Immortal Body, which is his Church or Congregation, more properly speaking, as
that worthy Martyr William Tindall's Translation of the Bible, calls it
Congregation and this is Christ's or Truth's Body, and he himself the Holy Head
of and in his own Body, his Congregation the Truth, and Christ the True Head is
on and in his own Body, not a great way off, by no means, such wild Notions are
preposterous, to imagine that Truth the true Head, and there is no other,
should be Thousands of Millions of Miles distance from its own Body, in some
place of Locality, nobody knows where.

But this is a notorious delusion of Satan and all his Ministers the World
over, to lead Peoples minds out, and to look for that a great way off, that is
so nigh and in them, for fear poor Mankind, that are his, Satan's, Slaves, though
Keepers of Slaves, should turn their minds inward and find a Redeemer there
that is willing if faithfully obeyed, and able easily to bind the strong Man
armed, Satan, and cast him out and spoil all his Goods which is Sin, and then
he Satan knows he loses his Kingdom, in such a Soul and Body.

Oh! that it might be so with every individual Body and Soul in the whole
Universe, that the Earth might become like Eden, and Eden as the Garden of the
Lord, where he the Holy one the Truth would then take delight to walk amongst
his pleasant Plants, and dwell in and amongst such well-beloved Children, Sons
and Daughters, Servants and HandMaids, and such Children Born of the Royal Seed
of Heaven, the Offspring of their Eternal Father the Truth, being filled with
his Power and his great Glory, and ravished with his ineffable Beauty, then,
then, then it is as it was of old, the Morning Stars can and does sing together
and the Sons of God shouted aloud for Joy, because the Heavenly Father, Lord
and King, the Truth is amongst them, in them, and is Glorious in Holiness,
fearful in Praises, and working wonders for them, and in them, and here in him,
in him, not out of him, but in him only and alone, and in none else; the Earth
enjoys its Sabbath again, as it did before there was any Sin in the World, in
as full and as sweet a Glorious and Heavenly manner I firmly believe as of old,
because it is the mind of TRUTH it should be so, I do know. B. L.

There is no Savior that saves from Sin,
But him that saves, and dwells within.
Something came into my Mind this Day, concerning the Foundation of the
Righteous, which are Saints, and the Foundation of the unrighteous, to wit,
Sinners of all Professions.
N Evertheless the Foundation of God, 2 Timothy ii. 19.
stands sure, having this Seal, Oh blessed Seal indeed, Oh holy Evidence, the
Lord knows them that are his, and his know him, and Worship him, in Spirit
and in the Truth, without any Sin, and let every one, that names the Name of
Christ depart from Iniquity.

He that has not his Spirit is none of his, but is an Idolater, and his
Worship is such; Preacher or Hearer of whatever Name.

He that does righteousness, is righteous, as he ( to wit) God is righteous.

Little Children, let no Man deceive you; he that commits Sin is of the
Devil.

All unrighteousness and Iniquity is Sin, and all Sin is the Devil's
Foundation, so all that are Building in Sin, and living in Sin, are Building on
the Devil's Foundation, and here the Devil's Foundation, stands sure likewise
in Sin his Servants and Ministers are established in his Kingdom in Sin, built
on his Foundation, and have a Commission from him too, to Preach the Doctrine
of his Government or Kingdom, Sin, Term of Life, no Freedom from it, say they,
while we are in these Bodies; although the Holy Ghost said to the Believers, your
Bodies are his Temple.

Now consider my dear Fellow Creatures, of all Names, while you are committing
of sin, and living in sin, you are established in Satan's Government or
Kingdom, and built and building on his Foundation, which is sandy or worse, you
may read and pray, sing Songs or Psalms at home, or go to Meetings, carry your
Bibles under your Arms, make an Idol of them, and hear Preaching or Praying,
either by Form or Extempore or receive the Bread and Wine, call it Communion,
but it is with Satan, you may go and be Sprinkled, Dipped and Plunged a Hundred
or a Thousand times calling it Baptism, yet it is all of Satan, while in sin,
you may go to Q -- -- r's Meeting and sit in silence, fall asleep, fall fast
asleep, then wake, first fall a sighing, spitting or blowing the Nose, stand up
pretending to Preach, kneel down pretending to pray, or sit or stand to hear
Preaching and Praying, its all of Satan, while in sin, the new Moons and
Sabbaths, Sabbaths, Sabbaths, and most solemn Gatherings or Assemblies, were a
cursed Abomination to the Lord of old, although of his own appointment, while
their Hearts were after Satan and their Idols; their offering Swines Blood,
cutting off a Dog's Neck, or slaying of a Man was not more offensive to God,
because both done in the Spirit of Satan, and so it is now with the Nominal
Christians; for the Plowing of the Wicked is sin, though nothing more warrantable
scarsly in this World; an offering well accepted in Abel, rejected and cursed
in Cain, because his Heart was not right in the sight of God; are not some of
us as bad as they were. Read Isa. 1. And you false Ministers read Jer. 23.

B. L.

ABINGTON, The 11 th of the 2 d Mo. 1737. To J. C. of Horsham. Dear Friend,
N Otwithstanding the great Bustle there was concerning my sitting quietly in,
and being carried out of Meeting Yesterday so roughly without speaking a Word,
signified little to me, or nothing in comparison to the Burden and Exercise I
was then under, on Account of a false and forward Ministry, which does so much
Work for Satan in our Meetings, by bringing great weights and burdens on the
true Seed of God's own right Hand, planting in his tender Babes which go not
forth, or dare not into Words when they please, to spend them upon their Lusts,
as the satanical Ministers do in our Meetings in this Country and in England
and elsewhere.

Nay, dear Friend, we need not go far, for I believe in this very
Monthly Meeting of Abington, there is such as are restless and uneasy with
sitting in Silence in Meetings, so will be Hammering and Hammering in Words
without Life, and so bring Death and Darkness over our Meetings, to the
wounding and almost slaying of some dear tender young Creatures belonging to
our and other Meetings, and for ought I know may be drove into Despair, if
there be not some powerful means used that may be effectual to stop these
Leviathans that plays and sports in the great Waters: The People are as Waters,
Oh! that it might be so says my Soul.

B. L.

Dear Friend, this has been the exercise of my sorrowful Soul above 20 Years,
and I still hope Truth, Time and Patience with Perseverance in well doing will
manifest my sincerity, whatever some of my Friends may be pleased to think or
say of me; and dear Friend, I can in all sincerity say, my Tongue, my Heart and
my Hand went together Yesterday, when I told thee I had good Unity with the
Testimony, which was against a false and forward Ministry, which took more care
to feed the Multitude with Words, than to feed the Children of God with Life,
or to that Effect; signifying that some Preachers were afraid what the People
would say, would think or say if they sat in silence; then they were in
grieving the true waiters, in speaking when they should not. And they were more
careful to feed the Dead than the living, which I say is the Work of Self,
Satan or the Devil, all one, although Man, vain Man and Woman do not see it so,
for as Blessed Jesus said, they that gather not with us, scatters abroad, and
that thou know dear Friend is the Work of the Devil. Please to read W.
Penn's Advice to the Ministry, in his Preface to G. Fox's Journal, p. lvi. and
the Journal, p. 216, 224. the First Part.

William Dewbery's Works, p. 18, 21, 216, 218.

William Edmonson's Journal. p. 300 306. Concerning Offerings and Prayer, and
many more I mentioned in that Paper I left with Friends at Spring Meeting in
Philadelphia; which I think if they were Reprinted and Bound up together they
might be of some Service to some young Preachers, and to old ones too, which
never see them, if it should, my end would be answered.

I wish, my dear Friend, our false and forward Ministers would consider these
Scriptures underneath.

Deuter. 13. 1, to the End. 18. 20. Is it not to serve or bow to other Gods to
join with Idolatrous Prayer.

I Kings 18, 19. 22. 6. There was a time when there was 850 false Prophets to
one true; what has been may be again.

Jer. v. 2, 13, 31. xiv. 14, 15, 16. xxiii. 9, to 16, 29, 30, 31, 32. xxvii.
15. Ezekiel. xiii. 2, to the End. xxxiv. 2, 3. xxii. 28. Isa. ix. 14 to 17.
xxviii. 7, 8, 9. Lam. ii. 14. iv. 13. Mic. iii. 5, 6, 7. Zechar. xiii. 2, 3, 4.
2 Pet. ii. 1, 2, 3.

Eccles. 5. 1. Be more ready to hear, than to give the Sacrifice of Fools; for
they consider not that they do Evil.

What is the Chaff to the Wheat? the Chaff is for Beasts, the Wheat is for
Children, to keep them alive in the Kingdom or Church of God, New-Jerusalem.

New England Judged, p. 299. Dear William Leddra's Advice to Ministers, the Day
before he was put to Death, in Boston, New England, for the Testimony of Truth.

Dear Friend, believe not all Reports, but what thou know amiss in me,
reprove me for it, and admonish me as a Father does a Son, whom he dearly
loves, and I hope it shall be well received, by B. L.

ABINGTON, The 26 th of the 12 th Month, 1737, 8
THIS being the 10th Day of my Fasting, it came into my Mind, the carnal
People's vain Notion of Christ the TRUTH, being in Heaven with a carnal Body,
or Body of Flesh; now I think it is absolute Blasphemy, to say, the eternal
infinite Being is in Heaven with a finite Body, as a Body or Vail of Flesh is,
and so limit the blessed eternal Maker and Savior of Mankind, and set the
Saints above him; For they will allow the Saints to be in Heaven with a Body:
Where is the Consistency of this dark, very dark Doctrine.

But Satan's Children are disputing about the Vail, the sanctified Body of
Christ, (that was made perfect through Sufferings; and he learned Obedience by
the Things which he suffered) as their Father did about the Body of Moses, but
could not find it, no more can they the other, although it be before their Eyes.
There Is no Occasion for Vails of Flesh in Heaven, or a Shadow, as the Substance
or Essence of Mary's Flesh was, which Christ took on him for a Time: But there
was nothing ascended but that which descended, no other. Now go thou Caviller,
go learn what that was, and is, and ever will be the same that it was, before
all Worlds, eternal Truth, Christ, Father, one divine Essence, not two
Essences, no no, not Flesh and Spirit, not earthly and heavenly, but heavenly
only. B. L.

There is no Savior that saves from Sin,
But he that saves and dwells within.
Pythagoras, that great and worthy Philosopher, asserted, That it is the
greatest of Injustices, to separate Children and Parents from each other.

Is there any Practice, any Thing like Slavekeeping? For that and all other
gross Sins, take it from first to last, in all its Twistings, Twinings and
murtherous Complications.

ABINGTON, The 29 th of the 3 d Mo. 1738.
THE right Establishment, Building, Settlement, Fountain and Foundation of the
true Congregation or Church, is God, is the TRUTH; and in him, not in Books, I
say in him, not out of him, no, no, no, not a great way of, but in Christ, not
out of him, but in him; the TRUTH is his holy House, built Church or
Congregation, (one) his living Body in him, and he in his living Body, and in
every living Member thereof, and every living Member knows it to be so, in
Verity and in the Truth; and the Truth, the Verity of Verities in them
forevermore. In his Children, born again in him the Truth, and he the Truth
brought forth in them to his own Praise and Glory, forever perfected in his
Saints.

And this is the Foundation, which is already laid, was, and ever will be firm
as a Rock, which did, does, and ever will stand sure, and no other Foundation
can any Man lay; no, no, not Christ himself can lay no other than this, which
is Truth, in the inward Parts of his Saints, his own Children which he has
made clean and holy, and has perfected forever, such as he has so sanctified:
But this Foundation is not in the unsanctified, unholy, and Sinners, that live
and delight in Sin, plead for Sin Term of Life, will freely acknowledge they
cannot cease from Sin in Thought, Word and Deed; such indeed are established
also, but it is in Unrighteousness (a bad Foundation) and in Sin, which is
Satan's Church, Government and Kingdom, where he rules in his own Body, and
every Member thereof are all Sinners; and he himself is Head of his own Body,
which is his sinful Church, or Church full of Sin and Iniquity.

B. L.

Dear Babes and tender Lambs of my heavenly Father's Fold; it is in my Heart
this Morning, to visit you with a few Lines, in the sweet Love of my heavenly
Father, truly sympathizing with you in your Afflictions, Exercises, and sore
Travel; which (my very dear and tender Friends, Brethren and Sisters, born of
the immortal Seed and Word of God) you go through on Account of the great
Degeneracy, declension and Apostasy that is got in, and spread itself over
almost all the Congregations of Friends, every where, for ought I can
understand, in this long time of Peace and Plenty, a loose, libertine, careless
Spirit has got into the Congregation; some are centred in their great
Possessions, so are buried in the Earth that Way, as with thick Clay. Some of
these are Ministers and Elders, but sleepy dead Weights, and very great
Burdens in Meetings, especially a false and forward Ministry, which intrude
into Things which they know not, but what they know naturally, as brute Beasts,
and are vainly pufft up in a fleshly carnal Mind; with such our Meetings are
often annoyed and disturbed, whose Voices being that of the Stranger, which I
very well know, dear Lambs, you cannot follow or join with, for they are fitly
compared to the unclean Beasts, which mudled and dirtied the pure Water with
their Feet: Such as these in our Meetings when gathered together, and the true
Sheep and Lambs of Christ's ^old are drawing near the Fountain of eternal Life,
with sweet Breathings and Prayers* that the pure Well might spring up in 'em,
to the refreshing of their weary Souls and traveling Spirits, which are often
heavy laden, and with Grief go mourning on their Way, because of the
Abomination of the Times.

And if the blessed Fountain seem to open and spring, although but a little, in
steps the Prodigal with his unclean Feet and so fouls the Water, and maybe the
Current is stopped, but he catches a Portion perchance in an unclean Vessel, to
spend on Harlots in riotous Living. Up he starts to preach, when its not
required of him or her; and here the Offering is not nor cannot be accepted by
the true Seed. That Cain is wroth and his Countenance falls, then Abel must be
slain; the true seed oppressed and kept in Bondage, and the false Birth reigns
and bears Rule with great Authority seemingly, to the carnal Mind: But the pure
humble, meek and lowly precious Seed of the Government, Kingdom, and true Heir
of God, and joined Heirs with Christ sits very still and quiet, waiting for the
blessed little River, that makes glad the whole City, Habitation, Congregation
or Church of God; to rise higher and higher, not to the Ankles, Knees and Loins
only; but as a River that cannot be forded or passed through: And here you dear
Babes, Children of the Kingdom, drink many times, until your Vessels can hold
no more, and yet are afraid to stand up when required, for fear of doing harm,
or standing in the Way of others, which you prefer; but dear Babes and Children
of the most High, beware I beseech you of this Error, and mind your holy Guide
in all your Approachings before him; let our Eye be single to him that our
whole Bodies may be filled with Light, that we may be may see Glory, and feel
the Life of the dear Lamb of God, to lead us and guide us in all our Duties and
Services, he may be pleased to require of us; and we need not fear being
deceived by the Enemy's Transformations neither within or without, for his
Grace is sufficient for us in time of need, as our Eyes are single toward him,
and him alone for Advice, Counsel and Strength, at all Times. Glory endless is
with Him.

B. L.

ABINGTON, The 1st of the 4th Month. 1738. To J. C. of HORSHAM.
DEAR and Well-beloved Friend, it came in my mind early this Morning, once more
to write a few Lines, to thee, concerning the close exercise of Mind, that is
now on me, and have been many Years, long before I ever saw Pennsylvania;
concerning that pernicious destructive Spirit, that destroyer of much good in
our Meetings, I say, that pernicious Spirit, that appears in a false, as well
as a forward Ministry in our Meetings, to their great disturbance and
annoyance, especially of the faithful, both Ministers and others. Oh! this
mighty Monster (false Ministry) with his many Heads, Horns and Crowns, this
Monstrous, Beastly Spirit in Men and Women, rising up out of the Sea, or
People, this Beast that had a Wound by a Sword, but does live, but it is the
Life of a Beast, although it was wounded by the Sword of the Spirit, by some
Convictions for gross Sins, but the deadly Wound being falsely healed, the Beast
does live and is alive, and reigns in full strength in them, and have got the
Dragons Power and Seat, and great Authority, and the whole World wonders after
the Beast, the Worldly mind, and dark earthly Spirit amongst us; then again
there is seen a little Beast with two Horns like a Lamb, rising up out of the
Earth, and it exercises all the Power of the first Beast, that went or came
before it, being of the same Essence, Nature and Substance, formed in the same
Womb, Born of the same Mother, Mystery of Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, or of
Bastards, illegitimate, base-born Children, full of all, all, all Iniquity, the
very depth of the Mystery of Iniquity, Dear Friend, is this little Beast with
his two Horns like a Lamb, very Demure in the outward appearance, seemingly
Zealous for right Discipline and good order in the Church, very loving to
Friends of Repute, Ministers especially, good and bad, and get to their Houses
and Tables, the richest sort of Friends, and those of the greatest Note to be
sure, and most Account in the World, that they may spread their Name, and their
Fame wherever they come or go, that they may be more securely, covertly,
cunningly and hiddenly carry on their Design in the Church, in making of
Parties to strengthen their own Interest in the Church and their Families, by
Trading and great Dealing, either in Land or Goods, Executorship, or by
whatever way or means Wealth may be obtained, to set up themselves, and furnish
their Posterity with rich Wives and Husbands, that they may be great in the
Earth: And this to be contrived, carried on, acted and done with the face and
appearance of Religion and Sanctity, and under pretense of Preaching the Gospel
too, this is the very Secret of Secrets, of the Mystery of Iniquity and the
depth of Satan, which many Thousands amongst us I believe does not see, and
here Satan does work safely, and will work until he is discovered by the single
Eye, the cleansed Eye of the mind, that is opened and cleansed by the very
Light and Power of Truth itself, and kept open too, and clean in and by the
Eternal Light and Life of Truth, or else the Dirt or Dust of the Earth, may and
will get in again, and stop the Eye up again, and make it more dark and blind
than ever, never, never more to be opened, and this is a sad dismal State
indeed for any to fall into, deplorable, never, never, never to be recovered.

They that are not right lie down in sorrow, though they hide it from others for
a time; they feel it themselves, but having once began to Preach for same base
End, they are ashamed to, and afraid to leave off, although they are convicted
and condemned in their own Consciences, clearly and heavily, to be sure, and so
it follows, he that doubts is Damned, as it is Written.

In the Building that Glorious Temple or House at Old-Jerusalem, there was
neither Hammer nor Ax, nor any Tool of Iron heard or to be heard, all things
were made ready before they were brought there, and yet that was built by Men,
but the Glory of the latter House, in New-Jerusalem does and shall exceed, and
be and is greater than the Glory of the former House, as much as Light,
Darkness, and Heaven, the Earth, the former was a Type, the latter the
Antitype, the former was Built by Men to abide for a time, and of Earthly
Materials, the latter was, is and ever shall be Built by TRUTH itself, of
Heavenly Substance, and shall abide forever; Glory be to the pure TRUTH alone,
that was and is, and is to come.

Now, My Friend, if there was such, and so much care, quietness, stilness,
silence and awfulness in Building that outward natural House, Built by Men but
for a time.

How much more abundantly had we need to be in an awful, reverend, holy, pure,
still and-quiet frame of mind, when we meet together in order for the Building
up of this inward and Spiritual House, New-Jerusalem, whose Builder and Maker
is God himself the Eternal TRUTH, and none else but he, and he himself alone,
which was and is, is, is, to come, the Alpha and Omega, the Author as well as
finisher of our most Holy Faith.

I am sorry there is so much Reason to say, and Proof to be made, that there is
amongst us many Foolish (if not right down sinful and wicked) Builders, that
pretend to be Teachers too, that considers little of these weighty Concerns and
knows less; these are them that are Crucifying the dear Lamb in his Spiritual
appearance, when they are still crying Hosannah with their sinful Lips in our
public Meetings, to the wounding and piercing through the sides all true and
saithful Ministers, and right Worshippers amongst us.

The 4 th of the 4 th Month.
Dear John, this Morning I was in my Garden pulling up some Weeds, it came in
my mind what was objected against me lately, by one that ministers amongst us
N. A. and has done near 20 Years; that I was for setting up some Ministers,
and pulling down others, Now, Dear Friend, I must confess I do not approve of a
false Minister, much less to set him up, neither would I pull down the True by
no means, nor touch the truly anointed to do them any harm, for they are very
near to my Life I can truly say without any reserve, and I hope ever will be
while I have a Being, But if one should ask any Friend, even a false Minister
himself, if we might at any Time receive, should or ought to encourage a false
Minister, or approve, join and unite with him in Prayer or in his Testimony, he
would answer in the Negative, no, no, if not for Conscience yet for fear of
shame or blame, but then, says he, who shall be Judge, why truly I may say if
we have no Judgment in our goings and doings, we are in a very poor dark
Condition, as well as other People, as false Ministers and Prodigals would have
us, that we might receive such Husks as they have to feed Swine withal, but the
True Children in our the True Kingdom cannot feed on such Chaff, if they offer
to receive it by conniving at or seemingly approving of or joining with such
Swine-Herds, in Prayer or Testimony they will be in danger of being Choked,
for they themselves have not true Peace, their Master Satan cannot give it
them; now if any one offer to prove or make manifest their pretentions to
Preaching is all Deceit and Cheat, and their seeming seed Corn, nothing but
Chaff and Husk, their Peace flys away at once, like Chaff before a strong Wind;
this I have often seen in England, here and elsewhere. This Chaff, Dear
Friend, will not do for Children, the Beast, the Beasts, Beasts can feed on it,
for it is agreeable to their Natures as Bread is to Children, like loves its
like.

This little or lesser Beast, with his two Horns like a Lamb, but spoke like a
Dragon, like the Dragon that gave his Power to the first Beast and his Seat,
and great Authority to rule and govern in the Church with an high Hand in a
lordly manner, and they that would or could not submit to his Commands,
although never so unjust and unreasonable, he spoke as a Dragon, especially if
any found it their Duty to contradict and oppose his usurped Authority, and his
unjust Commands, and Arbitrary Proceedings, such must expect no Mercy from him,
and yet have all the Profession and outward appearance of a meek follower of
the dear Lamb, who suffered the contradictions of sinners, for our sakes, that
we might follow his Example; so the Beast, I say the Beast had two Horns like a
Lamb, got into the outward Form as much as possible, the more craftily to
deceive, and thus the Beast is a Beast still, being a little outwardly reformed
in Speech and Habit; he then gets to Preaching, and that is his Masterpiece,
and here Satan is exalted, and shows himself that he is God, chief Ruler, and
here Satan's Chieftains thinks they reign in Glory or gloriously, and may be
others think so too, that see 'em and hear 'em hold forth, such I mean that
knows not any thing, but what they know naturally, as Brute Beasts; so even let
those Swine-Herds, with their Herds of Swine go down into the Sea, and be
choked together, if they please; that the true Sheep and Lambs might never
more be troubled with them, would be joyful News to a many afflicted dear
Souls, who go mourning on their Way because of the Oppressor.

There is likewise some others, amongst us, I am well satisfied, that have been
favored with a Part, and a Portion, and a good Portion too, of the ministry,
with the Saints and faithful ones, and have reigned with them in the Firmament
of God's Power, and I would to God, that they did reign so still; but alas,
alas, some of these are fallen, not from Words, but from Life, and that is all
in all. The Dragon's Tail has prevailed, drawn 'em down to the Earth, they
smell and favor of it, that were once fresh and lively, feeding in the green
Pastures, loved to sit in Silence in Meetings; as silent as a Flock of Sheep
and Lambs in a Field, sweetly feeding, without Noise of Words; but, alas, some
of these are grown restless and uneasy in sitting in Silence; but must and will
be hammering and tampering, especially, if they feel but a little tickling of
some former or old Experience, or a Drop of Wine in their old Bottle,
undigested and unrefined, thick and muddy, the Bottle not being very clean:
However having a strong Opinion of their own Performances, and a rich Conceit
of the great good they do, and have done; to Work they go, with Noise of Words,
and oftentimes no Sense. Then comes forth the Tongue of Egyptian Sea, and the
Language of Ashdod is heard, and the linsey-woolsey Garment is seen, and the
plowing is managed with the Ox and the Ass joined together; poor plowing with
Beasts so ill matched, so unequal in their Nature and Stature, one drawing one
way, and another another way; and then the Field is sown with two Sorts of
Seed, may-be a little good and a great deal of bad. Dear Friend, I wish these
Plowers and Sowers would stand still a little, and look over the Field they
have plowed, and sown, and behold the Produce of their Labors.

Those that go forth with Sparks of their own kindling, shall lie down in
Sorrow. I think, Oh that these would wait for the still, still Voice, that
would direct them aright, when and what to speak to the People, and when to be
silent; and not go forth in the hurry and bluster of their own Spirits, in
their own Time, but wait the Lord's Time: Nor in the Fire, nor the Wind, nor
the Earthquake, where the pure TRUTH is not known, nor his Voice heard.

I say again, I wish those that have been so long plowing with their ill-matcht
pair of Creatures, and sowing the Field with diverse Kinds of Seeds, would, or
could be prevailed upon, to stand still a little and be quieted, and look back
and round about the Field, and see what sort of Plowing they have made, and
what Sort of Seed they have sown, and what Sort of Grain is grown up; whether
there is not 30, 60 or an Hundred Fold more bad than good, and if so, sure
there have been a great deal of bad Seed sown in the Field, or it would not
have been so (I firmly believe.) I do not believe it is all owing to the
Badness of the Ground, but for want of honest Labor performed, by Faithful and
True Laborers, and then to have good, weighty, sound, clean, pure substantial
Seed sown, without Mixture, in it, by such Seed Men and Women, and such I love
as my own Soul, much more that which dwells and grows in them or in us, the
pure eternal Truth. Now my Friend, let all the impudent, false, forward,
restless, uneasy, bold, selfconceited, turbulent, noisey, clamorous, covetous,
selfwilled Preachers, Plowers and Sowers in our Meetings, look over the Field
where they have labored, and compare it with any of their Neighbor's Fields,
and see whether it be in any better Condition than theirs, if not much worse,
all things well considered. The Advantages we have had and the great Favors
that have been bestowed upon us, more than any People in the whole World, that
I know of, since the Apostles Days.

Friend J. C. is it not written, if thou take a Bird's Nest thou shall not
destroy the Dam, and the young, the young; but shall let the Dam go; but some
of these forward Spirits destroy all, lavish out all, leave their Nest empty of
all good, not considering there should be Store of good Seed left for Increase;
and are like the foolish Idolaters, that lavish Silver out of the Bag to enrich
and beautify their Idols and are left poor and needy themselves, And so it is
with these Idolaters, these profane Esau's; a Mess of Pottage or Porridge, a
rich Wife or Husband, worldly Honor and Profit, the Good of the Belly or
Applause amongst Men, or some other base sinister Ends. Oh these Nimrods! these
mighty Hunters before the Lord, before him, not Followers of him, not Followers
of the dear Lamb, through Sufferings and Death, in the Cross, in an holy, severe,
strict, pure Life of Self-Denial and the daily Cross, this daily Cross, how
contrary it is to proud idle lustful Flesh and Blood, what a Burden it is to
it, the very Thoughts of it, and yet how easy, light, sweet, safe and pleasant
it is, when once well attained, as the dear Lamb Jesus declared, My Burden is
Light and Yoke easy, but Satan's damned Burden full of Sin, or sinful Burden
is heavy enough. I would not wish any Body a heavier Burden, but rather, that
all might be redeemed or freed from it.

The 2 d of the 4 th Month.
Dearly beloved J. C. this M^tning early I opened the Bible, and met with that
Chapt. Jerem. xxiii. 9. and read it to the End, with some Concern, to think
what will become of us as a People; and of those bold confident Persons, Male
and Female, that dare to speak in the Name of the Lord, when he does not, nor
never did speak by them, and run and go, when he the holy One never sent them;
but it is to be feared there is many, yea, many amongst us that encourages 'em,
and they are Friends of Note too, if I may call 'em Friends. I think dear
Friend, I may say as one said, Oh that my Head were as Water, and my Eyes
Fountains for Tears! that I might, Oh, that I might* weep enough for the slain
and the blind! that the Enemy has blinded; indeed, for my Writing or Speaking
will avail little, no, no, no.

B. L.

PARADISE LOST, By JOHN MILTON: Book XII. Page 346, 347.
THE Apostles Ministry performed, and race well run,
Their doctrine, and their story written left,
They die. But in their room, as they fore-warn,
Wolves shall succeed for teachers, grievous wolves
Who all the sacred mysteries of heaven
To their own vile advantages shall turn,
Of lucre, and ambition; and the truth
With superstitions, and traditions taint,
Left only in those written records pure;
Though not but by the Spirit understood.
Then shall they seek t'avail themselves of names,
Places, and titles; and with these to join
Secular power; though feigning still to act
By spiritual: to themselves appropriating
The Spirit of God, promised alike, and given
To all believers: and, from that Pretense,
Spiritual laws by carnal power shall force
On every conscience; laws! which none shall find
Left them enrolled; or, what the Spirit within
Shall on the heart ingrave. What will they then
But force the Spirit of Grace it self, and bind
His consort Liberty? what, but unbuild
His living Temple, built by faith to stand,
Their own faith, not another's? (for, on earth,
Who against faith and conscience, can be heard
Infallible?) Yet, many will presume:
Whence heavy persecution shall arise
On all, who in the worship persevere
Of spirit, and truth: the rest (far greater part)
Will deem in outward rites, and specious forms,
Religion satisfied: truth shall retire
Bestruck with sland'rous darts; and works of faith
Rarely be found. So shall the World go on,
To good malignant, to bad men benign;
Under her own weight groaning; 'till the day
Appear of respiration to the just,
And vengeance to the Wicked: at return
Of Him so lately promised to thy aid,
The Woman's Seed; obscurely then foretold;
Now amplier known thy Savior, and thy Lord;
Last, in the clouds, from heaven to be revealed
In glory of the Father, to dissolve
Satan, with his perverted world; then raise
From the conflagrant mass, purged, and refined,
New heavens, new earth, ages of endless date,
Founded in righteousness, and peace, and love;
To bring forth fruits, joy, and eternal bliss.
Courteous and Friendly Reader,
THERE is some Passages in my Book, that are not so well placed as could have
been wished; some Error s may have escaped the Press, the Printer being much
incumbered with other Concerns: thou art lovingly entreated to excuse, amend,
or censure it as thee please: But remember that it was written by one that was
a poor common Sailor, and an illiterate Man. B. L.

THE CONTENTS.
Page 7. W. B's. Address to the Elders of the Church. P. 10. Preach against
fighting, yet receive the Plunder. P. 13. Great Burdens Slave-Keeping
Preachers bring upon their Brethren and Friends. P. 15. Comparing Turks and
Christians in Slave-Keeping. P. 16. Many Nominal Quakers will not forsake
Slave-Keeping, no not for the Joy of the Lord. P. 18. Many worthy Men have
bo^ne Testimony against this foul Sin, R. S. and others. P. 23. Corah and
Company, 250 Men of Renown, withstood Moses, much more Slave-Keepers withstand
the Truth. P. 28. Long Custom in Sin hard to be broken. P. 29. A few Precedents
in Friends of great repute in Slave-Keeping, is much more mischievous than in
many Publicans and Harlots. P. 34. The abominable Stuff filthy Rum is drawn
from; and the Barbarity used toward Slaves in West Indies. P. 41.
Slave-Keeping very opposite to the Doctrine of Christ. P. 48. Slave-Keepers
cause many tender Friends to go Mourning on their Way. P. 49. On their way Sla
-- K -- very ready to smite and revile any that reprove them for their Sin. P.
53,4. The best and only way for Friends or others that now have Slaves to
discharge themselves of them. P. 57. Partial Proceedings of some Slave-Keepers
to keep me from my proper Inheritance: A -- M -- s, I -- P -- n, S -- P -- n, R
-- J -- n, J -- B -- s, S -- P -- l, Men of renown in Philadelphia, and M. M.
and N. A. in Abington. P. 61. The Waldenses our first Reformers no
Slave-Keepers. P. 63. B. L. being kept out of Meeting at Philadelphia, by the
Constable; A -- M -- s I -- P -- n S -- P -- n, R -- E -- n. P. 64. Concerning
the Lying Spirit in Ahab's Prophets. P. 65,8. Some discourse with R. J.
concerning Slave-Keeping, and something concerning G. K. and New-Jerusalem. P.
75. The way of catching, stealing and using of Negroes. P. 78. Concerning the
sweet Communion we have been favored with, in our Meetings, beyond any People
that I know in the World. P. 82. Them that came to this Country Servants to
plead for Slave-Keeping intolerable. P. 88. An Account from Bristol in
Old-England, the great Numbers of Slaves their Vessels fetches Yearly to bring
to West Indies. P. 92. Miserable Condition of Slaves when old and past their
Labor. P. 94. Some has been pleased to say I wanted a Party. P. 98. Keeping
Concubines, Harlots and Slaves, practiced by Jews and Gentiles. P. 101.
Revelations 12 th Chap. some thoughts concerning it. P. 111. Revelations 13 th.
-- P. 122. How can we expect the Almighty will prosper us, so long as we will
continue in this practice. P. 131. Concerning my keeping my Elder Brothers
Sheep. P. 134. False and forward Ministers. P. 136. The light airy Spirit some
Preachers and others have discovered when I have been speaking against
Slave-Keeping. P. 138. Excellent Advice of Sir Thomas Moore and George Fox,
against putting Men to Death for small Matters. P. 140,1. The sweet anointing
Oil, the fine Linen. P. 143. Concerning Marriage, or Marrying in the Lord. P.
147. The faithful Friends called Quakers falsely charged with Keeping Slaves, it
is the Apostates does so. P. 152. G. Fox's Account of the greatest Deceivers,
Apostate Ministers, fallen Angels. P. 154. W. Penn's Advice to Ministers.
Second Part, mostly containing Advice to faithful Ministers, and Counsel,
Caution, Warning and Reproof to false and forward Ministers, which go of their
own Errand; collected from the Writings of our Ancient Friends called Quakers
and others, for general Service. P. 156. Edward Borrough's Works. Francis
Howgil's Works, Advice to Ministers. P. 158. Stephen Crisp's Works. William
Bennet's Writings. John Milton's Church Government. William Edmonson's Journal.
P. 161. August Elutherus forbidden Fruit. P. 163. Dr. M. De Molinus Spiritual
Guide. P. 164. Thomas a Kempis Christian Pattern. P. 165. Eusebius's
Eccleisiastical History. P. 166. Hermes Trismegistus, his Works. P. 169. John
Whiting's Works, Christ God and Man. P. 170. Robert Barclay's Apology. George
Fox' s Doctrinal, concerning the Kingdom or Government of Heaven, what it is,
and where it is to be possessed of, and enjoyed in this World. His great
Mystery. -- Margaret Fox's Writings. -- Samuel Fisher's Works. P. 172. William
Smith's Balm from Gilead concerning true discerning and Judgment. P. 173. The
Spirit of Martyrs revived by Ellis Hooks. P. 174. F. Rous, Esquire; his Works,
concerning God's own Teaching of his own dear Children, him, him, him himself.
P. 177. B. L. concerning his inward Unity with his True Friends. P. 179.
William Dewsberry's Works, very excellent, concerning Ministers. P. 187.
William Dell, Minister of the Gospel, Master of Gonvil and Caius College in
Cambridge, his Trial of Spirits, in Preachers and Hearers. P. 191. Concering
divine Wisdom, the Kingdom of Heaven or Heavenly Government within, not known
without, above the Skies. P. 193. Of Covetousness, that mighty Monster. P. 197.
The young ones spends their substance their Parents left them, then want to
borrow of others. P. 199. The selling of JOSEPH, a Memorial, by that Worthy
Judge Sewall, of N-England. P. 208. Of Backbiting that foul Disease. P. 209.
W* Leddra's Epistle, writ the Day before he was put to Death at Boston. P. 176.
George Fox, the Youngers Works, very excellent. P. 178. G. Fox continued. P.
215. A caution to Friends not to do as the Bostoners did. P. 219. Consistency
of Babylon's Doctrine. P. 233,236. Concerning the New Birth. P. 241. Concerning
Christ the living Vine, in the living Branches. P. 245. Concerning the True
Foundation of the True Congregation of God, the Truth. P. 247. A Letter to J.
C. at Horsham, concerning false Ministers. P. 251. Concerning Christ being in
Heaven, with a Body of Flesh. P. 254. An Epistle to the Dear Lambs of my
Heavenly Father's Fold. P. 258. Second Letter to J. C. of Horsham.
ERRATA.
Page. 6. line 7. Read Heathenish. P. 9. l. 17. r. they. P. 20. l. 10. r. and
Prophets. -- l. 22. r. have. -- l. 23. r. Wise. -- l. 26. r. as. P. 27. l. 16.
r. forth. P. 28 l. 15. r. long Custom in Sin. P. 33. l. 7. r. upon us. P. 34.
l. 13. r. Scum. P. 35. l. 29. r. mostly. P. 56. l. 20. r. called. P. 64. l. 29.
r. we be. P. 69. l. 20. r. to the. P. 97. l. 25. r. his Holy Name. P. 110. l.
8. r. he was wroth. P. 115. l. 27. r. or else. P. 116. l. 10. r. and a false
Ministry. P. 118. l. 11. r. and Truth's. P. 126. l. 10. r. same time. P. 130.
l. 29. r. Children. P. 165. l. 6. r. Christian Pattern. P. 172. l. 28. r. any
thing. P. 190. l. 14. r. in 1700 Years time. P. 195. l. 1. r. offensive. P.
209. l. 12. r. Death at Boston. P. 217. l. 4. r. inwardly beloved. P. 239. l.
18. r. the Father and I. P. 221. l. 4. r. serve him. -- l. 19. r. Master
Satan's Kingdom. P. 245. l. 14. r. Christ's Spirit. P. 249. l. 15. r. more
afraid. l. 27. r. Advice to Ministers.

THE END.

