Mr. MARSH's Sermon ON THE Fatherly Care of GOD to his Covenant Children.

Advertisement.
THE Reader may hereby be Informed, That the Sermons, Preached Annually, at the
General Elections in Hartford, from the Year 1712, exclusively, to 1736,
inclusively (excepting Two Years, viz. 1729, and 1735, when the Copies could
not be obtained for the Press) are Printed, Bound up in Three Volumns, and are
to be Sold by T. Green, at N.L.

GOD's Fatherly Care OF HIS Covenant Children; SHOWED and IMPROVED, In a SERMON
Preached BEFORE THE General Assembly OF THE Colony of Connecticut, On the Day
of their ELECTION At Hartford, May 13, 1736.

By Jonathan Marsh, A. M. Teacher of a Church in Windsor.

Printed by Order of the General Assembly.

N.LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR and COMPANY,
1737.

At a General Assembly holden at Hartford, on the 13th, Day of May, Anno
Domini, 1736.
THIS Assembly do Appoint Roger Welcott, Esquire and Capt Henry Allyn, to return
the Thanks of this Assembly, to the Reverend Mr. Jonathan Marsh, for his Sermon
which he Preached before the General Assembly on the 13th, Day of May, Instant;
and desire a Copy thereof that it may be Printed.

George Wyllys, Secr.

An Election Sermon.
PSALM CIII. 11. Like as a Father pitieth his Children, so the LORD pitieth
them that Fear Him.


THIS Psalm is Entitled, A Psalm of David; in which he stirs up himself and
summoneth all his Powers, both of Body and Mind, to bless and praise the Name
of GOD. The particular Reasons of it, are;

1. Special mercy shown to him in forgiving his sins and healing his diseases,
and in saving him from death when in imminent danger. See ver. 1. to 4. He
shows his care thus, To relieve the Oppressed, ver. 5, 6. And then,

2. His Particular care for and over his Church, even for Israel, in giving his
Law to them, and opening to them the mysteries of his Providence in their
favor. ver. 7, 8, 9. So that if he corrects them for their Sins, as his chosen
people; yet he limits and sets bounds to his Anger, as to the time and the
measure of it. If he visits sore, yet not according to the demerit of their
sins; but causes His Grace to Exert it self over their Unworthiness, ver. 10,
11. But it is in special to them that fear Him: He pardons their sins and does
them all away. They are removed from them so far as the East and the West in
their distances, ver. 12. This the Lord promises to do for the faithful, in the
day of his gracious visitation, Jer. 31 34. And here, ver. 13. His gracious
dealing is compared to that of a tender and compassionate Father in his dealing
with his Children. Text, Like as a Father pitieth his Children, etc God is a
Father to such; in the way of the New Covenant he owns them to be such, let
them be Jew or Gentile, in the Gospel day, without distinction; and he treats
them with like care and tenderness. And he is in special so tender and gracious
in his dealings toward them that truly Fear him; i. e. the Seed of the
Faithful; such as are Upright before him, and are under the influence of his
Fear. so as to make it their care to please Him by keeping Covenant with him.
Be it so they offend at times and break his Laws, He that knows their defects,
will bear much with their froward tempers and peevish dispositions. He is not
strict to mark their iniquities against them, for he knows their frame, ver. 14.

DOCTRINE.
That GOD has a Fatherly Care for His Covenant Children; in special for them
that Fear Him. Here to show,

1. He has a Fatherly Care for his Covenant People in general. He has so for
Israel, whilst a Nation or People in Covenant with him; and he has so for a
People or Nation taken into Covenant in Gospel times.

And we may briefly hint it in several Instances, in which the Lord shows it.

1. In declaring them to be his Children and owning them as such. When God
brings Israel into Covenant, he thus declares for Himself, and brings them thus
to stipulate with him; or to (...). Here ^s the mutual Engagement between them,
Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. So it is in Gospel Times, Heb. 8, 10. Again, He is said in
terms, To be their Father; and they are said to be, His Sons and Daughters, 2
Cor. 6.18.

But will the Most High and holy GOD thus transact with Vile and Sinful men,
that be as Worms of the dust? Yes, so it is; Oh! ineffable Grace and
Condescension in him. The Psalmist therefore Expresses his Raised thoughts upon
it, Psalm. 8.4. What is man, that thou art thus mindful of him? or the son of
man, that thou art pleased thus to visit him?

2. In taking them under his Fatherly Conduct and Directions Herein he acts the
part of a Father. Parental care tends to this; To be sure for the Child while
he is a Child, and wants skill and conduct to direct himself. Now the Father
will keep him under his Eye, and not let him go far from him, or get out of his
sight. The Lord has thus the wakeful Eye of his Providence over Israel night
and day: The Pillar of the cloud by day, and that of fire by night, to guide
them in the way they should go. This shows his particular care to guide them in
the Wilderness, after he has brought them out of Egypt by a Mighty Hand and
prevented them in their low Estate, Exodus 13.21, 22. So Moses speaks in his
Divine Song concerning them, Deuteronomy. 32.10. Thus, When Israel is a child the Lord
loves him, and calls his son out of Egypt, Hos. 11.1.

3. In the Provision he makes for them. It Is the care of a tender Father to
provide for his Children; to be sure while they be young and not able to
provide for themselves. The Lord has this care for men in general, to provide
for them, He provides for Man and Beast; These are all his Creatures, and live
upon his Bounty day by day. But he provides in special for Israel, as his
People in Covenant; in the Wilderness, Psalm. 78.26. He gives them bread from
heaven, and water out of the rock.

4. In taking them under his special Protection. A Father will do this as he is
able for his Child, He will protect him from harm, if he be exposed by Enemies,
or by Beasts of prey, etc. The Lord takes Israel, from the time of his coming
up out of Egypt, down to Succeeding Times, under the wing of his Protection. He
is tender of them, even as of the apple of his Eye, Deuteronomy. 32.10. If any touch
them to do them harm, still they provoke Him to anger by their sins; and shall
be sure to feel his Resentments for it, Psalm. 105.13, 14, 15.

5. In bearing with their evil Tempers and Manners. Parents are thus pitiful
toward their Children, in bearing with their peevish Tempers and froward
Dispositions; they bear much and long with them; to be sure some do so: they
bear with that from them through love and tenderness, which others cannot that be
strangers to them or not so nearly related. So the Lord bears with that from
his People in Covenant, that he will not bear with from others. He bears with
that from them, which they will not or cannot bear with from one another. This the
Context shows. He bears with them long; and if their Sins be many and very
grievous, and heavy Enough to tire his Patience, if he were like a weak and
angry man; so that he would be for consuming them at once. See Jonah 4.1, 3.
compared with Neh. 1.3. Mal 36. I am the Lord, I change not: therefore ye sons
of Jacob are not consumed.

6. In the Correction he uses when he sees there is need. He sees at times
there is need of it: Milder means will not do; Chidings will not do; Reproofs,
Admonitions, Warnings, Threatenings will not do; He hews them by his Servants the
Prophets, and slays them by the words of his Mouth, Hos. 6.5. So the Lord
threatens Israel. But this is not sufficient to Reclaim them. Now he proceeds
to visit with the Rod. But how loath does he seem to be to come to it, or to use
it as he might? If he Corrects, he acts as a Father in it, and not as an
incensed Judge. His Correction is seasonable; He will take a proper time and
season for it: He will not do it too soon; so as to be sudden and hasty in it;
nor will he defer it too long. He will take them alone to do it, or by
themselves as separate from other people, and when their minds are best
prepared to receive it, Lam. 3.28. Farther, In its particular nature and kind,
it shall be seasonable and proper to carry light and conviction with it, that
they may read or see their Sin in the punishment of it, Psalm. 18 26. Jer. 2.19.
Again, As to the measure of it; The Church prays for this, Jer. 10 24 O Lord,
correct me, but with judgment, etc lest thou bring me to nothing. He tries
lighter strokes, and then more heavy, if there be need; but yet it is in
measure. He does in the midst of Judgment remember Mercy.

And for a close to this, here we may observe a Fathers pity herein, His
lothness to give them up, if they prove Incorrigible under all See the
yearnings of his bowels; as the heart of a tender Parent ready to break within
him, Hos. 11.8. Yea, rather than do as at times, when all means fail, he will
try his own Strength upon them, and break their stubborn and rebellious Hearts
by the power of his Almighty Arm: (What is more than any Earthly Parent can
possibly do) See it in Ephraim's turn, Jer. 31.19, 20. Thus for the first
General Head.

II. To show He has this Care in special for them that truly Fear Him. Be it so
his Fatherly care reaches to the Body of a People in Covenant with him, then
that of a more special nature to them that truly fear him. These are the
faithful in the Land, on whom the Lord has set his Eye, and in whom he delights.

His Fatherly Care for them intends such things as these in it.

1. That his Love to them is Peculiar. He has set his love upon them before the
Foundation of the world. He has Loved them with an Everlasting Love, Jer. 31.3.
They are chosen in Christ, to be to the glory of his Grace, Ephesians. 1.4.

2. He has given them to know his Name and to put their Trust in Him. Others
hear of him and may have some sensible manifestations of his Presence and Glory
(As Israel at the Red Sea, and at Mount Sinai after it, upon the giving the
Law) that now dispose them to Praise him or to Fear him for a time; but they
don't see him, as Moses does in the Proclamation of his Name, Exodus 34, 6, 7.
Or as Abraham. Isaac and Jacob their Fathers, before did, when he made or
declared his Covenant with them; or as such as truly fear God in the
Gospel-day, know him at times in his Son Jesus Christ, Job. 17.3. The Spirit of
God thus opening their Understandings in Gospel Truths and giving them to see
and know the things set forth, or the Objects revealed by this medium, in a
spiritual manner; or to Evidence the clearness so as they could not see them
before, 1 Cor. 2, 9, to 14. So 2 Cor. 3.18. and Chap. 4.6.

3. Their Relation to God it is Saving. Others are Visibly related to him; they
may have right to External Privileges, as having a Regular standing in the
Covenant: But these upon believing in Christ and coming up to the Gospel
Condition, have the favor or privilege of Adoption in a Saving sense and
meaning. They have a real vital Union to Christ, Job. 1.12. They have the
spirit of Children given to them as the fruit of their Faith. Hence a filial
fear of God and love to him; coming to him with freedom, as Children to a
Father, in the duty of Prayer, or by way of Complaint upon occasion. This is
more in some than others, and more sensible in the Subject of it at one time
than at another; but yet there is something of it in every true Believer, Romans
9.15. Gal. 4.6.

4. God's Providence is concerned in all his dealings, to promote their best
good and to farther them in the way to Eternal Life. See the faith of the
upright man for this, Psalm. 73.24. Romans 8.28. Let us then be directed to look
constantly to the glory of God as our ultimate End in whatever we do or suffer,
and this will arm us with Christian fortitude and patience, Romans 2.7 Others
have found its strength and efficacy, when acted from this spirit of Faith, in
the view of things unseen and eternal. See it in the Primitive Christians under
their Persecutions, 2 Cor. 4.17.

But for the USE of the DOCTRINE.

USE, I. Of Information and Instruction, in a few Particulars. Learn hence,

1. The Obligations of such a People to GOD must be special and very great. As
they be the Subjects of his Fatherly Care, so their Obligations are
proportionate as Children, to be true and faithful to him. See what the Lord
expects from Israel, on the account of what he had done in taking them into
Covenant with himself. He saves them before hand, as it were. He mightily
trusts and confides in them, that they will be obedient and true to what they
promise, and what he has so fairly bound them to do. Isa 63.8 He said, Surely
they are my people, children that will not lie: so he was their Savior. They
be in particular bound to love the Lord their God, and to cleave to him as
their Portion and Inheritance; they are to give up themselves to him in Heart
and Life, Deuteronomy. 6, 4, 5. They be obliged to fear and honor Him. See the Lord's
challenge, (on the common right of a Parent) to Israel, Mal. 1.6. A son
honors his father, -- If I then be your Father, where is mine Honor? They
are to be much in the study of his Precepts to know his Mind and Will, that so
they may be Obedient to him in all things, and may attend the duties of Natural
and Revealed Religion with care: They are to Fear GOD and Reverence their
Superiors in every Order. Its like to go well with a People when the Fifth
Commandment is strictly observed by them. They are to own and profess the
Truths of God, and to Worship him aright, Job. 4.24. They are to Fear and
Reverence his Great and Holy Name; to Sanctify the Sabbath, to keep it as a
Holy Day unto the Lord; to Love his House, his Worship and Ordinances therein,
and not live in the careless Neglect of any of his Institutions. Farther, They
are to to be Sober, Temperate, Peaceable, Chaste, Diligent in Business, Men of
Truth and Honesty, Kind and Charitable, and so govern their Affections as to
these things, by the rules of Reason and Religion: They are to be Humble and
Meek, not Proud and Haughty; so as to gain the ascendant over their corrupt
Humors and Passions: And to be in all things Blameless as the Sons of God
without Rebuke. If the world in general be Corrupt, they ought not to be so;
but be separate and stop at a distance from them, 2 Cor. 6.19. Phil. 2.15. They
are to consider the End of God's dealing with them, and what will be the End of
their contrary Carriage to Him, Deuteronomy. 32.29 Farther, As to the special ties of
Gratitude to God, which are thus laid upon them and how if herein they fail and
are unmindful of the God that has formed them and Redeemed them, there is just
ground of Complaint against them; As in Deuteronomy. 32.6.

2. Learn hence, How sad it is if such a People do much to provoke him by their
Sins. If instead of Living to him as obedient Children, they Rebel against him;
if instead of Trembling at the word, or feeling the weight of God's Authority
in it, as well as the justice and goodness of the Precept, they trample upon it
and are bold to transgress; This is sad and looks with a dark Aspect on a
People. In special,

(1) If they be Sins which they have been often told of, reproved for, warned
against, and called on to humble themselves for before the Lord, and so to
Reform. If a people are often told of their forgetfulness of God, their neglect
of his Worship and Ordinances; of their Formality in God's service, or of their
strange Ease and Quiet in resting in doing something in the duties of Religion,
short of the life and power of Godliness. If they are told of their Pride,
Covetousness, Voluptuousness, Injustice, Deceit and Lying. If they are told of
their Strifes and Divisions in Towns and Churches, to the waft of much precious
Time, as well as to their apparent hurt and damage in Temporals and Spirituals.
And yet there is no return to God by Reformation: Still the same Sins laid in
charge against them, Year after Year; no change in the general for the better;
but it may be growing worse, here is a sad Omen upon a people, Jer. 7.25, 26.

(2) Sins for which they have suffered much already. If for these and such like
Sins the Land mourns, and for them the Lord yet smoaks against our Prayers; and
we have yet Sickness sore and grievous; just complaint of our low and declining
state in Temporals, as well as Spirituals. In particular, as to frowns in
Seasons in the Spring, and so in Harvest time, so that the work of our hands
fail as to the Fruit of it, and our Stock dies in particular places. If our
Losses are considerable by Land or Sea, every Year, and yet we have not Eyes to
see nor Hearts to reform; but some are impatient and find fault with others,
while some are easy and unconcerned; others be in the dark and at a loss, not
knowing what to do to Revive a dying or decaying State; saving but to go on in
the Path they have gone on in from year to year; And still the Complaint is, as
made by the more serious and thinking Part of this people, as wiftly looking
one upon another in Conversation, That the Land is sinking, no Reformation, no
Amendment; but things look darker on us from year to year in ssome respect or
other! What is it but to come to their case in Ezekiel. 33.10. To put away, etc.?

3. Inference, It may teach such a People not to distrust God's Care in time of
Distressed, Straits and Dangers. They may be at times much Exposed; their
Constitution may be Threatened, by such as are no Friends to it; God is angry,
and a series of Evils follow it: yet such a People as are in the hands of a
Merciful God and Compassionate Father, are not to distrust his Care. It may be
the People ben't brought low enough yet. To be sure they be not as to temper
and spirit; it may be as to their Circumstances neither. When the Child is got
much out of frame, grown to be very froward, peevish and stout, and will be
going away from its Parents in its own strength; no wonder if the Parent lets
go its hold and so it falls to wounding in a measure for conviction; yet it
goes not out of sight. A sad instance like this in Israel, when they had been
fretting and provoking the Lord, upon the evil report of the Spies, they will
yet venture to go up without Commission from God; but they smart for their
Presumption, Numb. 14. (...). So a People may be apt to trust to Man and (...),
to their own Strength and the influence of Others as Israel to Moses and Aaron
in Egypt, but yet their burden grows, their (...) is doubled before the Lord
begins to work for their deliverance. And so it may be now, when a People have
been looking here and there, to men and means to be saved from Evils, and it
Fails; now may be the time for the Lord to show his Power, Isa. 62.6. Farther,
In the time of outward Straits, it is with the Lord to supply our Wants; He has
done it for Israel in times past, and he is as able and willing to do it now as
then, Isa. 59.1. He will do it if we trust in him; He has so declared for such
as fear him and hope in his grace, Psalm. 34.10.37.3. Farther, If he brings
desolating Judgments by sore Sickness upon some parts of the Land, he may spare
us and our Children, if we take the warning and be humbled for our sins before
him, sympathize with our Christian Brethren under their sore Bereavements, and
unitedly be seeking for sparing Mercy in this time of threatening Calamity. The
Lord knows our frames, and considers that we are but dust; as it follows the
Text. See ver. 14, 15.

4. Inference, Learn hence, how dreadful is the state of such a People, to be
Rejected of God and to be Cast off by him. Their repeated Backslidings lead to
it, if they be of duration and continuance, Jer. 8.5. Now they grow to that
degree in Sin, and are so habituated to it, that their wound is said to be
incurable, Isa. 1.5. Jer. 8.22. Now if the Lord writes, (...), upon Isreal's
State, Hos. 1.9. First Rejects her, and then the House of Judah, for like
abominations. Now is their Glory and defense gone, their City and Temple; Mount
Sion once the Joy of the whole Earth, is made a Ruinous heap. So if after this
there be a revival upon Judahs Captivity; they quickly Revolt from God. How low
is their State brought at times, by particular Judgments from God, or by
Enemies, and they be threatened with utter Ruin, which comes at length upon
their Rejecting Christ. In the prospect of which, how is their sad state
Lamented by him, as he sees the Day of it to be approaching? Mat. 23.37. So
Luke 19.41, 42. Remarks made on this, are left for Ensamples and Warnings to
the Church in Gospel times, 1 Cor. 10.11. We have the like Instance in the
Asian Churches; how are they threatened, and since forsaken? See it as to
Ephesus, Rev. 2.3. And others of them since overrun by Turks and Infidels; and
have Mahomet or his followers possessing those places that were once the
Conquest of Christ, as Riding forth on his word of Truth in the day of his
Victorious grace, so to succeed and prosper the Ministry of his Apostles.
Compare Psalm. 45.4, 5. with Rev. 6.3. What is this for, but to warn the Church
in every Age to look well to their standing; so as not to be high-minded, but
fear.

USE, II. Of Exhortation and Direction, to several Orders and Degrees of
Persons among us, with respect to the Relative Duties incumbent on them, in
their Places. And here in particular,

1. Let it be directed to the Civil Rulers of this People; in special to the
Honorable the GOVERNOR, the DEPVTY-Governour, the Worshipful Assistants,
Judges and Justices; together with the Representative Body of this People now
Assembled on this great and weighty Occasion.

Honorable, Worshipful and highly Esteemed; As the Rule and Government of this
People, may be again devolved upon You, by this Days Election, and you may be
so directed by Providence to take the Charge a new upon you; be Entreated to do
it in Humility and the Fear of the Lord It Is from Him you derive your Power;
Let then a tender Regard for His Honor, and a Concern for the Public good of
this People, be the Principles and Motives by which you are acted in your
Conduct and Government of them. We Expect of You, as the Sons of the Mighty,
whose Name you bear in your Exalted Station, that you Eye Him in his Rectoral
Care and Goodness; and Imitate his good Providence, in a tender concern for the
Welfare of this People, so far as you are capable of. In particular, Be
directed and humbly entreated, to be tender and skilful Guides to the People.
Use and improve the Knowledge you have in the Rules of Government; and the
Experience you have gained in the state of this People, since you have been in
a Public Capacity over them for this End. Do you find the temper of this
People to Shift and Change; to be running to the Extremes on the one side or
the other; to be Influenced by present and sudden Views of things, without a
due care or concern to look to the End of them? Labor to see for them, to show
them their Dangers and the Mischiefs that may follow: And point out the way to
them which may be more plain and safe. Thus act in Imitation of the Faithful
and Experienced Ruler, Psalm. 78.72. Again, As the Heads of this People, use
your Strength, Providence and Skill, for the Protection and Defense of this
People, in their just Liberties Civil and Sacred. Let your United Counsels be
so improved in your Present Sessions, to know if our Privileges may be in
Danger; what the Exceptions may be that are made against the Government, how
they may be Obviated; that we may be yet a Peaceable and Quiet Habitation,
under the Umbrage and Protection of our Most Gracious SOVEREIGN. And be it so,
the LORD our God threatens us for our great and crying Sins, and his Anger
begins to burn us, as in other parts of the Land, we Expect you Observe it, and
Search into the Cause of it, or be Leading in it to Remove it; so to step in as
Gapmen to make up the Breach, that we be not Consumed. Pious Rulers, as well as
Faithful Ministers, may be prevalent Intercessors with God at such a time, and
so be made Public Blessings to a People. See Numb. 16.48. and 11.2 compared
with Psalm. 106.23. Moreover, Let the Eye of this Honorable Assembly be ever
upon the Lord, to be to them for a spirit of Counsel, Wisdom and Might, to make
them Wise and Knowing in their present Work and Business, to Direct their
Counsels, to lead to such Resolves and Acts as may be for the Health, Peace and
Prosperity of this People. Let Laws or Acts made to Restrain Excesses amongst
us, be Passed upon Deliberation and Judgment: And if so made, let them not be
hastily Repealed: Let it not be said, It will not bear, it cannot be practiced
upon; 'twill do no good to reach the End. Is the Remedy worse, or as bad as the
Disease? Is there nothing farther to be done to restrain us in our
Non-necessaries? Must the way be yet as open to Intemperance and Luxury, to
Rioting and Drunkenness, as it has been? Methinks, I hear the Lord speaking to
you, as to the Prophet, Jer. 15.19. Let them return unto thee, but return not
thou unto them. Farther, Let your Wisdom and Care be Improved, as to Retrench
(...) in Pride, Intemperance, Luxury and Prodigality, Idleness, etc. so to
Promote Industry, Diligence in profitable Business, among us; Promote and
Encourage Husbandry and Tillage, in the proper parts of it: so as to useful
Trades, etc. The People grow and spread themselves, here and there upon the
face of the ground; Crops fail often, and so does the Harvest other ways.
Providence frowns in the time of our Ingathering, so that if Husbandry and
Frugality is not promoted, Man and Beast is Exposed to suffer. Many are
spirited for Trading amongst us; but few seem to Understand it, or to Prosper
in it. They may make a Show for a time, if they have any Stock to begin with;
but it may be, by Ill Management, or Unexpected Loss, by Land or Sea, by and by
they fail and come to nothing.

Farther to this Assembly I would humbly offer or say, Hear the just Grievances
and Complaints of this People, so as to do them Justice, or to set them in the
way to have it done for them. Hear the Cause of the Small, as well as the
Great; of the Widow and Fatherless, as well as of the men of Strength, Parts
and Influence among us.

Farther, As to the Judges of this People, Such as may be so Constituted by the
Authority of this Assembly, to Sit in the Seat of Judgment, to Hear and to
Judge the Causes of this People, Let me Entreat you (with submission,) That you
bear not the Sword in vain; but use it for the Punishing and Suppressing Vice
and Immorality; so for the promoting of Religion and Virtue among us. Let
Justice and Honesty, Peace and Truth be promoted through your means. Be very
Zealous for the Lord your God, his Honor and the honor of His Laws, and
against the growing and prevailing Evils of the Times. Let there be no just or
reasonable Complaint of the want of Justice, or the delays of it beyond the
expected Terms of Trial. Keep the Attorneys close to their business, as you are
able to do; 'twill make them better Studied in the Law, and of more Service to
the truth and right of the Cause. These Gentlemen may know, who was wont to say
it in his Pleadings at the Bar, That the matter lies in a little Room, viz. Sir
Edward Cook. And for a close here, Eye the Charge of Jehosaphat to his Judges;
which how great and weighty is it? 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. And let each one in
Authority yet look higher, viz. to the Example of CHRIST, his Spirit and
Practice in his Prophetic and Kingly Office, to inspire them with a spirit of
Knowledge, Counsel and Might, Justice and Faithfulness, Peace, Love and
Tenderness, for their work: This makes the Vision in the dark Day of Sions
Trouble to shine forth with brightness, Psalm. 45.4, 5. and 85.9, 10. Now is his
Salvation near to them that fear him, and his glory shall yet dwell in the
Land; And if so, 'twill be for walls and bulwarks to a people. Isa. 11.4.26.1.

2. Let the Word of Exhortations be directed to Gospel Ministers; the Ministers
of these Churches, set over them in the Lord. To my Reverend Fathers and
Brethren; Be ye hence Directed and Exhorted, in humility and fear, to attend
with Care and Watchfulness, Cheerfulness and Diligence, to the Ministry which
you have received, so as to pursue the great Ends and Designs of it. Labor
suitably to your Office, as spiritual Guides to this People, to be spiritual
Fathers to them. Labor as men of Judgment, Wisdom and Knowledge in the things
of God, to know their state in particular, their Ignorance and Darkness, their
Doubts and Fears, their Tempers or particular Distempers of mind; and labor to
direct them as wise and skilful Physicians, in the way to a Cure. Exercise a
strict Watch over them, and labor to prevent their running into Errors in
Principles or Practice, or matters of Experience. See you be men of Experience
your selves in the more inward and vital part of Religion; and improve in it
(by God's help) by Observation made upon others. Thus may you be able to Guide
others in the way, as men of Knowledge and Judgment in Soul Cases. Use skill and
judgment in the Choice of your Subjects, to the method of healing them. Let
your Impovements be large in a pleasing variety of profitable Truths, and
continuing on plain and practical Subjects. Labor by pertinency and pungency
of Expression, to reach the Hearts, and to convince the Consciences of your
Hearers. Attend to Providence, and labor wisely to Improve them, by way of
carrying Reproof, or particular Motive to Duty. If the heart be prepared now
and made softer and tender by melting Providence, now use the Word to strike
with it, and set it home; it may be it may prove, as a fire and hammer, to
break the Rock in pieces, Jer 3.29 Call on the Secure, to awake out of Sleep,
in times of general deadness and corruption, Ephesians. 5.14. Romans 13.11-13. Do what
in you lies to Reform the Corrupt and Vicious, by seasonable Reproof,
Admonition and Warning. Encourage dark and drooping Souls, and lead them as you
may, to the thoughts of the Power and Grace of God, the Sufferings of Christ,
and the gracious Promises he makes to such as bow to him, and cast their
burdens upon him, Mat. 11.28. Be jealous of some with a godly Jealousy; and be
very tender and gentle in your dealing with others, Isa. 40.11.2 Cor. 11.2.
Jude ver. 22, 23. Travail in pain for some that have been long seeking for
Salvation, and yet be in the dark, as fearing they draw back to their ruin, or
continue so in the dark, till they die without any comfortable Change, Gal.
4.19. Visit your Flocks on occasion, when you may do it with Profit, or rather
invite them into your Studies, at proper times and seasons, where you may be
best at liberty to know their state, and to speak a word in season to weary
Souls, or any under concern. And to say no more on this head, My Fathers and
Brethren, Let us labor to be United in Love, as Brethren in the Lord, to be
mutual Helps to each other, to watch against a spirit of Division, to be tender
of the health and Reputation of one another, and be slow to receive Accusations
one against another, from faithless and prejudiced minds, to the hurt of our
selves, and disturbing the peace of our Churches. Let us consider our
Infirmities, Tempers, Dispositions, and particular Trials and Temptations. Let
us so bear one another burdens, that we may fulfill the law of Christ, Gal.
6.20. And let us be United in fervent and humble Prayer, in this dark and
Calamitous day, that the Lord our God will yet return and farther visit this
his Vine, and yet remember us with the favor he bears to his chosen People,
Psalm 106.4, 5.

3. Let it be directed to Heads of Families amongst us. Let Family Order and
Government revive in them. Let Parents see to it that they behave themselves
wisely in a perfect way, and walk before God in their Houses with a perfect
heart. Let Family Worship be Revived and kept up with care; such as United
Prayers to God, and the daily Reading the Scriptures in them. Let them use
their Authority to Restrain their houses from Sin, and to keep them close to
their place and business set them: Reform what they see and find to be amiss,
and they put away wickedness from their Tabernacle, Job 22.23. If this might
obtain in particular Families, it is the way to be built up themselves, and to
help forward the work of Reformation in others. Farther, Let Masters be kind to
their Servants, as knowing that they have a Master in heaven that is so kind
and gracious to them. Let them Feed and Cloathe them well; be tender of them if
Sick, and not make them Serve with Rigor when they are Well. Let them be
Concerned for their Souls; in particular for their Negro Slaves; and not be
content to bring them up in Ignorance. Let them be Taught when Young to Read,
and be Early Catechized in the Principles of Religion. If as grown to riper
Years, they be Serious, free from Vice, Well-inclin'd and have competent
Knowledge in the Principles of Religion, and may now seek for Baptism in the way
(...) Order, let not their Masters Frown upon it, or Discountenance it. If they
prove well upon it, as now wearing the Name of Christians, they will still be
greater Blessings: If not so, Masters have done their Duty, and may find much
Peace in it, as being found faithful to God, as Abraham was in his house, Genesis
18.19. And let Servants thus favored and privileged, be Subject to their
Masters, not only for Wrath, or fear of Punishment, but for Conscience sake,
Rom 13 5 So 1 Cor 7.21. Farther, Let it teach us Pity and Tenderness to Brute
Creatures, made for the service and comfort of men. There may much guilt be
this way contracted amongst a People, when they be hardly used, and kept in a
poor Starving state, from Rigor or Covetousness in men. Now, it may be, their
groans reach Heaven, and bring a blast on People; and that they strangely die,
here and there at particular times and seasons; or there is wast of their
Substance other ways, which leads to it, Romans 8.22

USE, III. And last, May be in a word of Encouragement and Comfort, to Two
sorts of Persons. Is the Lord as our God and Father in Covenant, a God of such
tender Pity to them that fear him as his Covenant Children? It may Encourage or
Comfort two sorts of persons. In particular,

1. To Souls in Distress under Inward Troubles; as Convinced Sinners, or such
whom the Lord may be about to humble and prepare for his grace, that yet remain
in the dark, and have not seen that the Lord is gracious. Here,

(1) Consider, There is grace enough in God for you. Be it so you have sinned
with a high hand and have lived long in it, so as to give ground to fear you
have got beyond the reach of mercy, yet consider this grace and goodness in the
Foun'tain, it is Infinite. And it may be the Lord designs to pour it forth upon
you, Romans 5.20

(2) He gives you particular Encouragement to seek it. Does your trouble and
distress drive you to God? as it does if it works aright. As wounded in spirit,
are you so prepared to look to him for Healing? Your Encouragement now is
great. It Is the Spirits work now in the time of his gracious Visitation, Zech.
12.10 Hos. 6.10

(3) He has bestowed it on others, as vile or worse than you be. Be it so you
are Vile and deserve to be turned down to Hell, and you appear to be viler than
any man; yet there be Patterns of mercy before you. See it in Manasseh, Mary
Magdalene, the Thief on the Cross, and others 1 Cor. 6.11

(4) He promises to Accept you upon believing and hoping in his Mercy. He bids
you do it, and warns you not to seek for rest any where else. It Is the Lord
against whom you have sinned, and it is his Prerogative to indemnify and clear
you from your Guilt. And this is sure to the Soul that truly turns and repents,
Isa. 55.7.

2. Let it be of Comfort to all such as truly fear the Lord. This Doctrine
gives ground of strong Consolation to all such as truly fear the Lord, or have
reason so to hope from what they have seen of him in his Power, Grace and
Faithfulness, after they have been brought to sensible Conviction of their own
Sinfulness, Nothingness and Unworthiness of his Favor. So if they may gather
it from the gracious fruits of his Love in them; as to Trusting in him upon
being bro't to know him and to see him in his Relative Goodness; so to Love him
and Fear him with holy Fear, as is the spirit of his Children: Such have sure
ground of Comfort. Here Two things. Let such Consider,

(1) The Covenant with the Promise of it is sure. The Covenant is Everlasting:
It reaches to you, and to your Seed, upon condition. It Is such a Relation made
between God and you, as that no Relation in Nature can reach it, or in the way
of Civil Contract. It Is set forth by many things; but they do but faintly show
it. The Lord speaks of being a Father to you in Covenant; and he is more than
so: Of being your Husband; and he is yet more than so, Isa. 54.5. Such
Relations hold fast for Life; but such is your Covenant Interest, as that
neither Life nor Death can disanul it. The Covenant it is Everlasting, and so
is the Foundation of your Comfort, Isa. 55.3. Romans 8 38, 39.

(2) Hence all his Dealings with them are in this way. Let the man that truly
fears the Lord Consider this, The Lord is ever mindful of his Covenant, in the
good or evil which he brings upon you; and it reaches to your Children too, as
they may be prepared to fear him and serve him Early. For which you have great
Encouragement to Plead at the Throne of grace. See the Encouragement, here as
it follows the Text, ver. 17, 18. But the Mercy of the Lord is from Everlasting
to Everlasting upon them that Fear him; and his Righteousness unto Childrens
Children: To such as keep his Covenant, and to those that remember his
Commandments to do them.

THE END.

