A SERMON Preached On the 25th of December, being the NATIVITY OF OUR SAVIOR.

By the Author of The Life of GOD in the Soul of Man.

BOSTON, N. E. Reprinted in the Year 1737.

ON THE NATIVITY OF OUR SAVIOR.
Psalm ii. 11. the latter part. Rejoice with Trembling.
THE observation of festivals being one of those balls of contention, which
have been tossed so hotly in the religious debates of this unhappy age, it may
perhaps be expected, that we should begin with a vindication of this day's
solemnity, from the exceptions that are wont to be taken against it, and that
the one half of our sermon should be spent in apology for the other. But I hope
we may well enough spare the pains, and employ the time to better purpose; for
you who are assembled in this house, are persuaded, I trust, of the lawfulness
of your own practice; and we cannot direct our speech to those that are absent
from it. And really it were to be wished, that there were less noise and debate
about matters of this nature; and that being agreed in the more substantial
parts of religion, we did all charitably acquiesce in that excellent advice of
the apostle, which he gives in a parallel instance, Let not him that eats,
despise him that eats not; and let not him that eats not, judge him that
eats: and then, as we shall not abate any thing of that love and reverence,
which we owe to the piety and truth of those who differ from us in so small
matters, so we might hope they would not be hasty to condemn us, if in
compliance with the practice of the ancient church, and the present
constitution of our own, we take the occasion of this season, with
thankfulness, to remember the greatest benefit that ever was conferred on the
children of men, and at this time perform that service which can never be
unseasonable. However, I am confident it is both more hard and necessary to
rectify and amend the abuses of this solemnity, than to justify the right
observation of it; to vindicate it from the dishonor of some of its pretended
friends, than to defend it from all the assaults of aggressors; and accordingly
we shall make it our work to persuade you to such a deportment on this
festival, as may best suit with the holy life and religion of that person whose
nativity we commemorate.

The text which we have chosen may seem somewhat general, but yet it is easily
applicable to the present occasion; especially if we remember that it is an
inference drawn from a prophecy, which though it had its literal completion in
the establishment of David's throne, yet it was in a mystical, and a more
sublime sense fulfilled in the incarnation and kingdom of the Messiah, as the
apostle in several places informs us; for to which of the angels has he said
at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee Heb. i. 5.
; whence he infers, that the angels themselves are inferior to Christ, of whom
this was spoken. The only difficulty of the words lies in the strange
conjunction of these passions, joy and extreme fear, which trembling seems to
import, but this will be more fully cleared in the sequel of our discourse.
Mean while ye may observe, that both these words, fear and trembling, are used
in the text, and in the scripture phrase, usually import humility, and
diligence, solicitude and caution, and the fear of displeasing, as being the
most proper qualifications of our obedience, either to God or man. Thus we are
commanded to work out our salvation with fear and trembling Ephesians. ii. 10.
; and servants are commanded to obey their masters with fear and trembling Ephesians.
vi. 5.
; so the Corinthians are said to have received Titus being sent to them, with
fear and trembling 2 Cor. vii. 15.
; and Chrysostom says of the angels, that they assist with fear and trembling.
All which places do import such care and diligence, as are very necessary and
reconcilable to cheerful service. Reverence and fear to offend will be happily
joined with holy joy in the performance of our duty, there being nothing more
pleasant than to serve him diligently whom we reverence, and fear to displease.
Thus much for the explication. The text is too short to be divided into many
parts, but does naturally fall asunder into two, the former exciting and
encouraging our joy, the latter qualifying and moderating the same. First we
are allowed, yea and commanded to rejoice, and then we are cautioned to do it
with trembling, and accordingly our discourse shall run in these two heads;
first to exhort you to cheerfulness and joy, then to set the right bounds and
limits to the same; and having done this in general, we shall endeavor to draw
both these home to the present occasion.

To begin with the first. Joy and cheerfulness are so far from being
inconsistent with religion, when rightly ordered, that we find them many times
allowed and recommended in scripture. Thus in the last verse of the 32d Psalm,
Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous: and shout for joy all ye that
are upright in heart: And in verse 1. of the next Psalm, Rejoice in the Lord, O
ye righteous, for praise is comely for the upright. So Ps. xxxviii. 3. Let the
righteous be glad, let them rejoice before the Lord, yea, let them exceedingly
rejoice. Psalm cxlix. 5. Let the saints be joyful in glory! let them sing aloud
on their beds. And that you may not think this a liberty proper only for the
former dispensations, but the christians obliged to greater severity, the
apostle does no less than three times give this admonition to the Philippians,
Rejoice in the Lord, rejoice always in the Lord, yea, I say rejoice; in
relation to this perhaps it was, that the old hermit Palladius, having 500
scholars, used never to dismiss them without this admonition, My friends be
cheerful; forget not, I beseech you, to be cheerful: this was the constant
lecture he repeated, as often as St. John was wont to do these words, My little
children, love one another.

None of our natural inclinations were made in vain, and joy is neither an
useless, nor a small passion, but if rightly ordered, may become an eminent
exercise of religion, as proper a concomitant of thankfulness, as sorrow of
repentance. Our devotion never soareth higher, than when it is carried on the
wings of joy and love, when our souls are filled with the sense of his
goodness, and we heartily applaud the Hallelujahs of the blessed spirits, and
all the praises of the creatures; and as joy is an excellent instrument of
devotion, so a constant serenity and cheerfulness of spirit is a fit
disposition for our other duties: I should be loath to countenance any levity
or dissolution of spirit, and I hope, before we have done, we shall leave no
ground to suspect such a design: and yet I would not have you imagine, that
innocence and severity are inseparable companions, or that a free and cheerful
countenance is a certain sign of an ill mind, or that men ought always to be
sad under the notion of being serious I would not have you in love with a
studied face, nor think it a crime to laugh, or scrupulously to refuse such
innocent and ingenuous divertisements, as you find useful to refresh your
spirits, and preserve their alacrity; for cheerfulness enlightens the mind, and
encourages the heart, and raises the soul (as it were) to breathe in a purer
air: it misbecomes none but the wicked, in whom it is commonly a light mirth,
and foolish jollity; as a curious dress may set off an handsome face, which yet
will render those who are ugly, more ill-favored: so does cheerfulness
exceedingly become good souls; in bad men it is most ridiculous. On the other
hand, a sad and sullen humor, a dumpish, morose, and melancholy disposition is
so far from being commendable, that at best it must be looked upon as an
infirmity and weakness in the best of those in whom it resideth, and if
purposely affected or cherished, may deserve a severer censure, being
dishonorable to God, injurious to our neighbors, prejudicial to our selves,
and a thing highly unreasonable. First, it is dishonorable to God, on whom we
profess to depend, and who through our moroseness may be mistaken for a hard and
severe master: If you should observe any man's servant to be always sad and
dejected, and could not guess at the reason of it, you would be ready to
conclude, that they were ill treated at home, and served an unkind tyrannical
person: and therefore if we have any regard to the honor of our master, we
ought carefully to avoid any thing from which those that are strangers to him,
are apt to take occasion to entertain harsh and disadvantageous tho'ts of him
and his service. Again, it is injurious to our neighbors, whom it does deprive
of the comforts of society, and the innocent delights of more cheerful
converse, it being better to be confined to solitude, than obliged to live with
those who are always sullen. They are not like to be good company to others who
are so bad company to themselves; nor will they easily endure to see others
cheerful and pleasant, when they cannot allow themselves so much as to smile.
Peevishness and anger are the ordinary companions of melancholy, and it is hard
for servants and friends to please them in any thing who are accustomed to
sadness and discontent. But this is not all, there is a greater mischief in the
matter, for they who are strangers to religion, and observe them who pretend to
it to be always sad and melancholy are thereby deterred from the study of
piety, as that which would imbitter their lives, and deprive them of all their
comforts; and they are apt to imagine, that if once they should undertake a
course of godliness, they should never after enjoy a pleasant hour, but by a
melancholy humor, and austere behavior, become a burden to themselves, and a
burden to all about them. Then they will think devotion a comfortless
employment, when they see men come from retirements with sad and heavy looks,
morose and untowardly deportment; whereas really the spirit of religion is in
it self most amiable, and most lively, most cheerful, free and ingenious, and
it is only men's weakness, and not their piety, that ought to be blamed for any
such disorder in their minds.

Again, melancholy and sadness is prejudicial to our selves, being an enemy to
nature, and hurtful to bodily constitutions, especially when it grows prevalent
and extreme, and therefore men are obliged to be cheerful for the same reasons
they take physic, and to guard against melancholy as we would do against a
disease. Besides, it is very troublesome to our spirits, and will make us smart
even when we know not why: although melancholy musings may be a very delightful
entertainment to the mind, yet in a little time they grow to be very
troublesome, contrary to the nature of other births, they please us much while
we bring them forth, but prove a miserable torment when they are born. But
which is much worse, it does exceedingly indispose for the duties of religion.
The eyes are not more darkened with fumes and vapors, than the understanding
is, when those sudden exhalations gather about us. Clogs are not a greater
impediment to the feet, than this humor to the motions of the soul; it
inclines not only to think worse of our selves, and our condition, than we
need, but to do worse than otherwise we should. It represents those things as
exceedingly difficult which may be done with ease, and those impossible which
have any considerable difficulty. It quite dispirits us, and will not suffer us
to attempt any thing, because we imagine we can do nothing; although perhaps in
a heat it may push us forward, yet it suddenly stays us, and makes us think we
cannot go; if it catches fire it makes us wild, and when it has spent that
flame, it leaves us dead and lumpish.

Lastly, sadness and dejection of spirit in christians, is a thing very
unreasonable; for why should they be sad and heavy who serve so good a master,
and who are assured of an infinite reward for their faithful service? If the
favor of a prince, or hopes of some earthly advantage, can support and cheer
the minds of men, why should not religious people, who have the friendship of
God, and so many divine blessings in present possession, and the certain
expectation of more and greater, cherish a perpetual joy, and ever be of good
comfort? What should afflict them, or cast them down? Is it worldly crosses or
fears? They have not their portions in things of this world, they are strangers
and pilgrims on earth, and cannot in reason be much solicitous about their
accommodation in an inn, which they are so shortly to leave. Besides, where is
he that does not enjoy more and greater comforts than those he is deprived and
stands in need of? Why then should thou not be more glad of what thou have,
than sorry for what thou want? Perhaps thou have lost part of thy fortune,
but yet enjoyest more than many who live happily enough notwithstanding: thou
want money, but thou have thy health; if that be impaired, thou enjoyest the
use of thy reason, which is infinitely more valuable; thou have lost a friend,
but perhaps thou have many behind, and shall that loss do more to make thee
sad, than all the rest to make thee cheerful; or will thou, like a peevish
child, throw all away, because something is taken from thee? I say not that
moderate sadness is blameable on such occasions, but that our grief ought not
to be indulged till it grow habitual; and sure whatever our crosses and our
fears be, we ought cheerfully to acquiesce in a constant dependence on the
divine providence; having that infinite wisdom and goodness, and power, which
made, and does govern the world, to care for us, and the promise of God for all
those things which he sees necessary or convenient for us. What is it then that
should deject us, and deprive us of that joy which the text allows and
commends? Is it the sense of our weakness, and the fear of missing that
eternal happiness for which we were creat ed? If thou be altogether graceless,
such thoughts would seldom trouble thee; but if thou be really concerned in
religion, and have a mind to heaven in earnest, if thou have begun thy race,
and art pressing forward to obtain thy prize, thou have no reason to be
discouraged or cast down; God loves thee better than thou do either him or
thy self, and holiness is the genuine issue of the divine nature, and therefore
he cannot hide his face from it, he cannot desert it as an outcast thing in the
world, nay he is ready to cherish and assist it, and perfect that gracious work
which himself has begun. Away then with groundless fears and dispondent
thoughts which dishonor God, and weaken your own hands; encourage your selves
with the assurance of the divine assistance, and cheerfully perform that which
is incumbent upon your selves, check the sadness of your spirits, and chide
your self into better temper, as David did, in Psalms xlii and xliii, he took
up his drooping mind with this encouragement, Why art thou cast down, O my
Soul, etc.

But perhaps you will tell me, that cheerful temper which we recommend, is very
improper for these bad times wherein we live; and though we had no trouble on
account of our interests, the miseries of others might oblige us to sadness,
and blunt and damp all our joys: I answer, compassion indeed is a christian
virtue, and a good man will be concerned in the miseries under which he sees
his neighbor groan, and be ready to assist him with his council, his labor,
or his purse, if that will relieve him; but he is not obliged to suffer the
calamities of others to sink so deeply into his spirit, as to disturb the peace
and harmony of his soul; else since the world is a great hospital of misery,
and we see well nigh as many miserable persons as men, we must needs draw as
much misery on our selves, as all theirs does amount to, and so deserve more
compassion than any of them. Again, if we partake of the miseries of others, so
may we in their happiness; if we ought to mourn with those that mourn, so we
ought to rejoice with them that rejoice; and though misery is far more frequent
in the world than happiness, this can be no measure for the whole creation; and
for any thing we know, for one sinful wretch there may be ten thousand holy and
happy spirits. However, all the misery in the world carries no proportion to
the infinite happiness of Almighty God, which ought to be the highest object of
our joy, and may drown and swallow up all the excuses or pretenses of excessive
sadness. We ought to rejoice in God, not only that he is our God, but that he
is God infinitely holy, and infinitely happy, that he is self-blessed, glorious
in all things, and that his enemies cannot reach nor unsettle his throne, this
is the most certain, and constant, the most pure and heavenly joy.

There remains yet one occasion of grief, which some may think enough to
banish all joy from a christian soul, and that is the multitude of sins whereof
we and others are guilty; and certainly contrition and zeal for the honor of
God, are very necessary duties; yet we were not born only to mourn, nor is the
lamenting of sin all we have to do in the world: we love to see a servant
sensible of his fault, but would be ill content if on that account he did
nothing but weep. Sadness in contrition is necessary to make our repentance
serious, and sadness of zeal to testify our concernment in God's interest, but
on neither of these accounts ought we to grieve without term or measure. As we
ought to grieve that we have offended so gracious a God, so ought we to rejoice
that the God whom we have offended is so gracious; and since the greatness of
God's mercy is as far above our sins, as the heavens are above the earth, our
faith and joy in God's mercy ought to be far above our sadness for our sins.
Whereas the blasphemies and oppositions of God's enemies, by his wisdom and
power, shall turn to his glory our sadness for these oppositions must end in
joy, for the almighty power and sovereign glory, which the enmity of Satan, and
the world, and the flesh, does but make more conspicuous by pulling against it.

By this time I hope it does appear, that joy and cheerfulness are more
allowable in christians, than some men perhaps are ready to imagine. I shall
add no more to this purpose, but that it is the privilege of a holy and
religious soul, that every thing he meets with may afford him occasion of joy;
if he looks up to heaven, it puts him in mind of the mansions that are
preparing for him; if on the earth, it rejoiceth him to think of his interest
in him who made and governs the same: if he considers the changes and
revolutions of human affairs, it satisfies him to remember that an unerring
providence does overruled all their seeming disorders, and makes them all serve
to great and glorious designs; if he live long, he is glad of the large time he
is allowed to do his work in; and if he die soon, he is glad that he is so soon
come to the end and reward of his work; if he be richer than his neighbors, he
rejoiceth in the opportunity of obliging them; and if they be richer than he,
he rejoiceth that they have the plenty and splendour which riches afford; and
that he wants the care and temptations that attend them. As many miseries as he
sees, so many arguments he has to glorify God, and rejoice in his goodness,
saying, Blessed be God that I am not maimed like that begging soldier, nor
frantic like the Bedlamite; nor in prison like that bankrupt; nor like the
thief in the shackles; nor in perpetual trouble like that counselor of state.

But joy is a passion so pleasing unto nature, that most men are easily
persuaded unto it, those especially who have least ground for it; and what we
have said hitherto, may have the ill luck to be mistaken or wrested by profane
persons, for the defense of their jollity and frolicksome mirth: But it should
be considered, that our exhortation to cheerfulness and joy, presupposes men
to be good and religious, and is addressed to them on that presumption; for we
should never encourage men to rejoice and be cheerful, while they are at enmity
with their maker, at feud with the infinite Majesty of heaven, whose least
frown is enough to confound them. We would not leave men to dance on the brinks
of hell, nor wantonly exult in the way that leads to destruction; another
temper would better become their unhappy condition, and they ought to be
thinking how a timely sorrow may lay a sure foundation for a lasting joy.
Again, the joy which we commend, is a quite different thing from the levity and
dissolution of spirit, which some persons would cover under that name. We allow
not that light airy temper that is inconsistent with gravity and seriousness;
we would not have a man's life become a sport, nor mirth to become his whole
employment; of such laughter we may say with the wise man, that it is mad, and
of mirth, what does it? The cheerfulness we have been speaking of, must spring
from the sense of the divine goodness, and the conscience of our sincerity in
his service; though we are not to refuse the assistance of innocent acts to raise
and recruit our natural spirits when they faint and fail within us. Finally,
that our cheerfulness and joy may be allowable, it must be rightly tempered;
which leads me to the second part of the text, which if it do not check, it
does at least mix and qualify our joy; rejoice we may, but it must be with
trembling. Trembling is a natural effect and sign of fear, and is here put for
the thing signified. Now fear may seem to be the most useless and unprofitable
passion in the mind, it is that which presages mischief, and anticipates our
miseries, giving them a being before they had any, and troubling us with the
apprehension of those evils which may never befall us, and hindering us to guard
against many which we might have prevented; betraying those succors which
reason offers, as the wise son of David tells us. The historian speaking of
the Persians, who in their flight flung away their weapons of defense, adds
this observation, Adco timor ipsa auxilia reformidat; such is the nature of
fear, that it not only makes us flee from danger, but from those helps and
succors which should keep it off. But as Alexander said of his fierce and
stately horse, qualem isti equum perdunt, dum eo per imperitiam uti nesciunt,
what a brave horse is lost for want of skill to manage him; so we may say of
fear, that they who would discharge it, do lose an useful passion, not knowing
how to order it. Fear doubtless is an excellent instrument, both of reason, and
of religion, and as all our passions, so especially fear, are as winds, which
although they sometimes drive us upon rocks, yet rightly improved may swell our
sails, and carry us on to the haven where we would be. Hence we find it so
frequently commanded in scripture, and so profitably practiced by wise and holy
persons. The question then is, what kind of fear and trembling is enjoined here
in the text. And first, as for the object, certainly the wrath and displeasure
of God is the most proper and suitable object of our fear; it is this that we
ought to look on as the greatest evil, and to shun with the greatest care: and
this fear, if rightly seated in our souls, will make us watchful against the
smaller sins, and make us heartily sorry for the offenses of others. But though
the fear of God's displeasure be more excellent and useful, yet the fear of our
own misery is not to be condemned. It is useful not only to wicked persons,
whom though it do not make good, yet it keeps them from being worse; but also to
holy persons, whom the fear of hell has many times helped forward to heaven.
Our Savior himself advises us, to fear him who can cast both body and soul
into hellfire; and that we may not forget it, he drives it home with an
ingemination, yea, I say unto you fear him; where we are to observe, that qui
imports as much as quia; the description of the person carries the reason for
which we ought to fear him. It were indeed to be wished, that our souls were
knit unto God by the more noble and generous passion of love, and that we
needed neither rewards to draw us to our duty, nor punishments to chase us to
our happiness; and that we loved goodness as Cato was said to do virtue,
because he could not do otherwise; but this is with the historian, votum
accommodare non historiam, to present a wish rather than a character of an
ordinary christian; or as Xenophon did with Cyrus, to describe rather what he
should be, than what he is; perfect love, as St. John tells us, casts out all
fear; but while our love is imperfect, it leaves room for some fear. Hell is
certainly in our creed as well as heaven, and as the fear of it is ordinarily
the first step of conversion, so it may be of use to quicken us, and push us
forward all along through our journey toward heaven. But if christians fear may
have hell for its object, what kind of fear may this be? In a word, it ought
not to be such an anxious and troublesome fear, as may disturb our tranquillity,
or extinguish our joy, or discourage our endeavors, but so rational and
modest, as may make us reverend in our love, and modest in our confidence, and
cautious in our joy, that it neither betray us to, nor vent it self in any
unseemly expressions.

And thus much of the duty recommended in the text. It Is high time now to apply
these general to the present occasion. We are assembled this day to commemorate
the greatest blessing that ever was bestowed on the children of men; a blessing
wherein all the nations of the world are concerned, and yet whose fruits do as
entirely redound to every good man, as if it had been designed for him alone: a
mercy that does at once astonish and rejoice the angels, who in comparison of
us are unconcerned in it. These mountains do leap for joy, because the valleys
were filled with a fruitful shower, for when those glorious spirits did behold
God stooping to the condition of a man, and man raised above the lowliness of
his state, and the happiness of all the angels, they were transported with the
admiration of the mystery and joy, for the felicity of their fellow creatures;
and did with the greatest cheerfulness perform the embasles they were sent upon
in this great affair. For having before advertised the blessed virgin of her
miraculous conception, lest her modesty should have been offended at so strange
an accident, and having removed the suspicion of her betrothed husband, they
rejoiced to bring the first news of that infinite mercy which we remember this
day: for as certain shepherds were feeding their flocks by night, an angel of
the Lord appeared unto them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them;
and when this glorious appearance had confounded their senses, and almost
scattered their understanding, the angel said unto them, Fear not for behold I
bring unto you tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all people; for unto
you is born this day in the city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord;
and suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host, the
whole choir of glorious spirits, who all joined in this heavenly anthem, Glory
to God on high, on earth peace, and good will toward men. And may not that
help to heighten and advance our joy and our thankfulness? Can we be insensible
of our happiness, when angels do so heartily congratulate it? It Is a nativity
which we celebrate, and any birth does much rejoice persons interested; a woman
forgets her pangs when a manchild is born into the world.

But that our joy and thankfulness may be more excited, we shall first consider
the excellency of the person who was born; secondly, the design of his birth;
and thirdly, glance a little at the circumstances of it.

First then, he was no common and ordinary person whose birth occasions our
joy: if we shall but fix our eyes on his humane nature, and consider those
excellencies that were obvious to the eyes of the world, we shall yet
acknowledge, that never such a person appeared on the face of the earth. It is
he whose nativity was promised immediately after the fall, and so exactly
pointed at by the prophets many hundred years before it happened, that the Jews
could tell the place, and the very heathens had some knowledge of the time; for
the world was big with expectation, that the prophecies should then be
fulfilled which foretold the birth of a great person. Lastly, it is he whose
very infancy not only startled a king, and made him fear his throne* but also
affrighted the powers of darkness, and silenced the heathen oracles, ille puer
Hebraeus, etc. whose childhood puzzled the knowledge of the aged, and
confounded the doctors of the law; who ruled the the course of nature and made
the strong winds obey him, and could walk on the billows of the seas as on a
pavement; who fed multitudes by his word, and healed all manner of diseases
without medicine; who could command them to leap that were cripple, and make
them see the heavens and the day, who had been born blind; and who could cast
devils out of their possessions, and restore the franrick to their wits; who
could break the gates of death, and open the doors of the grave and call back
the spirits to the buried carcases.

It is he who by the ministry of twelve fishermen, made his religion, though
contrary to the corrupt affections, and carnal interests of men, quickly subdue
the known world, and made it submit to a crucified king. The doctrine which he
taught, mastered the understanding of the most learned philosophers, conquered
the spirits of the most valiant commanders, and outwitted the cunning of the
subtlest politicians, it cancelled the ceremonies of the Jews, confounded the
wisdom of the Greek, and instructed the rudeness of the Barbarian; and remains
still in the world a constant evidence of the author's wisdom and power. And
what shall we speak of the goodness and moral endowments of that humane nature,
which were as miraculous as his power: Nay, all his miracles were instances of
the one as well as of the other. Should we speak of his ardent piety and
devotion, his love to God, and his zeal for his honor, his amiable meekness
and humility, his universal charity and compassion even toward his bitter
enemies, his venerable purity and temperance, that noble contempt of the world,
and all those other virtues which shined so eminently in his whole
conversation; a sermon were too little for every particular. But this is not
all, he was not only far above other men, but infinitely above the angels,
being personally united to the divine nature; he was God as well as man, and by
communication of properties, it may be said, that he whom we now behold in a
cradle, has his throne in the heaven, and fills all things by his immensity;
that he who is wrapped in swaddling clothes, is now clothed in infinite glory;
and he whom we find in a stable among beasts, is the same with him encircled
with millions of angels; in a word, that great person whose nativity we
celebrate, is divinely embodied, God made flesh. This union of the divine and
humane nature, is a mystery great enough to confound our understanding, but not
to trouble or shake our faith, who know how they are, and are not able to give
any account of the union betwixt the soul and the body, or of the parts of
nature among them selves, which yet we never call in question.

And thus much of the dignity of Christ's person, which is the first ground of
our joy; we proceed to the second, the design of his birth. He was Lord of the
world, but came not into it to exercise dominion, nor as the Jews expected, to
procure their temporal redemption, and restore the kingdom to Israel: He came
not for so mean a purpose as the Jews expected, to procure their temporal
redemption, to make his followers rich and honorable, fortunate or conspicuous
in the world; nay, both by precept and example he taught them to contemn and
despise all such empty trifles: but he came to deliver his people from
everlasting destruction, and from the captivity of sin, and to teach them how
by a holy life they might obtain an endless happiness. He came not indeed to
purchase us liberty to sin, without hazard, and then to cover all our
iniquities with his righteousness, to let us live as we list, and assure us of
pardon. Nay, it had neither been consistent with his love to God, to have
procured pardon for obstinate and incorrigible rebels; nor so great a benefit
to us to have obtained remission without sanctification: Had we been delivered
from all other punishment, sin it self would have made us miserable. But Christ
came into the world to save his people from their sins, Mat. i. 21. as well as
from the dismal consequences of them; and to procure for us, that being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him, Luke i. 12. In a word, Christ came into
the world to advance the glory of God, and the happiness of the earth, by
restoring us to the favor of our maker, and a conformity to him. And certainly
if we have any sense of the evil of sin, or the misery of hell, of the beauty
of holiness, or the glory of heaven, it must needs be a matter of great joy to
celebrate the birth of him, who does deliver us from the one, and gives us
assurance of the other.

It remains yet that we speak of the circumstances of the nativity which we
celebrate; and many things present themselves full of comfort and instruction.
We shall only observe our Savior's coming into the world after that manner,
which did best suit with his design. Indeed when a man should hear of the Son
of God's coming down from heaven, and making a progress into the lower world,
he would be apt to think that his appearance would be with the greatest
splendour and magnificence, and that the glory of heaven should continually
attend and signalize his person: at least, that all the princes in the world
should be summoned to attend his reception, and that the heaven should bow at
his presence, and the earth tremble at the approach of his Majesty, and that
all the clouds should clap together in an universal thunder, to welcome his
appearance; instead of all this pomp and grandeur, he slips into the world (as
they say) incognito, is born in a village, discovered by some poor shepherds,
and found by them in a stable, and such an homely cradle as that afforded, only
attended by his poor mother, who, though of royal blood, had nothing but goodness
to make her eminent; and his education was answerable to his obscure birth, and
his whole life a course of humility and self-denial* Now certainly this far
best agrees with the design of his appearance, who came not on so mean an
errand as to dazzle the eyes of mankind with the appearance of his glory, nor
to amaze them with the terribleness of his Majesty, much less to make a show of
the riches and gallantry of the world among them but to bring life and
immortality to light, and lead men to eternal happiness. In order to which it
was necessary, that by his example, as well as doctrine, he should disparage
the vanities of the world, and bring them out of that credit and esteem they
had gotten among foolish men.

I shall proceed no further on this subject; I hope it does appear, that we
have great reason to rejoice in the exaltation of the humane nature, and the
great salvation purchased to us by the incarnation of the Son of God. I shall
add, that even this joy admits of holy fear, even on this occasion we must
rejoice with trembling. Salvation is come into the world, but woe to them that
neglect it! The gospel is preached, but there is great danger in slighting it,
let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest,
any of us should come short of it, Heb. iv. 1. Little cause have obstinate
sinners to rejoice on this festival, the time is coming that they shall wish,
that either Christ had never come into the world, or they had never heard of
him: Behold, this child is set for the rise and fall of many, Luke ii 34. And
they that are not the better, shall be the worse for his coming. One way I must
name, that many men set this child for their own fall, when they make this
solemn anniversary, an opportunity of sinning and debauchery, as if it were
indeed a drunken Bacchus, and not a holy Jesus, whom they worshipped. What,
Sirs, because God became man, must we therefore become beasts? Or think we to
honor the child with dissoluteness, who came to the world on designs of
holiness. This it is, no doubt, that gives many men a prejudice against the
festival it self, and perhaps is their most specious Argument. We know an
answer, but you may and ought to afford another, by removing any ground for
such a pretense; indeed a forenoon's sermon will never compensate an
afternoon's debauch; nor will your service in the church justify your
intemperance at home. But as hereby at least some time is redeemed from the too
frequent courses of the day, so I wish the time we spend here, may have some
influence toward the right improvement of the rest; that our behavior on this
solemnity may be such, as suits with the infinite holiness of the person whom
we profess to honor, that we may serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling.

FINIS.

