A Third LETTER From a Minister of the Church of England TO THE DISSENTERS.

A Third LETTER FROM A Minister of the Church OF ENGLAND TO THE DISSENTERS.
Containing Some Observations on Mr. J. G's. Remarks on the Second.

Magna est Veritas et praevalebit. Blessed is the Man that -- sits not in
the Seat of the Scornful.

Psalm. 1.1. BOSTON: Printed in the Year 1737.

A Third LETTER From a Minister of the Church of England, TO THE DISSENTERS.
Dear Brethren,
I Told you in the Close of my Second Letter, that if Mr. G. thought fit to
write again, and would seriously and fairly attend to the real Merits of the
Cause, I would willingly attend him again; but if he was resolved to go on
Scoffing and Reviling, I should endeavor to find some better Method of
spending my Time, than to take any further Notice of him: Accordingly in hopes,
I suppose, that I would have done with him, and being resolved to have the last
Word; he has chose not only to go on in his reviling Method, but has, if
possible, gone a much further Length in his injurious and abusive Manner of
treating us than he did before.

I shall not therefore think it worth my while to write any particular and
distinct Reply to his Remarks; not because there would be any manner of
Difficulty in confuting every Syllable of them; but because there is scarce any
thing new of Reasoning in them, (nothing indeed worth mentioning but what is
sufficiently confuted already, in the very Letter which he pretends to answer;)
and because the pursuing such a bitter, reflecting, bantering, uncharitable
Dispute as he has gone into, in the manner it deserves, may rather tend to
increase than mitigate that unchristian Temper in you toward us, which his
Management of the Controversy has a sad Tendency to promote, and which
therefore I should rather incline to draw a Veil over than to expose. For it is
indeed a most melancholy thing in the Eyes of all serious Christians, that one
who professes himself a Minister of the Gospel of Peace, should, at all
adventures, give himself up in such an abandoned Manner to excite among
Christians a mortal Hatred and Aversion one toward another.

He says, p. 1. It has been justly observed, that such as lie in wait to
deceive, make it their first work to move the Passions of their Readers and
Hearers. In which Words he has unhappily described his own Character and
Practice; for I appeal to you all that read his Book, (which I believe will be
but few,) whether he has aimed at much else than to raise and inflame the
Passions of his Readers, and those of the worst Sort, even the Passions of
Anger, Malice, Hatred, Contempt and Ill Will, than which nothing can be more
scandalous to Christianity.

But though I do not design any particular Answer to this new Scold of his, yet
in Compassion to some who may otherwise be misled and imposed upon by certain
bold Assertions and artful Insinuations, I have, though very much against my own
Inclinations, been prevailed upon to make a few Observations upon his Remarks,
chiefly with Regard to certain pretended Facts, which are as directly contrary
to Truth as Darkness is to Light. --

And,

1. The first thing I shall take Notice of is, p. 85, 87. wherein he asserts,
that I confess some things are unlawful in the Church of England: Now as to
this I desire you to read that Passage in my Second Letter, p. 46 and see with
your own Eyes, which will soon convince you how far Mr. G. is from the least
Regard to Truth: for you will then be sensible that there is not the least
Ground for that Assertion. Read also p. 33. and first Letter p. 13. where I
challenge him and all the World to prove that there is any thing unlawful in
our Church, and p. 35. and many other Places there are to the same Effect. -- I
allow indeed that unlawful things imposed would be a justifiable Reason of
Separation; but I am far from saying or thinking, and as far is he from
proving, that there is any such thing in our Church: And when I say, that was
our Case: he cannot but know, I mean (not that any thing is unlawful in the
Church, but,) only that some necessary things were wanting among you which were
a justifiable Reason for our leaving you.

2. In p. 5. He calls Bohun an honest Man and says he is informed he is of our
Communion. -- Now it is certain he cannot be an honest Man, because he must know
that he speaks false in saying, that Our Bishops give Licenses to Midwives to
Baptize, and to Men to have two Wives, and to commit Adultery and practice
Knavery etc. -- And I have it from a Gentleman of great Character and Honor in
London, that he is reputed an Infidel, and consequently of no Communion: -- And
when I find fault with some of your Ministers for recommending and scattering
about that, and others the like abusive Books, he knows I don't mean the whole
Body of them; for I know, and he may know that there are many of them that do
abhor such Books, and his own among the rest.

3. He charges me, in p. 6. with reflecting on the Father of Spirits, because I
say, He that is not convinced by the mighty Reasoning of Hooker and
Chillingworth appears to me to have a Mind of a very odd make. -- Now as to
this, he knows I am far from thinking that God made his Mind so oddly who is
not convinced, and that what I mean is, that it seems to me he must, by
perversely indulging his Prejudices, have made himself obstinate and impregnable
against conviction: -- It is not God that make Men perverse, but they make
themselves so

4. In p 7. He does in effect charge me with barefaced wilful Perjury, because
I said "God is my Witness and you also, that he had charged me falsely in
saying, I had repeatedly railed against you either from the Press or Pulpit. --
Now as to this, I am content to leave it to your own Consciences, and still
appeal to you all that have ever known my manner of Life, whether any thing has
ever been my Practice that could justly be charged with Railing? and
consequently, Whether his dreadful charging me at this Rate be not
unsupportably abusive?

5. In p. ibid. He says, I charge him with excessive Rioting, as though I meant
Drinking; when he knows I meant, not Drinking excessively, but another Sort of
Riot, even that of malevolent Passions and Evil-speaking, which you all know to
be true. -- And on this Occasion he insinuates as if I were at the head of
Bonfires and drinking strong Drink on the Evening of Gunpowder Treason; when
you all know that I never had any Concern in those Diversions, and that there
were at least five of you to one of my People that were present on those
Occasions, when I cannot understand there ever passed any thing but what was
very innocent.

6. In p. 9. He denis that he represented the Church of England in that odious
and* abusive manner I mentioned, calling it not Christ's Church but the
Devil's. -- Now you all know that ever read them, that he meant the Church in
those Verses: And I have them to show in his own handwriting, and I dare
appeal to you all whether they can admit of any other Construction, and to his
own Conscience, both that he was the Author of them, and that this was his
meaning.

7 In p 10 He challenges all Mankind to show any thing whereby he ever
discovered the least Disposition or Inclination to conform to the English Modes
of Worship and Government. -- Now as to this I have a Letter by me in his own
handwriting, that I am ready to show you at any Time, which he wrote for one
of his Parishioners to a Gentleman in Boston, wherein, with all the good Wishes
imaginable for the Churches Prosperity and Success in this Land, that Gentleman
is desired to send the best Books in Defense of the Worship and Government of
the Church of England. -- Now I appeal to you all whether the Writer of that
Letter had not strong Inclinations to Conformity: though we are very thankful
that he never did actually conform, since he appears to be a Person of such a
virulent Temper.

8. In p. 12. He says I encouraged a Person to preach every Sabbath Day, who
confessedly had no Power. -- Now as to this it is far from being true: And that
very Gentleman himself told the Person who inspected the Press, upon his
Inquiry into this Matter, that I never directed or encouraged him to preach*
and it is very strange that he would let it pass when he knew it to be not
true: Nor did I ever direct him or any one else to do any thing besides what a
mere Layman might do, and what the Society that sent me hither, both approves
and rewards. -- As to what Mr. G. himself did, I assure you I had it from one
of your own Ministers who condemned his Proceeding* as being generally esteemed
very irregular and inconsistent with your Constitution.

9. He says, p. 15. That one of your Ministers did undertake to defend his
Remarks, and did it so rourdly that I had little to say; and that I declared,
that it is not Episcopal Ordination I stand so much upon, and that if I were a
Diocesan I should not oblige any that had Presbyterian Ordination to be
re-ordained. Now as to these Articles there is no truth at all in either of
them; and I appeal to all that were present at that Conversation, (and there
were several of both Persuasions,) that that Gentleman being once and again
urged to defend him, he utterly declined it, and said he had no Business to
defend Mr. G 's Notions, or to this Effect. -- And the Gentleman himself has
since declared to me before sundry Evidences, that he never reported me as
giving up Episcopal Ordination, or saying were I a Diocesan, I would not insist
on Reordination: So that Mr. G. is left alone to stand the Author of these
notorious Untruths.

10 On this Occasion he says once and again, p. 86. That he is well satisfied
we never had Episcopal Ordination. -- Now this is very strange indeed, for when
he disputed once with one of our Brethren on this Subject before several
People, that Gentleman, to convict him, showed him his Letters of Orders with
the Bishop's Hand and Seal, and he owned it was so: How then can he now say he
is well satisfied of the contrary, when he knows otherwise? -- And because you
are made to believe we never were ordained by the Bishop with Imposition of
Hands, etc. I do now for your Satisfaction solemnly declare, that we were, and
are ready to show our Letters of Ordination at any time; and moreover, that the
Bishops of England make no Account at all of the Ordinations we had before.

11. After all that I said in Vindication of our Discipline, it is really
amazing that he should go on in representing things in that utterly wrong and
injurious manner he does in Pages 26 to 29, and then conclude by saying that we
durst not refuse the Sacrament to the most openly vicious Person that belongs
to our Communion, if there were any spiritual Court at hand; when he knows, and
I told you from the express Words of the Prayer Book, that we are expressly
ordered to refuse the Sacrament to all such, till they openly declare their
Repentance: And this is our constant Practice -- And as to the ancient
Discipline which we lament the Want of, it is as much wanting with you, as with
us; for pray what open Penance is done among you in Lent? which alone is the
Discipline the Church means, as I showed you before.

12. In p 38, concerning the barbarous Murder of Archbishop Sharp, which it
never was doubted but that it was committed by Presbyterians, and it is
expressly asserted by the Author that continues Sir Walter Raleigh's History,
Vol. 4 p 150) I say, concerning this Murder Mr. G. says, Whoever did it, the
Fact is justifiable on the same foot that Phineas was justified in killing
Zimri and Cosbi. -- O prodigious! -- Shall an Example of Zeal inspired by God
himself in executing his Vengeance upon the vilest Idolatry and Lewdness, be
alleged to justify a barbarous Murder? At this Rate every wild Enthusiast
that has the Malice and Rage to prompt him to it, and the Madness to conceit
himself inspired in doing it, may be justified in committing what Murders he
pleases on every one that he conceits to be in a wrong way? He may plead the
Example of Phineas as Mr. G. does, and all is right. What does this tend to,
but to open a Door to all manner of Violence, to the most execrable Murders,
and inhuman Butcheries imaginable? Upon this Principle who could think his Life
safe? And what Mischief might one not look for from the Hands of one that would
talk at this astonishing Rate?

13. In p. 41. He says, The first Reformers took the Prayers of the Church out
of the Popish Mass Book. Now in this there is a most wretched Delusion; for the
Truth of the Matter is this: Our Reformers had no Regard at all to the Popish
Books as such, but to the Holy Scriptures, and the ancient Liturgies of the
primitive Church, which were used long before the Times of Popery, from whence
some Forms of Prayer had been continued down through the corrupt Times of
Popery; but surely they were never the worse for having been used by the
Papists, any more than the Psalms, the Scripture-Lessons, the Lord's-Prayer,
the Creed and the Ten Commandments: The Papists have done no harm to the Psalms
and Lessons, etc. by using them; neither for the same Reason could any of those
ancient Prayers be the less excellent and useful because they had been used by
them: And besides these a great Part of the Prayers of our Church were composed
by those holy Martyrs and Confessors themselves: For this see Sparrow, Comber
and Wheatly on the Common Prayer, which I will any Time show you.

14. On this Occasion, I observe p. 99. he says, That in the first 300 Years
there were no stinted Liturgies. -- Now nothing more untrue than this can be
asserted; for I can show you in Mr. Bingham's Origines, the very Forms taken
from the Apostolical Constitutions, which are supposed by him, and Bp.
Beveridge, and other learned Men, to be a Collection of the Rules and Practices
that were generally in use within the Three first Centuries in the Eastern
Church; and that many of them were, Mr. Bingham proves beyond all contradiction
from St. Cyprian and others of the Fathers. St. Cyprian says, They had one
public and common Prayer, De Orat. Dom. And he lived within 150 Years of the
Apostles. And Ignatius who wrote within 7 Years of St. John's Time, Ep. ad
Magn. says, Come all together to the same Prayer, let there be one Common
Prayer, etc. Now several of these ancient Forms are the same with ours. It is
pity but that you should see these Things in Mr. Bingham, and particularly I
would have you compare and see the Difference between the Popish Forms and
ours, which he would have you believe the same, and which I am ready to show
you: you would then see how little Truth there is in him.

15. He still goes on saying, p. 99. that the Extempore or free Way of Prayer,
(as he calls it,) is the ancient approved Scripture Way, and he cannot find in
Scripture that any one Person ever used Forms composed by another. -- Now as to
this, I still challenge him to show one Precept or Example in Scripture for
Extempore Prayers in public Worship: And it is plain as I showed you, that
Christ used Psalm. 22.1. on the Cross; and Acts 4.24. the Apostles used a
Passage out of the 2d Psalm; and the Psalms which were Forms composed by David
and others, are expressly required by St. Paul to be used in Christian
Assemblies, Ephesians. 5.19. and Col. 3.16.

16. In order to show the unlawfulness of Authority's interposing in
indifferent Things* he undertakes to show, p 70 that there are no human Actions
that are indifferent -- Whereas nothing is clearer both from the Nature of
Things, and in the Sense of all Divines of any Note, than that some human
Actions are indifferent; and it is evident that to deny lawful Authority a
right to interpose with respect to such Things for the public Good, does
manifestly destroy all human Government, in Familys, Church and State. -- When
our Savior says, ( Matthew. 12.36.) we must give an Account of every idle Word,
it is plain he means not every indifferent Word; but every false, vain or rash
Word, as Dr. Hammond on the Place, clearly proves.

N. B. On this Subject he has here a deal of idle, unintelligible Talk for 20
Pages together, which so far as you can make any Sense of it, you will find
fully answered already in my 2d Letter in the Places he refers to, and that he
takes little or no Notice of it, any otherwise than to misrepresent it: I must
therefore desire you to read it over carefully again, particularly p. 38.

17. But there is one Thing here, I cannot but take Notice of; and that is, p.
75, where he says, I rob every Man of his own personal Judgment of Discretion;
and that I teach that when lawful Authority has interposed, every one must
sacrifice the Peace of his Conscience to the Peace of the Church. -- Now this
is most notoriously false, for it is directly contrary to what I did teach you
in my Second Letter, P. 40. My Words are, " You will say, What, May we not
judge for our selves? I answer, Yes, We not only may, but ought to judge for
our selves, and see to it, that there be nothing required of us by Authority
that is evidently contrary to the Word of God. -- And he knows that it is not
any deliberate reasonable settled Judgment of Conscience, much less Peace of
Conscience, that I hold it our Duty to sacrifice to the public Peace, but only
little Doubts and Scruples about Things of small moment, as I abundantly show,
P. 41, 42. And in this all good Casuists agree. See A. Bp. Sharp's Discourse of
Conscience.

18. I told you that we are not obliged to read one Syllable of the Apocrypha
on the Lord's Day. -- To this he most falsely says, (though he pretends to have
the Calender open before him) That there is no Provision made that Apocryphal
Lessons may not be read on the Lord's Day, P. 89. Than which nothing can be
said more contrary to Truth; for there are other Lessons appointed for every
Sunday in the Year, as he might have seen if he would have opened his Eyes. A
Man might as well look up to the Meridian at Noon in a clear Day, and at the
same Time insist on it that the Sun don't shine. -- And here he says I would
have you believe that we read none but Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus; whereas I
never aimed at any such thing, but only mentioned them as such Parts as we do
read, not that we read no other.

But there is no End of observing to you the many gross Untruths and injurious
Misrepresentations of both the Church and me that abound throughout his
Pamphlet: I might soon collect an hundred at least, and it would be very easy
to confute them all; but you may readily see, from those that I have taken
notice of, what Judgment to make of the rest, and how little Credit is to be
given him in any thing that he says. The Truth is, and I am sorry I am obliged
to say it, that of all the Writers of Controversy I ever read, (and I have read
a great many) I never found one so full of Rancour, so disingenuous, or that
had so little Regard to the Truth and Right of Things as this Man: He little
cares what he says, so that he may but throw Dirt, and raise an Odium, and cast
a Contempt on his Antagonist, and bring Hatred and Ill Will upon us: And I do
again heartily pray God to give him Repentance and Forgiveness.

One thing however I must further take Notice of, and that is relating to the
Predestinarian Controversy, p. 123. where he says that the very Doctrine which
I deny, i. e. absolute personal Predestination, is the Doctrine of all the
foreign reformed Churches, and even of the universal Church of Christ. --
Whereas he cannot but know that it is only Calvin's Part of the Reformation that
ever taught this Doctrine, and those that follow him, and that Luther and
Melancthon and the Churches that they reformed, which were by far the greater
Number, ever disclaimed it, except a few rigid People among them; and the
Augustan or Ausburg Confession, which is the Summary of Luther's Doctrine, and
which was received by his Part of the Reformation, has none of this Doctrine in
it, but what is indeed inconsistent with it: Now this Confession is generally
received in the whole Kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and Prussia, in some
Parts of Poland, and all the Protestant Churches of the High Germany, and the
Doctrine taught in all these Churches, according to Luther and Melancthon is,
That God decreed to elect to Eternal Life those who he foresaw would so
cooperate with his Grace as effectually to repent, believe and persevere in
Well-doing, and to reject those who he foresaw would abide impenitent in their
Sins. (vid Apell. Evang. cap. 4.) And this is the same with St. Paul's and
ours, not to mention the whole Greek Church, comprehending a vast Body of
Christians, and this is agreeable to the Doctrine of all the Fathers, and the
universal Church of Christ in its purest Times, the first 300 Years, both
Eastern and Western; and I challenge him to show any of the ancient Writers of
the Primitive Church, of any Note, down to the Days of St. Augustine, that ever
taught the Doctrine of absolute personal Decrees. -- As to what he quotes from
the 9th of Romans, it relates not to the eternal State of particular Persons,
but to the Election or Rejection of whole Nations and People in this World,
whereby they become or cease to be the peculiar Covenant People of God, as will
plainly appear if you carefully attend to the Scope and Design of the Apostle's
Reasoning.

In p. 126. He says he hopes all he has said fully proves that the Doctrine of
absolute Predestination is really the Doctrine of the Church of England. -- I
answer, very far from it: all that he has proved is, that a few private Men or
particular Divines of the Church of England, in the latter End of Q.
Elisabeth's Reign, and some part of that of K. James the First, were of that
Opinion; and pray, who ever denied it? On the other hand, for these, (taking in
the whole, both at the Time of the first Reformation, as I showed before, and
ever since) there have been, I believe I may say, at least fifty to one of the
contrary Opinion, who were nevertheless as true Churchmen as the others; for
neither the one, nor the other of these Opinions were ever yet imposed in our
Church, as Terms either of Communion or Ordination. -- There was indeed, as I
allowed, a strong Party toward the End of Q. Elisabeth's Reign, who labored
hard to get the Lambeth Articles imposed, but were reprimanded for it, and the
Imposition of them never could be obtained, nor were they ever allowed to be
the Doctrine of our Church. And happy it was for us that they could not gain
their Ends, for had they been established they would have created such
Dissension and Confusion as would have soon broken the Church in pieces. -- For
all these things and many more, let me again beg of you to read Dr. Heylin's
History of this Controversy, and then you would see the Truth of the Matter
with your own Eyes.

Indeed Mr. G. endeavors to invalidate the Authority of Dr. Heylin, p. 42.
from the Testimony of Mr. Pierce, who says He was an Author that had no Regard
to Truth. But in Answer to this, I would recommend to you the learned Dr. Gray,
who in his Answer to Pierce, (who, by the way, was an abandoned Arian,) does
abundantly prove in multitudes of Instances, that he had no Regard to Truth:
And in reading this Book, which you may have of me, you will find a full Answer
to every thing that Mr. G. here writes against me, which he has, in a great
measure collected from the writings of this Mr. Pierce whom Dr. Gray answers:
There you will find the Stories of Heath and Cummin abundantly confirmed, p. 32
from Strype's Life of A. Bp. Parker, p. 244. -- Read also Dr Grey's and Dr.
Maddox's Answers to Mr. Neal's History of the Puritans, who do abundantly
convict him and Mr. Pierce of many gross and notorious Untruths: And I
challenge Mr. G. to show any Instances wherein these Gentlemen, or Dr. Heylin
either, have misrepresented things: No, they never were, and never will be
answered.

And now to conclude, Let me beseech you in faithfulness to Truth, to God and
your own Souls, to examine carefully both Sides of the Question, and
particularly I beg you will so far do me Justice, as to read over faithfully my
Second Letter, together with his pretended Answer to it, and then you will see
how far it is from being any just Answer at all. -- He says, p. 127. That he
has gone through the principal Passages, and has not silently passed by any
thing worthy of Remark. -- Whereas, if you compare them exactly together, you
will find that he has passed by the greatest Part, and things of the greatest
Weight and Moment, and that where he does remark, his Remarks mainly consist in
scoffing and reviling Language, and where he pretends to reason, his way is
first most abusively to misrepresent me, and then to fight in the Air with his
own Shadow, and in a Dust of his own raising: otherwise there is nothing new,
but the same things over and over again, which have been answered a thousand
times, and (as I said) even in the Letter he pretends to confute, to which
therefore as being yet safe and sound I will refer you, entreating you to
consider seriously how poor an Account you will be able to give of your Reading
and Inquiry, if you do not heartily and impartially read on both sides, and
procure all the helps that are offered you for your Information, and if you do
not lay aside all party Affections, and seek after Truth and Right for their
own Sakes, and that you may know and do the Will of God, and be saved.

He says, p. ult. If I am silent, he is resolved however to go on writing. --
Let him go on and welcome, since he knows not how or when to hold his Tongue.
You see from what I have here laid before you how little Regard is due to any
thing he says: Let him then, if he pleases, go on Scribbling, Reviling and
Scolding to the End of his Life: -- This I am sure of, he will never be able to
prove that ours is an unlawful, or unsafe Communion on any Account, and much
less as he asserts, because we have any Confusion or Difference about the Head,
the Doctrine or Modes of Worship. For this is a most groundless Calumny, like
the rest of his odious Suggestions. However, I would wish him to consider what
a sad thing it would be for him when he has spent his Life in this furious
manner, to go into the other World enflamed and reaking hot with such a bitter,
uncharitable and revengeful Spirit as you see his Writings do every where
abound with, which I do most heartily compassionate, and I pray God to calm his
Passions and recover him to a truly Christian Temper of Mind before it be too
late! For I shall be heartily glad to see him in Heaven, notwithstanding his
abusive Treatment of me here on Earth.

And I would observe to you, that it infinitely concerns you as you hope for
Heaven, to be upon your Guard against that malevolent uncharitable Temper, so
contrary to the Gospel, which his Writings tend to inspire you with: For our
parts we are resolved to take with Patience and Meekness all his severe and
abusive Reflections, and to endeavor to be as little exasperated as possible,
being persuaded that his Wrath can do us no harm; for as we find that all
serious considerate People, even on your own side, that we can hear speak of
it, (and they are not a few) are much ashamed to see your Cause defended in
such a weak, scurrilous, bantering and uncharitable Manner, as cannot fail of
bringing a great Dishonor to it; so we are more and more confirmed in it, that
his thus maliciously opposing the Church does greatly tend to promote it. --
The more he, and others like him strive to set you against it, the more they
will awaken your Attention toward it, and put you upon looking into it and
searching the Scriptures with the noble Bereans, (Acts 17.11.) to see whether
these things are so, at least those of you that are generously disposed to
consider things impartially and think and judge for your selves: And we are
well assured that the more you acquaint your selves with the Church, and
seriously attend to it so as to know what it really is, the more you will be
reconciled to it and be in love with it, as finding that the Truth and original
Simplicity of the Gospel is indeed with us, and in much greater Perfection than
with you.

Some of our Adversaries have been lately trying to do us all the Mischief they
can with the Bishop and Society, by false and odious Suggestions, whereby they
have however really promoted our Interest rather than done us any Disservice,
and only made themselves ridiculous: They have alleged things which they
cannot prove, and therefore can expect nothing by any further Attempts against
us, but to increase their own Shame, and involve themselves in greater
Confusion. -- No, my Brethren, Depend upon it, No Weapon formed against the
Church will ever eventually prosper: God will, in the Result of things, bring
Good out of Evil to us, and in the mean time cause all things to work together
for our Good: He has always done so hitherto, and we trust in his good
Providence that he ever will: And if God be for us, who shall be against us?
Truth is mighty, and under his Conduct, it will prevail.

In the mean time, I earnestly pray God to lead you all in the Way of Truth and
Holiness, to everlasting Happiness, and remain,

Dear Brethren, Your hearty Friend, and faithful Servant in Christ Jesus.
Aug. 21. 1736.
FINIS.

