AN APOLOGY For the Liberties of the Churches in New England: To which is
prefixed, A Discourse concerning Congregational Churches.

By SAMVEL MATHER, M. A. Pastor of a Church in Boston, New England.

-- Sed tamen meorum Periculorum Rations Utilita^ Reipublica vincat.

CICER. Orat. IV. in Catalin. -- Delicatus Amator est CHRISTUS: Non potest
amare Synagogam priscis Ceremoniis ac vetustae Legis studio rugosam -- Quod
aberrat a sacris Voluminibus non est CHRISTI. -- Sed falsa Scripturarum
Interpretatio vera Interpretatione refutanda est.

DESIDER. ERASM. Roterod. Symbol. Cateches. IV. -- Require of Christians only
to believe in CHRIST, and to call no Man Master but Him only: Let those leave
claiming Infallibility, that have no Right to it; and let them, that in their
Words disclaim it, disclaim it likewise in their Actions: In a Word, take away
Tyranny, which is the Devil's Instrument to support Errors and Superstitions
and Impieties in the several Parts of the World, which could not otherwise
withstand the Power of Truth: I say, take away Tyranny, and restore Christians
to their just and full Liberty of captivating their Understandings to the
Scripture only; that universal Liberty, thus moderated, may quickly reduce
Christendom to Truth and Unity.

CHILLINGWORTH. Part I. Chap. IV. Sect. 16. BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for
DANIEL HENCHMAN, over against the Brick Meeting House in Cornhill. 1738.

To the Honorable Mr. HOLDEN, One of the Directors of the Bank of England, At
London.
Honorable Sir,
I Flatter my self, that You will not think it any Dishonor to You to be owned
as a Friend of New England, especially in its best, its religious, Interests:
And for this Reason I venture to dedicate the following Performance to You;
desiring You to receive it as an Acknowledgment of Your many good and kind
Offices toward us.

It may not be amiss to inform You, that many Eminent Persons, besides Your
self, in our Mother-Kingdom have thought favorably concerning us and showed
their Readiness to serve us. The catholic and excellent Dr. TILLOTSON, from his
good Opinion of us, frequently concerned himself for the Welfare of
New England, and entreated His Majesty King WILLIAM to show the marks of his
peculiar Favor toward his faithful Subjects here, and once particularly was
so free as to declare in the Audience of his Majesty, that it would by no Means
do well for Him to take away from the People of New England any of their
Privilege. And the meritorious Bishop of Salisbury, Dr. BURNET, besides many
other weighty Expressions of his Kindness to New England, was once so good as
to profess before Dr. MATHER my honored Grandfather, that he would on the first
Opportunity declare openly in the House of Lords, that there was a greater
Sacredness in the Charter of New England than in those of the Corporations in
England; because those were only Acts of Grace; whereas the Charter of
New England was a Contract between the King and the first Patentees: They
promised the King to enlarge his Dominions on their own Charges, provided that
they and their Posterity might enjoy such and such Privileges: And They had
performed their Part: Now for the King to deprive their Posterity of the
Privileges therein granted to them, it would carry the Face of Injustice in it.
And the good old Lord WHARTON, the last surviving Member of the famous Assembly
of Divines that met at Westminster, whose Name should be very dear to every
true New-English Man, upon presenting a Petition for New England by my honored
Grandfather, who was then in the Agency for this Province, was pleased to say
with great Zeal and Earnestness to the King, that, if he were sure to die the
next Day, he would, as he now did, appear in behalf of this Country and
solicit his Favor for it. And, when one, from whom I have the Honor of
immediately descending, wrote an Account concerning the Affairs of New England
to the late great and good my Lord Chancellor KING, he was pleased to write a
Letter in Answer, wherein are these remarkable Passages; The Account of your
Country was very acceptable to me: And, wherein I can serve either it or you, I
shall always he ready; It is Matter of Joy, that the Christian Religion and
Learning do make such considerable Advances in those Parts of the World. And
indeed, wherever the Christian Religion is proposed in its native Plainness and
Simplicity, it is most likely to succeed.

Hence You see, Honorable Sir, that You are not singular in Your Regards
toward us and in Your Inclinations and Endeavors to serve us, but have such
good Company as may be an Encouragement unto You in them.

I need not mention to You the Claim, which these Churches have to their
Religious Privileges as Men, as Christians, and as Protestants: But I would
observe to You, that these Privileges are confirmed unto them by the Charter,
which was granted to this Province by King WILLIAM and Queen MARY of glorious
and immortal Memory.

And I would further acquaint You, that, since the Grant of our valuable
Charter, the same was ratified and confirmed by his most excellent Majesty King
GEORGE the First; and there has a Law passed in this Province in the fourth and
fifth of WILLIAM and MARY, wherein it is expressly provided, that the respective
Churches in this Province shall enjoy all their Privileges and Freedoms
respecting Divine Worship, Church Order and Discipline, and shall be encouraged
in the peaceable and regular Profession and Practice thereof: Which Law has bin
as it were touched by the Royal Scepter: For it has bin approved by his Majesty
of Great Britain: So that, Honorable Sir, the Liberties of these Churches must
be deemed to be as Sacred Things as the Ecclesiastical Liberties of the
National Churches of England and Scotland.

Besides, Sir, I can truly affirm, not only concerning the Church of which I
am the unworthy Servant, but also in behalf of all the Churches of our blessed
SAVIOR in New England walking in the same Faith and Order with our selves,
that they maintain an inviolable Allegiance to his present Majesty of Great
Britain, as they did to his Godlike Father before Him, and that they firmly
adhere to the Succession of the Imperial Crown of Great Britain in the present
Royal Family: Nor, I am well assured, is there so much as one Person in the
Communion of any of our Churches, but who has a cordial Regard and Affection
for the Person and Family of our present most gracious Sovereign and yields a
delightful Subjection to his auspicious Government.

Now considering these Things; and considering withal, what an honorable, as
well as vastly beneficial, Addition we have made to the wide and extended
Empire of the King of Great Britain: I said, Honorable Addition: For, while the
other British Provinces and Colonies have for the most Part bin settled by more
indifferent Persons, and for their Nourishment and Support have bin obliged to
the Royal Bounties; This Province was founded by worthy Persons, considerable
for their Families, Educations and Fortunes, as well as their superior Probity,
Religion and Goodness, who with vast Hazard and Expense past the wide Atlantic,
and consumed their Treasures and lost their Lives in these, then barbarous and
inclement, Regions, that so their Posterity might serve their GOD and their
King in the peaceable Possession and Exercise of those Civil and Religious
Privileges, which they had purchased and earned for them: Nor did the Crown
advance any Sums of Money for assisting and encouraging them in their expensive
and hazardous, but noble, Undertaking: Certainly, upon these Considerations, if
we do not challenge and claim as our Due, we may well promise our selves
however, the Royal Favor and Protection in the undisturbed Enjoyment of the
Liberties of our Churches and Schools.

I have rehearsed these Things to You, Honorable Sir, that so, as You have
Occasion for it, You may improve them to our Advantage and Comfort: In doing
which, as You will increase our Obligations, which already are very great unto
You; so, I doubt not, You will add to Your own Consolation and Joy: For, as the
wise Governor of the World has hitherto blasted the Designs and Attempts of
the Enemies to New England, so He has liberally rewarded and blessed its
Friends: And it is our Prayer and Hope, that He would graciously continue to do
so, and, in particular, that He would remunerate and prosper the honored Mr.
HOLDEN according to all the Good which he has done to the Churches and Country
of New England.

The Task which is undertaken in the following Sheets, cannot by any Means be
accounted singular; inasmuch as it is a common Thing in the Republic of Letters
for the Learned to apologize for those Disciplinary, as well as Doctrinal,
Principles, for which they have a peculiar and, as they imagine, just Esteem
and Veneration.

But, as to the Freedom of this Dedication, although it may be a great and
probably unbecoming one; yet You are well acquainted with the Occasion of it;
and, I believe, my Country will judge, that You were highly deserving of this
public Manifestation of Respect and Honor for You.

I cannot but hope, from what I have heard and learnt concerning Mr. HOLDEN'S
generous Sentiments, that the following Attempt will be acceptable unto You.
But, however this may be, give me Leave to beg the further Continuance of Your
Regards and Kindnesses to my Country, and please to think well of him, who
desires to be numbered,

Honorable Sir, among Your most respectful Friends and obedient humble
Servants, S. MATHER.
Boston, New England, March 1. 1738.
THE PREFACE.
BEING sensible, that long Life is not to be depended on here below, I have
thought it advisable to leave some abiding Testimonies that I have lived
Quatenus nobis denegatur diu vivere, relinguamus aliquid, quo nos vixisse
testemur. Plin. lib. 3. Epist. 8. Caninio.
behind me in the World; and I have determined to bear and leave my Testimony,
such as it is, to the Order of the Gospel in the Churches of New England.

As many of our Protestant Brethren abroad, so most of our People at Home, must
certainly have some Knowledge of the Privileges claimed by these Churches and
the Reasons of their Attachment unto them.

But, inasmuch as They may be desirous of a further Acquaintance with our
Religious Privileges and what we have to offer in Defense of them; I have
therefore thought it proper for their Sakes to prepare and publish the
following Apology, wherein I have endeavored to illustrate and confirm the
more distinguishing Privileges of these Churches.

That so this Attempt might be more fully and effectually answered, I have
consulted the published Works and many of the Manuscripts of the Fathers of
New England, I have searched the Records of the Primitive Church, I have read a
considerable Number of later Writers, and, in fine, I have examined the
Writings of the Inspired Apostles with Industry and Care: And hence I have bin
enabled to prepare the ensuing Apology, and offer it to the Consideration of my
Countrymen and all our Protestant Brethren.

By this Apology They will soon see, that we do not think Churches are such
Machines, as many on the other Side of the Atlantic take them to be, contrived
and to be improved for the outward Advantage of some sort of Persons; but that
they are Means for the Edification and spiritual Advantage of the Faithful,
which they are obliged to respect and observe in Obedience to JESUS CHRIST our
Savior and supreme LORD: For, to use the Words of the learned Abbot FLEURY
concerning his History, which may properly be applied to our Apology and used
concerning it, In This we have a Sort of Politics, which are Spiritual and all
Divine; a Government that is founded on Charity, the Public Good being the sole
End of it: For the Interest of the Governors is no Way concerned in it See
Fleury's Discourse on Ecclesiastical History.
.

Besides a particular Defense of the distinguishing Privileges of these
Churches in the following Attempt; there follows after this Preface a General
Discourse Preliminary concerning the Nature, Grounds and Reasons, Antiquity and
Advantages of Congregational Churches; which, I believe, will be judged by the
Impartial and Disinterested a sufficient Vindication of them.

In the Close, and as an Appendix to the Book, I have taken Care to publish
some Things that were never printed before among us, as well as some other
Things that have already bin given to the Public, but are now scarcely to be
found, concerning the Liberties of the New-English Churches, their catholic and
comprehensive Principles, their declared Regard especially to the Life and
Power of true Religion and their Duty and Interest to continue in their
respectful and affectionate Attachment to these Things.

Some perhaps may judge, that, in attempting to write an Apology for the
Liberties of our Churches, I have undertaken a Task, to which I am unequal: And
probably it may be so in Reality and Truth: But yet I am inclined to express my
self concerning my Performance, as TULLY concerning his Orator, The Work may be
great and arduous; but to him, that is inflamed with Love to it, there is not
found any sufficient Difficulty in the Way to discourage him from it Magnum
Opus conamur and arduum; Sed nihil difficile Amanti puto. Cicer. ad Brut.
Orator.
.

However, if the Remarks and Arguments made and collected in the following
Pages should be accounted slender and unsatisfactory; yet, if by Means of them
some abler Person here or elsewhere shall be excited to set the Liberties of
our Christian Brethren in a fairer Light and to show more Strength and Vigor in
defending them, I shall be so far from repenting of my Care and Trouble in
preparing and publishing the following Essay, that I shall heartily rejoice in
the good Success of it.

But, notwithstanding This, I must be so free as to declare, that in the
ensuing Pages I have endeavored faithfully to represent the Sense and Meaning
of the first Planters of these Churches: So that, with reference to what
follows, I may write in the Style of VEGETIUS, I am far from assuming any Thing
of Authority to my self in the following Sheets: If I have collected the Sense
of others right and well epitomized their Thoughts Nihil mibi Authoritatis
assumo: Sed gua ab aliis dispersa velut in Ordimem epitomata conscribo, Veget,
l. 1. c. 8.
which are variously dispersed and reduced them to a clear and natural Order, I
shall think it sufficient.

There is one Thing for which I expect to be somewhat blamed: And this is,
that, in illustrating and confirming the Liberties of our Churches, I generally
write in the Plural Number; whence some may conjecture, that it was at the
Direction or by the Desire of the Churches here, that I write this Apology for
them: But, wherever I use such a Way of expressing my self, I desire always to
be considered as representing what I take to have bin the Thoughts of the
Planters of these Churches, and so of the Churches themselves: Nor would I by
any means be understood as directed or advised by the Churches to enter upon
this Performance: For, if it were so, I should lose the Comfort and
Satisfaction, it not the Credit and Honor, of making my Free Will Offering to
their Service and Advantage.

Nor is it at all improbable, that some may find Fault with my frequent
Quotations from learned Authors and References to them: But, if the Province
undertaken by me did not unavoidably lead me to make those Citations and
References, I am very much mistaken: And, if it did, it is, I think, a
sufficient Excuse for me.

As to the Passages selected from the ancient Fathers, I have only this to say,
that they are generally taken from those, which are accounted the best
Editions: And I believe my References to them are exact and punctual; though it
is possible, that, in transcribing them into my Commonplace Book and this
second Transcription of them, some accidental Mistake may have occurred, which
any good-natured Man can overlook and forgive.

I have one Favor to ask of those, that shall read this Book, which, I think,
cannot in Reason be denied me: And this is, that, if any of them shall think
fit to animadvert upon any Part or the whole of it, they would be so kind as to
put their Names to what they publish: For otherwise they may not expect to have
any Notice taken of them; nor may they expect any, if they do, unless they
write in such a Manner as to require a suitable Answer from me.

I shall be very much disappointed, if, by the Publication of this small
Volume, I do not gain the Displeasure and Anger, if not mortal Enmity, of many:
But however I shall not be sorry for it, if I secure to my self, as I hope that
I shall, the perpetual Regard and Friendship Neque me paniset mortales
Inimicitias sempiternas Amicitias Baberc. Cieer. Orat. pro C. Rabirio Posthumo.
of all the true Lovers of Mankind and of our Christian Brethren in particular.

Since my writing this Book, there has a Pamphlet come to my Hands, which it is
said was written by a Gentleman of the Law in England, the Title of which is,
An Examination of the Scheme of Church Power, as laid down in the Codex Juris
Ecclesiastici Angli^^^, etc. As I was highly gratified in reading of this
Pamphlet; so I cannot help reciting some Passages from it, which were
peculiarly grateful to me; not doubting but that they will be singularly
pleasing to my Countrymen, and not the less so for coming from the Pen of an
eminent Lawyer. In Page 120th, 121st, 122d, 123d, he writes as follows, 'If the
Gentlemen of Synodical Learning will permit us to carry our Enquiry on this
Head so far back as to the Apostolic Age, we shall find that the Laiety at
that Time bore a Part in the most solemn Deliberations which concerned the
Interest or Government of the Church. The whole Number of Believers was
consulted in the Choice of a fit Person to succeed to the Apostleship, which
became vacant by the Apostasy and Death of Judas. Matthias was chosen, after
solemn Prayer to God for His Direction, by the Suffrage or Ballot of the whole
Church Acts, Chap. 1.
. The Multitude of Disciples was advised with touching the Institution of a new
Order of Church Officers, the Order of Deacons Acts, Chap. 6.
. The Constitution it self, as well as the Election and Consecration (as it is
now called) of the Seven, was the Act of the whole Multitude. The Apostles,
Elders and Brethren, (or as it is otherwise expressed in the same Chapter Acts,
Chap. 15.
, the whole Church, or all the Multitude) assembled at Jerusalem, Verse 12.
, to deliberate on the great Question, How far the Gentile Converts were
obliged to submit to the Law of Moses. And after two of the Apostles of the
Circumcision had delivered their Opinions; which they supported, not by
Apostolical Authority, but by strong Reasoning built on well known Facts, and
Principles universally admitted: And after Paul and Barnabas, Apostles of the
Uncircumcision, had related to the Assembly a Series of Facts happening within
their own Observation; from whence it might be reasonably concluded, that God
approved the Conversion of the Gentiles, and would receive them into his Chuch
without the Rite of Circumcision: After the Assembly, I say, had proceeded thus
far in the Way of rational and free Debate; they came to a Resolution, which
they communicated to the Churches concerned, by Letter and Message, in the Name
of the whole Body. Methinks, by the Way, his Lordship's Reasoning for
appropriating the Care of Spiritual Affairs to the Clergy, loses a great deal
of its Weight, when we reflect on the Behavior of the Apostles in those
Instances. As the Apostles had really that Superiority in Gifts and Abilities,
which their Successors bless themselves withal, They, of all Men living, might
have claimed a separate and exclusive Right of Jurisdiction and Legislature, in
Spiritual Matters. But the Apostles did not exclude the Brethren, the Body of
the People, from their Counsels; nor dictated magisterially to them. They
reasoned as with Men and Christians; and made no other Use of their superior
Gifts and personal Knowledge of Facts, than to convince and persuade. And their
Arguments, attended with the most evident Tokens in themselves of a
disinterested Zeal for the Honor of God, and the Good of the Church, had a
suitable Effect on their Hearers.

In Conformity to the Practice of the Apostolic Age, the Laiety continued to
have a Share in the Government of the Church, as Members of a voluntary
Society, and interested in its Concerns; till the Conversion of the Roman
Emperors made Way for very considerable Changes in the Ecclesiastical Polity.
Till that Time, all the Affairs of the Church were administered, at voluntary
Assemblies of the Parties concerned; which soon gained the Name of Councils or
Synods; whereof the Laiety were always considered as Members. At these
Meetings, Matters of Order and Discipline were transacted: And if any new Rules
appeared to be necessary for the Ends of Government, they were here agreed
upon. This was the Ecclesiastical Legislature of the primitive Church
Constitution and Discipline of the Primitive Church. Edit. 1712. p. 143, 144.
Father Paul's Rights of Soverergas, p. 44. Treatise of Beneficiary Matters,
Edit 1680. p. 19.
. But when Christianity became the established Religion of the Empire, and
Church and State became one Body, considered only in different Views and under
different Relations; the Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws of the Empire flowed
from one and the same Source, Imperial Prescripts. For though the Name and Shadow
of the Senatorial and Tribunitial Powers remained, these Powers had been long
extinguished: And the whole Legislative Power of the Empire was really vested
in the Emperor. And by this Legislature were Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil
Laws, ordinarily made; as every one sees, who has but looked into the Titles
of the Justinian and Theodosian Codes. The Emperors did indeed, upon
extraordinary Occasions, call Ecclesiastical Councils; sometimes of the Clergy
and Laiety, as particularly at the first Council of Nice: but more frequently,
I believe, of the Clergy alone Socrates, Lib. I. c. 9.
. At these Councils the Emperors, in Person, or by their Ministers, usually
presided, and assent Decrees there made; and in some Instances, did by a
separate Instrument, in Form of an Imperial Prescript, ratify the Decrees. The
Presence and Concurrence of the Emperor to the Acts of the Council, gave them
their binding Force, and incorporated them into the Laws of the Empire. For the
whole Legislative Power being, as I observed, in the Emperor, nothing could
become Part of the Law, without his Authority. This Principle of the Necessity
of an Imperial Sanction to Synodical Decrees, seems to be so well understood in
Justinian's Time, that he expressly ordained, that the Acts of the Councils of
Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon, should have the Force of Laws
within the Empire, etc. And, after this, the Author proceeds and shows, from
the 124th Page to the 137th Page of his Book, how, after the universal Monarchy
fell to Pieces about the Beginning of the fifth Century, the Northern People,
who erected independent Kingdoms on the Ruin^s of it, after their Conversion to
Christianity, provided for their Ecclesiastical, in the same Manner as they did
for their Civil, Polities; and how this was gradually brought about
particularly in England.

But what can be said, if, notwithstanding such fair Accounts from
disinterested and honest Men, the infatuated humane Race will not believe the
Truth, but take Pleasure in Unrighteousness and Oppression? Truly it must be
accounted a melancholy Thing, and be for a Lamentation among all the sincere
Lovers of Mankind.

For my Part I can say with the learned Dr. HENRY MORE, at the Close of his
useful Exposition of the Seven Churches, I am abundantly taught by Experience,
that both the Finding out and the Receiving of Divine Truths found out by
others is a special Gift of GOD. And therefore I conclude this Preface with the
Prayer, which the learned Abbot FLEURY makes at the End of his Discourses on
Ecclesiastical History, and I make it with all my Heart and Soul, GOD grant,
that we may reap Advantage by being born in so knowing an Age; and that, if we
are not able to recover the ancient Discipline of the Church, we may at least
know how to esteem it, to reverence it, and to regret the Loss of it. AMEN!

ERRATA.
THE kind Reader is desired to correct the following Errata.

Page 9. Line 4. from Bottom, for Spacious read Specious. P. 14. l. 19. for
Extents read Extent. P. 18. l. 2. in Margin, for dictatus read dicatur. P. 20.
l. 16. for institued read instituted. P. 28. l. 13. for Ambitions read
Ambition. l. 2. from Bottom, for Commands read Command. P. 29. l. 3. for
Churchts read Churches. l. 28. read Christianismo. P. 32. l. 3. After CHRIST'S
-- read Mind, we shall at the same Time declare for the Liberties of
particular, etc. P. 42. l. 7 for them read him. l. 14. for have read leave. P.
156. l 3. from Bottom, read Cordolia.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the Nature, Grounds and Reasons, Antiquity and
Advantages of CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES; wherein also An Answer is endeavored to
such Objections as have bin raised against them.
THE Churches of NEW ENGLAND are nominally and professedly Congregational: They
do not approve the Name of Independent Platform of Church Discipline. Chap. II.
, and are abhorrent from such Principles of Independency as would keep them
from giving an Account of the Matters to their Brethren of neighboring
Societies, regularly demanding if of them.

They apprehend, that a Congregational Church is, by the Institution of our
great LORD and King JESUS CHRIST, a Part of the visible Church in its militant
State, consisting of a Company of holy Brethren, united together by mutual
Engagements for the public Worship of GOD, and their common Improvement and
Edification in Knowledge and all Goodness.

Nor have they any Thing to object against that Article of the Church of
ENGLAND, which speaks of the visible Church of CHRIST in such a Manner that
they can heartily subscribe unto it. For they firmly believe it to be, as is
there declared XIXth Article of the Church of England.
, a Congregation of faithful Men, in which the pure Word of GOD is preached and
the Sacraments be duly administered according to CHRIST'S Ordinance in all those
Things that of Necessity are requisite to the same: So that the Earl of
SHAFTSBURY was exceedingly in the Right, when in a famous Debate He said before
the House of LORDS, that He found the nineteenth Article did define the Church
directly as the Independents do: For really it does so. Only, if it had bin
added in the Article, wherein also the Discipline of CHRIST'S Church is duly
exercised, they think that the Description would have bin more perfect.

As to the Churches, which answer to this Description, they are Congregational;
and, concerning such Churches as These, these Churches are not ashamed to
declare and maintain, that they take them to be instituted by the great Head of
the Church: So that, if any should ask us the same Question which the Roman
Catholics frequently ask our Protestant Brethren abroad, Where were your
[Congregational] Churches before LUTHER? We have the same Answer to give which
our blessed SAVIOR gave to an Enquiry of the Jews concerning HIMSELF, Search
the Scriptures: For they testify concerning Them.

A Dean of Worcester, we know, has, not long since, in a Sermon, concerning
Ecclesiastical Authority, declared in these Words, He must never have looked
into Scripture who is capable of thinking it a perfect Rule of Worship, I mean,
external Worship and Discipline: But, adds Mr. Dean, he that will take in the
Writings of the Primitive Church as a Supplement to Scripture in these Points,
cannot be at a Loss to know what are the Powers of Church Governors or what
the Obedience due unto them P. 29 of said Sermon.
. But, as For us, we are not sensible of the Want, nor are we desirous, of any
Supplements to the Scriptures in these Matters: Nor yet dare we indulge a Though It
of being wise above what is written in such Points as These: For we find
sufficient Reason for falling into the Sentiments of the learned Mr. Abbot
FLEURY, which are thus expressed in his Discourses on Ecclesiastical History,
-- There was nothing wanting at that Time [h. e. the Time of Primitive
Christianity] for the due Government of the Church: No! When the Apostles
founded it, there was without Doubt nothing omitted in laying down Practical
Rules as much for the Conduct of the whole Body, as the Manners of particular
Persons: And these Rules were neither imperfect nor impracticable, but such as
were absolutely necessary to bring Them to a Gospel Perfection, more or less,
according to the different Measures of GOD'S Grace. These Rules were not
imperfect; since, as the Christian Religion was the Work of GOD, it had all
Perfection at first. It is not like the Inventions of Men, which have their
Rise, Progress and Fall. GOD acquires neither Knowledge nor Power by Degrees.
All Things, says our SAVIOR, that I have heard of my Father, I have made known
unto you: And, speaking of the HOLY GHOST, He will lead you into all Truth:
And, to show that this does not only relate to the Tenets of Religion, He says
further, Go, teach all Nations, teaching them to observe all Things whatsoever
I have commanded you. Every Thing then was equally established at first, which
could be of Use to Them in Practice, as well as in Faith. -- And therefore we
cannot approve of any Humane Supplements to the perfect Rule of Worship and
Order, with which we are favored in the holy Scriptures.

We think indeed, that there are some Circumstances relating to the Worship of
GOD and the Government in these Churches, which, agreeable to what is practiced
in other Societies, may be regulated by Natural Light and Christian Prudence
according to the general Rules of GOD'S Word, which ought for ever to have a
particular Regard paid unto them.

But at the same Time our Churches judge, that they are not left at any
Uncertainty about the Essentials of that Polity, which our Lord JESUS CHRIST
has settled and would have to be observed: For it appears to them, that there
is a Divine Institution for the following Things; to wit, that there should be
public Assemblies for the Worship of GOD and the Improvement of His People in
Knowledge and Virtue, and that none should officiate in them but such Officers
as CHRIST has appointed; that Christians should be stated Members of one
particular Church, and that particular Churches should have proper settled
Pastors in them who should live among them and instruct them by their Preaching
and Example; that Pastors and People by mutual Consent become related to one
another, and that, by virtue of these Relations which are of Divine Appointment
as well as by their own Choice and Consent, they are formed and constituted a
Spiritual Society of CHRIST'S Institution; that none should be admitted into
the Communion of such a Society but such as profess the true Religion and
appear in a Judgment of Charity to be holy Persons; that all such as are
allowed the Privilege of Communion in such a Society should relieve, comfort
and assist one another in outward Respects, but that they should especially be
helpful to one another in their best Interests; and that, if any break in upon
the Laws of CHRIST and the Society to which they are related, they are
accountable to the Society and censurable by it; and, in fine, that all such
particular Societies should live at Peace within themselves, and hold a
friendly Correspondence and Christian Communion with other Churches for their
mutual Support, Edification and Comfort.

This is the Polity which these Churches own; and this is all the Form of
Church Government which they can find in the Scriptures to be instituted by
their great Lawgiver and King: Nor can they imagine, that any can with Reason
deny that such Churches as these are true Churches of JESUS CHRIST.

Nay, if those are true Churches of CHRIST in which the pure Doctrines and
Precepts of the Gospel are taught and inculcated, and the Sacraments of the now
Covenant are duly administered according to the Institution of our great
SAVIOR, and a sacred Regard is always bad to whatsoever our LORD has
commanded; these Churches may then esteem themselves to be true Churches of
CHRIST and even account themselves the truest Churches according to our
SAVIOR'S Institution: For, in their conforming to that Institution with
inviolable Fidelity, they shine with superior Glory to others.

The Principles, upon which these Churches are founded, are such, that they
need not be afraid or ashamed of owning them before the whole World: For,
according to the Account of the Bishop of Condom concerning our Congregational
Brethren abroad, these Churches believe, that every Christian ought to follow
the Light of his own Mind, the Conviction of his own Conscience, nor is obliged
to submit his Judgment to the Authority of any Person or any Ecclesiastical
Assembly. It Is true they are for paying a most profound Deference to the Word
of God; nor do they refuse to embrace the Decisions of Councils and Synods, if
upon a due and impartial Examination they appear to be reasonable and
Scriptural: But the Thing, which these Churches utterly disclaim and refuse to
do, is to submit their Judgment to that of any Assembly however considerable:
For they are persuaded, that the most considerable Societies of Men are liable
to Mistakes and Errors; and therefore they submit to the Word of GOD only, the
Authority of which is undisperted and infallible with them.

And, as these Churches assert and claim the Right of private Judgment as Men,
as Christians, and as Protestants; they also declare for and maintain the
Rights of particular Churches: For they conceive, that every Christian Society
or Church ought not to have any Dependence in Ecclesiastical Matters, nor are
obliged to acknowledge the Authority of Councils or Synods for their Direction
and Government, but ought to be governed within itself and by its own Laws.
They acknowledge indeed, that they ought to exercise their proper Jurisdiction
and Government within themselves with Dependence upon our blessed SAVIOR,
together with His Holy SPIRIT and unerring Oracles: But they think themselves
by Divine Right excused from Subjection to any other Church, though it be a
Mother one, and that they may exercise an independent Jurisdiction within
themselves. And the Reason why these Churches give into such Sentiments is
sufficient: For we cannot suppose, that Churches are to be propagated as
worldly Dominions; as though Original Churches, which send forth their Colonies,
must maintain Dominion and perpetual Power over such as came from them: For,
after this Rate, the Churches of Geneva, Heidelberg and the united Provinces
must claim a Dominion and Jurisdiction over the other Protestant Churches: But
we conceive of our Churches, as of adult Sons, who are not at the Disposal of
their Ancestors, but have a Right to govern themselves and exercise their Power
with respect to their own Possessions; or as of Branches taken from true Olive
Trees, which, being planted and watered, grow and increase, without any Manner
of Dependence upon the Trees from which they were taken, for Preservation,
Support and Fructifying Virtue Ex Voet. Desperate. Cause. Papatus. L. III. Sec.
III. Cap IV.
.

These Principles are the firm and unmovable Foundations of these and all
Congregational Churches: And, wherever these Principles prevail, as methinks
they should prevail every where among rational and considerate Christians;
there the Congregational Form of Church Government must be acknowledged and
preferred before any other.

But, while these Churches esteem this their Form of Government, inasmuch as it
is established upon such unshaken Principles; they cannot but entertain an
indifferent, not to say a mean, Opinion of National Churches in various
Kingdoms and Countries, with an Uniformity of Doctrine and of Discipline, which
are a distinct Government from the Civil, their Offices and their Jurisdiction
being different: For they apprehend, that such Churches have introduced
Ecclesiastical Tyranny and Antichrist into the World; and they are almost ready
to declare with Dr. DU MOULIN, that Dr. Lewis Du Moulin concerning the
Government of the Independents. p. 23.
a National Church has bin, is and will be the Cause, that there will never be
a Church in the World in its true Purity, unless Almighty God reserves some
among the Congregational Churches: For in such an Establishment it is not Truth
nor Goodness that influences and governs; but it is the greatest Number
together with worldly Power and Interest, that rules and bears down all before
it: So that it is not from a blind, partial and unreasonable Regard for the
Congregational Way, that these Churches do not approve of National
Establishments; but from a clear Apprehension of the Mischiefs arising from
such National Establishments.

Nay such is the Value which these Churches have for the Congregational Way,
that they even prefer it to all other Establishments, whether Popish or
Reformed, whether Episcopal or Presbyterian, as having much the Advantage of
them: For those Establishments cannot subsist, only by the Subordination of one
Judicatory to another: And how can this subsist, unless the Civil Magistrate
approve or tolerate it? But now the Congregational Way needs not the Aid of the
secular Powers, but stands good without it; flourishing in persecuting
Kingdoms, and under the most tyrannical, arbitrary and cruel of Princes.

Blessed be GOD this Government have sufficiently declared their Approbation of
the Congregational Way: But if GOD our SAVIOR, as a just Punishment for our
Unfruitfulness and Ingratitude, should frown upon us by sending us such Rulers
as are Enemies to the Constitution of these Churches; we may reasonably hope,
that they will not deprive us of the due, the confessedly due, Liberty of
Mankind, to wit, the Liberty of choosing our Religion and of joining with one
Church rather than another.

And, while we have such Sentiments concerning the Congregational Way, we
cannot but grow confirmed in these Sentiments upon finding that several learned
Protestants, who are not attached unto it, are even compelled by the Force of
Truth to declare in Favor of it. Not to mention LUTHER'S Assertion, that there
may be weighty Reasons for separating from Churches which are not erroneous in
their Doctrine Estamsi praterea nibil esset in Doctrina pont^ficia; justas
tamen fuisse Causas cur ab Ecclesia Romana nos Sejungeremur. Luther. in Cap.
IV. Genes.
: Nor yet to insist upon what Dr. STILLINGFLEET has observed, to wit, that a
Christian is bound to adhere to that Church that retains most of the
Evangelical Purity Stilling fleet 's Irenic. P. 109.
: I shall only quote the learned Dr. JACKSON, who declares the just and
necessary Reasons for which Men, whether few or many, may and ought to separate
from any visible Church: These are Dr. Jackson of the Church. Chap. XIV. ad Fin.
, In the first Place, because they are urged or constrained to profess or
believe some Points of Doctrine or adventure upon some Practices which are
contrary to the Rule of Faith or Law of GOD, etc., And, secondly, In Case they
are utterly deprived of Freedom of Conscience in professing what they inwardly
believe or be bereft of some other Me^^^^ber altogether necessary or most
expedient to Salvation, both which may be had in some other visible Church. In
which Passages we have a celebrated Divine of the Church of ENGLAND declaring
the Reasons of the Conduct of these Churches as expressly as they could
themselver and justifying our Choice of the Congregational Way, as plainly as
if he had by Name recommended it. I said, that I should only quote this learned
Doctor; and indeed I need not cite any other: Though I could with Ease produce
almost every Protestant Writer of Note, who has treated of the Church, as
giving into those Sentiments which have determined these Churches to profess
and practice the Congregational Way and prefer it before any other.

But we do not lay any great Stress upon the Testimonies of Men as weak and
fallible as ourselves: These Churches neither seek nor want the Recommendations
of others: We reckon it our distinguishing Honor, that of all the Reformed
Churches, we are the most distant from the Church of ROME, and the most
conformed to the Churches in the Days of the Apostles and of Primitive
Christianity.

It is well known, that these Churches have the most inveterate Antipathy to
the Dominion of the Clergy: And the Reason of this our Antipathy is, because we
conceive that the Mystery of Iniquity was accomplished by the Tyranny of the
Clergy and of the Bishop of Rome Si Episcopus dici potest Basiliseus the
Ecclesia Dei and Pestes Orbis Terrarum; scil. Episcopus Romanus. Martin Luthe^i
Praesal, praefix. Epid. quibusd J. Huss, Impress. Witteberg. 1537.
under the Form and specious Prete^t of Ecclesiastical Power and Catholic
Religion Roma Seeds Petri que Pastoralis Honoris. Facta Caput Munao, quicquid
non possides A^m^, Rellg^ore tenet.
. And therefore, as in the Congregational Way the Empire of the Clergy is
further forsaken than in any other Form of Church Government, we conclude to
our own Comfort and Satisfaction that we are at the most remote Distance from
the Mother of Abominations.

And we are free to appeal to the World of Mankind, as that these Churches are
at the greatest Distance from the Church of Rome, that they also come nearest
to those in the Days of the Apostles and are most conformable to Primitive
Institution: And we defy any Person whatever to produce and mention any Church,
which is spoken of in the more ancient Writers for two hundred Years, but what
was a Congregational Church.

The famous CALDERWOOD expressly asserts, that the Word Church in the Scripture
is never used to signify the Faithful or Christians of a Nation, Province or
Diocese, as it is now used when we say the Church of France, of England or of
Scotland: This Way of Speaking, says he, in not dictated by the Holy SPIRIT in
the Scriptures Non est ista Phrasis dictata a Spiritu sancto in Scripturis.
D^anclavin. Altar. Damascen. p. 281.
. And these Churches are entirely satisfied, that in the New Testament where
several Assemblies formed for public Worship are mentioned, they are called
Churches, nor are they ever once called a Church in the singular. Nay we are
persuaded, that a Church cannot once be found, only where the Church universal
which comprizes all particular ones is mentioned: So that we are not shy to
declare with the great HUGO GROTIUS, whose Authority with many of our Brethren
on the Episcopal Side is incontestable, though not with us, that as of Old there
were many Synagogues in one great City, so there were also several Churches or
Meetings of Christians, and that every Church had its Bishop Grotius in 1 Tom
v. 17.
.

If Instances and Examples of multiplied Churches and Bishops be desired, there
are enough at Hand to be produced: I might mention it, that in AUSTIN'S Time
there were Nine Hundred Bishops in Africa August. Tom. VII. De Gestis cum
Emerit.
, though there were not half so many Cities, and many of the Cities in his Time
were Pagans: I might observe, that in Ireland St. PATRICK Founded Three Hundred
and Sixty-five Churches and as many Bishops Sic scibit Nimius and Jacobus
Armachan in his Religion of the Irish.
; whereas to be sure there never was that Number of Cities in it: I might
recite the Testimony of BARONIUS, that, from the Year 1145, there were a
Thousand Bishops in Armenia; adding the Declaration of the Emperor JUSTINIAN,
that in his Time there were but Twenty Cities in Armenia Petravon. and Novell.
13. C. I.
and their Number afterward decreased. I might repeat what the peevish old
EPIPHANIUS has declared, to wit, that Alexandria never had two Bishops, as all
other Churches had had. I might offer it as certain, that at ANTIOCH there were
two Bishops together, PAULINUS and EUSTATHIUS: And it may be depended on, that
at the Conference at Carthage with the Donatists, the Orthodox offered, that if
the Donatists were overcome, their Bishops upon disowning their Error should
continue in their Office; and if the People could not bear two Bishops in one
Church, a Third was to be chosen Breviculum Collationum cum Donatist.
.

But, inasmuch as these Examples and others of the same Kind which I might
bring, may not have the Stamp of Early Antiquity upon them, and so may not be
much regarded, I shall therefore look further back, and say what we have found
in the more early Times of the Christian Church.

Now we are ready to speak concerning those early Ages, in the Style of Father
PAUL History of the Council of Trent. p. 2^0.
as those happy Times, when the Name of the Church was common to the
Congregation of the Faithful, unto whom did belong the Use and Propriety of the
Goods which are called Ecclesiastical. And it appears to us, that no ancient
Writers for the Space of Two Hundred Years mention any other Churches but
Congregational ones: And this is what the profoundly learned JOSEPH MEDE, in
his Proof for Churches in the Second Century, has clearly and abundantly
evidenced: For he has shown, that no Bishop had then more than one Altar, and
that one Bishop and one Altar were Correlates. Nor can we help thinking, that
the Report of the Magdeburgensian Conturiators is well founded, to wit, that
the Churches of the third Century were Congregational and enjoyed the same
Government, almost according to the Manner of the preceding Age, though
something increased by Pride and Ambition in Centur. III. Cap. 7.
. And we judge THORNDICK to be in the Right, when he acknowledges Bishops to be
so plentiful in Africa [in the Primitive Times] that every good Village must
have bin the Seat of an Episcopal Church Tho^ndick's Right of the Churches
Review. p. 153.
: For SOZOMEN declared before him, that Villages had their Bishops B^z^men. L.
VII. sap. 19.
. And the Abbot FLEURY, in his Discourses on Ecclesiastical History, has bin so
ingenuous as to own, that in those Times the Dioceses were so small that one
Man alone might be sufficient and know all his Flock himself.

We are ready to acknowledge indeed, that CYPRIAN about the Two Hundred and
Fortieth Year after CHRIST uses the Term Church for a Collection of many
particular Churches Cyp^^an in Epist. 71.6.4. p. 214.
: But otherwise we cannot recollect, any more than the excellent Author of An
Enquiry into the Constitution of the Primitive Church, that it is used in this
Sense by that Father in any of his Writings or by the rest of the Fathers: For
it is manifest unto us, as he that has Eyes may see and he that runs may read,
that whenever they speak of any Christians in any Province or Kingdom they
always speak in the Plural, never once in the Singular of the Church in such a
Kingdom. Sir Peter King's Constitution of the Primitive Church. p. 6.
. Nay we find by the same invaluable Author, that EUSEBIUS about the Year Three
Hundred and Twenty sixth of our LORD styles the Laity the Church, in Opposition
to the Clergy Ejusd. Author. page 10.
.

But there is no Necessity of laboring in Defense of Congregational Churches,
which are so firmly established from the Scripture and most early Antiquity,
that it would argue a strong Prejudice in favor of some particular new and
unscriptural Establishment to be against them.

As for these Churches, they are satisfied with the Congregational Way, and
judge the Proofs of Congregational Churches from Scripture and the purest
Antiquity to be strong and unanswerable. But however, if we should be willing
out of Complaisance to the Disciples of ERASTUS to allow, that neither our
SAVIOR has instituted nor Primitive Antiquity favored any particular Form of
Church Government, but that every State and Kingdom may regulate the Affairs of
Churches and form a Polity for them, just as shall appear to them to be fit and
convenient; still we cannot but think it entirely reasonable, notwithstanding
such a large Concession, that there should be Congregational Churches, and that
these Churches should in a good Measure have the Government of themselves: For
it is suitable to the Nature of Things, the Authority of the Civil Magistrate
and the Obligations of the Pastoral Care, that every Church should act within
herself as an entire and independent Body Dr. Burnet's Exposition of the Thirty
nine Articles. p. 374.
. And indeed, as particular or Congregational Churches support and protect the
whole Concerns of Religion, they have an undoubted natural Right to be
consulted and act within themselves; nor ought they to be restrained by the
Civil Magistrate or Lordly Bishops or Magisterial Synods.

There are, we are sensible, various plausible Pleas and Arguments against the
Right of particular Churches to act within and govern themselves. Some insist
upon it, that the Apostles bad Power over particular Churches and that their
Successors therefore should have Power over them also. Others plead, that
particular Churches should be absolutely subject to their own Elders or to
other Churches. And many others argue, that particular Churches should be
dependant on Councils and other Judicatories, and that they ought to be
determined by them, as the Jewish Synagogues were by the Sanhedrim at
JERUSALEM. -- These are the chief Arguments that are brought against the Right
of particular Churches to act within themselves and govern themselves: And
these shall be distinctly proposed, examined and refuted.

As to the Argument, which is bro't by many against the Congregational Form of
Government, from the Power of the Apostles over particular Churches, by which
it is concluded that their Successors should have Power over them also; This
Argument will easily be enervated by considering the Extent^ and Limits of the
Apostolical Power.

Now it must be acknowleged, that the Apostolical Power reached to every Church
as much as to any one: For, as they were empowered to disciple all Nations and
baptize through the whole World, they were also directed to feed the Sheep and
Lambs of CHRIST'S Fold, let it be said, every where; and I am ready to grant,
that this Feeding them implies in it all the Acts of Pastoral Government.

But, if all this be allowed; yet this will be no good Reason why any pretended
Successors to the Apostles should have such an extensive Power. How indeed
should they come by it? For it does not yet appear that our SAVIOR gave, and
His Apostles transmitted it unto them: It follows therefore, that, although the
Apostles might have such a wide Power and extensive Influence, their Power and
Influence ended with them, and no others may claim it to themselves and act in
virtue of it.

And besides I am ready to acknowledge the Power of the Apostles to be extended
not only to all Churches, but also to the Performance of the various particular
Offices in the several Churches: So that, as Pastors, as Teachers, as Rulers
and as Deacons, they might teach and exhort, govern, receive and distribute the
Offerings of the Church: Nay I am willing to grant for the present, that any
one Apostle or Evangelist might baptize or censure any Offender, just as if the
whole Church were present and concurred in those Actions.

But what then? Will it follow, because PHILIP baptized the Ethiopian Eunuch
without any Church, and the Apostle PAUL excommunicated ALEXANDER without any,
that therefore this was their constant Practice? No surely: For, when the
Apostle PAUL could obtain the Consent of the Church and Presbytery in the
Exercise of any Act or Ecclesiastical Power, he readily took it, as in the
Ordination of Timothy and the Excommunication of the Incestuous Corinthian.

It may therefore be fairly concluded, that the Apostles, when they were
distant from all Churches, put forth their Power in the Administration of any
Church-Acts, and the Power which they had received of CHRIST was sufficient to
countenance and justify them in so doing; but that in Churches, which were
regularly formed and organical, they did not exert any such Power as was
inconsistent with the Privileges of the People. Nay they were so far from it,
that we have Reason to think, that they did not baptize or ordain or
excommunicate without the Consent of the People. Were not all Things belonging
to the Churches, whether PAUL or APOLLOS or CEPHAS? Did not these derive their
Power of acting in them from Them under CHRIST? And were not the Apostles given
to the Churches? Truly the Scriptures affirm so, nor ever say that the
Churches were given to the Apostles or any other Rulers. And, as for the
Instances which have bin produced, from which the Plenitude of the Apostolical
Power is sometimes argued; it must first of all he proved, that there were
Churches formed and gathered in the Places where they administered the
Ordinances of CHRIST and the Discipline of His Appointment, before there can be
any Thing argued from those Instances: For, if there were no formed Churches,
and it has not yet bin proved that there were in those Places; it is not at all
to be wondered at, if the Apostles did not consult the Churches, but acted
alone: They could do no otherwise.

But, even allowing that the Apostles in the Fullness of their Apostolical Power
did these and such like Acts when and where they pleased, without any Regard to
the People; still what is all this to such as pretend themselves to be
Successors of the Apostles? For have they any such Power and Authority? Or,
ought they to have any such? Or, if any such Pretenders are in Possession of
it, how came they by it? -- Surely these are the Men, that enter not by the
Door into the Sheepfold, but they climb up some other Way: They are therefore
to be considered by Mankind as daring Thieves and Robbers of them in their best
Interests.

There are others who argue, that particular Churches should be absolutely
subject to their own Elders or to other Churches. But to this the Answer is
easy, to wit, that particular Churches have an undoubted Liberty to act within
themselves. Now will you say, that they derived this Liberty either from their
own Elders or from Neighboring Christian Societies? How can you say from the
former, when it was in the Power of the Churches to choose their Elders and they
exercised their Liberty in the Choice of them? So that the Churches could not
derive their Power and Liberty from their Elders; because, before they had
their Elders, they were in the rightful Possession of this Power and Liberty,
and saw meet to exercise it.

And how can it be said, that other particular Churches conferred on them this
Power and Liberty? For all particular Churches have equal Power and Liberty
within themselves. There was a Church at Cenchrea, which was but a little
Village, a small Port to Corinth; and yet that small Church was not subject to
the Church of Corinth. Nor indeed ought any one particular Church to be subject
or subordinate to another, however numerous, great and eminent: For there is
not a Tittle in the Scripture to justify such a Subordination of Churches.

Nor yet is This the declared Opinion of such only as profess and practice the
Congregational Way; but I find, that others, who conform to a different Way,
have received and expressed the very same Opinion: Thus, for Instance, the
vastly learned GILBERT VOET, in Answer to this Question, Whether Ministers
alone, considered by themselves or as in a Body, that is, as a meeting of a
Synod of Ministers; and whether constant Classes of the Delegates of Churches
whether of Ministers alone or other Elders along with them are the first
Subject of Ecclesiastical Power, so that from them this Power is derived to
particular Churches and their Consistories? He writes in this Manner, No! I am
so far from thinking, that Churches owe their Rise to such Assemblies as their
first constituent Principles, that all the Power of the Churches is
communicated from them and must finally be resolved into them, and that
therefore as to their Rise and continuing to act, they are dependant on such
Assemblies: I am so far from thinking this, that I choose rather to determine
the contrary. -- For this I offer no other Reason but the following, that every
particular Church is by itself, and may be called, a Church, and consequently
is the first and proper Subject of Ecclesiastical Power: As much as every Man
is the Subject of the Faculty of Understanding Tantum abest ut Ecclesias ab
illis Co^^^bus o^^^^ tanguans primis Principiis constituent^bus, omnemque ea^um
Potesta^^^^ inde communicari and in Delegatos illos ultimo resolvi, ^tque add^
necessario ab us in O^tu and act is s^^o depende^^ put^m^^^ potius coutrarium
statuam. Sententiam have mean exptic^b^, Part. 2, ^^^i de Classibus and
Synodis. Rations n^^llas adse^o, prater istam, quod Ecclesia qualibet
particularts per se sit and dictatur Ecclesia, and consequenter Primum ac
Proprium Subjectum sit Potesta^^s Ecclesiastica: Non me^ns quam Ho^^ quilibe^
est Subjectum Facultatis intelligendi. Voet. Pol^^. Ecclesiast. Part. I. Lib.
I. Tract. II Cap. I.
. Thus that eminent Dutch Divine. And if any should enquire, well! Granting,
that particular Churches may be the first Subject of Ecclesiastical Power; yet
may not a Sanhedrim or Synod or a Classis or the Civil Magistrate take away
their Power from them and transfer it to themselves? To this I shall only
render at present the Answer which is given by the great Divine just mentioned.
Now his Answer is in the Negative: For says He, not to repeat the Reasons which
may be bro't from their Divine and Natural Right; I shall only cite those two
Elements of Right, that Justice is the constant and perpetual Inclination or
Will of giving to every one his own, and that they who have a Right ought not
to be deprived of it. Now this Right, to wit, of particular Churches, is
divinely conferred and possessed by Divine Right: If therefore any, regardless
of the Fear of GOD, should go about to deprive them of it, they may expect the
Fulfillment of that Threatening, in Isa. XXXIII. 1. Woe to you that spoil and deal
treacherously: Thou shall be spoiled, and They shall deal treacherously with
you; and that, in 1 These. IV. 6. None should go beyond and oppress or
overreach or defraud their Brethren in any Matter; because the LORD is the
Avenger of all such Voct. Par. II. Lib. I. Tract. I. Cap. II.
.

But then, what shall we say to our Presbyterian Brethren, who argue that
particular Churches should be dependant on Councils and other Judicatories and
ought to be determined by them, just as the Jewish Synagogues by the greater
Sanhedrim at Jerusalem?

We may say and stand to it, that particular Churches are not beholden to
Councils, Synods or any other Judicatories for their Liberty. It Is true the
Church of ANTIOCH borrowed Light from the Synod at JERUSALEM, and by the
Decrees of that Synod were established in Truth and Peace: But it cannot be
made to appear, that they derived any Liberty at all from them. No! They had
undoubtedly the Power and Liberty of acting within themselves. They might
indeed in an emergent Case send to JERUSALEM for Advice and Assistance: But
this sending there will neither prove any Jurisdiction in the JERUSALEM
Churches over the Church of ANTIOCH, nor any Want of Jurisdiction in the Church
of ANTIOCH. Any Number of Men or any Council or Synod of Churches may
doctrinally propose Rules as necessary to be observed; but yet they may not
claim any Authority in a Disciplinary Way to punish those that will not conform
to those Rules: And therefore, although a Power of explaining and confirming
Doctrines according to the Scriptures might be allowed to be in a Council or
Synod, this will not prove that they have any further Authority in a
Disciplinary Way to enforce their Decrees on particular Churches: Nor indeed
has the Word of GOD granted to any Councils or Synods or other Judicatories any
such Jurisdiction over particular Churches.

Our Presbyterian Brethren will probably say here, What! Shall particular
Churches be dependant upon no Judicatories? Why may they not depend on Councils
and Synods and other Judicatories? The Jewish Synagogues depended on the
Sanhedrim at Jerusalem: And why should not Christian Synagogues acknowledge the
Jurisdiction of neighboring Presbyteries, of provincial Synods, of national
Conventions and General Assemblies?

I answer, that, supposing the Synagogues or particular Congregations in Israel
did depend upon a superior Judicatory, it will not therefore follow that
particular Christian Congregations should do so too: And the Reason is very
plain and obvious, nor is it easy to enervate it, namely, because particular
Synagogues or Congregations then were not complete Churches, as Christian
particular Churches now are: For the People could not have the ordinary and
continual Worship and Ordinances of GOD in them; but they were obliged to go up
to Jerusalem that so they might attend and enjoy them: Nay they were strictly
commanded not to keep the Passover nor to bring any Sacrifices and Offerings
only at Jerusalem, the Place which GOD had chosen for the special Seat of His
Presence: But now where is our Jerusalem? We know of none but that which is
above, the Mother of us all.

And, as for Christian Churches, They are entirely different Things from the
Jewish Synagogues: For all the ordinary Worship and all the special Ordinances
of GOD our SAVIOR may now be enjoyed in particular Churches: And this shows
them to be perfect and entire within themselves: And in Truth there is nothing
to be found in all the New Testament of any greater Church institued upon which
lesser Churches should depend: Nor are any Ordinances or Methods of Worship
prescribed in it, but what may be observed in every particular Congregation.

Besides; It is to be considered, that at Jerusalem there was a supreme
Judicatory, which had an uncontroleable Power and from the Determinations of
which there was no Appeal: So that this was the dernier Resort upon Earth: Let
it be so: But in the New Testament we read of no such supreme Judicatory: And
therefore, if we once depart from a particular Church for Jurisdiction, we
shall be wise beyond what is written and run wild in our Imaginations. All
Jurisdiction therefore should be confined to particular Churches, in whose
Hands our SAVIOR has left it: Nor may any particular Churches by any Act of
their own or through their own Negligence deprive themselves of this Power: For,
as by so doing they would betray a great Trust committted to them, so they
would renounce their Duty also by it: For, unless they have and keep this
Jurisdiction within themselves, they cannot faithfully discharge various
Duties, which are required of them by CHRIST JESUS their Lawgiver.

These Churches indeed acknowledge a Consociation of Churches for mutual Light
and Assistance; and, as they conceive, that such Churches as will not act in
Conjunction with others, but confine their Duty within the narrow Limits of
their own Assemblies, cut themselves off from the external Commution of the
Catholic Church; they judge also that it will not be safe or prudent for any
Christian to commit his Soul to the Direction and Conduct of such an
independent Church. But, while these Churches acknoledge a Consociation among
them, they cannot think that this Consociation forms and constitutes a new Sort
of Church, or a Church of Churches as the famous Mr. COTTON once spoke, though he
afterward spoke and thought otherwise: Nor do our Churches allow, that such a
Consociation may take away or lessen the Power and Liberty of particular
Churches: For they think, that, without any such Consociation or Correspondence
of Churches, every particular Church is essentially and integrally a true
Church Veot. Par. III. l. 1. Tract. III. Cap. II.
: And it is their declared Apprehension and Judgment, that the true Use of such
a Consociation is to direct and guide particular Churches, as they may have
Occasion for Light and Help: Nor have they any Thing to object against frequent
Meeting in Councils or Synods, to learn the Spiritual State of the Churches
within the Consociation, and to give Advice for the Amendment of what may be
amiss in one or another of the said Churches, for preserving Worship in its
Purity and Spirituality, for maintaining a godly Discipline and promoting the
Power and Evidences of true Religion: Provided, that the Churches, convening in
such Councils or Synods, are careful not to injure themselves, but see to it
that the Liberties of the particular Churches be not invaded by any
Determinations and Acts that may be passed in them.

This was the Opinion of the Fathers of New England, and indeed of all the
ancient Non-Confromists almost in England: So one of them in the Name of the
Rest has observed; and Dr. DOWNHAM, in a Sermon at Lambeth, page 5th. says,
They, that is, the Non-Conformists, say, that every Parish has sufficient
Authority within it self immediately derived from CHRIST for the Government of
itself in all Cause Ecclesiastical.

But some sanguine People cannot be content with such a Consociation as has bin
mentioned: No! They want something further: They must have their Judicatories,
they will have their decisive Synods or Convocations, or else they will
presently be for condemning the Gospel as more defective than the Law: Nay it
is well, if they do not plead for external Force and for Officers and Powers
derived from humane Laws, concerning which the Scripture is utterly silent.

If such Person as these could but be persuaded for a Moment to look off from
their beloved secular Interest, and to hear what we have to say upon this Head,
probably they might emerge into better Sentiments. Come then, all such of you
as have hitherto pleaded for Weapons which are not christian and spiritual, but
carnal and worldly, though mighty through Satan for the pulling down of all such as
conscientiously dislike and oppose your vain unscriptural Imaginations; Come, I
say, and let us reason a little with Calmness upon the Head before us. You say
then, that you would have a supreme Judicatory for the final Issuing of Cause,
with a decisive ungainsayable Power for that Purpose: Very well. To this it may
be answered, why may not a particular Church be this Judicatory? For indeed the
new Testament has not appointed any other. Whereas, according to your Opinion,
we shall be at a Loss forever where to find the Judicatory, which you want and
for which you so zealously plead: For, from a Congregation and Classis, you
must go to a Provincial Synod: And where next? Then to a National Synod: And
what will you do then? Afterward you must go to a general acumenical Council;
by which Means your Cause will be unreasonably protracted, nor in all
Probability ever come to a final Decision.

You will perhaps think it enough to reply, that, unless there be stated
Judicatories for the bearing of Causes, we shall be continually at
Uncertainties and never know in our Difficulties what shall be done: But it is
sufficient Answer to this to say, that particular Churches are such standing
Judicatories, not of humane Appointrment but of Divine, which always are or
should be ready to hear and to give Judgment in Cases that properly come before
them: Whereas Synods and other Judicatories, if they had the Supreme Power
lodged in their Hands, would not always be ready to consider nor yet to
determine, but would be both long in meeting and tedious in determining the
Affairs which come before them.

And, in fine, I would add, in Answer to any other Objection they may remain or
may possibly be raised or drawn from the Advantage of such a Supreme Judicatory
as is supposed to have sat at Jerusalem: First of all, That it is very
probable, that such a Sanhedrim, as the Friends of it suppose to be derived
down from Mosas in an uninterrupted Succession to the Fourth Century after
JESUS CHRIST, though some say not so late, is a mere Rabbinical Chimera that
never had any real Existence For the Scriptures never any where expressly
mention it: Nor yet does JOSEPHUS or PHILO or any other well acquainted with
the Jewish Government ever speak of it in such a Manner as is usual on these
Occasions There are indeed some Passages in the Gospels, which give us Reason
to think that there was a Sambedrim toward the latter End of the Jewish State:
But the profound Silence of the Times foregoing is a strong Argument for not
admitting any such Thing before the Babylonish Captivity: So that the Proofs of
such a Supreme Judicatory to be Divinely instituted and as such sub^^issively
regarded may well be questioned by us; and therefore the Argument, drawn from
the same, may as to us be considered as inconclusive and frivolous.

But, if it should be granted you, that there was such a Sanhedrim at
Jerusalem, in every Respect according to your Imagination; yet we may safely
affirm, that, in those particular Churches instituted by our SAVIOR and
conforming to His Directions, we have much the Advantage of the Jews in that
Judicatory: For now, praised be GOD our SAVIOR, Churches, wherein the Supreme
Power upon Earth is lodged, are many: So that Christians may have the Advantage
of that Power with considerable Ease and Convenience: It would therefore be
very strange, if they were not duly apprehensive of the glorious Privilege
enjoyed by them, and thankful to GOD their SAVIOR for the Enjoyment of it.

Thus I have in a general Way pleaded for the Liberty of these Churches and
showed that they are not subject to any Judicatories nor ought to be subject to
any: And, upon the whole, I am free to declare, that, supposing ever so many
Convocations or Synods or even General Councils were called, they would have no
Juirisdiction at all over these or any other particular or Congregational
Churches: For the great Head of the Church never gave them any such
Jurisdiction, nor is it in their Power to prove that they have derived any such
Jurisdiction from HIM: Even that worthy Presbyterian Mr. RUTHERFURD himself
professes, the he cannot see what Power of Jurisdiction to censure Scandals can
be in a General Council, and he adds, there may be some merely Doctrinal Power
if such a Council could be had, and that is all Rutherfurd's due Right of
Presbyteries. p. 482.
Surely then no lesser Judicatories can boast of any more Power: So that, after
all, the Power of Jurisdiction must be placed where it properly belongs, to
wit, in particular Churches of Divine Institution, where our SAVIOR and LORD
has placed it. For, as Dr. FULK observes in his Answer to the Rhemists, Chap.
III. p. 381. The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, whatever they are, are given to
the whole Church, as all the ancient Doctors agreeable to the Scriptures do
confess.

These particular Churches we judge to be the first proper Subject of all
Ecclesiastical Offices, Gifts and Powers according to CHRIST'S Institution and
the Primitive Pattern: For, when the Apostles had founded many Churches in
small Provinces and appointed ordinary Officers in them to administer CHRIST'S
Ordinances to all the Church; we find, that these Churches respectively met
together in the same Place to impart the various Spiritual Gifts with which
they were furnished and to discharge the Duties required of them: Nor can any
Thing be more plain than this, that the various Gifts imparted to one
particular Church and another by the HOLY SPIRIT, and the various Offices
sustained in them were to profit withal, as the Apostle speaks, or for the Good
of the Hive, as his Greek signifies: And it must be confessed, for it is as
clear as the Light, that the several Duties enjoined upon particular Churches
in the Apostolical Writings are such both in their Nature and the Manner of
complying with them that they cannot be faithfully attended and observed but in
particular Christian Societies or Churches: So that we may well form this
Conclusion, that it is the common Privilege of all other particular Churches to
have various Gifts imparted, to have these Gifts exercised, to have Offices
disposed of, and Christian Duties performed for them.

But, having thus said, that according to CHRIST'S Institution and the
Primitive Pattern we judge particular Churches to be the first Proper Subject
of all Ecclesiaftical Offices, Gifts and Powers; I cannot but think it proper
to introduce a Passage of the eminent Mr. CLAUDE, who thought it the best Way
of maintaining the Reformation, in his Defense of it, to espouse these
Sentiments and express them, as follows;

AUSTIN proved to the Donatists, that their Principle was false; and it is
worth the while to observe the Method which he took to convince them of the
Falsity of their. Opinions. -- He had Recourse to the Body of the Church, and
said, that the Sacraments were not the Sacraments of the Bishops or Pastors;
that the Power of the Keys did not belong to them, nor the Power of Binding and
Loosing, nor the other Acts of the Ministry or Episcopal Office; but that all
these Things did belong to the Church: So that it is the Church that baptizeth,
when the Bishops or Pastors baptize; it is the Church that binds, when the
Pastors bind, it is She that loses, when the Pastors loose: And JESUS CHRIST
gave all these Things to the Church. But what did AUSTIN understand by the
Church? Even the faithful People wherever they are, the Wheat of GOD, the good
Grain, the good Fishes, as He calls them, in one Word, the Saints, true
Believers: It was from this Source that He derived the Validity of the
Sacraments and other Functions of the Episcopacy, and not from the Pastors. And
I say the same Thing. Whatever the Bishops or Pastors do, They do it in the
Name of the Church, and consequently in the Name of JESUS CHRIST; for the Name
of CHRIST is in the Church. It is the Church that preaches by them, the Church
administers the Sacraments by them, governs by them, censures, suspends,
absolves or excommunicates by them: The Bishops or Pastors are her Ministers
and the Dispensators of her Rights.

It is very probable, that this Quotation may sound a little too Democratical
in the Ears of some genuine Protestants: But there will be no Danger at all of
our being the worse Protestants for taking it into our serious Consideration.
And besides, we may well think seriously upon it, especially considering, that
Father PAUL of Venice, in his Treatise of Beneficiary Matters, is so ingenuous
as both to affirm that in the Beginning the Government of the Church had
altogether a Democratical Form, and to give a punctual and observable Account
also how it came by Degrees to be altered.

But how, will you say, came particular Churches, who are the first Subject of
Ecclesiastical Offices, Gifts and Powers to be deprived of them, in such a
Scandalous Manner as they are in the greatest Part of the Christian World? And,
alas! it must be declared from the best Writers that this has come to pass
through the Negligence of the Churches and the Ambition of their Pastors: These
were the fatal Causes, why designing Men, regardless of the plain and obvious
Sense of the Apostolical Writings, have gone aside from the Simplicity of them,
and advanced their own Power upon the Ruins of those Churches which they have
impiously subverted: And hence the Observation of AQUINAS, with reference to
the Time, when Bishops became endowed with worldly Honors and Offices, with
great temporal Powers and Possessions, may hold good with regard to the Time
when the People grew utterly negligent of the Privileges belonging to them,
Then arose the Race of the Giants in the Church, and then raised the Proud
Tower of Babel Ex tune. exort^ sunt in Ecelesia Gogantes, in magnis et
mirabilibus supra se ambulantes, qui potius videntur Reges vel Marchiones quam
Episcopi: -- Et ideo non mirum, si per Eos Erigatur Statua Babylonis et terrena
Civitas dilatetur. T. Aquin, in Genesis VI.
: For, from that Time, Metropolitan Cities were by Degrees raised to be the
Seats of Metropolitan Ministers: And so, according to the Preeminence, Note and
Superior Power of Places in the Roman Empire, the Order to be observed among
Churches was to be constituted: Thus at length, from the Division of the
Commonwealth and the Civil Districts, the Political Division of the Churches
into Diocesses and Provinces obtained and was fixed and established, as several
learned Men have observed and Proved, and particularly the learned JUSTELLUS.
Justel. J. C. in Not. ad Cod. Canon. p. 231.
-- And there is a great deal of Truth in the honest Declaration of Father
PAUL: He having said, that the last Resolution of Ecclesiastical Matters in the
more early Times was in the General Congregation of the Church, and that this
Form was still on Foot in the Year Two Hundred and Fifty, for which He appeals
to CYPRIAN'S Epistles; He then proceeds to declare as follows, The Goodness and
Charity of the Bishops made their Opinion for the most Part to be followed and
by little and little was the Cause that the Church, Charity waxing cold, not
regarding the Charge laid upon them by CHRIST, did leave the Care to the
Bishop: And Ambition, a witty Passion, which does insinuate itself in the Show
of Virtue, did cause it to be readily embraced. But the principal Cause of the
Change was the ceasing of Persecution; For then the Bishop did erect as it were
a Tribunal which was much frequented; because, as Temporal Commodities, so
Suits did increase. -- Then the Tribunal of the Bishop began to be a common
Pleading-Place, having Execution by the Ministry of the Magistrate, and to gain
the Name of Episcopal Jurisdiction and Audience, etc History of the Council of
Trent. p. 331.
And perhaps, as the learned Mr. Abbot FLEURY has observed in his Discourses on
Ecclesiastical History, GOD has permitted these Disorders in his Church to
instruct Men from their own Experience strictly to follow His Precepts and not
to endeavor to maintain His Religion by the Maxims of Worldly Policy.

I have observed already concerning some Circumstances in the Worship of GOD
and the Government of particular Churches, that natural Light and Christian
Prudence, according to the general Rules of GOD'S Word, may regulate them: And
therefore it seems to arise from a captious and quarrelsome Humor, when any
cry out upon us, where is your positive Command, produce your express
Institution for this Practice and the other Custom in your Churches: For in
such Things the Light of Nature is sufficient to direct and guide us; and the
Obligation of Churches, as well as particular Persons, to conform to this is
such, that it would be impertinent and useless, if not pernicious, to make
permanent Additions: If therefore any Churches, instead of conforming to their
natural Light in such Things, should invent sundry odd Modes and Rites of their
own, and require canonical Conformity to them, without showing the Tendency and
Usefulness of them toward our Edification and proving the Necessity of
observing them with Relation to the Duties which they are invented to subserve;
I am sure, that neither the Word of GOD nor Christian Prudence will justify
them in finding out and imposing such odd Inventions, nor any Christian in
submitting unto them: And I may not fear to assert, that a great Part of those
Disorders, which have arisen in the Christian World, have bin occasioned by
usurping a Legisiative Power over the Churches in such trifling Oddnesses.

I could muster an Army of Protestant Authors who are of the same Mind, if
there were Occasion: But I shall content my self with reciting some Passages
out of a few of them only. The good and worthy Confessor and Martyr JOHN HUSS
said unto his Bohemians concerning many of the Things which the Priests and
Prelates of his Day called Order, that they produced all manner of Confusion
among Christians: Multa, says He, quae illi Ordinem dicunt, omnium Rerum in
Christianisimo Confusionem pariunt. The learned WHITAKER urges to BELLARMINE,
What! were the old Figures taken away that there might be Room for new ones?
Were those that were Divine taken away that such as are bumane might succeed
them Whitaker. Cont. Bellarmin. Tom. 2. Cont. 4.9.7. C 3. p. 737.
? And the Magdeburgensian Centuriators teach us, that, while indifferent Things
are left free, we may lawfully use them; but, when they are imposed, for the
maintaining of our Liberty we should withstand and oppose them Magdeburg.
Centuriat. Cent. 3. Cap. 4. Col. 85.
. CALVIN maintains, that, as no Doctrine, so no sacred Sign, should be admitted
among the Pious unless it appear to come from GOD Calvin. Harmon. Evangel. in
March. XXI. 25.
. LUTHER is free to affirm, that all humane Ceremonies have two Properties of
the Devil, Lying and Murdering Luther. Tom. 4. Fol. 351.
. BEZA goes so far as to call such Inventions the Ensigns of the Priests of
Baal Beza in Epist. 8. ad Grindal, p. 210.
. ZANCHY was not afraid to tell Queen ELIZABETH, who was more fond of Show and
Pomp in the Worship of GOD than real Devotion and the truest Lovers of it, that
all these Pomps and Popish Ceremonies are nothing else but whorish Paintings,
invented and devised to the End that Men might be enticed by them to spiritual
Fornication Zanchu Epist. ad Regin. Elizabetham. Fol. 214.
. Nay even Dr. MORTON scruples not to say, that Ritual Traditions, which
pertain to Order and the Rites of Divine Worship, are to be received only so
far as they clash not with Truth and Piety, Simplicity and Christian Liberty
Mo^ton. Apolog. Par. 21. l. 1. C. 42. p. 139.
. And I will add some weighty Passages from the great and generously good Mr.
HOW, who, in showing The Carnality of Religious Contentions, says, that, the
less Things are, the greater the Sin in making them necessary, and Christians
of one Communion and other [to wit, that are fond of their own Inventions] do
in Effect say, if you will not take Christianity with these Additions of ours,
you shall not be Christians, you shall have no Christian Ordinances, no
Christian Worship: We will, as far as in us is, exclude you from Heaven itself
and all the Means of Salvation: And he cites a remarkable Passage of the
Emperor MAXIMILIAN the Second to a certain Prelate, namely, That there was no
Sin, no Tyranny more grievous than to affect Dominion over Men's Consciences,
and they who do so go about to invade the Tower of Heaven: And it may well be
accounted a Remarkable Saying, as coming from so great a Prince, who lived and
expired in the Romish Communion. Nor may I omit the Remark of the warm nd
zealous Dr. HEIDAN, that it has bin owing, ^^ the Labor of ERASMUS and
CASSANDER, [and I may add of GROTIUS; for he followed and vindicated them]
that, although they wish some smaller Things might be reformed, nevertheless some
of the chief Defects of the Romish Church are concealed or lightly touched by
them: Hence, says he, it is come to pass, that in some Churches, and in the
English Church it especially appears very evident, while they have reformed
their Doctrine, they have not at the same Time amended their Orders; but still
continue a Government in some Measure like that among the Papists Erasmi and
Cassandri Porissimum Labor qui sum leviors quadim reformate optant, piacipous
Ecclesia Romans Naves dissimulant out transilimnt: Unde and factum in qui^nsdam
Eccles^s, at ^^ Anglica^^ presen^^ paret, non sinul cum Reformations Doctrine.
Ord^immutains est; sad Hurarchia and Eptsenpatus, quarts in Papitmex Paris
(...), re^enta sin: D Abraham. Human Fallic. Disputor Theologic de Soci^^^^. p.
10.
.

But, to return, although some Circumstances of Worship and Government may be
regul^ted by natural Light as I have bin saying, for the Banefit of the
Churches, and for this Reason the Apostle Paul frequently appeals unto it in
Things belonging to the Order of the Churches; nevertheless we are satisfied,
that the Ecclesiastical State, of which I have bin treating, is a Divine
Institution For so it appears to be from its Nature and Tending, from its
peculiar Relation to our great SAVIOR, from the great Glory resulting to GOD
by an accurate Conformity to it, and from those peculiar Duties and spiritual
and holy Methods of Worship appointed in it. If then the Rules of CHRIST be
observed, and Christians will but exercise their Reason and common Prudence in
conforming to those Rules; that is, in other words, if we are but Men and
Christians, if we will but be governed by Reason and the Revelation of CHRIST'S
Churches, which shine with intaminated Honors from the Light that they have
borrowed from the two great Luminaries of the Church and the Word, Reason and
Revelation.

It is to be hoped, that, under the Light and vital Heat of these glorious
Luminaries, the Churches, that have hitherto bin as it were under those Clods
of the Valley, their heavy and earthly Priefts, will ever long arise out of the
Earth and blossom in a fair Profession of Christianity and abound in all the
Fruits of Righteousness under a Rational and Scriptural Order.

But, if other Churches love to continue in a degenerate and corrupt State and
hate to be reformed; GOD forbid, that the Churches of NEW ENGLAND should ever
return to their miserable Condition: These Churches have come out from among
them; but it is to be wished and prayed, that they may never forget the
Goodness of GOD in bringing them out, nor fail to answer the gracious
Intentions of our strong REDEEMER in so doing.

Let these Churches then be careful, lest Ignorance, Negligence, Sloth and
Wickedness should prove their Ruin, as they have bin the Ruin of other
Churches: Let them never blindly resign themselves to the Direction of their
Ministers; but consider themselves, as Men, as Christian, as Protestants,
obliged to judge and act for themselves in all the weighty Concernments of
Religion: Blessed be GOD, that our Churches have hitherto manifested themselves
worthy of this Privilege: And may they still continue so! Nor let it ever be
said to our Reproach, as it musy be if ever it be said at all, that we were
possessed of all those invaluable Privileges, which particular Churches by
Reason and CHRIST'S Appointment can claim, but were either unacquainted with
them, or negligent in the Improvement of them, or by our Sin and Impiety have
forfeited and lost them: For, if ever this should be said, it must at the same
Time be proclaimed, that the Glory is departed from NEW ENGLAND.

Several things have bin published by our eminent Predecessors, of whom the
World was not worthy, in order to show these Churches their Liberties and fire
their Souls with a becoming Affection and Zeal for them: But most of those
Composures are not known among us: Inasmuch therefore as I have the same
sincere Regard for the best Interests of these Churches; I could not but think
it my Duty to produce my Sentiments concerning the Privileges of these
Churches, which I know to be conformable to those of my ever honored
Predecessors and Fathers in many of their printed Treatises and Manuscripts,
and so publish them for the Benefit of these Churches, that so they might know
themselves and learn to pity and pray for their Brothren, who are groaning
under National Establishments and long to be restored to our Liberties: And,
that so our Churches may by the Divine Blessing be restored to their former
Glory, I have thought it proper to use my best Endeavors for hte reforming of
particular Churches by setting their distinguishing Liberties before them and
soberly apologizing for them.

But, to conclude this Preface or Introduction to the Particular Discourses
which follow, I would make one Observation, which may not be omitted without a
manifest Injury to these Churches: It Is this, that although these Churches,
apprehending the congregational Way to be established on the Dictates of Reason
and by the Authority of the great King and Head of the Chruch, therefore prefer
it before any other; nevertheless they have great charity and Esteem for those,
who, being unacquainted with this Way, cannot therefore approve of it: It is,
indeed a Grief to our Churches, that there are sober and honest Persons in
other Communions, who are so strangely prepossessed, (...) to say prejudiced,
by Interest or Education against those that are of the Congregational
Persuasion, that they are ready to brand them with the opprobrious Names of
Schismatics, Enthusiasts and what not. -- But we have not so learned CHRIST:
For, although we prefer the Constitution of these Churches before and other;
still we think it our duty to love, and show our Affection to all good and well
disposed People of whatever Communion or religious Profession they may be, to
speak well and handsomely concerning them and serve them to he uttermost of our
Power: Nor indeed have we any Scruple about admitting any pious Baptist,
Presbyterian or Episcopalian into our Communior: Not only our Houses and
Hearts, but our Churches also are open Reason to think them to be Persons of
good Understanding, Piety and Virtue.

The distinguishing Privileges of the Churches in NEW ENGLAND maintained.
THE Nature, Grounds and Reasons, Antiquity and Advantages of Congregational
Churches have in the preceding Discourse bin briefly, but, I hope, honestly
and faithfully represented; and a short, though I think sufficient, Answer has
been produced to such Objections as are usually offered against the Way of
these Churches. What I now propose is, more particularly to sat, assert and
vindicate the distinguishing Liberties of these Churches from Scripture and
Reason and the approved Records of pure Antiquity: And, as there are some later
Writers, who have either inadvertently or from the constraining Power of Truth
bore their Testimony to the Religious Privileges claimed by our Churches, I
have though it it my Duty to consult these Writers and make the best Use of them
that I could on this Occasion.

Chapter I. The Right of these Churches to choose their own Ministers and other
Officers asserted and vindicated.
PRoposing thus to apologize for the distinguishing Privileges of these
Churches; I begin with the Power and Liberty of choosing their own Officers: A
Power and Liberty, of which they have bin long possessed, and to the Enjoyment
of which they have a satisfactory and valid Title.

In order to know what Methods and Rules our blessed LORD and SAVIOR would
have to be observed by His Churches; we must observe the Conduct and consult
the Writings of His Apostles, the Prime Ministers of His Spiritual Kingdom, who
were perfectly acquainted with His Mind, who steadily conformed unto it, and in
their Writings have clearly revealed it: For it is through their Word that we are
to believe and judge and act in Ecclesiastical Affairs.

If therefore in their Days, without their discountenanceng such a Practice,
the Churches elected their own Officers; the Churches have the same Power and
Right still and ought to exercise the same: But this Matter of Fact shall be
rendered manifest and incontestible, that the Churches in the Days of the
Apostles chose their own Officers: And, when this is made out, methinks there
can be no Difficulty in allowing the Conclusion which is drawn from it.

Now any one, that has Eyes and will see, may behold in the first Chapter of
the Acts of the Apostles that the Church were not excluded even in the Choice
of an Apostle, who was to supply the Place from which JUDAS by Transgression
fell: For, although an Apostle was an extraordinary Officer, so that if the
People had not bin concerned in the Election of such an Officer, probably they
would have bin satisfied; yet it is very clear, that the Church appointed two,
out of which one was to be chosen to supply the Place of JUDAS; and it is
equally clear, that, when the Lot fell upon MATTHIAS, he was by the Suffrage of
the Church chosen into the Number of the Apostles: For, although to serve a base
Design it was on Purpose translated in our Version, at Verse the Twenty sixth
of that Chapter, he was numbered with the Apostles; nevertheless all, that
understand any Thing of the Greek, must needs know the Truth of what the best
Critics inform us, namely, that MATTHIAS was chosen by all the Votes into the
Number of the Apostles (...), h. e. Omnium is Calculis allectus.
.

And what can our modern boasted Successors from the Apostles say to this? Here
was an Officer, an extraordinary Officer, who received his Calling and
extraordinary Authority from JESUS CHRIST HIMSELF immediately; and yet the
Church, in the Presence of the Apostles, first appointed two Persons, and then
by their common Consent and Suffrage approved the Person whose Lot it was to be
chosen by them! Truly they might as well resist the Light of EUCLID'S Elements
as the Light which appears in this Matter; and, if it were as much for their
Interests, it is very probable that they would do so.

But surely, from this celebrated Instance, Christians have now sufficient
Instruction and Authority to choose their own Officers: For, if the People had a
considerable Hand in the Choice of an Apostle, certainly their Right to choose
ordinary Officers cannot well be disputed; and, if in the Presence of the
Apostles, the People elected one into their Number, nor were excluded from this
Liberty, nor yet abridged in it by the present Apostles, it would now be a bold
Attempt in any to deprive them of their Liberty to choose their ordinary
Officers: I say, a bold Attempt; because all such as would deprive the People
of GOD of their Liberty to choose their own Officers, and by the Exclusion or
them would take this Power into their own Hands, are very assuming and arrogate
to themselves more than the Apostles of CHRIST, whose Power over the Church was
doubtless extraordinary.

This, it must be confessed, was a remarkable Instance and Proof of it, that
the Apostles were true and hearty Friends to the Liberties of their Christian
Brethren: But this is not the only Instance, wherein we find them to have bin
so: For, when Deacons were to be appointed, they were far from taking that
Affair into their own Hands; but, as we read in Act. VI. and 2, they called the
whole Multitude unto them and advised them to look out seven Men who might be
fit for that Business: And upon this it follows, that the Saying pleased the
whole Multitude, and accordingly they chose seven Persons, whose Names are
afterward mentioned: And, having proceeded thus far, they then set the Deacons
elected before the Apostles, who, when they had prayed, laid their Hands upon
them.

And, that the Apostles continued to be Favorers of the People's Right to
choose their Officers, may further be argued from Act. XIV. 23, where we read of
the Apostles PAUL and BARNABAS ordaining Elders in every Church: For, whereas
our Version to serve a Favorite Turn renders it only ordained, it is certain
that the Word signifies an Election or a listing up of Hands (...).
in every Church accompanying it, as every one that has but a small
Acquaintance with the Greek cannot but be sensible. So that, although we can
readily allow the Truth of what the learned DU PIN observes, namely, that,
after the Death of those who had bin ordained by the Apostles, the People
elected Du Pin. Biblioth. Tom. I. prop. ad ^i^.
; yet we must further insist, that before the Death of the Apostles and in
their Presence the People elected.

We see then, that these Churches have the Authority of the Apostles to
countenance them in the Choice of their Officers: If therefore the Apostles
themselves would not nominate and constitute Officers in the Churches, but it
was their Right according to CHRIST'S Will to choose their own Officers; it must
still be the Right and Liberty, of the Churches to elect their Officers: Well
therefore may we say with CHRYSOSTOM Chrysostom. in Act. VI 5.
, So it was then, h. e. in the Days of the Apostles, and so it ought to be now.

But, although these Scriptural Testimonies are enough to convince us, that, as we
are in the rightful Possession of this Liberty, we ought by all Means to keep
it, nor to let it go upon any Account or Pretense whatsoever; there are however
various Reasons besides, which will serve to betray the Folly and Stupidity of
those People, that can tamely bear to be kept out of this Liberty, and at the
same Time to confirm these Churches in their Resolutions not to part with it.

For it is certainly much more just and honest, much more fit and safe, that
the Officers of the Church should be chosen by the People, than it can be to
have them nominated and appointed by any one Bishop; because a Bishop may with
much more Ease be deceived and corrupted than an whole Church, and may be very
apt to abuse his arrogated Power: And it is entirely reasonable, that the
Church should choose those that are to be set over them in the LORD, lest
otherwise ignorant, dronish, wicked and contemptible Officers should be thrust
and imposed upon them: And it is furthermor meet; because there is no
Likelibood of it, that the People will love and revere, hear with spiritual
Profit and submit with Delight to such Persons as are thrust upon them against
their Inclinations: And, moreover, there is all the Reason in the World, that
Men should have the same Liberty in Religious Respects as they have in Civil:
Men can choose their Friends, their Lawyers, their Physicians: And can there be
any good Reason assigned, why they should be hindered from the Exercise of the
like Liberty in Spiritual Regards? Truly no! They ought to have equal
religious Liberty; nor ought they to be restrained in the Exercise of a Liberty
so reasonable, as this of choosing their own Ecclesiastical Officers, upon the
Choice of which their everlasting Welfare so nearly depends.

Besides; The Remarks of the famous CALDERWOOD are worthy to be taken into our
Consideration. Now He remarks in one Place, that common Sense teaches us, that
a Bishop is not to be thrust upon an unwilling People, lest the unwilling
People should either despise or hate their undesired Bishop Invitis Ecclestis
non obtrudendum communis Sonsus docet, no Plebs in vita Episcopum non optatum
aut contemuat aut oderit, etc. Didoclav. Altar. Damascen. p. 331.
: -- And, in another Place, He says, that the whole Church ought to be
concerned about the Means of Salvation Nam de omnibus Mediis Solutis sellicita
esse dabet: Dabet ergo eligere Postorem unum ex mill. Ejus^ Aut. and Lib. p.
332.
, of which the Ministry is one. -- And though, writes He, Popes have robbed the
Churches of this Liberty; [to wit, of choosing their own Ministers] yet Emperors
and Princes should not assume this to themselves, but, as Nursing Fathers to
the Church, if indeed they would be glad to bear that Character, they should
restore this Liberty to the Churches Non quia Pontfices hae Liberate
spoliament Ecclesias, eam sibi cendicare'debuerunt Imperatores and Principes,
sed ut Nutrith Advocati Ecclesia, si quidem his Elogiis gaudent, Ecclesias
reftitu^re. Ejutd. Auth and Libit. Page ead.
. -- And He remarks, that Experience with a loud Voice proclaims, that Churches
are more or less flourishing as their Election is with more or less Freedom
enjoyed Experientia ipsa elata Voce clamat magis aut minus florentes esse
Ecclesias, prout magis aut minus libera Electio. In Page ead. Ejusd. Lib. and
Author.
. And, to these Remarks of one famous Person, I may add the Observations of
another, GROTIUS, as I find them scattered up and down in his Book de Imperio;
In one Place He says, That Election is rightly made by the Church according to
the Law of Nature: For it is naturally allowed to every Society to procure
those Things that are necessary for its Conservation; in the Number of which
Things is the Disposition of Offices. Thus many Traders to Sea have the Right
of choosing the Governor of their Ship; thus Travelers may choose the Guide of
their Journey, and a free People may choose their King Ab Ecclesia Electionem
recte fieri probatur ex Jure naturali. Nam naturaliter Coetui unicuique
Permittitur ea procurare, quoe ad Conservationem sui sunt necessana; in quo
numero est Functionum Applicatio. ha vectores multi Jus habeni eligendi
Gubernatorem Navis faoe, viatores hineris Ducem, Populus liber Regem. Grot. de
Imptum. Potest. p. 258.
. In another Place, He asserts, It is altogether certain that in the ancient
Church after the Apostolic Age, though the People could rightfully choose their
own Pastors, yet they did not always and every where improve and exercise their
Right Omnino certum est in vetere Ecclesia post Apostolorum Aetatem, etsi Jure
potuit Plebs Postores suos deligere, non id ramen semper ae ubique observatum
-- Ejusd. Auth. and Lib p. 260
. And, to cite no farther, in another Place He observes, that even in later
Ages the Right of choosing their Pastors was often allowed to the People alone:
It is so plain and open, says He, that I need not take Notice of it Sed and Jus
Postores Ehgendi -- Saepe solis Laicis concessum, aperinus est quam us doceri
debeat, Fjusd. Auth, and Lib^. p. 287.
. -- Nor may I omit the kind Allowance of the ingenious and subtle CRELLIUS:
For, although he, with his Brethren, is for having the Civil Magistrate to
appoint Officers over the Churches, yet He thinks it ought to be observed, that
Officers should not be committed to any without the Consent of the whole
Church: Whoever therefore, says He, it may be, that has the Choice or
Nomination of Persons to these Ecclesiastical Offices; yet it ought to be
allowed to all in the Church, that if they know any just Objection against the
Election, they may bring it in proper Time and Place. And there will be Reason
for it, if they can not only object some Crime, against them, but also prove
such a Crime as ought deservedly to take him off from his Office. This is
clearly to be found in that Canon, wherein it is prescribed, that such as are
to be chosen should be blameless. Now how can this be known, unless Enquiry be
made and all have the Liberty of bringing what they know concerning such a
Matter. -- And truly such an Election constituted in a Church as does not have
this Liberty may lawfully be reproved and accounted vicious Itaque quisquis
tandem sit, qui eligat aut nominet Eos -- semper permitti debet omnibus in
Ecclesia, etc. Et sane quae Electio in Ecclesia jom constituta talem Libertatem
non relinquit illa jure reprehends and vitiosia censeri potest. Crell. Ethic.
Christian. L. IV. Cap. XXXI. p. 532.
.

Now what is there of Weight to be produced against such Considerations as
these? It would be impertinent to talk of an immediate Call from GOD to
Ecclesiastical Offices: For such a Call is not now to be expected: And yet it
would be very absurd to think of officiating in any Church without any Call or
Invitation at all: For none may assume such Honors to themselves but such as
are called of GOD.

If then any should argue for others, that they should nominate and appoint
Officers over the Churches, and not the Churches themselves: This is what we
peremptorily deny: For we cannot find, that GOD our SAVIOR has given such
Power to any Men, who are not of a particular Church, to appoint Officers in
and over it. Nor can we by any Means allow, that a Number of Men of any
particular Church, in Exclusion of the Multitude of their Brethren, should
constitute Officers in that particular Church: For we apprehend, that, in
Things which concern the whole Church, all the Church should be interested;
unless it can be made to appear, that the great Head of the Church has
empowered some only to act in the Matter: Now we know and are assured, that our
blessed SAVIOR has not committed to any particular Persons of whatsoever Age
or Quality the Power of choosing Officers for the whole Church: Nor has He
indulged the Churches with the Liberty of delegating their Power to some of
their Number to choose for them: For no Part of that Power which essentially
belongs to the Churches as such can be delegated; but every Part of such Power
must be exercised by the whole Churches. And therefore this Power of choosing,
as it belongs to the Churches essentially considered, must be acted by the
Bodies of particular Churches.

There are some, who are almost ready to concede to these Things; but yet they
are for excluding the People from the Election of Ecclesiastical Officers, on
the account of their Incapacity and unfitness to form a right Judgment
concerning Persons and to choose wisely: I remember SIXTUS SENENSIS was of this
Mind; for, although he acknowledges, that both in the Times of the Apostles and
of Pope LEO the People chose their Bishops; yet, he adds Sixius Senens.
Biblioth. Sanct. L. V. P. 466.
that it was easy for the Multitude of the Faithful to do this then; for the
People were then grave, moderate and concerned for the public Benefit: -- But
now, continues He, the People is a Beast of many Heads, always intent upon
Factions and Seditions: So that, if they had this Liberty, it would produce the
greatest Disturbance in the Church: And Dr. THOMAS BURNET, Master of the
Charter House, speaks to the same Purpose; for He says, that Elections Burns
de Fide and Officiis Christianorum. Cap. IX.
, as well as the Manner of Discipline, were formerly more popular, which
insensibly to avoid Confusion devolved upon those who presided over the Church.

But it is a sufficient Answer to all that can be said to this Effect, that the
People by our great Lawgiver and His Apostles are entrusted with this
Privilege, and therefore, for any to say that they are not meet for this
Privilege nor capable of discharging such a Trust, it must reflect upon the
holy Apostles, and even upon the Wisdom of our great SAVIOR. And, if it should
be granted, that the People may grow factious and troublesome in their
Elections, and Confusions should arise by Means of them; what then? All, that
this proves, is, that Churches may degenerate; and who denies that? But such
Degeneracy in them is to be lamented and reformed; and the People should still
possess and enjoy their Privilege of choosing their Officers. Even BZOVIUS the
Jesuit was of this Mind, and he gives three Reasons why it should be so;
namely, that so no Pastor may be set over such as are unwilling to have him
over them, that so the Pastor may be loved by his Sheep, and that so there may
be as it were a Spiritual Marriage contracted between them by the Consent of
both.

The Sum of what has bin said is, that, both from Scriptural Authority and
Examples and from the Reasons of the Thing, Churches should choose their own
Officers, and that the Objections against their Enjoyment of this Liberty are
of no Force and Validity.

And, if we search the Archives of Antiquity, we shall find, that the Primitive
Churches were in Possession of this Liberty, which through the Divine Goodness
these Churches enjoy.

It appears from CLEMENT'S first Epistle to the Corinthians, a valuable and
undisputed Remain of Antiquity, that Bishops and Deacons were constituted by
the Consent and Agreement or good Liking of the Church vid. Clement. Epist. I.
ad Corinth.
; that the Apostles themselves appointed qualified Persons to the Ministerial
Office with the Choice of the whole Church, and indeed that they were not
thought lawfully called or chosen to their Offices, nor might reasonably
challenge any Respect or Subjection from the People, unless the whole Church
concurred in the Election of them.

It is plain from an Epistle of IGNATIUS written to the Fraternity of the
Church, that he judged it becoming for them to choose their own Bishop Ignat.
Epist. ad Philadelph.
: For you must know, that, however despised the Fraternity may be by some who
are very sanguine in their Appeals to Antiquity, yet all the genuine Epistles
of IGNATIUS, except one to POLYCARP, are directed to the Brethren: And this
especially is so, wherein it is said to be becoming for them as a Church of GOD
to choose or appoint a Bishop.

It is not to be doubted, but that ORIGIN was of the same Opinion; for he,
writing concerning the Cities of GOD, even the Churches of JESUS CHRIST, and
concerning the Rulers of them, affirms that they are to be chosen Origin. cont.
Cells. lib. ult. ad Fin.
to their Office by the Churches which they rule.

EUSEBIUS declares, that in the Year of our LORD 236, all the Faithful Eusebi.
l. VI. cap. 22.
in ROME itself did meet together in one Place to choose another Bishop in the
Room of ANTERUS: And he says, that ALEXANDER, Bishop of Jerusalem was chosen in
this Manner, and then presented to the Neighboring Bishops for their
Approbation Eusebius. l. VI. c. ii.
.

CYPRIAN a little while after testifies to this Right of the People, saying,
that they have the Power of choosing their own Ministers Ipsa [Plebs] maxim
habet Potestatem eligendi dignos Sacer dotes, and Cyprian. Epist. 4. vid. etiam
in Epist. 68. and in aliis Locis.
over and over again; as every one knows, that has ever consulted his Writings:
And he acknowledges, that he was promoted Bishop, Populi universi Suffragio, by
the Suffrage of the People Cyprian. Ep. 55.
.

The first and most famous general Council of Nice, writing a Synodal Epistle
to the African Churches to warn them against Arianism, exhorts them to choose
orthodox Bishops in the Room of the Deceased, provided they be worthy --: From
which is should seem, they thought the Election of the People so necessary,
that real Merit was not sufficient to make and constitute a Bishop without
their free Election of him.

And that, in ancient Times a Conspiracy of Bishops could not chouse the People
out of this their Right, we have a remarkable Instance to produce: For Martin,
usually called Saint MARTIN, a little after CONSTANTINE, was made Bishop of
Turon in France by the People's Election and Consent, notwithstanding all the
Opposition that the Bishops could make against his Election and Settlement
among them: And Abbot FLEURY, in his Discourses on Ecclesiastical Hisory,
rightly observes, that in those Times so great a Regard was had to the People'
Consent, that, if they refused to receive [a Bishop or Minister] after he was
ordained, they were not forced to have him, but had another who was more
agreeable to them.

POSIDONIUS in the Life of AUSTIN says, That that Father was of the Opinion
that Augustinus in ordimandis Sacerdotes et Clericis Consensum majorem Christ
anorum et Consuetudinem Ecclesiae sequendam a^hisrabatur. Posidom. i^ Vic.
Augustine. Cap. XXI.
in ordaining Priefts and Clerks the Consent of the Majority of Christians and
the Custom of the Church should be followed.

In the Council at Orleance in the Year of our LORD, 540, this Rule was laid
down, that he is to be chosen by all who is to be set over all Cano. 3. de
ordinand. Episcop.
: So that then the Churches were not so big but that all the People might join
in choosing their Bishop.

And BELLARMIN himself confesses, that it was the Custom in the Time of
CHRYSOSTOM, AMBROSE, AUSTIN, LEO and GREGORY for the People to be concerned in
the Choice of their Biship Bellarmin. 1. I. cap. IX. de Clericis.
And some of the Papists even go higher: For LORINUS, SALMERON and SANCTIUS,
writing upon Act. XIV. 23. acknowledge, that it was the Primitive and Apostolic
Practice for the People to choose their own Ministers.

There are several Chronologers and Historians who relate concerning FELIX the
Fourth, that ascended the Papal Chair in the Year of our LORD 525, that he
first of all by a Law separated the Clergy from the People, while Divine
Service was performing in the Churches; and BONIFACE the Second did the same
after him: And the same Thing was decreed and confirmed afterward by
succeeding Popes and Synods: Now the very learned HOSPINIAN observes, that this
was done by them for two Reasons, in the first Place, that at length they might
deprive the People of their Voices, their Suffrages and their Places in the
Election of their Bishops; and, in the next Place, that so no one might be
allowed in any Civil or Criminal Cause to call a Bishop or any clergyman before
a Secular Judge Hospiman. de Origin. Templor. 1.2. cap. 1. p. 29.
.

Nay it seems ^o have bin the Custom of the Churches to be concerned in the
Choice of their Ministers for near Thirteen Hundred Years together: For the
Emperor FREDERIC the Second, who deceased in the Year 1250, is thought to be
the first, that was for excluding the Laity from the Election of their
Officers: But, that until then the People had their Suffrages, appears from the
Decretal Epistles of GREGORY the Ninth Chamier. de Ecclesia. Tom. V. p. 162. --
Electio Clericorum est P^titio Plebis. Decret. Par. 1. Distinct. 52.
. It Is true HILDEBRAND began to set up the Power of his Cardinals; but even he
denied not the Clergy and the people their Votes in Comitiis: So that until the
Twelfth Century, it cannot be disputed, that even in Rome itself the People
elected their Bishop. And THUANUS informs us Thuan. Iib. 83. Page 85.
, that in 585, a Popish Archbishop allowed the City of Magdeburg, Jus vocandi
ac constituendi Ecclesi. Ministros, sicut antea habebat; that is, their former
Right of calling and appointing their own Ministers. And I may add, that, in a
Gallican Council, convened in 1582, there was a Decree passed to this Effect,
namely, That so there may be a better Provision made for Cathedral Churches and
Monasteries than there has bin, especially since Elections have bin taken away;
we beseech and urge his most Christian Majesty by the Bowels of Divine Mercy
and the Blood of CHRIST, that, from his singular Piety toward GOD, he would,
for the Divine Glory and the Good of the Church, as also for the Freedom of his
own Mind from the greatest Scruple and the Deliverance of his Conscience from
the greatest Tortures, restore to the Church the Power of choosing fit and
useful Pastors Bechell, in Decret, Eccles, Gallic, 1.5. Tit. 8. c. 7.
.

Now it is very evident from these Testimonies, that in the Primitive Times the
Right of the Churches to choose their own Officers was acknowleged, maintained
and exercised; and that this was one of the last Things which the Enemy of the
best Interests of Mankind wickedly ravished from them.

Thus then we have Scripture, Reason and Equity, the Nature of Churches in
their Institution and Ends, and the Practice of the Church in the first and
some succeeding Ages, all conspiring to confirm this Privilege of the Churches
to choose their own Officers: Nor can we judge any otherwise, but that the
Robbing the Churches of this Privilege was great and abominable Sacrilege.

But, if any should say, that, although the Right of choosing and calling their
Ministers be in the people, yet de Facto in many Places, and even Places
professing the Reformation, they are deprived of this Right; and how is This
come to pass? In Answer to it, lest I should express myself with an
exceptionable Vehemence, I choose to transcribe the Answer of the very learned
VOET to that Question, Whether the Election and Calling of Ministers be in the
Power of the Church? It Is this. By Divine Right, says He, This Power is in the
Church. That any wehere This is either wholly or in Part given to Magistrates,
Patrons, those who are honored among Men, Bishops, Ediles or others; it is
owing to humane Doings, Usurpations and Appointments: If therefore among
Protestant and Reformed Divines you read of any such Thing; pray think, that
they relate the Custom of the Place and the Manner there tolerated which coul
not be taken away; not that it is a Divine Right or the Doctrine of the
Reformed or the Appointment of Fathers and Councils and the ancient Church An
penes Ecclesiam? Id jure Divino. Quod alienhi in Totumaut ex Part id evibuituv
Magist^atibus, Patronis, Honoratis in Seculo, Episcopis, Aedilihus out aliis
quibuscunque; id ex Factis, Usurpationibus and Ordinationibus humanis ortum
esse comstat. Si ergo apud Theologos quosdam Protestants and Reformatos tale
quidlegis; cogita cos Consuetudinem Loci sui referie and marem isthic
toleratum, qui tolli nondum po^uit; non Jus Divinum aut Doctrinam Reformatam
aut Patrum, Concitiorum and antiquae Ecclesiae Ptacitum. Voet. Par. II. 1. IId.
Trac. 1. C^ IV.
. And I would take Leave to add, that, as the Divine Right of People's choosing
their Ministers has bin already confirmed, so from Fathers and Councils it has
bin shown that the Primitive Churches possessed and exercised this Right: And
to prove that this is the Doctrine of the Reformed, I would put by Reader in
Mind, that LUTHER, both in his Book to the Bohemians Luther. in Lib. de
inflituendis Ministris ad Bohemian.
and in German Luther. in Sctipro cui Tir. Quod Ecclesis Potestatem babent
Eligendi and Deponendi Ministuos.
Tract asserred and maintained this Principle; and not only He, but CALVIN
Calvin. Epist. 8^.
, ZEPPER Zepper. Polit. Ecclesiast. l. 2. cap. 3.
, BALDVIN Baldvin. lib. Casuum. l. 4. cap. 5.
, the Synod of Dort Vide Constitution Eccles. Synod. National. Dovd. 1978.
, and the Leyden Divines Synopsis Leidens. Professor. Disp. 42. These. 31.36.
have held and maineained the same; And above all, the renowned FLACCIUS
ILLYRICUS in a Tract Flaccius Illyric. in Tract. cui Tit. Quod Electio
Episcoporum non ad Ecclesiasticos solum, sed and ad Laicos (ut vocant) pertines.
has laboriously and learnedly proved this Point from every Argument that He
could muster.

From the whole of what has bin offered, I would conclude this Chapter by
saying, that, as these Churches are in the rightful Possession of the Power and
Liberty to choose their own Officers, which Power and Liberty they have
recovered from the Oppression of unreasonable Men, while many Churches which
are reckoned among the Reformed are not so happy as to enjoy it; these
Chi^rches would do well to keep this Power and Liberty as the Apple of their
Eye; nor suffer themselves to be wrought upon so far as to part with a
Privilege of so much Worth and Importance: They ought indeed, in the Use and
Exercise of their Right, to consult the Edification, Comfort and Statisfaction
of their Neighbors: But, considering their rightful Claim to the Choice of
their own Officers and the many ill Consequences which will follow upon their
receding from it; they ought not to allow any to destroy or betray this their
valuable Liberty: And, if any should sacrilegiously attempt to rob them of this
Liberty or by any Means to hinder them in the free and perfect Exercise of it,
they would be very much in the Right of it to consider them among their
greatest Enemies.

Chapter II. The Right of these Churches to ordain their Ministers stated and
argued.
THE Design of this Chapter is not to deny, that, in churches which are
furnished with Presbyteries, those Presbyteries may use Imposition of Hands and
ordain: For this is what is readily acknowledged by these Churches.

Nothing can be more plain, than that the Church is before its ordinary
Officers: I say its ordinary Officers, For our blessed LORD might, as He
actually did, ordain Apostles, when there was yet no Evangelical Church, to
disciple the Nations and baptize them and gather Churches out of such discipled
and baptized Nations: But it does not appear, that the Apostles either did or
could ordain any stated Officers, until there were Churches formed for the
Reception of them: So that we judge it an absurd and extravagant Thing, and the
Whim of only some Ecclesiastical Don Quixots, to ascribe the Continuance of the
Church to the successive uninterrupted Ordination of Officers: For, if there
were any such Thing as a successive uninterrupted Ordination of Officers, which
there is hardly one found Protestant that can believe there is; still this
successive Ordination of Officers wholly and entirely depends upon the
Continuance of the Church, and must be an Act of the Church; and therefore it
can never be a Means of communicating Ecclesiastical Power to others, without
which there would be an End of all Ecclesiastical Power, as some fondly imagine
or would make us believe that they imagine, -- And besides; It must be not only
a vain and idle, but an impious Attempt, to derive a Succession, upon which the
Being of a Church shall depend, through the Presence of CHRIST with the Bishops
of Rome, who for an hundred Years together, namely from the Year 900 to the
Year 1000, were Monsters for Ignorance, Lust, Pride and Luxury, as BARONIUS
himself acknowledges, A. D. 912.5.8.

And yet there are here and there some defective Protestants, who are fond of
their uninterrupted Line of Succession. But we may fitly enquire of them, Why
there is such a Thing as a Degradation, and for what Purpose it is practiced at
any Time among them? Certainly you will all allow, that they, who by Schism are
cut off from the Church, must also be cut off from that Part of Apostolical
Power to which they made their Pretensions; and so it cannot be indelibly fixed
on them. And surely, where no Part of the Apostolical Power can be claimed,
there can be no Succession to it. Now, in the Church of Rome, it has bin proved
by ONUPHRIUS an Historian of their own, that there have bin at least Thirty
Schisms, by several, sometimes no less than s^^^ or six at once, pretending to
the Popedom: And one of the Schisms lasted more than Fifty Years, when one Pope
sat at Rome, another at Avignon: Nay BELLARMINE is obliged to acknowledge, that,
for above Eighty Years together, the Church for want of a lawful Pope had no
other Head than what was in Heaven. And, if Schism destroys the Succession of
Apostolical Power, certainly damnable Heresy, Devilism and Atheism will also do
it. Now what can be said to the Complaints of BARONIUS about the End of the
Ninth Century, How deformed, says he, was the Romish Church, when Whores no
less powerful than vile bore the chief Sway at Rome, and at their Pleasure
changed Sees and appointed Bishops, and which is horrible to mention, did
thrust their own Gallants into the Sea of Saint Peter. There cannot therefore
be any Thing more evident than that the Succession has failed, though indeed, if
it were not so, the uninterrupted Succession can never be proved.

But there are some, who, though they could never find in their Hearts to believe
the mad Whim of Papal Succession and a successive Ordination, yet, in order to
establish an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction or Government, are for giving the
Power of Ordination into the Hands of the Bishop or of a Synod: But it is to be
hoped, that these Churches will know better than to give such an inestimable
Branch of Ecclesiastical Power out of their own Hands into the Hands of others,
who ought not to have it, and who in the Possession of it have always made the
worst Use of it.

These Churches are far from disowning, that, when a particular Church has
Elders of its own, these Elders by the Imposition of Hands may ordain such
other Officers, as that Church may see Cause to elect: But our Episcopal and
Presbyterian Brethren still insist upon it, that Ordination is a Part of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to be dispensed, by the Bishop, say the former, by
the Eldership and that consociated, say the latter.

It is evident, nor has any one yet bin able to prove to the contrary, that
TIMOTHY was ordained by the Presbytery, not by any particular Bishop alone:
And, for ought that yet appears, the Presbytery which laid Hands upon that
Evangelist, might be the Presbytery of a particular Church, and not of a Synod
or inferior Classis: Ney it is very probable, that it was the Presbytery of a
particular Church: For, although PAUL and BARNABAS were Apostles, yet they were
not ordained [that is to say, if they were ordained] by any Classis or
Presbyterial Synod, nor yet by one single Person; but by the Presbytery of one
particular Church, namely the Church at Antioch.

But you will enquire, it is very likely, how it appears that the Eldership, in
Act. XIII, which ordained PAUL and BARNABAS, was but the Presbytery of one
particular Congregation? And I anser, that this is plain from Act. XIV. 27,
which clearly represents to us, that the Church of Antioch was not so great but
that it could assemble in one Place; and, that the whole Multitude at the
Return of PAUL and BARNABAS from the Synod at Jerusalem met together to hear
the Epistle which that Synod had sent them, this is very manifest from Act. XV.
30 and 31. Now therefore the Conclusion must be this, that, the Church at
Antioch being but one particular Church, the Presbutery, by which PAUL and
BARNABAS were ordained, could not be a Synodical Presbytery, but the Presbytery
of a particular Church.

There is, I confess, a considerable Noise made both by our Presbyterian and
Episcopal Brethren about the Epistles to TIMOTHY and TITUS: For, while the
former are endeavoring to support and establish their beloved Classes and
Synods from TIMOTHY'S Ordination; the latter continue to insist upon it, that
these Epistles are purely Episcopal: But the best Construction, which can be
made of those Epistles is plainly this; to wit, that they were not designed for
those Evangelists alone, nor any Ministers alone, but for a State that was
mixed, wherein the said Evangelists, having some assisting Presbyters or other
Officers, administered and executed the Affairs of the Agreement of the People:
For, although the Epistles be written by Name, and say especially, to TIMOTHY and
TITUS; still there can be no Question but that they were really intended for
general Use and Advantage: And this is what we may fairly conclude from the
Apostle's Wish, Grace be with you, Grace be with you all, which closes one
Epistle and another: For it cannot be well imagined, that these Wishes are only
belogning to the Evangelists, to whom the Epistles are directed. Why then
should it be conceeded to our Brethren of the Church of England, that the
Apostle writes his three Epistles to two Archbishops or Metrapolitans;
especially when, as the famous CALDERWOOD observes, there is not so much as one
Thing inserted in them that can properly serve the Archbishop or Metropolitan?
For, adds he, here are no Apostolical Monitions about convoking Synods of
Bishops, concerning Consecrations of Bishops, concerning the Correction of the
Defects and Excesses of Prelates, and receiving Appeals from Episcopal
Consistories; although these, according to your Hierarchical Gentlemen, are the
chief Offices of Archbishops Didoclav. Altar. Damascen, p. 37.
. -- And why should we allow those Things to be found in these Epistles, which
our Presbyterian Brethren fondly value, when no such Things are in these
Epistles? If it were actually declared in them, that in Crete and at Ephesus
there were Presbytertes; yet where do we read of the Powers to be claimed by
these Presbyteries or the Subjection of these Presbyteries to other and
superior Judicatories?

As to those, who confidently report, that Ordination cannot be validly and
lawfully performed but by a Bishop; we think it a sufficient Answer to say,
that we find the first Mention of a Bishop distinct from Presbyters to have bin
about Three Hundred Years after our SAVIOR: And this is no more than what many
of the more sober and considerate of the Episcopalian Writers are free to
acknowledge: And we conceive, that even then, for ought that the Friends of
Diocesan Episcopacy have bin able to prove to the contrary, there was no Bishop
who had any Jurisdiction or Authority over other Ministers, but who in common
with other Ministers ruled and governed the Churches according to their Consent
and Agreement.

But, if for Argument's sake it should be allowed, that the Bishop was a
distinct Order from the Presbyter; still this will be no Demonstration, that
the Bishop alone has the Power of ordaining: How then shall we be made sensible
of it, that the Bishop alone should have this Power? Alas! Confident Assertions
of a Thing will never convince us concerning the Truth of it, especially of
such a Thing as this which can never be proved: For in the whole New Testament
there is not so much as one Instance of an Ordination that was performed by a
single Person.

Let us therefore turn to our Presbyterian Friends and attend to what they have
ot offer: Now they are ready to object and say, But, dear Brethren, where do
you read of any Ordinations but by Presbyters? For Answer to these our entirely
beloved Brethren, there is no need of referring them to the Direction, in Numb.
VIII. 10, Thou shall bring the Levites before the LORD, and the Children of
Israel shall put their Hands upon the Levites; from which Direction some have
argued, that when a Church is destitute of Elders and Elders cannot
conveniently be had from another Church, then Imposition of Hands may be
performed by some of the considerable Men of the Congregation, although they
should not be Elders; and that therefore, what was performed in the Church of
Israel, may in the like Case be at present performed.

But, waving this Argument, I shall now remark and show, that the Case may be
such as that, if Ordination be really requisite, by the Imposition of Hands,
then it way be performed by such as are not Officers at all in the Church: Now
this is very clear; for the State of Things may be such, that there cannot be
any Ordination at all by the Imposition of the Hands of Elders: And in such a
State as this, as there are no Elders or Bishops. either there must be no
Ordination by the Imposition of Hands at all, or else the Ordination must be
performed by such as are no Officers: And, that this may be the Case of a
Church, that Ordination cannot be performed by Officers in it, this shall
presently be made evident.

To such therefore as are of the Opinion, that Ordination by Officers is so
necessary that there is no performing it without them, we may calmly address
ourselves and expostulate; Dear Sirs, How will you prove the Necessity of
Ordination for Elders or Bishops? And, if you will have it necessary, I pray,
what shall be done where there are no Ecclesiastical Officers to be had? For
this may be the Case of a Society of Christians by Shipwreck thrown upon a
Place where there are no Elders; say, upon the Island of Bermuda, which erects
its solitary Head in the Atlantic at a Distance from other Places: Suppose in
this Case Mr. PAUL should providentially come among them, who had never bin
separated to the Evangelical Ministry; might he not teach and instruct them in
the Principles of Christianity? And, if Ordination were necessary in order to
his Dispensation of the Word and Ordinances, might not the poor Shipwrecked
Christians properly ordain him and separate him by the Imposition of Hands to
the Work of the Ministry? or, which to me is the same Thing, by the laying on
of their Hands, commend him to the Grace of GOD in that Work to which they have
called him? Truly it is very plain to me that they might. This is certain,
that, at the Beginning of the Reformation in Scotland, the old Manner of
electing and ordaining Ministers was performed without Imposition of Hands, as
may be seen in KNOX'S Forms prefixed to the old Psalms: And the ingenious
STEUART, in the Fourteenth Page of his Collections, affirms this Ordination was
lawful and valid. If therefore it should be thought too much for Brethren
chosen to it to impose Hands on elected Officers; certainly we may claim the
electing and ordaining Power for the Brethren without it. And this is what all
Men would soon discover, if it were not for the Interest of some worldly minded
Persons to entangle the Sentiments of Mankind and lead them aside.

Antiquity is no Stranger to such an Opinion as ours: For FRUMENTIUS, who was
not in holy Orders, went and preached to the Indians, and afterward was made a
Priest and Bishop by ATHANASIUS: But no one that I know of ever faulted his
Conduct: Nor has the King of the Iberians bin condemned, although before be was
ordained by Elders or even baptized, he converted his Subjects, and, according
to the ancient Historian, before he was initiated himself was the Apostle of
his Country. And it is probable, that many even in the Times of the Apostles
preached and received Orders from the Churches to which they came: For SANCTIUS
Sanct. in Act. VIII. 4. and XI. verse. 19.20.
affirms and acknowleges with BARONIUS, that more than Fifteen Thousand went
out from Jerusalem to propagate the Gospel: But we can by no Means suppose,
that they were ordained canonically and in an ample Form, as indeed these Roman
Catholics themselves are free to declare that they were not thus ordained. To
be sure the Bohemian Brethren, whom they call Picards, thought themselves
empowered to ordain their own Ministers: For, in the Year 1456, they formed
themselves into Christian Churches, and from twelve that were chosen they
selected and constituted three by Lot for their Ministers Lazicius in Apolog.
cont. magu. Ducem Moscorum. Cap. 9.
. And the first Reformers laid this Principle of the worthy JOHN HUSS as the
Foundation of the Reformation, that the Law of CHRIST is sufficient for the
Government of His militant Church without the Addition of any humane Laws: And,
lest they or their Posterity should fall off from this Foundation, they
protested, that, in order to preserve their Assemblies so professing the pure
Doctrine of the Gospel from being scattered, they would be careful to keep a
Supply of faithful Ministers; and that therefore, without expecting any in
Orders to come over to them from the Church of Rome, they were Ordinandos esse
Domi, pro necessitate, Regenvolse. Hist. Eccles. Sclavonic. p. 30.
for ordaining them at home, whom they chose for their Ministers.

And this leads me to demand, how we shall do, if we cannot improve the
Officers, which we may obtain, to confer holy Orders? For it sometimes happens,
that, where Officers may be had to perform this Service, those Officers, as
well as the Churches to which they belong, may be so very corrupt or wicked
that it would be better not to improve them: And therefore we need not be
afraid or ashamed to declare, that, if our Churches here can have no Ministers
but what must be ordained by Popish Bishops, the Case appears to us as
sorrowful, as if the poor Sheep in the Wilderness could have none but Wolves to
appoint Shepherds over them: Blessed be GOD, this is not the Case with these
Churches. -- But let the Case be imagined, that there may be a general
Combination of degenerate Pastors in a Country, who will be for dispensing
Ordination to none but such as will partake with them in their Degeneracy or
submit unto sinful Terms; where a particular Church is desirous to have all
Things according to the Pattern in the Mount: Now in this Case would not the
making the Imposition of Hands from such Ministers as have bin themselves
ordained, to be essential to the Call of a Minister, be a Piece of foolish
Bigotry, to which no sound Protestant can safely and prudently subscribe?
Truly it seems to be so. And we are sure, that BEZA, in the famous Conference
at Poissy, clearly and fully renounced such an ensnaring Opinion, and
maintained, that unto a legitimate Call Imposition of Hands was not necessary;
but that the chief and substantial Tokens thereof were a good Life, sound
Doctrine and Election [from the People:] Nor was it to be wondered at, if the
Reformed had not received Imposition of Hands from them, whose corrupt Life,
Superstition and false Doctrine they were to reprove? Or how could it be
expected, they should ever be allwed of by them, who were Enemies to the Truth
which they defended?

And, in fine, I would enquire of the Patrons of Ordination by Officers,
whether even good and meet Officers, belonging to other Churches, may claim the
Power of ordaining Elders over Churches to which they are not related? Though
there may be very desirable Officers and in every Respect well qualified near
at Hand; never, theless it does not appear, that even these have Authority or
may assume to themselves the Power of ordaining Elders to other Churches, of
which they are neither Members nor Officers; unless those particular Churches,
in which the Elders are to be ordained, request their Presence and Assistance:
For ordinary Officers are not like the Apostles, who might feed all the Flock
of our SAVIOR; but there is one particular Flock, of which, and of which
alone, they are to take the Oversight.

If indeed it were acknowleged that we read in sundry Places of Ordination
performed by Elders, though the Proof of this is difficult; and that we never
read in the New Testament about the Performance of it by any others: This
however is nothing at all against what has bin offered: For, although we should
allow, that, in such Churches as are furnished with Elders, Ordination should
be performed by those Elders; we may nevertheless with Safety maintain, that,
where there are not Elders as at the first, nor any that can be conveniently
borrowed from other Churches, Ordination by the Imposition of Hands may then be
validly and lawfully performed by others. And it is no more than what a famous
Bishop of Salisbury, in his Exposition on the thirty nine Articles, has freely
declared: For He affirms, that, whatever some holter Spirits have since thought
of it; yet not only those who penned the Articles, but the Body of the Church
for above half an Age afterward were of a Persuasion which implied, that they
thought no spiritual Powers necessary for the Exercise of the Evangelical
Ministry, except what the People could convey to such of their Body as they
might judge qualified for it.

We may also be free and ready to grant, that Elders meeting in a Council or
Synod, with Brethren, may at the Desire of a particular Church, ordain its
Officers: But then, as it has bin the Judgment of these Churches in Times past,
there is yet no good Reason why these Churches should change their Judgment,
that the Elders so convened in Council or Synod with their Brethren for this
Service, have no Power or Jurisdiction of their own, but act by virtue of the
Power derived from the particular Churches which sent for them: So that, in
short, particular Churches are the first Subjects of this Power of ordaining;
as it is for particular Churches that Councils or Synods convene, when they
meet in order to ordain Officers for them.

The very learned FABRITIUS, the Principal Doctor of Divinity in the Reformed
Church of the Palatinate, whose Life is written and whose Works are published
by the great HEIDEGGER at Zurich, School, published two Dialogues in 1685, in the
latter of which he endeavors to demonstrate that the Controversy about Baptism
by a private Man in Case of Necessity does not belong to the fundamental
Articles of Faith, but to the Question concerning Order, it being appointed by
the Divine Law that all Things should be done in order: Which principally
consists in this, that every one perform the Duty belonging to his Charge: And
therefore if any Man, even a Laic, be appointed by the Church to administer the
Sacrament, if he does it, he does nothing but his Duty and neither offends
against the Faith or against good Order. The learned FABRITIUS indeed does not
lay this down as of himself; but he commends both the Ancients and Moderns who
are of this Opinion. And by the same Rule he would have commended such as
assert the Right of the Brethren to appoint some of their Number to confer
Orders on Officers called and chosen by themselves; and so our generous and
noble Parents would have bin applauded by him for their Opinion concerning
Ordination.

As our Fathers though it, that Ordination did not constitute an Officer nor give
him the Essentials of his Office: For they judged, that the Essence of the
outward Call of an ordinary Officer consisted, not in that, but in his free
Election by the Church and his Acceptance of that Choice: So they have declared
their Opinion, in the Ninth Chapter of their Platform, that, in Churches where
there are no Elders, Imposition of Hands on Officers elected may be performed
by some of the Brethren orderly chosen by the Church for that Servive: And the
Reason which they there assign for this is a good one: For, say they, if the
People elect Officers which is the greater, and wherein the Substance of the
Office does consist, they may much more, Occasion and Need requiring, impose
Hands in Ordination, which is less, and but the Accomplishment of the other.
But, notwithstanding the Claim of this Right for our Churches, they go on
afterward and say, in the same Chapter, Nevertheless in Churches, where they
have no Elders, and the Churches desire it, we see not, why Imposition of Hands
may not be performed by the Elders of other Churches.

Nor are our worthy Predecessors singular in these their Sentiments. The pious
and learned PERKINS, writing concerning Ordination and Succession, in his
Commentary on Gal. I. ii. says, that, if in Turkey or America, or elsewhere the
Gospel be received of Men, by the Counsel or Persuasion of private Persons,
they should not need to send unto Europe for consecrated Ministers, but have
Power to choose their own from within themselves: And his Reason is because,
where GOD gives the Word, He gives Power also. And PHILIP MELANCTHON, the
gracious and excellent, expresses himself much after the same Manner in his
Answer to the Bohemian Ministers, who taught the incorrupt Doctrine of the
Gospel, and refutes the Pretent of Ordination to be taken from Bishops from the
first Chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians. And the Author of the valuable
Scotch Dispute against English Ceremonies, freely declares, in page 285th,
that, as, when Princes are elected, the Election gives them Jus ad Rem, as they
speak, without which the Inauguration can never give them Jus in Re; so it is
as to a Minister: And Ordination only applied him to the actual exercising of
his Pastoral Office; which Ordination should be given to him alone that is
elected, and that because he is so. And the learned VOET, in his Desperate.
Cause. Papat. L. II. Sect. II. Cap. XX, has irrefragably proved against
JANSENIUS, Electionem tribuere Ministerium, that it is the Choice which makes
the Minister, by six or seven Arguments. Now, from these declared Sentiments of
such eminent Persons, it appears very plain to me, that the Tho'ts of our
Predecessors may be cleared from the Charge of Singularity, and with Ease be
supported and justified.

Nay I cannot but think, that even Archbishop BANCROFT has furnished us with a
good Argument in Favor of the Opinion maintained by our Ancestors: For, before
the Consecration of the three Scotch Bishops at London, ANDREWS the Bishop of
Ely said, They must first be ordained as having received no Ordination by a
Bishop: But BANCROFT maintained, that there was no Necessity for it, seeing,
where Bishops could not be had, the Ordination given by Presbyters must be
valid and esteemed lawful: For otherwise it might be doubted, if there was any
lawful Vocation in most of the Reformed Churches. Now, by the same Argument of
BANCROFT'S, (which is to be found in SPOTSWOOD'S Hist. l. 7. p. 514.) there
will be no Difficulty in maintaining the Validity and Lawfulness of Ordination
by the People: For, where Bishops or Presbyters cannot be had, Ordinations by
them must be valid and esteemed lawful: Otherwise it may be doubted whether
there be any lawful Vocation in many, if not most, of the Reformed Churches.

Wherefore I cannot but say with the celebrated Mr. CLAUDE, that the fierce
Opinion that goes so high as to own no Ministry in the World, but where there
are Episcopal Ordinations, and which would make all Religion depend on a
disputable Formality; that Opinion cannot be looked upon any otherwise than the
very worst Character and the grossest Mark of Hypocrisy and worthy of Contempt
from all the Christians in the World. But what he has thus strongly, but
justly, expressed concerning the hot Opinion about the Necessity of Episcopal
Ordinations; I would say and maintain the very same concerning the Opinion
about the Necessity of Ordination by as Presbytery, as well as a Bishop: And it
will give me very little Uneasiness, however vexed and angry or troubled any
may be with me for being of this Mind and freely declaring it: For I am
satisfied, that their Trouble or Anger must arise either from groundless
Fancies or something worse: So that I cannot have any Reason to be disturbed or
uneasy at it.

But, after all, some will challenge us to produce any Texts of Scripture that
give Laymen a Right to ordain Ministers in any Case. And, as this is the
Challenge which the Author of The Prejudices, etc. made to the famous Mr.
CLAUDE, I shall recite his Reply to it, which to me appears a full and
sufficient one: It is to be found in his Defense of the Reformation, P. IV. p.
94 and 95.

This Demand, says he, is but a vain Wrangling. For, when the Scripture
recommends to the Faithful the taking diligent heed to the Preservation and
Confirmation of their Faith and to propagate it to their Children; it gives
them by that very Thing a sufficient Right to make Use of all proper Means to
that End: And every Body knows the Ministry is one of those Means: And
therefore the Obligation the Faithful are under to preserve and propagate the
Faith includes that of creating to themselves Pastors when they cannot have
them otherwise: In short, when the Scripture teaches, that the Faithful have a
Right to choose their Pastors, it teaches thereby that they have a Right to
install them in their Office in Case of Necessity: For that Call consisting
much more essentially in Election than in Installation, which is but a
Formality, there is no Reason to believe, that GOD would have given the People
a Right to choose their Pastors and to have them installed by others, and that
He has not given them at the same Time a Power of installing them themselves,
when it cannot be done otherwise. Since naturally That, which we have a Right
to do by another, we have a Right to do by ourselves. Thus he.

Nay, not only the celebrated CLAUDE, but the learned DODWEL, that mighty
Oracle of the distracted, high-flying Clergy, acknowleges such a Right in
particular Societies of choosing and investing their Officers. It Is true this is
not at all reconcilable with the other Parts of his [Romantic] Scheme: But
this is nothing to us. It is in his Separation of Churches, [P. 102 and 52.]
that he writes after this Manner; The Church, with whom GOD has made the
Covenant, is a Body Politic, though not a Civil one; and GOD has designed all
Persons to enter into this Society. -- It is sufficient for my Purpose, that
the Ecclesiastical Power be no otherwise from GOD, than that is of every
supreme Civil Magistrate. It is not usual for Kings to be invested into their
Offices by other Kings, but by their Subjects: Yet, when they are invested,
that does not in the least prejudice the Absoluteness of their Monarchy, where
the Fundamental Constitutions of the respective Places allow it to them. -- And
(in Page 522 and 523) he says, "Whenever a Person is invested with the supreme
Power, and the Society over which he is placed is independent on other
Societies, such a Person can never be placed in his Power, if not by them who
must after be his Subjects, unless by his Predecessor, which no Society can
depend upon for a constant Rule of Succession. -- I am apt to think, this must
have bin the Way of making Bishops at first, how absolute soever I conceive
them to be when they are once made. -- This seems best to agree with the
Absoluteness of particular Churches, before they had by Compact united
themselves under Metropolitans and Exarchs into Provincial and Diocesan
Churches. And this seems to have bin fitted for the frequent Persecutions of
those earlier Ages, when every Church was able to secure its own Succession;
without depending on the uncertain Opportunities of the meeting of the Bishops
of the whole Province: And the Alterations of this Practice, the giving of the
Bishops of the Province an Interest in the Choice of every particular
colleague, seems not to have bin so much for want of Power in the particular
Churches to do it, as for the Security of Compacts, that they might be certain
of such a Colleague as would observe them. -- It is probable, that it was in
Imitation of the Philosophers Successions, that these Ecclesiastical
Successions were framed: And, when the Philosophers failed to nominate their
own Successors, the Election was in the Schools. Now, granting these Things, we
have all that we desire: For, if every particular Church has originally a Power
within itself to choose and invest its Bishop, and the Concurrence of other
Bishops herein be not for want of Power in particular Churches, but only for
the securing an [uncertain] Agreement of [arbitrary and troublesome] Bishops
among themselves; then certainly all particular Churches, according to the
common Principles of all Societies, have a latent Power of electing and
investing their Officers; although by the Laws of the Community, or through Custom
they may consign the Exercise of this Power to a particular Order of Men
amongst them. -- And with this we are satisfied.

But I have not yet exhausted my Stock: I have other Testimonies to produce in
confirmation of the Sentiments of those who founded these Churches.

A very valuable and ingenious Scotchman, whose Name is ALEXANDER LAUDER in his
Ancient Bishops considered has these Passages; The People had an inherent Right
to separate from the Bishops at the Reformation; because the Communion of the
Bishops was then Idolatrous, and so pulluted that it could not be continued in
without manifest Hazard. -- then they had also an inherent Right to set up
another Communion, distinct from the polluted and hazardous Communion of these
Bishops, or set up new Assemblies: For their Souls would have bin in Hazard, if
they had lived separately and had not set up new Communions or Assemblies,
through want of Sacraments and other Means of Grace or Access to worship God in a
public Way. -- There is no Right more authentic than that which is founded on
indispensable Necessity: In that Case GOD has not only given People a Right to
do the Thing, but has laid an Obligation upon them to do it. -- The people had
also an inherent Right to set up new Bishops and Presbyters to themselves; --
supposing that not one ordained Person had joined with them in their
Separation, and that all the Bishops and Presbyters without Exception had
adhered unto the Pope and the Roman Church. -- What Probability is there, that
CHRIST would refuse to give His People a Right or Power to do what was needful
for them; contrary to His express Promise, that He will give Grace and Glory
and withold no good Thing from them that walk uprightly? -- Bishops and
Presbyters after their Separation were necessary for them: They could not enjoy
the Ordinances of the Gospel without them. -- It must be said, either that
CHRIST gave them a Right to create Bishops and Presbyters to themselves or
obliged to have Recourse to the Church of Rome for them. -- To suppose that is
ridiculous and monstrous; yea it is a Blasphemy, and a Reflection upon the
Wisdom of GOD Almighty: For, according to this Supposition, He laid it on them
as a Duty to separate from the idelatrous Popish Communion and crect distinct
Churches to no Purpose at all, and to bring them into as great or greater
Difficulties than they would have bin, in if they had continued in the
Idolatrous Popish Communion. -- And the same worthy Writer, quoting an Order of
a Council at Rome, that the Bishop to be consecrated be chosen by all the
Church, and an Order of another Council at Clermont to the same Purpose, makes
this agreeable Reflection in the Margin; Hence it is evident, that Persons are
constituted or made Bishops by the Election of the People, and not by
Ordination which is performed by Bishops: One is made or constituted a Bishop
by that, by which he is advanced to the high dignity of the Ministry: But,
according to these councils, the Suffrage of the People is the Thing, and not
an Ordination, that advances one to the high dignity of the Ministry: This is
also evident from Canon XXII. of the Council of Constantinople: For in it the
Election and Promation of a Bishop are one Thing. Thus he.

And the worthy Mr. SIMON BROWN, in an ordination-Sermon preached not long
since by him, found himself obliged to give such Sentiments as these; Neither
Ordination by Bishops nor by other Ministers is absolutely necessary to the
Being of the Ministry. A Person may be a Minister without Ordination by other
Minister. This Power is not given, but acknowledged and declared in Ordination.
And yet in many Cases a Man may be obliged to the Work when he cannot be
ordained: And, where the Obligation is notorious and Plain, there is a
sufficient and valid Doclaration of his Ministerial Power or of the Will of
CHRIST that he should act in his Office. If a Company of Christians were
Shipwrecked on a remote and unkown Shore, to which they were incapable of
fetching ordained Ministers from any other Place, I think a Man must be out of
his Wits to assert, that this Body of Men must live like Heathens, and not
openly own CHRIST by performing all common Chistian Exercises in public
Assemblies for want of an ordained Minister. Without Doubt he, who was the most
capable among them to teach the rest and perform the other Duties of a
Minister, was bound in Conssience to undertake that Work; and, if obliged to do
the Work of a Minister, he had certainly Authority from CHRIST to be a
Minister, unless we make CHRIST'S Commands contradictory, and say, A Man was
obliged in Duty to do that, which when done would be unlawful and a Sin for
want of sufficient Authority. The like may be said, if Minister or Bishops
refuse Ordination to qualified Men, unless they will submit unto unlawful
Terms, and no other Ministers can be procured to do the Work; which was the
Case of several of the first Reformers: In these and all such like Cases
Ceremonies must be waved, whilst a due Regard is had unto what is chief and
principal.

Nor may I leave the Judgment of the uncommonly learned VOET untranscribed, as
he has left it, in his Desperate. Cause. Papatus. L. II. Sect. II. Cap. XXI. in
Answer to JANSENIUS, where he says as follows, The Succession and Calling of
Pastors can and ought to be repaired by the Church, that is to say, by the
Society of Company of the Faithful, though they be altogether destitute of
Bishops and Presbyters: For every Church has essentially and properly the Power
of Calling, though it may put over some Acts of that Calling to some other
Persons: For, as the Pope is created and consecrated by those who are not
Popes, and as the High Priest in the Old Testament was consecrated by his
Inferior; so a Bishop may be proclaimed, constituted and endowed with
Ministerial Power by 2 Presbyter, and a Presbyter by any Member of the Church,
that is peculiarly delegated to that Service by the Suffrages of his Brethren.
And indeed what should hinder that the formal Solemnity of Consecraction may
not in such a necessitous Case be laid aside, and that he who is lawfully
chosen may not without it perform the Business of his Ministry? Truly there is
nothing at all, that from the Divine Right of such Formalities can show them to
be a necessary Mean. And in the same Chapter He has many other Passages to the
same Purpose. Wherefore I cannot but fall into the same declaration with him,
in the fifth Part of his Select Disputations, De Eccles. P. 384. Our Belgian
Churches, as also the French Churches and others are true Churches and indeed
pure, yea and integral; though they want Bishops as at this Day called: And their
Ministers are true Ministers, truly and lawfully called; though they neither
have that pretended Episcopal Ordination, nor would have it or care at all for
it. These Citations, as well as the foregoing ones, are of great Weight and
Importance, not only on the Account of the Character and Quality of the
Writers, which with many may go pretty far; but also because, let their
Character and Quality be what it will, their Arguments are well supported and
cofirmed.

And well may Protestants speak and write, as I have rehearsed, when even
Father PAUL, in his Treatise of Beneficiary Matters, says expressly, Pope LEO
shows amply, that the Ordination of a Bishop could not be lawful or valid,
which was not required by the People and approved by them; which is said by all
the Saints of those Times: And St. GREGORY thought CONSTANCE could not be
sonsecrated Bishop of Milan, being elected by the Clergy, wihtout the Consent
of the Citizens, who by Reason of Persecution retired to Genoa; and He
prevailed that they should be first sent unto to know their Will. A Thing
worthy to be noted, continues He, in our Days, when that Election is declared
to be illegitimte and null, in which the People have any Share. Thus that rara
Avis in the Romish Communion.

Thus I have shown the Opinion of our discerning Predecessors concerning
Ordination, and recited various Aruguments and Authorities by which their
Opninon may be desended and justified: And I am sure, that however amiss any
way think of their Opinion on any them for being alone and singular in it: For
there has Bin a mixed Company introduced of the very same Opinion with them.

It is needless to confirm these Things from the ancient Writers: One CYPRIAN
is enough for, our Purpose, whom we have all reason to believe in a Matter of
Fast, although his Authority may not go very far with us: For he, speaking of
Ordination by the Suffrage of the whole Brotherhood of the Church, is so free
as to declare upon it, that Diligenter de Traditione Divina and Apostolica
Observatione servandum est and tenendum apud nos quoque, us sere per universas
Provincias tenetur. Cyprian. Epist. 68.
, according to Divine Tradition and Apostolical Practice, this Custom is to be
diligently kept and preserved among us, as it is throughout all the Provinces
almost: And his Testimony is so clear concerning this Matter, that it would be
superfluous to mention any other, de universae Fraternitatis Suffragio,
concerning the Right of the Fraternity to give their Suffrages in all
Ordinations.

Instead therefore of producing any other Citations in Confirmation of the
Remarks which have bin made; I shall write in the Style of the forementioned
Author concerning Ordinations, Let those Ordinations be still accounted lowful
and just which pass the Suffrage and Judgment of all Sit Ordinatio ista justa
at legitima, quae am^^^ium Suffr^^i is and Judicio fuerit examanata. Ejusd.
Epist. 68.
; adding the Remark of ORIGIN, in his Sixth Homily upon Leviticus; Requi^^tur
enim in ordinando Sacerdote and Prasentia Populi, ut omnes sciant and certi
sint. -- Et hoc astante Populo, ne qua post modum Retractano cuiquam, no quis
Se^^pului rssiteret. vid. Origan. Homil. 6. in Levit.
; Though, says he, the LORD had commanded concerning the Consecration of the
Priest and had chosen him; yet the People and even all the Congregation was
gathered together on that Occasic For in the Ordination of a Priest the
Presence of the People is required that they may all know and be certified,
etc. and that afterward there may be no. Retractation and Scruple: From which
Words SIXTUS SENENSIS, a learned Roman Catholic Writer, acknowleges, that
ORIGIN seems to allow the People some Authority in the Choice of their Bishops,
Sixth. Senens. Biblioth. Sanct. I. V. p. 465.
, though he afterward endeavors to prove the contrary. But we have, to our
Comfort, the Testimony of the Abbot FLEURY, another learned Roman Catholic
Writer, in his Discourses on Ecclesiastical History, that the People were
consulted in Things wherein they were any Ways concerned, as in Ordinations:
And of this, writes he, we have Instances in CYPRIAN; and the very Form of
ordaining still makes it appear. vid. Pont. Romans Hist. L. XXIV. N. 40.

Chapter III. The Right of these Churches to send forth their Elders and other
Delegates upon proper Occasions, and to call them to an Account upon their
Return maintained..
AS Churches cannot with Convenience repair to distant Places upon recurring
Occasions; it is for this Reason requisite and necessary, that on such
Occasions they should use the vicarious Help of others. And, as every
particular Church, that has Elders and other Members adorned with mental and
gracious Qualifications fitting them for public Service, has an undoubted
Right to improve and make Use of them in the best Manner and on the best
Occasions; so, if the Honor of our blessed Lord and the Welfare of any of the
Churches require it, they have then the Liberty of instructing and sending
forth their Elders and other Delegates.

Thus it was unquestionably in ancient Times: For the Brethren of the Church at
Antioch determined that PAUL. and BARNABAS and certain others should go up to
Jerusalem to consult the Apostles, Elders and Brethren there. And the
Philippians sent forth the worthy EPAPHRODITUS to the Apostle PAUL with a
Present; for this is the meaning of their Fellowship in the Gospel, for which
the Apostle thanks GOD, in Phil. I. 5 and 6 Verses. It means their contributing
or communicating to his Support while he was in Bonds to make Apology for the
Gospel before that roaring Lion NERO: And it appears from Chap. II. Verse. 25th
of that Epistle, that EPAPHRODITUS was their Messenger; who also in Return was
to act in our Apostle's Behalf and discharge his Office to the Philippians: For
this is the Sense of the Verse, your Apostle or Messenger and the Performer of
my Office toward you Vestrum autem Apostolum and mei muneris vicarium.
Caslellio.
, as a very ingenious Man has justly expressed it. And we read of one, whose
Praise was in the Gospel throughout all the Churches, that was chosen by the
Churches to travel with our Apostle on a charitable Occasion, in 2 Cor. VIII.
18 and 19.

And, that the Churches continued afterward to claim this Right, it will
abundantly appear from CLEMENT'S first Epistle to the Corinthians: For this
Epistle, which wears his honorable Name, was sent by the Church of Rome unto
the Corinthians by CLAUDIUS, EPHEBUS, VALERIUS, BIBO, FORTUNATUS, who were
their Apostles vid. Clement. Epist. ad Corinth.
or Messengers to the Church at Corinth: And these Persons, you must know, were
not Officers in the Church at that Time, nor appear to be mentioned at all
under that Character; but they were prudent and sit Members of that Christian
Community to be sent with this Epistle and act in Behalf of the Church of ROME:
It follows therefore, that, as this Letter was sent by the Church and these
Messengers were appointed and dispatched in the Name of the Church with it, the
Church must be heartily consenting unto the sending of the Letter and the
Messengers; and that therefore the Church must meet together; for, without
this, how could they consent to the sending Letter or Messengers to the Church
of the Corinthians?

Particular Churches then are possessed of this Right and Privilege of
appointing and sending forth Elders and other Delegates on suitable Occasions:
And by the same Reason they may call them to an Account at their Return: And,
if upon Enquiry it shall be found, that they have done any Thing prejudicial to
the Truth and Peace of the Gospel, they may justly expostulate with them and
ask the Reasons of their Conduct and refuse to regard what they have bin doing.

Nor indeed can any Thing be more fit and suitable than this, that the
Messengers of particular Churches, who have done amiss, or ly under the
Suspicion of irregular Conduct and a faulty Management of their Affairs, should
be questioned by the Churches, whose Messengers they are, and in whose Service
they are employed.

And as this is fit and suitable in itself, that the Brethren in particular
Churches should call their Delegates to an Account for their Management in
their Service; there is also an Instance to be given from the Scripture, which
will sufficiently justify the Brethren in the Use of this Liberty: It is in
Act. XI. 2 and 3 Verses, where we read, that, when PETER was come up to
Jerusalem, they that were of the Circumcision contended with him, or rather
called him to an Account in order to pass their Judgment; saying, Thou wentest
in to Men uncircumcised and did eat with them: And it follows in the next
Verse, that PETER rehearsed from the Beginning, and expounded by Order unto
them.

Now, if the Brethren might demand of an Apostle the Reasons of his Behavior,
and if the Apostle though it himself accountable to them and therefore obliged to
apologize for his Conduct before them; the Conclusion is strong and
irresistible, that now the Brethren have the Liberty much more to enquire
concerning the Managements of their Elders and other Delegates whom they
improve, and to require Satisfaction of them concerning any Breaches of Rule
into which they may be betrayed; and Elders and other Messengers are now much
more obliged to render them an Account and satisfy them, when they properly and
honestly demand that they should do so: And the Reason is plain: For no Persons
have any Right to consult, vote or act in behalf of any particular Church but
by virtue of a Delegation from that Church: It is this alone that empowers
them: And, if without such empowering, any shall pretend to act as their
Delegates, they must be deemed busy Bodies in other Men's Matters: And, since
these Things are so, surely particular Churches may appoint whom they please to
any Trust or Service, and may challenge an Account of their Stewardship and
Managements for them.

But supposing, as it is a supposeable Case, that any Delegates from particular
Churches upon emergent Occasions should substitute others in their Room, and so
should not be able to give any Account of their Transactions? I answer, That,
although the Case may be supposed, yet the Thing ought not to be: For none in
such Cases have the Power of substituting others in their Room and Stead; any
more than an Ambassador from one Prince or Commonwealth to another Prince or
Commonwealth has the Power of substituting whom he pleases to perform the
Embassy for him Voet. Polit. Eccles. Par. III. lib. I. Tract. III. Cap. IX.
. It Is true the Romish Bishops did not appear in some of their General Councils
and other Councils, but sent Messengers or Vicars in their Room to them: But it
is very evident, as that such a Method was disorderly, so that there was always
some vile Design to carry on, and some peculiar Stratagem to be forwarded by
it. And surely the Churches, if they are ever thus imposed on by such
Substitutions, should animadvert upon those that devolve the Trusts reposed in
them upon others, and ought not to mind what those, who were not appointed by
them, transact and agree to on their Behalf.

Animated by such Considerations as these, some of the ancient Fathers were not
at all backward, but very forward and ready to submit to the Brethren: Nay some
of them were so fond of making them satisfied and easy, that they were ready
almost to comply with any Thing. The angry old EPIPHANIUS, writing against the
Carpocratians, informs us, that, although CLEMENT was ordained by PETER, yet he
refused the Bishopric of Rome as long as LINUS and CLETUS were living; and
then he gives us the Reason of that his Refusal: For, continues EPIPHANIUS, he
says in one of his Epistles, I depart, I go my Ways: Only let the People of GOD
have Rest and Quietness Epiphan. L. I. Haeres. 27.
: But, if EPIPHANIUS means the first Epistle of CLEMENT here, it must be
confessed that this Passage is the^e, but it is used in another Sense: For
CLEMENT, in this Epistle to the Corinthians, is advising them upon the Rise of
Troubles and Contentions in the Church to speak in such a Manner, Is there any
one, says he, that is of a noble Spirit among you? Is there any one that is
compassionate? Does any one abound in Charity? Let him say, if this Sedition or
Contention or Schism be for me on by my Means, I will depart, I will go my Ways
whithersoever you please, I will do what the Multitude commands: Only let the
Sheepfold of CHRIST enjoy Peace Clement. Epist. I. ad Co^inth.
. This is the Advice of the good CLEMENT in that Epistle; and, although it be
directed to the Brethren in Corinth, or to such as might be in Office, on whose
Account there was a Disturbance and Contention in the Church; we may however
very well suppose, that he would himself have followed it rather than have
continued with his People when they were disatisfied and uneasy with him. And
CHRYSOSTOM has a Passage, which some conjecture that he used with reference to
the Clauses that have bin recited out of CLEMENT, If, says he to his People,
you conceive or suspect these Things of us, we are ready to depart and deliver
up our Power to whomsoever ye please: Only let the Church be at Unity within
itself Chrysostom. Homil. II. ad Ephesians.
. AUGUSTINE has some where well observed, we are Christians for our selves and
Bishops for you: And it seems to be his Judgment, that the End of every
Government in general is the Good of the Persons governed, and not of him who
governs. And GREGORY NAZIANZEN openly professed at Constantinople, that, although
he were innocent and free from Blame, yet he could depart or be cast out rather
than they should have Contention among them Gregor. Nizianzen. Orat. 52.
: And he did so accordingly Gregor. Nazianzen. vit.
. The first Synod indeed of Ephesus, in the Case of the aged EUSTATHIUS,
condemned him for renouncing his Office upon his own Judgment and without
seeking Advice: And probably he was to blame in that Affair: But a Synod,
convened under PHOTIUS at Constantinople, declared that such a Departure was in
some Cases lawful Synod. Constantinopol. Canon. 5.
.

Upon the whole; It would be an happy Thing for the Churches of CHRIST, if all
their Elders and all their Messengers which they improve were of such a
Christian Temper. But, if there be any who are not of this Temper, the
Churches, which are unhappily possessed of them, would do well to watch over
them and strictly enquire into their Managements on their Behalf, lest they
should abuse the Trust reposed in them and subvert their fundamental Rights and
Privileges; and the greater any one is or seems to be, whom they employ, they
should be the more careful of him lest the Church should be troubled by him and
annoyed by his superior and excelling Gifts. It is very reasonable, and the
learned Abbot FLEURY, in his Discourses on Ecclesiastical History, says it
ought to be so, that in every Society the Interest of each particular Person,
even of him who governs, should give Place to that of the whole Body, Wherefore
let these Churches be sensible of their Interest and take Care of it, nor
suffer that of any particular Persons to prevail and triumph over it.

Chapter IV. The Liberty of these Churches to depose and withdraw from their
Elders, when they are guilty of Maladministration, defended.
IT has bin asserted and proved, that Elders, as well other Delegates, are
accountable to the particular Churches who employ them: But some may probably
here enquire, Supposing the Elders of a particular Church should be guilty of
Maladministration, what is then to be done? Has not your Platform given to
the Eldership the Power of calling the Church together, and allowed them to
permit Speech or command Silence in the Church? How then can the Church come at
them? And after what Manner should they testify their Dislike of their
Proceedings?

I answer, as our wise and pious Fathers have already answered, that, although
Church Government or Rule be placed by CHRIST JESUS our LORD in the Officers of
the Church, who therefore may be called Rulers while they rule with GOD; yet,
in Case of Maladministration, they are subject to the Power of the Church
Platform of Church Discipline. Chap. X. Sect. 7.
: And, if it shall appear to the Church that an Elder has offended
incorrigibly, they have Power according to Order (the Counsel of other Churches
where it may be had directing to it) to remove him from his Office; and being
now but a Member, in Case he should add Contumacy to his Sin, the Church, that
had Power to receive him into their Fellowship, has Power also to cast him out
as any other Member Platform. Chap. X. Sect. 6.
: So that, as the Church puts forth a twofold Act in receiving a Pastor into
Membership and in choosing him to Office, they may also by Parity of Reason put
forth a twofold Act in removing him from his Office and from his Membership.
Some imagine, that there are two distinct Cases mentioned in these two Sections
of the Platform, that in the fermer Case a Plurality of Rulers in a Church is
supposed, who are guilty of Maladministration, and that in the latter it is
supposed that a particular Elder is guilty of an Offense and incorrigible under
it: And it is very probable, that they are in the Right: But I have put the
Passages together; concluding, as I think rightly, that, if a Plurality of
Elders in a Church be subject to the Power of the Church in Case of
Maladministration, doubtless a particular offending and incorrigible Elder
must be much more subject to their Power: And, if Counsel from other Churches
be not requisite in the former Case, much less in the latter: But, if it be
requisite or convenient in the latter Case, why should it not be in the former
also? So that, upon these Accounts, I may very consistently blend the sixth and
seventh Paragraphs recited from the Platform together.

That the Power of the Church extends to the Deposition of their Elders, --
This seems to be a pretty manifest Case: For, if the Church have Power to choose
their Officers and Ministers; then, in Case of manifest Unworthiness and
Delinquency, they have Power also to depose them: For to open and shut, to
choose and refuse, to constitute in Office and remove from Office are Acts
belonging longing to the same Power, as our judicious Ancestors rightly argue
in their Platform Platform. Chap. VIII. S. 7.
of Church Discipline.

And it is entirely just and reasonable, that particular Churches should have
this Power: For they are Ecclesiastical Societies confederate, that is to say,
they are Churches, before they have Officers and even without them: And, although
they may be in such a State as this, yet even then a subordinate Ecclesiastical
Power is under our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and by HIM delegated unto them: So that,
having the Nature and Essence of a Church as they surely have, they may act as
such: And, as it is natural to all Societies and Bodies whatsoever to preserve
themselves, the Churches of CHRIST also are doubtless furnished with sufficient
Power for their own Preservation and comfortable Subsistence Ejusd. Chap. X. S.
^.
. It follows therefore, that, if the Elder of a particular Church should be
found guilty of Maladministration and break in upon the known and fundamental
Privileges which every Christian Society has in common with other Societies,
that particular Church may and ought, from a sacred Regard to the Law of
Self-Preservation, to ^epose such an arbitrary and tyrannical Elder, if upon
their Admonitions he do not repent and give them Satisfaction.

Nor indeed can it well be disputed, that the Churches in the Days of primitive
Christianity were possessed of this most valuable Right and Privilege; when
there are such Testimonies in the ancient approved Writers, which fully
demonstrate it.

It is as clear as the Light from that deservedly prized Remain of Antiquity,
CLEMRNT'S first Epistle to the Corinthians, which is worthy of frequent
Citations from it, that the Church of Corinth at that Time had and exercised
this Privilege: For, he says to them in that Epistle, We perceive that ye have
removed some, who have performed their Office well, from the Ministry which
they were thought to deserve, as having no Fault to be found with them: Ye are
too contentious, Brethren, and too hot about these Things which appertain not
to Salvation vid. Clement. Epist. I. ad Corinth.
: Now is it not very plain from these Passages, that the Corinthians had
deposed and laid aside their Ministers, merely because in lesser or disputable
Points their Judgments did not please them? It Is true the good CLEMENT blames
them, and it must be confessed that they deserved to be blamed, for casting off
those Persons, who had holily and unblameably performed the Duties of their
Episcopacy: But CLEMENT never twits or blames them at all for exercising a
Power which did not belong unto them: No, far from it: All that he faults them
for, and indeed all that can be objected against them, is, that they exercised
the Power, of which they were possessed, in an irregular Manner, when the
Occasion did not require it.

And it is also certain, that the particular Churches of our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
enjoyed this Privilege, at least until the two hundred and fifty eighth Year
after CHRIST: For, in that Year, a Synod convened, in which CYPRIAN presided:
And that Synod approved and commended the Proceedings of some Churches who had
deposed their Bishops, upon the Application of those Churches to the Synod in
order to obtain their Opinion concerning their Conduct.

As for CYPRIAN'S own Judgment in this Matter it may easily be seen by reading
some of his Epistles: For, in one of his Epistles, he expressly acknowleges that
in his Time the People had the Power, as of choosing worthy Ministers, so
likewise of refusing and casting off those who were not so Cyptian. Epist. 4.
; and in another Epistle, he affirms, that this Power belongs to the Church,
and that it was given to the Church by Divine Authority Cyprian. Epist. 68.
.

And the learned ORIGIN was of the same Mind: For he freely declared to his
People, If I seem to you to be a right Hand, and am called a Presbyter and seem
to preach the Word of GOD; yet, if I shall do any Thing contrary to
Ecclesiastical Discipline and the Rule of the Gospel, so that I give Scandal or
Offense to the Church, let the whole Church conspire and with one Consent cut
me off, although I am their Right Hand Origin. in Joh. Cap. VII.
.

But, if for the sake of Peace it should be granted, that this Power is too
great for the Brethren, and that they have not sufficient Authority for it; may
we not then say, that they may withdraw from their Male-administring Elders,
and that there cannot be any reasonable Objection against such a Withdraw from
them? Truly we may well say this, and it may very well be granted us; For, as
every particular Church sets up their Presbytery by professing their Subjection
to them in the LORD; even so, when they walk disorderly in their Office and are
chargeable with Maladministration in it, then they may avoid them and
professedly withdraw their Subjection to them: So that, if according to the
Opinion of some, the Brethren should not have the Power of deposing their
Elders; yet, if they have the Power and Liberty of withdrawing from them on
requisite Occasions, which cannot be denied them, they have what is tantamount
to the Deposing Power, at least with respect to themselves.

And, that the Churches have this Pewer and Liberty, we may safely argue from
our Apostle's Instruction to the Church of Rome, in Romans XVI. 17. where he
beseeches them to mark such as cause Divisions, -- and avoid them, or withdraw
from them: For, our Apostle, foreseeing by the Holy SPIRIT enlightening him, the
vast Occasion of giving this Counsel to the Church at Rome, therefore
affectionately and faithfully gave it, and entreated that Church to make Use of
this Liberty, as there should be Occasion for so doing: And it is a just
Observation of ALARDUS upon the Text, that the Word which we render here mark
is a Military Term derived from the Speculatores or Sentinels upon a
Watchtower, who are constantly to mind and observe and tell the Motions of an
Enemy: So that the Romans are entreated, after their Example, to take special
Notice of their Elders in their Administrations, and properly to withdraw from
such of them as cause Divisions and Offenses.

And this Right and Liberty of the Brethren, for which we plead, is so fully
represented by CYPRIAN, and so strongly proved to belong to them from Passages
which he urges out of the old and new Testament that I shall refer you unto him
vid. Cyprian. Epist. 68.
: In the mean Time I cannot but transcribe a few Sentences from him; For this
Cause, says he, the People chedient to the Commands of the LORD and fearing GOD
ought to separate themselves from a wicked Bishop: For they principally have
the Power of choosing worthy Priests and rejecting the unworthy, which comes
from Divine Authority Piopte^ quod Plebs obsequens Praeceptis Dominicis and
Deum me^uens a Peccatore Praeposito separare se debet, -- quando ipsa maxim
^abet Potestatem vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes vel indignos recusand^: Quod
and ipsum videmus de Divina Authoritate descendere. Cyp^ian. Epist. 68.
. Nor may I omit the Testimony of the prodigiously learned GROTIUS with
reference to this Right of the People in the early Ages of Christianity: Now,
he testifies, that it was not only the Right of the People to flee and avoid an
unfaithful Pastor, but that such a Pastor by virtue of the Sentence against him
lost his Pastoral Right and whatsoever of that Kind was once ascribed unto him
Neque tantum Pastorem infidum fugere Plebs Jus e^at, sed Pastor talis vi
Sententiae in ipsum prolatae Jus Pastorale, and quicquid illi ascribebatur,
amittebat, Grot. De Imper. Sum. Pote^t. Circ. Sacra. p. 251.
.

To conclude; As JESUS CHRIST has made these Churches free in this Liberty; it
is to be hoped, that they will stand fast in it and exercise it, as Occasion
shall require, nor suffer their Pastors under their Male-Administrations to
deprive them of it.

Chapter V. The Privilege of these Churches to except against such Persons as
are disqualified for Communion among them, vindicated.
IN our Opinion the composing Churches of Habitual Sinners, and that either
with respect to Sins of Omission or Commission, instead of erecting Temples to
the Honor of GOD and the Redeemer, would be only the setting up Synagogues of
Satan and Chapels to the Devil.

These Churches indeed are far from denying the Communion unto any Person
whatsoever, whose Duty it may be to ask the Favor of enjoying it: Nor do we
oppose the Right and Interest of any baptized Person in our Churches; but,
conformably to the universal Practice of the primitive Churches after the
Decease of the Apostles, we advise them to such Methods as will qualify them
for a Reception to the Glory of CHRIST, and to partake of Divine Ordinances to
their own spiritual Edification.

The Things, which we judge requisite, absolutely requisite, in all those that
would enjoy the Communion in these Churches, are Repentance toward GOD, and
Faith toward our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and a fixed Resolution to lead a Life of
Piety and Virtue: And we think, that such as are sincere in these Things,
although they should be but weak Christians, but Babes in CHRIST I have heard or
read somewhere, that my great Grandfather, the holy and learned Mr. COTTON,
once said to his Congiegation, that, if any Person, though a poor Indian should
step forth and say, I love the LORD JESUS CHRIST in Sincerity and Truth, and
should testify his Willingness to walk according to the Gospel, though his
Defects were great for Ignorance and the Like, He should be for admitting him
to the LORD'S Table.
, may not nevertheless be excluded nor yet discouraged from attending the
Communion with us in our Churches.

But however we expect, and we may well expect, that all, who are sincere in
these Things and are desirous of Communion in these Churches, should make
Profession of their Faith and Repentance and Resolutions for a good Life: And
we protest, that we cannot admit any into full Communion and an actual
Participation in all the Privileges of our Churches, without such a Profession,
and unless this Profession be recommended by a moral and Christian Conduct:
For, without such a Profession, and such a corresponding Conduct, there is no
Person, that manifests himself meet and qualified for obtaining an Interest in
the Privileges of any pure Society of Christians.

These Churches therefore may lawfully require the making such a Profession and
that it should be adorned in the Conduct of those that expect Communion with
them: Nay they ought peremptorily to insist upon these Things: For particular
Churches will never preserve or recover their brightest Glory, unless they are
careful as to these Matters.

And, as particular Churches may and should demand the witnessing of a good
Confession from those that offer themselves to their Communion; so it is
reasonable and proper, that the Candidates for Communion should comply with the
Demand: For, as is well observed in one of the Homilies of the Church of
England for Whitsunday, If any Man be a dumb Christian, not professing his
Faith openly, but cloaking and coloring himself for Fear of Danger, he gives
Men Occasion justly and with good Conscience to doubt, lest he have not the
Grace of the HOLY GHOST within him, because he is Tongue-tied and does not
speak.

I cannot tell, whether in any of the Reformed Churches abroad such an open
Profession of Christianity before the Church be required of the Candidates for
Communion: But this I know that the very learned, judicious, pious and modest
WITSIUS of Utrecht, has wisbed the Custom to prevail in their Churches Optandum
foret idem nostris quoque in Ecclesus in usu esse, vel saltem ut ii, qui ad
sacram admittuntur Synaxim, publics etiam, inspectante and audiente tota
Ecclesia, profuerentur Dominum; quod qui vel coram Synedrio vel coram Pastore
private in facere renuunt, nescio quid caufificantes, Eos monitos volo etiam at
que etiam cogitens, quid Dominus de iis pronunciat, quos sui ac Sermonum suorum
puduelis. Whits. in Symb. Exercit. III. De Fide Salvifie.
, that such as are admitted to the holy Communion should publicly in the Light
and Audience of the whole Church profess the LORD; which, adds he, such as
refuse to do, either before an Assembly, or a Pastor in private, making I know
not what Excuses, I would admonish them again and again to consider what our
LORD has pronounced concerning them who are ashamed of Him and His Sayings.

Some, we are sensible, in the present Times of Degeneracy and Corruption are
bitter Enemies to the Churches having and execising this Privilege, and plead
that the Elders of the Churches only are possessed of this Right and they only
should improve it.

But, when the Brethren of the Churches are not duly apprized of the Fitness
of those who offer themselves as Candidates for Communion with them, by the
Profassion which they make, and by ordering their Conversations according to
it; but, on the contrary, have Reason to be dissatisfied about their Fitness,
as they will frequently have Reason to be, where the Elders only have the
Management of such Affairs, their Liberty in such Churches is manifestly
invaded and infringed.

The Brethren in our Churches may possibly be wrought upon so far as to part
with this Privilege to unreasonable Claimers of it: But, besides the Dishonor
resulting from such a tame Resignation of a valuable Right, our Brethren ought
to consider the bad Consequence, the vast Mischief, of parting with it: There
cannot indeed be a greater Inlet to Corruption than this; for Churches must
unavoidably be corrupted and the Ordinances miserably defiled in them, while
the unworthy are freely received into them and the Brethren have not the Power,
as they have the Right, of refusing such Persons.

The Reason of the Thing therefore is sufficient for the Justification of these
Churches in the Use of their Liberty to judge concerning the Qualifications of
those that offer themselves to their Communion: But we have Scriptural
Authority and Example besides, in favor of the Brethren's Power and Liberty to
propound any just and reasonable Exceptions against such Persons as appear
disqualified for Admission into their Communion and the Privileges consequent
upon such an Admission: For the Apostle PETER himself would not admit the
Family of CORNELIUS to Baptism, until he had enquired of the Brethren, whether
any of them had any Thing to object against the Admission of them, as in Act.
X. 47. And we read concerning SAUL, that, offering himself to the Communion of
the Church at Jerusalem, he was not immediately admitted into it, but kept off
from it, until the Exception which was taken against him by the Disciples was
removed, as in Act. IX. 26 and 27 Verses.

And the most primitive Antiquity, next to the Days of the Apostles, has taught
these Churches to be careful about their Admissions into Communion: It Is true
in the extraordinary Conversions to Christianity which were made among the
Jews, they were all immediately added to the Church: And it is not much to be
wondered at that they were so, because they were before acquainted with the Law
and the Prophets, and were already brought into the Covenant of GOD: But
afterward the Churches did not make it their ordinary Practice immediately to
admit Persons into full Communion; but kept them as Catechumens, that so their
Knowledge might be increased and the Truth of their Profession might be tried,
until they were judged qualified for joining to the Church and enjoying
complete Communion in it.

And this is a Thing that appears, not only from JUSTIN MARTYR, who asserts,
that none were allowed to communicate in the Church in his Time but such as
were baptized and believed the Doctrines of Christianity and lived according to
the Laws of JESUS CHRIST; but it is also manifest from numberless ancient
Writers, that the Baptized were of old confirmed before they were admitted into
Communion, and that in some of the primitive Churches none could be received
into full Communion or be perfect among them, until he had given some Evidence
of a Principle of Goodness within him.

Nor is it a Matter of much Dissiculty to prove, that in the Prinitive Times
none were received to the Profession of Christianity, unless they had first
given some Evidences of their Sincerity; either by enduring some initiatory
Penances, as three Days Fasting, which was prescribed in the Time of the Author
of the false Clementine Recognitions Pscudo Clement. Recog. L. III. and. VI.
; or by giving some Experiment of real Service. Thus ARNOBIUS was not trusted
until he had written in Defense of the Christian Religion: And CYRIL of
Jerusalem in his Homilies to the Competentes is very earnest in urging the
Necessity of a sincere and cordial Intention: And it was from the great Caution
of admitting the Pagans to the Intuition of their Mysteries, that even Adults
were not admitted after all the Manifestations of their Sincerity without the
Testimony of Susceptors or Godfathers, Persons of approved Gravity and
Sincerity Hen. Dodwel's Pref. to his two Letters of Advice.
: Though this was not always insisted on. But, among the Instances to be found in
ancient Writers of their Care in early Times to keep their Communions pure,
perhaps there was scarce any one more remarkable than that with reference to
VICTORINUS: He, you must know, was a famous Rhetorician at Rome, who, on the
Account of his Eminence and Fame, had a public Statue erected to his Honor:
And He, by Reading the Holy Scriptures, of a strong and zealous Pagan, became a
Christian: This He confessed privately to SIMPLICIAN: But He would not believe
Him, unless He confessed it publicly in the Church also: To this He at first
answered with Scorn, What! are they then the Walls of a Church that make a
Christian? But afterward He became sensible of his Fault, and was afraid of
being denied by the blessed JESUS at the last among such as refuse to confess
HIM: Whereupon He came to SIMPLICIAN and was instructed and baptized: And,
being to make the accustomed Confession, the Liberty of Privacy was then
offered Him: But He would not accept of the Offer: No, said He, I will make my
Confession before all the People Augustine, Confession 1, 8, c, 2.
.

It must be confessed indeed, that, as it was usual among the Primitive
Christians to imitate the Heathens too far in several Respects referring to
their sacred Rites, they particularly distributed their Converts into two
Classes according to the Pagan Style: For, as among the Pagans there were
Learners and Illuminated Persons; thus we find in the Fathers these two very
frequently mentioned: And in them, as the Persons are distinguished, so are
their Duties and Privileges: And it must be acknowleged, that the Apostle PAUL
frequently alludes to these Distinctions, and that the ancient Divines
afterward made an ill Use of those Allusions.

But, although the Improvements which were made of such Distinctions proved in
Process of Time not only superfluous, but also very prejudicial to
Christianity; nevertheless, that Things may be done agreeable to Reason and
Prudence, and that all Things may be performed decently and in Order according
to Apostolical Direction, the Churches should be careful not at once to admit
the Learners among the Illuminated: For there is no Divine Warrant nor any
Reason, why such as are not capable of witnessing a good Confession and have
not manifested their Faith and the Truth of their Profession by their Works
should be favored with equal Privileges to those who are capable of these
Things.

Wherefore, upon the whole, let the Elders of the Churches be as careful as
they please in their Examinations of such as present themselves for Candidates
of Communion, and let them endeavor to be fully certified of their Fitness for
complete Fellowship; but, at the same Time, let not these Churches be negligent
of their Duty, but except against all, whom they think to be disqualified for
Communion with them, either by Reason of the pernicious Opinions which they may
hold and vent, or by Reason of the vicious and unchristian Lives that they
lead: For it is their Duty not to be Partakers in other Men's Sins, but rather
to reprove them and keep themselves pure: And how can they comply with this
Duty, unless they testify against the destructive Opinions and unbecoming
Behaviors of such as offer themselves to the Communion among them? I cannot
therefore but conclude this Chapter in the Style of LAURENTIUS; As Negligence,
says He, with respect to Doctrine causes Heresies; so Negligence in Discipline
produces Confusion and Scandals: Nor can the Church of CHRIST consist without
it any more than a Commonwealth or School or any other Society: Wherefore we
ought most studiously to exercise it Sicut Negligentia in Doctrina Hareses
causet, it a Negligentia in Disciplina Confusionem and Scandala: Neque magis
fine hac Ecclesia CHRISTI -- recte regi potest aut consistere, quam vel Respub.
vel Oeconumia eivilis vel Schola vel ulius Conventus. -- Qua propter
studrosissime hane exerceri jussit in Eccelefits Dei Apoftolus Paulus, and
iplecam exercuit. Laurent. Exposit. Sept. Epistol. Hom. IX. p. 101.
.

Chapter VI. The Right of the Brethren in these Churches to deal with their
Christian Brethren in private and to judge in public Scandals opened and
confirmed.
THE Churches of JESUS CHRIST in this Land are of Opinion, that, not only the
Ministers or Elders or Bishops of the Churches, but all the Christians also
which compose them, have the Care of their Brethren; and that every Christian,
by the Authority of JESUS CHRIST, may confirm and establish his Brethren in
Knowledge and Faith, and exhort them to proceed in the Ways of Religion and
Goodness; and that, if any of his Brethren should subside either into fatal
Doctrinal Errors or irregular Behaviors, every Christian should use his
Endeavor to reduce them from their Errors in Judgment and the Irregularities
of their Conduct to the Truth of the Christian Doctrine, and a diligent
Conformity to the Divine Precepts: This is the Opinion of these Churches; and
the Reformation of Churches by this Discipline, wherein Love without
Dissimulation is exercised, we judge to be the only Method of recovering
Evangelical Love out of its Languishments and restoring it to its primitive
Vigor and Glory.

The Necessity of such a Discipline as this in particular Churches appears to
us very clear from those various Passages in the New Testament which require
the exercise of it among Christians.

Our blessed SAVIOR has expressly enjoined, as in Mat. XVIII. 15, If thy
Brother shall trespass against Thee, go and tell him his Fault between Thee and
Him alone: If He shall hear Thee, Thou have gained thy Brother. Which
Injunction, although it speaks concerning the Offense of a Neighbor against his
Christian Brother, nevertheless, as every true Christian cannot but think that
every Offense against GOD is a Trespass against Himself, therefore it may well
reach, and indeed ought to reach, to every Sin and Transgression whatsoever:
Now, besides the Dignity of the Person who gives this Injunction, the good and
inestimable Consequence of it is to be considered by us: For our gracious LORD
says, If He shall hear Thee, Thou have gained thy Brother, that is, Thou have
brought Him over to Repentance and Reformation, and so to Salvation and
Happiness. And it is required by the holy and inspired Apostle, in Gal. VI. 1,
Brethren, if a Man be overtaken in a Fault, ye, which are spiritual, restore
such an one in the Spirit of Meekness, etc: In which Text, whether we take
spiritual to signify Christians in general, or such as were eminent in the
Church for spiritual Knowledge and Gifts, as the Word is sometimes used, the
Sense is plain and easy; and the Command is strong to all Christians,
especially to such as are advanced in spiritual Knowledge, to take a particular
Care of their offending Brethren, and show all that Tenderness and Lenity
toward them which is becoming the Gospel. -- And how plain is the Precept to
the Thessalonians, in 1 These. V. 14, to warn them that are unruly, to comfort
the feeble-minded, to support the weak, etc; and in Verse 11th, to exhort and
edify one another.

It appears then to be indispensably necessary, that all such as would approve
themselves to be true Christians should, from a sacred Regard to the Authority
and Precepts of their declared LORD and Master, take the most watchful Care of
their Brethren and continually exhort them to every good Office and use their
best Endeavors, as to keep them from that which is evil, so to recover them
likewise out of the Snares in which they may be unhappily entangled.

And, as it is necessary that Christians should thus show their Care of their
Brethren, their Watchfulness over them; it is also equally needful, that such
as are admonished, corrected and exhorted by their Christian Brethren should
acknowledge the Appointment of CHRIST and submit to His Discipline, thankfully
receiving Brotherly Admonition and Correction as becomes the Disciples of the
lowly JESUS, and studiously conforming to the same: Nor in Truth will they
demean themselves as becomes serious Christians, if they despise such as from
the Word of CHRIST admonish and correct them: For, if they despise such, nor
will hearken to their pious Reproofs and Exhortations, they are not the
Disciples of JESUS CHRIST: For, whereas it is He that speaks to them by their
faithful Reprovers, they do not see meet to hear Him.

This is the Discipline, concerning which we cannot have too good an Opinion
nor express ourselves in too lofty a Strain: For we may say in the Style of
CYPRIAN of this Discipline, that it is wholesome to follow it, whereas
Averseness to it and Neglect of it is fatal Hane and sectari salubreest and
aversari ac negligere lethale. Cyprian. Epist. 28.
: Nor have we any Wonder, that the Bohemians should be urged to be less afraid
of Destruction from the Persecution of their Enemies than from the Neglect of
such an boly Discipline Dictum Lucae Pragensis -- Fratribus non tam ab Hostium
Persecutionibus quam a neglect a Disciplina Interitum esse metuendum.
Regenvolse. System. Hist Chronol. Eccles. Sclavon. p. 316.
. Wherefore may the great Head of the Church always dispose and enable us to
prize this Discipline according to its real Worth and Consequence, and to
conform unto it with the greatest Care and Religion!

It has bin observed already, that this Discipline is to be administered by
every Christian Communis haec est Doctrina, ut nobis Curae fit Fratrum Salus.
Calvin in 1 These. V. 14.
: But, whereas the Method wherein this Discipline should be exercised ought to
be particularly known, this therefore is now to follow: Now This, both from the
Prescription of our blessed SAVIOR and from the constant Practice of the
Primitive Church, appears to be nothing else but the Application of CHR^^^^
Institution according to the Circumstances which ^^^r Pro diversitate Morborum,
diversitas adhibenda est Medicinae: Illi corripiendine pereant: Isti consolandi
sunt, nedeficiant. Hieronym. in 1 These. V.
.

Wherefore, that so this Discipline may rightly and properly be administered,
there is a twofold Distinction of Offenses to be observed: For, while some are
secret and private, others are public and open; and some are great, whereas
others are comparatively small: According to which Distinctions, the Discipline
of CHRIST is to be privately exercised toward such whose Offenses are private;
whereas, if the Offenses of any be public and to the Scandal of the Church,
they are to be publicly admonished and censured.

If the Offense, that is committed by a Christian Brother, be private, provided
two or three are observers of it, there should the be three Steps taken by his
Christian Brethren in dealing with him: First of all, one of those who has seen
the Offense of his Brother, should privately admonish and reprove him for it:
And, if the offending Brother despise the Admonition and Reproof given him;
then, in the next Place, he, that is acquainted with his Brother's Offense and
grieved at his slighting his Brotherly Correction, should take one or two more
of his Brethren with him, that so by the Mouth of two or three Witnesses the
Regularity of the Proceedure may be established: And, in fine, if the offending
Brother shall continue to slight the Admonitions which are thus duly given
him, the third and last Step to be taken is, to tell the Church of his Fault
and of his Disregard of the Christian Conduct of his Brethren toward him.

But, if the Offense be at first public and manifest unto all, then there is no
need of such a regular and gradual Process; but your open and flagitious public
Transgressors are at once to be rebuked before all, that others also may fear,
as in 1 Timothy V. 20. And yet even this public Discipline should be exercised
according to the Distinction of great Transgressions or comparatively samll
ones; according to which Distinction, there should be either a public
Admonition and Reproof or a Deprivation of the Privileges of their Christian
Brethren who walk orderly: For Admonition and Reproof is a sufficient
Correction for smaller public Offenses. But, as for grosser Sins, and
Stubbornness under kind Admonitions even though for smaller Faults, these deserve
to be punished with denying the further Enjoyment of Communion and
Ecclesiastical Privileges.

So then the Duty of the Brethren is clear, and their Power is great and
invaluable: It is their Duty to expostulate with their Brethren, and as such to
deal with them, when they are guilty of private Scandals, in a private Way, in
a friendly and Christian Manner: And it is their Duty, Power and Privilege also
to hear and judge concerning their Brethren in public Scandals; and, as they
may forgive and receive such as are truly penitent, they may also reprove,
rebuke, exhort and censure notoricus Offenders: For, when our SAVIOR requires
a Christian, that, if he cannot succeed so far as to heal the Offense in
private, he should then tell the Church; He certainly means a particular or
Congregational Church Die Ecclesiae -- Hic Locus proprie and prima^^e de
Ecclesiis par^cularibus intelligendus est, non de ^^c^menica five Esse^tial^
five Representativa: Nam defer Offensas ad Ecclesiam Oecumenicam Essentialem
impossible est. -- CHRISTUS amandat Fideles ad Conventum ordinarium and
Remedium paratissimum. Didoclav. Altar Damascen. p. 196.
, as the famous CALDERWOOD makes evident. And the worthy BULLINGER has given a
good Reason, why it must be so, which is agreeable to that assigned by
CALDERWOOD; For, says He, the universal Church can never convene from all Parts
of the World, that rebellious Persons may be brought before it and submit unto
it: Therefore to particular Churches must the Judgment concerning stubborn
Offenders be bro't and referred Non potest universalis Ecclesia convenire
unquam ex tota Terrarum orb, ut Ei deferentur Rebels: Particularibus ergo
defertur Judicium de Contumacibus. Bullinger. Decad. V. Sermon. 1. De S. Cathol.
Eccles.
.

And this Direction of our blessed SAVIOR necessarily implies, that the Church
should hear the Case brought before them, make Enquiry into the State of it,
that so they may see with their own Eyes the Offense which has bin committed,
and then judge concerning the Offense as they should find upon Enquiry.

These Things are so plain and obvious to common Understandings, that Men could
never have perverted the Sense of our SAVIOR'S Words, if they were desirous of
attending to them and observing them: Nor, if their Love to Truth were equal to
their Regard to their Interest, could they so misunderstand our LORD'S
Direction as by a pretended Regard to it to deviate from the Simplicity of the
Gospel.

This is the Discipline, concerning which we heartily subscribe to the
Declaration of the learned ZANCHY, wherein he says, that no one is exempled
from this Discipline, whether he be an Elder, or a Pastor, or a Magistrate,
unless they would be exempted from the Number of the Brethren and therefore of
the Sons of GOD: Wherefore they were mere Flatterers, who contended that the
Pope of Rome could not upon any Account have this Discipline exercised upon him
Ab hac Disciplina nemo eximitur, quicunque ille sit, five Senior, five Pastor,
five supremus Magistratus, nisi velinte numero Fratrum eoque Filiorum Dei
eximi. Proinde meri Adulatores fuerunt, qui Pontificem Roman. contenderunt, non
posse ulla de Causa excommunicari. Zanch. De Eccles. p. 145.
.

To proceed.

That the Church or Brethren have the Power of Judging, as has bin said, may be
argued from several Passages upon sacred Record; from which Passages it is
abundantly evident, that they gave their Determination and Judgment in such
Cases as properly came before them.

Not to mention, that the Brethren of the Circumcision expostulated with PETER
about his Communion with CORNELIUS and his Family, and that He was so far from
rejecting their Complaint, as if they had gone beyond their proper Power and
Limits, that He readily undertook and endeavored to give them suitable
Satisfaction, as has already bin observed.

We find, that the Brethren of the Church of Corinth passed their Censure upon
the Incestuous Corinthian: And the Apostle PAUL reproved them all, that they
had no sooner put him away from among them, as in 1 Cor. V. 2; and, at Verse
12th, He expressly assures them, that they had the Power of Judging such as are
within Hujusmodi autem Disciplina pertinere ad Ecclesiam satis apparet Ex toto.
Cap. V. Prior. ad Corinth. Crell. Ethic. Christ. l. IV. Cap. XXXI.
; and, in the next the last, Verse of that Chapter, the Apostle requires it of
them all, that they put away the wicked Person from among them; and, in 2 Cor.
II. 7, He advises the Brethren, upon the Repentance of the Offender, to
forgive, restore and comfort him.

The same Apostle also toward the Close of his Epistle to the Galatians,
instructing them in the Discipline of the Church, advises them how to behave
with respect to their corrupt Teachers: Laying down the same Ground and Reason
of proceeding against them, as against the Incestuous Corinthian, namely, that
a little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, as in Gal. V. 9; and presuming that
they would be of the same Mind with him, as in Verse 10 and 11; he then
declares what Censure he wished might be passed upon their corrupt Teachers, as
at Verse 12, I would that they were even cut off which trouble you: Which
Passage all the Greek Fathers and some of the Latin oddly interpret, I wish
they were no^ only circumcised, but even made like the Priests of the Mother of
the Gods, who was formerly worshipped by you of Galatia Usinam non solum
circumcidantur, sed etiam abscindantur.
: But the most plain and natural Construction of it is, I wish they were cut
off from your Fellowship and Communion: And, lest it should be objected, that
the Brethren had not Power to do this, therefore the Apostle annexes this
Reason, for, Brethren, ye are called unto Liberty. And, because it might be
argued, that such a Liberty of cutting off their Teachers being allowed would
be attended with bad Consequences, therefore the Apostle advises, that they do
not use their Liberty as an Occasion to the Flesh, but so as that by Love they
might serve one another: Now, if the Brethren have the Power of censuring their
corrupt Teachers, as appears from these Hints, surely they may well have the
Privilege of censuring their offending Brethren.

And it was likewise the Direction of the very same Apostle to the whole Church
at Thessalonica, to withdraw themselves from every Brother that walks
disorderly, as in 2 These. III. 6: And this Direction of withdrawing from such
is much the same with that wherein he requires them to warn the unruly, in
(...) These V. 14, or admonish such: Where the Word which we translate unryly
is the very same as this which is translated disorderly: For this is a Power
belonging to all the Members of the Church, as is manifest from these
Directions to them.

And it moreover appears, that particular Churches have such a Power; because
they are chargeable with Guilt, if any Offenses are committed by their Members
and yet remain uncensured by them: Thus the Church of Pergamos is reproved as
guilty of Offense for suffering BALAAM and the Nicolaitans among them, as in
Rev. II. 14 and 15; and, at Verse 20, CHRIST has a few Things against the
Church at Thyatira for suffering JEZEBEL among them: But, if these Churches had
not sufficient Power to turn out the Offenders in them, it would be hard to
blame them for the Toleration of them in their Communion. And hence we may
conclude, that, what our SAVIOR wrote to any of those Churches, HIS SPIRIT
says to all the Churches: So that, if we would answer the Divine Expectations,
we should beware of Remissness in Discipline and calmly tolerating the like
Offenses among ourselves; and we should also be careful to admonish other
Churches about us with Love and Faithfulness for the Offenses observable in
them.

But, besides the Scriptural Directions and Patterns in Favor of such a
Discipline, the Reason of the Thing plainly speaks for such a Power in
particular Churches: For, as that animal Body is defective, weak and unsound in
its Nature and Constitution, which has not Strength equal to the Expulsion of
the malignant Humors which are brought into it; even so those Bodies,
particular Churches, would be but in a feeble State, which have not Power to
get rid of their vicious, corrupt and offensive People: Nor can we think it for
the Honor of our blessed SAVIOR to leave His Churches in such a feeble State:
-- But we have Reason to be thankful, that the great Head of the Church has
given His Churches such an athletic Constitution that they have Power equal to
the Purging themselves of their superfluous and vicious Homours: And blessed be
GOD, while some other Churches are complaining for the Want of a godly
Discipline, these Churches enjoy it and will not suffer such as are known to be
profane and vile Persons to escape it.

Perhaps it will be demanded here, whether the Churches in the Ages immediately
succeeding the Apostles Days were in the Possession of such Power and exerted
it upon proper Occasions? Now, in Answer to this Enquiry, I would say, that,
supposing they had not nor did exercise such a Power, this does not hinder but
that it properly belonged unto them, as it appears that it did from the
Injunctions and Examples upon sacred Record: So that they might lawfully and
honestly take and exercise this Power.

But the Truth is, we find, that the Churches in the Ages after the Apostles
possessed this Power, and on suitable Occasions used the same. So CLEMENT of
Rome styles the Censures of the Church, the Things commanded by the Multitude
Clement. I Epist. ad Corinth.
. And it appears, that all the People of the Diocese, Church or Bishopric were
present at the Censures of the Church from ORIGEN'S Description of the
Appearance of an Offender before the whole Church Origin. Comment. in Matthew.
Tom. XIII. p. 335
. And CYPRIAN writes, that, if any were under Censure, before they could be
admitted to Communion, they were to plead their Cause before all the People of
the Church Acturi Causam apud Plebem universam. Cyprian. Epist. 10
: And, when some had committed some considerable Faults, he was so far from
setting himself up as a sufficient Judge, empowered to manage the Affair, that
he expressly declares that they ought to be tried by all the People Cyptian.
Epist. 28.
: Nay he openly protests, that from the Beginning of his Ministry be determined
to do nothing of his own Head, and without the Consent of his People Cyprian.
Epist. 6.
. Thus we see what the Discipline of the Primitive Church was: And methinks, as
the Abbot FLEURY in his Discourses on Ecclesiastical History rightly observes,
the ancienter the Discipline is, it is by so much the more venerable.

And, if the Testimony of later Worthies may be of any Weight, we have these
also to produce in Favor of the Discipline for which we have bin pleading.
LAMBERT said, that Excommunication ought to be done by the Congregation
assembled together with the Pastors Fox. 2. p. 1017.
. PETER MARTYR concludes that none can be excommunicated without the Consent of
the Church Loc. Commen. p. 783.
. BUCER freely owns, that the Power is in all the Church In Matthew. XVI. 19.
. And Mr. HOW, when he was asked by Dr. WILKINS concerning the Discipline of
the Church of England, in which the poor People have no Share at all, replied,
that in Reality it had no Discipline at all Howe's Life. p. 32.
, and therefore he could not be fond of it.

Nay a celebrated Scotch Presbyterian Rutherfurd.
acknowleges, that not only grave BEZA, CALVIN, BUCER, BULLINGER, MELANCTHON,
BUCAN, PARAEUS, RIVET, SIBRAND, JUNIUS, TRELCATIUS; but also CYPRIAN, JEROME,
AUGUSTINE, NAZIANZEN, CHRYSOSTOM, AMBROSE, THEODORET, THEOPHYLACT require, that
all Things should be done consentiente Plebe, with the Consent of the People.

But some will be ready to say, If the Power of Discipline be in the Churches,
how came they to be deprived of it? And the Answer is, that some vile Persons,
under the specious Pretense of raising the Church and promoting its Power,
called the Clergy only the Church first of all, and then sought to make them
Lords over Princes by giving them the Power of Excommunication. Hin^^ille
Lachrymaoe! Hence the Power of Discipline has bin taken out of the Hands of the
People, and infinite Disorders have ensued upon it: For, when a Bishop or a
small Number of Ministers have the Supervision or Oversight and Management of
Affairs, it is next to impossible but that Pride and Ambition, Faction and
Envy, Political Regards and Secular Interests should govern: And indeed this is
no more than what is observed by the Historians SOCRATES and SOZOMEN, as well
as by several other Fathers.

I would not be understood, notwithstanding all that has bin said, entirely to
exclude the Elders from the Management of the Discipline of the Church: For the
Duty of admonishing Offenders privately and personally belongs to them in
common with the rest of the Church; though it does not properly belong to the
Elders as such, but only as Brethren of the same Society: And yet it must be
allowed, that Elders by Virtue of their Office are enabled to do it with more
Authority in a moral Sense, though they do not strictly and properly exercise the
Power of their Office. And it must be acknowleged, that in the Discharge of
their Office they may be capacitated to see and know the Faults of the Brethren
sooner than others; but yet, in the Exercise of this Discipline every Member is
equally concerned with the Elders, as appears from the Obligations which lie
upon them to watch over and exercise special Love toward one another; for
their Obligations to this are equal: And indeed this Duty is so incumbent on
every Member of the Church, that, if any neglect it, he sins against the
Institution of CHRIST and becomes a Partaker in the Sin of the offending Party,
and is guilty of his Danger and Ruin, as well as chargeable with all the
Inconveniences and I^^uries accruing to the Church by the Continuance of its
Members in Sin and Wickedness: So that, upon these Considerations, all the
Brethren not only have the Liberty of admonishing one another, but it is their
plain and indispensable Duty so to do: And whosoever of them neglects this Duty
is chargeable with the Hatred of his Brother.

But, although this Duty be personally incumbent on every particular Member of
the Church, this however hinders not but that, if several at the same Time know
the Sin of an Offender and jointly are offended at it, they may together, if
they think it prudent, in the first Instance admonish him: And, if they do so,
this is to be considered as the first and private Admonition.

As to the Way and Manner wherein this Duty is to be discharged, I would only
observe, that it should be done with Prudence, Tenderness and a due Regard to
all Circumstances, from Love to the Person offending, out of Obedience to JESUS
CHRIST, agreably to the Rule which is given for our Direction in it and with a
Readiness to receive Satisfaction.

And now the great and good Ends to be proposed in such a Discipline are, that
undissembled Love may be maintained, that the offending Brother may be gained,
that he may be preserved from Dishonor by the unnecessary Divulging of his
Failings and Errors, that the Churches may not be scandalized by the hasty
exposing of the Failings of their Members whether they be real or imaginary,
and that the Trouble of a public Hearing may be prevented: And, if these Ends
be obtained, by the accused Person's manifesting his Innocence as to the Facts
alleged against him or by his Acknowlegement, Repentance and Promises of
Reformation, then this Part of the Discipline of CHRIST'S Church has obtained
the desired Effect.

But, if these good Ends be not answered, then the Persons, who have
endeavored to reclaim their offending Brother by private Methods, are to
inform the Elders of the Church concerning their Proceedure; and by them the
Report should be made to the Church, as of the Crime committed, so of the
Testimonies given to prove the Truth of it, of the Means used to bring the
Offender to Acknowlegement and Repentance, and concerning the Deportment of the
Offender under the private Admonitions given him, to wit, his Rejection of them
and refusing to render any Satisfaction on the Account of his Offense.

And, when Things are thus proposed to the Church and the Offender heard, the
whole Church, Elders and Brethren, are to consider the Nature of the Offense
and to judge concerning the Offense, as well as the Demeanor of the Offender:
And, if the Offense be evident and glaring, the Offender is to be admonished
with the Consent and Concurrence of the Church by the Elders: But, if the
Offender despise the Admonition of the Church and continues obstinate and
impenitent, then it is the Mind and Will of our blessed SAVIOR, that he should
be cut off from the Privileges of the Church and cast out of the Society: And
this is the last Act of the Discipline of the Church for the Correction of
Offenders: So that, by the Constitution of JESUS CHRIST, the Body of the Church
or the Multitude of the Brethren are interested in the Administration of the
Disciplinary Power in the Church.

This is the Discipline of these Congregational Churches, which we apprehend to
be most conformable to Reason and the Holy Scriptures, to the Practice of the
Apostles and the Primitive Christians.

As to a Power fastened to the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, a Power of Binding
and Loosing, by which Men can excommunicate and deliver up a Person to the
Devil in the Name and by the Authority of JESUS CHRIST, we pretend to no such
Power: Nor do we approve of any such Power, to which some make their Pretenses,
by which Pastors or Synods, in Conjunction and Confederacy with the Civil
Magistrate, or by an Ecclesiastical Power distinct from the Magistrate's, but
equal to it, are capable of binding and losing, as has bin said: Nay we detest
it.

We know, that Excommunication was an Act of Apostolical Authority; but we can
see no Reason, why Delivering up to Satan to be buffeted should be made the
common Form of Excommunication, and become a Precedent for the constant
Practice of the Church.

That this was an Act of miraculous Power visibly lodged with the Apostles is
plain to us; because, as they could strike Men blind and dead, they had the
Power also of letting evil Spirits loose to terrify, plague and punish such
Persons as were Enemies of Truth and Righteousness, that so a terrible Remedy
might be inflicted for a dreadful Evil: We do not therefore wonder, that the
Apostles never mention this among the standing Appointments for the Church to
observe nor give any Charge or Directions about it: And it appears very strange
unto us, that this Method of denouncing Anathemas has obtained so much in
Churches, and even among such Churches as pretend to elevated Degrees of
Reformation; believing, that the absurd Notion of the Infallibility of the
Church has bin carried on by it, and that it has laid the Foundation for
endless Animosities and the greatest Uncharitableness.

In fine then; Although these Churches may be reproached by many as very
defective in their Politics, inasmuch as they did not erect an infallible
Tribunal, but yet expect the good People to submit to their Decisions, although
they are subject to Error; whereas, in other Establishments, the People are
obliged to submit to an uncontroleable infallible Authority Qualibet Ecclesia
sibi Verbis arrogat Orthodoxiam, R^ Infallibilitatem. Lock in Epist, ad
Limborch.
: It is nevertheless to be hoped, that these Churches will not fall from their
Stedfastness notwithstanding any Reproaches of this Nature. May GOD of His
great Goodness enable us still to follow the Illuminations of Reason and
Scripture, still to keep ourselves disengaged from an infallible and
incontestible Tribunal, and still to abhor the Thoughts of a mean, ignominious
Subjection to any humane Tyranmical Authority whatsoever! For the Consciences
of Christians are and ought to be the last Resort, wherein our Faith and
Worship and all religious Matters should be judged without any further Appeal:
And, although Christians may be exhorted and have Persuasions used with them,
none ought to be constrained in such Things wherein their Consciences are
concerned: The Magistrate may argue, and the Synod may advise and persuade; but
who gave them either Right or Power to oblige and force Men in religious
Matters? Now particular Churches have just the same Liberty with respect to
their Members? And, if they pretend to any constraining Power over their
Members, they act as the Civil Magistrate, not as an Assembly of Christians and
faithful People: So that, in short, though these Churches as such and as sincere
Christians think their Members accountable to them and censurable by them;
nevertheless they pretend to no more Power and Jurisdiction over them, than a
Society of discrete and grave Philosophers over such as are admitted into their
Society, whom they see meet to admit when they are duly qualified; and they
think themselves obliged to censure and exclude from their Society, when they
have forfeited the Privileges of it by their exotic Sentiments or indecent
Carriages. -- It Is true, some of our Congregational Brethren, who verge toward
Presbyterianism, pretend to much more in their Discipline than that for which I
have bin pleading: But all such as are thoroughly Congregational will be content
with this: I must confess, that this is all the Power to which I think the
Churches have any rightful Claim; and I conceive, all that they pretended to
exercise in the early Times of Christianity N^qu^ vero Excommunicatio aliud ^um
erat quam Separatio, Non-Communio, Renunciatio Communionis; non vero Damna^o
E^^cratio per Candelas Extinctas, Campanarum Boatum, ut boa^e fi^^^ so^^t
Romae. Hornii. Hist. Eccles. p. 145. Mr. Abbot F^cury says, in his Discourses
on Ecclesiastical History, that this Cursing or Excommunication, as practiced
at Rome, is like a feeble old Man, who, perceiving himself slighted by his
Children and not being able to come out of his Bed to chastise them as before,
throws whatsoever he has in his Hands at them to appease his impotent Passion,
and then, foreing the Ton^ of his Voice, uses all the Imprecations against them
he can think of.
: And GOD grant, that these Churches may never desire any further Power and
Liberty than such a rational due as they at present enjoy; nor suffer any,
whether Pastors or Synods, to take away their Crown.

Chapter VII. The Liberty of these Churches to sit and act in Councils and
Synods cleared and vindicated; and the Power of Synods explained.
IT is entirely consistent with Reason and the Revelation of GOD'S Mind in His
Word, that there should be Councils and Synods called upon requisite Occasions:
But it is neither agreeable to Nature nor Scripture to turn such occasional
Helps into the Form of a Carnal State Polity and erect a Government out of
Friendly and Christian Consultations for the Instruction, Benefit and Comfort
of our Brethren.

There may be Synods or Meetings of Pastors for promoting Peace and Concord;
but there is great Danger, lest such Meetings should be hurtful to the
Principles and Liberties of particular Churches and so degenerate from the good
Ends which ought to be designed and pursued in them: For, as SUTLIVIUS
observes, Nulla in Ecclesia Dei graviora excitata sunt Schismata, nec Haereses
exortae sunt ab ullo tetriores quam ab Episcp^^, The worst of Schisms and
blackest Heresies have bin raised by Bishops Sut^iv. de Pontif. Roman. l 2. cap
10.
.

In the Year 1700, there was published a Book at Amsterdam by one PETER
SHEPHERD Works of Learned for the Year 1700.
, wherein he endeavors to prove by natural, political and mathematical
Arguments that the Kingdoms, Principalities and Republics, wherein the Romish
Religion prevails, are in a fair Way of being destroyed by the Ambition and
Avarice of the Popes and of their Clergy: But it is as easy to prove from the
same Arguments, that the Liberties of all free Churches are in Danger of
Destruction from the frequent Associations of Ministers: The Resolution of
GREGORY NAZIANZEN therefore is not at all to be wondered at: For, said He to
PROCOPIUS Gr^g^r. Naztanzen. Epist. 55. p. 814.
, If I must write the Truth itself, I am of the Mind to be absent from every
Meeting of Bishops: For I never saw a joyful and happy End of any Council [of
them] nor any that did not occasion the Increase of Evils rather than the
Redress or Reformation of them: For pertinacious Contention and the vehement
Desire of Lording are such as no Words can express. And indeed there is none,
who knows any Thing of Antiquity, but is well acquainted with the great
Mischiefs which have arisen from Combinations of domineering Clergymen. One
DIOSCORUS, who was President in the Second Council at Ephesus over Four Hundred
Persons, was so moved with Rage and Passion against FLAVIAN, Bishop of Antioch,
that he rose up from his Seat and killed him with Blows and Kicks and trampled
upon his Body after he was dead. -- And it is remarkable, hat the Canons, which
have the best Doctrine and the truest Morality and Goodness in them, were not
made by Assemblies of Clergymen, nor by numerous Synods and Ecumenical
Councils, wherein the Clergy have had the chief Management, but in those
Councils and Synods which were private and consisted of a few Persons of the
Laity as well as the Clergy: And hence most of the Asrican Councils were the
best in all the World: For the Asrican Bishoprics were like our Congregational
Churches; nor did the Bishops or Ministers strive who should be greatest in
them, according to the Manner of some in other Places.

As for particular Churches, we readily concede, that they, as of equal Power,
may in some Cases appointed by JESUS CHRIST meet together by themselves or by
their Delegates in a Council or Synod and may perform sundry Acts of
Ecclesiastical Power; but yet it is our avowed Principle, that the Members of
Councils and Synods, with all the Power which they exercise and put forth, are
all of them primarily given to the several partitular Churches, on whose
Account they are gathered and employed, either as the first Subject in whom
they reside or the first Object about whom they are conversant: So that, although
we differ from some of our Neighbors about the Power of Councils and Synods,
we have no Difference at all with them about their Being; for we freely
acknowledge, that they ought to be, when proper Occasions require.

Dr. HUMPHREY HODY has published an History of English Councils and
Convocations, and of the Clergy's sitting in Parliament, in 1701, in which he
has taken a great deal of Pains and Care in turning over ancient Hecords and
collecting Passages out of them; but by them it does not appear, where the
Original Right of convening Councils and Synods was lodged: He shows indeed,
that Synods were sometimes called by the Authority of the Clergy, and at other
Times convened by the Prince: But this does not determine, where the Right of
Convening them is placed.

Councils and Synods should be composed of such Persons as are fit and proper,
both of the Eldership and the Laity; and both have equal Right to speak their
Sentiments in them: It Is true a particular Regard may sometimes be had to
Pastors and Bishops in sending Delegates to Synods: But, if the Churches should
only have such Bishops or Pastors as are either not so well acquainted with
their Constitution or are Enemies unto it, it is their Duty to keep them at
Home at least.

And, when a Number of pious, skilful and prudent Persons, both Ministers and
Brethren, are sent and convened in Council or Synod, they ought to have equal
Power and Authority in acting and voting: This is the Right of the Fraternity;
and, in order to support and establish this Right of the Fraternity in Councils
and Synods, there are a few brief Remarks to be offered, which have
considerable Weight and Significance in them.

It is certain, that we have the Authority of the Scriptures and the Practice
of the Church in the Apostle's Days for this Power of the Brethren: For we
read, that the Apostles and Elders came together to consider of the Matter that
was to be laid before them, in Act. XV. 6: And it follows, at Verse 22, then
pleased it the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to send ebosen Men,
etc: From which Passages it plainly appears, that, not only the Apostles and
Elders, but the whole Church also, and so the People, were present in this
Council and were concerned in the definitive Sentence of it: But now this
Council ought to be the Rule and Pattern for all other Councils whether greater
or smaller: Since therefore in this Council, not only the Apostles and Elders,
but all the People are said to give their Opinion and unite in the definitive
Decree; surely the same Rule ought to be observed in all other Councils or
Synods: For, as all other Synods are vastly-inferiour to this Apostolical one,
it may well be expected that they should be conformable to the same.

And, besides this Example upon sacred Record to justify the Right of the
Brethren to sit and act in Council, there are several Places of Scripture,
which allow all the Faithful in Ecclesiastical Conventions to judge in
religious Matters: Not to insist upon that Passage, in 1 Cor. XIV. 24, where it
is said, If all prophesy, and there come that believes not or one unlearned,
he is convinced of all, he is judged of all: It is plain both from the old any
new Testament, that Divine Matters should be publicly considered by the People
and the final Judgment referring to them should be left with the People. So we
read, in 1 King. XVIII. 21 and 39 Verses, that ELIJAH came to all the People
and said, how long balt ye between two Opinions? If the LORD be GOD, follow
HIM; but if Baal, follow him: And the People answered Him not a Word. -- And
when all the People saw [how the Sacrifice was consumed from above] they fell
on their Faces and said, The LORD HE is GOD, the LORD HE is the GOD. And it is
written, that, when PHILIP preached to the City of Samaria, the People with one
Accord gave Heed to the Things which He spoke, and there was great Joy in the
City, as in Act. VIII. 6 and 8 Verses. So that it should seem, as if the
People, upon hearing and maturely weighing the Discourses of PHILIP, publicly
testified their Approbation of what He taught them.

And it is worthy to be observed, that this Right of the Laity has bin asserted
and exercised in later Times: For, not to mention it, that the Temporal Lords
and Commons, in the two Reigns that brought on the Reformation, were much
better Judges of Religion, than the Bishops and the Convocation; and, if they
had not promoted the Reformation, though poor Laics, the English Nation to this
Day had lain buried in the Egyptian, and worse than Egyptian, Darkness of
Popery. -- It is well known, that, when the Calling of that infamous Assembly
the Council of Trent was proposed at Norimberg, in the Year 1522, all the
Estates of Germany desired and insisted, that Admittance might be granted unto
Laymen as well as Clergymen, to be, not only Spectators and Witnesses, but also
Judges in the Council: Which being refused, they would not come unto it, but
published the Reasons of their withdraw; one of which was, because Laymen were
not allowed to vote among them. And what learned Englishman is there that can
be ignorant, how our learned WHITAKER, our excellent JUEL, our skilful and
industrious WILLET and other Writers of our Nation, in writing against the
Romanists, maintain the Right of Laics to sit and judge in Ecclesiastical
Councils? And, as the most famous Councils and Synods in the Churches of the
Reformation have admitted such Members in them; so, in the primitive Times and
the Ages next unto the Apostles, it is unquestionable that such had not only
Seats, but Votes in Councils allowed them: And, even in as late a Council as
that of Calcedon, we find seven Earls, ten Senators and others, besides
Ecclesiastics.

But, in Truth if there were no Instances or Examples of this, this is very
plain and evident, that the Divine Spirit sometimes and very frequently bestows
such Gifts on the Brotherhood as render them worthy to be heard and make it fit
that they should declare their Judgment: So that the Reason of the Thing
requires, that their Gifts should not be despised, but that they should have
the Liberty of exercising them freely upon requisite Occasions.

And Natural Justice, besides, supplies us with an Argument in Defense of the
Brethren's Right to sit and act in Councils: For nothing can be more fit and
just and equal, than that the common Cause of all the Churches should be
determined by the Votes and Suffrages of the Churches: And, inasmuch as the
HOLY SPIRIT with His influences is not confined to any particular sort of Men
in the Churches, it is fit that every Brother should exercise freely the Gifts
which he has freely received: For that which concerns all ought to be handled
in some good Measure or Degree by all who are qualified: And, as the Faith of
Christians, as well as what should be their Practice, is a Matter of universal
Concernment; therefore the Brethren, who are qualified as before, should in
Councils have their Share in discussing these Things and giving their
Determinations upon them.

Furthermore; As the Scripture is the Supreme Judge of all Controversies in
Religion and the infallible Rule of all Judgment; and as they who sit and act
in Councils and Synods are only to be Interpreters and Explainers of what is
contained in the Word of GOD, therefore the Brethren, as well and as much as
their Officers, may give their Judgment in Councils and Synods. And indeed the
Opinion of one Layman, which is agreeable to the Scriptures, is to be preferred
before the solemn Judgment of an whole Council of Clergymen which is
contradictory to them. SO GRATIAN acknowleges, that the Authority of JEROME
supported by the sacred Scripture is to be valued before that of an whole
general Council Gratian. Quest. 36. Can. ult.
: SO PANORMITAN, though an Abbot, writes, that the Opinion of even one Idiot,
well guarded with Testimonies from the Scripture is altogether preferable to
the Decrees of an whole Council or the Pope Panormitan. Comment. in Chronic.
, which are not consonant with them: And GERSON maintains, that every Man of
Learning may and ought to resist or withstand and whole Council, if be sees
that they err either through Ignorance or Malice Gerson, De Examinat. Doctrine.
par. 1.
. And this is a good Argument in Favor of the Brethren's Right to sit and act
in Councils: For what is the pretended Reason, why Bishops and Elders should be
chiefly called to Councils? Why truly it is said, that they are generally more
wise and learned than their Neighbors and therefore they should especially be
employed: But it must be confessed, that it is often, otherwise: And therefore,
if there can be found any Laymen more learned than their Ministers or equally
wise, there can be no good Reason why they should not be called to Councils and
act and judge in them, in all Respects equally with their Ministers.

Nor, in fine, is primitive Antiquity a Stranger to this Liberty of the
Fraternity. I could quote numerous Passages out of the Historians EUSEBIUS,
SOZOMEN and THEODORET, from which it appears, that not only Bishops or
Ministers, but Laymon also, were not only present in Councils, but also spoke
their Minds and argued and gave their Determinations. But it is sufficient for
our present Purpose, that, from the Acts of ancient Councils, it is very
manifest that the Brethren voted and acted in them: In the first Council of
Nice, not only Bishops and Elders sat and judged, but the Laity also had equal
Liberty with them: And a Layman in the Presence of the whole Council, disputing
with a Pagan Philosopher, overcame him and converted him to the Christian Faith
Sacr^^. l. 1. cap. 3.
. Laymen, as well as Bishops, Elders and Deacons, represented the Churches to
which they belonged in the Synod of Antioch, which condemned PAULUS SAMOSETANUS
Eus^^ l. 7. cap. 30.
: And the Faithful (...) Asia condemned the Montanists Eu^^^ l. 5. cap. 16.
: And at a great S^^od held at Carthage C^^^. Ann 358
, there were present Eighty seven Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, with a great
Part of the Laity Cy^^an. Epist. 14.
: Nay Cardinal CUSANUS acknowleges, that Emperors and their Judges, who were
Laymen were present and acted in the eight Councils which are called general de
^^^corda^^. Catholic.
: And even NICHOLAS the Pope tells the Emperor MICHAEL to the same Purpose; and
he adds, that the Faith is universal and common, belonging not only to the
Clergy, but also to the Laity and to all who are Christians vid. Epist. ejus.
l. 3. cap. 16.
.

Upon such Grounds and Reasons as these, the Churches in New England have
asserted the Right of the People to sit and act in Synods in their Platform of
Church Discipline: And agreeable to these Principles, as well as the concurring
Practice of the Primitive Churches, these Churches have always allowed the
Brethren their full Liberty in Councils. And it is worthy to be remarked, that
in the Synod of these Churches, convened in the Year 1679, some Elders came
from some particular Churches to represent them without any Brethren: at which
the Synod was so far dissatisfied, that they would not suffer those Pastors to
sit with them, until they had prevailed with their Churches to send some
Brethren along with them: For they were very jealous of allowing any Thing,
that might look like an Infringement of that Liberty which by Divine
Institution belongs to particular Churches.

But, if any shall remain dissatisfied upon this Head, after all that has bin
offered; I must beg leave to refer them for the more full Display and
Confirmation of it to a learned Disquisition concerning Ecclesiastical
Councils, which was published by my Grandfather Dr. INCREASE MATHER;wherein
there is enough said to satisfy any reasonable Man concerning this Right of the
Brethren for which I have bin pleading.

These Churches in New England have never convened in a General Synod but upon
the Motion of the Civil Magistrate to consider of Affairs wherein all the
Churches were concerned: But they suppose, notwithstanding this, that they have
a full Liberty to meet in Synods, without the Direction of the Civil
Magistrate: For such a Liberty the primitive Churches had before CONSTANTINE
ascended the Imperial Throne: And surely no Christian Prince has any Right to
hinder these Churches in the Exercise of this Liberty, when they judge it
requisite for the preserving of their Peace and good Order.

And this will more especially appear, if it be considered, that the Synods of
these Churches are not like those of other Churches: For they have no Weapons
but what are spiritual: They neither pretend to nor desire any Power that is
juridical: If they can but instruct and persuade, they gain their End: But,
when they have done all, the Churches are still free to accept or refuse their
Advice: As they have no secular Power to enforce their Canons, they neither ask
nor desire its Aid. And, since these Synods are such innocent and inoffensive
Things, none, that have any due Information concerning them, can reasonably
object against their Meeting together or forbid them, without a manifest
Invasion of the common Liberties of Mankind.

I have said, that these Churches, when they meet in Synods, claim to
themselves no Juridical Power: For they are of the celebrated CHAMIER'S
Opinion, that the Determination of a Council or Synod is persuasive, not
compulsive; a ministerial Judgment, not bringing along with it any Authority
and Necessity; and so a decisive Suffrage not in itself, but as it is taken out
of the Scripture Sententia Concil^^ per se ipsa Suosionis est, non Coactionis;
judicium ministeriale, non Authoritatem per se Necessitatemque ad ferens;
ade^que Suffrogium decisivum non per se, sed quatenus ex Scriptura depromitur.
Chamier. Tom. V. Panstrat. Cathol, l. 3. cap 9. de Conciliis.
: And they can heartily fall in with the Declaration of the famous HOMMIUS,
that the Decrees of Councils ought not to be propounded to the Churches or
obtruded upon them, as Praetorian Saying or Persian Decrees, but should be sent
unto them, that they may examine them by the Rule of GOD'S Word Fest. H^^^^. de
Authorit. Concilior. Disput. 18. These. 4.
: And it is with Pleasure that they read the free and honest Confessions of Dr.
BURNET, that the Determinations of Councils, whether the greater or less, seem
to him to be little different from the Decrees of Senates or Courts, or from
the Opinions of learned Men concerning certain Matters proposed for them to
consult upon; to which indeed a due Regard ought to be paid: But, he adds, as
for any Obligation that lies upon us to receive any Opinions concerning sacred
Matters and embrace them as Articles of Faith; every Man's Conscience is to be
his Judge in the last Appeal, GOD being the Witness to his Sincerity. Doctors,
or Congregations of Doctors, may err as grossly as any others, and build upon a
Foundation of Hay or Straw, empty and combustible Matter. This I constantly and
firmly believe, that, since the Times of the Aposiles, there has bin no
infallible Tribunal here below: Nothing of equal Authority, of equal Certainty
with the sacred Writings, neither Determination of Council nor oral Tradition;
and that Men's Consciences cannot so far be bound by the Opinions of any
Persons whatever, but that there remains in private Persons the Judgment of
Discretion, which is to be directed by the Rule of holy Scripture Burnet. de
Fide and Officiis Christianor Cap. 9.
, etc. Thus he writes, and much more to the same Purpose. And, if we consult
many other learned Writers of the Church of England, we shall find Cause to
conclude them to be against the Power and Jurisdiction of Councils, and that
they are for Concord rather than Regimen or Government. Thus in the Scheme of
Church Government, drawn up by the eminently learned Dr. USHER, Archbishop of
Armagh. there is not ascribed to Synodical Conventions any proper Jurisdiction
over any Parochial Church. And, whereas some asfirm the Diocesan Church to be a
single one of the lowest Sort, and that whatever Power, A^^hority or
Jurisdiction belongs to a particular Church of the lowest Rank belongs to the
Diocesan Church; now This the famous Dr. BARROW has endeavored to prove to be
independent: So that, if the Bounds of particular Churches be made Parochial,
it must needs follow, that what is said to belong to the Diocesan Church must
be seated on the Parish Church. And, if so, what will become of the superior
juridical Power? And the worthy Reforming Bishops CRANMER, TONSTAL and others,
being required to give their Opinion concerning the Authority of General
Councils, freely declared, that this Authority did not flow from the Number of
the Bishops, but the Matter of their Decisions: So that, by this, they could
never by their Authority make an indifferent Thing to become a Duty: But, as
GROTIUS expresses it, proeant ipsi Judicio directivo, they may show Men what
they apprehend to be Sin and Duty; not, like Parliaments, make any Thing sinful
or a Duty which was not so before. -- But having occasionally mentioned
GROTIUS, I would take the Occasion here to mention it, that [in his Book. De
Imperio Sum. Potestat. p. 168.] he has fully proved that there was never a
truly General Council called, excepting that at Jerusalem, that Councils have
no governing or legislative Power by Divine Right, and that what was written in
Synods for the sake of Order are not called Laws, but Canons, and have the
Force of Advice only, or oblige by Way of Consent and Agreement. But to return,
I would cite a Passage from the learned Mr. RICHARD HOOKER, wherein he
delivers, not only his own particular Judgment, but, as he apprehended, the
Judgment of the Church of England: The Passage of this zealous Assertor of the
Church's Authority to which I refer, is to be seen in his celebrated Book of
Ecclesiastical Polity, and is as follows; I grant, says he, that Proof derived
from the Authority of Man's Judgment is ^^t able to work that Assurance, which
does grow by a stronger Proof; and therefore, although ten thousand General
Councils should set down one and the same definitive Sentence concerning any
Point of Religion whatsoever; yet one demonstrative Reason alleged or one
Testimony cited from the Word of GOD Himself to the Contrary could not choose
but oversway them all: Inasmuch as for them to be deceived it is not so
impossible, as it is that Demonstrative Reason or Divine Testimony should
deceive.

And yet, after all, it is of very little Consequence unto us, who are for or
against a Juridical Power in Synods or Councils: It is enough for us, that we
have weighty and unto us sufficient and satisfactory Reasons against allowing
such a Power unto them. And the Reasons, which have moved these Churches to
give into these Sentiments, are such as these: We know, that our Lord JESUS
CHRIST is the supreme Teacher sent from GOD, and that His Word is the supreme
Law of Christians, altogether infallible, and that therefore our last Appeal
ought to be to that: We think, that all the Power, which any Servants of CHRIST
ought to have in the Churches, is ministerial only, and not Proetorian: Our
Opinion is, that, if the Ambassadors of earthly Princes may not exceed the
Instructions of their Masters, much less may any Ministers, or Ambassadors of
the Prince of Peace go beyond the Directions of their great LORD and Master: It
is our Judgment, that, if the Determinations of Councils be founded upon the
Opinions of Men, weak and fallible Men, and not upon the Truth of GOD'S Word,
the blessed GOD would be contrary to HIMSELF: For how can it be consistent for
Him, to define and appoint one Thing in the Scripture, and to determine
otherwise in a Council? And, in fine, We are confirmed in these our Sentiments
from the Practice of all lawful Councils: For we find in the Apostolical
Council, JAMES answered, saying, Men and Brethren, hearken to me: SIMEON has
declared, how GOD at first did visit the Gentiles to take out of them a People
for his Name: And to this agree the Words of the Prophets, as in Act. XV. 14
and 15. And, agreeable to this, has bin the Practice of other approved Councils:
For, so says ATHANASIUS, in the Council of Nice, the Faith of the Fathers was
delivered according to the Scriptures Athanas. in Epist. ad Epicte^ Episc.
C^ri^th.
: And A^^^^ore expresses himself to the same Effect Ambr^s de Eide ad Grasian.
l. 1. cap. 8.
: And we find, that the Milevitan Council decides the Controver^^e^ raised by
PELAGIUS only from the sacred Soripture: And other Councils besides have
followed the same Method.

But, if any Councils should swerve from the Scriptural Directions and Rules,
still we should appeal to the Law and to the Testimony and consult the Mind of
our Heavenly Father in His unerring Oracles: So BRENTIUS thought; and
therefore, when COCHLAEUS, in urging the Invocation of Saints, pleaded, that
what the Church our Mother had said upon this Matter was to be heard, BRENTIUS
made this wise Reply, What, said He, if my good Father has commanded me
otherwise! Quid si Pater diversum proecipiat!

Some of our Brethren, we are fully sensible, think it not enough for Councils to
persuade and give Advice, but want something more for them; nor can they be
pleased, unless they have them clothed with a binding juridical Power: But to
these our Brethren it is sufficient to say, that, if they would have this Power
of binding and giving Law in indifferent Things, they are for exceeding the
Bounds of the Commission which was given to the Apostles themselves: And a
larger Commission than theirs cannot with any Modesty be challenged by Elders,
Synods or Churches. But, if this binding Power be desired and pleaded for only
in Essential Matters, then we may proceed and argue thus, that, as Synods may
meet to communicate Light and Peace to such Persons or Churches as are
erroneous or contentious, they may also at the same Time have Power not only to
give Light and Counsel, but likewise to require them in the Name of JESUS
CHRIST to attend and conform to the same: But, after all, we must suppose that
the ^^crees and Results of Councils are formed upon Scriptured Grounds: And, if
so, then all the Authority, to which ^^^nds may pretend, is only declarative:
And then this Question will unavoidably arise, whether the P^ssages, upon which
their Decrees and Results were founded, were well understood and properly
applied or no? And, if it shall be honestly conceived, that they had not a good
Understanding of the Scriptures, then, according to all the Principles of
Reason and of Protestantism, their Decrees can have no such binding Authority:
If therefore Infallibility be a pure Cheat, the Pretense of a binding juridical
Authority in Councils and Synods must be so too; and such an unnatural
Consequence of Ecclesiastical Power in any Hands whatsoever must be entirely
unreasonable.

Many, we are aware, are forward to contend, that Councils and Synods are not
so liable to err as particular Churches, and that therefore Appeals should in
all Cases be preferred unto them: This is the Reason, which the celebrated
RUTHERFURD gives for such Appeals. And, if this be the Reason of such Appeals,
it will then follow, that the greatest Assemblies should err the seldomest,
inasmuch as they have most Eyes, and so Appeals should be frequently made in
difficult Cases unto them: So that, by this Rule, all Matters of Importance
will be brought before General and Ecumenical Councils: And what shall we say
to these plausible Arguings?

In Answer to them, I could argue and urge it, that, according to this Method
and Rule of Proceeding, Causes would be too long depending, and probably would
never come to an Issue: Whereas we think, that out blessed SAVIOR has made a
better Provision for His Churches than this: But, instead of pressing this
Argument, I would observe, that whole Synods and General Councils are as liable
to deceive and be deceived and imposed on as particular Churches.

This is evident from Fact: For not to insist con^^^ning the Members and
Managements of that famous Synod, which the good old PAREUS wanted so ^^ch to
see O utinam mihi daretur in ultima jam vener (...) hane Synodum conspicari.
Parai. Epist. ad Synod. in Act. Synod.
I would not maintain here, that the Churches could not well be represented by
them: inasmuch as the Synod consisted of Seventeen Delegarts who were appointed
not by the Churches, but by the Orders General of the united Provinces, and of
Eighty three Ministers or Elders or Divines of the united Provinces and from
foreign Parts. Nor would I dw^ld upon the Testimony of Dr. BALCANQUAL, that he
must needs say the Remonstrants had no Favor shown them Dr. Balcanqual's
Letters from the Synod in the Remains of Mr. Hales.
: Much less would I mention the Declaration of EPISCOPIUS concerning Them
before the Synod, that. They were brought forth tanquam in publici Odi^
Victimas Episcopii, Ora^, inter Acta Synodal.
, as Victims of the public Hatred: These are tender Points: And I therefore
let them go. Yet I cannot omit one Thing determined in this Synod: By This I
mean the Decree of the Synod concerning the Question moved by those of
Amsterdam about the Baptism of a Child born of Ethnic Parents: Now this
Decision consisted of two Parts: The first concerned Adulis, and was this, that
such as were of Years and Capacity should be diligently taught and catechized,
and then, if they did desire it, they should be baptized: The Second concerned
Infants, and it was, that until they came to Years of Discretion they should by
no Means be baptized: Upon which Decree the memorable and judicious Mr. HALES,
who was a Member of the Synod, writes to the Right Honorable My Lord
Embaffador CARLTON, A strange Decision; and such as, if my Memory or Reading
fails me not, no Church either ancient or modern ever gave See Hales's Remains.
. -- But not to dwell upon what was amiss in this Synod, or in any other; I
proceed to write concerning the Errors, Mistakes and Misconduct of some of the
Conventions, which they call General Councils.

Now it is certain and undoubted, that there was a remarkable Cheat put upon
the whole ^eneral Council at Ariminum by VALENS and ^RSA^^ and some few other
Eastern Bishops, who in the Decree of the N^cene Council read omoiousios for
omoousios Jerome. advers. Lucifer.
And it is also evident from Fact, that some of the greatest Councils may use
many mean and trickish Arts: Such to be sure were used in the great Council at
Basil in the Year 1431, which ended in the Year 1442, in which the Bohemians
for four Days pleaded four Articles, namely, the Sacraments in both Kinds,
correcting public Crimes, Liberty to preach GOD'S Word, and concerning the
Civil Power of the Clergy: And, in this famous Council, after many Petitions
and some fair Promises and hopeful Approaches upon them, the B^hemians could
not obtain their Desire in one Instance; bitten Tricks were continually devised
to elude their Hopes and Expectations, and Inconveniences that would follow
upon such Concessions powerfully argued. -- And Father PAUL of Venice, like a
wise and honest Man, has plainly declared the many Quirks and Tricks of the
accursed Cabal, commonly called the Council of Trent.

And, that General Councils are not infallible, may be easily demonstrated from
undoubted Histories: Thus the largest Council that ever was known established
Arianism: And thus That, which the Papists call the Seventh General Council,
was such an one, that the good and excellent Dr. TILLOTSON remarked concerning
it, that, if a General Council of Atheists had met together within Design to
abuse Religion by talking ridiculously concerning it, they could not have done
it more effectually Tillotson's Rule of Faith. p. 251
. Thus in the third Council of the Lateran it was decreed, that all Princes who
favored Heret^^ks did forseit their Rights, and a full Indulgence was all^^^d
to all that fought against them: And, in the fourth Council at the same Place,
it was decreed, that the, Pope might declare this Forfeiture and absolve their
Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance and so transfer their Dominions unto
others. In the first Council at Lions they joined with the Pope in deposing the
Emperor FREDERIC the first by a Sentence against him: And in the Council of
Constance, which LUTHER judged to be most deserving of Reproach Concilio
Constantiensi Contumelia Dignissimo. Luther (...) Epist, J. Huss.
, it was decreed, that the Faith [or Promise] of safe Conduct was not to be
kept with an Heretic, that should come to the Place of Judgment rolying upon
it, etc.

We may say therefore, and bring the Confession of an English Synod in
HERBERT'S History to vouch for our saying it, that there is not, nor can be any
Thing in the World more pestilent or pernicious to be Commonwealth of
Christendom, or whereby the Truth of GOD'S Word has bin in Times past, or may
be sooner defaced or subverted, or whereof may ensue more Contention or Discord
or other Devilish Effects, than when General Council have bin or shall be
hereafter assembled, not christianly not charitably, but upon worldly or carnal
Considerations. And we may take leave to add, that the Observation which Dr.
WAKE, the late learned Archbishop of Canterbury has made concerning some
Synods will hold ^^od concerning all General Councils also, namely, that there
is hardly any Thing in Antiquity, which either more exposed our Christian
Profession heretofore, or may more deserve our serious Consideration at this
Day, than the Violence, the Passion, the Malice, the Falseness and the
Oppression, which reigned in most of the Synods held by CONSTANTINE and the
following Emperors. Thus he. And Dr. BURNET justly observes, that the Writers
of the fourth and fifth Centuries give us dismal Representations of the
Councils of those Times: And besides, there is Roason to think that Truth and
Right may sometimes be found with one single Person as soon as in a Council: SO
CYPRIAN, in his Seventy first Epistle, allows, that many Things are better
revealed to single Persons: Nay we have a Proof of this in the first Council of
Nice, which is reputed the best of any; for there had certainly bin issued a
Canon for divercing married Priests, if the old PAPHNUTIUS had not ftood up and
reasoned against it.

The Church of England has well determined in its nineteenth Article, that the
Churches of Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch and Rome have erred in Points of the
greatest Consequence: And, in the twenty first Article, that General Councils
may err.

But yet, supposing that a General Council were infallible, we must then
conclude, that the Church has now lost its Infallibility: For, as there has bin
no such Council for many Scores of Years, there is also no Likelihood of
another: And, if there might be one, the many Villainies in Trent may
sufficiently instruct the World that no Good is to be expected from such a
Council.

Upon the whole then; Since even General Councils may trick and be tricked, and
are as liable to err as a Synod or even a particular Church; Mankind must be
very stupid indeed to think, that they should have a binding Power and may
force their Decrees upon any Society or Person.

But yet, if after all it should be allowed for Argument's sake, that such
Councils were infallible and all their Decrees were entirely agreeable to the
Mind of GOD; ir will not nevertheless appear, that they have any juridical
Power at all: For, if we grant them a Doctrinal Power, by which they could
unerringly clear up the Mind of GOD our SAVIOR, still the Power of
Jurisdiction, as has bin already explained, would remain in the particular
Churches, wherein CHRIST JESUS has placed the same: And indeed this is no more
than what that excellent Presbyterian Mr. RUTHERFURD is ready to acknowledge, as
I have before quoted him.

In fine; The Way of these Churches has bin, and it is the best Way that can be
observed, to enquire where our blessed SAVIOR has placed the last Censuring
and final Determination of Causes: And, having found this, they ought to rest
contented: Councils and Synods, when Advice and Assistance is needed, may be
used by them; but it is not either their not Erring at all or their Erring more
rarely, that is a sufficient Reason for placing any Power of Jurisdiction in
them, unless our great LORD and Master has ordered that they shall have such a
Power: But, as yet, this does not appear.

Wherefore it is to be hoped, that the Brethren in these Churches will always
maintain their Right to sit and act in Councils and Synods; but yet that they
will never think of placing any juridical Power in them, but will always
continue to assert the Powers and Privileges of particular Churches, which are
sacred Things, by no means to be slighted and undervalued, nor to be left at
the Mercy of any Classes or Councils, Synods or General Meetings.

I was going to translate and conclude this Chapter with the Translation of
some Passages from LUTHER'S Preface to the four German Epistles of the worthy
JOHN HUSS; but I believe They will sound better in the plain and blunt Language
of the Writer, and therefore I choose to give them as I find them.

-- Having mentioned some of the vile and mischievous Consequences of the
Council of Constance; He then writes Lusher, ad Fin. Praefat. Epist. J. Huss.
Hi scilicet sunt dulces illi Fructus, quas, Constantiense Concilium tam
venerabile, imo execrabile, protulit. Quare merito de Eo Exemplum sumeremus,
(...) deinceps, si quod Concilium fieret, tam perversis and insanis Asinis --
Causam Religionis committeremus. Quin imo Imperatoris, Regum, Principum and
Episcoporum erit, summa Cura summoque Studio cavere, ne vel similia sint, vel
deteriora futuri Concilii Acta. Satis enim, opinor, manifest DEUS in Concilio
illo Constantienfi declaravit, quam non possit ullam far Superbiam, quamque
sibi jutundum sit dispergere superbos mente Cordis sui, quantumvis etiam illi
in hoc Mundo Potentia polleant. -- Qui igitur, hoc Exemplo edoctus, non vult
fieri cautior, ei cum a me praemonitus sit, liberum esto, ut, facto Periculo,
re ipsa Perversitatem illorum experiatur. The plain Sense of which Passages, in
short, is, that we ourselves and the Rest of the World shall be much to blame,
if, after the Observations which have bin made with regard to the Managements
of Synods or General Councils, we shall be so unadvised as to trust them and
commit the Cause of Religion to them.

Chapter VIII. The Liberty of these Churches to hold Communion with one another
asserted and proved.
THrough the Favor of our blessed SAVIOR, His Churches may hold Communion
with one another: For, although no particular Church is subject to another
particular Church of however large an Extent, as the Churches in the united
Provinces have bin so free as to declare with us in the first Article of their
Ecclesiastical Constitution; yet all the Churches may enjoy mutual and
reciprocal Communion among themselves: And there are several Ways, wherein this
Communion may be regularly and laudably exercised; some of which have in some
Measure bin considered or hinted at before; but yet there will be no great Hurt
in making a particular Mention of them here and giving a fair Description and
Recommendation of them.

First of all; These Churches may partake with one another at the LORD'S Table;
and the Members of one Church, coming occasionally to another where the
^uonarist is to be administered, may at their Desire be admitted to the
Privilege of partaking in that holy Ordinance; provided, that neither they, nor
the Churches to which they belong, are chargeable with any scandalous Offense:
For we are for receiving the Communion in all the Assemblies of the Faithful,
as well as in the particular Churches to which we belong; considering the
LORD'S Supper as the Seal of our Communion both with JESUS CHRIST and His
faithful People.

Nextly; Encouraged by the Example of the Apostle PAUL, who recommended PHEBE a
Member of the Church at Cenchrea to the Church at Rome; these Churches may
recommend their Brethren to Neighbor Churches, giving a good Testimony
concerning them and entreating the Neighbor Churches to receive them to their
sacred Fellowship and to watch over them in Brotherly Love: And, if any Brother
have real Occasion, either on the Account of his Business or for any other just
End and Motive, to remove with his Family and take up his Abode in some other
Place, and hereupon acquaints the Church to which he belongs of his Purpose and
the Grounds of his Removal; the Church may then write more full Letters of
Recommendation to the Church to which he removes, resigning him to their Charge
and entreating them to receive him as a Brother and allow him all the
Privileges of the Ecclesiastical State among them: And, when, according to the
Tenor of such Letters recommendatory, the recommended Brother is accepted into
the Fellowship of the Church, he is to all Intents and Purposes a Member of
that Church; so that he may perform the Duties and enjoy the Privileges of a
Member in that Society. -- Such Letters of Recommendation the Apostle PAUL
speaks of in his Second Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. III. Verse 1, as
needful for others, though not for himself. -- And besides it is reasonable in
itself, that none, without any Recommendations from the Churches to which they
belong, should claim or be allowed the Privileges of Societies to which they
have no Relation or do not properly appertain.

Thirdly; If any particular Church, that for a considerable Time has walked in
the Fear of GOD and the Comforts of the HOLY SPIRIT, has bin edified and
multiplied to such a Degree as to be overcharged with Members; they may send
forth their Members that are qualified for it to enter into an Ecclesiastical
State among themselves: And by the same Reason, if a Number of Christians
should come from foreign Parts to a Place where the Church may be so full that
they cannot conveniently join with it, that Church may warrantably encourage
them to enter into an holy Combination among themselves: For such a Propagation
of Churches is agreeable to Nature and Reason, consonant with the Practice of
the Apostles and indeed necessary for the Enlargement of our SAVIOR'S Kingdom
in all Nations and Generations to the End of the World.

Fourthly; When particular Churches have Occasion of spiritual Refreshment or
temporal Succor, Neighbor Churches may afford it: They may furnish them with
able Members or spare suitable Officers to them; and, if they can conveniently
send such to their indigent Neighbors, they ought with Readiness to impart
them: For so, when Tidings came to the Ears of the Church at Jerusalem,
[concerning the Success of the Gospel] they sent forth BARNABAS that he should
go as far as Antioch, as in Act. XI. 22: And it is entirely fit, that such
Churches as are full of useful Members and Officers should be ready from their
Fullness to supply the Necessities of their Brethren in other Churches. -- And,
if any of our Brethren should fall into such poor external Circumstances that
they cannot support themselves and the Gospel, it is then our Duty to minister
to their Necessities as GOD shall enable us: For so the Churches of the
Gentiles made their liberal Contributions for the poor Saints at Jerusalem, as
in Romans XV. 26 and 27; where also the Reasonableness of their so doing is
declared: And to be sure both Reason and Religion challenge it from Churches to
do Good and communicate to such Brethren and Churches as are destitute.

Fifthly: These Churches may lawfully consult with one another and ought to do
so as Occasion requires: For it is very probable, that other Churches may be
better acquainted with Persons and Causes than ourselves; and therefore their
Judgment and Counsel ought to be required. Thus particularly, when a new Church
is to be gathered, or Officers are to be chosen and ordained over any Church,
or there is some Difference among the Brethren about the Administration of the
Censures of the Churches, it is fit and proper to consult with Neighbor
Churches; and Neighbor Churches should be ready to send their Elders and other
Delegates to help them with their Advice and Counsel. -- And, if any Church
should want Light in any Case or should be at Variance, they should desire
Neighbor Churches to favor them with their Counsel: Whereupon such Churches,
convening by their Elders and other Messengers, may consider the Points in
Doubt or in Controversy; and, having according to their best Understanding and
Endeavors sought the Way of Truth and Peace, they may communicate by Letters
and Messengers their Sentiments and Advice to the Churches whose Case has bin
under their attentive and prayerful Consideration, that so, if they see meet,
they may conform to the same and be at Peace.

These are some of the Ways and Manors, wherein Churches are to show their
Care of one another and express their Communion with each other: But to these
there is another to be added: And the Sixth Way, wherein Churches are to
exercise Communion toward one another, is the Way of Communion by Admonition:
This is called the third Way of Communion in our Platform of Church Discipline,
Chap. XVth: And, from that Chapter, it appears, that this Method is to be
followed, when any public Offense is to be found in a Church, which they either
discern not or are slow in proceeding to use the means for the Removing and
Healing of it. -- I have reserved the Consideration of this Way to this Place,
that so I might enlarge upon it, for the Instruction of such as are
unacquainted with it, for the confirming of such as are wavering in their
Apprehensions about it, and that I might help toward removing the Prejudices
of such as have distinguished themselves by their Opposition unto it.

If therefore there be any Corruption in any Church whether in Doctrine or
Manners; a particular Church in the Neighborhood, having received a credible
Account of it and having upon diligent Enquiry found the Report to be true,
they send Letters or Messengers or both to the Church wherein such Corruption
is arisen and prevailing, and admonish them with Faithfulness and Speed to
amend it: If now the Elder or Elders of the Church should be so remiss as not
to communicate their Admonition, or should actually be in Fault themselves, the
offended Church should acquaint the Brethren of the Church offending with the
Fault and exhort them to call upon their Elders to take heed that they fulfill
their Ministry which they have received of the LORD: If the Church shall hear
the Admonition and remove the Scandal, the Process stops: But, if the corrupt
and peccant Church hear not their Brethren; the Church, which has bin offended
and continues to be grieved, then takes the Help of two or three more Churches,
that so the Admonition dispensed may by them be jointly enforced: And, if the
Church lying under public Offense still persist both in the Neglect of their
Duty and their Slight of the good Counsel and Admonition of their Brethren;
those Churches may forbear Communion with the offending Church in such
Exercises as Churches usually maintain toward each other; and they are to make
Use of the Help of a Synod or a large Council of Congregational Churches for
their Conviction: And, if they bear not this Synod or Council, the Council or
Synod having declared them obstinate and impenitent in Scandal, particular
Churches approving and accepting the Judgment of the Synod or Council, are to
declare the Sentence of Non-Communion respectively concerning them, and
thereupon, out of a religious Care to keep their own Communion pure, they may
justly withdraw themselves from Participation with them at the LORD'S Table and
from such other Acts of Fellowship as are otherwise allowed and required by the
Communion of Churches: But however due Care is to be taken in such a Process,
that the Innocent may not suffer with the Offensive: For, while the peccant
Party is to be deprived of the Privilege of Communion with these Churches,
those particular Members of the offending Church, who do not consent to the
Offense of the Church but in due Sort bear their Testimony against it, may be
received to wonted Communion in the Churches, and, after due Waiting in the Use
of Means for healing the Offense of the Church, may withdraw from the Communion
of their own Church, with the Allowance of the Council of Neighbor Churches,
and upon offering themselves to the Communion of another Church, may be
lawfully received by that Church, as if they had bin regularly dismissed unto
them from their own Church continuing still in Offense.

This is what is commonly called the third Way of Communion in these Churches,
but it would be better understood perhaps, if we called it the Way of Communion
by Admonition. It must be acknowleged to the Glory of GOD our SAVIOR, that,
although this Disciplinary Process has bin several Times undertook with offending
Churches, these Churches have but rarely bin put to the utmost Extent of their
Duty: For there has hardly bin a Church so daringly wicked as to hold out in
maintaining the Corruptions and Offenses found among them: But, whenever it
does fall out, it is as much the Duty of these Churches thus to be faithful to
each other as it is the Duty of Brethren in the same Church or Communion to be
faithful to one another: For these Churches enjoy Brotherly Communion with one
another, as well as Brethren of the same Church. The Apostles had the Care of
all the Churches: But it is to be hoped, that the public Spirit of Love and
Peace and Christian Faithfulness is not dead with them: There is not, it is
true, so much of this Spirit as there ought to be: But, wherever it resides or
reigns in Churches, they will have a watchful Eye over other Churches for their
Benefit, and a tender Care and Concern for their best Interests, and will
pursue the same in the Disciplinary Method, which has bin described, as there
shall be Occasion for it.

I am very sensible, that many Persons, and especially Clergymen, are averse to
a Compliance in the least with this Process of Discipline, and that for this
Reason; because they do not know any such Thing as a Consociation of Churches
among us: So that, inasmuch as they do not know that there is any express
Agreement of the Churches to conform to such a Process, they cannot think that
every Church is obliged to regard the Determination of a Synod in such a Case.

In Answer to which Pretense, I would say, that it is doubtless a Mistake to
declare, that there is no such Thing as a Consociation of Churches among us:
For our Platform of Church Discipline is to be deemed a Covenant, by which all
our Churches and every Member in them is obliged to conform to the Rules,
Directions and Orders laid down in it: And for the Proof of this I would
observe, that this Platform was composed by these Churches in a Body
Representative: So that the plain Sense and Meaning of the Composers must be,
that they engaged to conform to the Rules and Orders of it, and that they would
have their Successors, as well as themselves, directed and governed by them.
Nor can I help observing, that Approbation This must not be understood, as if
they absolutely bound themselves to a perpetual Conformity unto it: For out
pious Fathers renounced all Attachment to any more humane Systems or Forms, and
reserved an entire and perpetual Liberty for particular Christians and
particular Churches to search the inspired Records and to form both their
Principles and Practice from those Discoveries they should make therein,
without imposing them upon others; as you may see by consulting the New England
Chronology of the ingenious Mr. PRINCE: I have referred to the Pages in the
Appendix to this Apology.
of our Platform was voted unanimously by the Elders and Brethren of our
Churches; and there was not so much as one appeared, when the Vote was put in
the Negative in the Synod on Sept. 10.1679.

And besides, that this Order of Church Discipline is to be deemed an holy Pact
or Covenant, we may argue from those Synods and Councils which have met here by
Virtue of it and maintained constant Fellowship in many foederal overt Acts:
For, from these foederal overt Acts of Councils and Synods from Time to Time,
it is pretty manifest, that these Churches have all along maintained their
first Principles of Church Discipline and so have transmitted the Covenant
which they made to succeeding Generations.

Furthermore; It may be remarked, that in the Settlement of new Churches, in
the Ordination of Officers in the same Churches, and in giving the Right Hand
of Fellowship, of the Fellowship of the Churches, from Time to Time, these
Churches have so often plainly, significantly and formally renewed their
Original Pact or Covenant.

And it may, moreover, be mentioned, that even such Persons, as have made this
Objection, when they can find any Thing in our Platform of Church Discipline
suited to their own Humors and Inclinations and that will be serviceable for a
Turn or emergent Occasion, are very ready to cite, improve and conform to it:
And this seems to afford some Evidence, as if they themselves looked upon it as
a standing and general Compact, until the Churches shall agree to alter it.

These Hints are sufficient to render it probable, and more than probable, that
there is here a Consociation of Churches, and that between these Churches there
is still as mutual Confoederation: But, if to please some of our good Brethren
it should be allowed, that there is no such Compact between these Churches, nor
any Consociation of them; still it may be proved with Ease, that such a Process
of Discipline, as has but now bin explained, ought to be observed in these
Churches.

I shall not here cice any Authority for the Proof of this; intending in an
Appendix to this Book to reprint something referring to this Matter from Dr.
INCREASE MATHER'S, my Grandfather's, Vindication of the Order of the Churches
in New England; but I shall briefly mention a Consideration or two, which will
be sufficient to establish this Process of Discipline in the good Opinion of
all such as are the true Friends of these Churches.

First of all; This Process is entirely agreeable to the Nature and Design of
the Gospel, as well as the Reason of Mankind: For what is it for one Church to
admonish another on the Account of something judged to be amiss in their
Society? It is only for a Neighbor Minister, or Elder, with a few of his
Christian Brethren to pay a Visit to the Neighbor Church and humbly advise and
exhort them to seek for the Restoration of Peace and to rectify their Errors
whether in Judgment or Action. How rational and how Evangelical is this Method?
What Assuming, what Domineering is there to be found in this? Truly,
notwithstanding the frightful Dress in which this Process is represented, there
is nothing more Authoritative in it, than one Brother's admonishing another,
according to the Rules of the Gospel as well as of right Reason.

Again; This Method is well calculated for preserving the Reputation and Honor
of particular Churches: For, as particular Christians, so particular Churches,
are but Men and by Consequence are liable to Errors: But yet, as all Christians
make an high Profession and therefore should be careful lest there should be
any slur upon it; even so all particular Churches, which are corporate
Societies making a splendid Profession of Christianity, ought carefully to
maintain their Social Honor: And therefore, as with particular Christian
Brethren, so with particular Churches, fallen into Errors and Scandals, it
would be wrong and injurious to take at once precipitate and open Measures: Nor
indeed would exposing their Character openly at first be either a regular or a
probable Method of effecting their Amendment: Wherefore, in order to preserve
the Reputation and Honor of these Churches, it is vastly better, I mean more
rational and scriptural, in the first place, to follow this private Method, to
which by our Constitution also we are directed, than as the Manner of some is
to bring the Affairs of a Church before a Council and to a public Hearing at
once.

And, in fine, If this Disciplinary Method be not carefully observed, these
Churches have no Remedy at all against Male-Administrations in particular
Churches: For I cannot find, that by the Constitution of these Churches the
Power of calling Councils belongs to any particular Persons in them, but to the
Churches themselves: So that, according to this Constitution, if there be
Maladministration in any particular Church, the Aggrieved Members of it may
not convoke such Assemblies: But they should desire the Advice and Assistance
of a Neighbor Church: And, unless one particular Church interpose in this
State of Things and enquire into the Case in the Way of Communion by
Admonition, particular Churches may remain at eternal Variance within
themselves without showing our Dislike of their Proceedings: For there is no
other Process that we know of in the published Order of our Churches, by which
we can testify against them, but in this Disciplinary Method.

But, after all, some of our good Brethren will continue displeased with this
Process of Discipline from a peaccable Disposition, as should seem from their
Discourse about it: For they say, that they cannot by any means approve of this
Disciplinary Method; because the Prosecution of it will occasion great
Disturbance and Confusion in Churches.

But, for Answer to these Persons, it may be worth the while to expostulate a
little with them: Say then. Dear Brethren, why do you think that this Process
should occasion more Trouble and Consusion than the Method of calling a Council
by a few particular Persons, or even by one Person, dissatisfied or aggrieved?
Or is it, because your own Administrations have bin irregular or-unsuitable,
that you are therefore disaffected to this Process, from a prevalent Fear of
Examination according to it? However, is not this Disciplinary Method so
plainly prescribed in the Constitution of particular Congregational Churches
that we must be Brownists or Nothing if we recede from it? And, in fine, if it
should be so, as you say, that Churches will be disturbed in the Prosecution of
this Method; yet can we suppose, that some Disturbance of the Churches in a
sleepy and indolent State would be amiss and undesirable, if a more established
Order and a more comely Amendment may be occasioned through this Disturbance in
the Churches? Pray, dear Brethren, answer these Questions in the Spirit of
Meekness, as they are proposed; that so, if our Fathers erred in the
Prescription of this Method, the Churches may regularly use their Endeavors to
get their Error rectified.

Upon the whole, and from the best Observations which I have bin able to make;
I am free to declare my Apprehension, and I hope my Brethren will not be
offended with me for making this Declaration, that the Neglect and Slight of
this Rule of Discipline by the Pastors and Churches in this Government has bin
the true Reason, if not the sole Cause, of the Disturbances and Confusions in
many of our Churches, and that, as the great VOET observed with respect to the
Want of Correspondence among the Churches, I fear it much: Time will show what
will happen, when the Number of Churches is greatly increased, and one will not
bear another Nole -- Mordicus certare, quamdiu been se habent: Now equidem
invideo; metuo magis; and Dies docebit quid futurum si^, whi^in ingentem
Numerum excieverint and OUDEIS OUDENOS AKOUSH. Voet. Par. III. L. I. Tract.
III. Cap. V.
Nay, without the Spirit of of Prophesy, I may venture to say, that, if this
Method be neglected, those Things will fall and perish sooner than we imagine,
which we thought and believed to be firm and lasting Nisi in Ecclesia valeat
Admonitio and in quotidiano usu sit Correctio, Citius quam ipsi putemus
collabuntur and intereunt ea quoque quae firmissima credebantur. Bullinger.
Decad V. Sermon. X. De Institutis Ecclesiae.
. And I cannot therefore but wish to GOD, that the great Head of the Church
might so influence the Minds and Hearts of these Churches as to bring them to
an entire Approbation of true Congregationalism, and of this Disciplinary
Process in particular, by which alone Congregational Churches can be
distinguished from such as are Brownistical.

THE CONCLUSION, in a brief Address to the Churches of NEW ENGLAND.
THUS I have endeavored to state and vindicate the more distinguishing
Liberties of the Churches in New England. As these Privileges have bin
purchased by the Blood of the LORD JESUS, they ought to be very precious in our
Esteem, nor upon any Pretense whatsoever to be slighted and undervalued by the
happy People who enjoy them.

It is worthy to be always remembered by these Churches, that it was not on the
Account of any peculiar Sentiments in Doctrinal Matters that our wise and good
Fathers left their Native Country and came into this then howling Wilderness:
For they agreed to the Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England as much as
the Conformists to that Parliamentary Church, and indeed much more so than most
of them: But it was from a pure Respect to Ecclesiastical Discipline and Order
and to a more refined Worship, that those excellent Men our Ancestors
transported themselves, with their Families, into this Land.

The Church of Rome, as far as in them lies, have divested our great SAVIOR of
His Prophetical, Sacerdotal and Kingly Offices: Other Churches have bin so far
overcome by the Light of Reason and Revelation, that they have restored as one
may say His Sacerdotal Office to Him and His Prophetical Office olso: But our
gracious Predecessors, observing that their Brethen in England were not willing
to allow our Lord JESUS CHRIST to be the King and Ruler of His Church, nobly
resolved, as the Children of Zion, to acknowledge and rejoice in their King: And
hence they quitted their ungrateful Country, that so they might observe that
refined Worship and Order which their LORD and Sovereign had in His Word
appointed to be observed.

It follows therefore, that any Degeneracies from the pure Worship and
Scriptural Order in these Churches would be a direct Rejection of the Kingly
Authority of CHRIST JESUS, and a Means of setting up another King or Captain to
lead us backward, in the Steps we have taken from Babylon, toward it again:
May GOD of His rich Grace therefore preserve these Churches from any such
Degeneracies!

It is evident indeed, that great Pains are taken to draw our People,
especially our inconsiderate young People, who are too unmindful of the King
and GOD of their Fathers, from their Love and Attachment to those first
Principles of these Churches, which I have bin explaining and enforcing: But,
as NABOTH said to AHAB concerning his Vineyard, in 1 King. XXI. 3, The LORD
forbid it me, that I should give the Inheritance of my Fathers unto Thee; even
so it is fit, that we should say to such as would entice us to part with the
pure Order of these Churches, This was our Father's Inheritance: And GOD
forbid, that any should persuade us to give up our inestimable Rights: For the
very Thought of parting with them is shocking.

Dear People, The Liberties, which have bin challenged for you, are the same as
the Brethren in the Times of primitive Christianity enjoyed for hundreds of
Years together: And, whatever specious Pretenses some may make to the contrary,
the Dispossessing of the Brethren of these their valuable Liberties was a
considerable Instance of the Romish Apostocy: And indeed they have but a
slender Acquaintance with Ecclesiastical History who do not know, that the Rise
of Popery was owing to the People's tamely giving up their Rights and
Privileges, either through Ignorance or Imprudence, to the Clergy, who
unreasonably engrossed to themselves and grasped in their own Clutches all
Things in the Churches that were of any Worth and Importance.

There can be no Doubt, that there are many who are sworn and inveterate
Enemies to the pure Order in these Churches; and, besides these, we have Reason
to think that there are many false Friends to it; by which Sort I mean those
that pretend some Regard to the Order of the Gospel in these Churches, but yet
at the same Time would gladly subvert it: And it is well, if there are not
sundry Ministers in these Churches, who are disaffected to it: For, as LUTHER
has somewhere remarked concerning Religion, Nunquam magis periclitur quam inter
Reverendissimos; so it may be said with respect to the Order in these Churches:
Probably it may be in most Danger from some of the Reverend Body. -- But surely
all such in these Churches are very unadvised and blameworthy: And, if they are
not duly sensible of the Tendency of their Disaffection and Undertakings, it
is a Pity but their Brethren should, and carefully guard against them. And
truly there cannot any Good be expected from them: For, as they do not produce
a better Discipline and purer Order for our Churches in the Room of that, which
they unreasonably dislike and would throw away; so, if they could produce and
offer a better Order, which indeed is very unlikely, there is no rational
Prospect of its gaining Ground among us, but with that Disturbance and
Consusion in our Churches, of which they at other Times are exceedingly
fearful. But,

These Enemies to our Ecclesiastical Discipline and Order seem as if they knew
not what they would have. The Scheme, which they would promote, is very far
from Presbyterial: For, if one may judge by their Conduct, they seem to be fond
of one Minister's Ruling and Governing his own Church without the Consent of
the Brethren or any Elders in Conjunction with him: Whereas the London
Ministers, in their Vindication of the Presbyterial Government, say, that for
one Minister to assume such Power unto himself is to make himself a
Congregational Pope. -- Dear Brethren, let not these petty Popes then deprive
you of your just Rights and invaluable Privileges: But, like your worthy
Ancestors, continue fond of them: For it will be creditable and praiseworthy
not to let them go: And it will, in the Style of PLINY, be a most honest Thing
to follow the Footsteps of our Ancestors, if they have gone before us in a
right Path Honestissimum Majorum Vestigia Sequi, si recto I^^ere ^^^cesserin^,
Plin. Epist. 8.1.1.
.

And, when you observe any, who value themselves upon their Contempt of your
established Order and who often speak slightly of your Platform of
Church Discipline which is the Sum of it, Dear Brethren, Set a Mark upon these
Persons; remembering, that better and wiser Men than they, even those worthy and
famous Presbyterians, who published their Jus Divinum about Eighty Years since,
freely declare, that they agree with the Things of the greatest Concernment in
it, and that their Debates about some Things of lesser Consequence were not
[Contentiones] warm Disputes, but [Collationes] Friendly Conferences.

And, in fine, Much Honored and entirely Beloved Churches; be pleased to
accept of this Attempt of one, the most unworthy of your Sons; who, being set
for the Defense of the Order of the Gospel among you, has endeavored to
illustrate and confirm that Order in its primitive Purity for your Advantage,
and, from his Faithfulness to your best Interests, has dared to expose himself
to many Misrepresentations, if not Reproaches and Abuses: And wherein he has
failed of giving the true Sense of his and your Fathers, though from a diligent
Search of their Meaning in Manuscripts and printed Composures he has
endeavored it, be pleased to impute it to humane Frailty and undesigned
Mistaking: For into these alone his Failing must be resolved.

Ut desint Vires, tamen est laudanda Voluntas: Hac Ego [contentum] auguror esse
[Deum.] Ovid. de Pont. L. III. Eleg. 4.

The END of the Apology.
The APPENDIX To the Apology for the Churches in New England.
Part the first, containing some Evidences and Specimens of the Catholic and
Comprehensive Principles of the New-English Churches.
IN the Thirty-fourth Page of the Preliminary Discourse concerning
CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES I have observed, that, not only our Houses and Hearts,
but our Churches also, are open to Baptists, Presbyterians and Episcopalians,
when in a Judgment of Charity we have Reason to think them of good
Understanding, Piety and Virtue. Now, for the Proof of This, I shall recite
some Particular, and then some more General Testimonies to the Truth of it.

Number I.
I Have a Letter in my Hands, and the very Original Letter, of the learned and
pious and facetious Mr. CHARLES MORTON of Charlestown in New England; a Letter
to the Right Honorable HUGH BOSCAWEN, Esquire which, as it gives a large and true
Account of the Country and Churches in New England, I had some Thoughts of
Printing: But, finding that it will take up more Room than can well be allowed,
I shall therefore only select a few Paragraphs from it. And, if any upon the
Sight of These should want to see the Remainder of the Letter, I would here
acquaint them, that I have it in my Library and shall he ready to give them the
Sight of it. The Paragraphs are as follow:

-- Give me Leave, Sir, to acquaint you, that I am now in a Country, which has
bin a friendly Asylum to me: It gave me a kind Reception, when my Native Land
did in a Manner push me out. -- It Is my humble Petition to your Honor, that
you would become a vigorous Patron for the People of GOD in these remote Lands.
-- GOD has a great People here, an able and pious Ministry, and a great many
well ordered Churches. Their Church Government is interpendant, as their witty
Mr. WARD called it. -- I have bin called to some of their Councils and have
seen their good Effect in healing the Breaches of disturbed Churches. Their
Ordination to the public Ministry is solemn by the Pastors of Neighbor
Churches: And, though their Custom has bin a new Imposition of Hands upon every
new Call to the Exercise of the Ministry; yet to us, who came from Europe, Mr.
BAYLEY and myself, it was abated. And, for ought I can perceive, they mind more
the Substance of Religion than the Circumstances of some Men's private Opinions
It was principally for the Sake of this Passage in Iralic, that I have
transcribed such a Part of this Letter.
. Their public Worship in Praying, Singing and Preaching is plain, but grave
and solemn, and, I hope, sincere. -- The Influence of a Religious Profession
upon common and outward Conversation is very great: So that lewd Profaneness
did never openly appear, till a wretched Crew of Frigateers and Red Coats came
among us. -- I write not all this, as if Men were here perfect: For then there
were no need of Magistracy, Ministry or Gospel Ordinances for their
Edification: But certainly, Sir, if GOD has a People on the Face of the Earth
and any Part of the World may be called Emanuel's Land, New England may well
put in for a notable Share in that Denomination. -- If your Honor will afford
your Assistance to these Gentlemen, I hope you will never have Cause to repent
it. GOD has heretofore blessed the Friends of New England and blasted all her
Adversaries. May the GOD of Heaven so establish your Affairs, as may raise the
Hopes of us your Dependants! May His Wisdom guide your Counsels and His Power
be your Protection, that we with you may rejoice in the LORD. So daily prays
your Honor's most humble and many Ways obliged Servant,

CHARLES MORTON.
Feb. 3.1689, 90.

Numb. II.
THe next Testimony shall be from my own Father, who, in a Letter to Mr.
FRANCIS DE LA PILLONNIERE, which was printed in The Occasional Paper, but never
printed and generally known in New England, writes in the following Manner.

-- The Truth is, the Reformation that came on, when the Romish Antichrist had
passed through his Time, and his Two Times, and was entering into his Half-Time,
was little better than an Half-Reformation.

The Reforming Churches, flying from Rome, carried, some of them more, some of
them less, all of them something, of Rome, with them; especially in that Spirit
of Imposition, and Persecution, which has too much cleaved unto them ALL.

The Period hastens for a New Reformation; wherein it is likely that our holy
Lord will, in some Degree, reject ALL the Parties of Christians at this Day in
the World; and form a NEW PEOPLE of the good Men in the several Parties, who
shall unite in the Articles of their Goodness, and sweetly bear with one
another in their lesser Differences; leaving each other to the Divine
Illuminations.

PIETY will anon be the only Basis of Union, in the Churches of the revived,
refined, reformed Reformation; and pious Men, in several Forms, will come to
Love, and live, as Brethren; and the purged Floor of our Savior will be
visited with Tokens of his Presence, that shall be very comfortable.

It is thus very much in my Country; and therefore, Sir, if Old England prove
too torrid a Climate for you, come over to New England, where I will do my
best, that you shall be treated with more Christian Civilities.

But I hope that our Lord will find greater Employments for you in Europe, than
can be expected on the Western Side of the Atlantic. He has qualified you for
them, and, I hope, what you have seen among some very Defective Protestants
will animate you to them.

Being my self a Calvinist, I must needs differ pretty much from a Gentleman
who professes himself an Arminian. But I consider what those Maxims of Piety
are, which engage the Arminian to maintain his distinguishing Positions. Those
Maxims are, That the Holy and Sin-hating Lord must not be reproached as the
Impeller of the Sin, whereof he is the Revenger: That our Merciful Father must
not be blasphemed, as if He dealt after an illusory manner with Men, when He
invites them to His Mercy: That none, among the Fallen Race of the First Adam,
are to be shut out from the Hopes of Life, in the Death of the Second Adam:
That impenitent Unbelievers must not cast on God the Blame of their Unbelief;
but the Wicked must lay wholly on themselves the Fault of their own
Destruction: And, That Men must work out their own Salvation with as much
Industry, and Agony, and Vigilance, as if all turned upon their own Will and
Care, whether they shall be saved, or no. Now, these are Maxims, which every
pious Calvinist will also most heartily consent unto. And, if I should repeat
the Maxims of Piety, which make me fall in with the Positions of a Calvinist,
as requisite unto the supporting of them. I am confident the pious Mr. de la
Pillonniere would most heartily subscribe unto them. And we shall both of us
have the Modesty to confess, that we have also to do with Matters which are to
us incomprehensible. Now, if good Men are so united in the Maxims, which are
the END, for the serving whereof they declare that they pursue their
Controversies; why should not this Uniting Piety put an End unto their
Controversies? and beat their Swords into Plough-Shares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks?

Numb. III.
BUT, to these more particular Testimonies concerning the Catholic and
comprehensive Principles of these Churches from a superior Regard to the
Substance of Religion, I would take Leave to subjoin and mention some more
General ones.

The famous DURY, whose Heart was very much set upon a Pacification among
Protestants, having made his proposed Tour in Europe for promoting it, at
length wrote a Letter to his Brethren in New England to know their Sentiments
concerning such a Pacification; which Letter occasioned the following noble
Answer to it, that was written by the great Mr. NORTON, Pastor of the first
Church in Boston, New England, at the Desire of all the Ministers of this
[then] Colony, and afterward signed by them all. I have here reprinted the
English Translation of this Letter, that so it might be of more general
Advantage: But, for the sake of the Learned, I have inserted in the Margin
several of the Emphatical Passages in it from the Original Latin, which, I
think, was never published. N. B. If any Person has a Mind to see the Original
Latin Letter, with the Names of the Ministers subscribing it in their own
Handwriting, and will be so good as to repair to me for the Sight of it, I
shall readily gratify them with it.

The Letter returned by the Ministers of New England to Mr. JOHN DURY
concerning his Pacification.

To the worthy and eminent Mr. JOHN DURY.
Salutations.
THAT amongst so many horrid Alarms of War, amongst so many fatal Differences
of Opinion raised in Matters of Religion, and that also after so many, and such
unwearied Labors of famous Intercessors, now so often in this Cause undertaken
in vain; you should O Dury, the most zealous Friend of Peace, not only be
seriously thinking of, but are also unto this Day strongly endeavoring the
Espousals of Truth and Peace between the Professors of the Gospel; we verily do
largely congratulate you in the conceiving so great a Design, with our utmost,
and daily Prayers, helping forward (by God's Assistance) the Birth of this
Manchild. Suffer us to speak the very Truth of the Matter, nor is there any
need to deny the same: Even as the Holy Scripture relates how the Olive Branch,
brought much Comfort to the Parent of the other World after the Flood, while he
was lamenting over the Tremendous Spectacle of the Deluge overflowing all here
below; in like Manner did your Letter, breathing a very Spirit of Peace, as
another Noah's Dove, sent down from Heaven, wonderfully refresh the exile
Brethren, who were almost astonished to see so many Nations, that profess the
Gospel, making irreconcilable War amongst themselves, together with the many
and great Dissentions in the Business of Religion, and that monstrous Flood of
Error breaking forth, not out of the Cataracts of the Clouds, but the very
Mouth of the Dragon.

Be it so, that we are in the utmost Parts of the Earth; we have only changed
our Climate, not our Minds: We have altered our Place, that we might retain the
Faith without alteration. There are indeed some, that might have been better
employed, at least mere Strangers to our Affairs, who do therefore impute unto
us the Guilt of Schism, because in the first Place we have endeavored after
the pure Worship of God. But if any see good to enquire into the Reason, why
these Churches in the Wilderness left their Country, this it was, viz. That the
Ancient Faith, and pure Worship, might be found inseparable Companions in our
Practice, and that our Posterity might be undefiled in Religion: Nevertheless,
we are never unmindful of the Saying of Austin to the Brethren in the
Wilderness, as he styles them; There are two Things considerable, says he,
Conscience and good Name: Conscience as necessary for thy self, good Name for
thy Neighbor: He who trusts to his Conscience, and neglects his good Name, is
cruel, especially if he be set in that Place, of which the Apostle writing to
his Disciple, says, In all Things show thy self an Example of good Works. It
may not be unlawful for us, who are in the Wilderness on the further side of
the Seas, as well as those, who through Grace are called to the Ministry,
though in our selves the greatest of Sinners, and the least of all the Saints,
as any others, to Apologize for our selves in the Words of the Tribes beyond
Jordan a little changed, for the vindicating or preserving our good Name in a
Matter of so great Moment, both before great ones, Fathers, Brethren, and every
gentle Reader, The Lord God of Gods, the Lord God of Gods he knows, and Israel
shall know, if wittingly and willingly in Rebellion, or treacherous dealing
against the Lord, or in Schism it be, that we have departed from our Country,
save us not this Day.

But yet notwithstanding, we are not unmindful of that so known Oracle, [Love
the Truth and Peace:] We neither strive for Truth without making Reckoning of
Peace, neither do we pursue Peace with the Loss of Truth: The former defaceth,
this latter teareth the seamless Coat of the Church. It is as necessary to
avoid the Rock of Schism on the Right Hand, as the Quicksands of Confusion on
the Left. We renounce Samaritanism, that deadly s^^k of false Doctrine, as much
as we fly from Donatism, the sore Enemy of Evangelical Temperament, and
Devourer (if we may speak after Tertullian) of Christian Society; but admire
and embrace the Concord, and Agreement of the Gospel. We are no whit pleased
with Cassanders shaking Hands with Papists at the furthest Distance, erring
from the Truth; nor yet with the Romanist renouncing Communion with them that
are otherwise minded in lesser Differences: But in special Manner we ought to
labor, that we may walk with an even Foot, and not to turn aside an Hair's
breadth from the Truth: In the mean Time, it is better to be a Cyprian than a
Steven. It is much more grievous to think aright, and be found a Schismatic,
than to think amiss in Things not fundamental, and be of a peaceable Spirit.
The Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ is a Spirit of Truth, of Peace and
Communion: So desirous of Peace, that it requires Communion in a true Church,
although not pure; and so desirous of Truth, that it forbids impurity in any
Church whatsoever. That, that is the Mark at which we aim, and which we
endeavor and breath after, in him who is the Way, the Truth and Life.

It is confessed, there are some Apices, or lesser Points in Divinity, which
the Church of God has now for above an hundred Years bewailed, as the
obstacles of Peace, concerning which the chief Controversies maintained are
about Predestination, Ubiquity, and the Eucharist. About these Points how many
thousand Polemick Writings have been extant all abroad, which the Christian
World is scarce able to contain? Alas! that ever there should be a War about
the Sacrament! Alas! that ever there should be any contentious Treatises about
the Eucharist, turning the very Badge of Union into an Apple of Contention! Who
can refrain from Tears at the uttering of such Things? Yet these
notwithstanding, that there is Place for the so much desired Coalition between
the Evangelicks and the Reformed, so called, may easily be made appear, by
running through the chief Heads of Things:

As namely, Because in the first Article, they who were the greatest Favorers
of that eminent Worthy of the former Age, do yet ascribe the Work of Conversion
wholly unto God, and do likewise stiffly maintain, and accurately defend, Grace
to be altogether free; who were also utter Enemies to that pestilent Opinion of
the Schoolmen, [That God is bound to him that does what he can of himself.] And
who likewise do deservedly account it mere Pelagianism, to make any kind of
Qualifying Fitness a Moral Motive unto predetermining Grace.

As for the Opinion of the Ubiquity of the Humane Nature, by Virtue of the
Hypostatical Union; it cannot be denied, but that Papers have come abroad,
written with too much Gall and sharpness. In the mean while it is agreed upon
by all, and taken for granted, That the Humane Nature is Personally
Omnipresent. According to this Rule likewise are other Propositions about the
Person to be judged of, under this Head.

Lastly, As concerning the Lord's Supper; the Divines of either Part, do reject
Transubstantiation, together with worshipping of Bread. But about the Real
Presence, viz. Sacramental, of the Body and Blood of Christ, it is agreed
between both. These so many and great Differences, are to be accounted as so
many Heart-griefs, although not to be numbered amongst them which by the Apostle
are called Unlearned Questions; yet we judge them not to be of that Moment, as
to hinder the giving each other the Right Hand of Fellowship, or the Pledges of
Ecclesiastical Brotherhood Tot and talia Dissidia tot fatemur Cordelia; --
Tanti autem esse, quo minus dextras daretur jungere Dextris, and mutua audire
and red ere Fraternitatis Ecclesiastica Symbola, minime judicamus.
, building upon that Apostolical Canon of holy Communion, Nevertheless, in that
whereunto we have attained, let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same
Thing, Phil. 3.16. Here also we may call to Mind that common and received
Distinction between Fundamentals and Non-Fundamentals; and, that Brotherly
Fellowship is not to be refused with Men peaceable, and otherwise Orthodox, for
the sake of Non-Fundamentals.

We account it very unequal to fasten upon any one that holds an Opinion all
the Consectaries, which to him that argues according to the exactest Grounds of
Reason, seem to follow upon such Premises, especially if those Consequences be
disowned by him: In which respect there are no small Errors on both Sides,
while those of our Side impeach the other of Eutyches his Opinion, though
refusing to own it, for the sake of Consubstantiation; and they on the other
Side go about to make ours guilty of making God the Author of Sin, although we
never so much disclaim it, in the Point of Predestination. The Disputes about
the Consequences of these, whether rightly inferred or not, from the Premises,
belong not to this Place to be examined, yea the Matter itself requires rather
that we should forbear.

But this Tragedy is not yet at an End. For, as to Polity, and indifferent
Things, they have taken up diverse Opinions; who it were to be wished that they
would embrace that Concord one with another, which has been so often
endeavored after. But the Differences of this Nature, as they are not so
small, that the Lovers of Truth should be silent about them; so neither are
they so great, that they need be any hindrance to the Seekers of Peace and
Quietness in the present Undertaking; as may appear by the unquestioned Example
of our Savior, who refused not to celebrate the Worship of God in the Jewish
Church, defaced at that Time with more grievous Corruptions. They who are
united to Christ by Heart-converting Grace, are Members of his Mystical Body;
and whosoever, but in appearance at least, are joined to the Head, and have
added themselves to the Polity of Israel, are to be received Members of the
Political Body. Now Communion follows upon Union. Besides the Nature of
Political, as well as Christian Society, does utterly forbid to deny the
Privileges of Fellowship to such Members as are found without Scandal.

Thus much we thought good to speak briefly about this Point, that Honored
Persons, and Respected Brethren, might understand what Reasons moved us to
entertain the same Opinion with themselves. We have been taught, that the Idea,
or Pattern of holy Communion ought to be fetched from Divine Writ, and not to
be framed after our own Pleasure Communion is Sanctae Ideam a Divina Pagina
petendam, non pro Arbitrio nostro cudendam didicimus.
.

The Rules of Sacred Society are certain; beyond which, or short of which, it
is not in our Power to extend, or withold the Right Hand of Brotherhood.
Whoever having attained these shall acknowledge them; and having acknowledged
them, shall walk according unto them; so holding Communion with Sinners, as he
does not in the least communicate with their Sins, so as he is wanting neither
to the Truth, nor to himself, nor his Brethren, him we deservedly esteem both
as a Guide and Pillar of the Church: Whether we will or no, we are Brethren;
and seeing we are Brethren, let us acknowledge our selves what we are, namely,
Brethren in the Lord. A Day would scarce suffice, to rehearse how many and how
great incitements do call for, and require this. To account the weak in Faith
for none, is indeed itself a greater Weakness. The Name of Brethren is sweet:
It is Matter of great Delight to be such indeed. But it is much to be lamented,
that those who are so, should not be acknowledged to be so. So to stand for
Truth, that by too tenacious insisting upon Doctrine, we make no reckoning of
the Rights of Society, is to be carried with the Study of Parties, not of the
Truth Veritatem item Operam dare, ut Doctrinae tenacius inhaerendo Societatis
Jura susque deque faciamus, est Parts ager's non veritati studere.
; and to undertake the Patronage of an Opinion, rather because it is our own,
than because it is true.

Sounder Philosophy determines, that the excellency of Union is to be esteemed
according to the Dignity of the Cause. We here pass over in Silence the
conspiring together of the Waters and dry Land to make one Globe; as also that
of the Frame of the Heavenly and the Earthly Globe, to make one Sphere of the
World. There may be found an heap of Miracles in the quiet gathering the living
Creatures into the Ark, and there abiding in it, where the most savage of them
laid aside their savageness; being ready to acknowledge Noah for their Lord
(not much otherwise than Adam in giving Names unto them) where might be seen
the Wolf standing amongst the Sheep, neither do the Flocks seem afraid of the
great Lions: These are indeed very great Things; but yet if they be compared
with the Mystical Union, shining forth in one of the very least of Christ's
Members, there would want Words to express how great the Distance is. To
proceed therefore, if the Union of a very few Believers be of so great Moment,
of how great Account should be the Uniting of all Protestants in the Faith? But
let here pause a while, and not think much to weigh this Matter a little more
seriously, and we shall find (unless we are much deceived) this very Union
about which we are treating, if it be without Hypocrisy and Deceit, but as the
very Offspring and Image of the Hypostatical Union, and only next unto it on
Earth (as to the Kind) and like unto which there will not be found any in
Heaven, no not when Angelical Nature remained in its Perfection. We do believe
indeed, and not out (...) a vain Conceit, That this Agreement is a bright
Looking-Glass made of the Blood of the Lamb, wherein Jesus himself, the Prince
of so great a Peace, clearly shines forth: In passing through which also, he
does irradiate the World with its brightness, while it steadfastly beholds this
clear Looking-Glass, and by irradiating, ingenerates Faith therein. In which
respect w^ need not fear to affirm, That the perpetual Conjuncti^^ of all
Mankind, established by the Bond of the first Covenant, would be by infinite
Degrees exceeded by it; That they all may be one, as thou Father in me, and I
in thee, that the World may know that thou have sent me, Joh. 17.21.

If the possibility of such a Peace should appear, we could not do much in the
pursuing the Necessity thereof. Notwithstanding (if we may have Leave) that
this Necessity may be fastened in our Minds, as they say, with the strongest
Nail, before we leave this exhortatory Part of our Discourse, we think meet,
for a Conclusion, to adorn and strengthen it with the Sayings of some famous
Men, tending much unto Peace.

At Marpurg, Luther long since professed, That he would not yield this Praise
to the Adverse Party, that they should be more studious of Concord and Peace
than himself. From whence arose that famous Concord of Marpurg. We find also
Calvin thus expressing himself, that he might compose Minds, and allay so great
Commotions, at a Time when Contention was grown much too hot; But I desire you
to consider, first, How great a Man Luther is, and in what great Gifts he does
excel, and with how great Courage and Consta^^^ of Mind, with how great
Dexterity, with how great E^^^^acy of Learning, he has hitherto endeavored to
put to ^^ight the Kingdom of Antichrist, and propagate the Doctrine of
Salvation. I have been often wont to say, That if he should call me Devil a
thousand Times, that I would yet give him that Honor, as to acknowledge him
the eminent Servant of God. But our Davenant most severest of all; If the
Schisms of Churches might be taken away, as without Doubt they may, I would
rather have a Millstone hanged about my Neck, and be cast into the Sea, than
either hinder a Work so acceptable unto God, and so necessary to avoid
Scandals, or not promote it with my whole Heart, and all my utmost Endeavors.

Epiphanius would not that Christians should have any By-Name. Let the
Nickname of Zuinglians and Calvinists then cease, the Marks rather of Faction,
than of Brotherly Union. What should we have to do with Luther? What should we
have to do with Calvin? We profess the Gospel, we believe the Gospel Noluit
Epiphanius, ut Christiani gestarent Epitheton Nomen. Facessant Zuinglianorum
and Calvinianorum, Cognomenta Factionis, potius quam fraterna Unionis insignia.
Quid nobis cum Luthero? Quid nobis cum Calvino? Evangelici sumus: Credimus
Evangeli^.
. Bellarmine somewhere has a Catalogue of a great many Kingdoms that fell off
from the Papacy: Whose Defection from the Mystery of Iniquity, if it has
troubled the Cardinals of Rome, how much more would their Uniting together in
the Mystery of Piety, be a Terror to the Roman Party? When the truly holy
League shall wholly stand for the Lamb; when Humane Endeavors and Dissensions
being laid aside, they shall only intend that one Thing, to afford their mutual
Help for the promoting of Religion; when they shall unanimously carry on the
War of the Lord against the Whore, as if they were endued with the very Spirit
of the Revelation; when they shall be called neither English, nor Dutch, nor
Swedes, nor Danes, but only Christians.

If Poets Writings any Truth contain,
Ages fierce Wars shall never more maintain.
But it is not in our Power, most excellent Dury, to add our Counsel, either to
the beginning or the preserving this Agreement. You are not ignorant, that we
are Exiles, Britains, altogether divided from the rest of Europe; wherefore we
are less fit to perform this Task: Neither are we so unsensible of our own
Weakness, as not readily to confess our inability for so great a Service; nor
is there need, seeing we must thankfully acknowledge and own, that this Office
has been abundantly performed, both by Strangers, as well as by our own
Countrymen.

We may here call to Mind, and not without some sacred Sympathy, those Blessed
Souls, Melancthon and Pareus, now amongst the Blessed; the one no less famous
amongst the Reformed, than the other amongst the Evangelicks; The first of whom
going toward Haganoa, with sighing uttered these Words, In Synods hitherto we
lived have,
And now in them return unto the Grave Viximus in Synodis, and jam mortemur in
ill^s.
.
The other seriously meditating on the Controversy of the Eucharist, brake
forth into these Words; I am weary with disputing. Thus, if these Men might be
Judges, we ought rather to Pray than Dispute, and study how to Live than to
Contend. And perhaps the Divines of either Part, after they have been wearied,
and broken in their Spirits with daily and continual Contentions, will more
readily accept of the Counsels of Peace, which hitherto have been less
acceptable, while the Sense of Anger remained fresh: After by long Use they
have been taught, they may prefer the Waters of the Pacifick Sea before those
of Meribah. Nor need we say, That those Honored Persons, and Brethren, will
more kindly entertain the Counsels of Peace, seeing there are, we know not how
many Sayings, Writings, Deeds of Princes, Churches and Universities, openly
testifying, That eminent Men of both Orders, and that not of the lowest Rank,
have not only received, but taken Counsel together, and engaged their helping
Hand, as Need shall require: From which Beginnings it is but meet to hope the
best. God is able to make them Workers of Peace, whom he has given to be
Seekers of Peace: If otherwise, such eminent Endeavors shall not want their
Reward in Heaven, and their Honor in Israel. These are piously Heroic
Enterprises, which as they do oblige all good Men, so are they to be admired of
them. Their Praises, how great, or how little soever, as the present Age is not
altogether silent about them; so will Posterity declare the rest, and perhaps
the unknown Parts of the World.

We give Thanks unto the Father of Lights with all our Hearts, who has put
this Work into the Mind of Dury, savouring of a Spirit more than Humane; and
has added also suitable Courage to the promoting so Pious and Apostolical a
Matter: Which Task, whosoever shall effect, if we may be Judges, will deserve a
more than ordinary Triumphant Statue; and whose Monument will so far excel the
Trophies of Achilles, as if they were not worthy to be mentioned in the same
Day. However the Issue of the Matter fall, yet it is a great deal, to have
attempted in a great Design. Seek the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper
that love thee.

We give Thanks unto the God of Peace, who would not suffer the Labors of his
Servant endeavoring after Peace, to be undertaken altogether without Success.
Therefore, most worthy Sir, go on in this your Strength, resting on the
Prophecy for the desired Concord, That it shall be in its own appointed Time.
The Powers which have obeyed the Roman Harlot, shall hate her, make her naked,
and burn her with Fire; for God has put it into the Hearts of the Kings, that
they should fulfill his Will. It does not become those that have a meet
Understanding of Things, to doubt of their Agreement in the Faith, who are to
burn to Ashes the Metropolis of the last Head of the Beast, as an Enemy to the
Faith. The Discord of the Kings detains the Whore on her Throne, and keeps the
Woman in the Wilderness, while they are contending amongst themselves.

It makes all Priamus his House rejoice,
And other Trojans to lift up their Voice.
But this their sacred Concord, the renowned Sons of Sion cannot but look upon,
as a forerunner of the Destruction of Rome, now at the very Doors; and
accordingly with their daily and most ardent Prayers breathe after, hope, and
long for the same.

Lastly, We give Thanks to Mr. Dury, into whose Heart it came to remember
Joseph, separate from his Brethren at so great a Distance, both by Sea and
Land; and who has vouchsafed with so comfortable a Message to visit us poor
Wretches, clothed in Sackcloth for our Warfare; yet. as we trust, the Sackcloth
of the Gospel: who has not refused to put New England, as a part of the Skirt
of Aaron's Garment, upon which has descended some of the precious Oil, into
the Catalogue of the so much famed Agreement: And who has by his Letter
exhorting unto such an Agreement, given us an Occasion to bring in this
Testimony, such as it is, for our brotherly Communion with the whole Company of
Protestants professing the Faith of Christ Jesus. For we must ingenuously
confess, that then, when all Things were quiet, and no threatening Signs of War
appeared, seeing we could not be permitted by the Bishops at that Time
prevailing, to perform the Office of the Ministry in Public, nor yet to enjoy
the holy Ordinances without Subscription, and Conformity, (as they were wont to
speak) nor without the mixture of Humane Inventions with Divine Institutions,
we chose rather to depart into the remote and unknown Coasts of the Earth, for
the sake of a purer Worship, than to lie down under the Hierarchy in the
abundance of all Things, but with the prejudice of Conscience. But that in
flying from our Country, we should renounce Communion with such Churches as
profess the Gospel, is a Thing which we confidently and solemnly deny.

Certainly, so far as concerns our selves, in whatever Assemblies amongst us
the whole Company of them that profess the Gospel, the Fundamentals of
Doctrine, and Essentials of Order are maintained, although in many niceties of
controversal Divinity they are at less Agreement with us, we do hereby make it
manifest (which yet we would always have understood, so as the least part of
Truth, according to the Nature of that Reverence which ought exactly to be
yielded thereunto, may be preserved) that we do acknowledge them all, and every
one for Brethren; and that we shall be ready to give unto them the Right Hands
of Fellowship in the Lord, if in other Things they be peaceable, and walk
orderly Certe ad nos quod attinet (quod tamen vel Ungula veritatis pro Ratione
Religionis illi ad Amussim adhibendae semper salva dictum volumus) quoscunque
apud Coetus per untversum Evangelicorum Chorum Fundamentalia Doctrinae and
Essentialia Ordinis vigeant, quamvis in plerisque Controversae Theologiae
Apicibus nobiscum juxta minus Sentiant; Illos tamen ad unum omnes pro Fratribus
agnoscimus: Lisque catera Pacificis and ordinate incedentibus Dextram
Communionis in Domino porrigere paratissimos nos esse hisce palam fecimus.
.

We humbly beseech the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whose Lips
is only Power to perfwade, that he would enlighten Princes, Divines, and even
all who are rightly called Christians from the Name of Christ, with the lively
Splendour of such an Agreement, and draw them with a Soul-moving Energy to the
divine Love of himself. As for that which concerns your self, the sweetest
Follower of Peace, We should account it an heinous Crime to be wanting unto you
in our Prayers to the very God of Peace, That he would so preserve your Life,
your Course, and your Work, that you may bring unto a Conclusion your so
eminent Undertaking, with so many Sighs, Labors, Sweatings, Dangers, and with
so great Charges hitherto carried on: If otherwise, and that it seem good to
the great Determiner of Things, before this come to pass to advance him that
has been a follower of Peace on Earth, to the State of a Blessed Saint in
Heaven; that then he would raise up other Duryes, who may bring the Work so
happily begun to its desired End.

Your most observant Brethren in Christ, The Ministers of the Churches, and
Preachers of the Word, Militant for the Faith of Jesus in New England: John
Wilson Pastor of Boston. John Norton Teacher of the same. John Mayo Pastor of
New-Boston. Richard Mather Teacher of Dorchester. John Allin Pastor of Dedham.
John Eliot Teacher of Roxbury. Samuel Danforth Pastor of the same. William
Thomson Pastor of Braintry. Henry Flint Teacher of the same. Thomas Thatcher
Teacher of Weymouth. Peter Hubbard Pastor of Hingham. John Miller Pastor of
Yarmouth. John Wilson junior Pastor of Medfield. Zechariah Symmes Pastor of
Charlestown. Thomas Shepard Teacher of the same. Samuel Stone Teacher of
Hartford. Jonathan Mitchel Pastor of Cambridge. John Sherman Pastor of
Watertown. Edmund Brown Pastor of Sudbury. Edward Bulkly Pastor of Concord.
Thomas Carter Pastor of Woborne. Samuel Haugh Pastor of Reding. John Fiske
Pastor of Chelmsford. John Reyner Teacher of Dover. Ezekiel Rogers Teacher of
Rowly. Samuel Philips Teacher of the same. Samuel Whiting Pastor of Lyn. John
Higginson Pastor of Salem. Thomas Cobbet Pastor of Ipswich. William Hubbard
Teacher of the same. Francis Dane Teacher of Andover. William Worcester Pastor
of Salisbury. John Ward Pastor of Haverhil. Timothy Dalton Teacher of Hampton.
Seaborn Cotton of the same. Joseph Emerson Pastor of York. Michael Wigglesworth
Pastor of Maldon. William Walton Minister of the World. Ralph Smith Minister of
the Word. Charles Chauncy, President of Harvard College. Gershom Bulkly Fellows
of the said College. Thomas Graves Fellows of the said College. Zech. Symmes
Fellows of the said College. Zech. Brigden Fellows of the said College.



Numb. IV.
I Might fitly subjoin to the Letter foregoing another Letter of the famous Mr.
JOHN DAVENPORT Bachelor of Divinity, who was Minister of New Haven and
afterward Pastor of the first Church in Boston New England, to the pious DURY
upon the same Occasion that the foregoing Letter was written; which Letter was
signed by the Ministers of Connecticut Colony. This Letter breathes the very
same good and catholic Spirit with the foregoing one. But, lest the Appendix
should swell too much upon us, I consent to the dropping it. N. B. As I
signified concerning the former Letter; so I would advertize concerning this,
that if any Gentlemen or others desire to see the Original Copy of it, I have
it at their Service.

Numb. V.
AND, as a farther Demonstration of the Catholic and Generous Principles of the
first Founders of these Churches, I would ask Leave of the Reader to refer him
to the New England Chronology of the learned and accurate Mr. PRINCE of Boston;
in Pages the Eighty eighth, Eighty ninth, Ninetieth, Ninety first, Ninety
second and Ninety third of which Chronology he will find abundant Satisfaction
upon this Head.

Part the second, containing the Proofs and Evidences of a Consociation of
Churches among these Churches for their mutual Light and Assistance.
IN the twenty first Page of The Discourse concerning Congregational Churches I
have affirmed, that these Churches acknowledge a Consociation of Churches for
imparting mutual Light and Assistance: And in the Eighth Chapter of this Book I
have maintained the same Thing. Now, for the more full Proof and Confirmation
of this Point, I shall here reprint from my honored Grandfather's Book,
entitled, The Order of the Churches in New England vindicated, his Answer to
this Question, Is it expedient that Churches should enter into a Consociation,
or Agreement, that Matters of more than ordinary Importance, such as the
Gathering of a New Church, the Ordination, Deposition, or Translation of a
Pastor be done with common Consent?

Answ. This is both Expedient and Necessary. The Synod which Convened at Boston
Anno 1662. has sufficiently cleared this Point. And although there was in that
Synod some dissent as to the Question about the Subject of Baptism then
discussed; in the Answer to the other Question relating to the Consociation of
Churches, there was an unanimous Concurrence. The Design of which is not (as
has been well observed by Dr. Medul. Theol. L. 1. C. 39. These. 27.
Ames and Mr. De pol. eccles. L. 3. C. 22.
Parker) to infringe the Liberty of particular Churches, but from the Word of
God to direct and strengthen them in the regular Exercise thereof. The Reasons
for it are such as these.

1. The Churches of Christ stand in a Sisterly Relation each to other under
Christ their Head, having the same Faith, and ought to have the same Order.
Ephesians. 4.5. Col. 2.5. Phil. 3.16. This Union implies a suitable Communion, and
that they ought to have a mutual Care each of other. Cant. 8.8.

2. The Scripture teaches that in weighty Cases we should ask Counsel. 2 Samuel
20.18. Prove. 3.5. and 15.22. and 24.6. Which General Rules concern Polities as
well as particular Persons, and Churches as well as civil Societies.

3. There are Scripture Examples to instruct us in our Duty herein. We find,
that when the Church in Antioch had a weighty Case before them, they sent to
another Church for Counsel, Act. 15.2. The Apostle Paul sought for the
Concurrence, and Right Hand of Fellowship of other Apostles, Gal. 2.9. Ordinary
Elders and Churches have no less need of each other to prevent their running in
vain. Gal. 2.2.

4. Such a Communion of Churches as that which we plead for, is no Innovation,
but that which has ever been the Profession and Practice of those that have
been called Congregational. There is a Book which bears the Title of, An Answer
of the Elders of the several Churches in New England to Thirty two Questions,
Printed in the Year 1643. Of which Book my Father Mather was the sole Author.
And he wrote it in the Primitive Times of these Churches, ( viz. in the Year
1639.) as himself assured me. What he wrote was approved of by other Elders,
especially by Mr. Cotton, unto whom he communicated it. Now in Answer to Q. 18.
p. 64. are these Words, The Consociation of Churches into Classes and Synods,
we hold to be lawful, and in some Cases necessary: As namely, in Things that
are not peculiar to one Church, but common to them all. And likewise, when a
Church is not able to end any Matter which concerns only themselves, then they
are to seek for Counsel and Advice from Neighbor Churches, as the Church at
Antioch did send unto the Church at Jerusalem, Act. 15.2. The Ground and Use of
Classes and Synods with the Limitations therein to be observed, is summarily
laid down by Dr. Ames, unto whom we do wholly consent in this Matter. This was,
and is the Judgment of all that adhere to the Order of the Gospel professed in
the Churches of New England. The World is much mistaken in thinking that
Congregational Churches are Independent. The Name has indeed been fastened upon
them by their Adversaries; but our Platform of Discipline Chap. 2. Sect. 5.
disclaims the Name. And so does our renowned Hooker Part 2. Chap. x
in his Survey of Church Discipline. Likewise those famous Apologists in the
Assembly at Westminster, viz. Dr. Goodwin, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Simpson, Mr. Buroughs,
and Mr. Bridge, say, that It is a Maxim to be abhorred, that a single and
particular Society of Men professing the Name of Christ, should arrogate to
themselves an Exemption from giving an Account to, or being censurable by
Neighbor Churches about them. That Apostle of his Age, (as Dr. Goodwin calls
him) Mr. Cotton, the first and forever famous Teacher in this Boston, when he
in the Name of the Elders and Messengers of the Churches, gave to Mr. Mitchel
the Right Hand of Fellowship, at his Ordination to the Pastoral Office in the
Church of Cambridge, he did in a singular Manner recommend to him (and that
excellent Man was to his dying Day mindful of Mr. Cotton's Advice) Endeavors
for the establisment of a Consociation amongst the Churches of Christ
throughout this Colony, that wise Man foreseeing that without this, Disorder
and Confusion would in Process of Time inevitably happen; as I have more
largely declared in In my first Principles of N. E. p. 28. etc.
another Discourse in which Mr. Cotton's Proposals respecting the Consociation
mentioned, are published to the World. Moreover, that the concurring Judgment
of those who are Congregational is according hereunto is evident from the
Declaration of Faith and Order which was agreed unto by the Messengers of One
hundred and Twenty Congregational Churches in England, who met at the Savoy in
London, Anno 1658. They thus declare, (e) In case of Difficulties and
Differences in Point of Doctrine, wherein either the Churches in general are
concerned in their Peace, Union and Edification, or any Member or Members of
any Church are injured in, or by any Proceeding in Censures not agreeable to
Truth and Order: It is according to the Mind of Christ, that many Churches
holding Communion together, do by their Messengers meet in a Synod or Council
to consider and give their Advice in, or about the Matter in Difference. But
the Testimony of that Blessed Jeremiah Buroughs puts the Thing beyond all
Dispute. For his Words are these, In his I^enicum. p. 43, 44,-47.
Those in the Congregational Way acknowledge, 1. That they are bound in
Conscience to give Account of their Ways to Churches about them, or to any
other who shall require it. This not in an Arbitrary way, but as a Duty which
they owe to God and Man. 2. They acknowledge that Synods of other Ministers and
Elders about them are an Ordinance of Jesus Christ for the helping the Church
against Errors, Schisms and Scandals. 3. That these Synods may from the Power
they have from Christ, admonish Men and Churches in his Name, when they see
Evils continuing in, or growing upon the Church, and their Admonitions carry
with them the Authority of Jesus Christ. 4. As there shall be Cause, they may
declare Men or Churches to be subverters of the Faith, or otherwise according
to the Nature of their Offense, to shame them before all the Churches about
them. 5. They may by a solemn Act in the Name of Jesus Christ, refuse any
further Communion with them till they repent. 6. They may declare also in the
Name of Christ, that those erring People or Churches are not to be received
into Fellowship with an of the Churches of Christ, nor to have Communion with
any other in the Ordinances of Christ.


If it shall be said, surely they do not come up to these six Things mentioned.
To that I answer, (says Mr. Buroughs) I do not in these deliver only my own
Judgment, but by what I know of the Judgment of all those Brethren with whom I
have Occasion to converse by Conference both before and since, I stand charged
to make it good to be their Judgment also; yea, it has been theirs and mine for
diverse Years, even then when we never thought to have enjoyed our own Land
again. We see by these Testimonies that Congregational Men in general, as well
as the Churches of New England in special, are no such Independents, no such
Brownists, no such Morellians, as some have represented them to be.

5. If we admit not a Consociation of Churches, there will be no Remedy against
the Male Administrations of particular Churches; nor any Cure of Schisms, or
Errors that may happen in our Churches. This has been objected (but
injuriously) as a Scandal attending the Congregational Church Discipline, and
that therefore it is a Way not practicable. Indeed if we refuse this part of
Church Communion, the Objection would be unanswerable. And who would be willing
to be a Member of that Church, in which although he should be never so much
wronged, there would be no Relief for him upon Earth? There was once a Church
in New England, which having censured one of their Members, he complained of
the supposed Wrong done him, to Neighbor Elders, who thought he had received
hard Measure. The Pastor and major part of the Church were not willing the Case
should have a re-hearing before the Elders and Messengers of other Churches.
Upon this, great Clamours were raised, and Prejudices taken up against the
Congregational Discipline. Mr. Cawdrey got this Story by the End, and in his
Epistle to the Dissenting Brethren, p. 10. He says that a Minister in N. E.
writes over to England, that this injured Person would have no remedy until the
Churebes in New England were become Presbyterians, and that if Independency
does not break all the Churches in New England excepting a few
Semi-Presbyterians, some are deceived. Who the Minister was that wrote thus to
England, Mr. Cawdrey tell us not. But it is a great Wrong to the Churches of
New England, and to the way Congregational, to represent them, and all that are
of that way, as being of such Independent and Unaccountable Principles, which
they utterly disclaim. Dr. Owen in his Disciplinary Catechism, and especially
in the Additament thereunto, (which was written on Occasion of a harsh and rash
Censure in the Independent Church in Cambridge in England) has with great
Evidence of Reason, refuted the maintainers of such an Independency.

6. The Order asserted is (as has been truly observed by the Learned Doctor
last mentioned) confirmed by the Practice of the first Churches after the
Apostles: For when the Church in Corinth had by an undue Exercise of Discipline
deposed some of their Elders, the Church of Rome taking Cognizance of it, wrote
to them, reproving their rashness, and advised their Restoration as it is to be
seen in the Epistle of Clement then Pastor of the Church in Rome, which Clement
is thought to be the same whom Paul speaks of, Phil. 4.3. And when the Church
of Antioch was afterward troubled with the Heresies of their Pastor
Samosetanus, the Neighboring Pastors came unto the Church, and joined their
Concurrence in his Deposition. It is certain that in the next Ages to the
Apostles, a Pastor was not settled in any Church without the Concurrence of
others. When the Church had Elected a Pastor, they presented him to the
Neighbor Pastors for their Approbation, nor could he be legally confirmed
without it. Lib. 5. C. 11.
Eusebius tells us that when Alexander was chosen Pastor of the Church in
Jerusalem by the Brethren of that Place, he had the common Consent of the
Circumjacent Pastors. And thus (as Cyprian informs us) it was practiced in all
the Churches throughout Africa. He speaks particularly concerning Sabinus, who
was Elected a Pastor of Eremita in Spain, that Neighbor Ministers concurred in
his Ordination, after the Fraternity had Elected him. His Words are, Cygrian.
Epist. 68.
Quod factum videmus in sabini Ordinatione ut de universae Fraternitatis
suffragio, and de Episcoporum judicio, Episcopatus ei deferetur. We find in
Ecclesiastical Story, that in the Primitive Times the Names of Persons to be
ordained were published abroad that so if any one had ought to object they
might produce it. Which Custom of the Christians in the Election of their
Pastors was so highly approved of by the Emperor Severus, as that he would have
it put in Practice in establishing Governors of Provinces throughout the
Empire.

7. Neither do the Reformed Churches ordain a Minister without the concurrence
and approbation of Neighbor Ministers. To give the Right Hand of Fellowship to
a new ordained Minister, was a usual Custom amongst the Churches in Bohemia,
for which they alleged this Scripture, Gal. 2.9. as is testified by Ratio.
Discipline. p. 33.
Comenius. In the beginning of the Reformation in the Church of Scotland, one
Article of their Discipline, is, That when a Minister is ordained the rest of
the Ministers shall take the Elected by the Hand in sign of their Consent, as
is related in the History of the Reformation (b), which goes under the Name of
Mr. Knox. I find also, that there is the like Practice in the Protestant French
Churches, etc.

Part the third; containing a Vindication of the New-English Churches in sundry
Instances, taken from A Letter of Advice to the Churches of the Non-Conformists
in the English Nation, endeavoring their Satisfaction in that Point, who are
the true Church of England; which Letter was written by Dr. MATHER my honored
Father and published at London in the Year 1700. N.B. The infamous Wesley, in
his printed Abuses of Mr. MORTON'S Academy, where the Alms of the Dissenters,
especially of the renowned Dr. OWEN, had given him his Education, laments the
Danger of the Church of England from Three, whom he makes considerable
Adversaries, whereof the Writer of this Letter of Advice is one: But he
concludes with comforting himself, that the Intercession of K. CHARLES the
Martyr in the Heavens for it will preserve it.
THE Author of this Letter having shown, that the Dissenters in England are
more strict Adherers to the Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England than
some who make the greatst Noise in behalf of that Church, then proceeds as
follows.

-- But the Non-conformists cannot be sincere Members of the Church of England,
because they do not acknowledge the Divine Right of the Modern DIOCESAN
EPISCOPACY. No! I pray, why not? Let us a little enquire into the Judgment of
the Old and the True Church of England upon this Matter, and it will presently
appear, that you are far more of the Church of England, than those Fanatics
(of late so much increased) that not only advance the Jus Divinum of their
Diocesan Episcopacy, but also question the validity of the Sacraments
administered by any that have not received their Ordination from it. Albeit the
present Form of making and consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, asserts,
That Bishops and Priests are distinct Orders, and they must be published as
Excommunicate, who affirm, That this Book does contain any thing in it
repugnant to the Word of God: Yet, my Brethren, from the Beginning it was not
so. Behold, The Church of England it self stands Excommunicate by its own
Canons, as much as you. It is notorious, that the Diocesan Episcopacy and the
National Church Government by Bishops, was never owned to be Jure Divino until
K. James I. came to be King of England. It was he, who upon the Enchantments of
Bancroft, first yielded unto that, which his Predecessors would never have
endured. See this proved in Mr. Lob's True Dissenter, Chap. 1.
Even in King Elfrick's Days, Spelman, p. 576. l. 17.
the Church of England plainly denied Bishops and Priests to be distinct
Orders. But I will not carry you back to such early Days. In the Days of King
Henry the Eighth, Tindal In his Practice of Popish Prelates.
expressly maintained, That the Apostles following the Rule of Christ, ordained
in his Kingdom and Congregation Two Officers; one called Bishop, which same was
called Priest and Elder; and another called Deacon. All that were called Elders
or Priests (he says) were called Bishops also. Thus wrote the Martyr who was
owned by his Enemies themselves, Homo doctus, pius, and bonus.

Lambert expressly maintained, In Acts and Mon, Vol. 2.
That in the Primitive Church there were no more Officers than Bishops and
Deacons; and Hierom says, Those we call Priest, are all one, and no other but
Bishops, and the Bishops none other but Priests. One of the Articles against
Barnes, was Ibid.
his holding, That they who in one Place are called Episcopi, or Bishops, you
shall find in many that they be called Preshops, or Elders; and that according
to Athanasius, every City should have its proper Pastor; and according to
Chrysostom, the Teachers were not to be distracted with the governing many
Churches, but have the Care and Charge of one Church only. And this Persuasion
wherein you thus follow your Fathers, the Blessed Martyrs of the Church of
England, at last prevailed so far, that Cranmer himself, with others, embraced
it. Yea, 'twas not long before this became a Point established by Authority;
and, in The necessary Erudition of a Christian Man, a Book then published by
Authority, as the Doctrine of the Church of England, it is expressly affirmed,
That of these two Orders only [Priests and Deacons] Scripture makes express
mention. The Sea the Addenda to Dr. Eurnet's History of Reformation, p 324.
Declaration about the Institution of Bishops and Priests, then also subscribed
by the brave Lord Cromwell and the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and other
Bishops and Civilians, denied any Superiority of a Bishop above a Priest, to be
found in the New Testament, and allowed unto a Priest the Power of Ordination,
and of Excommunication. In the very first Year of Edward the Sixth's Reign,
there was an Act of Parliament, which History of Edward VI, p. ^1.
as Heylin complains, forced the Episcopal Order from their strong hold of
Divine Institution, and make them no other than the King's Ministers only. Dr.
Poinet, the Bishop of Winchester, then writing against Gardener, shows, That
the Refermers in those Days, were willing even to lay aside the Name of Bishop,
and say Elder instead of it. And the incomparable Cranmer in his Resolutions to
the King's Questions, approved by other Bishops, has these express Words,
Resal. to Q. 1^.
The Bishops and Priests were not two distinct Things, but hoth one Office in
the beginning of Christ's Religion; and he farther makes it manifest, that the
great Reformers owned not Episcopacy as a distinct Order from Presbytery to be
of Divine Right, but only as a prudent Constitution of the Magistrates for the
better governing of the Church. Beacon also, a famous Protestant Refugee in Q.
Mary's Time, in his Catechisir, dedicated to both Archbishops, puts the
Question, What difference is there between a Bishop and a Presbyter? And
answers, None at all; their Office is the same, their Authority and Power is
one. Upon the revival of the Reformation, at Q. Elizabeth's coming to the
Crown, the most acknowledged and celebrated Writers of the Church of England,
still made the very same Concession. Dr. Alley, the Bishop of Exeter, in his
Miscellanea, Alley's Poor Man's Library, Tom. 1. p. 95, 96.
proves, both from the Acts of the Apostles, and from the Epistle to the
Philippians, That the Scriptures make no difference between Bishops and Elders;
and he says, That before Factions, by the instinct of the Devil, began in
Religion, the Churches were governed by the Common Council of the Priests, or
Elders. Dr. Pilkinton, Bishop of Duresme, in his Confutation of the Addition,
affirms, That the Privileges and Superiorities which Bishops have above other
Ministers, be rather granted by Man for maintaining of Quietness in the
Commonwealth, than commanded by God in his Word. The rare Dr. Whitaker, De
Eccles. Regim. cont. 4. q. 1., 29. p. 540. col. 2.
making his Remarks on Jerome's Confession, That the Difference between
Presbyters and Bishops, was brought in by Men long after the Apostles, as a
Remedy against Schism; assures us, That it is a Remedy worse than the Malady.
And Bishop Morton Apol. Cathol. l. 1. c. 21. p. 55.
tells the Papists, That the Power of Order and of Jurisdiction which they
ascribe to Bishops, does De Jure Divino, belong to all other Presbyters. But,
that I may supersede a vast Number of other Quotations to this Purpose, let it
suffice, That the excellent Bishop Jewel delivers this not as his private
Opinion, but as the sense of the Church of England: Apol. Part 2. chapter 3. Div. 5.
In Saint Jerome's time, (says he) there were Metropolitans, Archbishops, and
Archdeacons, and others; but Christ appointed not these Distinctions of Orders
from the Beginning. This is the Thing which we defend. St. Jerome says, Let
Bishops understand, that they are in Authority over Priests, more by Custom
than by Order of God's Truth. Erasmus speaking of the Times of Jerome, says, Id
temporis idem erat Episcopus, Sacerdos and Presbyter; these three Names,
Bishops, Priest, and Presbyter at that Time were all one; and unto this
Testimony of Jerome, the Bishop adds that of St. Austin, That the Office of a
Bishop is above the Office of a Priest, not by Authority of the Scripture, but
after the Names of Honor, which the Custom of the Church has now obtained.
Yea, Archbishop Whitgift himself, speaking of the Government of the Church of
England by Bishops, in his Time, Tract, 17. chapter 8. Dio. 29.
says, It is well known, that the Manner and Form of Government used in the
Apostles Time, and expressed in the Scripture, is not now observed; but has of
Necessity been altered; and that any one kind of external Government
perpetually to be observed, is no where in the Scripture prescribed unto the
Church, but the Charge thereof is lest unto the Magistrate. Neither do I know
(says he) any Learned Man of a contrary Judgment.

You see, Sirs, that Cranmer and Jewel, and the Chief of the Reformers, are as
good as Excommunicated by the New Church of England; but you will, I know,
readily receive them into your Communion, and may now in this Point value your
selves, as being of the same Church of England with them. Indeed very few of
the Bishops themselves asserted any other than what you assert about this
Matter, until all Things were to be put into the Hands of a Party, that in
pursuance of certain secret Articles, were to effect an Accommodation with
Rome; and then by the Jus Divinum of Prelacy, the Power of Opposition must be
taken out of the Hands of the Inferior Clergy, who generally abhorred that
vile Design. But it has ever since been growing upon the Nation: See Def. of
Mr. Henry of Schism, p. 35.
Though I am informed the present Learned Bishop of Salisbury has learnedly and
courageously appeared on your Side against it. Vind. of the Church of Scotland,
p. 306.
We will then pass to another Article, viz. That of your DISCIPLINE, which is
too severe a Thing to be allowed by some that would be offended, if you should
not allow them to be the only Church of England. It will doubtless be as great
a Satisfaction as Vindication, for you to find the True Church of England
approving and applauding that very Discipline which is in your Churches
practiced: Now we all know what the Liturgy of the Church of England requires
of all its Communicants: Examine your Lives and Conversations by the Rule of
God's Commandment, [These are the express Words in the Order for the
Administration of the Lord's Supper:] 'And whereinsoever ye shall perceive your
selves to have offended, either by Will, Word, or Deed, bewail your own
Sinfulness, and confess your selves to Almighty God, with full purpose of
amendment of Life. And if ye shall perceive your Offenses to be such as are not
only against God, but also against your Neighbors, then ye shall reconcile
your selves unto them. If any of you be a Blasphemer of God, an Hinderer, or
Slanderer of his Word, an Adulterer, or be in Malice, or Envy, or any other
grievous Crime, repent you of your Sins, or else come not unto that Holy Table,
lest after the taking of that Holy Sacrament, the Devil enter into you as he
entered into Judas, and bring you to Destruction both of Body and Soul.

Now, my Brethren, all the strictness used in your Churches about the Terms and
Ways of admission to the Lord's Table with you, is nothing more nor less but a
Trial of your Communicants, whether they have those Qualifications which the
Liturgy of the Church of England has prescribed. Indeed, in some of your
Churches the Candidates of the Communion have not their Admission, without
certain Public Circumstances of expressing their Consent unto the Covenant of
Grace. But this is no more than what I find the more pious Divines in the
Church of England wishing and writing for. And one of them not Seven Years ago,
has published his Mind in these Terms: Snoden's Plea for Abatement, p. 41.
Would it not very much conduce to the Honor of God, and the Edification of
the People, in their most holy Faith, if every Person baptized into the
Christian Faith, should be obliged, when he comes to Years of Discretion, to
appear in the Public Congregation, there to make a Confession of his Faith, to
recognize his Primitive Engagement, to avow that in his own Person which was
done for him by Proxy; and that the Minister of the Congregation should
recommend the Person to the Grace of God. I durst say, that the strict Churches
of New England it self, which wisely choose to be as explicit as may be, in
managing their Church Matters, do not ask for any thing more than what this
Learned Son of the Church of England has thus propounded. And whereas you are
for maintaining a Godly Discipline in your Churches toward those who
scandalously break the Laws of our Lord Jesus Christ, is this any more than the
very Common Prayer Book of the Church of England has encouraged? You know that
the first Words of the Commination against Sinners in that Book are these:
Brethren, in the Primitive Church there was a Godly Discipline, that such
Persons as stood convicted of notorious Sin, were put unto open Penance; --
instead whereof, until the said Discipline may be restored again, which is much
to be wished, it is thought good that at this Time should be read the General
Sentences of God's Cursing against impenitent Sinners. Now, I hope, you will
not be denied your being a part of the Church of England, merely because you
have actually Restored that which the Church of England advises us, It were
much to be wished that it might be restored. I believe the Churches of
New England it self, in their Platform of Church Discipline, has not a more
severe Passage than that in the Homilies of the Church of England: The Second
Part of the Homily of The Right use of the Church.
According to the Example of our Savior Christ, and the Primitive Church,
which was most holy and godly, and in the which due Discipline with severity
was against the wicked, open Offenders were not admitted unto the use of the
Holy Sacrament with other true Christians, until they had done open Penance
before the whole Church: And this was practiced not only upon mean Persons, but
also upon the Rich, Noble, and Mighty. Behold, Sirs, your Discipline is by the
Church of England it self, called, A due Discipline. The Church of England
having thus allowed your Discipline, I hope now a few CEREMONIES, which by its
own Confession were never Instituted by the Lord Jesus Christ, will never be
counted so Essential to it, that for the want thereof you must be cast out of
Doors. Believe it, Sirs, an House built merely upon Ceremonies, or Parts and
Means of Worship, not Instituted in the Sayings of our Lord Jesus Christ, will
doubtless one Day suster a Storm wherein it will Fall, and great will be the
Fall of it. But that for your aversion to the Uninstituted Ceremonies, you may
have as clear a Direction from the Church of England as may be, I desire to be
informed, Whether the Confession of Faith in an hundred Articles on the Creed,
composed by Dr. Hooper, the excellent Bishop of Gloucester, were not then
agreeable to the sense of the Church? Now in the Eighty-fifth of these Articles
there is this remarkable Passage: They are not only Idolaters which worship and
serve Idols, and strange Gods, as the Ethnicks, and such like, but also all
those that worship and serve the true God of Heaven, after their own Fantasy,
or after the Traditions of Men, without Faith, without the Word of God, and
otherwise than God has commanded them. This is indeed a terrible Passage; and
it is the Terror of what is in it, that has made you to be what you are: But
it is none of you, it is a very Reverend Bishop of the Church of England that
has written it; and in the same Confession has he also written, That upon
pain of deadly Sin, to forbid and command Things that indeed are but
Indifferent, is the only Note and Mark by which to know Antichrist. Our more
conformable Friends in the Church of England hear not you calling them
Idolaters, and yet they, as well as you, will own, That the Surplice made an
Appurtenance of Divine Worship, the Cross in Baptism, and Kneeling before the
Eucharist, and the like, are Things introduced in the Service of the true God
of Heaven, after their own Fantasy, and after the Traditions of Men, and
without the Word of God, and otherwise than God has commanded. If therefore
you decline such Things, the Church of England will certainly excuse you, while
you have the Confession of Faith published by its own Bishops, thus charming
you so to do; especially since there are of the Bishops Dr. Tailor for one, who
acknowledged, That the Sign of the Cross, as now retained, is a Part of
external Worship, though it be an Uninstituted Ceremony. The Church of England,
with all Protestants, will grant you, That all Worship of God, not appointed,
is unlawful; and that no Power on Earth can add any Thing to the Worship of
God. Dr. Sherlock Answer to Prot. Reconciler, p. 56.
himself will grant you, That such significant Ceremonies as are merely for
Signification in the Christian Religion, do only obscure and debase, and are
only fit for the Entertainment of Children. And you, finding that the
Ceremonies now used by the Conformable in the Church of England, are used and
urged as direct Expressions of the reverence of the Heart unto God, cannot look
on them as any other than Parts of external Worship, the Invention whereof is
forbidden in the Second Commandment. Now, if you are delivered from the Yoke of
these unhappy Ceremonies, I know not why you should thereby come to be by the
Church of England worse looked upon than the most famous Divines of that
Church, who in their best Writings are still groaning for a Deliverance. Will
the Church of England renounce Bishop Bilson for saying, That the Reformed
Churches are so far from admitting the full Dose of the Heresies of the
Papists, that by no Means they can digest a Dram of their Ceremonies? Will they
renounce ^^r, Humphrey, for saying, That we ought to refuse to conform unto the
Enemies of God in any of their Ceremonies, and that he wished and hoped for the
utter abolishing of all the Monuments of Popish Superstition which yet remain
in our Church? Will they renounce Dr. More, for saying, That, It is an
Antichristian use of Church Government, to direct it unto the upholding of
Scandalous Ceremonies, and the ensnaring Inventions of Men? A thousand more
such Passages occur in the Writings of the Divines, who have all along been
reputed the Fathers of the Church of England. Se^ a Collection in Del^^^'s's
Plea for the Non-conformists.
Will the Church now renounce these Divines? Let them! And you, my Brethren, I
am confident, will be glad of their Company. But I suppose there is another
Thing that a little stumbles you; and that is this: If Conformity to the
Ceremonies be necessary to render one a Church of England Man, why should not
Nonconformity exclude one as well as another from that Character?
Supraconformity is no less Nonconformity than Subter-conformity. Multitudes in
England continually Go beyond the Rule of Conformity; why should not these be
Non-conformists as well as they that fall short of it? It is Enacted, That no
Form or Order of Common Prayer, Administration of Sacraments, Rites,
Ceremonies, shall be openly used in any Church, Chapel, or other public Place,
of or in any College or Hall, in either of the Universities, the Colleges of
Westminster, Winchester, or Eaton, or any of them, other than what is
prescribed and appointed to be used in and by the Book of Common Prayer. Now in
that Book, there are no where found several Ceremonies now practiced, nor
Orders used in many of the public Churches. Nonconformity being indeed
nothing but a varying from the Rule established; the Addition made by some to
that Rule, one would think should be Nonconformity, as well as the
Substraction made by others: And the Churches that perform the Worship of
Christ with Organs be Non-conformists as well as they that omit the Cross, and
some other Superfluities. I Will only touch upon this One Instance instead of
many; the Rubric requires, That the Communion Table shall stand in the Body of
the Church, or in the Chancel, and the Priest shall stand at the North-side of
the Table; so making it a Table according to the other Churches of the
Reformation; (which accordingly they observe in the Temple, where the Law is
best understood and practiced;) and yet in opposition to Authority in most
Places, they set it North and South, clapping it unto the Wall at the East End
of the Church, with Rails before it, as if (according to the Church of Rome) it
were an Altar. This is contrary to the Law; and I have read, This one Thing may
well be thought for to have given Encouragement unto the Non-conformists in
some other Cases. Briefly, If you must be no Part of the Church of England,
because you don't kneel at the Communion, I pray let the Priest who does not
stand where by the Law of Conformity he ought to stand at the Communion, be
discarded also! Though furious Bigots for Conformity will give no Answer but
Railing to all of this Reason; yet you, my Brethren, will calmly afford a
reasonable Attention to it. But you must by the way be prevailed withal to
cease wondering at such Contradictions. If they seem wonderful to you, you will
find continual Matter of Wondermen^^ For Instance, The Scripture commands us,
Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers; but the Apocrypha contradicts it,
Eccles. 11.34. dissuading us from Receiving a Stranger into our House. The
Scripture commands us, Love your Enemies, do good to them that hate you; be
like your heavenly Father, who makes the Sun to rise upon the evil and the
good; but the Apocrypha contradicts it, Eccles. 12.4, 7. Give to the godly Man,
and help not a Sinner; and again, Give to the Good, and help not the Sinner. No
Argument could prevail with our Unreformables to expunge these Lessons; but in
the Month of October these Lessons of the Apocrypha must be read as the
Doctrines of the Church of England: And then you must subscribe, That nothing
is ordained to be read, but the very pure Words of God, or that which is
agreeable to them. An abundance of such Contradictions will accost you, in that
which with a Contradiction equal to the rest, would be called, The only Church
of England.

If it be now objected against you, That the Dislike of the COMMON PRAYER is a
Thing that will utterly debar you from any Part in the Church of England; it
will be no Defense for you to plead, That Old King James himself, a great
Patron to the Church of England, called the Common Prayer, An ill-said Mass in
English; for he was yet with the Kirk of Scotland when he so called it. But you
may defend your selves by this, That several Bishops in the Church of England,
namely, Williams, Prideaux, Brownrig, Hacket, with Archbishop Usher in the
Head of them, disliked the Common Prayer so much, as to present unto the
English Parliament no less than Thirty-five Exceptions against several Things
in it, calling for a Reformation. It their Exceptions did not forfeit their
Claim to be of the Church, why should yours?

Perhaps they will complain of you, That you do not use the LORD'S PRAYER as a
Form. If they do, you may stop the Complaint, by citing to them not only an
Army of the Ancients, but one who has been a great Oracle to the Church of
England, even Grotius himself, declaring, That our Lord bound not his Disciples
to the use of those Words and Syllables. If he did, why does the Church of
England it self presume to alter them? In the Common Prayer Book the Form still
is, Forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that Trespass against us. The
Church of England herein varies from the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ: In
Matthew his Words are, Forgive us our Debts as we forgive our Debtors: In Luke
his Words are, Forgive us our Sins, for we forgive every one that is indebted
unto us. Why must you be tied unto a Form of Words? The Church of England, even
when most pretending to a Form, will not be tied, even to That for which there
is the most pretense. The Infatuation discovered by the Common Prayer thus
altering the Form and Phrase of the Lord's Prayer, deserves to be considered!
It may be, when you have silenced some of those froward Children in
Christianity, from insisting on all their other Impertinencies, they will still
refuse to visit your Assemblies, because the Houses wherein you hold them, are
not so Fine and Gay as many of their public Churches. But you may presently
show them, That the Gaudy Trimmings bestowed on some of their Churches are
directly contrary to the Church of England. For the Homily against the Peril of
Idolatry, expressly declares against the Abuses of Churches and Temples, by too
costly and sumptuous decking and adorning of them. The Third Part of the Homily
against the Peril of Idolatry.


These and such Points might be improved much more largely, to demonstrate,
That you are indeed among the TRUEST SONS of the True Church of England: But
what needs any more, since it is a Maxim, (and there is no need of quoting
Avicen for the Maxim) Quicquid sufficientiae additur, superfluitati ascribitur?
All that you will now demand of me, is to describe clearly and fairly to you,
What is that NEW CHURCH of England whereto you do not belong, and I suppose,
are not very willing to belong? It Is very certain, there is a Party in the
English Nation usurping the Name of the Church of England, whereto it will be
as little your Honor as it is your Desire to be United; and which (as one says)
differs as much from the OLD CHURCH of England, as Nebuchadnezzar grazing among
Beasts in the Field, from Nebuchadnezzar sitting on his glittering Throne.

Know then, my Brethren, That by a prevailing Faction in England, the Canon Law
which pretends to Form the Church of England, has been more than once altered,
since the Family of the Stewarts came to sit on the Throne of Great Britain;
and the Alteration has now made a New Church in England of quite another kind,
than what was before. There is now established by Law a National Church, which
the Canons do (though Archbishop Whitgift a little before durst not) affirm to
be a True and Apostolical Church. The Bishops, which before then, durst as well
have eaten Fire as have pretended to be as Diocesan Bishops, any other than the
King's Officers, do by the Canons now lay Claim to a Divine Right. But because
it puzzles them to make the King, who is not a Person in Orders, the Head of
the Church, having these Officers under him, and yet for to make the
Archbishop of Canterbury the Head of the Church, is Treason; here they are in
Confusion: And I suppose, you my Brethren, will not ask to be of this Church
till you see them extricated out of this Confusion. To proceed, In the National
Church thus established, there are Twenty-six Diocesses, which the Canons make
particular Churches of the lowest Rank; and though there be such vast Numbers of
Parishes in these Diocesses, the Canons have utterly divested them of the
Character of particular Churches, which once they had something of, and they
make no more than Twenty-six Churches, and no more than Twenty-six Pastors in
the whole Kingdom of England. The Parish-Presbyters are by the Canons
altogether stripped of all Power to Ordain, or to Confirm, or to Excommunicate;
though once there was a Power of Jurisdiction conceded unto them, which then made
the Old Non-conformists to look on the Parish-Ministers as Pastors, and the
Parishes as retaining the Substantials of particular Churches. You, my
Brethren, have been ready to say with Dr. Goodwin, In some of the Parishes of
the Kingdom, there are many godly Men that constantly give up themselves unto
the Worship of God in public, and meet together in one Place, to that end, in
a constant way, under a godly Ministry whom they themselves have chosen to
cleave unto, (though they did not choose him at first;) these, notwithstanding
their mixture and want of Discipline, I never thought, for my part, but they
were true Churches of Christ. But now the Diocesan Church Government being by
Canon established, the Parishes are no more allowed any of them to be
particular Churches. Archbishop Laud laboring for a full Settlement of this
New Church State, perished in the way: But upon the Restoration of King
Charles II. the Labors of the New Set, for to obtain Laud's Model, found more
Success. In those places of the Common Prayer, where they found the Word
[Pastor] they blotted it out, and put in Priest, or Curate. And in the New Book
of Ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, not only the Execution of the
Office, but the very Office of a Priest is taken away from all that have not
Episcopal Ordination. The Epistles and Gospels to be formerly read at the
Ordination of Priests, which referred unto the Pastoral Office, are now to be
read only at the Consecration of a Bishop. All Presbyterian Ordinations were
declared null and void by the memorable Act of Uniformity, and they that had no
more were pronounced as naturally Dead. This Diocesan Church of England,
according to Canon, receives to Baptism the Children of all Parents, (be they
Jewish or Pagan) that are brought unto the Minister. And every Baptized
Inhabitant within the Diocese, if he be not Excommunicated, or does say, That
he heartily desires the Lord's Supper, is admitted unto that Sacrament also, if
he will take it according to the Form in the Liturgy, (by the common Custom of
the Church) although he be never so ungodly. Whatever Admonitions the Rubric or
Canons do give against admitting the Wicked unto the Sacraments, it is yet
abundantly provided in them, That the Administrator shall be incapable of
excluding the wickedest alive. But at the same Time, See Can. 27.
all those who refuse to Kneel at the reception of the Sacrament, or who refuse
to be present at Public Prayers, according to the Order of the Church of
England; which Orders be, See Can. 18.
Reverently to Kneel, when the General Confession, Litany, and other Prayers
are read, and Stand up at the saying of the Belief, and Bow at the Name of
Jesus, and Say in their due place and audibly with the Minister, the
Confession, the Lord's Prayer, and the Creed, and make such other Answers to
the Public Prayers as are appointed in the Book of Common Prayer; all such as
refuse to do any of these Things, are to be denied the Communion; and what
Minister soever shall wittingly admit them, he is liable to Suspension. Yea,
whosoever affirms, That the Church of England, as by Law thus established, is
not formed according to Divine Institution, (or Apostolical) is ipso facto to
be looked upon as Excommunicated. See Can. 3, 4, 6, 7.
This is the Roaring of the Ecclesiastical Canons, and the Clergy by their Oath
of Canonical Obedience, are sworn to observe these as well as the rest of the
Canons. My Brethren, while you belong long to the CHRISTIAN CHURCH OF ENGLAND,
you have all the Reason imaginable to hear it, and bear it, and own it
patiently, if you be told that you do not belong unto this DIOCESAN CHURCH OF
ENGLAND. For, First, If I be not mistaken, this presumptuous CANONICAL CHURCH
OF ENGLAND has Excommunicated the best of Princes, (notwithstanding its
pretended Loyalty) if they do but offer to contest any Part of its
Constitution; and it will be no Dishonor unto you to be partakers with such
illustrious Heads, in suffering these Contradictions of Sinners. Perhaps you will
be surpised at this; but if any Princes or Parliaments, who declare, That they
who cannot use the Ceremonies of the Church of England, may be Men of very good
Conscience, escape an Excommunication by the Sixth Canon of the Church, which
is, Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England by Law established, are such as being commanded by lawful
Authority, Men who are zealously and godlily affected, may not with any good
Conscience approve them, use them, or subscribe unto them, let him be
Excommunicated ipso facto: I doubt the Eighth Canon bears too hard upon them.
According to that, Whosoever shall hereafter affirm or teach, That the Form and
Manner of making and consecrating Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, contains any
Thing in it that is repugnant unto the Word of God, let them be Excommunicated
ipso facto, and not be restored until be repent, and publicly revoke such his
wicked Error. That Form does assert, That Bishops and Priests are distinct
Orders in Christ's Church; and that it is evident unto all Men diligently
reading the Holy Scriptures, that from the Apostles Time they have been so. Now
suppose any Princes give the Royal Assent unto an Act for the extirpation of
Bishops in one of the Three Kingdoms; have they not very emphatically taught
us, That this Assertion in the Form of consecrating Bishops and Priests, is not
according to the Word of God? Have they not very sufficiently afirm'd, That the
Word of God obliges us not for to acknowledge Bishops of an Order distinct from
other Ministers in the Church of Christ? We'll suppose they have somewhere or
other in express Terms, They are the express Words of the Act abolishing
Frelacy, July 5. 1689.
abolished Prelacy and Superiority in any Office in the Church above
Presbyters; and declared and ordained the The Act restoring Presbytery, July
25. 1689.
Government of the Church there, by Presbyters without Bishops, to be the only
true and proper Government thereof. I am certain, this is to proclaim it with a
witness, That the Superiority of Bishops, as an Order above Presbyters, is not
Instituted in the Word of God. And at the same Time it is to maintain, That the
Doctrine of the Form of making Bishops and Priests, which asserts that
Superiority of Order to be of Divine Right, is repugnant unto the Word of God.
These Princes it seems, (which indeed I abhor to mention) stand excommunicated
ipso facto, by the Eighth Canon of the Church of England, until they repent and
publicly revoke the wicked Errors committed in abolishing that Prelacy.

This CANONICAL CHURCH continuing to offer such Affronts unto Majesty, you may
well decline to be any Part of it, until they repent and publicly revoke their
wicked Canons. But that which may confirm you in this aversion to that Church,
is the Wrong which those Canons do to all the Ministers of the Lord Jesus
Christ in the World. For according to them, none of the Scotch, or Dutch, or
French Ministers, nor any of your own, are true Ministers of the Lord Jesus
Christ, while they want Episcopal Ordination. Albeit, the famous Mr. Seldom has
out of Eutychius proved, That not only Bishops, but Patriarchs themselves, were
in the Primitive Times Ordained by Presbyters; yet now, forsooth, according to
our New Church, none may be owned for so much as Presbyters, but such as have
been Ordained by Diocesan Bishops. And therefore, although this Canonical Church
will admit a Popish Priest upon his Abjuration, to be a Minister without
Reordination, it will not without Reordination, admit any of these who are
the best of Protestants. Yea, and when this Church has admitted any unto its
Ministry, it presently strips them of their Rights that are essential to all
true Ministers of the Lord Jesus Christ. And here I will not insist on this,
That by the Canons of this Church, its own Ministers have not so much as
Liberty for one Occasional Prayer of their own left unto them. All the
Conformists are by the Thirty-sixth Canon to subscribe ex animo, a Covenant,
That they will use the Form in the Book of Common Prayer prescribed in Public
Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and NONE OTHER. Indeed a Custom
for Ministers to pray without Book in the Pulpit, is connived at; but in as
much as they are Public Prayers, I know others besides Mr. Baxter, who doubt
them to be a Breach of the Canon-Covenant. I pass from this, to say, I suppose
you are desirous to acknowledge all the Parish-Presbyters faithfully feeding
their willing Flocks in the Realm, notwithstanding their Conformity to be True
Ministers of the Gospel; but their own Canons, even those to which they
themselves have sworn, do all they can to forbid your doing so. For you, and
they too, must readily own, That unto the Office of a Minister of the Gospel,
here are two Things Essential, namely, Obligation to Teach, and Authority to
Rule the Flock. Whereas the Canons, whatever they require in some Clauses, do
evidently release the Parish-Minister from Obligation to Teach, by providing,
That the Sacraments are not to be refused at the Hands of Unpreaching
Ministers. And the whole Authority to Rule, is by the Canons reserved unto the
Bishop, to be executed by his Lay-Chancellor; so that the Parish-Minister
cannot exclude the veriest Infidel in the World from the Sacraments, if a
certain Lay-Chancellor do order his Reception. Briefly, No Ordained Priest may
take upon him, to Expound any Scripture, or Matter, or Doctrine, (or do any
more than read) so much as to his own Family, till he have a License from his
Ordinary. And he then too has no more Power than any Layman to censure an
Offender, or to judge who are worthy to be censured. Though the Rubric and Canon
do seem sometimes to favor the Significancy of the Curates, yet elsewhere it
the more inexcusably renders them utterly Insignificant. Doubtless you will
wonder how that the Clergy themselves can with Patience endure to be so
nullified, as they are by this their Canonical Church, or to see themselves
more honored by you that are Non-conformists than they are by their own
Canons! But you are sensible what Force it is that obliges them unto their
Patience. To see the Ministers of the Gospel so Degraded as they are by Canons,
gives Offense unto you, if not unto them; and methinks it should be no Offense
unto them, that you take this Offense on their behalf.

A Third Prejudice that you will easily take up against this CANONICAL CHURCH, is
the Number and Figure of those many other good Men, (besides Princes and
Parliaments) whom they have Excommunicated. This Laodicean Church may admire
her own Charity, (that is to say, the Easiness of her Discipline as well as the
Openness of her Communion toward the worst of Men) but she has the most
Excommunicating and most Anathematizing Charity that ever was in the World. For
by the Canons of that Church, Whoever shall affirm, See Can. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
That the Church of England by Law established, is not an Apostolical Church,
or that its Worship is Corrupt, or that any of the 39 Articles are in any part
Erroneous, or that the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England may not be
used with a good Conscience, or that the Government of the Church by
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. is repugnant to the Word of God, or that the Form
or Manner of making or consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
contains any thing in it repugnant to the Word of God, all these are to be
Excommunicated ipso facto. Now, Sirs, you will find perhaps the bigger Part of
the godly People in England, even among the Conformists themselves, to be by
one or other of these Clauses Excommunicated: That is to say, they are
Excommunicated out of the CANONICAL CHURCH into the CHRISTIAN CHURCH OF
ENGLAND: And I hope they will be content with their Condition, and not thrust
themselves upon the Party that has Excommunicated them. However, that you may
be sure of being driven both out of, and into the same Church with them, hark
how these Canons do further Thunder! See Can. 11.
Whosoever shall maintain, That there are within the Realm [and Note by the
way, That all the English Plantations, particularly Barbados, Jamaica,
Bermudas, New England, New York, Virginia, Carolina, all which have
Nonconformist Meetings in them, do belong to the Ecclesiastical Realm of
England, as being Part of the Bishop of London's Diocese;] 'other Meetings,
Assemblies, or Congregations of the King's-born Subjects, than such as by the
Law of the Land are held and allowed, which may rightly challenge to themselves
the Name of true and lawful Churches, let them be Excommunicated, and not
restored but by the Archbishop, after Repentance and Public Revocation of
such their wicked Errors. You see, Sirs, that either you are that Church of
England which the Law holds and allows, or else you stand Excommunicated But I
assure my self, you are not ambitious to be reckoned of that Party which has
Excommunicated all the Congregations of the Non-conformists. Nor will it bring
you under the Brand of Schismatics, if being thus Excommunicated ipso facto,
you settle your selves in the Communion of Churches that will receive you. And
this the rather, lest you should be found in the TREASONABLE PLOT, whereof the
famous Mr. Baxter among others, has convicted that Party, namely, That of
attempting a Revolt unto a Foreign Jurisdiction. Albeit the Canons of the
Church, (and the Articles also) whereto these Men are sworn, do most expressly
renounce all such Foreign Jurisdiction; yet such is the Confusion whereinto the
perfidious Builders of Babel run themselves, that according to the New Church
of England, See Mr. Buxier's true History of Councils defended. p. 19. And his
whole Book, Against Revolt unto F Foreign Jurisdiction, dedicated unto the late
A. B. of Canterbury.
The College of Bishops through all the World, are the Supreme, Universal,
Visible Sovereign of the Catholic Church, having Power of Universal
Government; That they are to exercise it in General Councils, where every
Bishop is by Office the Representative of his Diocesan Church; That these
Bishops are to have Metropolitans and Patriarchs, and the Pope of Rome is to be
their Uniting Head, and exofficio the President of the Councils; That in the
Intervals of these Councils, they are per literas formatas, to exercise their
Power over all the World; That all that will not unite with the Church of Rome,
(which is to be distinguished from the Court of Rome) on these Terms, are
Schismatics; but they that will, are no Papists; none being Papists but they
that are for the Pope's absolute Power above Canons or Councils; That the
Church of Rome is a true Church, and if it will not impose the Innovations of
the last Four Hundred Years, it may be united with; but the Protestant
Churches, which are destitute of Diocesan Bishops, are no true Churches, nor
their Pastors true Ministers, nor have they any true Sacraments, nor
Covenant-Promise of Salvation.

Of such a Church as this, methinks I hear you, and the bigger and better Part
of your Brethren, yet groaning under the Shackles of Conformity, resolve, Come
not into their Secret, O my Soul! unto their Assembly, my Tongue, be not thou
united! The most flourishing and glorious Island in the World, will be in
perpetual Danger of becoming a French Province, except the Nonconformists be
counted better Parts of the Church of England, than the Men of such dangerous
Principles; and except the Sacramental TEST be therefore taken off. But there
is the True CHRISTIAN CHURCH of England, which would have the Reformation of
Religion carried on according to the Direction of the Sacred Scriptures, and
the Intention of the first Reformers, and counts not Christianity to lie in
vain Ceremony; which looks on Diocesan Bishops as made such by the King and the
National Church Government, as an human, though some say useful Policy; which
owns the rest of the found Protestants in the World for Brethren, and would
have the Qualifications for the Pastoral Office, and for Communion in special
Ordinances, to be no other than what the Lord Jesus Christ has instituted;
which, in fine, is against bringing a Yoke of Slavery upon the brave English
Nation in Spirituals or Temporals. And of this Church ye are. God, and the
King, and the Parliament, and all sober Men, will reckon you a valuable Part of
this Church; while a certain Hectoring sort of People in the World, that would
be thought the only Church of England, deserve to be counted rather the Wens,
than any Parts of it, and indeed know not what it is. I beseech you, Sirs, let
not the CHURCH OF ENGLAND become a Name of such a Treasonable Importance, that
it must belong to none but that Faction, whose Religion lies in Sainting their
Martyr Charles I. whose Reign was spent in an unnatural Manner, plotting and
contriving to undermine and subvert the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the
English Nation; [The Words of the Earl of Bellemont, in a Speech to a General
Assembly]
and who notwithstanding the Sham of the Icon Basilike, it is feared would have
been another John Basilovitz, if he had prospered in his unnatural War against
the Parliament.

And now, my Brethren, if any go to seduce you from your own REFORMED
CONGREGATIONS into the more CEREMONIOUS ASSEMBLIES in the Church of England,
you are furnished with an Answer: Let your Answer be, That you are of the
Church of England, and that you cannot better express your being so, than by
keeping with your own REFORMED CONGREGATIONS. If the Bishop of London should be
offended at the Governors of Barbados, or Bermudas, or Carolina, for
worshipping of God in the Meetings of the Non-conformists there, the Gentlemen
may truly say in their Defense, That they worshipped God with the truest Part
of the Church of England in those Parts of America.

Be advised, my Brethren, to carry it with all possible Moderation and Civility
toward those that can conform unto Ceremonies farther than you; Be gentle unto
all Men. But yet continue steadfast in your present Nonconformity. The Day is at
Hand that will justify your Stedfastness. Even at this Day, the most
Conformable themselves confess, That the Rites whereto you are Non-conformists,
are indifferent Things, and the Worship of the Lord Jesus Christ is as well
without them as with them. Why should you then add those Rites, which in your
Consciences are not so indifferent as the Confession of the Conformable would
render them, and which will defile your Worship? Even Bishop Sanderson himself
expressly says, If any Man shall use them with an Opinion, as if God's Service
could not be rightly performed without them, doubtless the Use of such
Ceremonies by Reason of such his Opinion, would be superstitious unto him. Thus
by the Confession of the Conformable, you are well as you are. Know when you
are well. More Conformity will not make you better. And if the Rites are so
Indifferent, why should those that urge them for the sake thereof, make a
Difference? Let them return unto you; there is no Cause why you should go over
unto them. Reason and Justice will one Day take place: The Day foretold by the
Bishop of Worcester before he was a Bishop, God will one Day convince Men, That
the Unity of the Church lies more in the Unity of Faith and Affection, than in
the Uniformity of doubtful Rites and Ceremonies Stilling sleet's Iren. p. 121.
You will then be owned in the Church of England; yea, the Partition Wall
between you and all the other sincere Protestants in the English Nation, will
be taken down.

Part the fourth and last, containing some faithful Testimonies to the Cause
and Work of GOD in the New-English Churches.
Number I. The Great END and INTEREST of NEW ENGLAND, Stated by the Memorable
Mr. JONATHAN MITCHEL, Extracted from an Instrument of His, which bears Date,
December. 31.1662.
THE CAUSE of the People of GOD in NEW ENGLAND, is, RELIGION; That is, the
Profession and Practice of the Truths and Rules of the Word of GOD.

As, I King. VIII. 58, 59. That He may incline our Hearts unto Him, to walk in
ALL HIS WAYS, and to keep His Commandments, and His Statutes, and His
Judgments, which He commanded our Fathers, -- The CAUSE of His People Israel at
all Times.

More particularly, REFORMATION of RELIGION. There was Religion in the Places
whence we came. But NEW-ENGLAND'S Design in this vast Undertaking was
REFORMATION; that is, The avoiding of some special Corruptions, and the
vigorous and more Exact Profession and Practice of the contrary Truths and
Rules, according to Scripture-Pattern.

Hence, Our Cause is not Separation from any thing Good in other Churches;
whether Truth of Church State, or any Doctrine rightly professed, or Ordinance
rightly administered in them.

But it is REFORMATION, only of what was Amiss or Defective in the Churches we
came from.

Yet more Specially; if it be asked, what REFORMATION? Or, what Particular we
are here to seek and set up REFORMATION in? I fully close with Mr. Hooker's
Discourse, in his Preface before, Survey of Church Discipline; That as the
Prophetical and Priestly Office of CHRIST, was completely Vindicated in the
First Times of Reformation, so now the Great CAUSE and WORK of GOD'S Reforming
People, is, to Clear the Rights of CHRIST'S Kingly Office, and in their
Practice to set up His Kingdom.

The KINGDOM of CHRIST, though it be now distasted as a Fanatic Notion -- by the
Profaneness of Men's Hearts, which is ready to catch at any Occasion, to
blemish it, and to rise up in Rage against the Interest thereof: [Psal. II. 1,
3, 6.] Yet the True KINGDOM of CHRIST, (as the Scripture states it) is
Glorious, and Divine, and that for which GOD will Overturn, Overturn, Overturn,
until it be Erected in its Glory; and (say Men what they will) I will still
Pray, Thy Kingdom Come.

The KINGDOM of CHRIST is, in general, nothing else but The Flourishing of
RELIGION, Or that whereby the WORD of CHRIST in the SCRIPTURE, (which is called
the Word of the Kingdom,) is fully submitted to. In a Word, Then His Kingdom
Comes in its Glory, when the Will of GOD is done on Earth as it is in Heaven:
And so far that Kingdom Comes, as this Will is done.

The KINGDOM of CHRIST, or the Reception and Erecting thereof, is more Inward
and Personal, in the Hearts and particular Conversations of Men; more Outward
and Public in Societies.

The Former is, when any Persons are Converted, and helped to Walk in
New-Obedience; though they be never so Few and Obscure. Thus CHRIST has always
had a KINGDOM on Earth. And when this reaches unto Many, it cannot but become
Visible, in one Degree or other, and so Inseparable from the Latter. Hence the
General Conversion of Jews and Gentiles, will be the Inlet of the Greatest
Glory of CHRIST'S Kingdom on Earth. Hence also, CHRIST has always had a Kingdom
in some Degree Visible in some Societies of Men; though sometimes very Thin, Low
and Obscure, and kept under by Corruptions and Persecutions.

The Latter Erecting of CHRIST'S Kingdom in whole Societies, (whereby CHRIST is
seen Ruling all in a Conspicuous and open, in a prevailing and peaceable
manner,) was OUR DESIGN and is OUR INTEREST in this Country: though with Respect
to the Inward and Invisible KINGDOM, as the Scope thereof. The Public setting
up of CHRIST'S Kingdom, and Enjoyment of those Ordinances and Ways of His,
which can only be enjoyed in whole Societies, and that with Purity and Liberty,
was OUR END in coming hither. And this also is CHRIST'S Design in these Latter
Days; To set up His Kingdom, in a Public and Openly prevailing manner, in all
the Parts and Ways thereof.

In the Church, CHRIST'S Kingdom is clearly and gloriously set up, when ONLY
and ALL His Institutions, both in Worship and Discipline are attended and
observed in their Purity and Power, according to Scripture Pattern. [ Mat.
XXVIII. 18, 23.] THIS is the Great CAUSE and Interest of GOD'S People in this
Country, and was the Great END of their Undertaking, and has been the great
Matter of this TESTIMONY, in their Synodical Acts, and other Writings Published
unto the World.

Hence our Great DUTY is to keep and seek all the Commandments of GOD, [1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 8.] in that respect; that is, all the Institutions and
Ordinances of His House; To hold fast what we have attained, that is according
to Scripture-Pattern therein, and to come up unto what we yet want or are
defective in.

Hence also those among us, that desire to set up in this Country, any of the
Ways of Men's Invention (as, Prelacy, stinted Liturgies, Humane Ceremonies in
Worship,) they will bid Defiance to the CAUSE and Interest of CHRIST and of His
People, in these Ends of the Earth; and will (I persuade my self) but lay
themselves as Potters Vessels under the Iron Rod. For, CHRIST, who has taken
this possession of these uttermost parts of the Earth, will not Endure it. Let
us Go forward to any of those Things of CHRIST, that we are wanting in. But to
Go backward unto those Things which we know, and have openly Testified [
Platform, c. 1. and c. 7. Sect. 6.] to be not of GOD, and which we departed
from, will be such a Wickedness as the Lord's JEALOUSY will not bear withal.

Our Work is not only to depart from Men's Inventions, but to set up All [ALL]
GOD'S Institutions in their Beauty and Power; that we may Exhibit a clear and
complete Copy thereof before the World; and that we and ours may have that full
Enjoyment of GOD, in all His Ordinances, that we came hither for.

In the Common Wealth CHRIST'S Kingdom is set up, when all Things therein are
so ordered, (Laws and all Civil Administrations) as does most fitly and
effectually tend to advance, promote, and maintain Religion and Reformation.

Let us faithfully cleave to the WHOLE INTEREST and KINGDOM of CHRIST, and He
can make us a Burdensome Stone to all Opposers, as He has done hitherto, [
Zech. XII. 3, 5. Dan. II. 44, 45. Matthew. XXI. 44. Isa. LIVE. 17.] and make Good
to us, His Promise to Philadelphia; To keep our Door open, and to preserve us
in the Hour of Temptation that is upon all the World.

Number II. The CAUSE of GOD, and His People in NEW ENGLAND; Stated in a SERMON
of the Memorable Mr. JOHN HIGGINSON, unto the General Court of the
Massachusetts-Colony, May 27. 1663.
[On 1 King. VIII. 57, 58, 59.]

THE CAUSE of GOD and His People among us, is, The Cause of RELIGION. -- That
every Thing in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, be Conformed to and Regulated
by, the Rule of the WORD.

When the Lord stirred up the Spirits of so many of His People to come over
into this Wilderness, it was not for Worldly Wealth, or a better Livelihood for
the Outward Man. The Generality of the People that came over, professed the
contrary; Nor had we any Rational Grounds to expect such a Thing in such a
Wilderness. Though GOD has blessed His poor People here, and there are that have
increased here, from small Beginnings to great Estates; That the Lord may call
this whole Generation to witness. -- O Generation see! Look upon your Towns and
Fields, Look upon your Habitations and Shops, and Ships, and behold your
Numerous Posterity, and Great Increase in the Blessings of the Land and Sea;
Have I been a Wilderness unto you? We must needs answer, No, Lord, Thou have
been a Gracious GOD, and Exceeding Good unto thy Servants, even in these
Earthly Blessings; we live in a more Plentiful and Comfortable manner than ever
we did expect. But these are but Additions; they are but Additional Mercies; It
was Another and Better Thing, that we followed the Lord into the Wilderness
for. This is never to be forgotten, That New England is Originally a Plantation
of Religion. And if any Man amongst us, make Religion as Twelve, and the World
as Thirteen, Let such an One know, he has neither the Spirit of a True
New England Man, nor yet of a Sincere Christian.

And the Cause is not Separation from any thing Good in other Churches. The End
of our Coming hither was a Reformaiion only of what was Amiss or Defective in
the Churches we came from. We distinguish between the Corruptions and Disorders
of Churches, and the Churches themselves. So much for the Negative.

Now for the Affirmative. 'If my weakness was able to show, what the Cause of
GOD and His People in New England is, according to its Divine Original and
Native Beauty, it would dazzle the Eyes of Angels, daunt the Hearts of Devils,
ravish and chain fast the Affections of all the Saints.

First, This was and is our CAUSE, that CHRIST alone might be acknowledged by
us, as the only Head, Lord, and Lawgiver in His Church; That His Written Word
might be acknowledged as the Only Rule; That Only and All His Institutions
might be observed, and Enjoyed by us, and that with Purity and Liberty, with
Peace and Power.

Secondly, I conceive our CAUSE is not barely a Reformation, but a PROGRESS in
Reformation; To go on unto Perfection. A conceit of having already attained a
Perfect Reformation, should be far from us. -- Our Fathers fled into this
Wilderness from the face of a Lording Episcopacy, and Humane Injunctions in the
Worship of GOD. Now, if any of us their Children should yield unto, or be
Instrumental to set up in this Country, any of the Ways of Men's Invention,
such as Prelacy, imposed Liturgies, Humane Ceremonies in the Worship of GOD, or
to admit Ignorant and Scandalous Persons to the Lord's Table; This would be a
Backsliding indeed! It would be a Backsliding to the Things which we and our
Fathers have departed from, and have openly testified against, to be not of GOD.

Thirdly, The Union of Reformers belongs unto this CAUSE; For there is not any
one Duty more pressed by our Savior CHRIST and His Apostles, than this of an
holy and close Union among those that profess His Name. The best of Men may
err; and there being diverse Measures of Light and Grace, there cannot but be
Different Apprehensions in some Things: And therefore, where there is not so
full an Agreement as is to be desired, it is our Duty to forbear one another in
Love, Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.

This is the Chief Interest of NEW ENGLAND; the Matter of greatest Importance
in itself, and of greatest Concernment unto us. Whatever may be said of our
Interest in other respects, yet we may be sure of This, that here lies our
pradominant Interest and CAUSE; and the Great END for which we came into this
Wilderness, and continue in it.

Number III. NEW-ENGLAND's True Interest; further Declared, in the Words of the
Honorable WILLIAM STOUGHTON, Esquire in a SERMON preached by Him, (in the Audience
of the GENERAL COURT, April 1668.) when He was a Preacher of the Gospel at
Dorchester: From which he was called Successively to many Stations of the
highest Figure in the Civil Government; and when he died was Commander in Chief
of the PROVINCE. The Discourse is Entitled, NEW-ENGLAND's True Interest, From
those Words, Isa. 63.8. He said surely they are my People, Children that will
not lie: So He was their Savicur.
THIS we must know, that the Lord expects great Things of NEW ENGLAND, above
any Nation or People in the World. And His Expectations herein are just and
righteous. For

As for special Relation to GOD; whom has the Lord more signally exalted than
His People in this Wilderness?

As for Extraction and Descent; O what Parents and Predecessors may we the most
of us look back unto? Through whose Loins the Lord has stretched forth the Line
of his Covenant to take us in. -- As for Restipulations and Engagements back
again to GOD; What Awful Public Transactions of this kind have there been
among us? -- As to our Advantages and Privileges in a Covenant State, here
Time and Strength would fail me, to reckon up what we have enjoyed of this
kind. -- And then, As to New-England's FIRST WAYS; What Glorious Things might
be spoken to the praise of Free Grace.

But, O! what a sad Metamorphosis has there of later Years past upon these
Churches and Plantations? -- It must be spoken in the Name of the Lord, O
New England, Thy God expects better Things from thee and thy Children; not
Worldlyness; -- not an itching after new Things and Ways --; not a drawing
loose in the Yoke of God?

Alas! How is New England, in Danger of being lost even in New England? How
sadly may we lament it, that All are not Israel that are now in Israel? The
First Generation have been ripened Time after Time, and the most of them
gathered in as Shocks of Corn in their Season; But we that rise up to tread out
the Footsteps of them that are gone before us, Alas! what are we? It is a sad
Name, to be styled Children that are Corrupters. [ Isa. 1.4.] But are we not
indeed many of us Corrupted, and that which is far worse, Corrupters? How is
our Wine mixed with Water? Many, (as we may justly fear) would but too soon and
too easily entertain a Lie in the Worship of God, and return to the Onions and
Garlic of Egypt again.

The common Interest of the People of God, and of Us the Lord's People in
special, is, the Interest of practical Piety and Holiness; -- the Interest of
Unmixed Spiritual Gospel Worship; -- the Interest of Unity and Peace in the
Ways of Reformation: The Interest of these Things, and of just and righteous
Liberties in order thereunto; The Times are coming and hastening more and more,
wherein Faithfulness to God in all these Things, will be the most glorious
Crown that can be worn upon Earth; A Crown upon which it shall be graven, Here
is the Faith and Patience of the Saints. This then is the Word of the Lord to
His New England Churches, Let no Man take this your Crown from you.

This Eminent Person goes on, and earnestly Advises the risen and rising
Generation of this Land, to make Conscience, not only of being rightly informed
in that Cause of GOD which we are here wrapped up in, and in adhering to those
Things wherein the Lord has hitherto preserved and blessed His Churches and
People, but also of getting a Sight and View of the Divine Beauty and Glory
thereof. And truly, says He, As to this Cause and Interest of GOD, there can be
no other Foundations laid than those which have been laid. New-England's true
and main Interest, the Cause of Christ in His Churches here, It is a fixed and
unalterable Thing: It is not now to be found out by any new Light, Let us take
heed of inquiring of, or listening, in this Matter, unto, the Determinations
and Glosses of such as have had no Standing in the Ways of God here, but have
been grafted in upon By-Accounts, or move in the Eccentrick Orb of some private
Interest, distinct from that of the whole. And let us also lay down this as a
Rule, That whatsoever it is that has been unanimously Rejected and Condemned
in its Claims by the acknowledged most eminent Reformers in each Age, since the
Apostasy of Antichrist prevailed, this can never in these our Days, justify its
Title to that Cause of Christ, that is to be maintained and contended for.

Number IV. The TESTIMONY Finished, By Dr. INCREASE MATHER.
Now these be the Last Words --

HAVING reviewed the Harmonious TESTIMONY of those Three Worthies in our
Israel, our Memorable MITCHEL, our Venerable HIGGINSON, and our Honorable
STOUGHTON, unto the CAUSE of GOD in the Churches of NEW ENGLAND, and the Great
END of these Plantations, I do now with my DYING HAND Sign my Concurrence
thereunto. I am now in the Eighty Fourth Year of my Age, and under a Feebleness
in the Valley of the shadow of Death, wherein the LORD is yet a Light unto me,
and makes it but a Shadow of Death; and I am every Hour waiting and longing for
my Dismission to a Better World. In these very singular Circumstances, I am
willing to add my TESTIMONY concurrent with the foregoing, and I do Declare,
That the Principal DESIGN upon which these Colonies were at first Planted, was
to Profess, and Practice and Enjoy, with undisturbed Liberty, the Holy RELIGION
of GOD our SAVIOR, Exhibited in the SACRED SCRIPTURES, and Reformed and
Rescued from the Inventions and Abuses, which the Man of Sin has introduced;
And, more particularly, To set up CHURCHES [Even of the Aboriginal Natives, as
well as of English Christians] for our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that shall keep
themselves Loyal to Him, their Glorious KING, in His Word, giving Law unto
them; and faithful to the Religion of the SECOND COMMANDMENT; and he from
those Offensive Things from which our UNITED BRETHREN, of the Presbyterian and
Congregational Denomination in the English Nation have withdrawn themselves;
and which our Honored and Beloved BRETHREN, in the Renowned Church of
SCOTLAND, have abolished and abandoned.

It was equally designed by those Followers of the Lord into the Wilderness,
when it was a Land not sown, That the pure and undefiled Religion delivered
unto us in the Sacred Scriptures, (and Exhibited afterward in our Confession
of Faith,) should be continually Preached, and our Doctrines of Grace
particularly asserted, by MINISTERS of Good Abilities; and Exemplary Godliness
and Watchfulness, freely and fairly chosen by the Churches whereof they are to
be the Pastors. And it also belongs unto the Glory of these Churches, to be so
Constituted, as Livelily to Exhibit the Kingdom of Heaven to the World: Both
Debarring from their Communion such Ignorant and Scandalous Persons (who cannot
or will not Examine themselves) as are to be shut out from the City of GOD; And
Admitting of all those (though in different Persuasions about lesser Points) of
whom it may be Judged, That CHRIST has received them to the Glory of GOD. Our
Foundation is in these Holy Mountains.

It is now accordingly the DYING WISH, of One that has been about Threescore
and Six Years, after a poor manner, but I hope, with some Sincerity, serving
the best of Masters, in the blessed Work of the Gospel; That the CHURCHES may
Stand fast in the Faith and Order of the Gospel, and hold fast what they have
received, and Let no Man take away their Crown. And, that the PASTORS would
more Distinctly from Time to Time, and with proper Inculcations, acquaint the
Churches with their True Interest; and those Things which will be their Beauty
and their Safety. And considering the Relation which I have heretofore
sustained as a President for Twenty Years, it is highly proper for me to leave
it as also my more particular Desire, that the Tutors in our COLLEGES, from
whence the Churches expect their Supplies, would see to have the Students well
informed in the Points, which they must Know and Serve, that so the WORK of GOD
among us may not be marred by falling into Unskilful and Unfaithful Hands.

Indeed, I cannot but go away Rejoicing in it, That the Means, which are
indefatigably used, for the drawing of unwary People into the Things that will
not profit them, have had so little Success; and that the Body of the Sober
People throughout the Country, (so far as I understand) generally continue to
discover such a conspicuous Aversion to the Things, from the Face whereof their
Fathers sled into the Wilderness: though at the same time, a too general Decay of
that Real and Vital Godliness, which is to be the main Intention of all, is
greatly to be bewailed. But there may be Danger of Another Generation arising,
which will not know the Lord, nor the Works done by Him, and for Him, among His
People here.

And therefore from the Suburbs of that Glorious World, into which I am now
Entering, I earnestly Testify unto the Rising Generation, That if they sinfully
Forsake the GOD, and the Hope, and the Religious Ways of their pious Ancestors,
the Glorious LORD will severely punish their Apostasy, and be Terrible from His
Holy Places unto them.

Now, The Lord our GOD be with you, as He was with your Fathers; Let Him not
leave you, nor forsake you. LORD, Let thy Work appear unto thy Servants, and
thy Glory unto their Children!

November. 10.1722.

The END of the Appendix.
The CONTENTS.
The General Discourse of CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES.
COngregational Church what. Page 1. Congregational Churches instituted. Page
2. Principles on which they are founded. Page 5. These preferred to Nation^l
Churches. Page 7. Sentiments leading to the Congregational Way. Page 8. How the
Tyranny of the Clergy forsaken in it; and its Advantages. Page 9. Primitive
Churches Congregational. Page 10. Reasonableness of Congregational Way. Page
13. Arguments against it answered. Page 13. Congregational Churches the first
Subject of Offices, Gifts and Powers. Page 25. The Reformation best defended
from This. Page 25. How particular Churches came to be deprived of their
Powers. Page 27. Natural Light and Christian Prudence to be used by the
Churches in some Circumstances. Page 28. But no finding and imposing odd
Inventions. Page 29. Call to the Churches to observe the Rules of Reason and
Revelation and take Care of their Liberties. Page 32. Reasons of writing the
Apology. Page 33. Charity of the New-English Churches toward them that are not
of their Way. Page 34.
The Distinguishing Liberties of the New-English Churches maintained. Page 35.
Chapter I. Their Right to choose their Officers. Page 36. Scriptural Proofs for
it. Page 37. Reasons for it. Page 39. Objections answered. Page 42. Proofs from
ancient Writers. Page 44. Whence Churches deprived of this Right. Page 49.
Protestant Writers for it. Page 49. Call upon Churches to abide by it. Page 50.
Chapter II. Their Right to ordain their Ministers. Churches before their
Officers; and no uninterrupted Succession and Ordination. Page 51, 52.
Ordination by a Bishop or an Eldership. Page 53. Epistles to Timothy and Titus
neither Episcopal nor Presbyterian. Page 54. People may ordain their Minister.
Page 57. Antiquity no Stranger to This. Page 57. Officers of Neighbor Churches
may be corrupt or wicked. Page 59. If not, they have absolutely no Right to
ordain Ministers over Neighbor Churches. Page 60. Elders of particular
Churches may ordain. Page 60. So may Elders meeting in Council or Synod Page
60. Fabritius's Thoughts of Ordination. Page 61. Our Fathers' Thought of it.
Page 61. Arguments and Authorities for it. Page 62. Testimonies of the
Ancients. Page 71.
Chapter III. Their Right to send forth Delegates and call them to an Account.
Page 73. Scriptural and other Proofs of it. Page 74. No Substitutions of
Delegates. Page 76. Passages from ancient Authors. Page 77. The Churches
exhorted to Watchfulness. Page 78.
Chapter IV. Their Right to depose and to withdraw from their Elders. The
Sentiments of our Fathers. Page 79. The Reason of it. Page 80. Antiquity for
it. Page 81. They may certainly withdraw from Elders. Page 83. The Scriptural
Warrant for it. Page 83. Testimonies to it. Page 84. Exhortation to maintain
the Right. Page 85.
Chapter V. Their Right to except against the Approach of the Disqualified to
Communion. The Sentiments and Expectations of these Churches. Page 85. What
reasonable for Candidates of Communion. Page 87. Reason for the Right we claim.
Page 88. Scriptural Authority and primitive Antiquity. Page 88, 89. Churches
exhorted to perform their Duty. Page 91.
Chap. VI. The Brethren's Right to deal with their Brethren in Private and to
judge in Public. The Opinion of these Churches. Page 93. The Divine Warrant.
Page 94. How Discipline administered. Page 96. Sacred Proofs of the Church's
Power. Page 99. Reason of the Thing for it. Page 101. Testimonies from
Ancients. Page 102. Testimonies from Moderns. Page 103. How Churches and
Brethren deprived of their Right. Ibid. Elders not excluded from their Right.
Page 104. Manner and Circumstances of Discipline And Ends of it. Page 105. When
the Ends not answered, what then? Page 106. Excommunication what. Page 107.
Against claiming infallible Authority and using Force. Page 108
Chapter VII. Their Right to sit and act in Councils and Synods; with the Power
of Synods explained. There should be Councils and Synods, but no State Policy.
Page 109. Meetings of the Clergy dangerous. Page 110. Power of calling Councils
in Churches. Page 111. Persons composing Councils and Synods. Page 112. Right
of Fraternity from the Scripture. Page Ibid. Their Right asserted in later
Times. Page 113. Reason of Thing and natural Justice for it. Page 114. The
Scripture the Rule and Judge of Controversies. Page 115. Antiquity no Stranger
to Brethren's Right. Page 116. Our Churches for this Right: They have it and
ought to have it. Page 117. They have not, nor want any Juridical Power. Page
118. Testimonies against such a Power. Page Ibid. Reasons against it. Page 121.
Synods and General Councils may deceive and be deceived. Page 123. Proofs and
Instances of it. Page 124. Testimonies against Synods and General Councils.
Page 126. If General Councils infallible, they have no Juridical Power. Page
127. Luther's Advice and Caution applied to these Churches. Page 128.
Chapter VIII. The Right of these Churches to hold Communion with one another.
They may partake with one another. Page 130. They may recommend their Brethren.
Page 131. They may propagate Churches. Page Ibid. They may communicate temporal
and spiritual Relief and Support unto them. Page 132. They may lawfully consult
with one another. Page Ibid. They may admonish one another. Page 133. The
Method of admonishing. Page 134. There is a Consociation of these Churches.
Page 136. There ought to be such a Consociation. Page 138. No great Confusion
to be feared from it. Page 139. Our Apprehension of this Method and its
Neglect. Page 140. The Conclusion, in a brief Address to the Churches. Page p.
142.
The Appendix.
Part I. Specimens of the Catholic Principles of the New-English Churches. Page
147. One Evidence of them. Page 148. Another particular Testimony to them. Page
149. More General Testimonies to them. Page 151. Part II. Proofs and Evidences
of a Consociation of these Churches. Page 167. Part III. Containing a
Vindication of the New-English Churches in sundry particular Instances. Page
174. Part IV. Some Testimonies to the Cause and Work of GOD in the Churches of
New England. Page 200.
FINIS.

