A Funeral SERMON On the Reverend Mr. Nathanael Williams, Who Deceased Tuesday
January 10. 1737, 8. Aetatis 63.

Delivered At the South-Church in BOSTON, on the Lord's Day after.

By Thomas Prince, M. A. And One of the Pastors of the same Church.

Eccl. xii.7. Then shall the DUST return to the EARTH as it was; and the SPIRIT
shall return unto GOD who gave it.

Psalm. xxxi.5 Into thine Hand I commit my SPIRIT: Thou have redeemed me, O LORD
GOD of Truth.

Psalm lxxiii.24 Receive me to thy Glory.

BOSTON: Printed by S. Kneeland and T. Green, MDCCXXXVIII.

A Funeral SERMON.
ACTS vii.59. Calling upon and saying, LORD JESUS, Receive my Spirit.


AS this was the expiring Prayer of STEPHEN; not a settled Pastor, but an
eminent Evangelist in the Apostles Time: so it was the dying, earnest and last
Expression I heard proceeding from the Mouth of our Reverend and highly
esteemed BROTHER; who was an eminent Preacher of the Gospel in our Day, and
whose Body we lately attended to the Grave with Sorrow.

In the growing Prevalence of Death and small Remains of Life, as I took my
final Farewell of Him; He seemed to put forth all his fainting Powers, and
lifting up his Eyes, one Hand being Dead, He stretched forth his other toward
Heaven, and called as strongly as his feeble Breath was able, -- LORD JESUS,
Receive my Spirit!

And as the Hour is hastening on every one among us, when we shall be in
extreme Necessity of the great Favor here so earnestly implored: I have on
this Occasion chosen these Words for the present Subject of our Entertainment;
that we may form some lively Apprehension of this most important and
comprehensive Prayer; and may conceive more clearly what a Blessedness this is,
for our DIVINE REDEEMER to Receive our expiring Spirits, and what it is to
resign them rightly to him, that He may so receive them.

How happy we, if we gain these Ends! May the GOD of Light and Grace assist us!
And in order to it, let us now consider these three Things, 1. The Case of a
true Christian ready to expire, as Stephen was, when He made this Prayer. 2.
The peculiar Object of our believing View and Application at such a Season,
which is CHRIST Himself. 3. The great and comprehensive Favor we are then to
implore of Him, viz. to Receive our Spirits.


I. The Case of a true Christian ready to expire, as Stephen was, when he made
this Prayer.

By the History, it is most evident, He was then a Dying: And then he was in a
special Manner sensible, He had a SPIRIT in him different from his earthy Body:
that his Spirit would presently expire; not to vanish with the animal Life, or
cease to live as the material Part, nor be carried with it to the mouldering
Grave, to be resolved into the various Elements or Particles which composed the
corporeal Frame; but his Spirit was that vital Substance, which indeed animated
his dissolving Body, would quickly separate and leave it lifeless, but would
continue still distinct, and retain its vital Nature and perceptive Powers in
its State and Interval of Separation: that his Spirit was the Agent in him
which not only perceived, though it and understood, remembered, loved and hated; but
also had a spontaneous and conscious Power of reflecting on it self, of
recollecting its Ideas, of viewing and comparing them, of considering,
reasoning, judging, determining, designing, and of putting forth its various
Resolutions into Action.

And then he was also sensible that this Spirit in some measure knew the Being
and Perfections of its Supreme CREATOR, his Preceptive Will and Law, its
Obligations to observe them; and was therefore Subject to his moral Government:
that his Spirit was sent into the present Life as into a State of Probation for
the future; but was now to be disposed of, and must sensibly return to GOD who
gave it; to whom it was accountable, and to whom it therefore must return as to
a Sovereign Judge, from whom no Appeal was possible, to be exactly tried, and
receive a righteous Recompense: In fine, that his Spirit had been guilty of
innumerable and heinous Sins, for the least of which he could never atone; was
also defiled with many sinful Inclinations, from which he was utterly unable to
cleanse it: and yet must instantly appear before that Omniscient and Almighty
BEING, most glorious in Holiness and Justice; to whom no Sin is hidden, with
whom none is forgotten, and who cannot allow of the least Iniquity.

For this departing Spirit therefore, He must needs be most movingly concerned;
as his calling upon CHRIST the Savior, to Receive it now, implies.

And, as this was the Case of this eminent Saint; so it will be sooner or later
the certain Case, even of the best among us, if we have the Power of thinking
seriously, when we come to Dye.

As for the unrenewed, unbelieving or impenitent, who are all the same; it is
most evident, they are neither in any measure fitted for the Reception here
desired, nor entitled to it For as they have no degree of Holiness or true
Repentance; the very Sight of CHRIST Himself, that most Holy One, would be
abhorrent to them. Nor while they remain impenitent can they have any well
grounded Faith of his receiving them to Favor: No! but on the contrary, of
treating them as the great Administrator of Divine Justice, and ordering them
to the infernal Prison against the Judgment of the Great Day: And there are
Angels enough to seize them and execute his Orders.

They are the truly Penitents only, that are Real Christians: who have some
Degree of Sanctity; and therefore have their Spirits fitted for this Reception:
who by the Gospel Promise have a Title to it, and who can rightly make this
believing Prayer. They are such alone that can make this Prayer in a well
grounded Hope of being accepted. And these true Penitents are for the most Part
those who have for some time at least, before, repented of all their Sins,
embraced the Savior in all his Offices, and lived a Life of Piety. They have
proved to others, if not themselves, the trueness of their Faith and Penitence
by a Course agreeable: they have brought forth Fruits answerable to true
Repentance in the general Tenor of their Conversations, and in some Degree have
shined as Lights in the World.

And yet even such as these, when they come to die, are often in the Dark, are
jealous of themselves, can see no Evidence of the Grace within them, are
fearful least even their religious Life and pious Actions should proceed from
hypocritical or carnal Motives, and not from sanctifying Grace within them.

And this Darkness seems to rise from various Causes, and for various Ends or
Reasons.

Sometimes the DIVINE SPIRIT is pleased to withhold his inlightening Influence
from the Souls of the Sanctified, that they cannot see the Graces He has
planted in them. Sometimes He may permit the evil Angels to disturb and darken
their feeble Minds, either by physical Impressions, or with troublesome and
terrible Suggestions. Sometimes the Darkness rises from our own mistaken
Apprehensions, either of the Word of GOD, of the Tenor or Intention of his
Covenant of Grace, of the Nature of his Graces or Operations in us, yea of our
own Infirmities and Corruptions, or of the Purport of his Dispensations toward
us. Yea such is the present Union and Constitution of our Souls and Bodies,
that they have a mutual Influence on each other; that they affect each other
with their mutual Infirmities and Disorders: And hence it often comes to pass,
that some peculiar bodily Disorders will fill the Minds, even of the best of
Men, with dark and fearful Apprehensions, that no kind of Arguments or
Reasonings, of themselves can possibly remove.

And the Ends or Reasons of this Divine Procedure, either by Influence or
Permission, may be such as these -- To show us our present Weakness and
Dependence on the Sovereign Power and Grace of GOD, our utter unworthiness of
the Light of his Countenance, the hurtful Consequence of Sin and Influence of
Satan, even in the best of Men, with their remaining Imperfection and
Unhappiness; To increase their humble Apprehensions of themselves; to make
their present State on Earth more burdensome, or less desirable; to raise
their Aspirations after the World of perfect Light and Purity; and to lead them
out from all Dependence on themselves to CHRIST the Mediator, for Strength and
Righteousness, for Light and Grace, for Peace and Comfort, and entire Salvation.

Or however, whether these true Penitents when they come to dye, are under a
Cloud or no; yet if then they have the Power of Thinking, they will have lively
Views of that Eternity just before them. It will awaken their Minds with an
awful Sense of their need of a merciful and mighty SAVIOR, to forgive and
purify and receive their Spirits into his Hands. Even the holiest of Men will
then clearly see the glorious Holiness of that SUPREME MAJESTY with whom they
principally have to do; and in comparison with whom the Heavens are impure, and
the wisest Angels are charged with Foolishness: They will then clearly see the
Perfection of his holy Law, the remaining Vileness of their own Nature, their
horrid Contrariety to His, their innumerable Sins against Him, as well as
Failings in their Duties to Him, with their transcendent Aggravations: that
they will abhor themselves before Him; their own Righteousness or Services will
appear as nothing in comparison with their many and heinous Omissions and
Iniquities; they will loath themselves for the great Impurity both of their Souls
and Bodies; they will long to be delivered from it: and as their earthy Part is
soon to resolve to Dust, it is for their expiring Spirits they are chiefly and
anxiously concerned; that these may be purified and fitted for the immediate
Presence of their righteous Judge.

And now what shall they do but learn of this bright Example; that is,
earnestly look to CHRIST the Savior, and resign their Spirits to Him? For if
the holy Evangelist, flaming with Love and Zeal for CHRIST, and even then dying
in his Cause, had yet need of this Redeemer to receive his departing Spirit;
how much more have others? And what safer Method can they take, than to follow
his enlightened Pattern?

We therefore come to consider,

II. The peculiar Object of our believing View and Application at such a Time
as this, which is the LORD JESUS.

For though in our English Bibles, Stephen is represented as calling upon [GOD]
saying, LORD JESUS receive my Spirit; yet every one acquainted with the
Original knows, that the Word [GOD] is here inserted by our Translators, and
that in the Greek the Words are only -- calling upon and saying, LORD JESUS
receive my Spirit: And thus they are rendered in all the other Versions I know
of, both ancient and modern. So the Syriack, Aethiopick, Araba^k, Vulgar,
Montanus, Luther, Osiander, Castalio, Junius and Tremolius, B^za, Piscator, and
the French.


Nothing then is plainer, than that this Prayer was made peculiarly to CHRIST
by his expiring Follower. And that which led him to this peculiar Resignation,
seems to have been the transporting Vision he had just before received, and of
which we read in the preceding Verses. For while the Spectators then before
him were looking on him steadfastly, and saw his Face as it had been the Face of
an Angel; Acts vi.15.
He being full of the HOLY GHOST, looked up steadfastly to Heaven, and saw the
GLORY of GOD, and JESUS standing at the Right Hand of GOD; and said, Behold I
see the Heavens opened, and the SON OF MAN standing on the Right Hand of GOD.
Acts vii.53 56.


The HOLY GHOST that filled him, both made his Face to shine with an angelick
Luster, and also opened to him the View of the heavenly World: And among the
illustrious Objects there, he saw the GLORY of GOD, and JESUS standing at the
Right Hand of GOD.

What was this GLORY of GOD, and how it then appeared to the inspired Saint;
whether a transcendent Brightness in any particular Space or Form, in which the
DEITY revealed amazing and unutterable Beauties to the admiring Eye and Mind
together, of which the GLORY on the Mercy-seat of the Ark between the Cherubims
in the Holy of Holies, both of the ancient Tabernacle and of Solomon's Temple,
might be some faint Resemblance; and JESUS being nearest to it of all the
illustrious Company of Spirits, and Angels; -- is not explained.

Possibly the View might be somewhat like EZEKIEL's at the River Chebar; when
he says, the Heavens were opened, and he saw the Visions of GOD, -- Chap. I.;
or somewhat like those of DANIEL, Chap. VII. and X; or somewhat like those of
JOHN, Rev. I, IV, and V; in the latter of which he says, he saw a Door in
Heaven opened: or with a Mixture of them all; though with a View agreeable to the
peculiar State of the heavenly World, upon our Savior's Assention thither in
our exalted Nature, and in a Manner inconceivable to us now, unless our Minds
could be enlightened with the same Vision.

But by JESUS being at the Right Hand of GOD, doubtless signifies, his being in
the highest Place of Dignity of every Creature in the Realms above; all the
glorious Armies there being subject to him, as well as placed beneath him. And
yet his being described as the Son of Man, and standing at the Right Hand of
GOD, seems plainly to point out his humane Nature appearing there in the Form
and Character of our constant active Mediator; which the DEITY admits as
nearest to himself in Dignity and Intimacy, and as most acceptable to him, both
in his Person and Office.

The Impression made on the Mind of Stephen, by this raised View of CHRIST in
his mediatorial Character, seems to lead him therefore to this peculiar
Resignation of his Spirit to him: And this preceding Vision seems to be as a
Line of Light to lead us also to the Meaning of his following and dying Prayer.

The SON OF GOD as appearing in humane Nature in the heavenly World, and in the
special Quality of our MEDIATOR, is then the Object of this Resignation: And to
him it is we are more immediately to yield our departing Spirits.

And in this Respect our dying View and Prayer are to be somewhat different
from the dying View and Prayer of CHRIST our Mediator. For of him expiring on
the Cross, we read in Luke xxiii.46. And when JESUS had cried with a loud
Voice, he said, FATHER, INTO THY HANDS I COMMAND MY SPIRIT: And having said
thus, he gave up the Ghost.

Even CHRIST himself, THE SON OF GOD, had also an expiring Spirit, even an
humane Soul to resign. But a Spirit perfectly ^^re and holy, that had yielded
an entire Obedience to the Will of his FATHER, had completely finished the Work
he was sent into the World to do, and had no such need as we of a Mediator to
answer for any Fault, or procure a Reconcilement to the holy GOD: It therefore
seems most proper he should commend his spotless and most righteous Soul
directly into the Hands of the FATHER: And as he had just now said, It is
finished; the Purport of this final Action seems to be -- Most righteous and
holy FATHER! I have completely accomplished the Work thou gave me to do in my
State of Humiliation, and I have perfectly endured the Punishment thou did
order me to bare, all but the closing Act and suffering of Death! Into thy
Hands I therefore commend my Spirit, to receive it into Paradise, and be
entertained with the Joys and Glories there, 'till my Resurrection! And now I
bow my dying Head, and yield my Spirit to thee!

Thus this perfect MEDIATOR resigned his Spirit immediately into the Hands of
the FATHER. And so far in Conformity to him as was proper, his Desciple Stephen
resigned also his departing Spirit, but this into the Hands of CHRIST the
Mediator. And in this dying Act of Faith and Trust, should all Believers
imitate this inspired Example.

And that which makes this Resignation proper, is, that he is the LORD JESUS
standing as the Son of Man, in our humane but exalted Nature, nearest in
Interest, Affection, and Dignity to the GLORY of GOD in the heavenly World, and
in the needful Character of our MEDIATOR.

For JESUS we know signifies the Savior; i. e. the Savior of Sinners of the
Race of Men, especially of those who believe and follow him: And LORD prefixed
to it signifies his Exaltation and Dominion as our Savior, over every
Creature, both in Heaven and Earth; that he may entirely overruled them, to
carry on the Affairs of his universal Kingdom, and accomplish his wise Designs
in this lower World, 'till the Number of his People are completely saved, and
he presents them in one triumphant Church or Company in the heavenly Places.
But then he saves us by being and acting as our MEDIATOR: And as our Mediator
he rules the World.

In the certain Prospect of our Apostasy he undertook the Office: Upon our
first Transgression he interceeded for us, and gave an early Intimation of his
most gracious Purpose: He revealed it gradually in the preceding Ages to his
Incarnation: In the fullness of Time predicted and most suitable, he came,
assumed our Nature in spotless Innocence, born of Woman, made under the Law: He
grew up and lived in perfect Purity and Wisdom, in consummate Piety and
Obedience to GOD, in abounding Love and Beneficence to Men, and without the
least Iniquity.

He also appeared in our Room as well as Nature; as our most proper
Representative, to obey and suffer for us, to answer all our Obligations and
endure our Punishment. For us he lived a most humble, difficult, and laborious
Life, set a most excellent Example, suffered most exquisite Pains of Body with
Distress of Soul, and died a most ignominious and cursed Death: For us he rose
again in our humane Nature, ascended into Heaven, continually interceedeth
there, presents himself as the Lamb of GOD once slain a Sacrifice for the Sins
of Men: And for us in our Nature still he reigns over all created Powers in
Heaven and Earth.

For us he purchased a complete Salvation, as also perfect and eternal Life and
Blessedness, with a full Authority or Right to give them: Yea for us he
purchased the Gift of the HOLY GHOST himself, to sanctify, enlighten, and
comfort us; to produce every Grace within us, both in their Principle,
Exercise, Increase, and Consummation. For us he is ready to obtain this Gift,
of GOD; most free to interceed and reconcile us to him; yea, to offer his own
most perfect Righteousness, both to justify our Persons, and secure our Title
to eternal Blessedness.

With us he in his Divine Nature is always present: Yea, in his Humane Nature,
through the most intimate and perpetual Agency of his Divine, he always views us,
entirely knows our Cases, and therefore with his People bears a wondrous
Sympathy in all their Troubles.

In particular, He views them in the Approach of Death, and in all its
advancing Agonies: He sees and pities them while laboring under the oppressing
Loads of Sin, both in the afflicting Consciousness and Punishment: He views
them and is pleased with their pious Sorrow and Contrition, their low
Abasement, their Self-Abhorrence, their earnest Aspirations after perfect
Purity and Holiness, their humble Applications to him for them: and he will
surely and in the fittest Season give them.

By his MIGHTY SPIRIT he has begun to purify their Souls in their initial and
progressive Sanctification: He has determined the fittest Time for their
Dissolution: And then he is most ready to take them naked into his saving
Hands; first to cleanse them thro'ly from every remaining stain of Sin, and
then present them without Spot to GOD in that glorious World, whereinto nothing
but what is perfectly pure and holy shall ever enter.

This all-sufficient Mediator then is the peculiar Person to whom it is most
proper, more immediately to yield our expiring Spirits: Or if, being reconciled
to GOD, we resign them to HIM, we must resign them to Him in and through this
only Mediator, who is to accomplish their Salvation, and present them perfect
at the Throne of GOD.

This therefore brings us to consider,

III. The great and comprehensive Favor we are then to implore of him, viz. To
receive our Spirits.

Now this must needs be comprehensive of all the Blessedness the Spirit can
receive in its State of Separation, 'till it returns and resumes the Body at
the Resurrection. For as Stephen's Spirit was just then entering that amazing
State, which was then opening to him and he looked into, and this is all he
asks for in that most important Interval; he sums up his Desires in this, as
virtually comprizing all he wanted in it, that the LORD JESUS would receive his
Spirit.

Or at least whatever Blessedness or Privilege the Souls of the Saints enjoy
in their separate State, whether he mentioned it or no; he knew, that if the
LORD JESUS would receive his Spirit, this great Favor would most surely
introduce him into all the other Blessedness possessed by the Spirits of the
Saints in Light, throughout the Interval of their Separation.

For the LORD JESUS to receive the Spirit, is to receive it then, in general,
as our Lord and Savior, standing at the Right Hand of GOD in Heaven, as our
exalted Mediator.

In particular, as our Mediator, to take it into his special, gracious, safe,
and faithful Care, at the very Moment of its Separation: Interceeding
effectually with the Father for it; applying the meritorious Virtue of his most
precious Blood, by the Agency of his almighty Spirit, to purify it perfectly
from every Remain of Sin, and make it perfect like himself in Holiness. At that
very Moment, he by the same Agent fills it with a Perfection of Life and Power:
He makes it glorious like the holy Angels its new Companions: He makes it fit
for their exalted Company: He opens its latent Powers to see its own Glory and
the Glory of those illustrious Substances, as he once opened the Powers of
Elijah's Servant: He in a Moment learns it their perfect Language: He commits
it to their glad Embraces, their delightful Converse, their safe Protection
(though all are comprehended in his own) and their certain and most speedy
Conduct and Transportation, as his mighty and ready Instruments, to the
heavenly World.

Their Spirits doubtless fly as swiftly as the inconceivably grosser Rays of
Light, which in a Minute pass above ten million Miles: And the Joy and
ravishing Desire of all the Company to reach the celestial Regions, will needs
be as most active Wings to speed them thither.

Yea when he receives the separate Spirit, he no doubt receives it (as he did
that of Stephen, even before its Separation) to the opening Prospect of that
blessed World to which it is going: Though the higher it ascends, the brighter may
the Glory still appear, the more distinct and clear the surprising Objects open
to the View, and the more capaciated may the Spirit grow for the more immediate
Vision and Enjoyment of them.

If you ask me, Where is this World of Glory? I would only answer, Do we not
with our bare Eyes behold innumerable Multitudes of dazzling Worlds about us,
enlightened with perpetual Day; some of which are found a Million times greater
than the Earth we live on? And how much greater may others be we cannot yet
discover. Or if these will not suffice; you may every clear Night by the Help
of Glasses, look up and see several wondrous Openings in the Heavens over us;
where immeasureable Spaces of Light appear, underived from any visible Bodies,
and that seem to be beyond the starry Regions.

May not the GOD of Heaven allow us, from his Earth, to look unto the outmost
Borders of his upper World? May not the Light appearing in those amazing
Chasms, remote immensly from us, be the distant Rays of the heavenly Glory?
Does not every one acquainted with the Laws of Optics know, that these Rays
may be so directed as to make those Chasms appear vastly nearer; yea, to open
as large as Half the Firmament above us, and even represent the glorious
Objects from whence they flow? And may not this be the surprising Vision of the
separate Spirit, when its visive Powers are freed, perfected and opened;
whither as a Rebel to behold its awful Judge above, or as an Heir to be
advanced to its designed Inheritance?

But O! when the Spirit arrives within the Confines of those caelestial
Regions; with what mutual Exultations and joyous Welcomes is it received among
the happy Angels and Spirits there! And as every Spirit bro't up ^^^^her is an
Addition to the Triumphs of the GREAT REDEEMER; what Shouts of Praises ring
through the heavenly Hosts, with what triumphant Gladness do they conduct it to
him, with what transcendent Pleasure does he first receive it, and then present
it filled and clothed with his own most amiable and perfect Righteousness and
Likeness, in his own Name and as a Member of his own Body to the DIVINE FATHER;
present it spotless and faultless before the Presence of his Glory with
exceeding Joy!

And how will the happy Spirit join with all the celestial Choirs, in the
adoring Songs of which we have a Hint in Rev. V.8 -- e. where the four living
Creatures and the four and twenty Elders, are represented as falling down
before the LAMB, and singing a new Song, saying, THOU wast slain, and have
redeemed us to GOD, by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People,
and Nation; and have made us unto our GOD, Kings and Priests, and we shall
reign on the Earth': And I beheld and heard the Voice of many Angels round
about the Throne, and the living Creatures and the Elders; and the Number of
them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands: saying
with a loud Voice,' " Worthy is the LAMB that was slain, to receive Power, and
Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing": ' And
every Creature heard I saying, " Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power, be
unto HIM that sits upon the Throne, and unto the LAMB, for ever and ever";
And the four living Creatures said AMEN: And the four and twenty Elders fell
down and worshipped HIM that lives for ever and ever.

Yea, What new and surprising Scenes of Visions and Enjoyments will continually
open to delight us there! What Discoveries of the divine Perfections, Designs
and Works; both in the Creation of Heaven and Earth, with innumerable other
Worlds, of different Constitutions and Inhabitants; the various Trains of
Dispensations in them, with their admirable Harmony and Wisdom the astonishing
Redemption of an amazing Multitude of Sinners of the Race of Men, from their
first Apostasy, through out all their various and successive Generations, in
every Nation, Age, and Country, to the entire Accomplishment at the joyous
Resurrection.

And, O! how perfect and perpetual the Blessedness which CHRIST receives the
Spirit to in those exalted Regions!

For there is no Degree of Darkness or Blindness; but perfect and perpetual
Light and clear Decernment: No Death, Pain, Infirmity, or Faintness; but
perfect and perpetual Life, Pleasure, Strength and Vigor: No Degree of Error
or Mistake; but always a right Conception of every Thing exhibited: No Hatred,
Envy, Ill Will, or Enmity; but perfect and perpetual Love, Complacency in each
other's Blessedness, Benevolence, and Friendship: No Contention, Discord, or
disturbed Passions; but perfect and perpetual Peace, Serenity, and Harmony: No
Sorrow, Doubt, or Fear; but perfect and perpetual Joy, and full Assurance of
the Continuance of this Felicity to the Resurrection, and for ever after.

Yea, What growing Delights will spring, from our conversing with those holy
Angels who have successively remained in Heaven, and can tell us of the
admirable History of that UPPER WORLD, in its almost infinitely numerous and
spacious Regions, from their Creation! From our conversing with those Angels
also, who have successively returned thither from every Quarter of the WORLDS
BELOW! And from our conversing with those other numberless Spirits, whither in
or without their perfect Bodies, who from sojourning in those lower Worlds,
have happily passed through their Varieties of Trial, and are continually
ascending, to contribute all their Sanctity, Joy, and Knowledge to that highest
and perpetually growing World of Glory! And how gladly will they all conspire
successively to tell their surprising History, and increase our Views and
Admirations of the Perfections of GOD appearing in every World from their
Formation.

But above all this, what higher Delights will rise from our immediate Vision
of THE SON OF GOD himself! From our wondrous Likeness to him in Holiness! From
his transporting Converse with us! From his perpetual Revelations of the divine
Perfections, where the highest Angels all together are unable to display them!
And from his opening the Book of the Divine Purposes, which no mere Creature is
able to open: Though the full Discovery both of the Designs and Works of GOD,
with the Wisdom in his Management of every lower World, remains to be made at
their respective Consummations, when their several Schemes are perfected But in
the mean while, we see, there is infinitely more than enough to entertain us in
the World above, with perpetual Transports.

This is some faint View of the sublime Blessedness which CHRIST receives the
Spirits of his People to at their Expiration: And in this they shall continue,
'till all his hidden and intermixed Designs of Grace and Justice in the present
Constitution of our Earth are finished; and then he comes to open them, to the
ineffable Astonishment of Men and Angels.

With his illustrious Train of those seraphick Hosts, who by Turns have
supervis'd these Terrestial Regions, and of those perfect Spirits who sojourned
in them, He descends from Heaven, among other Ends, to raise the ancient
Partners of those separate Substances, and assume them to their social
Happiness His Glory enlightens the World, and makes the Sun to vanish. With his
almighty Voice and Power, he refines, he brightens, and he animates their Dust;
He makes it move and form into most pure and perfect Bodies: To These he
re-unites their welcome Spirits: and they wake, they rise, they shine, with
immortal Life and Power: they appear even like that most glorious Body of HIS,
from which they receive their Luster; though HIS being full of DEITY, must
inconceivably transcend in Glory: And now He puts an eternal Period to their
transient Separation; and they jointly enter into new and endless Scenes of yet
higher Joy and Blessedness. But these, our present Subject allows us not to
look into.

And thus have we in brief considered the comprehensive Import of this dying
Prayer. We now pass on to some

IMPROVEMENT.

And here,

I. What a lovely and raised Idea does all this give us of this admirable
SAVIOR!

It is HE who had a Divine Glory with THE FATHER before the World began. In
that Eternity preceding, He was the SON OF GOD appearing with every possible
Perfection. The FATHER perfectly delighted in HIM; delighted with the Views of
his own Perfections reflecting in Him. Both for and by Him, HE made all the
glorious and numberless Worlds around us. And as the Angels, the firstborn of
the Creation, were bro't forth into Being, He appeared the express and open
Image of the unseen Deity: They in the void Expanse with Wonder saw him; they
saw none but HIM, they saw the Glories of the GODHEAD in HIM, and they
immediately adored Him. Anon they saw the rest of the Creation produced and
multiplied by him: And they sang for Joy, and sang his Praises.

It is HE that has so lowly condescended to assume our Nature, for our
Redemption: That has purchased all this Life and Blessedness for us the vilest
Sinners, by the most astonishing Abasements and most bitter Agonies: And his
humane Nature having passed through his Sufferings, and entered into his Glory;
all Angels and created Principalities and Powers throughout the Universe, are
subjected to him. Even our exalted Nature is now at the Head of the whole
Creation: And therein we have a Specimen of what Capacities and Blessedness it
may be raised to.

HE is therein the visible Admiration and Delight of Heaven. In him the divine
Perfections appear and shine, and display themselves with amazing Glories. And
yet he continues our compassionate and prevailing Advocate at the Throne of GOD!

Being exalted to be a PRINCE AND SAVIOR, to give Repentance and Remission of
Sins to Men; he has the Power and Grace, the utmost Willingness and Readiness,
first to give them to those who seek him, and reconcile them to the HOLY GOD:
And then he is their Mediator, their Representative, their Surety; that manages
their Cause in Heaven; that makes his Angels Ministers, to promote their
Blessedness; that rules the World for their Advantage; that has prepared
Mansions for them in the heavenly Places; that guides them by his perfect
Counsel to the Hour of Death, and then entirely purifies their Spirits, and
receives them to his Glory: who has done these Offices for Multitudes
innumerable, even for all expiring Saints already: in his DIVINE PERSON, from
the Death of Abel to the Ascension of his Humane Nature; and thence in the same
Person as appearing in that exalted Nature: who is thus receiving them
continually every Moment: and if he has made us truly Penitent, is as ready to
receive us also, though we are the chief and most vile of Sinners.

What an admirable Savior is He! How do all the Celestial Hosts adore Him! How
exceeding happy in his immediate View and Company! And if we had the least
Degree of their sacred Relish; we need only know Him, in order to admire Him
with the highest Rapture, to prefer Him above a million Worlds: and even one
believing Prospect of Him, would make every Thing on Earth, even all its Crowns
and Empires, appear as Trifles in comparison with Him; that we may win Him, and
be as like Him as possible, enjoy his Company, and view his Glories.

II. How wretchedly do They deceive themselves, who in their Time of Health
take no serious Care for this happy Reception of their immortal Spirits!

And indeed the most of the Race of Men are openly Guilty of this most gross
and ruinous Delusion. For in our Season of Health, our Minds are full of
earthly Views, Delights, Desires, Cares or Businesses: we mind nothing of that
ETERNAL WORLD our Spirits are hastening to, and into which they must quickly
enter: we give our selves no Time to look into it: and indeed the Prospect is
offensive to the unrenewed and earthly Mind: It seems a great way off, if not
merely imaginary: when the serious Apprehension strikes us, we turn it away:
and because the View is disagreable, and hinders us in our earthly Pursuits and
Pleasures; we are ready to entertain every seeming Objection to its Reality;
and from doubting, by Degrees may come to persuade our selves, that there is no
such ETERNAL WORLD or separate State before us; that our Spirits, whatever they
are, were only made for the present momentany Existence, are not accountable to
GOD who gave them, and will entirely end with the Life of the Body.

But when DEATH comes on with its evident and near Approaches, and we clearly
see we have entirely done with all the Views, Affairs and Pleasures of this
little Point of Time, with this sensual, mean, corrupt and sinful State, and
when our momentary Appearance here is just expiring; Then, if our Powers of
Thinking are continued to us, and if we have not so depraved our selves as to
bar or dull our Minds against all Conviction; Then, they will open and see the
Dawn of ETERNITY rising on us, and there will be no resisting its awakning
Influence: Then, every specious Argument against it will entirely vanish, like
the nightly Shadows before the opening Day: Then our mere earthly Schemes,
Pursuits and Pleasures, will all appear as vain Amusements; inexpressibly
beneath and most unworthy of these intellectual and noble Substances within us:
Then these earthy Bodies in their present State will appear incomparably meaner
than those vital and intellectual Powers that inliven and govern them, that
most earnestly aspire to a farther Existence, and that are capable of
infinitely nobler Enjoyments than this Earth can give us.

In fine, then we shall clearly see, we have Spirits in us, that are moral
Agents; that have been capable of knowing much of the Preceptive Will of their
CREATOR, have been obliged to obey Him, and are therefore accountable to Him:
but as they have never yet been called to an Account before Him; they must now
appear at the Tribunal of that supreme, omniscient, holy, righteous and
ALMIGHTY BEING, from whom no Sin was ever covered, to whom every one is
infinitely contrary and offensive, and in whose Memory they all remain as fresh
as though now committed: And Then, as the Appearance of all earthly Objects will
lessen to nothing, the Appearance of GOD, and of our Sins against HIM, will
amazingly greaten in the dying Mind.

And what shall we now do with these sinful and immortal Spirits, in such an
Hour as this; at the final closing of all the past guilty Scenes of Life; and
their entering that ETERNAL WORLD, where they must immediately appear before
their Divine and righteous JUDGE, and have their State forthwith fixed by Him
immutable for ever!

The impenitent and unrenewed Spirit, must then, if duly sensible, be seized
with increasing Horror. It Is Season of Probation is now gone and over: It Is
hypocritical and delusive Hopes now entirely fail and fly away: and there
remains now nothing but a fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation
for it is future Recompense. All the Arguments, and all the Gospel Invitations,
can make no Impression: the Mind is so full of conscious Guilt and Terror, that
it cannot receive them: the rejected SPIRIT of Grace, of Light and Comfort, is
now wholly withdrawn: the wretched Soul is left to that judicial Hardness,
Blindness, Darkness and Desertion, it has a long while chosen, or would not
fear: and as it is hovering over the dark Abyss, and the DIVINE SPIRIT entirely
leaves it; the inveterate Spirits of Devils now possess and seize it: First
they drag it out of the Body into the open View of the Bar of GOD, when they
become its ready Accusers; and being soon delivered into their Hands, they wrap
it in their Chains of Darkness, and then continue it is Tormentors to the
Judgment of the GREAT DAY.

But if in such a Season we are full of Penitence, Self-abasement and
Self-abhorrence for all our Sins and Sinfulness, both of Heart and Life; if we
are begun to be purified with the Hatred of them, and with a thorough Sorrow
for all the Dishonours we have done to GOD, and for all our habitual
Contrariety and actual Opposition to Him; if we see his transcendent Excellence
and Loveliness, as He appears in CHRIST; if we descern the admirable Beauty of
Holiness or Conformity to his Will and Nature; if we prefer his Favor, with
the Appearance of it, above Life it self; and if we aspire after all these as
our only Happiness: Then we are to look to the All-sufficient SAVIOR, to hear
his gracious Invitations, to embrace Him in all his Offices, to lay hold on and
plead his precious Promises, to confide in Him for the Fulfillment of them; and
then, we are like Stephen, in the Exercise of Faith, to Resign our Spirits to
HIM.

But very few, alas, who have lived a sensual or irreligious Life, do ever
come into such a truly penitent and believing Frame as this, when ETERNITY
opens before them. They are either usually bereaved of the Exercise of their
Understandings; or left to a stupid Frame; or to damnable Delusions, deceitful
Hopes, or presumptuous Faith; till at once they find themselves in the ETERNAL
WORLD, their deluding Dreams entirely vanished, and their sinful Spirits
trembling and self condemned at the Bar of GOD. But,

III. What unspeakable Comfort have we in the Death of our religious Friends,
who have so resigned their Spirits to this lovely MEDIATOR, as we have Reason
to think He has thus received them.

How solacing to see them with their dying Breath, and in the earnest Exercise
of Faith, look up and yield their separating Spirits to Him? And how reviving
to consider his receiving them in the happy Manner above described? By Faith to
view them leaving a Body and World of Darkness, Sin and Trouble, received into
the gracious Hands of their mighty SAVIOR; in a moment completely purified,
enlightened and transported with surprising Joy; and then raised up with
blessed Angels to that World of Glory they aspired after; where HE appears, and
where they are all perpetually entertained and filled with the highest
Satisfactions: -- It should make us have a Fellow-feeling with them in their
exalted Happiness, and long to follow them in their Translation thither.

And this brings us to the Occasion of our present Meditations -- the much
lamented Death of our dear BROTHER of this Communion: whereby we suffer a most
heavy Loss, and sow in Tears; though he has gained immortal Life, and reaps in
Joy. And for our Help to improve this affecting Providence, let us take a brief
Review of the Person removed from us.

Being born of pious Parents, August 25. 16^5.
his Father a Deacon of this Church, and Mother a Sister of the late Honorable
Daniel Oliver, Esquire He received their gracious Spirit; He improved under their
religious Influence, and the happy Ministry and Life of the Reverend Mr.
Willard, for whom he had the highest Veneration; and he aspired to be like them.

In his early Days he gave up himself to his CREATOR: at fourteen Years of Age
He entered the School of the Prophets July 1689.
: and as he advanced in Knowledge, He grew in Wisdom and in Favor with GOD and
Man.

Being well accomplished for the Work of the Ministry, He was ordained an
EVANGELIST in the College-Hall, for one of the West India Islands In School.
: But the Climate not agreeing with his Constitution, He soon returned to this
his native City. Where he was first employed by several Gentlemen to instruct
their Sons in Learning; and soon after introduced into the Government of the
then only Public and Free Grammar School of this Great Town In 1703.
; the Principal School of the British Colonies, if not of all America.

Here he displayed his singular Talents for this laborious and important
Service: being very diligent and faithful; applying himself to bring on the
Children both to Virtue, Learning and good Manners; Praying with them every
Morning and Evening, instructing them in religious Principles, especially on
Saturdays, and affectionately recommending the Practice to them. By an
agreeable mixture of Majesty and Sweetness, both in his Voice and Countenance,
with a wise and steady Conduct, He happily ruled them; and was generally both
reverenced and beloved among them. Here He spent the Strength and Vigor of his
Life, was a great and public Blessing, and therein continued for about thirty
Years; till his bodily Infirmities increasing, He, to the Sorrow of many, laid
it down. In 1734.


Nor did this hinder him from employing his Intervals of Time, all along, in
the Study and Practice of Physic; wherein He also excelled, and was greatly
useful. He not only read the most valued Authors on this Branch of Science, but
carefully compared them with his own Observations, made many Extracts from
them, and wrote down the Circumstances of his own Experience in difficult
Cases, for his future Guidance. He was much concerned for all his Patients,
tender of them, careful in attending them, made up his more important Medicines
with his own Hands; gave those whom he though it proper, wise and pious Counsels;
and at their Desire often added his suitable and gracious Prayers in their
dying Sicknesses. He helped the Families of his Pastors, and the Poor Gratis;
and yet as careful of them, as if he had his Fees. And how encouraging his
lively Voice and Countenance when he came into our Chambers! They did good like
a Medicine, revived our Spirits, and lightened our Maladies.

Nor did both these Businesses take off his Heart from the Ministerial Work. To
this he seemed chiefly to incline: rising early and devoting the Prime of the
Day in religious Reading, Meditation and Compositions. And how experimental,
grave and savoury were his occasional Prayers and Sermons from the Pulpit? The
most serious and judicious loved to hear Him.

In his Conversation there was an agreeable Mixture of Gravity and Cheerfulness:
yet cautious and much guarded when he spoke of others. In one Thing indeed he
was disagreable to some; and this was his freely, but privately telling them of
their obvious Faults: For He was a faithful Friend; and in this Part of
Conduct, much like his Uncle Oliver before Him, and till six Years since
contemporary with Him.

He greatly admired and loved the ancient Religious Principles and Ways of NEW
ENGLAND: He had seen them in some of their departed Glory! He delighted in the
Doctrines of Grace, and of the Person and Offices of CHRIST: For he vitally
felt the Efficacy and tasted the Sweetness of them in his own Heart: and he was
greatly affected with our quick Declensions in the Power of Religion. He kept
up a close and constant Walk with GOD: and for a long Course of Years, though in
Characters, not easy to decipher, he has described the Frame of his Heart and
pious Experiences every Day.

He was always much concerned for the Purity, Peace and Welfare of this Church;
and careful to preserve them. We were dear to Him; and he was watchful over us.

In short, the Graces of CHRIST seemed much to shine in his Countenance and
Conversation. He was one of the most useful Men of the Town and Land. He has
exceedingly filled up his Time with Diligence and Service. And on all Accounts,
as a Scholar, Schoolmaster, Physician, Preacher and Christian, so many
Characters united in one Person and in such a Degree, I cannot expect to see
another like Him.

And yet when he comes to the End of this laborious and useful Life; how deeply
humble? Renouncing all Dependence on his own Righteousness; -- full of
Self-Condemnation for his Deficiencies, and jealous of his own Heart; He placed
all his Trust on the infinite Merits and Grace of CHRIST, on his prevailing
Intercession, and faithful Promises: on these he cast himself for Eternity, and
to this admired REDEEMER earnestly resigned his Spirit.

Thus lived and dyed this Beloved Physician. And with respect to Him, we have
the greatest Reason to be comforted: whom by Faith we may now view as happy, as
full of Joy and Triumph in the World above, as bearing a Part in the Songs of
the Heavenly Hosts before the Throne; beholding the SON OF GOD in all his
Glories, feeling their transforming Influence, and ravished in his advancing
Likeness to Him.

But with respect to our Selves; a great Part of our Strength and Beauty are
gone with Him! His Place among us shall see Him no more! and for this repeated
Loss, we have growing Reason both to mourn and tremble!

When we consider the many shining Lights we used to view with Pleasure in the
principal Seats of this Assembly, but now withdrawn for ever; what an awful
Gloominess seems to follow, and what Decays and Darkness are we declining to!
Are not the Righteous taken away from the Evil to come! Or to use another
Similitude, are they not removed from the widening Gap, to let in a prevailing
Torrent of Apostasy; till it overwhelms the Remains of our Religion, and we
come to have nothing but the outward Form, and the Power and Spirit be entirely
lost to us and our Posterity! Are not our Breaches great and dreadful, like
those of the Sea! and who can heal them!

However, let this excite our more earnest Prayers and Labors, that our PURE
AND VITAL PIETY, may neither Dye with us nor our immediate Offspring, but be
continued down to them; that they may transmit the same to theirs, and they to
theirs through every Generation: that our DIVINE REDEEMER may have here a Pure
and Pious Church to adore and serve Him, till his second Coming: and in this
Place may be a perpetual Succession of Pious Lights to shine and rise to the
Heavenly World; till He descends from thence to gather all his Saints into one
glorious and vast Assembly; that they may shine with Him together as the
Brightness of the Firmament; HE as the SUN, and They as Millions of Stars about
Him for ever and ever.

FINIS.
CORRECTIONS.
Page. Line. Read.

2 4 -- the Words

3 36 -- then the Case

4 17 -- true Penitents

19 7 -- from whom

22 28 -- spontaneous Powers.


