Zebulun advised.

Serious and ^^^^le COUNSELS for them that go to SEA, and for all that mind the
Good of their Souls. Delivered, March 7th. 1735, 6.

By a Minister of the Gospel.

1. Chron. xxii. 11. Now, my son, the Lord be with thee, and prosper thou.
NEWPORT: Printed by the Widow FRANKLIN, at her Printing House under Town
School. MDCCXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
Readers,
THE worthy Author of the ensuing excellent Discourse, putting it into the Hand
of a young Man, who desired Leave that it might be made public, for the
Benefit of all his Brethren, that would read it, the pious Author consented
unto the publishing of it, if I would usher it into the World with a prefatory
Line, to excite People to improve it, which I readily do; earnestly desiring,
that all our sea faring Friends, and all Others that see this Treatise, might
be persuaded immediately, to make sure, about giving themselves unto the
glorious Redeemer, according to his holy Covenant of Grace, and strive
continually to live, as becomes them that are given to the Lord, by the Grace
of Christ, praying without ceasing, for Grace, to sail apace forward unto the
Haven of eternal Blessedness.

And, my Friends, be thoroughly awakened, to consider about the Affairs of your
precious immortal Souls. Be not like them that sleep as on the Top of a Mast in
the midst of the Sea, always ready to roll off and drop down into everlasting
Burnings, but keep in Mind the awful Demand of our Savior, What is a Man
profitted if he shall gain the whole World and lose his own Soul. Frequently
and solemnly renew the Dedication of your selves unto the Lord, and often
examine how Things are between God and your own Souls, and pray always with all
Prayer, both in secret alone, and in private with your Company, Day and Night,
and read in the holy Bible every Day. And omit no Duty until God send a Storm,
to excite you to it. Keep always in the Love and Fear of God; and realize to
your selves, that the Lord sees you every where. Be not satisfied without being
assured, that you are where God would have you to be. Remember all the Rules on
all the Points of the renowned Fla^^'s Compass, and strive daily to be
advancing in your Course toward the heavenly Haven. But be sure to rely on the
glorious Redeemer, for the Influences of his holy Spirit, for the carrying of
you forward. And, that you may do so, seriously and frequently peruse the
savory Advice in the following Discourse, that has been composed and published
with an earnest Desire of your eternal Benefit. Read it over and over, and
strive to practice it daily better and better; and be assured the glorious Lord
knows how you improve it, and will reckon with you for it, as a choice Talent,
that he has betrusted you with. O strive to be able to give a good Account
about your benefiting by it. Our seafaring People are some of the most
serviceable of our Neighbors; and we should be concerned for their best Good.
Who more than Sailors and Soldiers, do carry their Lives in their Hands?
Therefore they need the Prayers, the Cares, the Helps, and the best Endeavors
of all their Friends for their Good. They are destitute of many Advantages that
Others do enjoy: They are sometimes a long While without the public Worship of
God. And 0 that Private, and Secret, and Sabbath Religion were more minded than
I can learn, they generally are, among our seafaring Friends; that they may
have more Ground, than I fear they have, to hope to enjoy the gracious Presence
of God with them.

And I wish that those young Men that might live at Home comfortably would
consider seriously, whether the Enemy of their Souls may not be driving them,
when they are mightily hurried, to run away to Sea. Does not their Enemy drive
them to Sea, that he may more easily drive them to Hell? But as for them that
must go to Sea, I wish they would all follow the Counsels in the following
Treatise, and make sure that they have the gracious and favorable Presence of
God with them. and let them always remember that awful Advice and Warning in 2
Chr. 15. 2. The Lord is with you, while you be with him;If ye seek him he will
be found of you, if ye forsake him he will forsake you.

But now, may the best of Blessings be on the Souls of all our seafaring Tribe,
and on him, that first desired the Publication of this beneficial Discourse,
and on all that assisted the Publication and on all the serious Readers of it.
And may the godly Author be blessed in his Person, his Family, and his Flock:
And may he still more and more be a rich Blessing, not only unto those, over
whom the Holy Ghost has made him an Overseer, but also unto many more of the
Chosen of God. And may he finish his Course with Joy, and help abundance of
Souls into everlasting Joy. So wishes the unworthiest of Sinners.

Newport, Rhode Island, Sept. 29, 1738 ^ath. Clap.

TO Capt. E. B. and his Company, bound to the West Indies: SALVATION.
SIR,
INstead of a small Venture, I proposed to have lent by you, for my own
temporal Advantage; I recommend to you and your Company, the following Papers;
as a small Present for your spiritual Profit. They contain in them, the
Substance of two Sermons, delivered the last Lord's Day, in which (you cannot
but be sensible) I had a special Regard to you, and hazardous Enterprise you
are pursuing, upon (...) The Argument insisted upon (...) exceeding weighty,
and incomparably precious. And though it is but very meanly handled, yet if you
read the following Essay, with suitable Dispositions of Piety, you may meet
with such Hints, as(by the Blessing of God) may be of greater and more lasting
Service to you, than the Riches of both Indies. They will be really so, if
hereby you are effectually persuaded to comply with the gospel Terms of
Reconciliation: Upon which, you may be well assured of the divine Presence and
Favor in all your Ways. Yea, God himself will be your Portion, Shield, and
exceeding great Reward. And then nothing shall be wanting that is good for you,
for God is all in all. Are you weak? He is Strength. Poor? He is Riches. In
Trouble? He is Comfort. Sick? He is Health. Dying? He is Life. Have you
nothing? He is all Things. Whatsoever is suitable to your Nature, or convenient
for you in every Condition of Life, that God is. Whatsoever is great, or
pleasant, good, or needful to make Men happy, that God is. Summum ac universale
Bonum. An immense and universal Good.

But though the tender Mercies of God are over all his Works; and the vilest of
Men, in this World, are refreshed with the common Fruits of the divine
Benignity; yet the Good, which I would here recommend to you, is no common
Thing. God, it is true, as to his Essence, is ubiquitary; and his Providence is
equally extensive with his Works of Creation. Matthew. 5. 45. He makes his sun
to rise on the Evil and on the Good, and sends Rain on the Just and on the
Unjust. But it is only some Men, and some Angels that he is present with in a
Way of special Grace and Favor. This is that great, that comprehensive, and
inestimable Good which I would plead with you to seek after, above all Things
whatsoever. With it you cannot be miserable, and without it you cannot be happy.
It is certainly a Pearl of great Price: The wise Merchant will readily part
with all for it, This, this will steer your Course, and fill your Sails, be to
you an unerring Compass, and never sailing Pilot. If therefore you love your
selves, your Bodies, your Souls, your best Interests, either temporal,
spiritual, or eternal. Venture not to weigh your Anchors, nor to holst your
Sails, till you have Ground to believe that God will go along with you. Repent
therefore of all your Sins without Delay, close with the blessed Jesus, upon
the Terms of the everlasting Gospel, and yield up your Souls to the forming
Hand of the blessed Spirit: That the Kingdom of God may be set up within you,
even that Kingdom which is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, and Peace,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Romans 14. 17. And then you need not doubt of God's
gracious and spiritual Presence, for he never will forsake his own Palace. That
you might be directed and assisted in making sure of this incomparable Good,
and so your Father's God be your God, and the Guide of your Youth, is next to
the Glory of my Master, the Design of the following Essay, its being put into
your Hands. For this Purpose therefore I recommend it to the Blessing of the
Father of Lights; and you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able
to build you up, and give you an Inheritance among all them which are
sanctified. And so wishing you a prosperous Voyage, by the Will of God, and a
safe Return. I remain.

Yours, in all Christian Service. E. P.
March 12. 1735, 6.
The Necessity and Benifit OF THE Divne Presence,
Considered and Improved in some Remarks upon what is written Exodus 33. 15. And
he said unto him, If thy Presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.

MOSES, an eminent Servant of God, renowned to all Posterity, having God's
Call, notwithstanding many and mighty Discouragments pursued that arduous and
difficult Charge of conducting the untractable Seed of Jacob from Egypt to
Canaan, so far as to bring them into the Wilderness of Sinai; he was called up
into the Mount of God to receive the Law at his Mouth: And his Attendance upon
that awful and important Affair was so far protracted (he being detained there
Forty D^ys and Forty Nights) that the Congregation of Israel began to despair
of his Return; and thereupon fell into Idolatrous Practices, which so incensed
the Anger of God against them, that he withdrew his Presence from them, and
refused to go along with them, as he had promised.

MOSES upon his Return, finding his Charge under such gloomy Circumstances not
only expresses a just Indig^^^^ against their horrid and provoking Impieties,
but in his Address to G^d pleads their Cause with an agonizing Importunity, as
you may ohserve toward the Close of the 32. Chap.

And in our Context, on his own Behalf, having a very weighty Charge upon him,
pleads with God for Guidence and Direction, with the Addition of (...) Special
Token of his divine Favor, (...) God says to him verse. 14. My Presence shall
go with thee, and I will give thee Rest. A great, precious, and comprehensive
Promise, surely! happy is that Man who is in such a Case; yet, blessed is that
People whose God is the LORD.

MOSES, the Captain General and Governor in Chief, of the Congregation of
Israel, was (no doubt) sensible of the vast Consequence of the Divine Presence
with a Person or People in the common Concerns of Life, much more in
Enterprises peculiarly hazardous, such as w^^ that of their passing through an
howling Wilderness, and taking possession of the Land of Canaan (though promised)
against the united Force of many and mighty Enemies. And therefore he makes
such a Reply to God as that in the Text.

If thy Presence go not with me, carry us not up hence. q. d. O Lord, I desire,
I incline I am willing to go no futher in this great Undertaking, than thy
Presence goes along with me. Indeed the Words, with me, are supplied in our
Translation, for they are not in the Original; but Moses being the Commander in
Chief, had peculiar need of the Divine presence.

As the Loyalist's in Israel in the time of Absoloms Conspiracy. told King
David, 2 Samuel 18. 3. Thou art worth Ten Thousand of us: He being the Head, and
in some sort Heart, from which all Intellectual and Vital Insfluences flow, so
it might be said of Moses, considered in his public Capacity, he was worth an
Hundred Thousand of the Israelites in the Wilderness, and by Consequence the
Presence of God with him was of very great Importance, inasmuch as the Divine
Presence with the governing Head of a People or Sociery of Men engaged in any
hazardous Enterprise, may be as extensive and beneficial as the Intellectual
and Vital Influences of the Head and Heart are to the Body Natural. Israel, no
doubt ^^red much the better upon the Account ot God's Presence with his Servant
Moses.

But the main Thing aimed at in this Essay, is not to consider the blessed
Fruits of the Divine Presence in such a limited Sense, though the Words read
would very naturaly lead me to it, but to discover, and improve upon the
Importance and vast Consequence of the Divine Presence with a Person or People,
any Body or Society of Men, even in the most common Concerns of Life; but
especially in Enterprises, attended with any peculiar Hazard and Danger. The
Engagments of which will, no doubt, be the solicitous Concern and Study of
every pious and devout Soul; those especially that have the Care ot Others, as
well as themselves; as Moses had of the whole Congregation of Israel in the
Wilderness.

Wherefore, since the Words under Consideration, need no other Explanation but
what may be very naturally and methodically attended, in the various Parts of
the ensuing Discourse. I shall without any further Remarks, proceed to a
Consideration of the main and principal Thing aimed at, which may be expressed
in this

DOCTRINE.

THat, since the Presences of God in all the Concerns of Life, especially those
that are attended with peculiar Hazard and Danger, is of vast Consequence to
the Children of Men. It should be the solicitous Concern of all, as it is of
every pious and devout' Soul, to eng ge the Presence of God with them in all
their Undertakings.

Indeed the Case of Moses in our Text and Contex was extraordinary; he had
therefore the greater Reason to be solicitously concerned in engaging the
Divine Presence and Favor with himself and People. Nevertheless, since the
Presence md Favor of God, and that only, can make every Circumstance of Life
pleasant and profitable and fill our Sails with the refreshing Gales of
Prosperity, in those various Enerprises wherein we embarque in this present
World of mutability, therefore both Dury and Interest, if we are not forgetful
of our God and selves, will certainly fill us with an earnest Concern for the
enjoyment of God's Presence in all our undertakings, hightened in proportion to
the Hazard and Difficulty attending those Enterprises we are engaged in.

Therefore in speaking further to the Doctrine, I shall,

1 st. Enquirealitle into the Nature and Quality of that Presence of God, which
is o^ such vast Consequence to the Children of Men.

2 dly. Discover to you the Vast Consequence of the Divine Presence to the
Children of Men in all their Undertakings, especially those that are attended
with any peculiar Hazard and Danger. And then,

3 dly. Show you that it should be the selicitous Concern of all, as it is of
every pious and devour Soul, to engage the Presence with them in all their
undertakings. Unto which over and above, some Reflections that may be made as I
pass along, I shall add.

4 thly. Some Improvement, or Application of the whole.

1 st. Let us, a little, enquire into the Nature and Quality of that Presence
of God, which is of such vast Consequence to the Children of Men.

In order to which, without any Critical Exactness, something may be spoken.

1 st. Of God's Essential.

2 dly. Of his Providential. And,

3 dly. Of his Gracious and Spiritual Presence,

1 st. Something may be spoken here of God's Essential Presence, which, beyond
dispute is Uniquitary: For he is not included in, nor excluded from any Place
whatsoever, the Light of Nature affords convincing Arguments of this Truth.
Hence, an Heathen Poet could say -- ^ouis omnia plena. The Empyreal, of highest
Heavens, though the Presence Chamber of the Lord JEHOVAH are not a Local
Limitation of his Essence, which is boundless and unlimmeted. Will God, indeed,
dwell on the Earth? Behold the Heaven and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him.
1 King. 8.27. Much less does he dwell in Temples made with Hands; as though
confined to those Places where he peculiarly manifests his Presence, Grace and
Favor on Earth. A^. 17. 24. Indeed he is not far from, but essentially present
with every Creature; not only in the Heaven, but upon the Earth; yea, in the
deepest Abyss of Eternity. The Royal Psalmist very Elegantly discants upon this
Argument. Psalm. 139 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Whether shall I go from thy Spirit?
Or. Whether shall I flee from thy Presence? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou
art there: If I make my Bed in Hell, behold thou art there: If I take the Wings
of the Morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even there shall
thy Hand lead me, and thy Right, and shall hold me. If I say surely the
Darkness shall cover me: Even the Night shall be right about me; yea, the
Darkness bedeth not from thee; but the Night sh^^eth as the Day; The Darkness
and the Light are both alike to thee.

What Reason then have Sinners to tremble, and Saints to be joyful in God who
is their Portion and exceeding great Reward; and accordingly will he unto them
a Sun to refresh, and a Shield to defend them in all Times of Difficulty and
Danger, and will not withold any good Thing from them that walk uprig^^ly Psalm.
84. 11.

Is God Uniquitary? What Reason then have Sinners to tremble and be filled with
pressing Concern? Since there is no Darkness nor Shadow of Death where the
workers of Iniquity can hide themselves! For God's Eyes are upon the Ways of
Man, and be sees all his Goings, Job 24. 21, 22,. Are you in a Corner, were no
m^ is ai Eye sees you! Compassed about with Midnight Darkness? Yet remember,
God always stands by, and his Eye, which sees through the thickest Mist of
Darkness is always upon you, Or, are you in some small Company, of but Six or
Seven, removed into some Corner of the Earth, or placed a far, off upon the
Sea, where, if joined in Contederecy, your boundless Exorbitancys may escape
the Censure of the Law, and Punishment of the civil Magistrate, as well as the
Shame and Reproach of the World; Yet, remember that, The Eyes of the Lord are
in every Place, beholding the Evil and the Good. Prove. 15. 3. Your Judge is in
the midst of you, when you are in the uttermost Part of the Earth, or afar off
upon the midst of the Seas; He observes your excessive Drinking, prosane
Swearing, wrecched Sabbath-Breaking, your casting off Fear and restraining
Prayer before God; your Criminal Neglect of God and your own precious and
Immortal Souls. Yea, there is not an Idle nor a wicked Word, no, nor so much as
a vain or sintal Thought, but what is written in God's Book of Remembrance, in
indelible Character and shall be brought into the Account against you in the
great R^ck^ning Day. Psalm. 139, 1, 2, 3, 4, 0 Lord thou have searched me, and
known me; Thou know ^y Down s^^ng, and mine (...) sing: thou understandest
my Thought a far ff: Thou (...) passest my Path, and my y^^g down, and art
acqainted with all my Ways: For there is not a Word in my Tongue but lo, O Lord
thou know it a together. Mat. 12. 36, 37.

But i say unto you, That every idle W^^d that Men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the Day of Judgment: For by thy Words thou shall he
justified, and by thy Words thou shall be condemned.

With what trembling Reflectons, then, may Sinners justly look back upon their
secret Faults, as well as open Transgressions; endeavor speedily to make their
Peace with God by Repentance of all Sin, and Faith in his Son; conscientiously
^triving to refrain from every Thing that is morally Evil and Dis. honorable;
and to maintain a sincere Respect to all God's Commandments, duly expressed in
(...) Uniform Practice of he great Du^es of (...) and Faith as the (...) of the
Lo^^? Mat. 22, 23. And at (...) when exposed to the (...) of the World, but
m^lt out of (...) remem^^n what the Wise Man s^ys, Eccl. 12. 14. That God (...)
Work into Judgment (...) Thing, whether it be good or whether it be Evil.

Am I a God at hard faith the Lord, and not a God a far (...) Can (...) himself
in (...) that I shall not see him, faith the Lord? Do no I fill Heaven and
Earth, faith the Lord? J^^. 23. 23, 24

Furthermore, This Truth speaks Comfort to the Godly, as well as Terror to the
Wicked. They certainly, have reason to rejoice in his Uniquity, or Omni
presence. And to put their Trust in him, not only at all Times, but in all
Places and Conditions; upon the Seas, as well as upon the Land; in the midst of
the most gloomy Storm, as well as in a serene and perfect Calm. For the Lord
has his Way in the Whirle Wind and in the Storm, and Clouds are the Dust of
his Feet. Nah 1. 2. And there is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rides
upon the heavens, in thy Help, and his Excelency on the Sk^^. Deuteronomy. 33. 26.
Wherefore, trust in the Lord forever, for in the Lord Jehovah there is
everlasting strength. Ifa. 26. 4. His Eyes ran to and fro throughout the whole
Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose Heart is perfect
toward him. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.

How suitable an Object is the Eternal JEHOVAH for Faith to stay the whole
Weight of the Soul upon, in the Times of the greatest Difficulty and Danger?
Being infinite in his Essence boundless in his Perfections, an in^ms^ce and
Omnipresent Being: A God a far off as well as at Hand. Happy then is he who
has the God of Jacob for his Help, whose Hope in the Lord his God which made
Heaven and Earth, the sea, and all that therein is; which keeps Truth for
ever, Psalm. 146. 5, 6.

To proceed this Truth, in its double Aspect of Terror and Comfort, ma be
further improved upon, by a Consideration of God's Providential Presence. I am
not satisfied, that t^^s is equally extensive with his Essential Presence,
which is nor limited by Time or Place, but eternally fills that Immense void,
where there is no created Existence. Whereas the Providen^ial Presence of God,
though equally Extensive with the vast Circle of the Crea^ion: Yet, as such. is
confined, within, and not extended beyond those Limits: It being that divine
Inspection, Care and Presidency, whereby the great Creator watches over,
supports and governs all second Beings, according to the Counsel of his own
Will. Ephesians. 1. 11. Universal Nature feels the Effects of it in the Supports
which the Almighty JEHOVAH affords to all Creatures, by which they are kept
from relapsing into a State of Nonentity: And the Government which he
exercises over them; by which they are led to their designed Ends: Some in one
Way and some in Another. The most inconsiderable Orders of being, in the
Creation, with all their Individuals, are under the Influence of God's
providential Presence; none so contemptible, as to be passed over with neglect:
But Angels, Men and Devils, are in a peculiar Manner so, God having made them
reasonable Creatures, capable of a moral Agency, and so placed them under the
Government of a Rule, respect vely suited to their Natures; and therefore will
be their Rule of Judgment in the great Day;

Here, then it may be our purpose to observe.

That whilst God is providentially present with some in a way of Favor, he is
so with others in a way of Wrath and Displeasure. He is present with the Devils
in Hell: How? In a way of Wrath and Displeasure; they are in his Chain, at his
Beck and Command, under the dreadful Impressons of his Anger, reserved to the
Judgment of the great Day. This is likewise the Case of those damned Souls who
are now in the Dark and gloomy Hades of Infernal Misery. And thus God will he
eternally present with the Damned in Hell; not only to keep them in Being, by
his Manutenency, but to execute on them the fierceness of his Anger, holding
them up with one Hand, whilst he smites with the Other. They shall be separated
from his favorable and gracious Presence, which is a Circumstanced d^eful,
beyond Expression: For in his Favor there Lite; but add to this, the dreadful
Impressions of his wrathful Presence, and then consider Is it not a fearful
Thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God? Heb. 10 31. Both these I
presume may be implied in that awful Scripture. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. When the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming
Fire, taking Vengeance on them that knew not God and that obey not she Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction
from the PRESENCE of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power.

But to return from this D'gression, to our Earth. God is not always
providentially present here, with Men, in Ways of Favor: sometims in a Way of
Anger and Displeasure, by visiting them with consuming Judgments. Psalm. 9. 3.
When mine Enemies are turned back, they shall fall and perish at thy Presence,
says David. And accordingly by a Prophetic Spirit, prays for the Destraction
of Gods Enemies Psalm. 68. 2. As Smoke is driven away, so drive them away; as
Wax melts before the Fire, so let the Wicked perish at the Presence of God.
Thus the old World perished at the Presence of an angry God. Thus, Sodom and
Gomorrah, and those City which God overthrew in his Anger and in his Wrath, and
repented not. Jerem. 20. 16. Thus the Egyptians perished in the Red Sea,
through the angry Presence of an Holy God, who in that Instance of Judgment
upon the Enemy, pleaded the Cause of his People, being present with them in a
Way of Favor. And thus God is many Times present in the midst of Sinners to
execute Judgment upon them, even in this Lite. It would be easy to produce
remarkable Instances hereof, over and above what have been mentioned, both by
Sea and Land. Indeed there is a vast Difference between Chastisements and
Judgments, in the Principle from whence they flow, and Design upon which they
are sent, though materially considered, they may be very much alike: The
Principle from whence Chastisements flow, is, Divine Love: And the End for
which they are sent, is the Good of the Afflicted, Heb. 12 6, 10 Though the same
sort of Afflictions may be sent upon some as Chastisements, and upon others as
Judgments and Fruits of God's Wrath; hence, that of Solomon, Eccl. 9. 1. No Man
knowerh Love or Hatred, by all that is before them. So that God may be present
in a Way of Grace and Mercy, with a Man, or Number of Men, when they are under
afflicted Circumstances. And on the other Hand, God may be present in a way of
Wrath, when he gives Sinners their Desires, but in Judgment as as he did to
Israel of old, Psalm. 106. 15. He gave them their Request, but sent Leanness
into their Soul.

Indeed, God may be said to be providentially present with a Person or a People
in a way of Favor when he compasses them about with outward Blessings, smiles
upon, and prospers their Undertakings in the World; so that the Blessings of
Life flow in very plentifully upon them, as the Darlings, or peculiar
Favorites of P^^^^dence. This appears very desirable to our Natural
Resentments of God and Evil; but in order to make them real Blessings, one
Thing further is necessary, and that is Grace and Wisdom from on High, to
receive them as coming from God, with the most graceful Resentments, and to
improve them to his Glory, and our own everlasting Good.

This brings me to speak something of God's gracious and spiritual Presence.
This is not common to all, but peculiar to some only. Such are they who belong
to God, and are redeemed and sanctified by the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Having set up his Kingdom within, he presides, rules and reigns in the Heart.
And being Lord of Providence, orders all their Outward and Temperal Affairs in
a Way of Mercy. If infinite Wisdom sees that Prosperity in this World shall be
best for them; That, no doubt, shall be their Portion If Adversity be
necessary, God will be present with such to support them under, give them a
sanctified Use of Trials, and in the proper Season to deliver them out of all
their Distesses.

This Gracious and Spiritual Presence of God, is that, which makes his Esse^^al
and Providential Presence comfortable, and peculiarly servicable to the best
Purposes of the Soul and Eternity, and therefore above all Things to be desired,
as may further appear under the Second Head, where I proposed to discover to
you the vast Consequence of the Divine Presence to the Children of Men in all
their Undertakings, especially those that are attended with any peculiar Hazard
and Danger; as some Undertakings are, much more than Others

There is, indeed, no Enterprise that we engage in, among that great variety of
Designs that are pursued by the Children of Men, but what is attended with more
or less of Hazard and Danger; but some are peculiarly (...) Among others, our
Seafaring Tribe of Mankind, may be looked upon as peculiarly exposed above many
others. This is the Case, not only of those that are employed in the Whiling
Design, they being many Times eminently expeled, both Life and Limb; but also
of there that go down to the S^^ in Ships, and do Business in the Great Waters.
How are they exposed to Sin and Harm, to Sands and Shoals, to Rocks and
Robbers, to Storms and Tempests, which many Times brings them to their Wits,
and sometimes to their Lives End? Of what vast Consequence then is the Presence
of God, in these or any other arduous and perrillous Undertakings purs^^^ by
the Children of Men?

This may he illustrated under various Heads, distinctly and conjunctly to be
considered,

1 st. The Presence of God is necessary to keep Men from the Power of
Temptation and Sin in their various Concernments. To be kept from the Hour of
Temptation, is little to be expected, from the Power much to be desired; but
not to be expected without the Influences of God's Presence and Grace: Our
corrupt Natures being like dry Tinder, will be very apt to take Fire by the
least Spark, unless prevented by the Grace and Spirit of God. We are therefore,
ever in Danger: For there is no Circumstance of Life, or particular Calling
among Men, but what is attended with its Temptations; but some are so, in a
peculiar Manner. I might ^ere particularize the Business of the Seas, and
Tra^ck, abroad in Foreign Countries. So lamentably are the grea^e^t Part of
S^a^faring Men habituated to excessive Drinking, ^orr^d ^^^ating, with many
other Vicious P^^ct ^es; That there is eminen Danger of Sober and Virtuous Men's
being infected by the Con^agion of (...) evil Examples, when c^nfi^ed o^ their
Socie^y. Iniquity, it is true, horribly abounds in our Land; and there are many
Snares apd alluri^g lemptations by which ^nwary Yout^ especially, are decoy d
into the Paths of Sin and Destruction: But in some other Parts of the World,
there are many more, and much greater Temptations; some of almost the vilest of
Sins (which a virtuous Disposition would tremble at the Tho'ts of) are there
become Fashionable and Creditable. And this goes a great Way, in recomending
any Practice to young Persons, especially in this degenerate Age ^ As good be
out of the World as out of the Fashion, is a received Maxim with some. Yea,
over and above, the fatal Influences of evil Examples, the Factors of ^ell, are
very active and busy in representing Vice and Inmorality under the most
charming forms, and setting off Sin to the g^e^^e^^ Advantage, to ensnare and
ruin simple Souls, who are taken with the Bait. but don't discern the fatal
Hook: And at the same Time, God's Word, Sabbaths, Sermons, Ordinances,
Ministers, and every Thing that is Serious, Sacred, and has any Show of Virtue
an P e y, are treated, with the utmost Scorn and Contmpt, by those prosane Sons
of Belial. These, indeed, are but some of those many Ways which Satan and his
Instruments have to Induce poor Sinners into the Pains of Death and Hell: But
these duly considered, do abunantly discover the Necessity of the divine
Presence of God's Grace and Spirit to preserve feeble Man from the Power of
Temptation and Sin: And by Consequence, what Occasion we have to make that
Petition in the Lord's Prayer, One main Article in our's, Lead us not into
Temptation.

2. The Presence of God is necessary to save Men from the Harms and Casualties
they are exposed to in their various Ways. As Ive already intimated, wherever
we are going, whatever we are doing, we are exposed to Harm as well as Sin. But
sometimes our Undertakings are peculiarly hazardous. and we therein exposed,
not only to Harms, that are obvious but to many unseen Casualties and Dangers,
which we are not able to guard against, nor prevent. This is often, yea I may
say always, the Case of those that are employed on the great Deeps, who lie
open to the cruel and rapacious Treatment of many and mighty Enemies, and among
the rest, of those Hosts humani Generis, bloody Pirates, like Devils
incarnate, more barbarous than the mercyless Tiger, roving after their Prey.
Though blessed be God, we hear little of late concerning this common Enemy of
Mankind, which has been (not without Reason) a Terror to honest Seamen: Who
besides Enemies, have many other Dangers to encounter, contagious and mortal
Diseases may sieze upon them; a leaky Bottom, a Spit of Sa^d, or a fatal Rock
confound them, and the raging Billows of the foaming Ocean fill them with the
Terrors of Death. Who can enumerate the many hidden Accidents by which their
Persons and temporal Interests are exposed to the Extremity of Danger? How
necessary? How desirable then is it they might enjoy the gracious and
favorable Presence of the Lord JEHOVAH who g^there^h the Wi^d in his (...);
Yea, be makes the Clouds his Chariots, and w^k^h upon the Wings of the Wind,
Psalm. 101. 3. So that the stormy Wind, and proud Waves of the Sea are at his
Command: He says to those mighty Waters, Hitherto shi'r thou come, and so
further; and here shall thy proud Waves be stayed, Job 38. 11. He can say to
the troubled Raging Sea, Peace, be shall, Mark, 4. 39 And it will be obsequious
to his Command; then the furious Tempest will give way to a quiet and happ.
Calm: Though before, the mighty B^llows of the Ocean seemed to threaten the
Heights of Heaven, and the very Foundations of the Mountains. The Psalmist very
naturally, and elegantly represents the Dangers and Terrors of Seamen in the
midst of a furious Storm, and their w^^drful Salvations coming from the
gracious and powerful Hand of an om^^prefen God which by reason of the Aptitude
nd Naturalness of the Representation I shall rep^a^. Psalm. 107. 23 -- 30. They
that go down to the Sea in ships, that do Bus^^s in great Waters: These see the
Work of the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep. For be commands and raises
the stormy Wind which lifieth up the Waves, thereof: they mount up to Heaven,
they go down again to the Depths, their Soul is melted because of Trouble, they
reel to and Fro. and stagger like a drunken Man, and are at their Wits End:
Then they cry unto the Lord in their Trouble and he brings them out of their
^istresses. He makes the Storm a Calm, so that the Waves thereof ere still;
then they are glad, because they be quiet, so he brings them unto their
desired Haven. So that if God be graciously with them, he will be a present
Help, not only in such times of Trouble, but their Refuges,, their Fortress and
Power of Defense against all Harms. They shall dwell in the secret Place of the
Most High, and abide under the Shadow of the Almighty He, faith the Psalmit, in
Psalm. 91 4 -- 8. shall cover thee with his Feathers, and under his Wings shall
thou trust: His Truth shall be thy Shield and Buckler. Thou shall not be afraid
for the Terror by Night; nor for the Arrow that flies by Day; nor for the
P^stilence that walks in Darkness; nor for the Destruction that wa^teth as
Noon Day: A thousand shall fall at thy side, and Ten thousand at thy Right
Hand; but it shall not come nigh thee. Only with thine Eye shall tbou behold,
and see the Reward of the Wicked. And as to Enemies, God's gracious and
favorable Presence is a necessary and effectual Security against the most
powerful Efforts of their Malice and Rage. If God be for us, Who can be against
us? The Psalmist triumphs in this, Psalm. 118. 6. The Lord is on my Side, I will
not fear when Man can do unto me. There is no Wisdom nor Understanding, nor
Counsel against the Lord, Prove. 21. 30. Hencee Solomon adds, ver. 31. The Horse
is prepared against the Day of Battle; but S^f^y is of the Lord.

3. The Presence of the Lord is necessary in order to Man's Direction and
Assistance in the Way of Duty; and that with Respect, both to his general and
particular Calling. He only can open our Eyes, and give us saving Knowledge of
the great Things of his Law and Gospel; and enable us to give suitable
Entertainment thereunto, for of our selves we cannot think a good Though It, or
speak a good Word; much less able to perform the ^reat and weighty Duties of
our general Callings, as Christians. As, The Entrance of his Words gives
Light, Psalm. 119. 130. So, It is God that girdeth his People with Strength and
makes their Way perfect, Psalm. 18. 32. And as to our particular Callings
wherein we are concerned with the common Affairs of this Life, That of the
Prophet may be applied, Jerem. 10. 23. The Way of Man is not in himself: It is
not in Man that walks to direct his steps. If it was not for the Manuduction
of God's favorable Providence, even in the common Business of Life, we should
often run into inextricable Labyrinths; from which all our own Prudence and
Policy could never disengage us. And then as to Execution, there is no
Enterprise that Man engages in, which he could go through with, if it were not
for renewed and fresh Supplies from ELSHADDAI. Wherefore is the Prophet says,
Jerem. 9. 25 Let not Wise Man glory in his Wisdom, neither let the Mighty Man
glory in his Might; but let him that glories, gory in the Lord, 1 Cor 1. 31.

4. The Presence of God is necessary in order to Prosperity and Success in our
Undertakings. In Spirituals, it is not in Means nor Instruments. Paul may
plant, and Apollos may water; but God alone can give the Increase. 1 Cor. 3. 6,
7. So likewise it is in Temporals, Means and Instruments without the
Concurrence of the Divine Presence, and Blessing will never reach the End. You
may plow and sow; but it is God that gives you a Crop. You may send your
Ventures abroad into other Parts of the World; but unless God smile upon the
Design, you will have no good Return, if any at all. It would, indeed, ho
Presumption to expect Success without the Use of proper Means. But to look no
further,, is a Criminal Contempt of the first Cause, and imimense Fountian of
all Goodness, God's efficacious and succeding Presence, and was only can give
us Reason to ^^joyce in our Labor. Our own ^r^dence, Policy and industry, will
be our vain without it. Schemes for temporal Profit, drawn by the most politic
Heads, that best understand the Mysteries of Trade and Commerce; when brought,
in Appearance, ^ig^ to Maturity, come to Nothing, or don't turn out according
to Expectation; and the Main and ultimate Reasons is this, The Design is
blasted for want of God's Presence, and the Concurrence of his divine Blessing,
Psalm. 127. 1. Except the Lord build the House, they labor in vain that build
it; Except the Lord keep the City, the Wa^chmen waketh but in vain. In a Word,
the Success of Navigation Husband^y and Trade, is owing to the Almighty's
Presence and Heavenly Benediction. All my Springs are in thee. Psalm. 87. 7.

5. The gracious and spiritual Presecnce of God is necessary to support us
under frowning Providence, We cannot reasonably expect that kind Gales of
Prosperity shoud always fill our Sails: And that we should meet with no
Disaster in Life. No, no, many are the L sses. Crosses, Disappointments and
Afflictions, of the best of Men in this evil World of Changes, Psalm. 54. 19.
Shocking Trials, may be our Portion, both at Sea and ashore: Now the gracious
Presence of God, and that only can be a sufficient Support in such Hour of
Trial. This was David's Support, and the Churches, Support, in a Time of great
Confusion, Psalm. 46. 1, 2, 3. God is our Refuge, and Strength, a very p^e^^^^
Help in Trouble. Therefore will not use fear, though the Earth be removed, and
though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. Though the Waters
thereof roar, and be troubled, though thee Mountains shake with the Swelling
thereof. This supporting and comforting Presence of God, will make a good
Christian smile in the Face of Danger, and rejoice in the darked Night of
outward Sorrow and Trouble. Thus it was with the Primitive (...). As sorrowful,
yet always rejoicing, 2 Cor. 6. 10. And no Wonder, for this Presence of God
gives Songs in Night, Psalm. 42. 7, 8. Deep calls unto Deep, at the Noise of
thy Water spouts; all thy Waves and thy Billows are gone over me. Yet the Lord
will command his Living-Kindness in the Day Time, and in the Night, his Song
shall be with me When Fl sh and Hearth Fails, God is the Strength of their
Hearts, and their Port^^s for ever, Psalm. 72. 26. The Cons^^ations of God are
not small,

6. The gracious and spiritual Presence of God is necessary to enable the
Children of Men to improve both the Smiles and Frowns of divine Providence, to
God's Glory, and their own Good. Outward Prosperity, however pleasing it may be
to the Flesh, instead of being rally serviceable, is very hurtful to the Soul.
Solomon speaks of the Prosperity of Fools, which will destroy them, Prove. 1.
32. Without the the Influences of divine Grace, Prosperity will make us forget
God, and walk unsteadily with him: Yea, deny him, Prove 30 9. And ^eshurun like,
kick with He^ls of Rebellion against him, evilly requiting the Lord for all his
Goodness; but through the kind Influence of his gracious and Spiritual Presence,
the Riches of his Goodness will lead us to Repentance, and make us abundantly
fruitful in good Works, Gncerly endeavoring to walk, in some Measure,
answerable to our Receipts of divine Kindness. This is the Language of an Heart
warmed with those divine Influences; under the outward Smiles of a kind
Providence. Psalm. 116. 12. What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his
Benefits toward me.

On the other Hand, as to the Frowns of divine Providence, unless sanctified
they will disturb our Peace, imbitter our Spirits, and fill us with Discontent,
which will very much unfit us for the Services and Sufferings of this present
Time, put us out of the Possesson of our own Souls, and render us incapable of
enjoying our God, the most desirable Object that the Soul of Man can converse
with, or be brought to the Fruition of; infinitely fo^l being possessed of all
possible Perfection, Excellency and Glory. Whereas, if the Frowning Providence
of our Almighty Sovereign be sanctified to us, by the Influences of God's
gracious Presence, which is to be expectd in no other Way: Our most grievious
Troubles here shall, in fine, contribute to our Spiritual Comfort, and our
greatest Losses to our best and most lasting Gain. In a Word, by the kind and
benign Influences of God's gracious and Spiritual Presence here, we shall be
brought through the various Scene of changeable Time, into a permanent Eternity
of immutable Bliss, in the immediate Presenc of Divine Glory; where there is a
Fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for ever more, Psalm. 16. 11.

Thus, under sundry particular Heads, I Have endeavored to discover to you the
vast Consequence of the Divine Presence with the Children Men in all their
Undertakings, especially those that are attended with any peculiar Hazard and
Danger; by showing you how necessary God's gracious and spiritual Presence is,
to keep Men from the Power of Temptation and Sin, to save them from the Harms
and Casualtys they ares exposed to, in their various Ways, to direct and assist
them in the Way of Duty, to succeed them in their Undertakings, to support them
under frowning Providence, and to enable them to improve both the Smiles and
Frowns of divine Providence, to God's Glory and their own Spiritual, and
Everlasting good.

What has been said under these Heads, will, I think, very naturally lead as to
a Consideration of these Two Deductions, or Inferences.

1. That nothing can make a Man, or Society of Men, miserable so long as they
enjoy the gracious and favorable Presence of Almighty God. Unto such God will
be a Sun and a Shield he will give them Grace, and Glory too, and no good Thing
will he withold from them that walk uprightly. If God be with you, neither the
Rage of Men, or Malice of Devils shall ever blast or ruin you, or any other
Evil prove finally fatal to you, What (...) Winds blow, the Waters rear, the
Seas rage, and all seems to be in Confusion round about you? Yet, Fear not, for
I am with thee, faith the Lord: ^e not dismayed, for I am thy God, I^a. 41. 10.

What, though you fall into the Hands of merciless Enemies, more cruel than the
Lion, Tiger or Bear? Or are foundered and overwhelmed in the fathomless Deeps,
constrained to take up your Lodging in those watery Regions, enwrapp'd about
with the marine Weeds of the troubled Ocean. through the long and darksome
Night of Death? Yet if God be with you, none of these Calamities shall mar your
Felicity, if you are under the kind Influences of sanctifying and saving Grace,
and are, indeed, the Subject of a Christ living within, as the Hope of Glory,
your Enemies may abuse, torment and murder your Bodies, but they cannot hurt
your Soul, which as to their Rage are impenetra'le and impossable. Your Souls
likewise, may be separated from your Bodies by the suffocating Thickness of the
watery Element into which you are inevitably plunged; but if in Christ which is
your Security of the divine Presence) they shall by guardian Angels, be
conducted into the joyful Presence of God that gave them; And your Bodies during
their Term of Insensibility, in the bowels of the moving Ocean, shall be
carefully kept and preserved by our great Emanuel, and in the last D^ by the
irresistible Efficacy of their Union to Christ, be brought forth to the
Resurrection of Life. The Time is coming when the Sea shall give up the Dead
which are in ^, Rev. 20. 13. But dear Souls! The one Thing needful, is to be
found in Christ, not having on your own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but
that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by
Faith, Phil. 3. 9.

I proceed to the second Inference.

2. Without the gracious and favorable Presence of God, nothing can make them
Happy: For the Happiness of Man's Life does not consist in the Abundance of the
Things which he possesses, or has a Possession of. Luke 12. 15. And therefore
be your Prospects never so fair and promising, and your creature Dependancies
never so great. (If God be not with you) youll either meet with some blatting
Providence, God will blow upon your encouraging Enterprises, and bring them to
naught; or if outwardly they seem to succeed, it will turn to your greater
Disadvantage; the Ruin of your Souls, For the Prosperity Fools (as Ive told you
before) shall destroy them. There' y you will be lead on to nil up the Measure of
your Sins, ripened for Judgment, and so an holy and jealous God, in his just
Displeasure, will cut you off, Root and Branch in one Day, Isai. 9. 14. Now,
therefore, consider this, ye than forget God, left ^ear you in Pieces, and
there be none to deliver, Psalm. 50. 22.

Hereupon I proceed,

3. To show you, That it should be the Solicitous Concern of all, as it is of
every pious and devout Soul, to engage the Presence of God with them in all
their Undertakings.

Here it may be of Service, to deliberate a little upon two Points.

1. The Engagement of God's gracious and spiritual Presence, is the solicitous
Concern of every pious and devout Soul, Especially in Enterprises, that are
peculiarly hazardous and dangerous. The great Desire of their Souls is, not
that they might make a great Figure in the World, enjoy a great Confluence of
temporal Blessings, or be honored with the Applause and vain Complements of a
giddy Multitude; but that they might enjoy the Presence of the eternal JEHOVAH
as their sure Friend, compassionate Father, and heavenly Comforter; to be their
Guide, their Portion and exceeding great Reward. What a solicitous Concern
do^t. Moses, express upon this Head in the Text? If thy Presence go not along
with me carry us not up hence. The same Concern in some Proportion, influences
every pious and devout Soul. And no Wonder, For,

1. They are sensible That their Preservation from Sin, Temptation and all
Evil, depends upon the gracious and favorable Presence of God. Not only the
Word of God; but repeated Experiences of their own, have abundantly taught
them, the Inssufficiency and Weakness of all other Places of Refuge and
Defense. To conquer a hase Lust or Passion, to eradicate the inviterate Habits
of Vice and Sin; or withstand the Force of a violent Temptation, they have
formed to be an Herculean Labor, surpassing their own Strength. David, when he
goes forth in the Name and Strength of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the Armies
of Israel, is more than a March for a gyamick Goliath, whom he presently lays
sprawling at his feet, 1 Samuel 17. 50, 51. But when left to himself, without the
concurring Influences, of Corroborating Grace, he is presently overcome by a
vile Lust. 2 Samuel 10. 4. A Sense his own Weakness in that lamentable Instance,
was (no doubt) an O^^sion of that particular Petition (...) his Prayer, Psalm.
51.

2. -- Uphold me with thy free Spirit. Peter, being too confident of his own
Strength when he sa d to our blessed Savior, Mat. 26. 35. Though I should die
with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Being left to himself, repeatedly denied
his Master, and at last with horrid Oaths and Imprecations, a dreadfol
Aggravation of that horrid Crime, ver. 74. He (no doubt) thought he had rather
die, and when he said it, believed that he should sooner yield his dear Life a
Sacrifice, in his Masters Cause, than disown or deny him. But when God withdrew
his strengthening Presence from him, soon found by sad Experience, the Fear of
Man to be a Snare; too strong a Temptation for his own best formed Resolutions,
to hold out against How poorly accomplished then is feeble Man, in his own
Strength, to fight against Principalities and Powers, and the Rulers of the
Darkness of this World, against Spiritual Wickedness, in high Places, Ephesians. 6.
12. But through the Grace and Strength of Christ, they may come off more than
Conquerers in this spiritual Warfare For it is God that heacheth their Hands to
War, and their Fingers to fight. This the Saints and faithful Servants of God
have learned, by Experience, Thus David, Sam. 22. 33. God is my Strength and
Power, and he makes my Way perpect, Psalm. 18. 29. -- 34, 35. By thee (says
he) I have run through a TROOP, by my God have I leaped over a Wall. He
teaches mine Hands to War so that a Bow of Steel is broken by mine Arms. Thou
have also given me the Shield of thy Salvation: And thy Right Hand has bolden
me up. No Wonder then the Saints are solicitously concerned for, and desireous
of, the gracious and favorable Presence of God, since it is their Security
against the prevailing Power of Temptation and Sin. As to this, God, and not
their Strength, is their Confidence, Psalm. 26, 1. I have trusted in the Lord:
Therefore I shall not slide.

And as to the Casualties of this uncertain and changable World, they know that
God is the Rock of their Salvation. The Lord is my Defense (says the Psalmi^)
and my God is the Rock of my Refuge. Psalm. 94 22. They have good Assurance of
all necessary Protection and Defense, if Gods Presence goes along them, in
their various Ways and Concerns: For God has said, and, Shall he not make it
good? Job. 5. 19, 20, 22, 23. He shall deliver thee in Six Troubles; yea in
Seven there shall no Evil touch thee. In Famine, he shall redeem thee from
Death: And in War, from the Power of the Sword: Thou shall be bid from the
Scourge of the Tongue: Neither shall thou be afraid of Destruction when it
comes. At Destruction and Famine thou shall laugh: Neither shall thou be
afraid of the Beasts of the Earth. For thou shall be in league with the Stones
of the Field: And the Beasts of the Field shall be at Peace with thee.

2. Pious and devout Souls have an experimental Knowledge of the great
Advantage of the divine Presence, both as to Duty and Comfort. As to Duty, they
have often found the Grace and Strength of Christ made perfect in their
Weakness. And upon this Account they do, ask it were, glory in their
Infirmities: Thus it was with St. Paul in a Time of great Temptation, 2 Cor.
12. 9 10: And be said unto me. My Grace is sufficient for thee: For my Strength
is made perfect in Weakness: Most gradly therefore will I rather glory in my
infirmities that the Power of Christ may rest upon me. Therefore I take
Pleasure in Reproaches, in Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses for
Christ's Sake: For when I am weak then am I strong. Upon the same Foundation,
David draws up that Resolution, Psalm. 71. 16. I will go in the Strength of the
Lord God: I will make mention of thy Righteousness. even of thine only. And as
to Comfort, it is God that by the refreshing Influences of his Presence gives
Songs in the darknest Night of Trouble, Job. 35. 10. The Lord, by the Blessings
of his Presence, shall comfort Zion, Isa. 51. 3. His Saints and faithful
Servants have tasted the Sweets of his Presence. in this Respect, in Times of
Distress and Trouble, Psalm. 91. 19. In the Multitude of my Thoughts within me,
thy Comforts deligth my Soul. God's gracious and favorable Presence will not
only afford sufficient Support and Comfort, in the most gloomy Season of
outward Trouble here; but even in the dark Valley of the Shadow of Death. Hence
David's Resolution, Psam. 23 4. Yea though I walk through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil, for thou art with me, thy Rod and they
Staff, they comfort me. The Presence of God is their Support, their Comfort and
Song in the House of their Pilgrimage, and in him do they make their Boast all
the Day long.

Hence,

3. They know that their Case will be very sad and deplorable, if God withdraws
his gracious and favorable Presence from them, Hos. 9. 12. Woe to them when I
depart from them What an awful. Circumstance was Saul in when uttered those
Words? 1 Samuel 28. 15. The Philistines make War against me, and God is departed
from me, and answers me no more neither by Prophets nor by Dreams. If God
withdraws his gracious and favorable Presence, What will become of that poor
weak, feeble, sinful Creature, Man? He will then have no Safe-Guide to lead him
in the Way of Duty; no effectual Restraint on his Lusts; no powerful Antidote
against Temptations; no impregn^ble helmet to secure against threatening
Mischiefs; but will, unquestionably wander out of the Way of Peace and
Happyness, and pine away in Sin, under the Curse of God. No Wonder then, that
pious and devout Souls are solicitously concerned for the Enjoyment of God's
gracious and favorable Presence.

2. It should be the solicitous Concern of all, to engage the Presence of God
with them in all their Undertakings. That this ought to lie very near the
Hearts of all, both Young and Old, might be abundantly argued from what has
been said, already, of the vast Consequence of the divine Presence with the
Children of Men, in all their Undertakings.

But, passing those Remarks, I shall but a little more than mention Two Things
under this Head, which may serve to discover how necessary it is, That every
one should be solicitously concerned to engage the divine Presence, which is of
so great Consequence, to the Children of Men, and as powerful Motives put us
upon it.

1. If you don't endeavor with a proper Concern to engage the divine Presence,
you cannot reasonably expect any thing but to miss of it. If you forsake God be
will cast you for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And, what an Inundation of Woe and
Misery will then break in upon you, and overwhelm you? Deur. 31. 16, 17. And
the Lord said unto Moses, behold, thou shall steep with thy Fathers, and this
People will rise up, and go a Whoring after the Gods of the Strangers of the
Land, whether they go to be amongst them, and will forsake me, and break my
Covenant which I have made with them. Then my Anger shall be kindled against
them in that Day, and I will forsake them, and I will hide my Face from them,
and they shall be devoured and many Evils and Troubles shall befall them, so
that they will say in that Day, Are not these Evils come upon us, because our
God is not amongst us? In a Word, They that forsake the Lord shall be consumed
Isai. 1. 28. And what less do they do, who don't take due Care to engage his
divine Presence, by walking with him in the Way of Duty, who set light by God's
Presence, as Israel did of Old, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. But Jeshurun waxed fat, and
kicked: Thou art waxen fat, thou art thick, thou art covered with Fatness; then
he forsook the God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his
Salvation. An horrible Crime surely! That justly exposes the Guilty, to God's
awful Displeasure, Jer. 2. 19, -- Know therefore and see, that it is an Evil
Thing and Bitter that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my Fear is
not in thee, faith the Lord God of Hosts.

2. If you make it your solicitous Concern to engage the Presence of God with
you in all your Undertakings, you have a great deal of Reason, to encourage
your selves, with an Expectation of the Blessings of the divine Presence. If
you seek him, he will be found of you, forecited, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. For he loves
them that love him, and they that seek him early shall find him, Prove. 8. 17,
-- He has never said unto the Seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain. Isai. 45. 19.
But his Voice is this; Seek and ye shall find. see Mat. 7. 7. So that it will
be your own Fault, if you don't enjoy the gracious and Favorable Presence of
God with you in your various Ways and Concerns. Wherefore, if you would be wise
for your selves, you must do your Utmost to engage God's Presence with you in
every Enterprise and Undertaking, those especially that are attended with any
peculiar Hazard, Dificulty or Danger. Saying as Moses in my Text. If thy
Presence go not with me, carry us not up Hence.

4. I come now to make some particular Improvement of the Doctrine, under Two
or Three Heads, distinctly.

USE I. Is the gracious and favorable Presence of God of such vast Consequence
unto the Children of Men in all their Undertakings (as we have heard) but
especially in those that are attended with any peculiar Hazard and Danger? Then
the Circumstances of those are sad and deplorable to whom God denies his
gracious and favorable Presence. The Ubiquity of God's essential Presence none
can escape. It would be an happy Case for the Devils, and Damned in Hell, if
they could fly and hide from the Presence and Face of him that sits on the
Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6. 16. But this they cannot,
neither Dens nor Caves, Rocks nor Mountains can secure them from the dreadful
Impressions of God's Wrathful Presence. And though the finally Impenitent, whilst
they are here in this World, may be encompassed about, with with the outward
Blessings of Providence may, Wash their Steps with Butter, and the Rock may
pour out Rivers of Oil to them, as the Phrase is, Job 29. 6. So that they have
more than Heart can wish, Psalm. 73. 7. Yet the Curse of God is upon them: They
are cursed in their Persons and Enjoyments: There is Poison in their most
pleasant Cups. Concerning such, God says as in Mal. 2. 2. -- I will curse your
Blessings, yea, I have cursed them already. -- Their Prosperity does but fatten
them up against the ^^y of Slaughter. For, As the Lord knows how to deliver
the Godly out of Temptation; s o also to reserve the Wicked to the Day of
Judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2. 9. And if, in their most Flourishing
Circumstances, they are in a cursed and deplorable Condition: How doleful must
their Case be, when under the dreadful Frowns of an angry God, in this World?
Miserable Wretches! In the Time of Prosperity, though you are cursed Creatures,
without God, without Christ and without Hope in the World: Yet (it may be) you
Bless your Selves, in your own Hearts, and say unto your Souls as the Fool in
the Gospel, Luke 12. 19. -- Eat drink and be merry. Thinking with those profane
Monsters, Isai. 56. 12. That, To-morrw shall be as this Day, and much more
abundant. Yet, What will you do in the Day of your Calamity? When God shall
strip you naked of those outward Enjoyments which you value your selves so much
upon. Your Prosperity is but short, and your Rejoicing but for a Moment: The
Days of Evil are coming and they shall be many. How do you expect to hold our,
in the Day of the Lord's indignation? Without any Staff to support, or Cordial
to revive your sinking Spirits. Behold, the Clouds thicken a-pace, the Heavens
are clothed with Blackness, as with a Covering of Sackcloth, The terrible
Voice of the Lord is upon the Waters, the God of Glory thund^^eth, the Storm
increases, the Winds ^ow, the Seas roar, and with impe^^^^s Surges, seem, every
Moment to threaten you with sudden Destruction. Death looks you in the Face on
every Side; you are overwhelmed in the Deeps, and now must in a few Moments
appear before God's Judgment Seat. O! what will you do in this last Extremity,
if God be not with you? How can you pass through the dark Valley of the Shadow
of Death without his supporting Staff and comforting Rod? What will you do in
the Day Visitation, and in this Hour of Desolation? To whom will ye flee for
Help? And where will you leave your Glory? Isai. 10. 3. Read, and tremble at
what you read in Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Because I have called and ye
refused, I have stretched out my Hand, and no Max regarded; but ye have set at
naught all my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof: I also will laugh at your
Calamity, I will mock when your Fear comes; when your Fear comes as a
Desolation, and yuor Destruction as a Whirlwind; when Distress and Anguish
comes upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they
shall seek me early, but they shall not find me.

USE II. Let it then be the solicitous Concern of every one of us, to engage
the gracious and favorable Presence of God with us in all our Undertakings;
especially those that are attended with any peculiar Hazard or Danger. No
Safety, or real Prosperity, can reasonably be expected in any Design, without
the special Presence of God. We should therefore make it the main Article of
our Concern to get God to go along with us in all our Undertakings, and by
Consequence, it is reasonable that our Concern should be heightened in
proportion to the Difficulty, Danger and Importance of the Enterprise we are
engaging in, whether by Sea or Land; the Former, of which (as I Have already
observed) is attended with peculiar Hazard and Danger.

Wherefore, let those that are going from us, to do Business upon the great
Deeps, be prevailed with, to make it their great Concern, to get God to go
along with them, in a Way of Mercy, Grace and Favor.

And in order to that blessed Purpose, give me leave to recommend some Things
to your serious Consideration and Religious Practice; by way of Counsel and
Direction, in which I would act the Part of a true Friend (as I really am) to
your Souls, and the Souls of all my Hearers; who are equally concerned with you
in the following Words of Advice; as they desire the Presence of the ever
blessed JEHOVAH, to go along with them, in any and all their Undertakings,
whether common or more extraordinary.

What I shall offer by way of Counsel and Direction, may be reduced to Two
general Heads.

1. Be very careful least you provoke God to withdraw from you, and refuse to
go along with you.

2. Do what in you lies, to engage the gracious and favorable Presence of God
with you in all your Undertakings.

1. Be very careful, least you provoke God to withdraw from you, and refuse to
go along with you. In general, Take head, and beware of Sin, all Sin, Sin of
every Kind; those Sins especially, to which you are most exposed in your
Calling and way of Life. God is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity. He
cannot look upn Sin, or Sinners with Approbation or Allowance; but with the
greatest Detestation and Abhorrence, Mab. 1. 17. Nothing like Sin, to provoke
as holy God to withdraw his gracious and favorable Presence from the Children
of Men, Isai. 59. 2. Your Iniquities have separated between you and your God,
and your Sins have bid his Face from you, that he will not hear.

But to come to some Particulars,

1. Keep, as much as possibly you can, out of the Way of Temptation, Lead us
not into Temptation, is one Article in that Pattern of Prayer, which our Lord
Jesus Christ taught his Disciples, Matt. 6. 13. Wherefore, as our Imbecility
and Weakness to withstand Temptations, should make us repair to God for Grace
and Strength; so in Point, both of Duty and Prudence, it should make us very
careful to keep out of the Way of Temptation; for if we run into Temptation, we
have little Reason to expect that God will preserve us from the power of it. To
go in Harms Way, when there is no Need of, it is a great Degree of Presumption,
Folly and Madness. Take heed therefore of dallying with Temptations in
Presumption of your own Strength, or the Aids of supernatural Grace to preserve
you; many have fallen grieviously, been wounded sorely, nay, slain by such
Presumptious Folly, and Madness.

Here I would Caution you against,

1. Those Places.

2. Those Objects, And,

3 Those Persons, That may prove a Snare to you, and prevail with you to walk
in the broad Way of Destruction.

1. Take heed of, yea fly from such Places, as are notorious for Wickedness
least you be taken in the Snare of the Infernal Fowler. Open Seminaries of
Lewdness and Debauchery, if not Countenanced by Authority (which is the Case in
some Parts of the World) yet under no special Marks of Insamy you may meet
with; but, O let me entreat you to avoid them as you would one that has the
Plague. Do you love your Selve, your Souls, your Bodies, your Estates? Take heed
of such Theaters of Vice and Sin. Strong Inducements and Temptations you may
meet with, to draw you into the Way of the Wicked: But as Solomon says, Prove.
4. 15. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it and pass away The Lips of an
whorish Woman may drop as an Honeycomb, and her Mouth may be smoother than
Oil; But her End is bitter as Wormwood, sharp as a Two Edged Sword; her Feet go
down to Death, her Steps take hold on Hell, Prove. 5. 3, 4. 5. Wherefore, as it
follows, Verses, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Hear me now O ye Children, and depart not
from the Words of my Mouth. Remove thy Way far from her, and come not nigh the
Door of her House, left thou give thine Honor unto others, and thy Years to
the Cruel. Left Strangers be filled win thy Wealth, and thy Labors be in the
House of a Stranger. And thou mourn at last when thy Flesh and thy Body are
consumed. Can a Man take Fire in his Bosom and his Clothes not be burnt? Can
one go upon hot Coals and his Feet not be burnt? Prove. 6. 27, 28.

2. Be not familiar with such Objects as have a Tendency to provoke the Lusts
and Corruptions of your depraved Natures. Would you avoid the Snare of the
strange Woman? Look not upon, Lust not after her Beauty in thine Heart, neither
let her take thee with her Eyelids, Prove. 6. 25. Would you avoid Intemperance?
Keep under your Carnal Appetites, and don't make Provision for the Flesh to
fulfill the Lusts thereof. Look not thou upon the Wine when it is red, when it
gives his Color in the Cup; when it moves it self aright. At the last it
biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, Prove. 23. 31. 32.

3. Take heed, and beware of Evil Company, Solomon tells us, Prove. 13. 20. That
he, that walks with Wife Men shall be wife, but a Companion of Fools shall be
destroyed. It may be, your Calling and way of Business, will render it
necessary for you to have some Converstion with very vile and wicked Men, yea,
sometimes, it may be unavoidable, but let it not be your Choice, don't frequent
such Company without Necessity, left you be infected with their Plague, which
is a mortal Disease. My Son, be not amongst Wine Bibbers, amongst riotous
Eaters of Flesh, Prove. 23. 20. left thou learn their Ways and get a Snare to
thy Soul.

Thus much for the first Particular.

Keep as much as you can out of the Way of Temptation. But inasmuch as the
World is full of Temptations, and your Business may sometims necessarily, and
unavoidably lead you in the Way of those that are very strong and powerful.

Therefore,

2. Be always upon your Watch and Guard, and see to it that you are well
fortified within, being forwarned, get your selves well Armed to withstand all
the Assaults that, shall be made against you from one Quarter or another: That
so, nothing you meet with, may interrupt a steady Walk with God, or turn you
out the Way of Duty.

1. Get, and maintain, a tender Conscience: A seared, stupid Conscience renders
a Man an easy Prey to Temptation. When the Soul has no lively Sease of the
Evil of Sin, one of the most powerful Restraints is broken: And little, if any
Thing, besides Shame remains to prevent a ready Compliance with forcable
Temptation; for where there is no lively Sense of the Evil of Sin, Fears of
Divine Wrath will in some Proportion abate, or rather will not be lively and
operative, and as to Shame, which has a very considerable Influence upon a
modest and virtuous Disposition; it presently loses its Force, when the
Practice of Vice and Sin becomes sashionable. So that a stupid Conscience is
not only a Token of the Divine Withdrawings; but that which lamentably exposes
a Person to the power of Temptation and Sin. This discovers the Importance and
Necessity, in this Cafe, of a lively and tender Conscience.

2. Every Day before you go into Company, or engage in Business, renew your
Covenant Obligations to God by solemn Acts of Devotion; not only recommend your
Persons and all your Concerns to the Conduct, Protection and Care of Almighty
God, by solemn and servent Prayer; but therein renew your own Covenant Bonds,
to be the Lords, in all your Ways, saying as David Psalm 116. 16. O Lord, truly
I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, and the Son of thy Handmaid. Therein
sincerly rsolving to have a due Respect to all God's Commandments. The Awe of
such fresh and repeated Dedications of your selves to God and his Service, if
duly performed, will have a very powerful Restraint upon you to keep you from
Sin, and be a mighty Incentive to Duty.

3. At all Times, maintain a realizing Belief, of the all-seeing Eye of your
great Judge, which is always upon you. A firm Belief of the Divine Omniscience,
in order to future Judgment, would certainly have a mighty Awe upon our
Spirits, not only to make us serious and diligent in Duty, but watchful against
Temptation. Beer-lahai roi, The Name which Hagar gave to the Well, where God
appeared unto her, Genesis 16. 14. was much to the Purpose: It signifying, The
Well of him that lives and sees me: For she said, Verse. 13. -- Thou God see
me. This certainly would be a very seasonable and serviceabl^e Though It, when we
are entering into Duty or assaulted by Temptation, to censider, That the Eye of
that God, who lives for ever, and will one Day be our Judge, is upon us, and
that he will call us to a strict Account in the Day when the Secrets of all
Hearts shall be made manifest. Will a Man venture to break the Law in open
Court, or affront the Judge to his Face?

4. Exercise your Tho'ts much upon such Subjects as may have a Tendency to take
away the Force of those Temptations, you do, or are most likely to meet with.
Such you may meet with abroad in the World, as will endeavor not only to draw
you into the Ways of Vice and Wickedness, by the pleasant Baits of Pleasure and
Profit; but to fright or banter you out of all Virtue, Religion and Goodness,
by their angry or reproachful Treatment: But let none of these Things which you
may meet with, move you from the Line of Duty. Are you reproached and abused by
vile Men because you refuse to run into the same excess of Riot with others?
And it maybe, branded with much more dishonorable Names than Precisian,
Puritan, or New England Presbyterian; if these can be called dishonorable, as
they are unjustly esteemed by some; yet, regard if not, but consider that the
Testimony of a good Conscience with the Comforts flowing therefrom, and the
Approbation of your great Judge in the last Day, will incomparably, more than
make Amends for all such Abuses, and the Pains you may take in maintaining your
Integrity.

Whereas, on the other Hand, if you are banter'd out of your Innocence, and
frighted into a mean and servile Compliance with the vicious Humors, and
wicked Practices of Others, you may expect to be filled with very uneasy
Reslections upon your selves, at the best, to have your Hearts broken with the
Sorrows of Repentance, otherwise, to be eternally reproached, affrighted and
distressed with whole Armies of errors in the Place of the Damned, under the
the dreadful Impressions of the Wrath of God. And as to the Pleasures and
Profits of the World, are they presented to you, in the most engaging
Appearance, to corrupt your fidility and tempt your from your Duty, consider,
that by a base Compliance with the Temptation, you will forfeit the Gains of
Godliness, the unfullied Glory and durable Riches of God's heavenly Kingdom;
And so be banished eternally from the Presence of God where there is fullness
of Joy and Pleasures for ever more. Wherefore my Son, if Sinners entice thee,
consent thou not, if they say Come with us, let us lay wait for Blood, let us
lurk privily for the Innocent without Cause: Let us swallow them up alive as
tbe Grave; and whole as th se that go down to tbe Pit: We shall find all
precious Substances, we shall fill our Houses with Spoil: Cast in thy Lot among
us, let us all have one Purse: My Son, walk not thou in the Way with them,
refrain thy Foot from their Path, Prove. 1. 10. -- 15.

5. Have your Hearts ever lifted up to God for Grace and Srength to withstand,
resist and overcome Temptation. The Case may be so circumstanced, that you may
have a great deal of Reason to say as Jebosaphat did in another Case, 2 Chronicles.
20. 12. O our God, will thou not Judge them? For we have no Might against this
greatCompany that comes against us: Neither know we what to do, but our Eyes
are upon thee. God only can give you an happy Victory over the World, bruise
Satan and all his Instruments under your Feet for you; and save you from the
Power of Temptation: Trust in him at all Times.

Thus much for the Second Particular, be always upon your Watch and Guard, and
see to it, that you are well fortified against Temptation.

3. Suffer no Lust or vicious Passion to reign in or rule over you. If Sin
reigns in your mortal Bodies and you obey it in the Lusts thereof, no Wonder if
God withdraws his gracious and favorable Presence from you. Unmortified Lust
indulged and gratified will inc^^le the Anger of an holy God, and Fuel to the
fearful Flames of his Jealousy, which will burn to the lowest Hell; unless
seasonably prevented. Wherefore get rid of every Lust and vile Passion, else
you will forfeit and lose God's favorable Presence, and by consequence, be laid
open and exposed to all manner of Evils, both here and forever,

4. Take beed and beware of a Laodicean Lakemurmnest in Religion: A Spirit of
Indifferency with Reference to the Things of God, and of the eternal World, is
become very modish and fashionable in this degenerate Age: There is so much the
more Need therefore to watch against it, especially, since it will expose the
Guilty to God's loathing Displeasure, make him depart from such, and as it
were, spve them out of his Mouth. Rev. 3. 16. What then will become of those
that have no Religion at all! But make a Mock of every Thing that is sacred. O
my Soul, come not thou into their Secret; unto their Assembly, mine Honor be
not thou united: For they spoke evil of the Things they understood not, and
shall utterly perish in their own Corruption. 2 Pet. 2: 12

5. Let not your Hopes and Expectations from the World be raised, without a
suitible Dependence upon God. God is to be acknowledged in all our Ways, and
therefore our Dependence, for Direction, Safety, and Success in all our
Undertakings, should be upon him: Otherwise we shall cast Contempt upon the God
of all our Mercies; and provoke him to leave and forsake us. Wherefore put not
your Trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man in whom there is no Help. Psalm.
146. 3. Yea, let us not trust in, nor reckon too much upon, uncertain Riches,
but trust in the living God, who gives us richly all Things to enjoy. 1 Timothy
6. 17. Commit thy (...) unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it
pass. Psalm. 37. 6.

This brings me to the second general Head of Counsel and Direction.

2. Do what in you lies to engage the gracious and favorable Presence of God
with you, in all your Undertakings. Certainly this is well worth your while, if
what you have heard, concerning the Necessity and Benefit of the Divine
Presence be true, as undoubtedly it is.

Wherefore,

1. Be sure to make your Peace with God, before it is too late; and therefore
without any Delay. Sin has certainly made a Breach between God and you. A
fearful Breach! And you can never enjoy God's gracious Presence, until this
Breach is made up, by an happy Reconciliation. For how can two walk together
unless they be agreed? Amos 3. 3. Be persuaded then to take the Advice of
Eliphaz Job 22. 21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at Peace, thereby
Good shall come unto thee. In order hereunto, comply with God's own Terms of
Peace, as they are prescribed in the Gospel of Peace. Repent of, mortisy and
forsake all Sin, which is the Cause of God's Controversy with you: And accept
of the Lord Jesus Christ the great Peacemaker, upon his own Terms, as your
Prophet, Priest and King. Make sure of our Union to him, and then all is well.
For he is the Son of God's Love, in whom the Father is well pleased. Matthew. 3.
17. And therefore if united to him, he will be well pleased with you in him.
And then you may be assured that he will never leave vou nor forsake you. But
if you continue in your Enmity to, and Distance from God, instead of being
encompassed about with the Blessings of his Presence, as with a Shield; an
angry God will pursue (...) with the dreadful Storms of his Indignation,
until you are consumed. Don't then procrastinate or delay any longer in this
important Concern. For as St. Paul says, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold now is the
accepted Time: Behold now is the Day of Salvation. It is gone into a Proverb,
That Tomorrow is a new Day: But Tomorrow has no Being, and it may be never
will with you. Prove. 27. 1. Boast not thy self of Tomorrow; for thou know
not what a Day may bring forth. It may bring forth thy Death, and then where
art thou, if thy Peace be not made with God? This Evening all Things may be
seemingly well, a pleasant Gale, a clear Sky, and no Sign or Token of Danger,
but before Morning you are foundred in the Deeps; and then what will become of
your poor Souls, if you are in ill Terms with God? O, they will sink, sink, sink
eternally in the bottomless Abyss of Divine Wrath.

2. Take God for your God in Covenant, and with the utmost Sincerity devote
your selves to his Grace and Service, making it your great Concern to walk
answerably. It may be you have been given up to God, in Baptism: And by a
solemn Profession of Religion, have owned the true and living God for your God;
this is all well if you have done it aright; but don't rest in what you have
done: Make frequent and fresh Surrenders of your selves to the Grace and
Service of God, And having opened your Mouth unto the Lord take Care to pay
your Vows, by an agreeable Conduct and Conversation, remembering what the wise
Man says, Eccl. 5. 4. 5. When thou vowest a Vow unto God, defer not to pay it;
for he has no Pleasure in Fools; pay that which thou have vowed. Better is it
that thou should not vow, than that thou should vow and not pay. It has
been the Practice of good Men, when they have taken in Hand any weighty
Enterprise, to bind themselves to God by a solemn Vow, in order to engage his
Presence and Blessing. Thus did Jacob, Genesis 28. 20. 21, And Jacob vowed a Vow,
saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this Way that I go, and
will give me Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on, so that I come again to my
Father's House in Peace: Then shall the Lord be my God. And who can say that
such a Thing would be unlawful at this time of Day. To be sure it is our Duty,
in a most solemn Manner, to enter into Covenant with God, and then to walk
answerable thereunto, upon which, there is good Ground to hope for the divine
Presence and Blessing. God will be with his People and Children in Covenant,
showing Mercy to Thousands of them that love him and keep his Commandments.
Exodus 20. 6. For as David testifies, Psalm. 103. 17. The Mercy of the Lord is
from Everlasting to Everlasting upon them that fear him: And his Righteousness
unto Children's Children, (Ver. 18.) To such as keep his Covenant; and to those
that remember his Commandments to do them.

3. In all your Undertakings let the Honor and Glory of God be your last End.
That certainly is a Precept of universal Influence and Obligation, which is
written in 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye
do, do all to the Glory of God. This should be our Mark in all our
Undertakings; and the Purpose to which we improve all our Time and Talents,
endeavoring to advance the Honor and Glory of God in all our Ways, and then
we need not fear but that God will honor us with the Blessings of his
Presence, for he has said, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Them that honor me, I will honor;
and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.

4. Resign up your selves to his Direction, Care and Keeping; and be willing to
have your Persons disposed of and your Circumstances ordered according to God's
Pleasure, therein acknowledging and adoring the Wisdom and Sovereignty of God's
Providence. A Soul thus resigned and given up to God, has no Ground to question
the Fulfillment of those Promises of God, wherein he has engaged his Presence
and Blessing to his People and Children; through all the Vicissitudes of
changeable Time.

5. Bear upon your Minds the most grateful Resentments, of all the signal
Discoveries of God's gracious and favorable Presence, you have been blessed
with; whether as to Temptations, by strengthening you against them, and making
way for your Escape; or, as to extraordinary Dangers, by appearing in the Mount
of Difficulty, and commanding seasonable Salvations for you, etc. In what Way
soever, whether by Sea or Land, God has appeared for you, in a signal Manner,
don't forget it, but give God all the Glory of it. Let the Remembrance thereof
fill your Hearts with Gratitude, and furnish you with Arguments of Praise and
Thanksgiving to God. This will not only fit you for, but be a Pledge and happy
Assurance of God's gracious and favorable Presence with you for the Time to
come.

6. Maintain and keep alive the Power of Godliness, both in your Hearts, and
Practices. Wherever you go, whether by Sea or Land, be sure that you have the
Power and Principle of the Spiritual and divine Life within; exemplified, in an
agreeable Practice. Without this, you have little Reason to expect that God
will go along with you in a way of Grace and Favor.

I have heard there is a Saying that passes among some of our Seamen, in these
Parts of the World, that when they go off to Sea, they leave their Religion at
a certain island, and take it up again at their Return, I (...) it is too true
with many of them, if they have any Religion at all; though they had even as
good have none, as such in hypocritical Vizor, that they can put off and on as
easily as a loose Garment: It will be of no real Service to them either by Sea
or Land. For it is vital Piety, the Power of Godliness, and that only, that
will engage the gracious and favorable Presence of God to go along with you.
Leave this behind and, in a Sense, you leave God too. For though he is
essentially present every where, yet not in a way of Grace and Favor.

7. Plead with God by earnest and servent Prayer, that he would g^^al^^g with
you in all your Ways. And venture not upon any Enterprise. but what you can
with an holy Confidence, recommend to God by Prayer. What cannot be prayed over,
with a good Conscience, may not be practiced. But every lawful Design, we may
and ought, and O it is a great Privilege. that we may recommend it to God by
Prayer. See to it then, that you improve this precious Privilege: by doing
your Duty, in this particular Article of it. Are any of you engaging in any
hazardous Enterprise? Going from us, to do Business upon the Seas, and in
foreign Countries, with an agonizing Importunity plead for God's gracious and
favorable Presence. Saying as Moses in the Text, If thy Presence go not with
me, carry us not up hence. This certainly is a Matter of the last Consequence
in all your Undertakings. For if God be not with us, our Circumstances are
deplorable beyond Expression. But if his Presence go along with us we need not
fear any Evil. Psalm. 121. 5, 6, 7, 8. The Lord is thy Keeper: The Lord is thy
Shade upon thy right Hand. The Sun shall not smite thee by Day; nor the Moon by
Night. The Lord shall preserve thee from all Evil: He shall preserve thy Soul.
The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in, from this Time forth
and even forever more.

Thus I had Thoughts of concluding, but I shall add one Word more by Way of
Improvement.

USE III. Is the gracious and favorable Presence of God of such vast
Consequence to the Children of Men, as we have heard, Then certainly we ought
to be concerned for Others, as well as our selves; that they may enjoy the
Blessings of the divine Presence. Though Charity begins at home, yet it is not to
terminate there. We are bound to love our Neighbors as our selves, and
accordingly to seek their Good; which we can in no way so effectually consult,
as by doing what in us lies, to engage the gracious and favorable Presence of
God with them in their various Ways and Concerns. Hence in Proportion to the
nearness of our Relation to them, and the Interest we have in them, our Concern
for their Enjoyment of this comprehensive Privilege, should be increased:
Especially, when they are engaging in any Enterprise that is peculiarly
hazardous and difficult. Since the gracious and favorable Presence of God is
the Summary of all Blessings, that can be wished for here; what greater Good
can Parents seek for in behalf of their Children? which are Parts of
themselves, than this, that God may go along with them, wherever they go,
either by Sea or Land; and compass them about with his Favor, as with a Shield.

Give me leave then, to offer two or three Words of Counsel and Advice to those
Parents, whose Children are going from them to do Business in many Waters. You
desire, certainly you do, that the Presence of the Lord JEHOVAH might go along
with them in so hazardous an Enterprise; well then, Do what in you lies that it
may be so.

1. Rest not till you have good Ground to believe, that Christ is formed in
their Souls. Travel in Birth again for them, that they may be born again of
Water and the Spirit, and so become new Creatures, being created anew in Christ
Jesus, unto good Works; and then you need not question but that God will go
along with them. They are his Children as well as yours; and he will not leave
them, nor forsake them, but watch over them Night and Day, in Storms as well as
in Calms, in strange Lands as well as in their own Country, when they pass
through the Waters God will be with them, and through the Rivers, they shall
not overflow them, when they walk through the Fire, they shall not be burnt;
neither shall the Flame kindle upon them. If Christ be formed in them, neither
Death nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present,
nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall be
able to separate them from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Romans 8. 38. 39.

2. Recommend them to the Care of divine Providence, and trust God wholly with
them. Commit them to his Care and Keeping, and then believe it, be will take
Care of them; whatever Casualties and Harms they may be exposed to. If God be
with them, surely, they shall want nothing that is necessary for them, unless
we can suppose that infinite Wisdom may be disappointed, almighty Power
conquered, and the immense Fountain of Free Grace dried or sealed up. What though
they are going forth upon a Design, that is attended with many Casualties and
Dangers, yet if they be the Charge of divine Providence, all will be well.
Therefore when you are afraid and concerned, trust in God; saying as in Psalm.
112. 7. I will not be afraid of evil Tidings, my Heart is fixed, trusting in
the Lord.

3. See to it, that your own Hearts be right in the Sight of God, and be
faithful in his Covenant. This will not only afford you good Ground to hope for
the Presence of God with your own Persons, but you will have, upon this Account, a
great deal of Reason to expect that God will be with your Children: You Will be
better able to plead his covenant Promises on their Account: and with a
comfortable Assurance of divine Care, to resign them to the sure Mercies of
that Covenant, which (God has commanded to a thousand Generation?, of them
that love him and keep his Commandments. Deuteronomy. 7. 9.

But to hasten to a Conclusion.

4. Send your Children away with your Blessing and Prayers; and let your
Prayers ever attend them, even in the uttermost Parts of the Earth, and of the
Sea. Did I say with your Blessing? I mean, with earnest Prayers to God, for his
Blessing upon them. God only can bless efficaciously: Man may instrumentally,
by wishing and praying for Blessing upon Others. This do for your dear
Children, who are going from you. You wish them well, (...) you do; Let your
good Wishes be (...) to God, in earnest and frequent Pr^^^rs on their behalf;
with utmost Importunity, wrestle with God by Prayer, 'till you prevail with God
to bless the Lads, and then none can reverse it. Who can curse those whom God
has blessed? Number. 22. 8. If God be with them all will be well. Therefore let
your Prayers attend them, not only when they are going, but when gone from you.
Prayer (if I may be allowed the Expression) has a long Arm; when they are
Thousands of Miles distant from you, upon the Seas or Land, you may visit them
by Prayer, take them up in the Arms of Faith, and carry them to the Throne of
Grace, unweariedly importuning Heaven's Blessing, on their Score as well as
your own. And, Oh! may they, and you, and every one of us, when at the greatest
Distance one from another, as to Place, daily meet at the Throne of Grace; with
flaming A^dours of Devotion and Christian Charity, and then we need not doubt,
but that God will be with us, and our's and bless us. Psalm. 128. 5. 6. The Lord
shall bless thee out of Zion: And thou shall see the Good of Jerusalem, all the
Days of thy Life. Yea, thou shall see thy Children's Children, and Peace upon
Israel.

F^n^l^y To conclude, If by any Means you can prevail with the ever blessed God
to bless your dear Offspring with the Blessings of his Presence; you ne^ not
doubt of their Prosperity and Happiness, abroad, as well as at home. The Lord
shall preserve them from Sin and Harm, and keep their Souls in Peace and
Safety. And if it shall be best for them and you, he will carry them them to
their designed Ports, and return them to their desired Havens, laden with
Experiences of his Goodness. -- It is God, and he only, that makes Issachar to
rejoice in his Tents, and Zebulon in his goings forth.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
NOtwithstanding all the Care, about the Press-Work, this little Book is not so
free from Errata as a Folio, printed by the celebrated Christian W^chel, a
famous Printer at Paris, before the middle of the XVIth Century; wherein were
observered but two Errata. Those in this are chiesty Literals; only the Reader
is desired to correct the following.

Page 1. Line 1. read Benefit.

-- Line 2. read Divine.

Page 7. Line 10, read Presence cf God.

Page 16. Line 5. read there is Life.

Page 34. Line 18, read Children of Men.

Page 38. Line 6 and 7, from the Bottom for formed, read found.

Page 51, Line 16. read Day of Visitation:


