Mr. Williams's SERMON Occasioned by the Execution of Philip Kennison, At
Cambridge, September 15. 1738.

The serious Consideration, That GOD will visit and judge Men for Sin, would be
a happy Means to keep them from it. A SERMON Preached at Cambridge, September
15th. 1738. On Occasion of the Execution of Philip Kennison, For the Crime of
Burglary.

By William Williams, M. A. Pastor of the Church in Weston.

Ezekiel. 18.20. -- The wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. v.21. But if
the wicked turn from all his Sins -- he shall surely live.

Deuteronomy. 13.11. And all Israel shall hear and fear, and do no more any such
Wickedness --.

With the Confession of his Faith.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by Thomas Fleet, at the Heart and Crown in Cornhill;
where may be had the Narrative of Kennison's Life, written by himself. 1738.

Serious Tho'ts restraining from Sin.
Job XXXI.14. What then shall I do when God rises up? and when he visits,
what shall I answer him?


BEING assembled here on such a solemn Occasion, when we have before us a
sorrowful Spectacle, one of our Fellow Creatures under a Sentence of Death, for
his Crimes committed, to be speedily executed; it is very fit it should be
accompanied with the Word of God and Prayer; that when such a numerous Audience
of Christians are together, not out of Curiosity, we trust, but in a serious
Frame, with their Hearts affected, to consider the sorrowful Effects of Sin,
and what Folly is in the Hearts of the Children of Men while they live, and how
soon for it, they go down to the dead; that they, as well as the Person
himself, may receive some seasonable Divine Instruction.

And having bin desired by the Reverend Pastor of the Church in this Town, to
stand in his Place on this Occasion; I have turned my Tho'ts on this serious
Subject, -- the Words which I have now read unto you; which suggest unto us
some of the most affecting Motives (...) engage Persons against any manner of
Irregularity, and that we should always stand in awe, and not sin against God.
This is the Improvement we should make of the Instances of Judgment executed
upon Men for their Iniquities, and of the Admonitions and Warnings of the Word,
in both which the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against the Ungodliness
and Unrighteousness of Men.

In this Chapter, which is the Conclusion of Job's Discourse with his Friends,
he makes a very large and solemn Defense of his Innocence and Integrity, and
that he was clear of the Crimes that his Friends either charged upon him, or
might suppose him to be guilty of; which was not in way of Ostentation, but
just and necessary Vindication of himself. Happy the Man whose Heart was thus
upright toward God! This was his Consolation in the day of evil. -- I shall
not stay to consider the Particulars in which this holy Man acquits himself. --
The Words of the Text come in as the Reason why he avoided all harsh or severe
Dealing toward his Servants, which were very numerous. He considered God as
his Judge, as well as his and their Creator, (v. 15.) and therefore he would
not do any unequal or unrighteous thing to them. -- Upon this Supposal, or if I
should do so -- what then should I do when God rises up? -- etc. God so
superior to me and all Men, of infinite Power, and inflexible Justice!

In this and diverse other Passages in the Chapter, he shows the Reason of his
eschewing Evil: It was because he had a devout Regard to God, and feared him,
and that his Piety was at the Bottom of his Justice and Charity, and this (as
one Mr. Henry.
well observes) crowns the Proof of his Sincerity.

To give some Explication of the Words --

-- When God rises up -- Such Postures of sitting and rising --, are
attributed to God, only figuratively, or after our manner of speaking. God is
said to sit on his Throne, in Allusion to earthly Princes and Judges, who sit
and hear Causes, and give Sentence. "And he may be said to rise up, when he
proceeds to execute Judgment. To rise up, notes readiness to Speech or Action"
C^ryl on Job.
. God's rising up means the manifestation of his Purpose, the actuating of his
Power. Thus Moses prays, Numb. 10.35. Rise up, Lord, and let thine Enemies be
scattered. And thus his Church are taught to pray, Psalm. 68.1. When any expose
themselves to God's Displeasure by Sin, they have Reason to put this trembling
Question to themselves, What shall I do, when God rises up? The Expression
imports, 1. Enquiry, as one asking Counsel and Advice, not knowing what to do.
Or, 2. It signifies, or is the Language of Grief and Trouble, as one bemoaning
his sad Condition, perplexed with the Tho'ts of what he has done, or the Fears
of what he shall suffer.

And when he visits, what shall I answer him?

To visit is, in Scripture Sense, 1. sometimes to show Favor and Kindness, as
Luke 1.68. God has visited and redeemed his People --, and v. 78. This was a
most gracious Visit indeed.

It is not meant in this Sense.

2. To visit is to manifest Displeasure, and to execute Judgment. Exodus 32.34.
Nevertheless, in the day when I visit, I will visit their Sin upon them. i. e.
In way of Punishment; they shall suffer the sorrowful Effects of their Sin. And
Jer. 5.9. and

3. It signifies to call to an Account. This is the Office of a Superior
toward those under his Charge and Inspection. ( Hos. 4.9.)

In this and the second Sense this Expression may be understood. And the
Question imports, that he should not be able to answer when God should call him
to an Account, for any contemptuous Treatment or Unrighteousness: That he could
not excuse himself, nor expect to escape his righteous Judgment, nor could he
deliver himself out of his righteous Hand.

I shall not consider the Words with the reference they have to those just
preceding, but as carrying in them a powerful Restraint from all manner of Sin.

Doctrine. They are very weighty Questions, which Persons should put closely to
themselves, as a good Means to prevent their sinning, -- What they shall do
when God rises up? and when he visits, what they shall answer him? Or,

That the serious Consideration of God's visiting and judging Persons for their
Sins, would be a happy Means to prevent their sinning against him.

In the 23d. v. of this Chapter, Job, to the like Purpose, professes,
Destruction from God was a Terror to me! Well may it be so: It is so to
Nature, and it is so to a gracious Soul.

There is a servile Fear in some, avoiding Evil, or Sin, only for fear of Evil
or Punishment. But there is also a filial Fear, which should be labored for
and cherished. This sanctified Affection is attempered with Love to God, and
does not afflict and disquiet the Soul in its way, but keeps it from wandering
out of the way of Understanding.

It is because Men don't consider, that they are not afraid of the Judgments of
God. The want of Consideration is the great Misery of Men! They consider not
that they do evil. And they consider not what will be the Consequences of their
doing evil: And so they dare to omit the Duties which God requires of them, and
to Transgress his sacred Laws. Divine Counsels and Persuasions prevail not, to
any good Purpose, because they do not set themselves to ponder and consider.
This is God's complaint of his People, Isa. 1.3. Israel does not know, my
People does not consider.

There are very weighty Considerations which God sets before Men to keep them
in awe, that they might not dare to sin against him; sufficient to over balance
their corrupt Inclinations, and the strongest Temptations which they are
exposed to; but this is their Unhappiness, they will not apply their Hearts
thereunto. It would surely be of very powerful Tendency to prevent Men's
sinning, if they would seriously consider, What they should do in the end
thereof! as Jer. 5.31.

This may be evident, if we consider the following Heads.

1. That such Tho'ts will lead them into the Consideration that their Probation
Time will come to an end. That there will certainly be an end of their Time,
and Action, and manner of Life. God has placed Men here on Earth in a state of
Trial for Eternity. They have a great Business to do, and but a short Time to
do it in. There is a Time and Season for every lawful Business Men have to
prosecute, but none for Sin. If Men would but consider, surely they must
conclude, that God in whose Hands their Breath is, and whose are all their
Ways, will bring their Opportunities to a Period; and that they know not how
soon: That he will not wait always, and it may be not long. A few Weeks or
Days, or for ought they know, an Hour may bring them to an End. If they pressed
home this Though It; God shall not always be as one still and silent; he will put a
Period to their Days, and then as there shall be an End of all their worldly
Enjoyments and Pursuits, of all their sensual Gratifications, of all their
Sports and Pleasures, so also of all their Advantages of seeking the Favor of
God, and making Provision for their Souls.

2. As this leads them to consider that a righteous God will call them to an
Account for all that they do. This is the Purport of the Words --, When God
rises up, and when he visits --. And this may refer to three distinct
Periods.

(1.) God does often in this Life reckon with Men, or manifest his Displeasure
for their Sins, in the Strokes of his Hand upon them. Thus the Lord is known by
the Judgments which he executes. (Psalm. 9.16.) He says concerning his People,
Jer. 5.9. Shall I not visit for these things --? And Chapter 14.10. I will remember
their Iniquity, and visit their Sin --. Hos. 9.9. Sometimes he visits them in
Wrath, and punishes them in his sore Displeasure; sometimes in Mercy, and to
reduce them from the Error of their Ways, Psalm. 89.32. He has a great variety
of Methods whereby he visits and chastizes them for their Sins in this Life, as
he threatened them Lev. 26.14 -- 39. He brings Wars, Scarcity, Famine, and
sometimes sore and mortal Sickness, sore Sickness, and of long continuance, and
all to vindicate his own Name and Honor, because Men would not consider their
Ways, and turn from their Sins.

(2.) God visits all Men at the Day of Death. And this sometimes by the Hand of
Humane Justice, or by his own immediate Hand --. It may be suitable on this
Occasion, to mention such Crimes as the Laws of this Land have made Capital, or
to be punished with Death. Possibly it may prevent some Persons sinning in
Ignorance of their Danger. -- As, the murdering of any Person, which is to be
punished with Death, by the Laws of God, and the Laws of all civilized Nations.
And a Woman being delivered when alone of a spurious Child, though the Child may
happen to be still born, or die, yet she is liable to suffer as a Murderer, not
calling for Help. So the burning of a dwelling House, or other House or Parcel
thereof, or any House built for public Use, any Barn having Corn, Grain or Hay
therein, any Mill, Malt-House, Storehouse, Shop or Shops, when done wilfully
by any Person above the Age of Sixteen Years, the same is adjudg'd a Felon, and
to suffer the Pains of Death. And so the abominable Sin of Buggery, with
Mankind or Beast, and the Sin of Rape or Ravishment; as also Polygamy, or
having more than one Wife at the same Time --. For Treason of any kind, and
particularly counterfeiting the King's Great or Privy Seal: For counterfeiting
the Seal of the Province: For counterfeiting the Bills of public Credit. --
Assault and Robbery upon a second Conviction. And for Burglary, or a Person's
breaking and entering a Dwelling House in the Night, with a felonious Intent to
rob or steal, or do any other Felony, being convicted thereof, shall suffer the
Pains of Death. For which Crime the poor Prisoner here, has been adjudg'd to
suffer Death.

But if it be by the Hand of Justice or the Providence of God, or in what
Manner soever, it is an awful Visit to every unrighteous Man, every impenitent
Sinner; for then the Reward of his Hand shall be given him. Isa. 3.11. We are
assured concerning Men in common, ( Heb. 9.27.) It is appointed unto Men once
to die, and after that the Judgment. Though we know not what manner of Process
there shall be at Death, yet this we are sufficiently assured of from many
Passages of Scripture, that every particular Person's Judgment is passed at
Death, and their State irreversibly determined by the glorious Judge. The
Spirits of the just are made perfect, and the Souls of the wicked are presently
sent into the Place of Torments. Prove. 14.32.

(3.) The great Judge will come to visit and call all Men to an Account at the
Resurrection of the Dead. This we are plainly assured of in the sacred Oracles,
that God shall judge both the Righteous and the wicked. God has appointed a
Day in which he will judge the World in Righteousness. Act. 17.31. No Man shall
escape this Judgment of God. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ. 2 Cor. 5.10. Then the Books shall be opened, and all that have lived
and died from Adam to the end of Time, shall be judged out of them. Rev. 20.12.
This was what the World was warned of so long ago as the Days of Enoch, Jude,
v. 14,15. Thus there will be a strict Account taken what Rules they have
transgressed, what Bonds and Obligations they have violated, what Evils they
have done, and what Duties they have left undone. Then Sinners must stand forth
before the vast Multitude, however reluctant, miserable and ashamed they may
be! Then they shall be called to an Account how they have improved the outward
Enjoyments God gave them; whether they honored the Lord with their Substance,
and were just and honest in all their Dealings and Concerns with Men. Whether
they were merciful, kind and charitable; -- and how they governed their bodily
Appetites and Inclinations; whether they were sober, chaste and temperate; and
whether they were good and faithful and obliging in the several Relations they
sustained; and how they improved their Time, and especially their Seasons of
Grace, their Sabbaths, and the Instructions they received; and whether they
made Religion the main Business. -- Nothing will be then forgotten, nothing can
be hid from the Eyes of the omniscient Judge! In Sum, we are taught Eccl.
12.14. God shall bring into Judgment every Work, with every secret Thing,
whether it be good or evil. Then the Lord who is a God of Knowledge, and by
whom Actions are weighed, (1 Samuel 2.3.) and who knows all Hearts, will not only
discover "who and what was good, and what "was bad, but how good and how bad,
every thing was, that was done by Men.

And in this great Audit, this Visitation Day, who will be able to answer! We
are assured that the ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment. The Lord
acknowledges the way of the Righteous; only those shall be in Safety, who have
a Principle of Holiness wrought in them, and the Righteousness of Christ
imputed to them.

Would not such Tho'ts closely pressed upon the Mind, greatly restrain Persons
from all Ways of Sin, and promote their Repentance for Sin?

3. By such Tho'ts they would be led to discern the Vanity and Insufficiency of
those Pleas and Excuses, whereby they endeavor to quiet themselves in their
sinful Neglects and Transgressions. Sometimes Persons excuse themselves that
they were drawn and enticed into Sin by insnaring Companions: And it is too
true, that this has bin the Bane of many a one! But if they would consider,
that God takes Notice of their Sins, and will rise up against them in his sore
Displeasure, and not suffer their Iniquity to go unpunished; would not this be
more powerful to restrain them, than any Enticements can be to allure them?
Surely they would rather hearken to Wisdom, Prove. 1.10. My Son, if Sinners
entice thee, consent thou not.

What Temptations of airy Honor, of worldly Gains, of sensual Pleasure, can be
of equal Force with these Considerations? Which must convince Men, that to sin
against God, is to wrong their own Souls, and practically to choose Death! And
what is the Honor that is gotten by Sin? Superficial and vanishing now, and
which will end in Shame and everlasting Contempt! What is that Pleasure worth,
or how dear bought, which is but short lived, and will end in Bitterness and
everlasting Pain? And what are the Gains of Unrighteousness and Fraud, Stealth
and Robbery, which bring a Blast and Curse from God, and for which the
righteous Judge shall cast them into the Prison of Hell? Romans 6.21. What Fruit
had ye then of those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those
things is Death. Mat. 16.26. What is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole
World, and lose his own Soul?

And as these Tho'ts would serve to arm Men against vicious and wicked
Practices, so also to Silence their foolish Excuses for Sloth and negligence in
Religion.

Some are tempted or disposed to put away serious Tho'ts as uncomfortable and
melancholy; or if they have some concern about forsaking their Sins and turning
to God, they stumble at the Difficulties of Repentance and Conversion.

But would not these Tho'ts convince Men, that it will be far more difficult
and hard to bear the Displeasure and Wrath of an angry God?

Would they quiet themselves with the Excuse that they are weak and impotent to
Good, and so sit still? Would not the Tho'ts of God's Anger, and that they must
stand before his dread Tribunal, make them use their utmost Endeavors, and cry
to him for Pity and Help?

Would Men content themselves in their Neglect with this Pretense, That it is
uncertain whether they shall speed, whether they shall obtain Grace if they
seek it? If they had these serious Tho'ts, that they shall certainly be
rejected and condemned if they do not, would they not set themselves to improve
a bare Probability, a Peradventure that God may grant them Repentance unto
Life? And especially be excited to take hold of the gracious Encouragements of
the Gospel.

Would they flatter themselves with Purposes of Repentance hereafter, and live
careless in their Delays? Surely these Tho'ts closely applied would rouse them.
If they considered that God is angry with the wicked every Day, and his
Judgments may speedily break forth upon them, and Death overtake them; they
would not dare to boast of to Morrow, when they knew not what a Day may bring
forth; but to Day they would hear his Voice, and not harden their Hearts.

These solemn Tho'ts would serve to bear down all vain Pleas and Excuses,
whereby Men too often quiet themselves in their Negligence and Impenitency.

4. Lastly. As these Tho'ts would naturally lead them to apprehend something of
the Greatness and Dreadfulness of the Punishment which God will inflict upon
Sinners. Our Lord and Judge has told us beforehand for our Warning, what will
be the terrible Sentence pronounced upon Sinners in the great Day, Mat. 25.41.
and after that the Punishment which will follow, ver. 46. This Punishment will
fall upon both Body and Soul, Mat. 16.28. -- Fear him who can destroy both Body
and Soul in Hell. Mark 9.44. -- where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not
quenched.

The Misery is set forth in Scripture, by the most awful distressing and
afflicting Things in Nature, to signify the greatness of it, and that we might
know that nothing can fully represent the Dreadfulness of the Wrath of God.
Their Pains will far exceed all the Pains and Miseries in this World! Such as
to extort the most bitter Outcries and Lamentations, Mat. 16.42. -- Shall cast
them into a Furnace of Fire, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth!

They will not know how to bear the Torment, neither can they any way shun or
escape it; and the Everlasting Duration adds to the greatness of it. There will
be no Intermission of their Misery, no Period, it will abide for ever!

If Sinners would seriously consider these Things, would they not own, that it
is a fearful Thing to fall into the Hands of the living God? Heb. 10.31. And
would not such Reflections make them afraid to offend him, and convince them
that it is the Extremity of Folly and Madness, for the sake of the mean and
temporary Gains or Pleasures of Sin, to expose themselves to such tremendous
Evils!

Use 1. We learn, that they are very faulty and foolish, who do not take it
into their serious Consideration, That God will visit them for their Sins, or
bring them into Judgment; yet we have Reason to think that there are many such:
though they wear the Name of Christians, and profess to own the Truths of the
Gospel, and often hear the Ministers of it, reasoning of Righteousness,
Temperance and a Judgment to come, yet they neglect the great Business of Life,
and go on in their Sins. Though some may be started as Felix was; yet they get
rid of the Tho'ts, and choose to give themselves a Liberty to walk in the Ways
of their Heart.

Some are pursuing Earthly Things, and their carnal Affections carry their
Tho'ts and Affections after such Objects. Some make Provision for the Flesh, to
fulfill the Lusts of it, and are indulging their sensual Inclinations.

Some have secret Hopes that there is no Occasion for such Tho'ts, and flatter
themselves that they shall have Peace, though they add Drunkenness to Thirst,
Deuteronomy. 29.19.

Some are afraid to entertain such serious Tho'ts, and strive to divert them;
and would not suffer them to lodge within them; because they bring a damp upon
their Spirits, and render their Pleasures insipid, and make their Enjoyments
look with a gloomy Aspect.

But certainly all such are greatly to blame, as they despise God's Authority
and Government, so they exceedingly injure their own Souls.

2. I might have inferred, That the Ministers of Christ had need, after his
Example, to be frequently putting Sinners in mind of these Things, That God
will visit and judge them, as a great Means to restrain them from Sin, to
promote Repentance, and to prepare them to receive the Offers of the Gospel.
But I shall only further apply what has been offered, in a

Use of Exhortation, first to such as are yet in their Sins, or who live in a
way of Sin; and then to the Person who is the sorrowful Occasion of this
Assembly.

To all such who are yet Impenitent, who indulge themselves in any sinful
Practices; Let me entreat and persuade you to put these affecting Questions to
your selves, now and often; What shall I do when God rises up? and when he
visits, what shall I answer him? Think closely and thoroughly, answerable to
the Importance thereof. Think till you form some Purposes and Resolutions
agreeable; or conceive God himself putting this solemn Question to you; Can thy
Heart endure, or can thy Hands be strong in the Days that I shall deal with
thee? as Ezekiel. 22.14. What can be more affecting and moving? And here your
Tho'ts may easily dilate, as they may be ranged under these Three Heads.

1. What will you do if God shall deal with you in a judicial Way; and visit
you with some distressing temporal ^^dgment? This is not uncommon, that Divine
Providence visits Men with temporal Evils and Calamities. Thus he has
threatened many sorts of Sins, and some have a natural Tendency to bring Evil
upon Men; particularly, Pride, which is hateful to God; he tells us, Prove.
29.23. A Man's Pride shall bring him low; and Chapter 16.18. Pride goes before
Destruction, and a haughty Spirit before a Fall. Uncleanness, as Heb. 13.4.
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge; and Ephesians. 5.6. And Intemperance,
Prove. 23.21. The Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to Poverty, etc. Chap.
23.29, 30. Who has woe? who has sorrow? Who has Contentions? who has
bablings? who has Wounds without Cause? who has redness of Eyes? They that
tarry long at the Wine, they that go to seek mixed Wine. And he often testifies
against, and threatens Unrighteousness and Oppression. Ezekiel. 22.13. I have
smitten my Hand at thy dishonest Gain. Isa. 30.12, 13. Zeph. 3.1. And also
Theft and false-Swearing, in the Vision of the Flying Roll, full of Curses
(Zech. 5.4.) which shall enter into the House of the Thief, and of him that
swears falsely by my Name, and shall consume it with the Timber thereof, and
the Stones thereof. And Prove. 21.7. The Robbery of the wicked shall destroy
them. It brings temporal Evils and Calamities as well as exposes to future
Destruction. -- Think, what will you do when your Sins and Follies have brought
such Evils upon you? What will comfort you? Will the Gain counter-ballance the
Loss?

And such as avoid these more enormous Crimes, yet are liable to suffer the
Judgments of God. You know for what sinful Disorder and Irreverence, the
Apostle told the Corinthians, many are weak and sickly among you, and many
fallen asleep. (1 Cor. 11.30.)

For the Sins of the People of this Land, God has been visiting us with a
strange Punishment in many parts of it. I mean an uncommon and mortal Sickness.
The Slain of the Lord have been many; and especially the Young Men and Children
have perished from the Streets, and many Families made desolate! Parents
weeping for their Children, because they are not. God is yet threatening us, and
should we not take the Warning, and put that solemn Question to ourselves, What
will ye do in the Day of Visitation? to whom will ye flee for help? (Isa.
10.3.) If the Visitation should reach us, as it has many others; and why
should we expect Exemption? What will you do when you shall see Death suddenly
seizing your tender Offspring, your beloved Children, and threatening
yourselves? To whom will you flee for Help? You may flee to your Friends and
Neighbors, or to the Physician, but all Help will fail if God will not help
you, as ver. 4. Without me, they shall bow down, -- and shall fall under the
Slain. Will you not then bewail your Sins, whereby you have displeased the
Lord? And why not now, renounce them, and get into a State of Reconciliation
with God? that you may not have the Terrors of an accusing Conscience to
grapple with, besides the afflicting Strokes of God's Hand!

2. What will you do in the Day of Death? when the Lord of Life shall send the
King of Terrors to visit you? And the Time will certainly and may speedily
come: It hasteneth greatly as the swift Moments flee away!

When your Opportunities are just at an end, what will you do? When you may
say, I shall go to the Gates of the Grave, I am deprived of the residue of my
Years, I shall behold Men no more! Will you not look back upon your past
Seasons with Grief and Bitterness? to think how God has called and you
refused, and that he may now justly refuse to hear your Cry? You may wish
earnestly for more Time, but in vain. Now you put far away the Evil Day; and
think yourselves secure, and that you may live in Ease and Pleasure, but what
will you do, for your neglected Soul, when that awful Hour comes on, and your
Strength and Spirits are failing, and you gasping for Breath, expecting to
receive your Doom? And when you know not but the Evil Spirits, your Tempters to
Sin, may by the righteous Judgment of God, seize your departing Spirit, as
their unhappy Prey, to suffer in the infernal Prison, when a few Minutes more
expire! O, how will your Heart fail you, what Distress and Anguish will seize
you!

3. Lastly. What will you do, in that great and terrible Day of the Lord? When
he comes to Judgment, what will you answer him, if you die in your Sins?

When you shall see the Son of God coming in his Glory, and with the Glory of
the Father, and all the holy Angels! (Mat, 25.31.) When he shall make his last
Visit to this Earth, to determine the State of every Man according to his
Works. -- Will not your Heart and Flesh tremble to think, how you have slighted
and despised him? -- To think how ungratefully you refused his most gracious
Offers, and would not obey his most reasonable Commands! O how terrible to have
your only Savior your Enemy? To whom can you flee for Help? We are told, Rev.
1.7. Behold he comes with Clouds, and every Eye shall see him, and they also
who pierced him, and all kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of him! And
how is their Distress represented, Rev. 6.16, 17?

And what will you do, how will you bear it, when you shall see the Saints at
his right Hand in Robes of Glory? (Mat. 25.33.) and some perhaps, that have
been of your Relatives or Acquaintance in this World, to think that you had the
same Opportunities and Advantages and Offers of Life that they had, but
indulged your Sin and Sloth, and lost alas! your precious Season, and your
Souls! Luke 13.28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth! when ye shall
see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and you yourselves
thrust out!

And when the all-knowing Judge shall bring all your Sins to your Remembrance,
and set them in order before your Eyes, what will you do? how will you answer
him? when Conscience will witness against you, thus and thus you have done, and
these and those Duties you have left undone! Whatever Pleas and Excuses Sinners
quiet themselves with now, they will have no Cloak nor Excuse for their Sin
then. The Slothful will be adjudged a wicked Servant. And all such as have
enjoyed the Gospel, and are found without the Wedding Garment of Righteousness
and Holiness, will then be Speechless, Mat. 22.12.

And what will you do when you shall hear the dreadful Sentence pronounced,
from the glorious Judge, as the last Word to the wicked. -- The Voice of God on
Mount Sinai made the People tremble; but how much more amazing will that be,
(Mat. 25.41.) Depart ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels! -- Every Word carries Terror in it, and given forth with
Majesty and Authority from the Lord God Omnipotent; it will be far more
terrible than the loudest Thunder, or roaring Earthquake! O what unutterable
Horror, Confusion and Anguish will fill your Souls!

And when presently the tremendus Doom is executed upon you, then with what
amazing Despair will Sinners cry out, What shall we do? O how will you be able
to bear the loss of all Good? How will you be able to endure the suffering of
all Evil? when you will have no Friend to support you, no Hope to relieve or
comfort you for ever!

Such as will seriously consider these Things now, and call their Souls to an
Account, would surely Resolve by the Strength of Christ, to forsake and strive
and watch against Sin, and attend their Duty, and earnestly endeavor to get
into good Terms with God, or else they must be stupid and hardened, and not
afraid of the Wrath of the Almighty!

And may the Sight of this unhappy Criminal, here in Chains, and presently to
suffer the Pains of Death, and to appear before the glorious Judge of all the
Earth, -- give an Edge to these Meditations, and fix them with lasting
Impressions on all our Hearts: If so, our Attendance here will not be Time
spent in vain. Thus God can get to himself Glory, that the Death of this poor
Man may prove an Occasion of the Life, the Everlasting Life of some Souls.

And now I apply my self particularly to the poor Prisoner, the sad Occasion of
our being here assembled at this Time; with a Heart full of Concern and Pity,
let me advise you,

1. Now labor to be rightly affected with your sorrowful Condition. Now God
has risen up against you, in his holy Providence, and visited your Sin upon
you. Your Iniquity has found you out, and your Sins have taken hold of you as
Waters! Now be willing to receive the deepest Convictions, and call your Sins
to Remembrance. And mourn to think, that you should so soon fill up the Measure
of them Not 30 Years old.
. That for being foolish and wicked overmuch, you must die before your Time
(Eccl. 7.17.) i. e. before the ordinary Time of Man's Age. May a merciful God
give you a right Sense of your Sinfulness and Folly!

Think how you have proceeded from Step to Step in Sin, until you provoked God
to leave you to your own Hearts Lusts; to indulge your covetous Desires, and
repeat your Thefts and Unrighteousness and Burglary, till now for this Crime,
by a righteous Sentence, you are condemned to suffer a shameful Death. Thus you
have wrought Falsehood against your own Life. Whatever secret hopes you may have
had of escaping, yet now you see the fatal Day is come! the Hour hastens when,
for a Warning to others, you are to suffer an ignominious and cursed Death!
and, which is more awful, your Soul must immediately appear before God! who
perfectly knows all your Sins and Transgressions, and needs no Witnesses* and
he will judge you according to Truth, according to his holy Laws, his glorious
Gospel, which you have bin instructed in; and he will pass a Sentence which can
never be reversed!

2. Now let your most earnest Enquiry be, What shall I do, in this distressed
Case? How shall I answer my Judge for my many and heinous Sins? And be heartily
concerned to take the right Course. Here I would not burden you with many Words.

May you call to Mind the serious and pertinent Admonitions and Counsels which
have been given you publicly and privately. Be very thankful for the kind
Assistances you have had. You have professedly renounced Sin, and given your
self to the Lord, (since your Confinement) and received the sacred Ordinance of
Baptism; in hopes (we conceive) that your Sins may be forgiven and washed away,
and be no more remembered against you. But now, I earnestly entreat you, look
narrowly into your Heart, and beware that you don't deceive your self. Pray
unto God, -- What I see not, teach thou me: Let me discern if there be any
Wickedness loved and cherished in my Heart, and lead me in the Way everlasting.

Don't depend upon any External Privilege or Ordinance as if Grace and
Salvation were necessarily annexed thereto. Examine and see, whether you find
your Heart turned fr^^ Sin to God. If you have had Sorrow and Heaviness for
your Sins, as no doubt you have, consider whether you have had right
apprehensions of the Greatness and glorious Excellencies of God against whom
you have sinned. And do you mourn that you have despised the rightful Authority
of your Creator and Lawgiver? and abused his Mercy and Goodness which should
have led you to Repentance! And especially that you have undervalued and
slighted so often the Grace of a most compassionate Redeemer, who came to bless
us by turning us from all our Iniquities! Do these and such Considerations melt
your Heart, and make you sensible that it is an Evil Thing and bitter, that you
have forsaken the Lord, and that his Fear has not been in your Heart?

Have you been first, brought to see your self, in a Spiritual Sense, a poor
helpless, wretched, undone Creature; and that you can make no amends, no
Satisfaction to Divine Justice for your Offenses, by your Prayers or Tears or
Promises? But yet that you are a Prisoner of Hope: You have read and heard,
This is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, that Jesus Christ
came into the World to save Sinners, even the Chief. Has this been joyful
Tidings to you?

Do you indeed believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God? and
that as a glorious High Priest, he appears in the Heavens for us? And is able
to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him? Then let not the
greatness of your Sins discourage your betaking your self to him, nor prevent
your pleading and trusting in the infinite Merits of the all sufficient
Savior. God can pardon great Sins, and save the chief of Sinners, consistent
with the Honor of his Justice, Holiness and Truth. When the Apostle mentions
the black Catalogue of Sinners, among which are the unrighteous and Thieves, (1
Cor. 6.9.10.) he says, Such were some of you, but ye are justified, etc.

Consider, this is the Work most pleasing to God, that you can perform* to
believe in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and put your trust in his perfect
Righteousness, and that you commit your Soul into his Hands, that he would save
it from Sin and from the Hands of your Spiritual Enemies, and from Eternal
Death. You are just going to appear before the Judge of all the Earth! Does
this fill you with dread, under a Sense of your Guilt, and that you have
nothing to answer? Let this Though It be your support, That CHRIST graciously
offers to be your Savior, and assures you, that whosoever comes unto him, he
will in no wise cast him out. If you can now understandly come unto him weary
and heavy laden with your Sins, desirous to be saved from all Sin, and to be
made holy and fit for the Heavenly Inheritance, then your Estate will be safe.
This miserable Death will not separate you from his Favor. Unbelief will damn
you, but if you believe in Christ, your other Sins will not.

O may the wonderful Love of Christ, who was hanged on a Tree, to save us from
Eternal Death, affect and draw your Heart unto him.

Now call to Mind that memorable Instance of one of the Thieves who were
crucified with Christ, who, confessing that they justly suffered, as receiving
the due Reward of their Deeds, says unto Christ, Lord, remember me, when thou
come into thy Kingdom. (Luke 23.41, 42.) So under a Sense of your own
rightful Suffering, humbly look unto Jesus, with this dy^^^ Wish, and fervent
Prayer, Lord remember me now thou art ^^alted in thy Heavenly Kingdom. -- Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit.

To conclude, Give Honor to God, as far as you can, by bearing Testimony to
his righteous Laws, -- by public Confession of your Sins, taking Shame to
yourself. Justifying a righteous Providence, and your Judges, and be in Charity
with all Men.

And give Warning unto others, that they may not sin against God as you have
done, nor run into any evil and wicked Ways which lead to Destruction and
Perdition! And particularly the Young People, that they do not hearken to the
Temptations of Satan and evil Men; but fear God in their Youth, and beware of
all beginnings of Departing from God. -- I am glad you have been disposed to
make Confession of your Sins and give Warning to Sinners, may they hear and
fear and turn from their Wickedness --.

If you are enabled by Divine Grace to comply with the Counsels given you, and
are heartily desirous thus to give Glory to God, you shall be among those in
whom free Grace shall be for ever admired, and exalted! Which may God grant,
for his Mercies Sake in Jesus Christ. To whom be Glory for ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
The Word if, in the Third Line form the Bottom of the 8th Page, having been
battered and spoiled in working off, the Printer desires the kind Reader to add
it with his Pen.


