Dr. Colman's SERMON ON THE Unspeakable Gift.

February 1. 1739.

THE Unspeakable Gift of GOD; A right Charitable and Bountiful Spirit TO THE
Poor and Needy Members OF JESUS CHRIST. A SERMON Preached at the public
Lecture in Boston, February 1. 1739.

By Benjamin Colman, D. D.

Prove. xxii. 9. He that has a bountiful Eye shall be blessed, for he gives of
his Bread to the Poor. Romans v. 17. They which receive Abundance of Grace and of
the Gift of Righteousness, shall reign in Life by Jesus Christ. BOSTON: Printed
by J. DRAPER for H. FOSTER in Cornhil. 1739.

THE Unspeakable Gift.
II. CORINTHIANS, ix. 15. Thanks be to GOD for his unspeakable Gift.


THANKS is the least that can be rendered for any Gift; and unspeakable Thanks
the least for a Gift that is unspeakable. Let us consider the particular Gift
here spoken of, and the Honor here done it, the Glory put upon it.

Some would have it to mean CHRIST Himself, who is indeed the greatest Gift of
God to fallen Man, ineffable, inconceivable. John iv. 10. If thou knew the
Gift of God! Ephesians. iii. 8. What is the Height and Depth, and Length and Breadth
of the Love of Christ, which passes Knowledge.

Some say Grace, the regenerating Grace of God; or (which is the same) the HOLY
SPIRIT of God in all his saving Gifts, Graces and Comforts: And indeed all the
Fruits of the Spirit Gal. v. 22.
are unspeakable Gifts, " Love, Peace, Joy, Longsuffering, Goodness, Meekness,
etc. My Context Ver. 8.
speaks of this Gift, " God is able to make ALL GRACE to abound to you, that ye
always having an Alsufficiency in all things, may abound to every good Work.

But after all, The Grace and the Gift by Grace here spoken of, is neither more
nor less than the particular Grace of Charity and Liberality to the Poor and
Needy; an enlarged Heart and open Hand to relieve and supply them in their
Wants and Necessities. -- The whole Chapter is on this single Subject and
Argument, touching Ministering to the Saints, v. 1. as a Master of Bounty, v. 5.
sowing bountifully, v. 7. giving to the Poor, v. 9 supplying the Wants of
Saints, v. 12. liberal Distribution to all Men: This is the exceeding Grace and
unspeakable Gift, for which Thanks is here given to God.

And great is the Honor and Glory done it, in the Epithet UNSPEAKABLE, and in
the THANKSGIVING to God for it.

" Who can by searching find out GOD, or any Gift of His, unto Perfection? Who
can show forth all his Praise? All is comprehended in the one Word LOVE. Yet my
Text means not to dignify a Spirit of Liberality above the other Exercises of
Grace, save only as the Greatest of all is Charity 1 Cor. xiii. 13.
, which is but perfected at Death and abides for ever, when Faith and Hope are
swallowed up in Vision. Nevertheless it must be added, that Love in this
particular Mode and Ministration, of which my Text speaks, will soon fail; for
there are no Objects of Charity in Heaven, none poor or needy there: However,
Benevolence, the Soul and Essence of Charity, reigns there in Glory for ever
and ever.

Blessed be GOD that we have something and so much of it on Earth, in our Way
to Heaven: " Thanks to Him for it, says my Text. The Glory is God's, for it is
his Gift, and this is the Glory of the Gift that it is his; this makes it the
unspeakable thing it is: Divine, Heavenly, Infinite, in its Origin, Influence
and endless Effects.

GOD is the free and bountiful Author of this Grace in any, He gives it to
Those that have it; the Ability and the Heart to do kind and liberal Things is
from Him; He puts it into the Heart, and he enlarges it. "Even Power to eat our
Bread is from Him, how much more to give of it to others, to seven and also to
eight Eccle. iii. 13. xi. 2.
.

The liberal Man is God's Gift to the World; to the Place where he lives, to
distant Places also, if he have a Hand full and strong eno' to scatter far and
near. Some in the Churches of Macedonia were thus made to differ and excel: God
ministered seed to them and they sowed plentifully; God curiched them unto all
Bountifulness, and the Thanksgiving was abundant to God.

The Praise is not to the charitable Person, who devises the liberal Things,
but to God who gives him the Heart. The good Man will be far from taking any of
the Praise to himself, but to God's Name he gives the Glory. " It is not in me,
said the Princely Joseph, when Pharaoh asked him of the unspeakable Gift he
heard was in him; " God shall give Pharaob an Answer of Peace Genesis xli. 38.
: He honored himself the more in the Sight of Pharaob and his Princes by
assuming nothing to himself; " Can we find such a Man as this (said the King)
in whom the Spirit of God is? for as much as God has showed thee all this,
there is none so discreet and wise as Thou art.

We must have a great Care not to idolize those whom God pleases to honor, by
sacrificing to them instead of God, who alone is to be worshipped. Yet the Man
who is God's Hand, and his Gift, comes in for a civil Honor and Respect, a
grateful Acknowledgment of his own Goodwill in showing the Kindnesses of God:
of which our Context is full, For to their Power and beyond they were willing
of themselves, praying us to receive the Gift and take on us the Fellowship;
Wherefore show before the Churches the Proof of your Love, and of our boasting
on your behalf; for I know the Forwardness of your Mind, and your Zeal has
provoked many: As it is written, He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the
Poor, his Righteousness endures for ever, his Horn shall be exalted with
Honor Psalm cxii. 9.
While by the Experiment of this Ministration they glorify God for your
professed Subjection to the Gospel; longing after you for the exceeding Grace
of God in you.

Having thus set my Text in its true and best Light, I shall endeavor to speak
to this Doctrine from it,

"That a right charitable and liberal Frame of Spirit to the poor and needy is
an unspeakable Gift of God; for which great Thankfulness is due to his glorious
Name, and abundant Thanksgiving should be fervently rendered in the Churches of
the Saints."

I am therefore to show, 1. What we are to understand by a right charitable and
liberal Spirit? 2. That it is an unspeakable Gift of God. 3. The abundant
Thanksgivings to be rendered for it in the Churches of Christ.


I. By a right charitable and liberal Spirit, I understand a Mind and Heart
prone and large, free and ready in Proportion to our Ability and the Occasions
occurring to us, to pity and relieve the Wants of the Poor, more especially of
the virtuous and religious Poor.

It is the religious Exercise of the Grace of Charity, which we are to preach
to you from the Gospel of Christ; and my Context confines me to this
Consideration of it, "as the Grace of God bestowed on the Churches, and the
Fellowship of ministering to the Saints. So that a Principle of Grace in the
Heart, and the Exercise of it in the Life, are here supposed: That is to say, a
giving to the poor and needy from Faith in Christ and his Word, from Love to
Him and his People, upon the Commandment and Promises of the Gospel; in
Obedience to the one, and Hope in the other.

It is not therefore merely a humane, tender, generous natural Temper, or
acquired Disposition toward a necessitous or compassionable Object; and yet
this is a distinguishing Gift of Providence to some more than others, which
renders 'em more lovely and of a superior Spirit; but we must suppose a Soul of
this Disposition sanctified, and acting upon religious Principles and Motives;
or one of another Disposition changed by the Power of Divine Grace into this;
and then what raised and enobled Souls do the one and other become? all their
Things being done with Charity! from a reigning Love to God and Goodness as
such, as there is Opportunity unto all Men, but especially unto the Household of
Faith, proving their Love before the Churches.

In this Case a special Exercise of proper Evangelical Faith with Love is
supposed, as in the Frame of Spirit, so in the chosen Objects, poor Saints and
Members of Jesus Christ, for His sake, and as unto Him, and as He will accept
and reward another Day; " Ye did it unto Me. This is Christ formed in us, his
Spirit ruling in us, a new Nature given to us, acting in new Manner, on new
Principles, Ends and Motives; such as the mere natural Man perceives not, in
equal or greater Benefactions; a Sacrifice holy and acceptable to God.

It is easy to the Power of God and worthy of his Mercy, so to change the Heart
of the naturally Niggard and grudging, into this Riches of Benignity and
Beneficence, whereof there seem to have been many Instances in the first Days
of the Gospel, upon the pouring out of the Spirit; when the Multitude of them
that believed were of one Heart and Soul; neither said any of them, that ought
of the things they possessed were their own, but they bad all things common,
Acts iv. ult. An extraordinary Spirit of Love, at an extraordinary Time and
Occasion! a wonderful Effusion of the HOLY GHOST, from the late crucified and
ascended JESUS. The like therefore has not been known in ordinary Times, nor is
it the standing Exercise of the Spirit in the sanctified. But the Want of what
should be common among Christians at all Times, is a sad and dark Testimony of
the Poverty of Grace; for there certainly are among us People of high
Profession, who have no Heart to do almost any thing at all, in a way of
Distribution to the Poor, or for pious Uses; no not a known Instance for Years
together; while God is liberally giving to them, and they can lay up and lay
out and make Purchases! but if you speak of giving, they hide themselves from
their own Flesh, even though they be esteemed Members of Christ also.

Let us always see to it, that our Principle and End be right before God,
genuine and truly Christian; that neither Vanity, Affectation or Ostentation,
nor yet mere Humanity and good Nature, be passed on God for gracious Charity,
on Whom it cannot; nor yet on Men, nor on our selves, which also is next to
impossible under our Illuminations by the Gospel. Wherefore our Lord, according
to the infinite Wisdom and Sanctity of God in Him, has warned us to take heed
how we do our Alms, Jest we have no Reward from our Father in Heaven. Matthew. vi.

II. I am now to show, that this Evangelical Christian charitable Frame of
Spirit is an unspeakable Gift of God.

And here,

1. Literally true it is, that no Tongue of Man can duly speak of it, or
enough praise and celebrate it. It is above all our Thoughts and Words, we can
neither think or speak of it as it merits. Such is every Work and Gift of God
in the Kingdom of Nature and Providence. "See that thou magnify these visible
Works, which Eyes of Flesh behold. " His Work is honorable and glorious, and
his Praise endures for Ever. How much more his Spiritual Work, the Gift by
Grace within thy Self and Others. The Angels of God pry silently into this, and
we need their Eyes and Tongues to look into it and speak of it. "Bless the Lord
ye his Angels that excel in Strength! and " awake up our Glory too, though we
be but Babes and Sucklings in comparison of Them; for from our Mind and Mouth
God has ordained Strength. -- We lisp and stammer at a proper Word, and poorly
apprehend many of the Great Words put into our Mouth. "Let Him teach us what we
shall say! and shall it be told Him that we speak! who can utter his mighty
Acts, or show forth all his Praise! -- Accordingly the Apostle labors in my
Context, to speak of the Gift of God; seems at a loss, speaks abundantly, over
and over, and knows not when he has said enough of the excellent Grace:
Enriched, says he, in every thing, to all Bountifulness, which is abundant by
many Thanksgivings to God, from those that long after you for the exceeding
Grace of God in you. -- If a Man would speak of a thing unspeakable, it must be
just after this manner; it being literally true, that no Tongue of Man can
fully speak the Praises of Christian Charity.

2. Unspeakable is the Good done in the World by a right charitable Frame of
Spirit. Unspeakable are the Needs which Sin has brought upon us, not only on
the poor and low of the World, but also on others, even on the richest and
highest. We unspeakably need one another Help and Service, and unspeakable are
the Benefits we receive from others in our Necessities. The poor serve the rich
abundantly, more especially in their Sicknesses; and very often do it gratis,
for nothing, out of pure Humanity, Respect and Compassion, and are never
requited: Sometimes from Gratitude for Favors received, and as often (I would
wish) from a Principle of Grace within them, it being all the Way they have to
express a pious Love to God and their Neighbors. -- Others to whom God has
given Riches, and Largeness of Heart to do Good with it, give Portions to the
Poor by sevens and eights, and by scores and hundreds; devising liberal things,
and casting their Bread upon the Waters. The Bowels of the poor are refreshed
by them, they are Eyes to the blind and Feet to the lame, Parents to the
Fatherless, and they cause the Widow's Heart to sing; the Blessing of them that
are ready to perish comes on them, and of him that is helpless. They are as the
Heat and Rain to a thirsty and cold Earth, as the Light of the Morning and the
Dews of the Evening to those among whom they dwell, who pass their Days and
Nights the better for their Neighborhood. Their Glory is fresh in them, and
their Bow is renewed in their Hand. They live not to Themselves, but others
glean by handfuls of what they plentifully sow. God multiply their Seed sown,
and increase the Fruits of their Righteousness; while the Loins of the Poor
bless them, warmed with the Fleece of their Flock. These are the Men of whom we
shall hear well another Day, but how will they be able to bear the Joy of the
blessed Words! I was hungry and ye gave me Meat, thirsty and ye gave me Drink,
naked and ye clothed me, a Stranger and ye took me in. Unspeakable (you see) is
the Good done in this needy World, and Heaven acknowledges it to be so, and
accordingly rates the Gift in the Book of Account.

3. Unspeakable is the Glory redounding to GOD from a right Christian
charitable Frame of Spirit, in the noble humble Exercise of it through the Earth,
and therefore is it an unspeakable Gift. This is a Reason or Argument that
rises much higher than the former; for if it be a good and great Thing to do
much Good to our Fellow Creatures, how much more is it to be any Ways
Instrumental in any Glory and Honor to the Name of GOD? Yet HE is glorified
(says my Context) by Others, on the Account of the Acts of Bounty done them by
their merciful Neighbor.

The Great and bountiful God makes much, makes the most of our little Alms and
Offerings to Him: As our Savior did of the Widow's two Mites; they were a rich
Offering in his Eye, and he magnified it and her. So God shines on his own
Works wrought in us and by us, and puts great Honor on 'em, makes great
Account of 'em. And so in the last Day he will glorify Himself in glorifying
his Elect, In as much as ye have done it to the least of these my Brethren, ye
have done it unto me.

We are bid to let our Lights shine before Men, that they seeing our good Works
may glorify our Father which is in Heaven. The liberal Man does so, but not to
be seen of Men. There is that is manifest, and cannot be hid. Men do not light
a Candle and put it under a Bushel. A good Man blesses God for the Light that
shines on others, as well as on Himself. If one is enriched to all
Bountifulness, it causes in others Thanksgiving to God; yea is abundant by many
Thanksgivings to Him, says my Context: "They glorify God for your professed
Subjection to the Gospel, and pray unto God for you.

Now the least Glory to God is an unspeakable thing. What is Man, and what the
World he lives in, and what the Riches thereof, and you will say what the poor
of it, that GOD should have Glory from them! " Behold He puts no Trust in
his Saints, and the Heavens are not clean in his Sight! how much less Man that
is a Worm! What then can Man think or speak of, ask or pray for, like to this!
Father in Heaven, thy Name be hallowed! -- for Thine is the Kingdom and Power
and Glory for ever! Well is it made the Alpha and Omega, the first and the
last, in our Prayers. It must be the everlasting Law and Motive to us,
respecting giving and receiving; 1 Peter iv. 11. If any Man minister, of the
Ability which God gives, that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus
Christ; to whom be Praise and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

4. The Good to our selves is unspeakable, in a liberal and bountiful Spirit,
and therefore it is an unspeakable Gift to us and in us. Unspeakable is the
present Comfort to a good Man by this Gift, and unspeakable is the future and
eternal Reward of it in the Life to come.

1. If we consider only the Pleasure and Comfort of it to a Man in this Life,
to be of a merciful and bountiful Eye, it is to him an unspeakable Gift. He is
satisfied in Himself, God answers him in the Joy of his Heart. The greatest
Pleasure of Life is to be good and do good. The Words of our Lord Jesus are to
be had in everlasting Remembrance, " It is more blessed to give than to
receive. The Man's State and Frame is more blessed; unless it be when the poor
Man exceeds in Grace, in the manner of his receiving; and then the Tide turns
on his Side.

Job tells us the Pleasure he found in Acts of Munificence in the Days of his
Prosperity; and it was unspeakable: When the Ear heard me, it blessed me! when
the Eye saw me it gave witness to me! then said I, I shall die in my Nest, or
multiply my Days as the Sand! my Root was spread out by the Waters, and the Dew
lay all Night upon my Branch! my Glory was fresh in me, and my Bow was renewed
in my Hand! they waited for me as for the Rain, and opened their Mouth wide as
for the latter Rain! I chose out their Way and sat Chief, and dwelt as a King
in his Army; as One that comfort the Mourners.

Even all the bitter Sorrows of Job could not take away the Comfort of the
Remembrance of his past Joys in Acts of Charity and Mercy. " If (said he) I had
withheld the poor from his Desire," -- O the Pleasure of yiedling them their
Desire, when it is pious and just, and the Power be in our Hand, and our Heart
be big enough; -- or if I caused the Eyes of the Widow to fail! If I eat my
Morsel alone, and the Fatherless did not share with me! for from my Youth I was
his Father, and Widow's Guide. -- I tell you, that as the Heart knows its own
Bitterness, so only the Heart of a Job knows the Comfort of a Consciousness of
such a Frame and Exercise, as this which his own Words have spoken, and who can
add to them? How did all the Good he had ever done to the Poor return into his
own Bosom, and flow out of his Lips from the Abundance in his heart! The
Objects of Charity were always to him as his own Bowels, and how were his
Bowels refreshed hereby, at the Time and long after. He felt the ruling Power
of Grace, and had Confidence toward God. The Joy of Faith and Hope accompanied
and followed the Exercise of Love and brotherly Kindness.

2. But the Great and last, the infinite and eternal Rewards of Grace, to the
charitable and godly Man, are in the Blessedness and Glories of the World to
come, and these render the Gift of Grace to him and in him unspeakable. Eye has
not seen this, nor Ear heard it, nor can it enter into our Hearts to conceive
of it. When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and fashion his Elect and
Merciful Ones after his own glorious Body, and say to 'em in the Hearing of all
his holy Angels, -- Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you from the Foundation of the World! for I was hungry and ye gave me Meat,
etc. -- O with what Rapture will they make the humble Answer, "Lord, when saw
we thee hungry and fed thee, or thirsty and gave thee Drink? -- The Day must
reveal it, what the Joy of the Lord and of his Members will then be! then they
shall be recompensed, at the Resurrection of the Just. It is worth waiting for
the Joys of that blessed Day, which will be given in full Measure, pressed down
and running over. Then he that has sown bountifully shall reap bountifully:
Then not a Cup of Water given as to a Disciple of Christ shall be forgotten.
The Rewards of free Grace will be found nothing less than a Crown and Kingdom,
a Crown of Glory eternal in the Heavens. How unknown, unspeakable, unsearchable
is this! it is high as Heaven, what can thou know? Infinite as GOD Himself,
who is thy SHIELD and exceeding great Reward; O Seed of generous Abraham! It is
a far exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory. -- We find and see many temporal
things unsearchable, how much more those that are unseen and eternal. Wherefore,

III. The highest Thanksgivings are due from us to the blessed God, for this
his unspeakable Gift to any of the Children of Men; and should be fervently
rendered to Him in the Churches of his Saints. " Thanks be to God for his
unspeakable Gift.

But (as was said before) what Thanks can we render, when the Gift is
unspeakable? O it is above all our Praises and Blessings! Yet as the Levites
said to the August Congregation, Nehem ix. 5. " Stand up and bless the Lord
your God for ever and ever! and blessed be thy glorious Name which is exalted
above all Praise.

I shall only say two Things here,

1. They that receive the Gift should be very thankful to God for it. The
charitable Person should himself give Thanks to God for making him so, while
yet he abases himself before the Lord, as an unprofitable Creature, and behaves
humble and lowly before Men. Yet ought he to glorify God for any Heart to do
good, and for any Means to do it. He must assume nothing to himself, but
ascribe all to God; of Whom and to Whom are all things. "For what have thou
which is not received? and if received, whereof have thou to glory? The Glory
belongs to Him who has given to thee, that thou may give to others. As,
suppose a rich and charitable Person puts into my Hand a Sum or Sums of Money
to distribute unto others in Want; it is his Gift and Bounty, and not mine; and
I ought to be thankful to Him together with those to whom I distribute. In like
manner if GOD give You Ability and a Heart to do good to others, you owe the
first Thanks to God, and should be ready to say with the Church, "Not unto us,
O Lord, not to us, but to thy Name be Glory.

You, my Brethren! that are honored of God to give unto the poor, might have
been your selves, and so your Families, among the indigent and necessitous! You
might have been Receivers of the Charities of others, the Objects of their
Compassion.

Or yet worse, You might have been among the niggardly and covetous in the
midst of Riches; not able to eat of your own Bread, and less to give unto
others! An Evil too often seen and felt, a Misery too common under the Sun,
which yet shines liberally on the niggard Soul.

Or still worse, You might have been among the fraudulent and unjust, the
Cheat, the Theif and the Robber; or (which is little better) the Gripe and the
Extortioner, the Spoiler of the Widow, the motherless and fatherless! But who
has made you to differ? made Thee a Benefactor and Blessing to the World, among
these Plagues and Curses in it? GOD, who is rich in Mercy, and Sovereign in his
Gifts and Grace to Men, He has done it! "Who has Mercy because he will have
Mercy. He that made Abel Cain's Brother, and gave to Abraham and Job and Moses
their Grandeur of Heart.

Let free Grace therefore have all the Glory; as the Apostle teaches us, Ephesians.
3.18. To me, who am less than the least of all Saints is this Grace given. So
thou by the Grace of God art what thou art, and his Grace given thee has not
been in vain! And if you labor more than others, yet not you, but the Grace of
God in You. -- So when David had done a kingly part, and his Princes a very
princely one, in way of Offerings out of their Estates; then David said before
the Lord, 1 Chronicles. xxix. 14. But who am I O Lord God, and what is my People,
that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort! for all things
come of Thee and of thy own have we given thee. -- Thus they that receive the
Gift, should give Thanks for it.

2. Others, but especially the poor and needy, they should be very thankful to
God. The Charitable are God's Gifts to Men, even to the rebellious; (and indeed
such themselves among their Brethren) that the Lord God might dwell among us. I
may lawfully transfer these Words from Ministers in the Church, to the liberal
in the Flocks; for it is the same God and the same Grace that forms both the
one and the other, to serve the Needs of Souls and Bodies. "We do you to wit
therefore of the Grace of God bestowed on the Churches, in both. The same Holy
Spirit that descended on the Apostles in Tongues of Fire, came down on the
Multitude of Believers at that memorable Time and they had all things common.
And now the ordinary Gifts of your Ministers for the Service of your Souls, and
the ordinary Spirit of Charity in our Churches, are from the same Fullness, of
Christ; of Whom all do receive and Grace upon Grace. He puts the earnest Care
for Soul and Body into the one and other; whether it be Titus or Gaius, doing
faithfully for the Brethren or Strangers.

The Gifts and Graces of others, and the Use God pleases to make of them,
should be pleasant to us and admired by us; and we should rejoice in all that
we see of God in them. We should prize the good Examples they give us, give God
the Glory of them, and be excited to a holy Imitation. 1 Thessalonians. iii. 9. For
what Thanks can we render unto God for you? for all the Joy wherewith we joy
before our God for your sakes.

The poor especially should be very thankful to God, for his unspeakable Gift
to them, in all the Charities of the rich and bountiful. They should
religiously accept the Gift of Heaven in those whom they must call their
Benefactors. They should look through and above Men unto God, who gives by their
Hands. They must no more idolize Men, than they would bow down to an Image of
Wood or Gold; no more than they would kiss the Calves, or their Hand to the Sun
or Moon in their Brightness; for this were to deny the most high and first
Benefactor. " Why look ye so earnestly at us? said Peter and John to the
wondering and almost worshipping People at the Gate of the Temple, when they had
in the Name of Jesus given more than Silver or Gold to the Cripple, even Feet
to walk and leap. What is a bountiful Donor to us, but a Steward and Almoner of
God, his kind and open Hand! Who shall have the Praise? the King that orders
his Medals to be strowed among the Crowd, or the Servitor that scatters 'em at
his Command? Jacob saw the Face of God in Esau's Affection, when he ran with
open Arms and Eyes full of Tears to embrace him. So let the poor see the Face
and Hand of God, in all the Heart and Care of others for them. They are what
God makes 'em, and he has made 'em such (...).

God knows the irreligious poor, ungrateful to Him, unthankful and unholy, who
receive and eat and give him not Thanks. It may be they how to Men, and treble
their Thanks to them and bless 'em, and yet do not lift their Hearts at all to
God. It may be they neither pray for themselves or others in secret, although
their Dependence is so great on Providence and its Instruments; nor do they
bless God when he sends 'em in Supplies. -- God values the Thanks of the Poor
as much as of the Rich, and they as much owe it to Him. Let 'em learn the Song
of Hannah, and sing it with her gracious Spirit, 1 Samuel 2. init "My Heart
rejoices in the Lord, my Horn is exalted in the Lord: He makes poor and makes
rich; the hungry cease, and the rich have hired out themselves for Bread.

Having thus at large considered the unspeakable Gift of God, in a right
charitable Frame of Spirit, and the Thanksgiving and Praise due from us unto
God therefore, I might naturally go into a large Compass of Meditation on other
the unspeakable Gifts of God to us, all of which are more or less related unto
this that I have been speaking of; and it may be I could not well go into a
more proper and profitable Application of the Subject.

As,

1. Look we within our selves, into our own Souls and Bodies, framed as they
are for Thanksgiving to God, and for all Offices of Humanity and Charity to our
Nei'bours; what a Gift of God is this Mind and Heart, and these Eyes and Hands;
first to lift up to God, and then to look and reach out to his poor! this
social Nature for worshipping and communicating! In every Relation and in all
Offices of Human Life, public and private, wherein God has placed us to serve
and bless one another; what Gifts of God unspeakable ought every One to be unto
his Correlate and therein to the Community! from the Consort, Parent and Child,
up to the King on the Throne; and down again from all that rule under Him, to
the lowest Subject in the State! -- What a wide Compass of unspeakable
Blessings would every Person, in every Order, present us with? all under the
Law of Kindness, and all their Things done with Charity.

2. What an unspeakable Gift therefore is a good Government, good Magistrates,
wise, pious, faithful, public-spirited Rulers; great and good Kings, Princes,
Nobles, Governors, Legislators, and Judges: Whom we are bid to pray for, and
are bound to give Thanks for; while under them we are living quiet and
peaceable Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty. 2 Samuel xxiii. 1, -- 4. He shall
be at the Light of the Morning when the Sun arises, even a Morning without
Clouds; and as the tender Grass springing out of the Earth by clear shining
after Rain. Such Gifts from Heaven were Moses and Joshua, Samuel and David,
Hezekiah and Nehemiah to the Israel of God, in their Generation.

3. What an unspeakable Gift of God to us is our Church State, our spiritual
Relation in Christ, our Fellowship in the Gospel, our Brotherhood, the Vocation
wherewith we are called! to be a spiritual House, a Kingdom of Priests, a
chosen Generation, a peculiar People and Treasure, to show forth the Praises of
our God and Savior. Your Sabbaths, the preached Gospel, the Ordinances of our
God, and the Ministers of Religion; these are among the Gifts from the Ascended
Jesus. As it is written, -- I gave them my Sabbaths for a Sign between Me and
them that I am the Lord that does sanctify them Ezekiel. xx. 12. Psalm. cxlvii. 19.
Ephesians. iv. 8, 11. 2* Cor. iv. 7.
: He gave his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments unto Israel, He has
not done so by many a People: He gave Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors
and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry,
for the Edifying the Body of Christ. Enoch, Moses and Aaron, Elijah and Elisha,
Peter and John and Paul, and many after them, in their Spirit, have been
invaluable Gifts to the Church; a Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the
Excellency of the Power may be of God and not of Man. Nor have there been
wanting in the Churches of Christ, nor ever shall be, such Gifts from among
their gracious Members, to and of whom we may take up the illustrious Words of
the Apostle to the Philippians and the Thessalonians, in our Thanksgivings to
God Phil. i. 3, 1 These. i. 3. 2. i. 3.
: I thank my God upon every Remembrance of you, for your Fellowship in the
Gospel! and we give Thanks always for you all, remembering without ceasing your
Work of Faith, and Labor of Love, and Patience of Hope in our Lord Jesus
Christ; and ye became followers of us and of the Lord, having received the Word
with much Affliction and Joy in the Holy Ghost; because your Faith grows
exceedingly, and your Charity one to another abounds; so that we glory in You
in the Churches of God for your Patience and Faith. Thus the meanest and
poorest, on worldly Accounts, in the visible Church, became unspeakable Gifts
of Grace to it; and will be found so in the Church of the Firstborn, whose
Names are written in Heaven.

But to leave all things here below, and to ascend up far above all Heavens, I
add

4. and lastly, The unspeakable Gift of CHRIST and of the HOLY SPIRIT, the
Savior and Sanctifier of Souls; which two are one, equal in Godhead and Glory.
Here triumph with me, my Hearers, in the adoring Contemplation of the ineffable
Gift of God, his own Eternal Son, the Only-begotten of the Father, whose Glory
was beheld in his Miracles of Mercy to the Bodies of Men, but more in his
Compassions to their Souls; his holy Ministry, Labors and Sufferings for their
Salvation; to save our Souls from spiritual and eternal Death, to cover a
multitude of Sins, to make Reconciliation for Iniquity, to bring in an
Everlasting Righteousness for the Justification of Sinners. The crucified Jesus
is such a 2 Gift of God to the Sons of Men, as infinitely transcends the
Tongues of Angels, when they would give Him the Glory of it. They desire to
look into it, and give Glory in the Highest. The Elders with them prepare new
Songs for ever, and cast their Crowns before the Throne.

How then shall the Tongues of Men below be able to speak of the Gift of God to
us in the Incarnation, Obedience, Death, Resurrection and Intercession of
CHRIST, or of his Coming again in Glory for the Salvation of those that believe
in Him! -- Here all Words are swallowed up, we are struck mute, and Praise sits
silent. Isai. ix. 6. To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be upon his Shoulder: And his Name shall be called, Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace!

This, this (my Brethren) is the unspeakable Gift of God unto us, to be in in
Everlasting Remembrance with us in all our Worship before Him, secret, private
and public; every Lord's Day and all our Communion-Days: In every Ordinance of
Worship He is offered to us for our thankful Acceptance, to be of God made unto
us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption! and we must be making
the Offering of our Selves to Him, as bought with a Price, living Sacrifices,
which is our reasonable Service, holy and acceptable to God. Grace to do this,
is an unspeakable Gift indeed.

Therefore we must give equal Glory to the HOLY GHOST, yielding our Selves to
Him, as the blessed Sanctifier, proceeding from the Father and the Son! One
with the REDEEMER in Godhead and everlasting Love to Souls. John xiv. 16. The
Comforter, whom I will send unto You from the Father, He shall receive of Mine
and show it unto you.

This Heavenly Gift rested on Moses and the Elders, Patriarchs and Prophets,
sanctified and inspired them. He has formed every Saint through all the Ages of
the Church. But the grand Effusion was the Glory of the New Testament, and the
Promise is still flowing down to us: Isai. xliv. 3. I will pour Water upon him
that is thirsty, and Floods upon the dry Ground; I will pour my SPIRIT upon
your Seed, and my Blessing upon your Offspring: And one shall say I am the
Lord's, and another shall subscribe with his Hand to the Lord, etc. -- Souls
can need nor ask more. Christ has no more to offer to us. John vii. 37. In the
last and great Day of the Feast Jesus stood and cried, saying, "If any Man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink, and out of his Belly shall flow Rivers
of living Water: This spoke He of the SPIRIT which they that believe on him
shall receive.

CHRIST and the HOLY GHOST are the One, inseparable, undivided, infinite,
eternal, and therefore unspeakable Gift of GOD. Let us wait for it as for the
Rain, and open our Mouth wide for it as for the latter Rain. God fill us with
this Blessing of Blessings. Revel. xxii. 17. " The Spirit and the Bride say,
Come; and let him that hears say, Come; and let him that is athirst come; and
whosoever will let him take of the Water of Life freely.

FINIS.

