CHRIST THE ETERNAL WORD, THE Only Means of Man's Salvation; Briefly asserted:
Submitted to the sober Perusal of all Christian Professors.

By CHARLES WOOLVERTON.

All things are delivered to me of my Father: And no Man knows who the Son
is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him.

Luke X. 22. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. Abide in me,
and I in you.

John XV. 1, 4. And this is the Life eternal, that they might know thee, the
only True GOD, and JESUS CHRIST whom thou have sent.

John XVII. 3. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, for the Author.
M,DCC,XXXVIII.

The PREFACE.
Friendly Reader,
TO see the Diversity of Men's Opinions and the many Censures that some cast
upon Truth, brought me to a serious Concern to appear in this manner, that, if
possible, I might be instrumental to remove the Clouds of Prejudice from some
Minds; and by speaking intelligibly to Men of moderate Tempers and common
Capacitys, as much as in me lies, to demonstrate what I have clearly seen, to
wit, CHRIST the Hope of Glory, the only means of Man's Salvation.

Christ is the Rock I have built on, who am in Unity with the People called
Quakers, whose Testimony I know to be sound, and yet I have not endeavored to
persuade any to come to them as Men, but to that Foundation they as well as I
direct Men to.

I have used as much Brevity as I could, with Clearness, in this little Piece,
knowing there are many Books of the same Tendency wrote by Men of larger Gifts;
yet as smaller Tracts are sometimes of Service, when bigger Volumes cannot
easily be got: And as I have writ with Charity and Plainness, I hope it will be
acceptable and advantageous to my Readers; which with great Sincerity and
Affection is the real Desire of (Courteous Reader) Thy Souls Friend.

Charles Woolverton.

ALTHOUGH many Books have been wrote on this Subject; yet I conceived the
writing of this small Tract to be my Duty: And have therefore cast my Mite into
the Treasury.

I shall begin with that heavenly Testimony the Evangelist John bears of
Christ: In the Beginning was the Word, (here he plainly declares where the Word
was) and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. Here (he affirms what it
is,) he further goes on to confirm the foregoing Words, The same, says he, was
in the Beginning with God, all things were made by him, and without him was not
any thing made that was made: In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of
Men. John i. 1, 2, 3, 4.

It was the Eternal Word which made all things, that upholds all things by his
eternal Power, who was with the Father before the World was made: For we find
he was in the Beginning with God, all things were made by him, and without him
was not any thing made that was made; in him was Life, and the Life was the
Light of Men. Hence it is plain, that CHRIST was and is the WORD of GOD, and
the only Means of Man's Salvation. The holy Scriptures are a divine Declaration
of him, his Work and Power, whose Work was with the Father both to make Man and
save him. For although Man by his Disobedience had incurred the Wrath of God;
yet he was pleased to provide a divine Mediator, who wrought with the Father
for the Salvation of Men; and this was Christ the Eternal Word.

This the holy Scriptures abundantly prove; for it was impossible for Man of
himself to make an Atonement to God for the Sin he had committed in breaking
his Command. Now, God in his great Mercy showed his Love to Men through Christ,
reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them,
but, as says the Apostle, has committed unto us the Word of Reconciliation, 2
Cor. 5.19. Now, this Word of Reconciliation, was Christ, was that Word that was
the Mediator for Man, and it is that Word that is the Savior of Man; it is this
Word nigh in the Heart, that Man is to hear: For the invisible things of him
from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead, Romans 1.20. Thus we may see
the heavenly Harmony of the holy Scriptures how they concur; and that Spirit
and Power that gave them forth, brings Man to a right Understanding of them.

Now, after Man had fallen by Transgression, he was received into Mercy by the
Means and Mediation of Christ; Life and Death was set before him, with this
annexed to it, Choose Life, that both thou and thy Seed may live, Deuteronomy. 30.19.
Man was created after the Image of God in Holiness, but for his Transgression
incurred the Wrath of God; then he was made sensible he had sinned; then he was
afraid of that Divine Presence he had before enjoyed; and in that State it
seemed meet to divine Wisdom, to provide a Mediator, which was Christ the
Eternal Word of God. Now, we find, that Adam after he sell, sought to hide
himself from God; and had not God in infinite Mercy called unto him, he had
been utterly lost: But willing to bring Man to Repentance he called unto Adam,
Adam where art thou? Now, Adam of himself could not come to a State of
Repentance, neither could he fly from the Voice of the Lord, no; I heard thy
Voice and was afraid, because I was naked, therefore I hid my self. And he
said, Who told thee thou was naked? have thou eaten of the Tree, whereof I
commanded thee, Thou should not eat? This was great Condescension thus to
expostulate the Case with Adam, thereby to open his Understanding and bring him
to Repentance.

The great Love of God to Mankind is also plainly shown, in providing a
Mediator to make Atonement for their Sins; for although Man's Disobedience
occasioned his being turned out of Paradise, a Means of Restoration was
provided for him; the Serpent who tempted him was cursed above every Beast of
the Field, and the Seed of the Woman it was promised should bruise the
Serpent's Head. This promised Seed was CHRIST; and for this End did he make his
Appearance unto Mankind through diverse Dispensations. His Appearance to the
holy Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, was in the similitude of Angels, and
he gave to faithful Abraham a Sign and Seal of his Mercy, to wit, Circumcision
in the Flesh, as a Type and Figure of what was to follow: Then followed the
Dispensation of the Law of Moses, added because of Transgression, in order to
bring Man near to the Lord; the Ceremonial Part of which stood in outward
Observations, and were figurative of what was to follow, as the Paschal-Lamb,
which was to be slain and the Blood to be sprinkled on the People, signified,
that it seemed meet to Divine Wisdom, that no Atonement should be made without
Blood, and the Burnt-Offerings made by Fire, typified the one Offering made by
Christ for the Sins of the World. And Christ being come, the Substance of that
Law, all Types and Figures in the Law were fulfilled in him; for Christ is the
End of the Law, for Righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10.4.

Now, true Believers in Christ they see through the Law, that Christ came not
to destroy it, but to fulfill it; and as it is fulfilled, the Service of the
Law is at an End: For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through
the Flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin
condemned Sin in the Flesh; that the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit, Romans 8.3,
4. This is enough, one would think, to satisfy all sorts of Men professing
Christianity, to forsake all outward Shadows, and come to Christ the Substance
of all.

For even under the Law, in Performance of the Service required in that
Dispensation, the Upright in Heart with an Eye of Faith saw through the End of
the Law, to wit, the Messiah which was to follow; in this Faith they stood who
were faithful in that Day, and it is the same in this: For that Spirit then
that rested in the bare Observation of outward Performances, even that Spirit
denied him, when the Fullness of Time was come for his blessed Appearance to do
his Father's Will in him. They would not receive, but preferred Barrabas a
Robber before Christ the Savior of the World; yet they were many of them
learned knowing Men as to worldly Wisdom, but the World by Wisdom knows not
God. This is the Case of many in this very Age, they will not receive him in
his spiritual Appearance, no, no, that is too mean for them, they are too
learned to come there: But, hear what Christ says to the unbelieving Jews? He
that believes on the Son, has everlasting Life; and he that believes not the
Son shall not see Life but the Wrath of God abides on him. Joh.3.36

Now, the Jews who rested in the outward Observation of the Law, not coming to
the Substance of the Law, crucified him in the Flesh; and the professing
Christians that rest in outward Observations and will not come to him, they
crucify him in Spirit. Hear what Christ says to the unbelieving Jews Ye sent
unto John, says he, and he bore Witness unto the Truth; but, says he, I have
greater Witness than that of John: For the Works which the Father has given me
to finish, the same Works that I do, bear Witness (...) me, that the Father
has sent me: And the Father himself which has sent me, has bor^^ Witness of
me: Ye have neither heard his Voice at any time, nor seen his Shape; and ye
have not his Word abiding in you: For whom he has sent, him ye believe not. Ye
search the Scriptures, says he; for in them ye think ye have eternal Life, and
they are they which testify of me: And ye will not come to me, that ye might
have Life. Further adding, I am come in my Father's Name, and ye receive me
not. Joh. 5. v. 33, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 43. I have made this large Citation to
open my Reader's Understanding: These Texts are so clear and full to the
subject Matter I am upon, I think no Man can with Reason be dissatisfied. Here
Christ plainly and fully shows his Work* and Power, which was to bring Man to
himself; in short, He that comes not to him, will never be saved by him; no,
no: For his Invitation is, Come unto me all you that are heavy laden, and I
will give you Rest. Now, there is nothing can lead to him but the Spirit of
Truth, which proceeds from him: For if the Performance of outward Things could
have made Men perfect in Christ Jesus, there had been no need of his being
crucified for the Sins of the World; but in that they were imperfect in
themselves, he came and offered himself as a Propitiation for the Sins of the
whole World, that, as he was lifted up upon the Cross, he should draw all Men
after him. Wherefore remember, says the Apostle, that ye being in time past
Gentiles in the Flesh, who are called Uncircumcision by that which is called
the Circumcision in the Flesh made by Hands; that at that time ye were without
Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers from the
Covenants of Promise, having no Hope, and without God in the World: But now in
Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the Blood of
Christ. For he is our Peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the
Middle-wall of Partition between us; having abolished in his Flesh the Enmity,
even the Law of Commandments, contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself,
of twain, one new Man, so making Peace; and that he might reconcile both unto
God in one Body by the Cross, having slain the Enmity thereby: And came and
preached Peace to you which were afar off, and to them that were nigh: For
through him we both have an Access by one Spirit unto the Father. Ephesians. 2. v.
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

I think these Texts clearly demonstrate the great Work he has done for Man,
even from the Beginning down to this very Day: For he it was that made Peace,
and he it is that makes Peace between God and Man; He it was that led Israel
through the Red Sea and through the Wilderness; he it was that stood between
Pharaoh and his chosen Israel; he it was that led them through the Wilderness
to prove them and to try them; and finally he it was that brought them to the
good Land, which, was a Figure of the heavenly Canaan, or Place of Rest. And as
the great Work of traveling from Egypt to the Land of Promise outwardly was
completed in time through Faith and Patience in them that continued faithful
to the End, and as those were saved by that divine Power they trusted in; so
undoubtedly shall every one be in this Day, that retain their Integrity to God
in the same Faith and Spirit that they did. But we find there were but few of
that great Number which came out of Egypt entered into the good Land: For though
they saw the mighty Works which were done for their Preservation, such was the
Hardness of their Hearts, they daily provoked God to Wrath, in so much that he
threatened to destroy them, and said to his Servant Moses, Now therefore, let me
alone, that my Wrath may wax hot against them; for I will consume them; but I
will make of thee a mighty People. But Moses prayed unto the Lord his God to
turn away his Wrath from his People; and the Lord heard his Prayer and spared
them. Thus we see Moses under the Law became a Mediator for the Israelites, a
lively Type and Figure of Christ under the Gospel, who ever lives to make
Intercession for the Sins of the World.

Moses made Intercession for the People under his Conduct; but Christ makes
Intercession for the whole World, that all Men through him might be saved. And
it is certain, that, as he shed his precious Blood for the Sins of the whole
World, so all that will come and abide with him, shall be saved by him; as the
Prophet Isaiah plainly declares, Look unto me, and be ye saved all the Ends of
the Earth; for I am GOD, and there is none other, [or as some Translations
render it, none else, which is of the same Effect,] Isai. XLV. 22. Here the
Prophet directs Man to look unto him, and not to outward Observations: No, no;
for his Message was of another Tendency; these were as Shadows that passed
away, they all directed to him, and centred in him. This I lay down for
Christian Doctrine, not to be confuted by the wise and learned in worldly
Wisdom: For it is not all the learned Men in the World by their Learning in
Tongues and Books, can bring Men to the saving Knowledge of Christ; for Paul
whilst he followed human Learning, and fed upon the Leaves of the Tree of
Knowledge, persecuted the Church of Christ which were gathered by the Spirit of
which; but when by that Spirit he was enlightened, not consulting with Flesh and
Blood, he soon learned another Lesson; it was then no more Book-Learning, but
Saving Knowledge he exhorted Men to, and that was Christ in them the Hope of
Glory; here Paul centred, he was at his Journy's End, his Travel was to bring
Men to Christ, this was the End of his Message, he was not sent to baptize, but
to preach the Gospel, which Gospel is Christ the Power of God unto Salvation;
this Gospel teaches Men perfect Faith in Christ, there is no waveing, there is
no running from one Place to another, no; Christ is come the Hope of their
Salvation, he it is they believe in, he it is they look unto, and by him they
are saved. To multiply Words upon this Head is needless; for all Men professing
Christianity will in Words own Christ Jesus to be their Savior: This is a
general Confession Men make; but they will not come to him in that way he
requires that they may be saved by him. He says, God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth: This is the Way he
directs Men to; then certainly if it be in Spirit and Truth, Men must worship
God; they must have a Measure of that Divine Spirit to worship withal, which
leads from the Teaching that is merely of Men, and out of the World from the
Noise of Lo! here and Lo! there.

Oh! how full is the World of Forms and Opinions! One admires one Form, and
another another Form: But the Spirit of Truth leads out of empty Forms to Life
and Substance; yea, into all Truth, as those that are led by it do certainly
know. It therefore behooves all to beware of a Spirit of Unbelief; for that
blessed immaculate Lamb of God, when he was upon the Earth in that prepared
Body his Father gave him to do his Will in, and who did the Works that no Man
could do; yet such was the Hardheartedness and Unbelief of the Jews, they
believed not in him, but said, He has a Devil, why hear ye he him? Others more
moderate said, Which of the Rulers has believed on him? Bring this home to the
Age we live in, and it runs too like a Parallel with many: For now, to speak of
the Light of Christ within Man for a Teacher, gives great Offense; his divine
Revelations to Mankind are disbelieved by many Wise and Learned in worldly
Wisdom; many of them say, Revelation is ceased, Men must look to the Word of
God and his Ministers to be directed in the Way in which they are to go: And
the holy Bible is what they call the Word of God, and the learned Men in
Tongues they call the Ministers of Christ; although they never were sent by
Christ to preach the Gospel. Now, this is the very Rock the Jews split upon,
when Christ came in the Flesh; they had the Law and the Prophets, by which they
had a Historical Belief of Moses, reading of him in those holy Writings, which
directed them to believe in the blessed Messiah, who was to come, and of whom
Moses was a lively Type and Figure: Yet, when the fullness of Time was come,
they rejected Christ, resting in the formal Part of those figurative Things,
which pointed to him the Substance, and through the Hardness of their Hearts
they crucified him, and said, His Blood be on us and our Children. A dreadful
thing indeed! that Man which was created a noble Creature, and bore the
heavenly Image in his State of Innocence, should fall so far below his Station!

Now, what do they do better, that deny him in his spiritual Appearance, and
cry, Revelation is ceased, our Ministers tell us so; and sure, they who are
learned Men know better than we, therefore let us hear them; often making use
of that Text, The Priest's Lips shall preserve Knowledge. Under the Law it was
so; but under the Gospel Dispensation Christ is the high Priest and Bishop of
our Souls, and to him we must adhere.

Now, from the foregoing Observations I hope it is plain, That Revelation is
not ceased: For if that be ceased, by what Spirit must Man learn to know his
Duty? God gave Man in the Beginning his good Spirit to be a Leader, and there
was no other way whereby he was led to God but that. But Man's rebelling
against it incurred his Wrath to the disobedient; this was the Case of Adam in
the Fall: Yet God through the Son of his Love extended his Mercy to Mankind,
that by Repentance and Faith in him they might be saved.

Now, through all Ages of the World the Upright in Heart saw the Day of their
Redemption, and rejoyed therein. Time would sail to enumerate what might be
writ in Defense of the Truth I contend for. Should I trace the holy Scriptures
throughout, it would swell to a large Volume; and I see no great Necessity for
it: They are plain and clear in themselves, and those who are led by the Spirit
of Truth may read them with Comfort; but those that reject that Spirit, they
are a Mystery unto, and so will remain till they come to be led by it: For it
is the Spirit of Truth that gave forth the Scriptures, which can only unseal
them and no other; and without this, neither learned nor unlearned can ever
lead them to Edification.

Yet to confirm the foregoing, I shall add what the Wise Man says concerning
Christ: The Lord possessed me in the Beginning of his way before his Works of
old: I was set up from everlasting, from the Beginning, or ever the Earth was.
When there were no Depths, I was brought forth; when there were no Fountains
abounding with Water: Before the Mountains were settled, before the Hills was I
brought forth; while as yet he had not made the Earth, nor the Fields, nor the
highest part of the Dust of the World: When he prepared the Heavens, I was
there; when he set a Compass upon the Face of the Deep; when he established the
Clouds above; when he strengthened the Fountains of the Deep; when he gave to
the Sea his Decree, that the Waters should not pass his Commandment; when he
appointed the Foundations of the Earth; then I was by him, as one brought up
with him; and I was daily his Delight, rejoicing always before him; rejoicing
in the habitable part of his Earth, and my Delights were with the Sons of Men.
Prove. VIII. 22, to 31. Now, the Compass of his Earth which he took Delight in,
was Man, that he had made for a Purpose of his own Glory; he made him of the
Dust of the Earth, and breathed into him the Spirit of Life, and Man became a
living Soul. This was the habitable Part of his Earth he took Delight to solace
in; and a heavenly Solace it was to Man, whilst he stood in the State he was
created in: But falling through Transgression, he lost that heavenly Enjoyment,
which is only renewed again in Christ the Lamb of God, who never fell; and is
the only Means of Man's Salvation. And seeing then he is the Means, let us come
to him for the Effect. And the Way to come to him, is through the divine
Influence of the Spirit of Grace, which proceeds from the Father and the Son,
who are one. To confirm this my Assertion, I shall quote diverse Texts of
Scripture, sufficient to prove it to Men of common Capacities.

I shall begin with Christ's own Words: Verily, verily I say unto you, He that
hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting Life, and
shall not come into Condemnation, but is passed from Death unto Life, John V.
24. Here the Doctrine I advance is so plain and intelligibly laid down by the
Lip of Truth, that it needs no Comment.

I shall next add the Testimony of some of his Followers: The Evangelist John
says, God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life: For
God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but that the World
through him might be saved, John III. 16, 17. Oh! the Harmony there is betwixt
the Lamb of God and his Followers! It Is sweetly Refreshing to read those holy
Lines, by such as are gathered unto Christ by his Spirit.

My next Instance parallel to the Subject I am upon, to wit, CHRIST the Eternal
WORD the only Means of Man's Salvation, is that of the Apostle Paul to the
Romans, who says, Moses describes the Righteousness which is of the Law, That
the Man which does those things, shall live by them. But the Righteousness
which is of Faith speaks on this wise, Say not in thine Heart, who shall
ascend into Heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down from above) or who shall
descend into the Deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from the Dead) But
what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart,
(that is, the Word of Faith which we preach) That if thou shall confess with
thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine Heart, that God has
raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. Romans X. 5, to 9.

Now, this is the Word which the faithful Ministers of Christ preach, and
exhort Men to; and this they do by the divine Influence of the Spirit of Grace,
revealed unto them: For no Man can truly speak or write of the Things of God
but by the Inspiration of the Spirit of Truth; for God is inaccessible in his
own pure Essence and Being, and cannot be approached to by Man, without the
Divine Influence of a blessed Mediator, which is Christ the Hope of Glory to
all them that believe. Such the Apostle Paul preached; but how did he preach?
by human Learning only? no; for in that state he persecuted the Church of
Christ: But he plainly tells us, how he came to be a Minister of Christ; hear
what he says: But I certify you, Brethren, that the Gospel which was preached
of me, is not after Man: For I neither received it of Man, neither was I taught
it but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. Galat. I. 11, 12. My Reader may, if
he pleases, read the whole Chapter for further Information, where he treats of
this Matter at large, as well as in many other Places in his Writings; of which
for Brevity-sake I shall instance but few; every one may read them with Profit,
if they will follow the Spirit of Truth; and without that, their reading will
do them no good: For if they reject the Fountain from whence good comes, how
can they drink of the Streams of it? But to return to Paul's Account, how he
came to be a Minister of Christ, hear his own Words: For this Cause I Paul the
Prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles; if ye have heard of the Dispensation
of the Grace of God, which is given me to you-ward: How that by Revelation he
made known unto me the Mystery, that I wrote before in few Words; he yet goes
on, whereby, says he, when ye read ye may understand my Knowledge in the
Mystery of Christ, Ephesians. III. 1, 2, 3, 4. Here Paul declares how he came to be
a Minister of Christ, and tells the Causes to the Gentiles: Now, if Revelation
be ceased, as many Scholars and learned Men have affirmed, how shall Men come
to the Knowledge of God, since our blessed Lord says, All things are delivered
unto me of my Father, and no Man knows the Son but the Father, neither
knows any Man the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him? Matthew. XI. 27. Such evident Proof from the holy Writ, one would
think were enough to convince all who gainsay it.

Seeing then there is no other way to come to the Knowledge of God, but by
Divine Revelation, it is a great Error in Men to deny that which is Essential
to Salvation. This Error crept into the World since the Apostles Days, by going
from the Spirit of Truth, and setting up Idols in its Place, like the Jews of
old, who set up a Calf in the Wilderness, through which they were passing
toward the good Land, and cried, These be thy Gods, O Israel, that brought
thee out of Egypt.

Now, when Men's Hearts are gone from the Lord, they run into Idolatry, and set
up something in their own Will, to please their own Minds; and whilst they
continue in this impenitent State, to such Revelation may cease: For the Lord
has said, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man; although God in his
Mercy to Man (whom he created for a Purpose of his own Glory) gave him a
Measure of his good Spirit to lead him, and invites all in the Son of his Love,
saying, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you Rest. Now, it is certain, there is no greater Burden than Sin, and no
greater need of Rest than to cease from it; which is altogether impossible to
be done, if Revelation be ceased: For no Man knows the Son, but the Father,
neither knows any Man the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
will reveal him: This is confirmed by the Lip of Truth, and the whole World can
never reverse it. Now, how the Wise and Learned Men can stem the Current of
this Testimony, I cannot see. If they deny Revelation, what Spirit must they
learn of, to teach Men to come to Christ? For there is the Center of all
Christian Doctrine; and if Men deny the Way that leads to him, they will never
come to him. (...) blessed be the God of Heaven, the(...) a Remnant upon Earth
who bear a f(...) Testimony to his Name, and dire(...) (...) center in Christ,
where they may (...) these are the true Believers in (...) and these that
retain their Integr(...) (...) their Testimony will stand, (...) able to
Mankind: But whoev(...) human Learning, and place the (...) Ministry there, in
that State (...) find Peace.

Let Men say what they (...) or unlearned, we know (...) Mediator which leads
(...) the divine Influence of his (...) reveals it self to Mankin(...) (...)
their Duty to God and (...) as says the Author to the (...) at sundry times,
and in (...) in time past unto the Fathe(...) (...) has in these last Days
(...) Son, whom he has appointe(...) (...) by whom also he made the (...) the
Brightness of his Glor(...) (...) (...)mage of his Person, and (...) Word of
his Power, (...) purged our Sins, sat dow(...) (...) of the Majesty on high.
(...) lays down our Doctrine(...) (...) (...)old think it might satisfy all
Sorts of Men (...)essing Christianity: But if Men will (...) their Hearts, and
slight the Day of (...) Visitation, the Sun will withdraw its (...), and
Darkness will be their Habi(...) A woeful State indeed! for he that (...)
Darkness, knows not wither he (...) is the very Reason of the Insta(...)
(...) Minds of many, who are run(...) (...) here is, and Lo there is; and (...)
(...)uilding upon the sure Rock are (...) Wind of Doctrine, and are (...) their
Ways.

(...) then, to take hold of Mercy (...), and come to Christ the (...) World:
His Call is unto (...) all ye that are heavy laden, (...) Rest: This is the Sum
of (...) none can find true Peace (...). Therefore, as it (...) have the Light,
believe (...) may be Children of the Light. (...) then this is the Way, (...)
into so many weak (...) their own Peace, (...) Forms of Religion, and (...) to
Christ the Substance? (...) (...)bstance, they find true (...) in the Shadow
and (...)

The Way to come to a State of Conversion, is to learn of Christ through the
divine Influence of his holy Spirit; none ever was converted to Christ but by
it, nor ever will without it. And if People would come to sit down under their
own Vine and under their own Fig Tree, they would not want an outward
Priesthood to teach them. The Prophet Isaiah tells us, It shall be in the last
Days, that the Mountain of the House of the Lord shall be established on the
Top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills, and all Nations
shall flow unto it, Isai. II. 2. The Prophet speaks in general Terms, All
Nations; then surely all Nations must have a Measure of the Spirit of Grace, to
lead them to this Mountain; and who shall dispense this Spirit, but the
Fountain from whence it flods? Great and Learned Men by their Skill in Tongues
cannot do it, no; they (many of them) direct Men to their learned Ministers,
Men who are skilled in Tongues and Books; but the Grace of God directs Men to
Christ, who is the Giver of Divine Knowledge; for there is a saving Knowledge,
and a Historical Knowledge, a Knowledge which saves the Soul, and a Knowledge
which puffs up the Mind; and that Mind that is led by a wrong Spirit, is too
apt to think it self safe, and guards it self with Natural Reason; but saving
Knowledge looks to its Center, from whence it came. Now, learned Men from Human
Learning can never bring Men to saving Knowledge; no: We find Paul was a
learned Man, and zealous in the way he was learned in; and in that learned Zeal
persecuted the Church of Christ: But when the Light shone round about him, as
he journied to Damascus, the Vision brought him to saving Knowledge; it was
then no more outward Learning which he depended on, but Christ the Power of God
unto Salvation. Oh! then he became a true Minister of Christ, and then he saw
the Effect of the Ministry of Christ; he then saw, it was not limited to Time,
nor Place, nor School-Learning, nor to preach for Hire by the Year, no; it was
a free Ministry, freely received, and freely dispensed to Mankind.

But some will say, By this Man's writing we must have no Ministers to teach
us, nor have any Meetings of Worship to go to, but every Man is left to the
Light of Nature to do as he pleases? This is the Way that some will argue; but
there is nothing further from my Thoughts. For the Tendency of my Labor is, To
bring Man to the Knowledge of God through Jesus Christ; for that is Life
eternal. I am not against Meetings of Worship, to worship the true God in
Spirit and in Truth, nor am I against Ministers, to preach or teach the People;
but I would have them be taught by the Spirit of Christ so to do. Were this
observed, we should all be in Unity one with another; and it is the Want of this
keeps us so wide apart, the more is the Pity. But the Satisfaction which would
result from such an Union, we are not yet come to, although much desired by the
honest-hearted. In all gatherings, where an uncharitable Opinion is let in, in
any Society, they lose Ground from the Christian Principle; for as Truth leads
Men to Christ, so Contest and Debate in a wrong Spirit scatters from him. Men
may toil all Night about their Forms, and catch nothing till Daylight come,
that they see Christ. Oh! he that told his Disciples to cast the Net on the
right Side, must direct Men still, or they may toil all Night in vain: Forms
and Shadows are but Night-work without the Life and Power. The one stands in
Man's Will, the other in the Power of an endless Life. They that rest in Forms,
are like a troubled Sea; but those who are in Christ, they are in Peace. Now,
Christ has dispensed his Grace to all Mankind, that thereby all the Ends of the
Earth may look unto him, and be saved; this is the Effect of his great Love; it
is expressed in general Terms to all; none are exempted from him that will come
to him. And blessed be the Lord, he has raised up a Ministry and People to bear
a Testimony to his Name, which the World can neither refute nor confound, who
have been like Trumpets to the Nations, by whom many have been awakened out of
that drowsy Ease they were in, been convinced and converted. And if Men would
come to hear Truth, and not sit down at Ease with slumbering Eyes, half awake
and half asleep, there would not be such Blindness amongst Men as there is, nor
such Contest as there is, running after Lo! here, and Lo! there. These being
abroad, lose the Blessing, for want of being at home: But my Counsel is to
such, Retire and repair home, before your Sands of Time be run, before the
Midnight-cry be come upon you. Oh! remember, at that Time there is none can
enter in, but those who have Oil in their Lamps: It was so in the Parable, and
so it will undoubtedly be. Oh! then where will all your empty Forms be? For
want of Oil your Lamps will go out; 'twill be too late then to buy or borrow,
and the Wise will not have to spare. Be persuaded then to take hold of Mercy in
the Day of Mercy, and here improve your Time whilst it is to Day; close with the
Offers of his Love, whilst Mercy is extended to you, before the Sun be set upon
you, and the Curtains of the Night be drawn. Oh! remember, in the Grave there
is no Repentance; it is here in Time ye must return, or else ye are lost for
ever. Oh! trifle not with Eternity, nor slight the Day of your Visitation:
Despise not the Reproofs of Instruction, but hear them, lest Darkness overtake
you. Remember what a woeful State that is; for he that walks in Darkness
knows not whither he goes. Oh! then prize the blessed Light and walk in it;
it will lead you in the Way to Peace: Despise it not to your own Destruction;
for that will comprehend your Darkness, and your wonted scoffs against it, will
vanish away. Oh! remember these Things, whilst here you have Time to remember
them in.

Oh! what was it that strengthened Daniel, and gave him Power to stand so
valiantly for his God, but the Influence of that divine Spirit I have been
speaking of? He feared not the evil Counselors, nor the King's Rage; he
mattered not their Images, nor all their threatening Tortures; he would not bow
down to any but the true God, no, neither the Image nor the Beast could deceive
him; he saw the little Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, which broke
the Image and all his Compounds. And that Stone which Daniel saw, is able to
break all the Images in our Days; and those that are led by the Spirit of
Truth, see the Image when it is set up, and by that Spirit they fear it not,
nor bow down to it; but those that are not led by that Spirit that Daniel was,
will sooner bow than go to the Lion's Den: But I would have all to trust in
that God that Daniel did, and they shall be preserved as he was.

Diverse Instances might be brought out of the Book of Martyrs, to corroborate
this Doctrine, and to show how zealous and faithful they were to their
Testimony in their Days; Fire and Faggot were trying Things surely, and they
must have had something more than Human Learnings or Notional Forms to support
them, or they could not have stood the Trial of that Day; they were led by that
Spirit that Daniel was, no doubt, and that supported them as it did him, and
enabled them to refuse the worship of Images in their Day, and to offer their
Bodies living Sacrifices to God. Now, bring this home to this Age we live in,
and see how remiss too too many are in their Duty to God, that have known a Day
of good Things: Oh! how does Pride abound in this Land in too too many! Well,
let such know that Dust and Worms will be their Portion, and their haughty
Spirit will some Time be brought low.

But to return the holy Martyrs, History informs us, That Richard Woodman, a
valiant Martyr, his first Examination before one of the dark Romish Bishops in
those Days, was as follows:

Bishop. What is your Name?


Woodman. My Name is Richard Woodman.


Bishop. I am sorry for you, you have been a Man of good Report and Esteem in
your Country till now of late; therefore look to your self, your Wife, and
Children, and Friends, and be ruled; and think not your self wiser than all the
Realm, but be informed; and you shall have their Favor as much as ever you had.


Woodman. My Life, my Wife and my Children, I love them, but they are in God's
Hands, and I have them as if I had them not.


Bishop. The Sheriff told me you were desirous to speak with me.


Woodman. I thought meet to appeal to you; because you have taken upon you to
be the Physician of our Country: For many unjust Things are laid to my Charge,
and they seek my Blood; and I have appealed unto you, that if my Blood be shed
unrighteously, it might be required at your Hand.


Dr. Story. Is not this a perverse Fellow? Do thou think thou shall be put to
Death unjustly, and that thy Blood shall be required? No, said he; and further
added, That he could condemn an Hundred such Heretics, and threatened he would
help to rid them.

Then Woodman would have answered, but the Bishop desired them both to give him
Place.


Bishop. Well, Neighbor Woodman, I call you Neighbor, because you are of my
Diocese, and you are sent to me, that I should give you spiritual Counsel; for
I am your spiritual Pastor: Hear what I say unto you.


Woodman. First I desire you to hear me a few Words. You have said, you will
give me spiritual Counsel; are you sure you have the Spirit of God? [here the
Martyr tried him, and shook his Copyhold Religion]


Bishop. No, I am not sure, I dare not be so bold to say so.


Woodman. Then you are like the Waves of the Sea, tossed about with every Wind,
and unstable in all your Ways, and can look for no good thing at the Lord's
Hand. [How firm the Martyr takes the Spirit of Truth for his Guide] He further
goes on, Yea, says he, you are neither hot nor cold, and therefore God will
spue you out of his Mouth.

Then in a Fury Story said, What a perverse Fellow is this? He has a Devil in
him, and is mad. And the Bishop said, He was sent to me to learn, and he takes
upon him to teach me.

Then Richard Woodman seeing their Blindness and Blasphemy, it made such an
Impression upon him, that his Heart was most melted, and his Eyes gusht out
with Tears, and he spoke to them after this Manner: The Jews said to Christ, He
had a Devil, and was mad, as you have here said to me; but I know, the Servant
is not above his Master: And God forbid I should learn of him that confesses
he has not the Spirit of God.


Bishop. Why do you think you have the Spirit of God? You boast more than ever
Paul did, or any of the Apostles, the which is great Presumption.


Woodman. I boast not in my self, but in the Gift of God, as Paul did, who
said, He verily believed that he had the Spirit of God, making no Question
thereof, 1 Cor. VII.


Chichester. It is not so, you belie the Text.


Woodman. If it be not so, let me be burnt to Morrow.

Here we may see, how valiant the Martyr was for the Truth, which he had
learned through the Grace of God in Christ Jesus, which Grace led him into all
Truth; and that Grace and Spirit supported him triumphingly through all those
fiery Trials. But hear yet further this holy Man, what a Godly Zeal he had for
God in his Day: No Man, says he, can believe that Jesus is Lord, but by the
Holy Ghost: For he that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his. And
again, We have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father;
the same Spirit certifieth us that we are the Sons of God. Also John says, He
that believes not, that Christ is come in the Flesh, is an Antichrist, and
denies both the Father and the Son: Further adding, And he that believes in
God, dwells in God, and God in him.

Julius Palmer at Newberry, before Doctor Jeffries, Bishop of Sarum, and
others, gives this Account of his Faith and Hope in the Lord, being enabled by
the Spirit of Truth so to do. After many needless Questions put to him, he
answered very boldy in the Lord:

I know, that of my self I am able to do nothing; yet if you and all mine
Enemies should do your worst, you shall not be able to bring that to pass,
[meaning to bring him to their Superstition] neither shall you prevail against
God's mighty Spirit, by which we understand the Truth, and speak it so boldly.


Bishop. Ah! are you full of the Spirit? Are you inspired with the Holy Ghost?


Jul. Palmer. No Man can believe but by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost;
therefore, if I were not a spiritual Man and inspired with God's Holy Spirit, I
were not a true Christian; he that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of
his.


Bishop. I perceive you lack no Words.


Palmer. Christ has promised not only to give us Store of Words necessary, but
with them such Force of Matter, as the Gates of Hell shall not be able to
confound or prevail against it.


Bishop. Christ made such a Promise to his Apostles; you will not compare with
them.


Palmer. With the Apostles I may not compare; but this I am certain pertains
to all such as are appointed to defend God's Truth against his Enemies, in the
time of their Persecution for the same.


Bishop. Then it pertains not unto thee.


Palmer. Yes, I am right well assured that it pertains unto me; as it shall
appear, if you will give me Leave to dispute with you before this Audience, in
the Defense of all that I have there written.


Bishop. Thou art but a beardless Boy, start up Yesterday out of the Schools;
and dare thou presume to offer Disputation, or to encounter with a Doctor?


Palmer. Remember Mr. Doctor, The Spirit breaths where it pleases, etc. And,
Out of the Mouth of Babes etc. And, Thou have hid these Things from the Wise,
etc. God is not tied to Time, Wit, Learning, Place, nor Person. Thus far that
worthy Martyr Palmer. And had the Envy of that Age thought on it, might have
branded him for a Quaker, with many more of those who were faithful in their
Day; diverse of whom, according to the Book of Martyrs, preached against Tithes
and Swearing upon a Book, and that some worthy Women preached, who were joined
to Christ's little Flock.

Agnes Ashford, being one of the said People, for preaching these Words
following, was articled against, viz. We be the Salt of the Earth; if it be
putrified and vanished away, it is nothing worth: A City upon a Hill may not be
hid: Ye light not a Candle and put it under a Bushel, but set it on a
Candlestick, that it may give a Light to all in the House: So shine your Light
before Men, that they may see your Works, and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven. And further she did teach, saying, Jesus seeing his People, as he went
up a Hill, was set, and his Disciples came to him, he opened his Mouth and
taught them, saying, Blessed be the poor Men in Spirit; for the Kingdom of
Heaven is theirs: Blessed be the mild Men; for they shall rule the Earth. For
teaching this Doctrine, the Bishop strictly enjoined and commanded her to teach
no more Lessons to any Men, especially to her Children.

Many more might be instanced out of the Book of Martyrs, which I omit for
Brevity's sake, which showed their Christian Zeal, and what Spirit they were
led by, how the the Doctrine they taught agrees with the Doctrine of the People
called Quakers in this Day. For let Men draw up what Forms they will, and make
what Show of Worship they will; till they come to know Christ to be their
Teacher through the divine Influence of the Holy Spirit of Grace which proceeds
from the Father and the Son, they worship but an Image, a Shadow in stead of a
Substance.


So this I do affirm and lay down for Christian Doctrine, CHRIST JESUS which
was with the Father before the World was, by whom all Things were made, this is
the WORD we must hear, this is the Teacher we must learn of. It Is not the Forms
Men can make will bring the Soul true Peace, no, it is nothing but that WORD
that gave it a Being can give it Peace.

Now, if Men would come to be led by the Spirit of Truth, they would soon leave
off Contention, and be of the Woman of Samaria's Mind, Come see a Man that told
me all that ever I did: Is not this the Christ? Here she was touched with a
lively Sense by the divine Influence of the Holy Spirit; and her
Fellow-Citizens when they heard the same Christ, they came to be of the same
Mind she was of; their Eyes were then no more to Jerusalem, no more to the
Mount; no, a Savior was come, and him they believed in. Oh! then the Angel of
his Presence was come; Oh! then the Fountain was open; Drink, and thirst no
more: Oh! blessed Enjoyment, O! heavenly Solace! what would Man have more? O!
that Men would prize the Mercy offered to them in this the Day of his Love, and
come to drink of this Fountain that springs up to Eternal Life; and not break
their own Peace by choosing Darkness rather than Light, which leads to the
Chambers of Death.

So Friendly Reader, thou have a Soul to save, or to lose, and Life and Death
is set before thee; a Savior is nigh unto all, that all may be saved by him;
there is none exempted that will come to him: And in Order that thou may come
to him, he has given thee a Measure of his good Spirit to lead thee: This it is
thy Duty to hear, to follow, and to obey: It proceeded from him, and it will
lead to him. Time would fail to say all that might be said or writ on this
Subject, to wit, CHRIST the Teacher of his People. And there are many Volumes
extant wrote by worthy Men, who are gone to their Rest, and whose Works follow
them, whose Memory is dear to Posterity. Therefore I shall draw to a
Conclusion, greatly desiring all the Inhabitants of this Land may prize the Day
of Mercy while it is called To Day. You have enjoyed great Blessings beyond
many Nations: You have had the Angel of his Presence to surround you, when many
have been involved in Blood: Have a Care you don't incur his Wrath upon you by
your Disobedience; for he is a God of Justice as well as of Mercy. My honest
Caution can do no Harm, if it finds no Room in the Crowd of worldly Minds.

So to CHRIST the WORD nigh in the Heart I recommend my Reader; there is no
other Way will bring the Soul to Peace: And shall conclude this little Piece
with the Supplication following:

AND now, O LORD, if it stands good with thy Divine Will, cause thou the Light
of thy Countenance to shine upon the Children of Men, whom thou have created
for a Purpose of thy Glory: Let the Sun of thy Love arise and shine more and
more upon them, that they may see the Day of their Redemption, and thereby
livingly come to praise thee. And those that are in Darkness and Hardness of
Heart, O LORD enlighten their Understandings, and tender their hard Hearts, in
Order to their Salvation. Keep those that are in thy Way to the End of their
Pilgrimage: And those who are wandering from thy Pold, do thou be pleased to
bring Home, that they may come to worship thee the true GOD in thy own Way.
Grant this, O LORD, to the Children of Men, in and through thy dearly beloved
Son, our blessed LORD and dear Redeemer JESUS CHRIST. To whom with thee be all
Glory and Honor ascribed now and for evermore. Amen.


