Mr. Chauncy's SERMON ON Religious Compulsion

The only Compulsion proper to be made Use of in the Affairs of Conscience and
Religion.

A SERMON Preached at the Old Brick Meeting House in Boston, September 2d 1739.
And Printed at the Desire of many who heard it.

By Charles Chauncy, A. M. One of the Pastors of the First Church in said Town.

-- Humani juris et naturalis potestatis est unicuique quod putaverit colere;
nec alii obest aut prodest alterius religio: Sed nec religionis est cogere
religionem, quae sponte suscipi debeat, non vi.

Tertull. ad Scapulam. C. ii. BOSTON: Printed by J. DRAPER, for J. EDWARDS, in
Cornhil. MDCCXXXIX.

THE NATURE OF Religious Compulsion.
LUKE xiv. 23. -- Compel them to come in. --


IT was a common Thing with our Savior, to discourse to his Hearers in
parabolical Language: And his View herein (at least in Part) might be to
accommodate himself to their Capacities, and take greater Hold on their Hearts;
For there is no Way of Speaking, that more easily and familiarly conveys Truth
into the Mind, or more strongly impresses it there.

The Words I have selected to employ our present Meditations, are Part of the
Parable of the Supper: Concerning which, it may suffice to observe in general,
That the Blessings of the Gospel-State are here compared to a Supper: The
Persons firstly invited to it were the Jews; but these making light of the
Invitation, and excusing themselves from an Attendance at it, the Gentiles were
then called in, the Gentiles of all Sorts and Kinds; and this, while the Jews
were left under that Blindness of Mind and Hardness of Heart, in which they
continue to this Day.

The Text falls in that Part of the Parable, which concerns the Gentiles; and
is a Command to enforce their Acceptance of the Gospel Offer of Mercy, with all
the Methods of Persuasion, with all the Motives and Arguments, suited to work
upon the Reason and Understanding of Men. Says our Lord to the Servant, Compel
them to come in: In discoursing to which Words, I shall do two Things.

I. Explain to you the Meaning of that Compulsion, which our Savior here
recommends. And then,

II. Do the Duty enjoined the Servant in the Text, by endeavoring to compel
you to come in, and partake of the Gospel Supper.

I. I am to explain to you the Meaning of that Compulsion, which our Savior
here recommends. Says he to the Servant in my Text, Compel them to come in. But
what are we to understand by this Compulsion? Of what Sort of Compulsion does
our Lord speak?

Now, it is plain, he here speaks, not of physical, but moral Compulsion; not of
Compulsion by outward Violence, but internal Persuasion; that which is
effected, not by Fines, Imprisonments, Racks and Tortures, but by Application
to the Understandings of Men. The Compulsion, our Savior intends, is of that
Kind, which the Mind of Man is capable of, and is suitable to it as rational and
intelligent: And this is Compulsion by sound Reasoning, good Argument.

Compel them to come in; It Is is if our Lord had said, Argue with them about
coming in to the Gospel Kingdom; apply to their Reason and Conscience; inform
their Understanding; convince their Judgment; make Use of those Persuasions,
lay before them those Motives and Arguments, which will leave them inexcusable,
if they are not wro't upon; if they are not, in the moral Sense, compelled to
come in.

This is the plain Meaning of the Phrase; nor is its Sense at all difficult or
perplexed: And yet, as if Men had a Design to misunderstand our Savior, they
have taken Occasion from this, and such like Texts, to introduce that Sort of
Compulsion into Religion, which can never be justified, either by Reason or
Revelation.

This is particularly true of the Church of Rome, who interpret my Text as a
Divine Warrant to make Use of Force and Violence in the Affairs of Conscience
and Salvation. Instead of Reason and Argument; at least, together with it, they
suppose our Savior means Fire and Faggot: And if this is what he had in View,
they have, it must be acknowledged, most punctually complied with his Command;
as not having omitted any Kind of outward Violence, however barbarous and
inhumane. But it is impossible our Savior should have had it in his Thoughts to
recommend this Sort of Compulsion: To be sure, if we may judge, either from his
Example, the Nature of his Gospel, or indeed from the Reason of Things, this
was one of the last Methods he would ever have recommended.

As for the Example of Christ, this was ever against the Use of Force in
Matters of Religion and Conscience. He never compelled Men to embrace his
Gospel; never made Use of the Art (which has since been found out* and so often
put in Practice) of enlightening Men's Consciences, by fining their Estates, or
imprisoning their Persons, or abusing their Bodies; tying them to the
Whipping-Post, Gibbet or Gallows. He did not go about, in any of these Methods
of Force, to propagate his Religion; but in the gentle Methods of Persuasion.
That was his Manner in making Proselytes to his Religion, If any Man will, let
him be my Disciple. If any Man will, let him follow me. Will ye also go away?
He used Violence with no Man; but applied to all, in a Way suited to their Make
as Men: Reasoning the Case with them, offering Light to their Understandings,
and Conviction to their Consciences; but after all, leaving it to their own
free Choice, whether they would reject or receive Him and his Gospel.

And it is remarkable, when his Disciples, in a Fit of religious Zeal, would
have called for Fire from Heaven, to destroy those who would not receive him,
he very seasonably gave a Check to it; informing them, how contrary such a
Spirit and Conduct was, to the Design of his coming, which was to save, not to
destroy Men's Lives. Says the Evangelist Luke, who gives the Account of this
Matter, Luke xix. 55, 56.
He turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye
are of. For the Son of Man is not come to destroy Men's Lives, but to save
them. Our Lord, you see, with a greater Severity than ordinary, corrected this
burning Zeal of his Disciples; and this; though it was a religious Zeal; and
the Object of it, those who rejected and despised, both Him and his Doctrine.
And he ever discountenanced religious Fury and Rage, in all the Acts and
Instances of it: To be sure, he did so by his Example; for he never once, in
his whole Life, did any Thing that looked like persecuting Men for Religion. So
far from it, that he was always calm and peaceable, and treated even his
greatest Opposers with all Meekness and Mildness. His Concern was to serve the
Interest of Men's Souls; and if he could do this in the Methods proper to be
used with Men, i. e. by Persuasion and Argument, he was not wanting in his
Endeavors: but he would not make Use of Force, nor in a compulsive Way have
any Thing to do with them.

And the Gospel of Christ as little favors the Use of Violence in Matters of
Religion as his Example: Yea, the Use of Force is absolutely inconsistent with
the Nature of that Kingdom, the Gospel was intended to set on Foot in the
World. So speaks our Savior in those express Words, John xviii. 36. My Kingdom
is not of this World. i. e. It Is not like earthly Kingdoms and Monarchies,
which are established with a View to Men's worldly Happiness, and are
accordingly supported and guarded with worldly Sanctions: But it is a Kingdom of
a quite different Kind, a Kingdom that is spiritual, having to do with Men's
Souls, not their Bodies; with their eternal, not their temporal Concerns: And
being a Kingdom thus spiritual in its Nature and Design, its Sanctions are of
the same Kind; its Weapons not carnal, but spiritual: It exercises no Dominion
over Men's Estates or Bodies; it makes no Use of secular Force. For so it
follows in the next Words, If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my
Servants fight. i. e. they would, in a Way of Force, defend my Person and my
Doctrine: But, as a sure Evidence of the Truth of what I have said, that my
Kingdom is not like the Kingdoms of this World, my Subjects and Servants make
Use of none of the Methods of Hostility and Violence: Or if they do, it is not
with my Approbation, they act not by Commission from me. And indeed, so far was
our Savior from encouraging the Subjects of his Kingdom, to do any Thing in a
Way of external Violence, though it were in Protection even of his very Person,
that when one of them, upon such an Occasion, drew his Sword, he instantly gave
forth his Command, Put up again thy Sword into his Place; and added upon it, in
those solemn Words, All they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword
Mat. xxvi. 52.
.

Nor is the Use of Force in religious Matters less contrary to the Gospel
Precepts, than it is to the Nature of the Gospel Kingdom: Nay, such a Method of
dealing with Men is contrary to what runs through the whole Gospel, as its
peculiar and distinguishing Spirit and Genius. That of loving one another, of
loving even all Men, Enemies as well as Friends, those who embrace Error as
well as those who believe the Truth; yea, Pagans and Infidels, as well as
Christians, is the Commandment of the Gospel, by Way of Eminence and
Distinction. Says our Lord, John xv. 12.
This is MY COMMANDMENT, that ye love one another. And again, John xiii. 34.
A NEW COMMANDMENT I give unto you, that ye love one another; as I have loved
you, that ye also love one another. And again, V 35.
By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to
another. Men of all Professions and Religions are known by some peculiar Badge
and Character, So the Jews were distinguished by their Adherence to the Law of
Moses; and the Pharisees among the Jews, by their Habit and Separation from
other Men: But our Savior would have his Disciples known and distinguished by
their Benignity of Temper, their Love and Charity; expressing it self in all
the Acts of true Kindness and Beneficence. And he requires it of Christians, so
far to exceed all others in all the Instances of real Love and Benevolence, as
that this may be a Characteristick, a Mark by which to distinguish them from
all other Men: So contrary is all Hatred and Strife, all uncharitable and ill
treating one another, to the Precepts of the Gospel.

It may perhaps be pretended, it is from true Charity to Men, a Love to their
Souls, a real Concern for their eternal Interest, that the Methods of Violence
are used with them, that they are called to undergo Hardships and Sufferings in
their Bodies or Estates. But the Gospel knows of no such Methods of Love and
Charity: Nor is it Love to Men's Souls; but the Love of this World, the Love of
Power, the Love of Tyranny over Men's Consciences, that puts Men upon the
Methods of Force, to bring others to be of the same Profession and Principles
with themselves. What the Scripture says of the Wisdom, is as true of the Love,
that is from above, James iii. 17.
It is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of
Mercy and good Fruits. And that ought always to be the Character of those, who
call themselves the Servants of God, They strive not, but are gentle to all
Men, patient; In Meekness instructing those who oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth 2 Timothy
ii, 24, 25.
.

This is the Temper and Conduct, which the Gospel requires in Matters of
Religion. Its Precepts are directly calculated to encourage and promote Peace
and Good Will among Men: Nor can any Thing be more opposite to the Design and
Spirit of the Christian Religion, than for Men to bite and devour one another,
injure and male-treat each other: Nor does it at all alter the Case, though they
should do this under the Pretext of Zeal for God, or the most passionate
Concern for the Salvation of Souls.

We ought, it is true, to have near our Heart the Glory of God, and the
spiritual and eternal Good of our friends and Neighbors; yea, of all Men: But
we are much mistaken, if we imagine, that we can either do Honor to God, or
Service to the Souls of Men, in the Methods of Wrath and Anger and Clamor: No,
our Concern for the spiritual Good of others ought principally to express it
self, in instructing those who are out of the Way, and oppose the Truth, not,
as Gideon did the Men of Succoth, with Briers and Thorns; but with Meekness of
Wisdom. For Anger rests in the Bosom of Fools, as the wise Man speaks Eccles.
vii. 9.
: And, as the Apostle observes, The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness
of God James i. 20.
. If we are fierce and furious, and of a Temper disposing and engaging us, to
convert Men's Souls by abusing their Bodies, we are in an exceeding bad Frame
of Mind. For Zeal without Charity, a Zeal that would put us upon calling for
Fire from Heaven, or the Sword from the Earth, to destroy Men's Bodies, for the
good of their Souls, is as opposite to the Gospel, as contradictory to its
great and fundamental Precepts, as any Thing we would rectify, that we suppose
to be amiss in others.

But the Use of Force, in Matters of Religion and Conscience, is not only
contrary to the Example of Christ, and the Precepts of his Gospel; but to the
Nature and Reason of Things. It Is in it self a Method altogether unsuted to
Work upon the Minds of Men. For whatever Influence it may have upon their
Bodies, it can have none on their Souls. It conveys no Light into the Mind; it
brings no Conviction to the Judgment and Conscience; it effects no Alteration
in Men's Thoughts and Sentiments: But after all that can be done, in a Way of
Compulsion, Men's Minds will be the same; they will entertain the same Thot's;
the same Notions and Principles; and will, in the moral Sense, remain just the
same Persons. Nor is there the least Sutableness in external Force to move the
Soul, in any of its rational Operations: Yea, it is as absurd and ridiculous to
make Use of Force to affect the Mind and Conscience, as it would be to make Use
of Reason and Argument to affect the bodily Senses. Force is proper to the
Body, Reason to the Mind: And it is plainly an inverting the Order of Nature, to
make Use of that with Reference to the Soul, which is adapted, in its Use, only
to the Body: Nor let Men use what Violence they please, will it have the least
Influence upon Men, to make them truly religious. It may put them upon making
an outside Appearance in Religion, i. e. It may make them Hypocrites, it may
make them deal deceitfully both with God and Man, and often does so; but it can
never make them good Christians. It may put them upon professing with their
Mouths, or worshipping with their Bodies, as those, in whose Power they are,
would have them; but there is no Value, religiously speaking, in such
Professions and Worship: Nor indeed is there the least true Religion in any of
those Actions that are the Result, not of Reason and Conscience, but of Force
and Violence.

Not but that Men may, consistent with Reason, be restrained from these or
those vicious Practices. The civil Good of Society may make such Restraints
necessary: And whenever it does so, they are reasonable; Men ought to be laid
under them. Bat then it must, at the same Time, be remembered, there is no
Religion in their abstaining from these or those Vices, while their abstaining
from them is the Effect of external Force. As Men are rational, free Agents,
they cannot be religious but with the free Consent of their Wills; and this can
be gained in no Way, but that of Reason and Persuasion. Compulsion is of no
Significancy here. It has no Influence to persuade the Will; but rather the
contrary: Nor was any Man ever forced to be religious.

Nay, even God himself does not, in this Way, go about to make Men religious.
He uses Violence with no Man; forces no One, contrary to his Will, to betake
himself to a religious Course. Whenever he draws Men to a Life of Holiness,
it is with the Cords of a Man, and with the Bands of Love. i. e. in a Way suited
to their Character as Men; in a Way adapted to their Make as free Agents. He
does not make Use of the Methods of Force, turning Men from Sin to himself,
whether they will, or no; but so manages the Affair, as to gain the free and
full Consent of their Wills. He opens the Eyes of their Mind, and gives them to
see the Ugliness of Sin, the Beauty of Holiness, the Need they stand in of
Christ, his Sufficiency and infinite Readiness to be a Savior to them; and he
gives them such a Sight of these Things, such an Apprehension and Persuasion of
them, as they never had before: And having thus removed the Ignorance that was
in them, through the Blindness of their Mind, he persuades and enables them to
choose and act, according to the Dictates of their enlightened Understanding. And
so, the whole of what he does, is in a Way suited to their Character, as
Creatures endowed with Reason, and a Capacity of making a free Choice.

And this is the only Way, in which Men ought to be dealt with. It Is the Way
that is suited to their Nature; it is the Way which infinite Wisdom thinks proper
to take with them: And to leave this Way, and go into that of Force and
Compulsion, -- there is no Foundation for it in the Reason of Things; it is
altogether absurd and inconsistent.

And thus we have seen, what that Compulsion is, which our Savior recommends
in the Text; that it is not a physical, but moral Compulsion: A Compulsion not
by outward Force, but internal Persuasion; a Compulsion by Reason and Argument,
which is the only Compulsion, that is proper to be used with Men, who are
rational and free Agents.

And now, considering what has been said, how contrary external Force is to the
Example of Christ, to the Gospel of Christ, and to the Reason of Things, way we
not even wonder, that this is a Method that has been so much in Practice, in
the Affairs of Religion and Conscience? It has all along been the grand Engine,
in the Church of Rome, to make Men Proselytes to their Way of Worship. And what
they have wanted in Reason and Argument to bring this about, they have made up
in wholesome Severities; and they have gone on in the Use of these, from one
Step to another, till they have arrived at the Height of Barbarity: Insomuch
that there is scarce any Kind of Cruelty, however unmerciful, but they have
practiced it. They have plundered Men's Estates; they have imprisoned their
Persons; they have banished them from their Families, their Wives and their
Children: Yea, they have destroyed their Bodies; and this, in all the Ways of
Cruelty, that Inhumanity itself has been capable of inventing. And all this
they have done, under Pretense of Zeal for the Honor of God and Christ, and to
serve the Interest of Religion: Yea, they have barbarously murdered Men's
Bodies, at the same Time, pretending the greatest Love and Charity to their
Souls.

It could scarce be believed, that Men should act so much in Contradiction to
the most plain and the most fundamental Precepts of the Christian Religion, and
all the while pretend a zealous Regard to them, but that it is a Fact, that can
neither be disputed nor denied. It Is really an astonishing Thing, that the
Christian Institution, which is so full of Love and Charity, and is intended
and calculated to promote Peace on Earth, and Good Will toward Men, should be
the Occasion of so much Hatred and Ill Nature, of so much unmerciful Barbarity
and Cruelty! And yet, this is no more than what our Lord both foresaw and
foretold. Says he to his Disciples, Mat. x. 34.
Think not that I am come to send Peace on Earth: I am not come to send Peace,
but a Sword. And again, Luke xii. 51.
Suppose ye that I am come to give Peace on Earth? I tell you nay; but rather
Division. The Words are not to be interpreted of the Design, but Effect of
Christ's coming; what would follow thereupon, not in the Way of natural
Tendency, but through the Wickedness of Men, in Words professing a Regard to him,
but in Works denying him. The Design of Christ's coming was not to send a
Sword, but to give Peace on Earth: And to this End the Laws of his Gospel are
admirably well contrived: Insomuch, that if Men did but pay a due Regard to
them, there would be no Strife and Contention, no Persecution, nor ill using of
Mankind: No, not for the Sake of their Souls, any more than on other Accounts.
But the Effect of Christ's coming has been quite different from the Design of
it: Instead of Peace, it has, as our Savior foretold, unhappily bro't a Sword;
and this, to the most shameful Degree. Those who have called themselves
Christians, have taken Occasion, even from the very Gospel of Peace, to devour
with the Sword; committing all manner of Barbarities, the most horrid
Blood-sheds. As was prophesied of the Church of Rome, under the Figure of a
Beast exceeding dreadful, whose Teeth were of Iron, whose Nails were Brass, she
has made War with the Saints, and prevailed against them, and worn them out;
yea, she has devoured the whole Earth, has trodden it down, and broken it in
Pieces: Or, as the Apostle John prophesies of the same Thing, under the Figure
of a Woman whose Name is, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH,
she has been drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus: Which, when he saw in Vision, he said upon it, as he had
infinite Reason to do, I WONDERED WITH GREAT ADMIRATION.

Nor are those of the Church of Rome the only Ones, who have come into the Use
of Compulsion and Force in the Business of Religion and Men's Salvation. Even
Protestants themselves, of whom it could never have been expected, have too
nearly resembled them in this Antichristian Practice. And indeed, this Spirit
of Popery, the tyrannising over Men's Consciences, has been too much in Use,
throughout the whole Christian World, in all Ages Nor have any, among
Christians, been more ready to practice themselves, and recommend to others,
the Method of secular Discipline, than many among the Clergy. They have not
only been Enemies to a Freedom of Inquiry, and the Right of private Judgment;
they have not only been zealous to make Creeds, and impose the Belief of them
on others; they have not only delivered over to Satan those, who were so
unhappy as to differ from them, though in Points of more Nicety than Importance;
I say, they have not only come into such Methods as these, but have also
stirred up the civil Magistrate, and got those fined, or whipped, or hanged, or
burnt, who could not bring their Consciences to a Compliance with their
Decisions in Matters of Faith. And for the Proof of this, we may appeal to the
whole Series of Ecclesiastical History, which contains little else but such
Matters as these.

O let it be for a Lamentation, that the GRAND CHARACTERISTICK of the GREAT
WHORE OF BABYLON, viz. the SPIRIT OF PERSECUTION, the introducing Compulsion
into the Affairs of Conscience and another World, has been so generally
visible, in a less or greater Degree, upon all Sorts of Christians! And the
rather, because it has been the Occasion of so much Dishonor to Christ, and
Reflection on his Gospel; and is so great a Reproach to the Christian Name.

It Is worthy our thankful Notice, that the Principles of Liberty By Liberty, I
mean not Licenciousness, which is the Excess in Liberty; as Intemperance is the
Excess in eating and drinking. And as it is no Argument, that Men ought not to
eat or drink, because they may be intemperate; so neither is it an Argument,
that they may not have the Use of Liberty, because they may be licencious. The
Abuse of any Thing is no Argument against its Use; nor against our
Thankfulness, that we are favored with its Use.
are every Day gaining Ground in our Nation; and that I use here the Words of
the Rev. Mr. Samuel Chandler, in his excellent Book, entitled, Reflections on
the Conduct of the modern Deists. Page 12.
a censorious persecuting Bigot is generally looked upon with Contempt, and
treated as a common Enemy to Mankind. It ought also to be mentioned to the
Honor of the Government at Home, that Ibid. Page 13.15.
it is just and generous, invades no Man's Right of Conscience, nor threatens
him with Punishment for the greatest Difference of Judgment, in Matters of
Religion: Insomuch, that not only Dissenters from the public Establishment are
tolerated, and secured in many of their Rights as Men and Christians; but even
Dissenters from Christianity itself, have been suffered to enjoy and publish
their Sentiments, without any other Opposition but that of Reason and Argument.

God Almighty protect the Persons, and prolong the Lives of his present
Majesty, his Royal Highness, with the rest of the Royal Family, on whom, under
God, the Nation depends for their Enjoyment of this Blessing of Liberty, on
which depends every Thing else that is dear and valuable to them. And may this
greatest of temporal Blessings be continued to them, in its full Extent, as
long as the Sun and the Moon shall endure!

And as for us, the professed Disciples of Christ, in this Land, Let us stand
fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. And as we have appeared
against the Methods of Force in Matters of Religion, against the Impositions of
Men in the Worship of God, let us go on to do so; esteeming it to be our Glory.
And let us always plead for the Use of Liberty in the Affairs of our Souls, and
another World: And if any should claim a Power to bind those Things upon the
Consciences of Men, which Christ has not commanded, and should enforce their
Impositions with the Sanctions of this World, let us esteem them, as having
upon them, in this Respect, the Mark of the Beast. And let that be our
Language, O my Soul, come not thou into their secret; to their Assembly, mine
Honor, be not thou united.

II. But it is time that I come, in the second Place, to do the Duty enjoined
the Servant in the Text, by endeavoring to compel you to come in, and partake
of the Gospel Supper.

Only, let me previously observe, that by the Gospel Supper, we are here to
understand the Blessings of the Gospel State; the Mercies promised and offered
in the Dispensation, by Jesus Christ. These Blessings are here compared to a
Supper, and in the parallel Place in Matthew's Gospel, to a Marriage Feast: By
which is denoted the Plenty of these Blessings; that there is a full Provision
of them in the Gospel; which all may partake of upon Free-cost, who will come
and accept of them.

Having said this, I shall now make it my Business to compel you to come, and
partake of this Supper.

1. And I would compel you, in the first Place, by minding you of the Person,
who invites you to it. And this is none other than the infinite and eternal
God. For he is the Person meant by the certain Man, in the beginning of this
Parable; or, by the certain King, as it is in Matthew's Gospel. And shall we not
accept an Invitation from the King of Heaven? Where is our Ambition? Where our
Sense of Honor? If on of the Kings of the Earth should invite us to an
Entertainment, how should we esteem our selves honored? With what Readiness
should we embrace the Opportunity of setting down with him at his Table? And
shall we make light of an Invitation from him, who is infinitely higher than
the Kings of the Earth? Shall we excuse our selves, when invited by that
glorious Being, before whom all Nations of the World are as nothing; yea, less
than nothing and Vanity?

It Is amazing Condescension in the high and lofty One, who inhabits Eternity,
that he will so much as vouchsafe a Look toward such Worms of the Dust as we
are: But O how much more amazing is the Condescension, for that he is willing
to sup with us, and that we should sup with him! And shall we be unwilling?
Shall God call upon us to come, for all Things are ready, and we turn off the
Invitation, making one Excuse and another? O our Senselessness and Stupidity!
We ought, most certainly, to accept the Invitation, and come to the Supper,
which God has provided.

2. I would compel you from the Consideration of the Blessings, you are invited
to receive. And these are many and exceeding great. They extend to even all our
Wants; especially, to those that respect our Souls, and their spiritual and
eternal Well-being. Nor is there any good Thing, which our Souls do stand in
Need of, but it is provided for them in the Gospel. Here is pardoning Mercy, and
regenerating Grace; here is Peace with God, and Peace of Conscience; here is
Strength to assist in Duty, to help over Difficulties, to resist Temptation;
here is Comfort and Support under afflictive Trials; here is divine Guidance
through this World; and in a Word, complete and everlasting Blessedness in the
next.

O the Wonders of Divine Grace in making such a Provision of Blessings for the
Good of our Souls! And shall we cast a Slight upon them? Shall we refuse to
accept of them, when they are freely offered to us? O foolish and unwise if we
do! For by rejecting the Gospel Offer of Mercy, we shall wrong our own Souls,
as well as reflect Contempt on God.

3. I would compel you by laying before you, the great Cost a good God has been
at to make this Provision of Blessings for us. And he has been at a vast
Expense. The Blessings, he invites us to receive in the Gospel, were all
bought; and this, at the dearest Rate. They were not purchased with corruptible
Things, such as Silver and Gold; but with the precious Blood of Christ. Nothing
short of this was sufficient to make a Purchase of them: And yet, rather than
we should go without them, the infinitely merciful God has put himself to this
vast Expense. He has even parted with his own dear and only begotten Son. He
spared him not, but delivered him up, to shed his Blood on the Cross; and by
this Means has got ready for our Acceptance a Provision of Mercy, equal to the
Needs of our Souls.

And will it not move us to come and accept of the Blessings of the Gospel
State, when we consider what they cost, how much a good God has parted with for
the Procurement of them? Where is our Ingenuity? Where our Gratitude to the
dearest Lover of our Souls? We shall deserve to be forever stigmatized as base
to the last Degree, if we entertain a low Thought of these Blessings, which
have cost so much: Much more if we neglect, or refuse to come and take our Part
of them.

4. I may compel you from the Need, the absolute Need, you stand in of these
Blessings. You are undone, remedilously undone, without a Share in them. These
Blessings are provided no where but in the Gospel: And if you will not come, at
the Call of God, and partake of them, as they are here offered, your Souls must
perish through Want of them. You can be pardoned in no Way, but that of the
Gospel; you can be regenerated in no Way, but that of the New Covenant; you can
be saved in no Way, but that of the Mercy of God, in Jesus Christ. And are you
willing to go without these Blessings? You cannot do without them. Your
Interest, the Interest of your Souls; and this, for all Eternity, is concerned
in this Matter. Necessity is laid upon you. Your Salvation depends upon this
very Thing. You must accept of the Mercy of the Gospel, or you must perish, and
that unavoidably.

I have hitherto considered the Gospel Supper, as meaning the whole Provision
of Gospel Mercy It will not be a Misapplication of the Text, if I take Occasion
from it, to compel you to come in to the Gospel Supper, meaning hereby the
Lord's Supper, the holy Sacrament,

And alas! That there is so much Need to make Use of Compulsion in this Matter;
Compulsion, I mean, in the Way of applying to Men's Understanding and
Conscience. One would think, much need not be said to persuade Men to a Duty so
reasonable and beneneficial: And yet, but few are wrought upon to come in to
the Practice of it. The Number of those who go out of the House of God, when
the Ordinance of the Supper is to be administered, is vastly great in compare of
those, who make a tarry! Alas! How few are the Guests who sit down with Christ
at his Table! They are but thinly scattered, here and there one to be seen.
When the Invitation is given, in the Language of the Parable, in which is the
Text, Come, for all Things are now ready: May it not be said, as follows in the
next Words, And they all, with one Consent, began to make Excuse.

It will not therefore be unseasonable The Sermon was preached on a
Communion-Day.
, if I take upon me the Work assigned the Servant in the Text, and endeavor to
compel you to come in; to come in to the Church of Christ, and to sit down with
him at his Table.

Only, before I proceed, I would just observe, that as the Sacrament is an
Institution of the Christian Religion, spiritual Considerations are the only
proper ones to be used with Men, to move them to an Observance of it. Worldly
Motives have no Place here. Men ought not to come to the Ordinance of the
Supper, if they have no other Reason for their coming, but that they may be
qualified for some Place of Honor or Profit. This would be a base Motive
indeed: And it is pity Men should ever be tempted with a Motive that is so mean
and low: Nor would it be to the Credit of any religious Establishment, to make
that which is a solemn Test of Men's Subjection to Jesus Christ, a
Qualification without which they can sustain no Office in the State, not so
much as that of a common Excise-Man. If any Thing can be, this certainly is, a
wicked perverting the Use of the most sacred Rite of the Christian Religion;
turning it into an Engine of worldly Policy: At best, it is making Use of a
Motive, which tends to compel Men to regard this Institution of Christianity,
more with a View to themselves, than to God, or the Lord Jesus Christ: Nor,
where the Motive from this World is so strong, would it be any Thing strange,
if Men should frequently be wrought upon to go to the Sacrament, that they
might make a Gain of Godliness.

But it is Time that I proceed to the Work of compelling you to give your
Attendance at the Lord's Supper. And,

1. Let me compel you from the Authority of Jesus Christ. The Ordinance of the
Supper is plainly an Institution of his. Do this in Remembrance of me, are the
Words of Christ himself; and as express a Command from him, as any in the whole
Gospel And is he not our Lawgiver, and King, and Judge, as well as Savior?
Has he not a rightful Authority to give out his Commands? And are we not bound
to obey them? And if we are obliged to obey his Commands at all, why not in
this Instance as well as in any other? Has not this the same Stamp of his
Authority on it? And if we may dispense with his Authority in this Article, why
not in any other? Why may we not neglect Prayer, and the public Worship, as
well as the sacramental Supper? The Authority of Christ is just the same in
these several Instances of Duty; and we may no more neglect to remember Christ
at his Table, than to worship him in his House.

Nay, there are some Circumstances that do, in a peculiar Manner, recommend to
our Observance the sacramental Institution. It Is the Institution of our dying
Savior. To remember him, by eating Bread, and drinking Wine, in a religious
Manner, was the Command he gave us, just as he was going to lay down his Life
for us. Says the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. xi. 23. The Lord Jesus, the same Night in
which he was betrayed, took Bread; -- and said, Take, eat; -- this do in
Remembrance of me. And shall we not remember Christ, when he has desired we
would; and expressed this his Desire, when he was about to do the greatest Act
of Kindness for us, even offer up himself a Sacrifice to make Atonement for our
Sins? O let us not put so small a Value on the Love of our Redeemer, as to
neglect that Institution he has set up in his Church, on Purpose to perpetuate
the Memory of it. Let us rather joyfully embrace every Opportunity of
remembering this Love of his, which was stronger than Death. It Is infinitely
reasonable we should do so: Nor otherwise shall we be able to free our selves
from the Charge of the blackest Ingratitude, to our best Friend and greatest
Benefactor.

2. Let me compel you by showing you, that you have no just Ground of Excuse,
nothing sufficient to plead, why you should not come to this Supper.

Do any excuse themselves, became they have other Things to mind, which call
off their Thoughts and Hearts from this Duty? This is the Excuse in my Context.
One had bought a Piece of Ground, and he must needs go and see it. Another had
bought five Yoke of Oxen, and he must go and prove them. And a third had
married a Wife, and so could not come. And this is the Excuse of Multitudes at
present. They are so encumbred with the World, that they have not Time to think of
their Duty, or to engage in the Practice of it. But this is certainly an
insufficient Excuse. We ought not to regard this World, or suffer any of the
Affairs and Businesses of it, so to engross our Hearts, as to take 'em off from
minding the Concerns of our Souls, and an Attendance on our Duty; particularly,
this of waiting upon Christ at his Table. And if this is all that we have to
say, the Lord of the Feast will be angry with us: Nor can we expect, but that
he will bind us Hand and Foot, and cast us into outer Darkness: There will be
weeping and wailing and gnashing of Teeth.

Do any excuse themselves for the present, resolving that they will attend this
Duty sometime hence? This, it may be feared, is the Case of too many. They are
for putting off the Duty, hoping they may, with more Convenience, engage in it
hereafter. But this also is an insufficient Plea. The Command of Christ, This
do in Remembrance of me, requires instant Obedience. It Is a present Obligation
that lies on us; and we may, by no Means, dispense with it: It Is at our Peril,
if we do. Besides, we have no Time in our own Power, but the present: And if we
don't attend this Duty now, we may never have another Opportunity.

Do any excuse themselves, because it is a solemn Ordinance? Some are too ready
to make this Plea; putting too great Difference between this and the other
Duties of Religion. This, it is true, is a solemn Duty: But so is the Duty of
Prayer. It Is a solemn Thing to address the supreme Majesty of Heaven and Earth.
And perhaps the Prayers at the Sacrament, are the most solemn Part of the Duty.
But let the Solemnity of the sacramental Institution be what it will, this is
no Reason why we should neglect it. The more solemn the Ordinance, the greater
is its Importance; and the stronger therefore the Reason, why we should attend
it.

Do any excuse themselves, because they an't prepared for so holy an Ordinance?
This is the most common Plea; but a very insufficient one. If we an't prepared
for the Sacrament, it is our Sin: And do we think, that that which is our Sin,
will be a sufficient Excuse, for a plain Neglect in Point of Duty? It can never
be. If we are really unfit for an Approach to the Table of the Lord; our Duty
is plain: We should instantly set about the Work of preparing our selves
herefor; and give no Sleep to our Eyes, nor Slumber to our Eyelids, till we
have accomplished it: And the rather, because if we are unprepared, in our
habitual Frame, for the Sacrament, we are unprepared for Death and Judgment; we
are unfit to go to Heaven. And this is certainly a State, we ought not to be
quiet in.

Do any excuse themselves, imagining there is less Danger in a total Neglect of
the Sacrament, than in coming to it, unless in the best prepared and most
worthy Manner? This seems to be the Apprehension of some. They would willingly
come to the Sacrament; but are afraid, they shall not receive in so worthy a
Manner, as they would be glad, and so think it safest and best, totally to
abstain. But this is entirely a wrong Way of thinking and arguing. For there is
Danger in neglecting the Sacrament, as well as in coming to it in an unprepared
Manner; and the Danger of a total Neglect is certainly much greater, than a
mere Defect in the Measure of Preparation. It Is a Fault to come to the
Sacrament, unless we are in some good Measure prepared: It Is a Fault likewise,
and a greater Fault, totally to abstain. Our Wisdom therefore in this Case is,
neither to abstain from the Sacrament, nor to come to it but in a well prepared
Manner: And this is what we should take Pains about; nor should we allow our
selves to be easy, till we have effected it.

In fine, Do any excuse themselves, because they imagine they shall be under
greater Ties of Duty, and more will be expected and required of them? Some are
afraid of this. They imagine, if they come to the Sacrament, they must lead
more holy Lives; be more circumspect, more careful of themselves, and of their
whole Walk. But neither is this an Objection of any Weight. It Is true indeed,
the more Men profess, the more holy they ought to be; and the stronger are
their Bonds to be circumspect of their Ways. And is this what we are afraid of?
We should be ashamed to make such an Excuse. It Is certainly to our Dishonor;
as arguing the Want of a just Sense of that Holiness, without which we can
never see the Lord. We cannot be too holy, nor too strongly bound to endeavor
to be so, to the highest Degree.

The Time will not permit me to mention any Thing further; nor have I, indeed,
any more than hinted at the Things, which have been mentioned, O be persuaded
by the Arguments wherewith you have been compelled! And let it be your speedy
Care to come to the Sacrament. You are now solemnly invited in the Name of
Christ to give your Attendance at his Table. O excuse not your selves! Let it
not be said, you were invited, but rejected the Invitation; least the Lord
should swear concerning you, that you should not hereafter taste of his Supper,
in his heavenly and eternal Kingdom.

And as for us, who have accepted the Invitation of Christ, and are about to
eat Bread and drink Wine, according to his Appointment, let us take Heed to our
selves, that we do it in a religious Manner. Let us put a Difference between
this and common Bread and Wine. Let us eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup;
employing our Tho'ts on Christ, and remembering his Love in giving himself to
die for us.

And may the Love of Christ constrain us to live unto him! Since he died for
all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto
him who died for them, and rose again.

FINIS.

