AN Historical Discourse ON THE Civil and Religious Affairs of the COLONY of
RHODE ISLAND AND Providence Plantations IN NEW ENGLAND in America. From the
first Settlement 1638, to the End of first CENTURY.

By JOHN CALLENDER, A.M.

Joshua xxii. 22. The LORD God of Gods, the LORD God of Gods, he knows, and
Israel shall know, if it be in Rebellion, or if in Transgression against the
Lord.

Psalm. cxlv. 4. One Generation shall praise thy Name to another, and shall
declare thy mighty Acts.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN in Queen Street,
MDCCXXXIX.

To the Honorable William Coddington, Esquire
SIR,
IT is not barely to give you a public Testimony of my Gratitude for many
personal Favors, nor yet of that Esteem and Respect which all Men bear you,
for your singular Equity and Benevolence, not only in private Life, but in all
the various Offices, in which you have served and adorned your Country; that I
prefix your Name to these Papers: But because an Attempt to recover some
Account of this happy Island, and to make a religious Improvement of the
merciful Providence of God toward it, is justly due to the lineal
Representative of that worthy Gentleman, who was the great Instrument of it is
original Settlement.

Your honored Grandfather William Coddington, Esquire was chosen in England to be
an Assistant of the Colony of the Massachusetts Bay, A. D. 1629, and in 1630
came over to New England with the Governor and the Charter, etc. after which
he was several Times rechosen to that honorable and important Office. He was
for some Time Treasurer of the Colony. He was with the Chiefest in all public
Charges, 'and a principal Merchant in Boston', where he built the first Brick
House.

In the Year 1637, when the Contentions ran so high in the Country, he was
grieved at the Proceedings of the Court, against Mr. Wheelwright and Others.
And when he found that his Oppositions to those Measures was ineffectual, he
entered his Protest, 'that his Dissent might appear to succeeding Times'; and
though he was in the fairest Way to be Great, in the Massachusetts as to
outward Things, yet he voluntarily quitted his Advantageous Situation at
Boston, his large Propriety and Improvements at Braintree, for Peace sake, and
that he might befriend, protect, and assist the pious People, who were
meditating a Removal from that Colony, on account of their religious
Differences.

Here when the People first incorporated themselves a Body politic on this
Island, they chose him to be their Judge or chief Ruler, and continued to elect
him annually to be their Governor for seven Years together, 'till the Patent
took Place, and the Island was incorporated with Providence-Plantations.

In the Year 1647, he assisted in forming the Body of Laws, which has been the
Basis of our Constitution and Government ever since; and the next Year being
chosen Governor of the Colony, declined the Office.

In 1651, he had a Commission from the supreme Authority then in England, to be
Governor of the Island, pursuant to a Power reserved in the Patent: But the
People being jealous 'the Commission might affect their Lands and Liberties as
seemed to them by the Patent', he readily laid it down on the first Notice from
England that he might do so; and for their further Satisfaction and
Contentment, he, by a Writing under his Hand, obliged himself to make a formal
Surrender of all Right and Title to any of the Lands, more than his Proportion
in common with the other Inhabitants, whenever it should be demanded.

After that he seems to have retired much from public Business, till toward
the latter End of his Days, when he was again diverse Times prevailed with to
take the Government upon him; as he did particularly 1678, when he died Nov. 1.
in the 78th Year of his Age, a good Man full of Days. Thus after he had the
Honor to be the first Judge and Governor of this Island, 'after he had spent
much of his Estate and the Prime of his Life in propagating Plantations', he
died Governor of the Colony -- in promoting the Welfare and the Prosperity of
the little Commonwealth, which he had in a manner founded.

If there was any Opposition at any Time to any of his Measures, or if he met
with any in grateful Returns from any he had served, it was no more than what
several of the other first excellent Governors of the other New-English
Colonies met with, from a People made froward by the Circumstances of a
Wilderness, and over jealous of their Privileges. A free People will always be
jealous of their Privileges, and History abounds with Examples of the Mistakes
and Ingratitude occasioned by that Jealousy.

If the following Discourse has done any Justice to the Memory and Character of
the pious People who first settled this Colony, or if it has any Tendency to
promote the true original Ends of this Plantation, I am sure of your Patronage.
And as to what relates to some Articles, different from your Judgment and
Practice in religious Matters, the Generosity and Candor you inherit from your
great Ancestors, will easily bear with me, endeavoring to vindicate my own
Opinions on such an Occasion.

I hope there are few or no Errors in the Matters of Fact related, or the Dates
that are assigned; to prevent any Mistakes, I have carefully reviewed the
public Records, and my other Materials; this Review has bro't to my Knowledge
or Remembrance many Things, that were not mentioned in the Pulpit, which
however it seemed ought not to be omitted.

I designed to have put all the Additions and Enlargements, in the Form of
Notes for my own Ease, but have been persuaded to weave as many of them as were
proper into the Body of the Discourse, as what is generally most pleasing to
the Reader. I am very sensible, several Things will be though it too minute or
personal by Strangers, but the Descendents of the Persons concerned, and the
Inhabitants of the Colony, will readily pardon me. And some other Things which
are familiarly known among our selves, will be necessary to Others.

It is much to be lamented that many valuable Manuscripts of some of the first
Setlers here, are so soon embezled and lost. And it is much to be wished, that
some Gentlemen of Ingenuity and Leisure, would take Pains to collect as many of
these old Papers as can be found dispersed about. I am apt to think, that
these, with the public Records, would furnish Materials for a just History of
the Colony.

What is here presented to your View, will by no Means supersede such a Design;
I rather hope it will stimulate Gentlemen in every Part of the Colony, to make
a Search after such Papers, and more especially now, while the New England
Chronology is in Hand, composing by a Gentleman, above all Exceptions
universally acknowledged the best versed in the History of the Country, and the
most capable to give the World a just and clear Idea of all our civil and
religous Affairs, and who is already so well furnished with Materials from
every other Part of the Country.

That the most High would be pleased to bless you with all the Blessings of
Grace and Providence, together with your pious Lady and numerous Offspring, is
the Prayer of

Your Honor's most obliged humble Servant, John Callender.
Newport on Rhode Island, Octo. 27th 1738.
An Historical Discourse, etc.
PSALM. LXXVII. 10, 11, 12. I will remember the Years of the right Hand of the
most High. I will remember the Work of the LORD, surely I will remember thy
Wonders of old, I will meditate also of all thy Work, and talk of thy Doings.


AS it is now more than a Century, since the Lands within the present Patent,
or Charter of this Colony, began to be settled by English Men, and inhabited by
Christians our Ancestors; and as this Day is just an Hundred Years since the
Indian Sachems The Name of this Sachem is usually spelt in the printed Books,
Miantonimok, but in all the Manuscripts, Myantonomy, or Miantonome, or
Miantonomu, and the Name is to pronounced by the People who take the Sound by
Tradition, and not from the Books, with the Accent on the last Syllable but one
Miantonomy and the ancient Canonicus his Uncle and Guardian, signed the Grant
of this Island, to Mr. Coddington and his Friends united with him; and as Mr.
John Clark the Founder under GOD, and the first Elder of this Church, and it is
liberal Benefactor, was a principal Instrument, in negotiating the Purchase,
and Settlement of the Island, as he was likewise afterward, in obtaining and
maintaining the old Patent, and procuring the present Charter; I though it it would
be but proper, to defer our Lecture, which in Course fell out on Yesterday, to
this Time; and now, I propose to lay before you, such an Account as I have been
able to collect, of the Occasion and the Manner of our first Settlement,
together with a short View, of the civil and religious History, and the present
State of the Colony. And then to entertain you, with such Reflections, as the
Subject will suggest, and such Remarks, as may serve to dispose, and assist us,
to a religious Improvement of those memorable Occurrences.

I confess the Account I have been able to collect, is very lame and imperfect,
and for that Reason, I should have laid aside the Design, if I had not thought
it, in Reality a Duty, to recollect and review so much as we can, of the
merciful Providence of GOD, in the settling and preserving this Colony; and
that we ought to remember the Years of the Right Hand of the most High, the
Works of the Lord, and the Wonders of old, to meditate of his Work, and talk of
his Doings.

And here in order to lay before you some Account of the Occasion and Manner of
our first Settlement, and the Conduct of divine Providence toward us ever
since; it may be proper, previously to mention, a few Things relating to the
Settlement of NEW ENGLAND in general.

And that we may take Things from the Beginning, be pleased to observe that
October 12. 1492, Where several Writers, give the same Account, it is needless
to quote any one in particular, as it is also, where the Account, is taken from
a Comparison of many Authors, with one another. However, I have followed the
Dates in the New England Chronology, where the most material Facts are
collected, and placed in the truest Light, and the Dates fixed with the
greatest Accuracy, and Exactness. The Reader will observe many Expressions
marked (...)* these are the very Words, of the Authorities I follow, and which
I choose to make use of as often as conveniently might be.
this Part of the World since called America, before that wholly unknown to the
rest, was first discovered by Christopher Columbus, a Genoese, in the Service
of the King of Spain. The Pope soon after, generously bestowed the new World,
on the Spaniards, they made many successful Voyages, and many great Conquests
and Settlements in the southern Parts of the new found World. Their Success,
and the immense Riches, they carried home to Europe, did in Process of Time,
excite other Nations, to put in for a Share with them. Among the rest the
English (who had narrowly mist the Advantages of the first Discovery) besides
their Enterprises on the Spaniards, made many successsive Attempts, to discover
and settle in North America.

In 1578 or 1579, there was a Patent granted by Queen Elizabeth for six Years
to Sir H. Gilbert, to plant, and inhabit some northern Parts of America,
unpossess'd by any Prince, with whom she had any Alliance.

March 25. 1584, Queen Elizabeth granted to Sir W. Raleigh a Patent for foreign
Parts not possessed by any Christian Prince. And the same Year, he took
Possession of the Country, to the westward of Roanoke, and called it Virginia,
in Honor of his Mistress. He sent three several Colonies, to settle in those
Parts, who all failed. As did Capt. Gosnold in a like Attempt, to settle, in
what, is since called New England, which he first discovered in 1602. And
several other Attempts met with the like ill Success.

April 10 1606, King James divided Virginia into two Colonies, which were
called South and North, the first between 34 and 41 Degrees North, and the last
between 38 and 45, and they were not to settle, within an hundred Miles of one
another. By 1611 the southern or London Company, had made an effectual
Settlement; while the northern or Plymouth Company were almost discouraged at
their repeated Disappointments. However Judge Popham, Sir Ferdinando Gorges,
and others, continued their Attempts, and their Designs, till divine Providence
began a Settlement, within their Jurisdiction, without their Knowledge or
Contrivance.

It is acknowledged on all Hands, the first Settlements of New England, were a
Consequence of the Disputes, which attended the Reformation in England; and
therefore we must observe, that during this Time, viz. 1517, Learning having
revived all over Europe, the Reformation was begun by Luther, and others in
Germany, and carried on in several Parts of Christendom, particularly in
England, where, after a long Struggle, it was finally established, by Act of
Parliament, under Queen Elizabeth, who began to reign November 17. 1558.

As the whole Christian Religion, had been corrupted, and disfigured by the
Inventions and Impositions of Popery, in a long Course of Time, it is so far
from being to be wondered at, that it could not, but be expected, that many,
who were justly and equally offended, at the horrid Corruptions of Popery,
should yet be unable, entirely to agree in their Sentiments, of what Things
were to be reformed, or how far, they should carry the Reformation at the
first. And yet this, was every where, a great and unhappy Remora to that
glorious Work, and gave their Enemies, a very considerable Advantage, which
they well knew how, and failed not to improve to the utmost.

The Effects of these Divisions, and the Animosities with which they were
maintained, were felt in England, not only, in the Beginning of the
Reformation, but after it was established, and even ever since to this Day.
Among the Reformers in Queen Elizabeth's Reign (many of whom had been Exiles in
Queen Mary's Persecution, and so had more Opportunity, to see and converse with
the foreign Protestants) there were many, who sought to carry the Reformation,
farther in some Points, than had been done in King Edward's Time. They sought
to take away every Thing, they imagined, had the Color of Superstition, and to
make the Bible their real Rule in Worship, and Discipline, as well as in Faith.
These were presently called Puritans, as pretending to seek a purer Church
State, and a farther Reformation, than the other Party, though it was necessary or
expedient.

Those, had not the same Exceptions, to many Things the Puritans scrupled; and
beside, though it it was but good Policy, to make as few, and as little Changes and
Alterations, as possible, especially in the Ceremonies, which most powerfully
affect the Vulgar, in order to draw in the Bulk of the Clergy, and the Nation,
to favor the other Alterations, which all of them esteemed to be, of the most
Importance. And the Queen zealously espousing this Party, turned the Balance
in their Favor, and accordingly for some Years, the whole Nation, in Effect,
came to Church, though the Times were far from being settled.

The Puritans, it seems, had few or no Objections, to the Articles of Faith,
but they chiefly, objected against the Liturgy, the Ceremonies, and the
Constitution and Discipline. But however, they were not perfectly agreed among
themselves; while the much larger Part of them, Fathers of those since called
Presbyterians, generally strove to keep their Places in the Church, without
conforming to some of the most offensive Ceremonies, and by voluntary Agreement
among themselves, sought to remedy, and supply what they though it, was amiss or
wanting, in the parliamentary Establishment; others of them, Fathers of those
since called Independents and Congregationalists, separated wholly from the
public Worship, in the Parish Churches, and sought a thorough Alteration, in
the whole Form and Constitution of the Church, and to lay aside the Liturgy,
and all the Ceremonies together.

Queen Elizabeth kept a watchful and jealous Eye over them all, as fearing, and
being determined against all farther Alterations in religious Matters. And
Subscription and Conformity, being at Times pressed harder, as the Friends to
the Puritans were out of Power, some of them, especially of those called
Seperatists, had been driven out of England, and at Length there was a Church
of the Independent Scheme, formed at Amsterdam in Holland. In the Reign of King
James (whom the Puritans expected, to be a Patron to them, as he had been
educated in Scotland, and had openly censured the Church of England) those
Things which offended them, were carried with an higher Hand. In the Years 1608
and 1609, several more of them in the North of England, removed to Holland, and
a Number of them settled at Leyden under the pastoral Care of Mr. John Robinson
(afterward the Father of Plymouth Colony) in hopes, to enjoy that Liberty of
their Consciences, in a strange Land, they were denied at Home.

Here they continued eleven or twelve Years, 'till, for many Reasons, they
began to meditate a Removal, and chose to seek an Asylum, somewhere in
North America near Hudson's River. They had a long and tedious Treaty, with the
Southern or Virginia Company, who might reasonably expect, greater Sobriety,
Patience, and Industry, from a People of such a Character, and in such
Circumstances, and who had such Views and Designs of their own, than they had
found, in such other People, as they could prevail on, to transport themselves
into a Wilderness. However the Factions and Disturbances in the Company, and
other Causes, delayed the Affairs for some Time, 'till 1619, in the Fall, they
obtained a Patent for the Land, but they could not obtain a legal Assurance of
the Liberty of their Consciences. However they determined at length to remove,
depending on some general Promises of Connivance, if they behaved themselves
peaceably, and hoping that the Distance, and remoteness of the Place, as well
as the public Service, they should do the King and Kingdom, would prevent
their being disturbed.

After encountering many Difficulties, and Discouragements, from the Nature and
Circumstances of their Voyage, and from the Treachery of some of the
Undertakers, they arrived at Cape Cod on the 9th of November 1620. Here they
found their Patent useless, this Place being within the Bounds of the
New England or Plymouth Company; and yet Necessity obliged them to set down
thereabout. They did therefore two Days after incorporate themselves a Body
politic, and having made such a Search of the adjacent Country, as their
Circumstances would allow, at that Time of the Year, they began their
Settlement, about Christmas, at a Place, called by the Indians, Patuxet, by
them named New-Plymouth. Infinite almost were the Hardships, and Distresses of
the ensuing Winter, in which near half the Company died, for want of
Necessaries. However through the merciful Providence of GOD they maintained
their Ground, and through many Difficulties, which they overcame by Patience
and the divine Blessing, they increased to three hundred Souls in nine Years
after, when they obtained a Patent, from the New England Company the 13th of
January, 1629, 30.

In that Period, there had been many successless Attempts, to make Settlements
in New England, for the sake of Trade and Husbandry only, as if divine
Providence had reserved the Place for those who soon after took Possession of
it. The Success of the Plymouth Planters began to excite the Puritans, all over
England, to meditate a Removal, to those Parts of the World, in order to enjoy
the Liberty of worshipping GOD according to their Consciences. There was no
Ground at all left them to hope for any Condescension or Indulgence to their
Scruples, but Uniformity was pressed with harder Measures than ever. A great
Part of the Nation was alarmed, with the Apprehensions of Arminianism, and that
even Popery itself was approaching; yea, the civil Affairs, and the Peace of
the Nation, began to be embroiled and interrupted by the false Politics, and
bad Councels of the unhappy Prince on the Throne; so that New England began to
be looked on by them, as a Place of Refuge; and it is said, that some who
proved principal Actors in the Changes and Events that followed, had even
determined to transport themselves here, had they not been unaccountably
restrained by Authority. This is certain, the same Principles in some Persons,
which had rendered their Stay, uneasy at Home, and which refused them a legal
Toleration, in the Wilds of America, made their leaving the Kingdom, as
difficult as possible. Whereas could good Policy have prevailed over Bigotry,
it would have appeared a good Expedient for them, thus to clear the Kingdom of
the Disaffected and Nonconformists, and with them make such an effectual
Plantation, as promised a great Addition to the Trade and Riches, and Power of
the Kingdom, and greatly enlarged its Territory.

Mr. White of Dorchester, the Father of the Massachusetts Colony, encouraged
Mr. R. C^nant, who had on Disgust, removed from Plymouth to Nantasket, to
continue in the Country, with the Promise of Men, and all Things necessary for
another Plantation. Whereupon this Gentleman, 1625, removed to Cape-Ann, and
the next Year to Naumkeak, since called Salem. March 19, 1627, 8, the Council
for New England signed the Massachusetts Patent, and March 4, 1628, 9, the King
confirms it by a Charter. The Nonconformists so called, are busily employed
about their intended Expedition. In 1628, they send Mr. Endicot, with some
People, to begin and prepare the Way for them, and the next Year they send Mr.
Higginson and many more, and 1630, Governor Winthorp, deputy Governor Dudley,
with the Assistants, the Charter, and 1500 People, and all Necessaries, came
over and made effectual Settlements at Charlestown, Watertown, Dorchester,
Boston, etc. and more of their Friends coming over to them, in the following
Years, the new Settlements increased, and prospered, notwithstanding the many
Difficulties, and Hardships which must necessarily attend, the planting such a
remote Wilderness.

As the Country was more fully discovered, the Lands on Connecticut River, grew
so famous for their Fruitfulness, and Convenience to keep Cattle, that great
Numbers from New-Town, Dorchester, etc. removed there, under the Conduct of Mr.
Hains, Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Ludlow, and Mr. Hooker, etc. and through inexpressible
Hardships, through Famine, and Weariness, and Perils of the Enemy, they at length
settled at Hartford 1635 and 1636, which was the Beginning of Connecticut
C^lony, and in 1637 New Haven Colony, was begun by a People directly from
England, under the Leading of Mr. Eaton, and Mr. Davenport, etc. Thus the four
grand Colonies of New England, were begun in a few Years, and some faint
Attempts likewise made to settle, in the Eastward Parts, in the Province of
Main, etc. for the sake of Trade and Fishery, and by some of the People who
afterward came here. Which brings me to the more immediate Occasion of the
Settlement of this Colony, and the Manner in which it was brought about, and
accomplished: It is allowed by all Sides, the religious Differences among the
first Settlers of the Massachusetts Colony, gave Rise to this Colony, and the
settling of this Island.

Almost all the first Settlers of New England, were Puritans. The People at
Plymouth were generally of that Sort called Seperatists, and those of Boston
generally had lived in the Communion of the Church of England, though they
scrupled conforming to some of the Ceremonies. But these being come to so great
a Distance from the Bishops Power, could well enough agree in the same Forms of
Worship, and Method of Discipline with the Church at Plymouth, and a mixed Form
of Church Government was generally set up. Though they had seemed well enough
united, by the common Zeal against the Ceremonies, yet now they were removed
from the ecclesiastical Courts, with a Patent which gave them Liberty of
Conscience, a Variety of Opinions, as to several Points, before not so much
regarded, and perhaps not though it of, now began to be visible, and operate with
considerable Effects. It is no Wonder such Differences in Opinion, arose among
them, as had been the Case before among the Protestants in general. It was the
avowed Opinion of some among them of chiefest Note and Authority, (Mr. Hooker.)
That there were two great Reserves for Enquiry in that Age of the World, First,
wherein the spiritual Rule of our Lord's Kingdom does consist, and after what
Manner it is revealed, managed, and maintained in the Souls of his People. The
Second, After what Order the Government of our Lord's Kingdom is to be
externally managed and maintained in his Church. Magnalia B. 3. p. 66.

Notwithstanding which, the chief Leaders, and the major Part of the People,
soon discovered themselves, as fond of Uniformity, and as loath to allow Liberty
of Conscience to such as differed from themselves, as those, from whose Power
they had fled. Notwithstanding all their Sufferings and Complaints in England,
they seemed incapable of mutual Forbearance, perhaps they were afraid of
provoking the higher Powers at Home, if they countenanced other Sects; and
perhaps those who differed from them, took the more Freedom, in venting and
pressing their peculiar Opinions, from the Safety, and Protection they
expected, under a Charter, that had granted Liberty of Conscience.

In Reality the true Grounds of Liberty of Conscience, were not then known, or
embraced by any Sect or Party of Christians; all Parties seemed to think, that
as they only were in the Possession of the Truth, so they alone had a Right to
restrain, and crush all other Opinions, which they respectively called Error,
and Heresy, where they were the most numerous, and powerful; and in other
Places they pleaded a Title, to Liberty and Freedom of their Consciences. And
yet at the same Time, all would disclaim Persecution for Conscience sake, which
has something in it so unjust, and absurd, so cruel and impious, that all Men
are ashamed of the least Imputation of it. A Pretense of the public Peace, the
Preservation of the Church of Christ from Infection, and the Obstinacy of the
Heretics, are always made use of, to excuse, and justify that, which stripped
of all Disguises, and called by it is true Name, the Light of Nature, and the
Laws of Christ Jesus condemn and forbid in the most plain and solemn Manner.
Mr. R. Williams, and Mr J. Clark, two Fathers of this Colony, appear among the
first, who publicly avowed, that Jesus Christ is King in his own Kingdom, and
that no Others, had Authority over his Subjects, in the Affairs of Conscience,
and eternal Salvation. So that it was not singular, or peculiar in those People
at the Massachusetts, to think themselves bound in Conscience, to use the Sword
of the civil Magistrate, to open the Understandings of Heretics, or cut them
off from the State, that they might not infect the Church, or injure the
public Peace. These were not the only People, who though it they were doing GOD
good Service, when smiting their Brethren and Fellow Servants; all other
Christian Sects acted generally, as if they though it this was the very best
Service they could do to GOD, and the most effectual Way, to promote the Gospel
of Peace, and prove themselves the true and genuine Disciples of Jesus Christ
-- of Jesus Christ, who has declared, his Kingdom was not of this World, who
had commanded his Disciples to call no Man Master on Earth, who had forbidden
them, to exercise Lordship over each other's Consciences, who had required
them, to let the Tares grow with the Wheat till the Harvest, and who had in
fine, given mutual Love, Peace, Long-Suffering, and Kindness, as the Badge and
Mark of his Religion.

Mr. Roger Williams, a Minister, who came over to Salem 1630, had on a Disgust,
removed to Plymouth, where he was an Assistant to their Minister Mr. Smith for
two Years. And being disgusted likewise at Plymouth, returned back to Salem,
where he was chosen by the People, to succeed Mr. Skeleton in 1634, the
Magistrates opposed his Settlement there, as they had done before. They made
great Objections to his Principles, and it is said some worldly Things, helped
to increase the Animosities, that soon prevailed against him; though Mr. Williams
appears, by the whole Course and Tenor of his Life, and Conduct here to have
been one of the most disinterested Men that ever lived, a most pious and
heavenly minded Soul. He was charged with holding it unlawful for an
unregenerate Man to pray, or a regenerate Man to pray with him. That it was
unlawful for the Magistrate, to meddle with the Breaches of the first Table,
and that he insisted on an unlimited Toleration, or Liberty of Conscience; from
whence they inferred him, an Advocate for Licentiousness, which the good Man's
Soul abborred, "and ever disclaimed." However, on these Accounts, and for
teaching the Patent was sinful, (in what Sense and how truly is very obvious)
for opposing the Oath of Fidelity (not out of Disloyalty to the King, but on
account of the Nature of an Oath, which he though it as a sacred Thing, ought not
to be forced on all Men promiscuously, whether in a State of Grace, or Nature)
and for seperating from, and renouncing Communion with, all the Churches in the
Land, and even with his own, for not joining with him therein. For these Things
he was at length banished the Colony, as a Disturber of the Peace of the Church
and Commonwealth; and as he says, a Bull of Excommunication, was sent after
him in his Absence.

He came away to Secunke, since called Rehoboth, where he procured a Grant of
Lands, from Ousamequin, or Massasoiet, the chief Sachem of Pokanokik. But being
desired to remove from thence, which was within the Jurisdiction of
New-Plymouth, he had several Treaties with Myantonomy, and Canonicus, the
Nantygansick, or Narraganset Sachems, in the Years 1634 and 1635; who assured
him he should not want for Land, for a Settlement; divine Providence giving him
wonderfully, great Favor in the Eyes of the Sachems. And in the Spring of the
Year 1634, 5, he came over the River, to a Place called by the Indians
Mo^shausick, and by him named Providence, in a Sense of GOD's merciful
Providence to him in his Distress. And several of his Friends following him,
they planted there. The Authority and Power of Miantonomy, awed all the Indians
round, to assist and succor these few feeble and helpless English Men, thus
cast out by their Brethren, in a strange Land. However, we must (to be
impartial) own, that their being Englishmen, was a real Security and
Protection to them; unless the Indians had designed a general War. The English
at Massachusetts, employed Mr. Williams, to make a League offensive and
defensive with the Narraganset Indians, in the Pequot War, which followed in
1637. And the Indian Sachems, in one of their Confirmations of the Grants of
Lands to him, The said Writing is dated Nantiggansick, the 24th of the first
Month, commonly called March, the second Year of our Plantation, or planting at
Mooshasick or Providence.
express their Gratitude, for the many Kindnesses, and Services he had
continually done for them, both with their Friends at Massachusetts, as also at
Qunniticut, and Apaum or Plymouth. Mr. Williams also maintained a loving
Correspondence, with many of his old Friends to the East, and was esteemed and
valued by many of them; though he ever opposed, and that in Print, once and
again, what he called the bloody Tenent, i. e. every Kind and Degree of
Persecution for Conscience sake. The Hardships and Distresses of these poor
Exiles, are hardly to be conceived by the present Generation, who through the
divine Goodness, have never seen any Thing like what they cheerfully endured.
But divine Providence, in which they trusted, supported them, and provided for
them in their greatest Straits, and wonderfully blessed their honest Industry,
so that in a few Years, they had Plenty of all Things necessary to their
Subsistence and Comfort.

The Banishment of Mr. Williams, and the voluntary Exile of many of his
Adherents, did not put an End to the unhappy Divisions, and Contentions in the
Massachusetts. Mr. Hains the Governor, in 1635, did with great Difficulty,
still and quiet the Storm for the present, in the Beginning of his
Administration; but Mr. afterward Sir Henry Vane, jun. arriving at Boston that
Summer, and zealously falling in with the Opinions of one Party, he was by them
persuaded, to tarry there, (though designed for Connecticut River) and was the
next Year, 1636, chosen Governor, and then the Animosities and Contentions,
were carried to a very great Height. One Side reproaching the other, as
Legalists and under a Covenant of Works, etc. and the others calling them
Familists, Antinomians, etc.. The next Year, Mr. Winthrop being rechosen
Governor, with a great Struggle, he strenuously exerted himself, to crush and
exterminate the Opinions, he disapproved. A Synod was called for that End at
New-Town (since named Cambridge) on the 30th of August, where Eighty erroneous
Opinions, were presented, debated, and condemned; and a Court held on the 2d of
October following, at the same Place, banished a few of the chief Persons,
among those who were aspersed with those Errors; and censured several that had
been the most active, not, it seems, for their holding those Opinions, but for
their pretended seditious Carriage and Behavior; and the Church at Boston,
likewise excommunicated at least one of her Members, not for those Opinions,
but for denying they ever held them, and the Behavior, which these Heats
occasioned; and some of these, with their Friends and Followers, came to this
Island.

Notwithstanding such a formidable Number of Errors, produced at the Synod,
that which these People differed in from the others, was chiefly this, as Mr.
John Clark has briefly represented it, viz. Touching the Covenants and in Point
of evidencing a Man's good Estate. Some (says he) pressed hard for the Covenant
of Works, and for Sanctification to be the first and chief Evidence; others (he
means himself, and those who came here) pressed as hard for the Covenant of
Grace, that was established on better Promises, and for the Evidence of the
Spirit, as that which is a more sure, constant, and satisfactory Witness.
(Clark's Narrative Introd.) This Account is agreeable to what there is in those
Books wrote on the other Side, I have had the Opportunity to consult; only they
must be allowed, to express their own Way, their own Sentiments of the Opinions
of the other Side, and they add such Shades as darken and disfigure the
Opinions of the opposite Party, and set off their own to the best Advantage.

Dr. Mather, thus describes the five Questions, debated between the Synod and
Mr. Cotton, (which were the same Points about which all the Divisions first
began,) they were about the Order of Things in our Union to our Lord Jesus
Christ, about the Influence of our Faith in the Application of his
Righteousness, about the Use of our Sanctification, in evidencing our
Justification, and about the Consideration of our Lord Jesus Christ, by Men,
yet under a Covenant of Works, briefly they were the Points whereon depend, the
Grounds of our Assurance for Blessedness in another and better World. Mag. B.
7. p. 17.

Mr. Neal says, The Commonwealth was almost torn in Pieces, by intestine
Divisions, occasioned by the spreading familistical and antinomian Errors,
among the People. And from the Writers before him, he gives the Original of the
Controversy, to this Purpose, The Members of the Church at Boston, used to meet
once a Week, to repeat the Sermons they heard on the Lord's Day, and to debate
on the Doctrines contained in them; those Meetings being peculiar to the Men,
some of the zealous Women, though it it might be useful to them. One Mrs.
Hutchinson, a Gentlewoman of a bold and masculine Spirit, and a great Admirer
of Mr. Cotton, set up one at her House. The Novelty of the Thing, and the Fame
of the Woman, quickly gained her a numerous Audience, and from these Meetings
arose all the Errors, that soon after overspread the Country. He says she
taught that Believers in Christ are personally united to the Spirit of GOD;
that Commands to work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling, belong to
none, but such as are under the Covenant of Works; that Sanctification is not a
good Evidence of a good Estate. She likewise set up immediate Revelation about
future Events, to be believed as equally infallible with the Scriptures; and a
great many other Chimeras and Fancies, which (says he) under a Pretense of
exalting the free Grace of GOD, destroyed the practical Part of Religion, and
opened a Door to all sorts of Licentiousness. Neal's Hist. C. 5. p. 166.

I shall not enter into the Merits of the Cause, there is neither Time, nor
Occasion for it, only, I must observe, how each Side ascribed to the others,
Consequences, they imagined followed from their Opinions, which they did not
see or own. And particularly the People who came here, have Things laid to
their Charge, which they utterly denied, and detested equally with their
Antagonists. So harshly did their Adversaries judge of them, as even to involve
in their Opinions, or the Consequences of them, a Denial of the Resurection of
the Dead, and the Life everlasting; which totally subverts and destroys
Christianity, and all Religion at once, which necessarily implies a future
State; when yet the whole Debate supposed the Truth of Christianity, and the
Certainty of a future State; and the main Question, was about the Method in
which they might best obtain an Assurance of their Interest in, and their Title
to, the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. The very first of the eighty
Errors, to be tried in the Synod, does (as I remember) charge the Denial of the
Immortality of the Soul, as a Consequence of the Opinion, that the Faculties of
the Soul are passive or quiescent in the Work of Conversion and Regeneration;
when yet the Synod themselves, unanimously believed particular Election, and
irresistible Grace.

The Question was, By what Evidence, must a Man proceed, in taking to himself
the Comforts of his Justification? The bigger Part of the Country laid the
first and main Stress of our comfortable Evidence, on our Sanctification; but
the Opinionists (says Dr. Mather) were for another sort of Evidence, as their
Chief, namely the Spirit of GOD, by a powerful Application of a Promise,
begetting in us, and revealing to us, a powerful Assurance of our being
justified. Mag. B. 7. p. 14.

Now, as the Doctor adds (even on this Way of stating the Question, or
expressing the Sentiments of those called Opinionists, which they would be far
from acquiescing in, as expressing their full and true Opinion) "The Truth
might easily have united both these Opinions." But as he goes on, They carried
the Matter on to a very perrilous Door, opened to many Errors and Evils, yea to
threaten a Subversion of the peaceable Order in Government. But they deny and
disclaim the Consequences sixed on them, and justify their own Opinion and
Conduct, and charge the other Party with as fatal and mischievous Consequences,
and a Conduct arbitrary and oppressive.

Besides the Differences about those Points, for which these People were
charged with Antinomianism, what was called Familism, was perhaps not a little
offensive. Nay their Differences in Opinion were worked up to almost a State
Quarrel at the last, as Arminianism had been in Holland, and Episcopacy was in
England afterward, and as the Reformation still is all over Europe. The
public Affairs of Town and Colony were affected by these Contentions, and the
Governor and Assistants put in and out, as the one or the other Side
prevailed. The whole People unhappily run into Factions and Parties, in such a
M^^ner, as if Contention and every evil Work, had not been Evidences
incontestable, that the Wisdom from which they proceeded could not be from
Above. But so it is, where Men differ about Religion, their Contentions are
usually the most sharp, and carried on with the most irreligious Heat and
Animosity: Even though they differ about the smallest Matters, or when, as was
the Case here, they differ from each other but in a very little.

A great Part of the Body of the People, and I am apt to think, at the first,
the Majority of the Town of Boston, were of the same Side the Question with
those People who afterward came here. It Is certain the Synod and the Court
were both held at New-Town, because of the Disaffection of the People of
Boston. The Deputies of the Town, at least some of them, openly espoused that
Party. The Town, at least many of them, petitioned in their Favor. And Mr.
Cotton, the chief Oracle then of both Town and Country, was confidently
believed by them, to be of the Opinion they contended for. To which I might add
the Number of the People in that Town, that were censured at the Court.

Those who came away were most of them long esteemed as Brethren of the Church,
and never censured by the Church at all; nay that Church did long retain some
Particularities, as to the Brethren's Power in Church Affairs, and their
Liberty to exercise their Gifts in private or family Meetings, and as to the
Subjects of Infant Baptism. It is certain Mr. Wheelwright, Minister to a Branch
of that Church, at a Place since called Braintree (where the Town had some
Lands) was eager and zealous against the Covenant of Works; and was banished by
the Court for what was then called Sedition, by the same Rule which will make
every Dissent from, or Opposition to a Majority in any religious Affairs, to be
Sedition, and an Iniquity to be punished by the Judge. The minor Part must
always be seditious, if it be Sedition to defend their own religious Opinions,
and endeavor to confute the contrary. This Maxim once allowed must chain Men
down under Errors and Falsehoods wherever they prevail, and even rivet their
Chains. On this Foot, what will become of the glorious Martyrs for the Gospel
in the first Ages of it, and the holy Apostles, who turned the World upside
down, who turned Men from Darkness to Light, from the God's of the Nations,
whom they called Vanities, to the living and true GOD. Nay, what shall we say
of our blessed Savior himself, who says he came to send Division on Earth. How
shall we excuse the Protestants, nay how shall we justify the Puritans
themselves, if it be seditious to oppose any religious Opinions we think are
false or erroneous, when the major Part of the Society happen to think
otherwise. I must farther add, that however Mr. Cotton, at the Synod, after
long Labor with him, disowned many of the Opinions charged on these People,
yet he would not condemn all the said Errors in the Gross, as the rest did, and
there is some Reason to believe that he differed from the other Ministers to
the last, at least in the Manner of explaining these most abstruse and
difficult Points; if he did not continue to hold, that Union to Christ was
before Faith in him, and that the Habit of Faith proceeded or followed from our
Justification, which it is said, he once seemed to hold in the Synod; and which
was in Reality the Root or Fountain of all the Opinions so much faulted in this
People. And however Mr. Cotton has in Print disowned them, and they are by
others charged with Falsehood and Calumny, in shrouding themselves under the
Authority of his great Name; yet they who should be owned to know their own
Opinions, and understand their own Expressions and Designs best, always
persisted in it, that Mr. Cotton was with them, or that they meant no more than
they understood him to mean.

But to return --,

The Affair was agitated in Court for three Days, and some changing Sides in
the Court, the Majority was on the Side of the Synod, and took Measures
effectually to support their own Opinions. Whereupon, many of the other Side
determined to remove, for Peace sake, and to enjoy the Freedom of their
Consciences. And Mr. John Clark, who made the Proposal, was requested with some
others, to seek out a Place, and thereupon by Reason of the suffocating Heat of
the Summer before, he went North, to be somewhat cooler, but the Winter
following proving as cold, they were forced in the Spring to make toward the
South: So having sought the Lord for Direction, they agreed, that while their
Vessel was passing about a large and dangerous Cape, (Cape Cod) they would
cross over by Land, having Long Island and Delaware-Bay in their Eye, for the
Place of their Residence. At Providence, Mr. R. Williams lovingly entertained
them, and being consulted about their Design, readily presented two Places
before them in the Narraganset-Bay, the one on the Main called Sow-wames, (the
south-easterly Part of the Neck since called Phebe's Neck, in Barrington
Perhaps Sowames is properly the Name of the River, where the two Swanzey Rivers
meet and run together for near a Mile, when they empty themselves in the
Narraganset Bay, or of a small Island, where those two first Rivers meet, at
the Bottom of New Meadow Neck, so called.
) and Aquedneck, now Rhode Island. And inasmuch as they were determined to go
out of every other Jurisdiction, Mr. Williams and Mr. Clark, attended with two
other Persons, went to Plymouth to enquire how the Case stood; they were
lovingly received, and answered, that Sowames was the Garden of their Patent.
But they were advised to settle at Aquetneck, and promised to be looked on as
free, and to be treated and assisted as loving Neighbors. (Mr. J. Clark's
Nar.) On their Return, the 7th of March 1637, 8, the People to the Number of
Eighteen, Their Names are as follow, William Coddington, John Clark, William
Hutchinson, John Coggeshall, William Aspinwall, Samuel W^lbore, John Porter,
John Sanford, Edward Hutchinson, jun. Thomas Savage, William Dyre, William
Freeborne, Philip S^earman, John Walker, Richard Carder, William Baulston,
Edward Hutchinson sen. Henry Bull.
incorporated themselve a Body politic, and chose Mr. Coddington their Leader,
to be the Judge or chief Magistrate. After the same Manner Plymouth and
Connecticut Colonies were forced to enter into a voluntary Agreement or
Covenant at the first, as having no legal Authority amongst them; the People
here however immediately sought a Patent, and in a few Years obtained one.

Mr. R. Williams was very instrumental in procuring the Island of the Indian
Sachems, and has left this Account in pe^pe^uam rei memoriam It was not Price
or Money that could have purchased Rhode Island, but 'twas obtained by Love,
that Love and Favor which that honored Gentleman, Sir Henry Vane and my self,
had with the great Sachem Myantonomo, about the League which I procured,
between the Massachusetts English and the Narragansets in the Pequot War. This
I mention, that as the truly noble Sir Henry Vane, has been so great an
Instrument, in the Hand of GOD, for procuring this Island of the Barbarians, as
also for the procuring and confirming the Charter, it may be with all thankful
Acknowledgments recorded, and remembered by us, and ours who reap the sweet
Fruits of so great Benefits, and such unheard of Liberties among us Mss. of R.
W. And in another Manuscript he tells us, the Indians were very shy and jealous
of selling the Lands to any, and chose rather to make a Grant of them to such
as they affected, but at the same Time, expected such Gratuities and Rewards as
made an Indian Gift often times a very dear Bargain. And the Colony 70 Years
agon 1666 avered, that though the Favor Mr. Williams had with Myantonomy was the
great Means of procuring the Grants of the Land, yet the Purchase had been
dearer than of any Lands in New England; the Reason of which might be, partly,
the English inhabited between two powerful Nations, the Wamponoags to the North
and East, who had formerly possessed some Part of their Grants, before they had
surrendered it to the Narragansets, and though they freely owned the Submission,
yet it was though it best by Mr. Williams to make them easy by Gratuities, to the
Sachem his Counselors and Followers. On the other Side the Narragansetts were
very numerous, and the Natives inhabiting any Spot the English sat down upon,
or improved, were all to be bought off to their Content, and often times were
to be paid over and over again.

On the 24th of March 1637, 8, this Day an Hundred Years, the Indian Sachems
signed the Deed or Grant of the Island Aquetneck, etc and the English not only
honestly paid the mentioned Gratuities, to the Sachems, but many more to the
Inhabitants to remove off, as appears by the Receipts still extant. And
afterward, at a considerable Expense, they purchased Quit-Claims, of the Heirs
and Successors of the Sachems; besides they were forced to buy over again,
several Parts of the first Grant. So that they came very justly by the Soil.
And thus they describe themselves twenty Years after, in an Address to the
supreme Authority in England 1659; This poor Colony (say they) mostly consists,
of a Birth, and Breeding of the most High. We being an outcast People, formerly
from our Mother-Nation, in the Bishops Days, and since from the rest of the
New-English over zealous Colonies. Our whole Frame, being much like the present
Frame, and Constitution of our dearest Mother England; bearing with the several
Judgments, and Consciences of each other, in all the Towns of the Colony; which
our neighbor Colonies do not; and which is the only Cause, of their great
Offense, against us.

The Settlement began immediat^^^, at the Eastward or Northward End of the
Island, (then called Pocasset,) All our Histories call the main Land, over
against the ^asterly End of the Island, where is now Tiverton, etc. by the Name
of Pocasset, and in the Indian Grant to the first Setlers, the same Place seems
to be called Powacasick. But it is as evident in our Records, that the eastern
End of the Island, is called by the same Name; perhaps if I may be indulged a
Conjecture, the Name, properly belonged, to the Strait in the River or Bay, at
the eastern End of the Island, where is now Howland's Ferry, and the Lands on
both Sides might be called Pocasset, 'till the English Name of Portsmouth for
the easterly End of the Island prevailed, when the Indian Name Pocasset might
became confined to the main Land, which was not settled by the English for many
Years after. It Is certain every remarkable Strait, or Fall in a River, had a
Name among the Indians, as well as every Point of Land in the Bay. A Knowledge
of the Mea^ing of the Indian Words, would decide all such Disputes.
round the Cove, and the Town was laid out at the Spring. And many of their
Friends following them that Summer, their Number was so considerably increased,
that the next Spring, some of the Heads with others, came to the s^uthern or
western End of the Island. The Island was divided into two Townships, the
eastern Part called Portsmouth, and the other Newport; and 1644, they named the
Island the Isle of Rhodes or Rhode Island. Thus began the Settlement of this
Island and Colony, and through the good Hand of our GOD upon us, we have
continued to this Day. GOD has blessed and prospered the People, in their
Labors, and preserved to them their Privileges, for the sake of which they
followed him into the Wilderness.

And now having seen something of the Occasion, and Manner of our first
Settlement, let us take a short View of the History, and present State of the
Colony.

And here in the first Place, as to the inhabiting the other Lands, and
erecting the other Towns n^w within our Bounds. -- At the same Time the Island
was inhabited, a Number of the Providence People, Mr. Arnold, etc. sat down at
Patuxet, a Place adjoining, and within their Grant. They were encouraged by the
Meadows, on the River, which were every where an Inducement, to People to
settle themselves, as they immediately furnished Food for their Cattle in the
Winter.

In 1642, 3, on the 12th of January, Shawomet, or Mishawomet, since called
Warwick, was purchased of Myantonomo; Pomham the petty Sachem consenting to the
Sale or Grant, though he afterward denied it. The Grant was made to Randal
Holden, John Wickes, Samuel Gorton, John Green, Francis Weston, Richard
Waterman, John Warner, Richard Carder, Samson Shotten, Robert Potter, William
Woodeal.

Here it may be proper, to take some Notice of the religious Opinions of Mr.
Gorton, whose Followers were called Gortonists, or Gortonians, holding some
Things peculiar to themselves, and different from all the other People in
New England.

He came to Rhode Island in June 1638, where he tarried 'till 1639, 40, that he
was on some Contentions banished the Island. Thence he went to Providence,
where many of the People growing uneasy at his planting and building at
Patuxet, and complaining to the Massachusetts-Government in 1642, he was
summoned to appear before their Court, which he despised. But however he
purchased this Tract of the Indians, and removed there with his Friends. But
new Complaints soon went to Boston from some of the English, and Pomham and
Socononoko petty Sachems of the Indians, who it seems, were willing to take
Advantage of the Protection of the Massachusetts-English, to revolt from their
Subjection to Myantonomy, as Massasoit had done before, by Means of the
Plymouth-English. Hereupon Mr. Gorton and his Friends being summoned to Court,
he refused to obey, as out of the Jurisdiction, both of Boston and Plymouth,
who both sought to stretch their Bounds, to have taken him in. The Government
at length, sent up a Company of armed Men, who after a fruitless Treaty, made
him and his Friends Prisoners, except a few who escaped by Flight. They were
carried to Boston, and after a Trial in their Court, condemned, to be confined
in a severe, and even a scandalous Manner, in several Towns, for the Winter,
and in the Spring banished the Colony. They came to Rhode Island, and fearing
to be again troubled, the Massachusetts seeking a Patent of some of the
Narraganset Country, they procured an actual and solemn Submission of the
Sachems to King Charles, on the 19th of August 1644, and Messi. Gorton, Green,
and Holden, went to England, and obtained an Order, to be suffered peaceably to
possess their Purchase. And the Lands forementioned, being incorporated in the
They sometimes called themselves the Colony, sometimes the Province of
Providence Plantations, and sometimes the Colony or Province.
Province of Providence Plantations; They returned and carried on their
Improvements, naming their Purchase Warwick, in Honor to the Earl of Warwick,
who gave them his friendly Protection.

What Mr. Gorton's religious Opinions really were, is now as hard to tell, as
it is to understand his most mysterious Dialect, for there are sufficient
Reasons, why we ought not and cannot believe, he held all that are confidently
fathered upon him. For it is certain that whatever impious Opinions, his
Adversaries imputed to him, and whatever horrid Consequences they drew, from
the Opinions he owned; he ascribed as bad to them, and fixed as dreadful
Consequences on their Tenets; and at the same Time, in the mos^ solemn Manner,
denies and disavows many Things they charge him with; above all, when he is
charged with denying a future State, and the Judgment to come, both in Theory
and in Practice; he peremptorily, and vehemently denies the Charge, and
solemnly appeals to GOD, and all that knew him, of the Integrity of his Heart,
and the Purity of his Hands; and avers, that he always joins Eternity with
Religion, as most essential. And that the Doctrine of the general
Salvationists, was the Thing which his Soul hated.) Mss. Letter in Ans. to Mr.
Morton's Memorial.)

In an Address to King Charles II. 1679, he disowns the Puritans, and most
unaccountably says, he sucked in his peculiar Tenets, "from the Breasts of his
Mother, the Church of England." He strenuously opposed the Doctrines of the
People called Quakers. I am informed that he and his Followers, maintained a
religious Meeting, on the first Day of the Week, for above sixty Years, and
that their Worship consisted of Prayers to GOD, of Preaching, or expounding the
Scriptures, and singing of Psalms. He lived to a great Age. He was of a good
Family in England, and says he made use of the learned Languages in expounding
the Scriptures to his Hearers.

About 1642, 3, there were two trading Houses, set up in the Narraganset
Country; one by Mr. Wilcox, and Mr. R. Williams, the other by Mr. Richard
Smith, and some few Plantations made near them, on particular Grants or
Purchases of the Indians, but not very many 'till 1657: When several Gentlemen
on the Island, and ^^sewhere, made a considerable Purchase, called the
Petaquams^ut Purchase. And the same Year there was a Purchase of the Island of
Canonicut, as the smaller Islands had been purchased before.

In 1665, Misquamicut was purchased of the Indians, and it was granted a
Township by the Name of Westerly, 1669. In 1672 Manisses called Block-Island,
was made a Township, by the Name of New-Shoreham. In 1674 the Inhabitants at
Petequamscut and Parts adjacent, had their Lands incorporated, a Township by
the Name of Kingston. And in 1677 the Town of East-Greenwich was incorporated,
and 1678 Canonicut Island, or rather Quononoquot, was incorporated a Township
by the Name of James-Town. In 1722, the Lands properly called Narraganset, were
divided into the two Townships of North and South-Kingston. In 1729 the whole
Colony was divided into three Counties, for the Ease of the Inhabitants. And
1730 the Town of Providence was divided into the four Towns of Providence,
Smithfield, Gloucester, and Situate. The whole Land being filled with
Inhabitants, partly by the coming in of some few from other Places, but chiefly
by the natural Increase of the first Setlers. In 1738 the Town of Westerly is
divided, and the easterly Part of it, erected into a Township, by the Name of
Charlestown, which may be to the Honor of King Charles the II. who granted
us, our present Charter.
In the foresaid Year 1730, there was by the King's Order, an exact Account
taken of the Number of Souls in the Colony, The said Account was taken before
Providence Township was divided. The whole Account is this, Whites. Negroes.
Indians. Newport, 3843 649 148 Providence, 3707 128 81 Portsmouth, 643 100 70
Warwick, 1028 77 73 Westerly, 1620 56 250 North-Kingston, 1875 165 65
South-Kingston, 965 333 225 East Greenwich, 1149 40 34 James-Town, 222 80 19
New Shoreham, 250 20 20 15302 1648 985


and they were found to be no less, than Seventeen Thousand Nine Hundred and
Thirty Five, of which no more than Nine Hundred and Eighty Five, were Indians,
and One Thousand Six Hundred and Forty Eight, Negroes. So that the English in
all were Fifteen Thousand Three Hundred and two.

Some of the principal Persons, who came at first to this Island, removed again
in a little Time, some to Long Island for larger Accommodations, some to
Massachusetts again, where three Hutchinson, Dummer, Savage.
of those Families, have made a very considerable Figure, ever since to this
Day. A considerable Number likewise, removed to the other Towns in this Colony,
and many settled in the Parts adjacent, that are within the Colony of Plymouth.
Nevertheless in 1730 the Inhabitants of the whole Island were Five Thousand
four Hundred and Fifty Eight, and of this Town Four Thousand six Hundred and
Forty, who are no doubt by this Time increased to Five Thousand Souls. The
Trade and Business of the Town at the first, was but very little, and
inconsiderable, consisting only of a little Corn and Pork and Tobacco, sent to
Boston, for a ^ew European and other Goods, they could not subsist without, and
all at the Mercy of the Traders there too. Perhaps it may be agreeable to some
Persons, to observe, that about 1660, and many Years after, Provision Pay was
100 per Cent. beneath Sterling Money. In 1687 the Prices of Goods set to pay
Taxes in, were, Wool 8 d. per Pound, Butter 4 d Indian Corn 1 s. 6 d per
Bushel. If the Tax was paid in Money, then there was to be an Allowance or
Abatement of one sixth Part, and that perhaps will nearly give the true ^urrent
Price, of those Kinds of Provisions, at that Time.
At present there are above one Hundred Sail of Vessels belonging to this Town,
besides what belong to the rest of the Colony. GOD grant, that as we increase
in Numbers and Riches, we may not increase in Sin and Wickedness; but that we
may rather be lead, by the divine Goodness, to reform whatever may have been
amiss or wanting among us.

As to the Form of Government we have passed under, it must be observed, the
Government has been always more or less democratical. At the first
Incorporation on the Island, the People chose a Judge to do Justice and
Judgment and preserve the public Peace; and toward the latter End of the
Year, on the second Day of the eleventh Month, they added three Gentlemen as
Assistants to him in his Office. The three Elders were Nicholas Easton, John
Coggeshall, and William Brenton.
And soon after appointed all, to take the Oath of Allegiance to the King,
according to the Statute. In 1640 they voted, the chief Magistrate should be
called Governor, the next Deputy Governor, and four Gentlemen chosen out of
the two Towns, Assistants Their Names were W. Coddington Governor, W. Brenton
Deputy Governor, N. Easton, J. Coggeshall, W. Hutchinson, J. Porter,
Assistants. The next Year R. Harding, was in Mr. Easton's Place, and Mr. W.
Baulston in the Room of Mr. Hutchinson, (who perhaps removed) and the next Year
Mr. Easton was chosen Assistant again, and those six The Six Gentlemen were W.
Coddington Governor, W. Brenton Deputy Governor, N. Easton, J. Coggeshall, W.
Baulston, and J. Porter, Assistants.
Gentlemen, held their Offices, 'till the Patent of Incorp^ration.

At Providence, all new Comers promised to submit themselves in active or
passive Obedience, to all such Orders, and Agreements, as shall be made for
public Good of the Body, in an orderly way, by major Consent of the
Inhabitants, The first twelve Persons who came to Mr. Williams, and therefore
had, by virtue of his Conveyance, some Prerogative with him, in the Divisions
etc. of the Land, were William Arnold, John Green, John Throgmorton, Thomas
James, William Harris, Thomas Olney, Richard Waterman, Francis Weston, Ezekiel
Holliman, Robert Cole, Stukeley Westcoat, and William Carpenter Soon after came
to them Chad. Brown, Wm. Fairfield, J. Warner, E. Angel, J. Windsor, R. Scott,
Wm. Reinolds, Wm Wickenden, Gregory Dexter, etc. etc. most of whose Names
remain in a numerou^ Posterity.
b^^ this being insufficient, 27th Day 5th Mo. 1640, they did to the Number of
near 40 Persons, Combine in a Form of civil Government, according to a Model
drawn up by some of themselves, as most suitable to promote Peace and Order in
their present Circumstances; which however left them in a very feeble Condition.

But all the Inhabitants in the Narraganset-Bay, being without a Patent, and
any legal Authority, 1643 Mr. R. Williams, went to England as Agent, and by the
Help and Assistance of Sir Henry Vane, jun. obtained of the Earl of Warwick
(appointed by Parliament Governor and Admiral of all the Plantations) and his
Council, a free and absolute Charter of civil Incorporation, by the Name of the
Incorporation of Providence Plantations in the Narraganset-Bay in New England;
impowring them to rule themselves, and such as should inhabit within their
Bounds, by such a Form of civil Government, as by the voluntary Agreement of
all, or the greater Part, shall be found most serviceable, in their Estate and
Condition; and to make suitable Laws, agreeable to the Laws of England, so far
as the Nature and Constitution of the Place will admit, etc. -- It was dated
17th of March, 19th Charles, i. e. 1643, 4. but it don't appear how long it
was, before Mr. Williams brought it over. It is not to be wondered at, if it
took them some Time to agree in a Method.

In 1647 May 19th, a General Assembly of the Province (as then called)
established a Body of very good and wholesome Laws, agreeable to the English
Statute Book; and erected a Form of civil Government for the Administration of
the Laws, and the making such other, as should be found necessary. The supreme
Power was left in the Body of the People, assembled in an orderly way; a Court
of Commissioners, consisting of six Persons, chosen by each of the four Towns
of Providence, Portsmouth, Newport, and Warwick, had a Legislative Authority,
at least, their Acts were to be in Force, unless repealed within a limited
Time, by the Vote of the major Part of the Freemen of the Province, to be
collected at their respective Town Meetings appointed for that End.

A President and four Assistants were chosen yearly, to be Conservators of the
Peace, with all civil Power, and by a special Commission, they were Judges of
the Court of Trials, assisted by the two Wardens or Justices of the particular
Town, in which the Court sat from Time to Time.

Every Town chose a Council of six Persons, to manage their Town Affairs, and
their Town Court, had the Trial of small Cases, but with an Appeal to the Court
of the President and Associates.

This Form of Government subsisted till 1651, when there were some Obstructions
to it, by a Commission granted from the Council of State, to the principal
Inhabitant of the Island, to govern the Island, with a Council chosen by the
People, and approved by himself. But the People thinking it, "a Violation or
Incroachment on their Liberties, and Purchases, as granted and secured by
Charter"; immediately dispatched Mr. R. Williams and Mr. J. Clark to England,
as their Agents, and they easily procured an Order from the Council of State,
to vacate or suspend the Commission. This Order is dated 2d of October 1652,
but by Reason of some Misunderstandings between the four Towns, it was a Year
or two before they returned to their old Plan, which then lasted to the present
Charter.

In 1663 July 8. Charles 2d. granted an ample Charter, whereby the Province was
made a Body Corporate and Politic, in Fact and Name, by the Name of the
Governor and Company of the English Colony of Rhode Island and Providence
Plantations in New England in America. This CHARTER we enjoy to this Day, through
the merciful Providence of GOD. And as every one knows, the Form of Government
established in it, I need say but little about it. The Governor, the Deputy
Governor, and ten Assistants chosen yearly by the Freemen, on the first
Wednesday in May, have the Administration of the Government in their Hands; and
together with thirty six Deputies, The Town of Charlestown being erected since
this was prepared for the Press, the Number of Deputies is now Thirty Eight.
chosen half yearly by the several Towns, make up the General Assembly; which
is the highest Court in the Colony, and our Legislature: empowered to make Laws
as to them shall seem meet, for the Good and Welfare of the said Company -- so
as such Laws be not contrary and repugnant unto, but as near as may be,
agreeable to the Laws of England, considering the Nature and Constitution of the
Place and People there.

This Assembly meets twice a Year by Charter, on Election Day, and the last
Wednesday of October. The first, by Law is held at Newport, and the last at
Providence and South-Kingston alternately. The Governor has no negative Voice,
and the major Vote of the whole Assembly in one House, determines in the Choice
of civil or military Officers, but in the passing Laws the Assembly sits in two
Houses.

It would be too tedious, to give a particular Account of all the repeated
Attempts, and Stratagems made use of, to wrest the Jurisdiction and Propriety
of a considerable Part of the Lands within our Patent from the Colony.

Therefore I proceed to say,

When Col. Dudley was appointed President of the Massachusetts, the Narraganset
Country, called then King's Province, was included in his Commission. In 1685
October 6 a Writ of Quo Warranto, was issued out against the Colony, which was
brought here June 26. 1686, by Ed. Randolph, Esquire whereupon the Free
Inhabitants, especially of the chief Towns, met at Newport on the 29th, and
gave in their Opinion to the General Assembly, and left "the further Proceeding
to the judicious Determination of the Assembly." The Assembly upon serious
Consideration, published and declared, that they determined, not to stand Suit
with His Majesty, but to proceed, by humble Address to His Majesty to continue
their Privileges and Liberties according to the Charter; and they accordingly
sent home an Address to the King, who by his Answer promised them Protection,
and Favor. However the Colony was put under the Government of Sir Ed. Andross,
and "suffered with others, several Hardships, and severe Impositions."

The Reasons why the Assembly chose not to stand Suit with the King, were
partly their Poverty, and Inability to bear the Expense of such a Lawsuit in
England, and partly the Example of the many Corporations in England, which had
in the like Case surrendered their Charters, and perhaps the secret Hope they
should find more Favor with the King, by this way of Proceeding, was the
principal Motive.

January 12. 1686, 7. Sir Edmund Andross's Commission to be Governor of this
Colony, with the rest of New England, was published here, and the Colony made
one County, and governed by civil Officers under him.

After the Revolution in England, there was a General Assembly of the Freemen
of the Colony at Newport, May 1. 1689, who agreed that since Sir Ed. Andross
was seized and confined with others of his Council (at Boston) and his
Authority silenced and deposed, it was their Duty, to lay hold of their former
Charter Privileges; and avowedly professing all Allegiance to the Crown of
England, they replaced all the general Officers that had been displaced three
Years before. But some of the Gentlemen afterward declining to act by this
Authority, a general Assembly called February 20 following, elected others in
their Room. And there having been no Judgment against the Charter, the
Government allowed of the resuming it, and through the divine Goodness, and the
Clemency, Justice, and Prudence of our Princes, it has been continued ever
since. GOD grant, we may never forfeit nor lose our precious and invaluable
Liberties and Privileges; and that we may ever use them with Prudence and
Discretion, with Gratitude to GOD, the Governor of the World; and with Loyalty
to the Crown!

It is now more than Time for me to lay before you, some Account of our
religious Affairs.

It is a Pity we cannot entirely confute all the oppr^brious Things, which
some have written of some of the Inhabitants. I am satisfied a great many of
them were wholly groundless, many others very much aggravated, and
misrepresented, and some Things made to be Reproaches, which in Reality were
Praiseworthy.

I take it to have been no Dishonor to the Colony, that Christians, of every
Denomination, were suffered to lead quiet and peaceable Lives, without any
Fines, or Punishments for their speculative Opinions, or for using those
external Forms of Worship, they believed GOD had appointed, and would accept.
Bigots may call this Confusion, and Disorder, and it may be so, according to
their poor worldly Notions of Religion, and the Kingdom of Christ. But the
pretended Order of humane Authority, assuming the Place and Prerogatives of
Jesus Christ, and trampling on the Consciences of his Subjects, is, as Mr. R.
Williams most justly calls it, monstrous Disorder.

Though it be very certain, that a public Worship of GOD, is very necessary even
to civilize Mankind, who would be likely to loose all Sense of Religion without
it; yet it will not follow, that the civil Magistrate, as such, has Authority
to appoint the Rites of Worship, and constrain all his Subjects to use them,
much less to punish them for using any other. What has been forever the
Consequences, of his pretending to such Authority, and using his Power to
support it? What Glory does it bring to GOD, and what Good can it do to Men, to
force them to attend a Worship they disapprove? It can only make them
Hypocrites, and GOD abhors such Worshippers.

Notwithstanding our Constitution left every one to his own Liberty, and his
Conscience; and notwithstanding the Variety of Opinions that were entertained,
and notwithstanding some may have contracted, too great an Indifference to any
social Worship, yet I am well assured, there scarce ever was a Time, the
hundred Years past, in which there was not a weekly public Worship of GOD,
attended by Christians, on this Island, and in the other first Towns of the
Colony.

It is no ways unlikely, some odd, and whimsical Opinions may have been
broached, the Liberty enjoyed here, would tempt Persons distressed for their
Opinions in the neighboring Governments, to retire to this Colony as an
Asylum. It is no ways unlikely, that some Persons of a very different Genius,
and Spirit from the first Setlers, might intrude themselves, and use this
Liberty as an Occasion to the Flesh; but the first Set of Men who came here,
were a pious Generation, Men of Virtue and Godliness, notwithstanding their
Tincture of Enthusiasm, which was not peculiar to them; and notwithstanding
their peculiar Opinions of Justification, and the Nature, and Rights, of the
Christian Church. They had not so many great and wise Men among them, perhaps,
as were in some of the other Colonies; but their whole Number was very small,
in Comparison with the other Colonies: Nevertheless they had some very
considerable Men, and of superior Merit. It is true likewise, their Form of
Government was too feeble, their first Patent left them without sufficient
Authority in their civil Officers, to check any popular Humors; but yet, they
did, and that as early as the Massachusetts Colony, form a Body of good Laws,
by which all Vice, and every Immorality, was discouraged or punished. And
throughout the whole History of the Island and Colony, there is ma^^^estly, an
Aim and Endeavor, to prevent or suppress all Disorders and Immoralities, and
to promote universal Peace, Virtue, Godliness, and Charity.

I do not pretend to defend all the Opinions, that were entertained by any of
them; much less all the extravagant Notions, that were unjustly ascribed to
some of them; nor yet to justify every Word, or Action, that might be the
Effect of heated Zeal, or raised Indignation and Resentment. That Man, who will
go about to justify, or condemn a Party, in the Gross, and without Distinction,
shall never be approved or imitated by me, much less can it be expected, I
should defend all the Opinions of so many different religious Parties, as were
here united in civil Peace. However, I dare say it after Mr. J. Clark, that
notwithstanding the different Consciences and Understandings among them, they
agreed to maintain civil Justice and Judgments, neither were there such
Outrages committed among them, as in other Parts of the Country were frequently
seen. ( Clark's Nar. Introd.) And I bear them Witness, they had a Zeal for GOD:
If it were not according to Knowledge in every Article, yet they lay open to
Instruction, desirous to find out and discover the whole Mind and Will of GOD;
which cannot so truly be said of all Places, where yet Men are not more
infallible. If there were any of them, who made Shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience, perhaps it would be as easy, as it would be invidious, to find
Parallels enough in other Places, to show there are other dangerous Rocks,
besides Liberty of Conscience. It is an unaccountable Humor, that has
prevailed among too many christian Sects, to make Religion, and the Gospel
consist, in their own peculiar and distinguishing Tenets, which would almost
tempt an impartial Man, to think it ought rather to consist, in those Things,
wherein they are most generally agreed, and conclude in the Words of the
excellent Dr. Cotton Mather, The Period hastens for a new Reformation, wherein
it is likely none of our very best Parties, will be in all Things, the Standard
of what shall prevail in the World, but our holy Lord will form a new People,
of those good Men that shall unite in the Aticles of their Goodness, and
sweetly bear with one another in their lesser Differences. ( Good Men united.
p. 26, 7.)

It must be a mean contracted Way of thinking, to confine the Favor of GOD,
and the Power of Godliness, to one Set of speculative Opinions, or any
particular external Forms of Worship. How hard must it be, to imagine, all
other Christians, but our selves, must be formal, and hypocritical, and
destitute of the Grace of GOD, because their Education or Capacity differs from
ours, or that GOD has given them more or less Light than to us, though we cannot
deny, they give the proper Evidence, of their fearing GOD, by their working
Righteousness; and show their Love to him, by keeping what they understand, he
has commanded; and though their Faith in Christ Jesus, purifies their Hearts, and
works by Love, and overcomes the World. It would be hard to show, why Liberty
of Conscience, mutual Forbearance, and Good Will, why brotherly Kindness and
Charity, is not as good a Center of Unity, as a constrained Uniformity in
external Ceremonies, or a forced Subscription to ambiguous Articles. Experience
has dearly convinced the World, that Unanimity in Judgment and Affection, cannot
be secured by penal Laws. Who can tell, why the Unity of the Spirit in the
Bonds of Peace, is not enough for Christians to aim at? And who can assign a
Reason, why they may not love one another, though abounding in their own several
Senses? And why, if they live in Peace, the GOD of Love and Peace, may not be
with them?

Indulgence to tender Consciences, might be a Reproach to the Colony, an
hundred Years agon, but a better Way of thinking prevails in the Protestant
Part of the christian Church at present. It is now a Glory to the Colony, to
have avowed such Sentiments so long ago, while Blindness in this Article,
happened in other Places, and to have led the Way as an Example to others, and
to have first put the Theory into Practice.

Liberty of Conscience, is more fully established and enjoyed now, in the other
New-English Colonies; and our Mother-Kingdom, grants a legal Toleration, to all
peaceable and conscientious Dissenters from the parliamentary Establishment.
Greater Light breaking into the World, and the Church, and especially, all
Parties by Turns, experiencing, and complaining aloud of the Hardships of
Constraint, they are come to allow as reasonable to all others, what they want
and challenge for themselves. And there is no other Bottom but this to rest
upon, to leave others the Liberty we should desire ourselves, the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made them free. This is doing as we would be done by, the
grand Rule of Justice and Equity; this is leaving the Government of the Church
to Jesus Christ, the King and Head over all Things, and suffering his Subjects
to obey and serve him.

But to take Things in their Order, Mr. R. Williams is said, in a few Years
after his settling at Providence, to have embraced the Opinions of the People
called (by Way of Reproach) Anabaptists, in Respect to the Subject and Mode of
Baptism; and to have formed a Church there, in that Way, with the Help of one
Mr. Ezekiel Holliman, Since this was transcribed for the Press, I find some
Reasons to suspect, that Mr. Williams did not form a Church of the Anabaptists,
and that he never joined with the Baptist Church there Only, that he allowed
them to be nearest the Scripture Rule, and true primitive Practice, as to the
Mode and Subject of Baptism. But that he himself waited for new Apostles, etc.
The most ancient Inhabitants now alive, some of them above eighty Years old,
who personally knew Mr. Williams, and were well acquainted with many of the
original Se^lers, never beard that Mr. Williams formed the Baptist Church there
but always understood that Mr. Brown, Mr. Wickenden or Wig^^^n. Mr. Dexter,
Mr. Olney, Mr. T^^inghast, etc. were the first Founders of that Church.
and that after a while he renounced these Opinions likewise, and turned
Seeker, (i.e.) to wait for new Apostles, to restore Christianity. He believed
the Christian Religion, to have been so corrupted and disfigured in what he
called the "Apostasy, as that there was no Ministry of an ordinary Vocation
left in the Church, but Prophecy," and that there was need of a special
Commission, to restore the Modes of positive Worship, according to the original
Institution. It don't appear to me, that he had any Doubt of the true Mode, and
proper Subjects of Baptism, but, that no Man had any Authority, to revive the
Practice, of the sacred Ordinances, without a new and immediate Commission. It
is also said ( Neale.) That his Church hereupon crumbled to Pieces, every one
following his own Fancy, and the Worship of GOD came to be generally neglected.
But I believe this to be a Mistake in Fact, for it certainly appears, there was
a flourishing Church of the Baptists there, a few Years after the Time of the
supposed breaking to Pieces; and it is known by the Names of the Members, as
well as by Tradition, they were some of the first Setlers at Providence;
however, it is possible some of his Followers, might embrace his new Opinions.
Mr. Williams used to uphold a public Worship, sometimes, though not weekly, as
many now alive remember, and he used to go once a Month, for many Years, to Mr.
Smith's in the Narraganset, for the same End.

There was no Reason, to lay aside the Use of the sacred Institutions of Jesus
Christ, because they had been perverted, for surely the Disciples of Jesus
Christ, must of Necessity have an inherent Right, to revive, or rectify, any of
his Ordinances that have been misused. The Protestants in general have done so,
by both Sacraments, which they have all of them rescued from some or other of
the Corruptions of Popery. And why they may not be as well rescued from every
Corruption, as from some, and why Christians may not revive the true Form of
administering Baptism, as well as the Supper, is hard to tell, unless we make a
Charm of the Institution. So long as we have the New Testament, wherein the
original Commission and Instructions are contained, we can want no immediate
Warrant, to obey the general Laws of Christ, any more than a new Revelation,
and new Miracles, to justify our believing the old Facts and Doctrines of the
Gospel. The Bible contains the Religion of Christians, and the Word of GOD is a
sufficient Rule of Faith and Worship. Had Mr. Williams adhered to this Maxim,
the Maxim of the Protestants, and more especially of the Puritans, he might
have continued an Anabaptist all his Days, as it is said he was more inclinable
to them, in his latter Time.

Bishop Sanderson says, ( Veneer on the thirty nine Articles, p. 655.) That the
Rev. Archbishop Whitgift, and the learned Hooker, Men of great Judgment, and
famous in their Times, did long since foresee, and declare their Fear, that if
ever Puritanism should prevail among us, it would soon draw in Anabaptism after
it, -- This Cartwright and the Disciplinarians denied, and were offended at. --
But these good Men judged right, they considered only as prudent Men, that
Anabaptism had it is Rise, from the same Principles the Puritans held, and it is
Growth from the same Course, they took; together with the natural Tendency, of
their Principles and Practices toward it; especially that ONE PRINCIPLE, as it
was then by them misunderstood, that the Scripture was adequata agendorum
regula, so as nothing might be lawfully done, without express Warrant, either
from some Command or Example therein contained; which Clue, if followed as far
as it would go, would certainly in Time carry them as far as the Anabaptists
had then gone.

This I beg Leave to look on as a most glorious Concession, of the most able
Adversaries. One Party contend, that the Scripture is the adequate Rule of
Worship, and for the necessity of some Command or Example there; the other
Party, say this leads to Anabaptism. It seems very remarkable, that the
Puritans, at least some of the Puritans, put the Baptism of Infants, and the
administering Baptism by Sprinkling, on a different Foot from many of the other
Party. It was one grand Reason of the Plymouth People's Discontent in Holland
that the Dutch would not reform the Custom of baptising indifferently, the
Children of all Persons that had been themselves baptized in Infancy. And it
was once a great Complaint, against New England, that the Children only of
visible Church Members, were admitted to Baptism. Nor did the general Way of
baptising the Grandchildren of the Covenant, or the Infants of such as do,
what is called (owning the Covenant) (a Phrase and Way peculiar perhaps to New
England;) take Place, without a very great and long Struggle: perhaps it don't
yet universally prevail. When the first Principles, and Practice of New England
are inquired into, and compared together, and with those that prevailed forty
Years after; it will be found no great wonder, if a Person (and there have been
such Persons) who heard the unanswerable Argument, with which some
Paedo-baptists prove the Infants of those who are not Members of some visible
Church, are not to be baptized; and the like powerful Arguments, with which
others, prove that other Infants have an equal Right and Claim with the Infants
of Church Members; I say, it would be no wonder, if such a Person should
believe them both, and conclude in the Words of the late excellent Dr. C.
Mather on a like Occasion, "that REGENERATION is the Thing, without which, a
Title unto Sacraments, is not to be pretended. That real Regeneration, is that
which before GOD, renders Men capable of claiming Sacraments; and visible or
expressed Regeneration, is that which before Men, enables them to make such a
Claim". ( Comp. for Comm. p. 31.)

But to return, about the Year 1653 or 54, there was a Division in the Baptist
Church, at Providence, about the Rite of laying on of Hands, which some pleaded
for as essentially necessary to Church Communion, and the others would leave
indifferent. Hereupon they walked in two Churches, one under Mr. C. Brown, Mr.
Wickenden, etc. the other under Mr. Thomas Olney; This last continued 'till
about 20 Years since, when becoming destitute of an Elder, the Members were
united with other Churches. At present there is some Prospect of their Re
establishment in Church Order.
but laying on of Hands at length generally obtained.

It is remarkable, that the Principles of a too rigid Separation, planted by
Mr. Williams, have taken a deep Root, while some other of his darling Opinions
are almost withered away. That Church which was distinguished by holding laying
on of Hands, necessary to all baptized Persons, came in Time, generally to hold
universal Redemption.

This Church shot out into diverse Branches, as the Members increased, and the
Distance of their Habitations made it inconvenient to attend the public
Worship in the Town; several Meetings were thereupon fixed at different Places,
for their Ease and Accommodation; and about this Time the large Township of
Providence became divided into four Towns: their Chapels of Ease, began to be
considered as distinct Churches, though all are yet in a Union of Councils and
Interests: And there is a strict Association, of all the Baptist Churches in
New England, that hold the Doctrine of laying on of Hands, in that Sense,
maintained, by yearly Meetings of the Elders and Brethren, at several Places,
from time to time, where the Affairs of all the Churches are considered.

The People who came to Rhode Island, who were Puritans of the highest Form,
had desired and depended on the Assistance of Mr. Wheelwright, a famous
Congregational Minister aforementioned. But he chose to go to Long Island,
where he continued some Years. In the mean Time Mr. John Clark, who was a Man
of Letters, carried on a public Worship (as Mr. Brewster did at Plymouth) at
the first coming, till they procured Mr. Lenthal of Weymouth, who was admitted
a Freeman here August 6. 1640. And August 20, Mr. Lenthal, was by Vote called
to keep a public School for the learning of Youth, and for his Encouragement
there was granted to him and his Heirs one hundred Acres of Land, and four more
for an House-Lot; it was also voted, that one hundred Acres should be laid
forth, and appropriated for a School, for encouragement of the poorer Sort, to
train up their Youth in Learning, and Mr. Robert Lenthal while he continues to
teach School, is to have the Benefit thereof. But this Gentleman did not tarry
here very long: I find him gone to England the next Year but one; but there is
no Reason to think that Persons of their Zeal, should immediately fall into a
total neglect of a social Worship. One of their first Cares both at Portsmouth
and at Newport was to build a Meeting House, which I suppose was designed for
public Worship.

It is said, that in 1644, Mr. John Clark, and some others, formed a Church, on
the Scheme and Principles of the Baptists. It is certain that in 1648 there
were fifteen Members in full Communion The Names of the Males were John Clark,
Mark Lukar, Nathanael West, Wm. Vahan, Thomas Clark, Joseph Clark, John
P^^kham, John Thorndon, William Weeden, and Samuel Hubbard.
. And it is this Church, of which we are by divine Providence, the Successors,
though with some little Variation in the Points, which their Adversaries had
objected to them, in the other Colony. And thus all the Churches of Christ in
New England have meliorated their Opinions, and ways of speaking of some
Points, since that Age of Dispute, Contention and Temptation. However, I have
good Reason to think, the first Founders of this Church would have heartily
joined in that Explanation, which was accepted from Mr. Cotton, by the Synod,
and which is said "to make an happy Conclusion of the whole Matter," and I
suppose every one of the present Members, would readily subscribe it, viz. That
we are not married to the Lord Jesus Christ, without Faith, giving an actual
Consent of the Soul to it. That effectual Calling, and the Soul's apprehending
by Faith, is in the order of Nature, before God's Act of Justification on the
Soul; and that in the Testimony of the Holy Spirit, which is the Evidence of
our good Estate before God, the Qualifications of inherent Graces, and the
Fruits thereof, proving the sincerity of our Faith, must ever be co-existent,
concurrent, and co-apparent, or else the conceived Testimony of the Spirit, is
either a Delusion or Doubtful? ( Magnal. B. 7. P. 17.) In this Church there
were several Persons, able to speak to the Edification of the rest; and I have
been informed by Tradition, that the greatest Part of the Inhabitants, used to
attend this Worship, though the Members in Church Fellowship were always but few.

In 1652 (during Mr. Clark's Absence in England) some of the Brethren, embraced
the Opinion of Laying on of Hands, as necessary to all baptized Persons, and in
the Year 1654 or 1656, the Opinion it was necessary to Church Communion and
Fellowship, together with their Opinions of the Doctrines of Grace and
Free Will, occasioned some of them to separate, and form a Church by
themselves, under the Leading of Mr. Wm. Vaban; this Church continues to this
Day, and is numerous; at present under the pastoral Care of Messi. D. Wightman
and N. Eyres.

In 1656 or 1657, some of the People called Quakers, came to this Colony and
Island; and being persecuted and abused in the other Colonies, that, together
with the Opinions and Circumstances of the People here, gave them a very large
Harvest; many, and some of the Baptist Church, embraced their Doctrines and
particular Opinions, to which many of their Posterity, and others, still adhere.

About 1665, a Number of the Members of the Church under Mr. J. Clark, removed
to the new Plantation at Westerly, among whom Mr. John Crandal was a Preacher
and Elder. They afterward did generally embrace the Seventh-Day Sabbath, and
their Successors are now a very large and flourishing Church, under the
pastoral Care of Messi. T. and G. Mexon, and Mr. William Hisc^x.

In 1671, some of the Members of Mr. Clark's Church, who had been in the
Observation of the Seventh-Day Sabbath, for some Years, though it it proper and
necessary to draw off by themselves; and they erected a Church, under the
Leading of Mr. William Hiscox. It Is under the Roof of their Successors we are
now assembled. While our Church is erecting a new and more convenient Meeting
House, we are kindly favored with the Use of this, belonging to the
Sabbatarian Church.
Mr. J. Crandal, Elder of this Church, died the 12th of Sept. 1737.

In 1695, several Ministers of the Massachusetts-Colony, came and preached here
to some who had desired it. The next Year there was a Meeting House erected, in
which the public Worship of GOD, was maintained by the Rev. Mr. Nathanael
Clap. In 1720 there was a Church in the congregational Scheme gathered, and he
was ordained the Pastor, and is still alive, laboring in the Word and
Doctrine. In 1728 there was another Church, formed out of this; the present
Pastor the Rev. Mr. James Searing.

About 1706, the Worship of GOD, according to the Rites of the Church of
England, was began to be set up here, by the Society for propagating the Gospel
in foreign Parts. Mr. Lockyer was the first Missionary, succeeded by the Rev.
Mr. James Honyman, at present the most ancient Missionary of the Church of
England in all America.

So that there are at this Time, seven worshipping Assemblies, Churches or
Societies, in this Town, besides a large one of the People called Quakers, at
Portsmouth, the other Part of the Island.

I am not able, to assign the exact Date, when every Church, or Meeting began,
or every Meeting House was built, in all the several Towns of the Colony. But
there are now in the other eleven Towns no less than twenty five distinct
Societies or worshipping Assemblies of Christians; besides several Places where
there are occasional Meetings, in some Part of the Year, or at certain Seasons,
as is the Custom in the other Colonies, among the new or scattered Settlements.

There are in the nine Towns on the main Land eight Churches of the People
called Baptists, one in every Town, except Greenwich, where there is however a
Meeting House in which there is a Meeting once a Month. The Names of the Elders
of these Churches are, at Providence Mr. T. Windsor, and Tho. Burlingham; at
Smithfield Mr. Josias Cook; at Situate Mr. S. Fisk; at Gloucester Mr Ed.
Mitchel; at Warwick Mr. Manasseh Martyn and Mr. Francis Bates; at N. Kingston
Mr. R. Sweet and Mr. B. Herrington; at S. Kingston Mr. Daniel Everit.


Of the People called Quakers there are seven Meeting Houses on the main Land,
and one at James-Town on Conanicut Island; and a constant Meeting at Westerly,
though no Meeting House yet erected.

There are four epis^opal Churches on the Main, one at Providence, to which the
Rev. Mr. John Checkley is appointed, and one at North-Kingston, of which the
Rev. James Mc'Sparran, D. D. is the present Rector; besides one at Westerly,
and one on the Edge of Warwick, adjoining to East-Greenwich, which are
occasionally supplied by the Missionaries at other Towns.

There are three Presbyterian or Congregational Churches, at Providence,
South-Kingston, and Westerly; each of them supplied at present with a Pastor,
viz. the Rev. Mr. Josiah Cotton, at Providence; the Rev. Mr. Joseph Torrey, at
South-Kingston; and the Rev. Mr. Joseph Park, at Westerly. And at New-Shoreham
or Block-Island, there is a Meeting House, which is at present supplied with a
Preacher.

Thus, notwithstanding all the Liberty, and Indulgence here allowed, and
notwithstanding the Inhabitants have been represented, as living without a
public Worship, and as ungospelized Plantations; we see there is some Form of
Godliness every where maintained. GOD grant the Power may always accompany the
Form, and that all that Name the Name of Christ may depart from Iniquity; may
Christ Jesus walk in the midst of his golden Candlesticks, and hold the Stars
in his right Hand; and may he heal all Divisions among his Disciples, may he
unite the Hearts of all that love Him, to love one another; may he grant them
to be all like minded, and may pure Religion, and undefiled, before GOD, and
the Father, thrive and flourish among us!

It remains now that I say a few Words relating to the State of the INDIANS,
within the Bounds of this Colony, and the Circumstances of the English in
Regard to them.

In general, all the New-English Colonies, were at the first but one Interest,
in Relation to the Indians, and though the other four, called themselves the
united Colonies, there was a Commission from this Colony to Mr. Williams and
Mr. Clark, to enter into a League offensive and defensive with them.

A few Years, three or four, before the English came to Plymouth, the Indians
had been dreadfully wasted away by devouring Sickness, from Narraganset to
Pen^bscut. So that the Living sufficed not to bury the Dead, and the Ground was
covered with their Bones in many Places. This wonderfully made Room for the
English at Plymouth and Massachusetts, and those Colonies protected the rest.

In the Year 1637, the English with united Forces subdued the Pequots, who had
attacked their Brethren in Connecticut; the Narragansetts, who bordered on the
Pequot's Land, consented and assisted in their Destruction, through a Desire of
Revenge, which is remarkable in all the Savages, though their old Sachems desired
to have preserved Peace.

The Nantyggansiks, or Narragansets, inhabited the Lands, or governed over all
the Indians within the Bounds of this Colony. They were a numerous, a rich, and
powerful People: and though they are by some said, to have been less fierce,
and warlike than the Pequots, yet it appears they had lately before the English
came, not only increased their Numbers, by receiving many who had fled to them,
from the devouring Sickness, or Plague in the other Parts of the Land; but they
had enlarged their Territories, and that both on the Eastern and Western
Boundaries. They were reckoned five Thousand fighting Men. (Mss. of Mr. R. W.
in Evidence.) And Mr. Williams says, they were so populous, that a Traveller
would meet with a dozen Indian Towns in twenty Miles.

In the midst of this mighty, and haughty People, the little handful of
helpless English, ventured to sit down; though not without taking all possible
Precautions; on the one Hand, to give them no just Offense, and on the other
Hand, to keep themselves in the best Posture of Defense their Circumstances
would admit of. But the Conquest and utter Destruction of the Pequots, had for
the present endeared Englishmen to the Narragansets. And the Conduct and
Valor they had shown, and the wonderful Success of their Expedition, had made
them a Terror to all the Indian Nations round about.

Mr. Williams at first "made a League of peaceable Neighborhood, with all the
Sachems and Natives round about"; in this Rhode Island was included. And on the
7th of July 1640, Mr. Coddington, with the rest of his Assistants, had a
particular Treaty of Peace and Amity with Myantonomy and the rest of the
Sachems. Nevertheless, the next Year, there was a Misunderstanding, and some
Hostilities, occasioned, I think, by some of the Indians, (if not Myantonomy
himself) kindling Fire in Mr. Easton's Land, Lord's Day April 4. 1641. whereby
an House of his was burnt. But whether it was designedly, or only through
carelessness, don't plainly appear in the Records. However it alarmed the
People, and among other Measures, they fitted out an armed Boat, to ply round
the Island, to keep off the Indians from Landing; and it seems in some Scuffle
on that Account, two English Men were wounded, and one Indian slain; though the
Orders to the Soldiers were as mild and prudent as could be given. They
likewise appointed Garrison Houses, to which the People were to repair on an
Alarm. Among which I find one was Mr. Lenthal's the Minister. But the Rupture
lasted not long, before Peace was restored.

In 1643 Myantonomy the great Sachem of the Narragansets, was taken Prisoner by
Uncas Sachem of the Moheags, and some time after Slain, and as some of the
English say, after Quarter and Promise of Life given. This excited his Subjects
to revenge his Death, but the Terror of the English at the Messachusetts kept
them quiet. And so it is said, that seven Years after, there were some
Commotions stilled, by the same Terror likewise in 1653, etc. etc

In 1652 when the Council of State confirmed their Patent, the People were put
on some Enterprises against the Dutch at New York, or New-Netherlands, and the
next Year the Island sent some Men to the Assistance of their Countrymen,
settled at Long Island, which gave great Offense to the Towns on the Main, and
in the two Dutch Wars, in King Charles 2d's Time, the Colony and Island were
put to considerable Expense and Trouble, to put and keep themselves in a
Posture of Defense.

In 1675 Philip, King of the Wampaneags, began a War against Plymouth Colony in
June, which soon spread almost throughout all New England. Tradition says, All
the Histories from Mr Hubbard and Dr Mather, make Philip to be the Spring and
Mover of the War; but there is a constant Tradition among the Posterity of the
People, who lived next to him, and were familiarly conversant with him, as also
with the Indians who survived the War, that both Philip, and his chief old Men,
were utterly averse to the War, and they show the Spot Kikemuit Spring, in a
Farm belonging to Stephen Pain Esquire in Bristol) where Philip received the News,
of the first English Men that were killed, with Grief and Sorrow, and wept at
the News; and that a Day or two before the first Outrages, he had protected an
English Man the Indians had cap^ivated, rescued him from them, and privately
sent him home safe.
"He was forced on by the Fury of his young Men, sore against his own Judgment
and Inclination; and that though he foresaw, and foretold the English would in
Time by their Industry, root out all the Indians, yet he was against making War
with them, as what he though it would only hurry on, and increase the Destruction
of his People:" and the Event proved he judged right. The Powaws had foretold
Philip, no English Man should ever kill him, which accordingly proved true; he
was shot dead by an Indian. I have heard from some old People, who were
familiarly acquainted with the Indians, both before and after the War, that the
Powaws had like^ise given out an other ambiguous Oracle, which did very much
s^irit on the Indians to War at first, and afterward as much discouraged them,
viz. that they promised the Indians would be successful, if the English fired
the first Gun. It is certain the Indians long delayed, and designedly avoided
firing on the English, and seemed to use all possible Means, to provoke the
English to fire first, by rifling their Houses, abusing their Cattle,
threatening and insulting their Persons etc. And the Histories carry it, that an
English Man fired the first Gun, at Metapo^set Garrison, some Days before any
English were slain. But those ancient People, since dead, told me, that by a
Mistake, occasioned through the Hurry and Trepidation, which usually attends the
beginning of any considerable Enterprise, an Indian fired the first Gun,
(whether on Pocasset Side where there was a Skirmish at the beginning of the
War, that is not mentioned by Mr. Hubbard etc I cannot now say) and that the
News of this, when known among the Indians, was a fatal Wound to their Courage,
they saying the English Man's GOD would now subdue them, which contributed not
a little to their after Destruction This I always looked on, as a very
remarkable Passage, but the Authors before mentioned, and Col. Church, who had
by far, the best Means to be informed, in all Circumstances, relating to the
Beginning and Progress of the War, in this Part of the Country, being wholly
silent about it; and the few ancient People who are now alive, that were Actors
in the War, not retaining any perfect Tradition of the Matter, the Reader may
entertain the Story as he pleases; I dare not warrant the Truth of it, but only
that I certainly heard the Story from some ancient People of Swanzey, since
dec^ased.


When Philip could no longer resist the Importunity of his Warriors, he, like
a wise Man, took the most proper Measures, to make their Enterprise effectual,
especially by an early Endeavor, to persuade the other Indian Nations into the
War, that with united Forces, they might fall on the English every where at
once; and particularly he endeavored to persuade the Narragansets, who had
several Pretensions to quarrel with the English, and who were then reputed four
Thousand Mr. Hubbard says, Page 13. The Narhagansets promised to rise with four
Thousand in the Spring of the Year 1676. and in a Postscript says, Concerning
the Narhagansets, this is further to be added here, that Mr. Thomas Stanton and
his Son Robert, who have a long Time lived amongst them, and are best
acquainted with their Language and Manners of any in New England, do affirm,
that to their Knowledge, the Narhaganset Sachems, before the late Troubles, had
two Thousand fighting Men under them, and nine Hundred Arms. These Accounts are
perhaps both true, for the first, might mean to contain, all the Indians in the
Bounds of this Colony, who being under the Authority of the great Narhaganset
Sachem, were often called by this general Name, and were p^^haps four Thousand
fighting Men. Mr. Stanton might mean, only those properly or precisely called
Narraganset Indians, in Distinction from the Indians at Providence and the
Indians at Warwick, who joined in the War under Pomham, etc. and from the
Nyhantick Indians, under Ninigret who did not join in the War; though these were
always, and to this Day, are frequently included in the general Name of
Narhaganset Indians. What seems to confirm this is what Mr. Hubbard adds, viz.
Yet are they so broken and scattered at this Day, that there is none of them
left on this Side the Country, unless some few, not exceeding seventy in
Number, that have sheltered themselves under the Inhabitants of Rhode Island,
as a Merchant of that Place, worthy of Credit, lately affirmed to the Writer
hereof. Those sheltered at the Island were either Prisoners of War, or such as
had voluntarily surrendered themselves to the English for Protection, on Promise
of Life. But it is well known, that Ninigret's Men alone, vastly exceeded that
Number; besides there were diverse Prisoners at Providence. And that Side of the
Country, was much fuller of Indians, in the Memory of very many now alive.
fighting Men. But whether the War began too soon for them, or the first
Beginnings discouraged them, or that they did not intend to make War at all;
they renewed their League of Peace and War with the united Colonies, in July, a
Month after Philip had began Hostilities at Swanzey.

However when he was driven out of his Country, they were charged to have
received, and entertained his People. Whereupon the united Colonies sent an
Army of a thousand Men, under Jos. Wins^^w, Esquire He arrived with the
Massachusetts and Plymouth Forces, the 12th of December, at Major Smith's in
North-Kingston; on the 18th the Connecticut Men being arrived, the Army marched
the next Day near 18 Miles to a Sort of a Fort, (19th of Hubb.) which the
Indians had raised on a Island of Upland, in the midst of a most hideous Swamp.
Their Indian Guide lead them to the only Place where it could be attacked, the
English fell on with too much Courage and Eagerness, which proved fatal to some
of their valiant Captains. However their Victory was complete; the Fort was
taken, and it is said seven Hundred fighting Men, and twenty chief Captains of
the Enemy were slain that Day, besides Women and Children, and three Hundred
more died of their Wounds afterward, besides the vast Numbers who perished
through Cold and Hunger. The Loss to the English was of about eighty Men; six
Captains slain, and one Hundred and Fifty Men wounded, many of them by their
own Friends. Toward Night, they set Fire to the Fort, and retreated to their
Head Quarters, through the Cold and Snow. Some though it, if they had kept Possession
of the Fort, where was the Indian Provisions, they might have saved many of
their own wounded Men, and that the Indians must all have perished, through Cold
and Hunger, or surrendered at Discretion the next Morning. Others though it it a
merciful Providence, they retreated so soon, notwithstanding the Fatigue of
such a Retreat. But however that be, which cannot so well be judged of now, Mr
Hubbard represents the burning the Fort as necessary to dislodge the Indians,
and after that the Retreat must be also necessary. However he men^ions their
Want of Provisions, by Means of their Vessel's being frozen in at Cape Cod. He
says there was a great Quantity of Provisions burned in the four or five
Hundred Wigwams in the Fort. And he several Times laments the Misery of the
wounded Men, in marching near eighteen Miles through the Cold and Snow that
Night, before their Wounds could be dressed. But Col. Church, who was present
and wounded in the Actions tells us, he vehemently opposed the firing the Fort.
That the General was surprised into it, and he condemns it as a very imprudent
and unfortunate Conduct. He says, 'The Fort was full of Corn and other
Provisions, sufficient to support the whole Army 'till the Spring, and there
was no other Provisions to be depended on; there was good warm Lodging for the
wounded Men, not elsewhere to be had.' He supposes every one acquainted with
the Circumstances of that Night's March, deeply laments the Misery of the whole
Army, especially of the wounded and dying Men. He adds, 'That it mercifully
came to pass, that Capt. Andrew B^^^ker arrived that very Night at Mr. Smith's
from Boston; laden with Provisions for the Army, who must otherwise have
p^^ished for Want. ( Church p. 16, 17.) Tradition is on the sa^^ Side, and
supposes had the Army kept Possession of the Fort, it must have in a Manner
finished the War.
the wounded and starving Indians, in their Retreat, returned, put out their
Fires, and sheltred themselves, and found some Refreshment among the Ashes of
the best and strongest Fortification the Indians were ever Masters of in this
Country. This was the greatest Action ever performed by the New-English
Colonies, against the Indians; if we regard either the Numbers of Men on each
side, or the Consequences of the Action. Beside that the Indians had now the
Use of Guns, as well as they; and were as expert in the Use of them, as any Men
in the World. The Indians were soon pursued with Famine and Sickness, so that
after they submitted the next Year, they were never formidable again. These
Narragansets, do now in a Manner cease to be a People, the few, if any,
remaining in the Colony, being either scattered about where the English will
employ them, or sheltred under the Successors of Ninegret, a Sachem that
refused to join in the War, and so has preserved his Lands to his Posterity;
and there are a few Indians now living round him, on his Lands, or belonging to
his Tribe.

As to the Part this Colony had in that War, it must be observed, that though the
Colony was not as they ^^ght to have been consulted, yet they not only afforded
Shelter and Protection to the flying English, who deserted in many of the
neighboring Plantations, in Plymouth Colony, and were received kindly by the
Inhabitants, and relieved, and allowed to plant the next Year on their Commons,
for their Support; but they likewise furnished some of the Forces with
Provisions and Transports: and some of their principal Gentlemen, as Major
Sanford, and Capt. Goulding, were in the Action at Mount Hope, as Volunteers in
Capt. Church's Company, when King Philip was slain. In the Colony's Answer to
the King's Letter 1679, enquiring the Value of Mount-Hope Neck, which was
begged of the King, by Johny Crown the Poet, they say, that a Rhode Island
Indian, under a Rhode Island Captain, a Voluntier, with a Plymouth Captain,
killed King Philip His Name was Alderman, and Col Church says he deserted the
Year before, from Aw^s^onks Sq^aw Sachem of Pocasset, and came over to
Rhode Island with his Family, and gave good Intelligence to the English at that
Time, which was ill improved or neglected.
The Indians never landed on the Island, in the War Time, armed Boats being
kept plying round, to break their Canoes, and prevent their making any
Attempts. But our Settlements on the Main suffered very much, both at
Petequamscut, and at Warwick, and at Providence; where the Indians burnt all
the ungarrison'd and deserted Houses. And the Inhabitants made heavy
Complaints, that when the Army of the united Colonies returned home, they did
not leave a sufficient Number of Forces to protect our Plantations, which were
now, in a very peculiar Manner, exposed to an exasperated and desperat^ Enemy.
I know this was attempted to be excused, by the Agents of a neighboring
Colony, before the King; and they had the Face to assert, that the Colony would
never yield any joint Assistance against the common Enemy, no not so much as in
their own Towns, on the Main, nor garrison their own Towns of Providence and
Warwick, and so that the Blame ought to lie on this Government, if they
suffered Spoil, while the Army was pursuing the routed Enemy. But the printed
Histories confute this Answer in Part, the Providence Company under Capt.
Andrew Edmonds, was very helpful, and successful too against the common Enemy,
and that even out of our own Bounds. (See Hubbard's Narrative of the Troubles
with the Indians, p. 28.) (See also Col. Church's History.) I could give
several Reasons, why the Colony did not act more jointly, and why it ought not
to be charged to their Fault, that they did not. But perhaps 'twould be no
Service to any Body now to mention them. However I must say; it was not owing
only to the religious Principles of the Gentlemen then at the Head of our
Administration. It Is true the Governor and the Deputy Governor that Year,
were both of the People called Quakers, but there are military Commissions
still in Being under their Hands and Seals, to Mr. B. Arnold, jun. and others
to go in an armed Sloop to visit the Garrisons at Providence, etc. It was but
reasonable the united Colonies, should have left a sufficient Guard, at least,
at their own Head Quarters, and some other Places, while the Island, the only
Part of the Colony able to contribute to the Charge of the Wars, was at so
great an Expense, in supporting and defending the distressed English, who fled
to them from all the adjacent Parts. On account of these and some other like
Aspersions, the ^o^emen^ioned Deputy Governor, in order that Things might no^
be otherwise resented against us than they were, gave an Affidavit or Evidence
on solemn Engagement, that he never was against giving forth any Commissions to
any, that might have been for the Security of the King's Interest in this
Colony. This with some Commissions actually signed by him, is among a large
Number of ancient Manuscripts in the Possession of the honorable William
Coddington, Esquire


As King Philip had no fortified Places, and no Magazines, when the foreign
Succor and Assistance, which he depended upon, failed him, when the
Narragansets were in his own Condition, and the Mohawks refused to assist him,
his People lost all Hope, and Courage, and Conduct; being beaten off from their
Planting and Fishing, and pursued by Famine and Sickness, and diverse Parties of
the English, who had their Courage raised in Proportion, as the other Side were
discouraged, they were forced to surrender almost at Discretion, and beg Peace
on any Terms. Philip himself being slain, and most of the chief Captains, the
War wholly ceased, in this Part of the Country, and with those Nations who
first began the War.

Ever since that Peace, this Colony has had little or nothing to do with the
other Indian Wars, but only to assist the other Colonies, when properly
consulted and applied to. The Colony bore it is Part cheerfully in the several
Expeditions against the French a Port-R^yal, and Canada. And divine Providence
remarkably succeeded and smiled on the Defense and Protection of our
Seacoasts, which were very much exposed all the two long French Wars.

The necessary Defense of the Inhabitants, was never neglected in the Time of
War, and since the Peace, the Colony, though so small as it is, has rebuilt an
handsome Fort on an Island that commands the Harbor of Newport, and 1733
furnished it with a Number of fine Guns, at their own Expense. Besides, the
Colony always keeps a certain Number of smaller Carriage Guns and small Arms,
with all Necessaries and Appurtenances in good Order, ready to put on Board one
or more Vessels, as Occasion may require, on the very first Notice of any Enemy
on the Coasts. And though a large Proportion of the Inhabitants, are not free in
their Consciences to learn War, yet the Military Exercises, are kept up as in
other Places, and the Success, which formerly attended the Enterprises of our
Forces, will, while the Memory thereof remains, keep up a military Spirit, in
the Body of the People.

The Narragansets, as I observed, were the most populous Nation among the
Indians, but all Attempts to Civilize or Christianize them were utterly
ineffectual. Their Sachems would not suffer the Gospel to be preached to their
Subjects, and their Subjects obstinately adhered to the Traditions and Customs
of their Forefathers. It seems hard that New England should be complained of
and reproached as particularly negligent of the Conversion of the Indians, and
harder still we should be reproached for neglecting the Methods used by the
French to make Proselytes of their Indians, and most unhappy that such
Complaints, are made by Writers that seem otherwise well acquainted with
Plantation Affairs, and are deservedly of great Note and Character. It is happy
however these Reproaches are not well grounded. NEW ENGLAND, nay the
Massachusetts and Ply^^uth Colonies alone, have had more REAL SUCCESS, in the
Conversion of the Indians, not only than all the larger English Colonies, to
the Southward; but than ALL THE OTHER CHRISTIAN NATIONS that have settled
throughout the whole Continent of America. The Societies of New Eng-England,
could never be contented with such sort of Converts as the Roman Catholic
Missionaries boasted of in many Places; they had no Satisfaction in the
Religion of the nominal Christians in Europe, and though it it would be no
Advantage, to make such Christians among the Indians, as knew no more of the
Gospel, than to make the Sign of the Cross, or who desired Baptism only, for
the sake of the new Shirt, with which their Conversion was to be rewarded. And
there was very great Opposition, to the making them real Christians. Their
Sachems or Princes generally, their Powaws or Priests always, opposed all their
Power and all their Arts to prevent the Growth of the Gospel, as what they
imagined would put an End to their Authority, especially that of their Priests;
and the Customs of the People, their way of Life, and their national Vices,
made it a most difficult Task to gospellize such People, as must be first
civilized or humanized. The New-English wonder to hear themselves reproached,
for not intermarrying with such Barbarians, of a Complexion so different; they
never had the Temptations to the unnatural Mixture, as some foreign Plantations
had, nor do they know other English Plantations used to do so.

As to this Colony in Particular; at first, the Narragansets made it a public
Interest, to oppose the Propagation of the Christian Religion. And though Mr.
Williams made some laudable Attempts, to instruct them, yet he was much
discouraged, not only by want of a lawful Warrant, or an immediate Commission
to be an Apostle to them, but especially by (as he though it) the insuperable
Difficulty of preaching Christianity to them, in their own Language with any
Propriety, without Inspiration. After the War, they were soon reduced to the
Condition of the laboring Poor, without Property, Hewers of Wood, and Drawers
of Water; and there is no more Reason to expect Religion, should by human
Means, thrive among such People, than among the lazy and abandoned Poor in
London. The few that have lived much together, on Ninigrets Lands, have had
several Offers of the Gospel, as the Narragansets had before; and at present
the Congregational Minister at Westerly is a Missionary to them, and encouraged
by an Exhibition from the Scotch Society for propagating Christian Knowledge,
by means of an Estate, mortified to them for this End, by the late Dr. Daniel
Williams of London. However, it must be owned we have been too soon
discouraged, and too negligent in this Affair. Perhaps it is one of the worst
Effects of the variety of religious Opinions, among the English, that it has
been some hindrance to this good Work, and even furnished the Indians some
times, with an Excuse or Pretense to wave any Offers to instruct them. If the
Manners of any, have likewise prejudiced any Indians, it is most lamentable.
The Vices of Christians have been an insurmountable Obstacle to the progress of
Christianity, in all the other Parts of the World, as there are too many
Evidences. May these Reflections, however, stir us up to adorn our holy
Religion, and to be careful that we give none Offense to any, that are without:
And may it dispose all Persons to contribute all in their Power, to farther the
Conversion of these People to the Christian Religion. They demand our
Compassion, and our Prayers to the Throne of Grace, that God would remove the
Vail from their Eyes, and all Prejudices from their Hearts; that he would
convert and save them.

Mr. R. Williams at first, gave a promising Character, of the Morals of these
People; but on longer Acquaintance, and more Experience, he seems to have
altered his Opinion of them; as appears by some Expressions in a Manuscript of
his yet remaining. The Distinction of drunken, and sober honest SACHEMS, is
(says he) both lamentable, and ridiculous; lamentable, that all Pagans are
given to Drunkenness; and ridiculous, that those (of whom he was speaking) are
excepted. It is (says he) notoriously known, what Consciences all Pagans make
of Lying, Stealing, Whoring, Murdering. etc. 25th 6th m. 1658.

After this Account of their Morals, I should think it hardly worth while to
inquire, what was their Faith and Worship that had so little Effect on their
Conversation; if we had not just heard what a scandal to Christianity, the
Lives of too many Christian are. However the Faith of this People and their
idolatrous Worship, was much like the other Indian Nations. They believed in
one Great and Good God, who lived somewhere at a great Distance in the South
West, and that the Spirits of Good Men do after Death reside with him. But, the
Government of the World, they seemed to think, left in the Hands of an Evil
God, the Devil, to whom, with many inferior and subordinate Deities, they paid
their chief Worship, at their Nicemmors, or devilish Feasts, as Mr. Williams
calls them.

The Indians in this Part of America, appear to have been some of the least
improved, of the humane Species, without any Learning, or Knowledge in any of
the politer Arts of Life, even without Iron and the Improvements which depend
on that. The strange Destruction of this People, now since the Wars ceased, and
within Memory, is very remarkable. Their insuperable Aversion to the English
industry, and Way of Life, the Alteration from the Indian Method of living,
their Laziness, and their universal Love of Strong Drink, have swept them away,
in a wonderful Manner. So that there are now above twenty English to one Indian
in the Colony. Their few miserable Remainders are left, as Monuments of the
Anger of a righteous God, and for our Warning and Instruction. While the
Cont^ntions, and mutual Animosities of the Indians in general, and their cursed
Thirst of Revenge, made them a Prey to the Weak, and small Number of English,
we should learn not to bite and devour one another, lest we be devoured one of
another, or of the Judgments of God. While we have seen their Iniquities prove
their Ruin, we should learn to break off from our Sins by Righteousness, and
especially abstain from, and watch against the Sins, which have been so
evidently both, the procuring Causes, and the Means, of their Destruction. When
God was conducting the Israelites to the Land of Canaan, and driving out the
Inhabitants, to make room for them, he was pleased to warn and require them,
not to defile themselves with the Abominations of those Nations, lest as the
Land then spued out its Inhabitants, so it should spue out them likewise, when
they in like manner defiled it. Though it would be ridiculous to compare our
selves, to the Israelites, and the Indians to the Canaanites, in many
Instances, yet in this Respect, it may be proper to argue, that if we Indianize
in our Manners and Vices, they will in Time draw down the like, or as heavy
Judgments of God, upon us, as those with which he has destroyed our
Predecessors. God grant that the People, who have been overthrown in the
Wilderness may be Ensamples to us, to prevent our lusting after any Evils, lest
we be destroyed likewise of the Destroyer! --

And this brings me now at last, to the REMARKS I promised at the Beginning. And

1. The first is, The wonderful and unsearchable Providence of GOD, in the
whole Affair, of driving out the Natives, and planting Colonies of Europeans,
and Churches of Christians, in the Place of Heathenism and Barbarity.

I pretend not to have known the Mind of the LORD, or to have been his
Counselor, or to be able to comprehend, the Ways of divine Providence. GOD's
Judgments are a great Deep; but we must be wilfully blind, if we cannot see,
that the Hand of the Lord has wrought this.

The Discovery, and the Conquest of AMERICA, with the amazing Desolations
wrought therein, appear a more remarkable Event, than a^^ other in all profane
History, since the universal Deluge. A new World, as it was justly called,
discovered to the other, or rather to Europe, and all its Riches and Glory
overturned, and given away to an other People; and the Aboriginal Natives, by
Famine, Sword and Pestilence, destroyed, and wasted away by Millions throughout
all America! Who can tell how, or how long it had been inhabited; and by what a
Series of Iniquity, it was ripe for such a fea^ful Desolation, such an utter
Destruction! If we believe a Providence (and it is impossible we can believe
none) we must needs think it concerned, in the Preservation, and the Punishment
of Kingdoms, and Nations; and that these Parts of the World, though separated,
hid, and unknown to the rest, are yet as near the Omnipresence of GOD, and as
much under his Government, as any other. And therefore we should take Notice of
the wonderful Providence of GOD, in this great Affair. How should we learn to
submit our little personal Affairs, to the divine Providence, when we see that
Nations, before Him, are but as the small Dust of the Balance? And how justly
may we say, Great and mavelous are thy Works, O Lord GOD Almighty; true and
faithful are thy Ways, and righteous are thy Judgments, thou King of Saints;
who shall not fear thee, and glorify thy Name, for thou only art holy: Let all
Nations come and worship before thee, for thy Judgments are made manifest. The
most High rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and gives them to whomsoever he
pleases.

Again, the Settlement of New England in particular, was evidently
providential, in many Respects. I have mentioned often the prevailing Motive
with the People, who came first to plant and inhabit in this Wilderness; but
the Difficulties and Discouragements in their Way, were really many and very
great; so that whoever reflects the least upon them, must wonder so many were
carried out from a flourishing State, to a Wilderness so far distant; for (as
One of them, Mr. Shepherd of Cambridge; his Life in the Magnalia; says) "they
were not all of them rash and weak spirited Persons, inconsiderate of what they
left behind, and were going to. It was not Gain, or Riches they aimed at. When
we look back (says he) and consider, what a strange Poise of Spirit, God had
laid on many of our Hearts, we cannot but wonder at our selves, that so many,
and some so weak and tender, with such Cheerfulness, and constant Resolution,
against so many Persuasions of Friends, and Discouragements from the ill
Reports of the Country, and the Straits and Wants, and Trials of God's People
in it, yet should leave our Accommodations and Comforts, forsake our dearest
Relations, overlook all the Dangers and Difficulties of the vast Sea, and all
this to go into a Wilderness, where we could forecast nothing but Care and
Temptations, only in hopes to enjoy CHRIST in his Ordinances, and the
Fellowship of his People.

Moreover, as these People came not here, for Plunder, which drew over the
Spaniards to the Southward, neither did they settle themselves by Force or by
their own Might; but GOD was pleased to make ready a Place prepared as an
Asylum for them: And since he has wonderfully driven out and consumed the
Natives by his devouring Judgments, their Sins have proved their Punishment;
and their detestable Vices, have drawn on those mortal Sicknesses, which have
wasted away all within the English Pale, but a few embraced Christianity, or
who by submitting to the English Power, remains the Memorials of these
wonderful Events. It is true, the Indian Jealousy and Revenge prevented a Union
among their several Clans at first, and made them instrumental in the
Destruction of one another, and the English had great Advantages in their Arms;
but still the Indians vastly out-numbred them; were more able to endure
Fatigue, and Hardships, Hunger, and Travel; and were perfectly acquainted with
their own Country. However a remarkable Interposition of Providence, was
visible in some of the earliest, and other the most important Enterprises
against them; and it would be unjust not to give to GOD the Glory due to his
Name: The LORD is King for ever, and the Heathen are perished out of the Land!
As therefore GOD has planted this People, and not their own Skill, or Power,
so neither let them imagine it was for their Merits and Deserts: We know not
the secret and future Designs of Providence. Only let us remember, that He who
chastises the Heathen, will also correct those, who are called by his Name, if
they turn to Folly.

Again, it is remarkable how divine Providence was pleased to supply their Wants
in a Wilderness, among a People that never took care for the Morrow; and to
support them under the Distresses they were tried with. At Plymouth and Boston,
many died at first, for want of Necessaries and Conveniences, but afterward,
it was many Years, before any Sickness prevailed amongst the Planters. And though
they have often since been visited with sore Calamities, and wasting
Sicknesses, yet their Numbers have continually increased to a very great
Degree; while the Natives have been wasted away, by the same Diseases, and some
other infectious Distempers, from which the English have been providentially
delivered. Thus I am informed by a worthy Gentleman, that an Indian, coming in
from Sea, sick of an uncommon Fever, infected his Acquaintance, and they
propagated the Disease to others, and a very gre^^ (...) ensued among the
Indians, in Narhaganset; (...) the English, were preserved from the Infection.
I cannot help observing here, the very great Age, to which many of the first
Settlers of this Colony lived. Many of them through all the Difficulties and
Hardships of a new Plantatio^, lived here near and some above forty Years, and
some above sixty. Many of the Original Settlers of the Colony, lived through all
the Dangers and Difficulties of their new Settlement, above forty Years.
Particularly Mr. Wm. Arnold, Mr J Green etc. who came up the first Year with
Mr. Williams. Mr. Harris, Mr. Olney etc. who came soon after Mr Williams
himself, lived till about 1682, when he was buried with all the Solemnity the
Colony was able to show. Gov. Arnold, who came up a Man grown, the first
Winter, dyed a few Months before Gov. Coddington in 1678. At Warwick Mr Weeks
was slain by the Indians 1675, a very ancient Man; and Mr. Gorton, Mr. Holden
etc. survived the War, and some of them, many Years: Particularly Major J
Green, who came a Youth to Providence in 1634, 5, and was a Commissioner for
Providence the first Assembly after the Patent in 1647. was Deputy Gov. of the
Colony 1700, as he had been many Times before. Here at Newport several of those
who Incorporated themselves 1637, 8 and of those who came to them the Summer
following survived the Indian War. Mr. John Clark lived to the 20th of April
1676. Gov. Brenton died in 1674. Mr N Easton who came 1638 from Hampton, where
he built the first English House, as he did also in 1639 in Newport, lived to
1675, when he died a very ancient Man. His Son Mr. John Easton, who, as his
Father, was diverse Times Governor of the Colony, died 1705, in his 85th Year
Mr. H. ^^ll, one of the 18 that Incorporated themselves at the first, was
Governor of the Colony after the Revolution. Mr. Ed Thurston, who was
Assistant 1675, and many Times Deputy for Newport, died 1706, 7, aged 90 Years.
Many such Instances might be given. And many of the second Generation, such I
mean, as were born within the first 20 or 25 Years, reached to fourscore, and
some to ninety Years. If we consider, the long Lives of so many (...) the first
Comers, notwithstanding the Hardships and Distresses they underwent, and the
Change of Climate, Diet etc. and to this add, the great Age of many of their
Children, we cannot call the Country, Unhealthy, or the Inhabitants Short-Lived.
The Proportion of ancient People above 70 Years of Age, to the whole Number of
the present Inhabitants, compared with the like Proportion in other Countries,
which have been fully settled, and inhabited above 1000 Years, can be no good
Rule to judge by. Eighty Years agon, the whole Number of the Inhabitants, and
consequently of the Births here, was very small, perhaps there were fewer than
two hundred Families in the whole Colony. And the Number of Inhabitants in this
Town, has vastly increased the last 30 Years. Let me further add, that the
foresaid Rule will not be applicable to this Colony a great while hence, if
ever; because, so many of the Natives, dye in the West India Islands. It is
certain, a very great Part of those of them who dye between sixteen and
thirty-six, are lost at Sea, or dye in those Islands, or bring home from
thence, those Diseases, which soon prove fatal to them here; though it is
notorious, how conducive to the Rocovery of Health, a Voyage from those
Islands, to the Northern Plantations, is generally found, so that we have
almost always some or other of their Inhabitants here for that End.
Remarkable was the Care of divine Providence in preserving them from Famine in
a new Country, where 'twas some Time before they could be enabled, to provide
for their comfortable Subsistence. God was pleased to bless their Provision,
and satisfy his Poor with Food. January 22 1639, it was found that there were
but 108 Bushels of Corn, to supply 96 Persons: Which at the Proportion of one
Bushel and half a Peck to each, was not more than sufficient, to supply them
for six Weeks, and yet it was then more than so many Months to Harvest. But
there was plenty of Fish, and Fowl, and Venison; and soon after, even to this
Day, all the Necessaries of Life have been plentiful.


II. We must remark (however it will sound in the Ears of many) that this
Colony was a Settlement, and Plantation for Religion and Conscience sake. The
first Comers, came on this Account; their Brethren may have said many hard
Things of them, in their Haste; but it is certain the first Planters of this
Colony, and Island, fled not from Religion, Order, or good Government; but to
have Liberty to Worship GOD, and enjoy their own religious Opinions and Belief.
They left England for the same Reasons, and with the same Views, as the rest;
and they left the Massachusetts, as they though it, on the like Account, and came
here to pursue, and effect the Ends of their first removal into America.

I know well what Account, the New English Historians give of that Set of Men;
but we must remember, they were Parties, and wrote by way of Apology, or to
vindicate themselves from the Charge of Persecution, or Error and Heresy, both
alike odious. Now if it be considered what Account contending Parties, usually
give of each other, and in what a Light, and with what Colors they usually
represent their Adversaries; no one will charge me, with any Design to reflect
on those Gentlemen, whose Memory is so highly regarded in the other
New-English-Colonies, if I beg leave to question and suspect the ill Character,
they have fastened on those poor People, some of whom have expressed a deep
Resentment of the Injury, and Wrong that was done them, by the Historians of
the other Party. Whoever considers the Character, those Writers give of all
other Sects, and Parties of Christians; and the Character some other Parties
give of them, will be apt to think that both Sides are to be read with
Allowance for their respective Prejudices, I say, whoever considers the
Character the contending Parties of Christians, almost for ever give, not only
of each others Tenets, or Opinions, but of their Conduct, especially in so far
as relates to the Support or Spreading their Opinions; not only the Papists of
the Protestants, but the Protestants of one another, particularly the Lutherans
of the Calvinists: (Hornbeck; Sum.) Whoever considers how common it is for
personal Reflections, to mix with solemn Debates, on the highest and most awful
Doctrines, as well as the least and most indifferent; I say, whoever considers
these Things, will readily acknowledge we are not to take the Character of any
Sect or Person, barely from the Description of known Adversaries; especially
when the Description does it self imply many Circumstances, which carry the
strongest Grounds of Suspicion with them.

If there be any thing in that Observation, that the Nature, and Import of the
Questions, about which the Difference began, and the Zeal wherewith they were
handled, intimate something of the holy Temper, prevailing among the Body of
the People; (Magnalia.) I desire it may be considered, that those Persons, were
in repute with the very best, for Holiness and Zeal, before this unhappy
Contention. Moreover, it must be remembered, that the Points about which they
were charged with Error, are of such a Nature as that a Person's Sentiments may
be easily mistaken, and misrepresented. It was long before the Church at Boston
could have any Evidence of their holding those Opinions, which that Church
condemned, the Witnesses at the last were Parties and transported with Zeal.
It Is not doubted there was some Difference in their Opinions, at least in their
Expressions; but there is much Ground to doubt, whether any of them held all
the Opinions condemned in the Synod, and that few of them held many of those
harsh Consequences, which their Adversaries, drew from their Tenets. Besides
much the greater Number were never censured at all; but (as I observed before)
considered as Brethren; long after their coming here.

We cannot reasonably suppose that they directly forgot or neglected the sole
End of their Removal, but as they followed that Church Order, they judged most
agreeable to the Will of GOD, and professed those Opinions, and Articles of
Belief they though it GOD had revealed, so we must charitably judge, the Life of
Religion, and the Love and Fear of GOD, did not go out, and vanish away, on
their leaving all, for his Name sake and the Gospel, i. e. the Liberty to
worship Him according to their Consciences. And yet all the other Colonies will
be obliged to own, that the Trials and Temptations of a Wilderness, had some
unhappy Effects, on many who had shown great Zeal about Religion.

However, while we are contemplating the Occasion of our Settlement, and the
Ends and Views of our pious Ancestors, when we find that Religion and
Conscience began the Colony, it is natural, it is necessary to reflect and
consider how these Ends are answered by their Posterity at present. Our Fathers
bore the Heat and Burden of the Day, and though Providence gave them a pleasant
and fruitful Land, Mr. Neale justly observes (p. 595) this Island which is
about 14 or 15 Miles long, and about 4 or 5 Miles broad (though of unequal
Breadth) is deservedly esteemed the Paradise of New England for the
fruitfulness of the Soil, and the temperateness of the Climate; that though it be
not above 65 Miles South of Boston, is a Coat warmer in Winter, and being
surrounded by the Ocean is not so much affected in Summer with the hot Land
Breezes, as the Towns on the Continent." Let me add, we have all Summer a South
or Southwesterly Sea Breeze, almost every Day, which rises about 10 A. M. and
wonderfully cools the Air. And by reason of southeasterly Sea Breezes, in the
Spring, the Summer does not come on so quick as at Boston, though the Winter
usually breaks up sooner. -- Here let me be permitted to offer a Correction of
a vulgar Error, about the Reason of the Cold of New England Winters, which is
so very much greater, than in the European Countries in the same Latitudes. The
Lakes usually bear the Blame of our cold Northwest Winds, but by a Map of the
Country of the five Nations, and of the Lakes etc. published at New York by
Authority, and said to be taken from a Map of Louisiana, done by Mr. De Lisle
in 1718. it appears that all the Lakes, except the Lake Champlain, are
considerably to the Westward of the Northwest Point, from this Town The chief
of these vast Lakes are Northwest from Pensilvania, Maryland, and Virginia All
the great Lakes are West from Albany, as the Council of New York seem to
assert; and Albany is, as I suppose, nearer West from Boston than Northwest.
Besides, it is credibly reported by intelligent Persons, most conversant in
those Regions, that at the most Eastern of the Lakes, the Winds are usually
Easterly i^ those Months, when we are frozen with North West Winds. Perhaps as
our Distance from the Equator, occasions the long Draft of Winds from
North-West, so the vast Body of Lands, uncultivated, and covered with a
perpetual Forest, which breaks the Rays of the Sun, and prevents their
Reflection from the Earth, is what occasions those Winds, to be so very cold
here.
the Garden of New England, yet the subduing and cultivating a Wilderness, was
a tedious, and a laborious Business, and necessarily attended with many
Hardships, Straits, and Difficulties. Their Posterity possess the Fruit of
their Labor, and should think themselves obliged to fulfill the pious Ends of
our Plantation. GOD justly expects that we fear the Lord our God, and Love Him,
and walk in his Ways, and serve him with all our Heart. It seems, that pure
Religion, and true Godliness, is what we in a most peculiar manner, owe to GOD,
as the very Quit-Rents of our Lands, and an Acknowlegement of the merciful
Providence in our first Settlement; as well as for the constant Favors of GOD
to us ever since.

The Posterity of a People, who were guided by the Providence of GOD, to this
happy Island, as a safe Retreat from the stormy Winds; as a Place of freedom to
practice every Branch of Religion in, must be inexcusable, if they degenerate
and forget the God of their Fathers. The very Instrument of our original
Incorporation, obliges us to "serve GOD and JESUS CHRIST, and obey all his holy
Laws." Irreligion then, and Prophanness, and Immorality must be a peculiar
Reproach to such a People. Our Fathers will rise up in Judgment against, and
condemn their degenerate Offspring, and the GOD of our Fathers will cast us off
for ever, if we do not practice that Sobriety, Righteousness, and Godliness,
which his Gospel requires, and we are under so many peculiar Obligations to
observe. Nay, it will be more tolerable for the Pequots, the Wampaneags, the
Narragansets in the Day of Judgment, than for such of us as obey not the Gospel
of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. It is true, the Indian Nations did obstinately refuse
the Gospel, but they knew not what they did; they did it ignorantly, and in
Unbelief; while we have known our Master's Will; and to whom much is given, of
them much will be required. As we have been as it were lifted up to Heaven with
Privileges, our Fall will be so much the greater, in the bottomless Pit, unless
we lay hold on eternal Life.

If our Neighbors observe the Manners of the Inhabitants are reformed in any
Instances, formerly grievous to them; let us endeavor to reform whatever is
still really amiss among us, and put away the Evil of our Doings, that the Lord
GOD may dwell among us. May we be noted only, and ever, for the general
Discharge of all public and private Virtues; for the impartial Administration
of Justice; and the steady Execution of good and wholesome Laws; and for
leading quiet and peaceable Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty.

It is an old and common Observation, that the Stature, and Complexion In like
manner some Diseases are peculiar to every Country, perhaps we may this Way
account for what has been, in vain, attempted to be accounted for so many other
Ways; viz. the defective Teeth so common in New England. Mr. R. Williams, says,
that when he first came here, the Indians were vastly subject to the Toothache,
and that their very stoutest Men, complained more of that Pain, than their
Women of the Pains of Travail.
of humane Creatures, as well as of Plants and Animals; yea, and the Genius and
Dispositions of a People, are very much influenced by the Soil, and Climate; by
the Situation, the Nature, and Circumstances of the Place they inhabit. Thus,
the Inhabitants of the several Parts of Italy, of Germany etc. are
characterized from their respective Countries; and thus it was observed of the
Carthaginians. The peculiar Genius, and Dispositions of a People, must arise
from hence; or the Form of Government, and Laws they live under; or the Genius
of the present chief Commanders. The Narragansets, who inhabited this Tract of
Lands, before us, were not remarkable among the Indians, for many Vices
peculiar to them, Mr. Hubbard says, pa. 3. "The Narhagansets, were always more
Civil and Courteous to the English, than any of the other Indians."
only that in proportion to their greater populousness, they exceeded in the
Vices, common to all the Indian Nations. Idleness and Intemperance are every
where branded, as Indian Vices; and they were complained of, as shamefully
negligent in the Education of their Children, and that they had in a Manner, no
Family Government at all. Though the Face of the Country is greatly changed by
English Industry, and an almost Immense Labor and Expense, yet a plentiful
Country will always afford its Inhabitants Inducements and Temptations to abuse
the divine Goodness, and to turn the Grace of GOD into Wantonness. If instead
of having been able, to teach the Indians, Christian Virtues, we should learn,
and imitate the Indian Vices, how unhappy, how reproachful, how lamentable
would it be? Surely, we must think GOD expects more from us, with all our
Advantages of Knowledge, with the Gospel, the Word of GOD; which is able to make
us wise to Salvation, through Faith that is in Christ Jesus. We have not only the
Light of Reason, brightned and improved, but Revelation, to be as a Guide to
us: Let us make the Scriptures then as a Light to our Feet, and a Lamp to our
Path.

And in fine, let every Sect, and Party of Christians among us, be followers of
GOD as dear Children: Let us be careful to build only Gold, Silver, precious
Stones, on the Rock of Ages, the true Foundation of our Faith, and Hope: Let us
walk worthy of GOD to all well pleasing, and adorn the Christian Religion in
general, in the Sight of the Heathen; and recommend our distinguishing Opinions
to one another, by a more exemplary Behavior; and so induce others to glorify
GOD our Heavenly Father.

III. Liberty of Conscience was the Basis of this Colony. Our Fathers though it it
just and necessary to allow each other mutually to worship GOD, as their
Consciences were respectively persuaded: They though it no Man had Power over the
Spirit of GOD; and that the Duty of the Magistrate was to leave every one to
follow the Light of his Conscience. They were willing to exhibit to the World,
an Instance that Liberty of Conscience was consistent with the public Peace,
and the flourishing of a civil Common Wealth, as well as that Christianity
could subsist without Compulsion, and that bearing each others Burdens, was the
way to fulfill the Law of Christ.

I do not know there was ever before, since the World came into the Church,
such an Instance, as the Settlement of this Colony and Island. In other States
the civil Magistrate had for ever, a public Driving in the particular Schemes
of Faith, and Modes of Worship; at least, by negative Discouragements, by
annexing the Rewards of Honor and Profit to his own Opinions; and generally,
the Subject was bound by penal Laws, to believe that Set of Doctrines, and to
worship GOD in that Manner, the Magistrate pleased to prescribe. Christian
Magistrates would unaccountably assume to themselves, the same Authority in
religious Affairs, which any of the Kings of Judah, or Israel, exercised,
either by Usurpation, or by the immediate Will, and Inspiration of GOD; and a
great deal more too. As if the becoming Christian, gave the Magistrate any new
Right, or Authority over his Subjects, or over the Church of Christ; and as if
that because they submitted personally to the Authority, and Government of
Christ in his Word, that therefore they might cloth themselves with his
Authority; or rather, take his Scepter out of his Hand, and lord it over GOD's
Heritage. It is lamentable that Pagans and Infidels allow more Liberty to
Christians, than they were will not to allow to one another. It Is evident, the
civil Magistrate as such, can have no Authority to decree Articles of Faith,
and to determine Modes of Worship, and to interpret the Laws of Christ for his
Subjects, but what must belong to all Magistrates; but no Magistrates can have
more Authority over Conscience, than what is necessary to preserve the public
Peace; and that can be only to prevent one Sect, from oppressing another, and
to keep the Peace between them. Nothing can be more evidently proved, than "the
Right of private Judgment for every Man, in the Affairs of his own Salvation,"
and that both from the plainest Principles of Reason, and the plainest
Declarations of the Scripture. This is the Foundation of the Reformation, of
the Christian Religion, of all Religion, which necessarily implies Choice and
Judgment. But I need not labor a Point, that has been so often demonstrated,
so many Ways. Indeed as every Man believes his own Opinions the best, because
the truest, and ought charitably to wish all others of the same Opinion, it
must seem reasonable, the Magistrate should have a public Leading, in
religious Affairs, but as he almost for ever exceeds the due Bounds, and as
Error prevails ten Times more than Truth in the World, the Interest of Truth,
and the Right of private Judgment seem better secured, by a universal
Toleration, that shall suppress all Profaneness, and Immorality, and preserve
every Party, in the free and undisturbed Liberty of their Consciences, while
they continue quiet and dutiful Subjects to the State.

Our Fathers established a mutual Liberty of Conscience, when they first
Incorporated themselves: this they confirmed under their first Patent, and and
at the Restoration, they petitioned King Charles 2d. (Charter) That they might
be permitted, to hold forth a lively Experiment, that a most flourishing civil
State, may stand, and best be maintained, and that among English Subjects, with
a full Liberty in religious Concernments, and that true Piety rightly grounded
on Gospel Principles, will give the best and the greatest Security to
Sovereignty; and will lay in the Hearts of Men, the strongest Obligations to
true Loyalty. And the King was pleased to make them a Grant, by which every
Person may ever freely and fully have and enjoy his own Judgment or Conscience
in Matters of religious Concernment, behaving himself peaceably and quietly,
and not using this Liberty, for Licentiousness, and Profaneness, nor to the
civil Injury, or outward Disturbance of others. This happy Privilege we enjoy
to this Day, through the divine Goodness; and the Experiment has fully answered,
and even beyond what might have been expected, from the first Attempt. The
civil State has flourished, as well as if secured by ever so many penal Laws,
and an Inquisition to put them in Execution. Our civil Officers have been
chosen, out of every religious Society, It has been no uncommon Sight, to see
Gentlemen of almost every religious Persuasion among us, sitting on the same
Bench of Magistrates together. And we may always expect to see it, while that
Principle prevails, that the surest Way to preserve and enjoy our Charter
Privileges, is so to divide the Posts of Honor, Trust, and Profit among all
Persuasions indifferently; and in general, to prefer those Gentlemen, of
whatever religious Opinions they are, that are otherwise best qualified, to
serve the Public, and adorn their Stations; and to suffer no one religious
Sect, to monopolize the Places of Power, and Authority.
and the public Peace has been as well preserved, and the public Councils as
well conducted, as we could have expected, had we been assisted by ever so many
religious Tests.

All Profaneness, and Immorality, are punished by the Laws made to suppress
them; and while these Laws are well executed, speculative Opinions, or Modes of
Worship, can never disturb or injure the Peace of a State, that allows all its
Subjects an equal Liberty of Conscience. Indeed it is not variety of Opinions,
or separation in Worship, that makes Disorders, and Confusions in Government:
It is the unjust, unnatural, and absurd Attempt to force all to be of one
Opinion, or to feign and dissemble that they are; or the cruel and impious
punishing those, who cannot change their Opinions without Light, or Reason; and
will not dissemble against all Reason, and Conscience. It is the wicked Attempt
to force Men to worship GOD in a Way, they believe He has neither commanded,
nor will accept; and the restraining them from worshipping Him in a Method,
they think He has instituted, and made necessary for them; and in which alone,
they can be sincere Worshippers, and accepted of GOD; in which alone, they can
find Comfort, and Peace of Conscience, and approve themselves before GOD; in
which alone, they can be honest Men, and good Christians. Persecution will ever
occasion Confusion and Disorder, or if every Tongue is forced to confess, and
every Knee to bow to the Power of the Sword: this it self is the greatest of
all Disorders, and the worst of Confusions in the Kingdom of Christ Jesus.

Liberty of Conscience was never more fully enjoyed in any Place, than here;
and this Colony, with some since formed on the same Model, have proved that the
terrible Fears, that Barbarity would break in, where no particular Forms of
Worship or Discipline are established by the civil Power, are really vain and
groundless; I am aware, some such Charges of Ignorance and Barbarity, have been
formerly insinuated, and that the People lived in a State of Anarchy; but I
hope, I have said enough, to show the groun^essness of such Reports; which were
the Effects of Prejudice, and Misinformation.
and that Christianity can subsist without a National Church, or visible Head;
and without being incorporated into the State. It subsisted so for the first
three hundred Years; yea, in Opposition and Defiance to all the Powers of Hell
and Earth. And it is amazing to hear those who plead for penal Laws, and the
Magistrates Right, and Duty to govern the Church of CHRIST, to hear such
Persons, call the early Times, the golden Age of Christianity.

However, as the best Things, the wisest Institutions are subject to some
Inconveniences, while some Good may accidentally follow the very worst Things
in the World, it may be worth our while to consider, whether some
Inconveniences do not naturally, or have not in Fact, followed or attended our
Constitution. The popish Inquisition it self, which is such an open Tyranny
over Conscience, and such an absolute Destruction of the Essentials of
Christianity, and all true Religion, yet keeps up the Face and Show of the
greatest Decorum, Order, and Harmony imaginable. It ought not to be wondered at,
if an unlimited Toleration of every Doctrine, or Form of Christian Worship,
though never so just in it self, and so useful and beneficial in many Respects,
yet in some other Respects, may be attended with, or productive of some
Inconveniences. We know some followed on the Gospel itself. It cannot be
wondered at, if some should make an ill Use of this Liberty; yea, if this
Liberty it self, should be unhappily a Snare to some Men. Have, never any in no
Parts of the Colony, appeared lost, and bewildred in a variety of Opinions
round them? At least, is it not likely, there should be some Persons so weak
and unstable? Have never any pretended, to think it needless, or endless, to
search after Truth, among so many Pretenders to it? And have not some, in the
Heat and Hurry of Dispute about the Circumstantials of Christianity, the
Circumstances of Order, Time, and Place, grown cold or negligent, about the
Vitals and Essentials of the Gospel Covenant? Has not too much Zeal about
outward Things, too often occasioned Censoriousness, and Uncharitableness, and
starved the Life of Religion? Is there no Foundation for that Character that
has been given of too many among us, that they have a thorough Indifference for
all that is sacred, being equally careless of outward Worship, and of inward
Principles, whether of Faith or Practice." And "that they have worn off a
serious Sense of all Religion. It would be no wonder if some or all these evil
Consequences, should have followed, in some Degree; they have often done so in
other Places, even where there was not the like fair Occasion. The Tempter
always suits his Temptations, to the Circumstances of those he assaults. But
these Things will be no good Objection against Liberty of Conscience, because
infinitely greater Evils, necessarily follow on Persecution for Conscience sake.

Nevertheless our own Experience, on the Observations, and Reproaches of
others, will dispose us to be peculiarly careful, against all these Evils, and
some others, that our Constitution may be peculiarly liable and exposed to.
Here in a particular Manner, let us be exhorted,

1. To prevent our religious Differences, from being ever carried into our
civil Affairs -- Let them never make Factions in Government. --

2. Let us study for Peace, and to promote mutual Love among Christians of
every Denomination. We should love all of CHRIST, we see in them, and as far as
possible speak the same Things. On the one Hand, we should take heed that
Charity and mutual Forbearance don't sink into Lukewarmness and Indifference to
the Truth of the divine Institutions; and on the other Hand, we should maintain
our own Opinions, and manage the Defense of them, when Need requires it, with a
Christian Spirit of Candor, and Moderation. Especially, let us be warned by
our own History, to take heed of imputing to others, the Consequences we think
follow from their Opinions; if on the Account of the Consequences, we cannot
embrace their Opinions, yet let us remember, every Man's Opinion must be taken
from his own Understanding, and Judgment, and not from the Understanding, and
Judgment of other Men.

It is no Pleasure to any real Christian, to see his Brethren, the Disciples of
JESUS CHRIST, so divided as they are through the World, in their Opinions of
various Articles, of his Religion; and much less, to see them so divided in
their Affections. Indeed, considering the finite Capacity, and the Corruption
of humane Nature, we ought to expect a variety of Opinions in Religion, as well
as in every Thing else. But as the Enemies to the Cross of Christ, make this,
though unjustly, a Reproach to Christianity; and as many weak Persons, are
carried away with the Errors of the Wicked, every sincere Christian cannot help
wishing, that every stumbling Block, and Rock of Offense, was removed out of
the Way, and that all Christians walked in the Truth, with one Consent of Heart
and Voice. It is a Grief to a Christian, as it is a Scandal to the whole World,
to see Christians, (so called) full of Envy, and Malice, hating, and reviling
one another, and smiting with the Fist of Wickedness. This, when all is said
and done, is a more full and just Argument, that such have no Part in Christ,
than any supposed orthodoxy of Opinion, can be of their Interest in Him. For by
this (says he) shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love one
to another. It is a glorious Sight, to see the Disciples of JESUS, live in Love
and Peace, and "sweetly bear with one another in their lesser Differences:" To
see every one, keeping the Ordinances, as he thinks CHRIST has commanded him,
and at the same Time, carefully abstaining from all Evil, and the Appearances
of Evil; and practicing whatsoever Things are true, honest, just, and pure;
whatsoever Things are lovely, and of good Report.

When we have Freedom to search the Scripture, and Liberty to believe, and
profess what we find there revealed, how unhappy would it be, if any should
neglect their Privilege, and be Fools and slow of Heart to improve the
Opportunity they enjoy? How unhappy would it be, if any should neglect the
Worship of GOD, and the Institutions of CHRIST JESUS, because they are not
enforced by humane penal Laws? Let us be all able ever to give an Answer to
every one, that asks us a Reason of the Hope that is in us, with Meekness, and
Fear; and let us lay aside all Wrath, Anger, Malice, Bigotry, and
Censoriousness; and endeavor to pay a universal and constant Regard to the
Will of GOD, revealed in his Word. Let us be united to Christ Jesus by a true
and living Faith; and let every Man take heed how he builds: Other F^undation
can no Man lay, than that which is laid, viz the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ himself being the great corner Stone. Now if any Man build on this
Foundation, Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble; every Man's Work
shall be made manifest. For the Day shall declare it, because it shall be
revealed by Fire; and the Fire shall try every Man's Work, of what sort it is.
If any Man's Work shall be burnt, he shall suffer Loss; but he himself shall be
saved; yet so, as by Fire.

3. Above all Things, let us unite in the practice of Piety and Holiness. Let
us do justly, and love Mercy, and walk humbly with GOD; let us deny all
Ungodliness, and every worldly Lust, and live soberly, righteously, and godly,
and perfect Holiness in the fear of GOD. These Things we may do without any
Offense to any Party of Christians. If we be followers of that which is Good,
who are they that will harm us, or be offended at us on that Account. Each
Party requires all Men, to be redeemed from a vain Conversation; every Party
owns the Necessity, if they differ in the Nature of the Obligation of these
Duties: Let us then unite in the Practice of them, and have our Conversation,
as becomes the Gospel, which we in common profess. How unhappy, how
inexcusable, would it be, if Liberty of Conscience should degenerate into
Licenciousness, and open a Door for a Flood of Immoralities? If while we plead
a Right to think, and judge for our selves, and reject all mere human
Authority, in Matters of Faith and Worship; we should neglect the sacred Laws
of GOD, and the una^^^erable, and eternal Duties of Morality? It is certainly a
Reproach to Christians, that they can be so zealously affected, about the
Things, which are peculiar and distinguishing to each Sect respectively, and
yet be so cold, and negligent of those, wherein they all agree. It is
reasonable to suppose those Doctrines and Duties, which all agree in, are the
most important, and essential. Let us then be truly concerned to glorify, and
serve GOD, by a true and spiritual Worship, and the Vertu^s of a good Life; and
to imitate the Example, which the great Author and finisher of our Faith has
set us. Let us hold fast the Form of sound Words we have received, and not make
Shipwreck of Faith, and a good Conscience.

IV. I hope I shall be excused, if on this Occasion, I exhort the Member of
this Church in particular, to review the merciful Providence of GOD, which
have hitherto preserved this Vine, which we trust, his own Right Hand has
planted. We may sing of Judgment and of Mercy; in many sore Losses and
Bereavements; in some uncomfortable Contentions; and in a total failure of
Elders, for many Years together. Nevertheless, the burning Bush has not been
consumed; the Church has still subsisted, and been resettled again in Peace and
Comfort. Various are the Storms in which this Church has been tossed; but through
them all, GOD has preserved us. May we, and our Successors, be as a Name, and a
Praise to Him, throughout all Generations! Let us pray the Father of Lights,
and the Lord of the Harvest, to revive and prosper his Work in the midst of
these Years. May He unite our Hearts to Love Him more, and Serve Him better;
and to Love one another, and strive together to promote his Glory, and our
mutual Edification, and Growth in Grace. May he that ministers Seed to the
Sower, both minister Bread for your Food, and multiply the Seed sown, and
increase the Fruits of your Righteousness.

As this was the first Society, settled in Church order on this Island, as it is
the eldest, (though nearly the least) let us strive to go before all others, in
the primitive Simplicity, Love, Integrity, and public Spiritedness.

Let us consider, whether we make good the Ground of those pious and excellent
Christians, who first formed this Church; and whether the Successors of Men, so
holy, and so zealous, are not obliged in a singular Manner, to imitate them,
wherein they followed CHRIST. We have professed a Subjection to the Gospel of
CHRIST; let ou^ Lights shine before Men; let us adorn the Doctrine of God our
SAVIOR in all Things; and let us hold the Beginning of our Confidence,
steadfast to the End; and let us consider one another, to provoke unto Love, and
to good Works: In fine, let us con^end earnestly for the Faith, and Order of
the Gospel, once delivered to the Saints; and at the same Time, maintain the
unity of the Spirit in the Bonds of Peace. Him that is weak in the Faith
receive, but not to doubtful Disputations. And the GOD of Patience and
Consolation grant us to be like minded one toward another, according to CHRIST
JESUS.

V. Is it not proper to remark, the very great Alteration which the merciful
Providence of GOD has made, in the outward Circumstances, and Accommodations of
the Inhabitants of the Island and Colony, since their first Settlement here.

We have reason to think, the very first Setlers, did not come here empty
handed; Vid. Mr. Cotton's Way of Congregational Churches cleared. P 61.
but as their Stock, on which they lived, was by Degrees consumed, the produce
of wild Lands was able to go but a little way, in purchasing a new Supply of
many Comforts of Life; and they were obliged to make an hard Shift with such
Things, as the present Generation perhaps may too much despise. I don't well
know, how to describe the Difference in some Articles, in suitable and grave
Expressions: the mention of some Instances, would perhaps surprise many. Let us
then be thankful to GOD, who has blessed the Labors of our Hands; and let us
not wax Fat and kick against GOD, now we have eaten, and are full of the
Mercies of the Lord.

Nay, would it be unuseful, or improper, to think of the outward Accommodations
which the present English Inhabitants enjoy, above the Aboriginal Natives, and
their miserable Remainders among us? Doubtless, it would excite our Gratitude
to GOD, who has made us to differ, and to say with David, Blessed be thou, LORD
God of Israel, our Father, for ever and ever. Thine, O LORD, is the Greatness,
and the Power, and the Victory, and the Majesty, for all that is in the Heaven,
or in the Earth, is thine. Thine is the Kingdom, O LORD, and thou art exalted
as Head above all. Both Riches, and H^nour come of thee, and thou reignest over
all; and in thine Hand is Power, and Might, and in thine Hand it is to make
Great, and to give Strength unto all. Now therefore our GOD, we thank thee, and
praise thy glorious Name!

VI. Lastly. As the pious People, who first planted this Island and Colony,
were so concerned, about the best way of evidencing a Man's good Estate,
methinks, there is no more proper Remark, for us to finish with, than the Duty,
the Wisdom, and the Necessity of every one, to get into a good Estate as to
GOD, and the future World; and to se^k after sufficient and satisfactory
Evidence there^f.

I mean not to revive the old Dispute; I am well satisfied, the Difference may
be compromised, with great Ease and Justice; but to persuade each of us to
think of this Article, with seriousness, and suitable Concern. What will it
signify, which of those Ways is the most satisfactory, if we our selves have no
Grounds for Satisfaction, in either of them? And what can excuse us neglecting
to work out our Salvation, and make our Calling and Election sure, when GOD is
working in us to will, and to do, of his good Pleasure? Alas! how very common
is it for Persons, who live under the Gospel, to be very careless and
unconcerned in this Matter? for many who call themselves Christians, to presume
they are something, when indeed they are nothing? and cry Peace, Peace to
themselves, when they are in the Gall of Bitterness, and the Bonds of Iniquity;
and have no Lot or Part in the Christian Salvation?

A Man's good Estate consists in his being reconciled to God through Jesus
Christ, who was delivered for our Offenses, and raised again for our
Justification. Let us aim to have both the Testimony of our own Consciences,
and the Spirit of God witnessing together with our Spirit, that we are the
Children of GOD, and Heirs with CHRIST, to the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light. And may He that is able, keep us from falling, and present us faultless,
before his Presence with exceeding Joy.

To Conclude, Should not this Solemnity put us in Mind of our mortal transitory
Condition, and so stir us up the more, to give Diligence to make our Calling
and Election sure. The Generations of Men are passing away continually. Not one
Person, that we know of, is now alive, of all those who began this Settlement;
and but few remain of the second Generation. Death is daily preying upon us.
Should we not then be the more quickened in the securing our eternal Welfare?
Should we not do with our Might, what our Hands find to do, before the Night of
Death overtakes us?

Let us remember we are Strangers and Pilgrims here, as were all our Fathers;
and let us seek after a City which is to come, which has Foundations, whose
Builder and Maker is GOD. And let us be followers of those, who through Faith
and Patience, inherit the Promises.

Let this Occasion, an Occasion we can never expect again, excite us to number
our Days aright; so as to apply our Hearts to true Wisdom. May we so prepare
for Death and Judgment, and the eternal World, as that an Entrance may be at
last administered to us into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior
JESUS CHRIST: Which GOD of His infinite Mercy grant through Him: To whom with the
FATHER and the HOLY SPIRIT, be all Honor, Glory and Power, both now and ever.
AMEN.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THe Reader is desired to Excuse and Correct the wrong Punctuation in several
Places, and the following Errata, most of which injure the Sense; and to insert
a few Amendments.

Title Page, read the first Century.

Dedication p 4 l. 5. r. Opposition. l. 15. r. and his. p. 6. l. 6. f. seemed,
r. secured.

Sermon p 1. l. 2. in the Note of Miantonimok r. Miantonimoh. p. 11. l. 18.
after and which, insert at first. p. 12. l. 11. after Charter, insert, which
included Liberty of Conscience. p. 19. l. 22. f. East r. last. In the Note l.
1. f. Nantiggansick r. Nanhygansick, p. 22. l. 5 r. express in their own Way.
p. 28. l. 7. r. Gods. p. 30. l. 7. dele the south easterly Part of. Note. l. 4.
dele first. p. 32. l. 12. r. Wampanoags. p. 34. Note l, 8. r. become. p. 41. l.
20. r. Forms. p. 45.l. 10. f. Associates r. Assistants. p. 46. l. 17. f. to r.
at. p. 53. l. 2. r Judgment. p. 56. Note l. 9. r. Williams. p. 60 l. 17. r.
Arguments. p. 62. l. 2. f. this r. the. l. 4. f. their r. these. p 65. l. 25.
r. J. and J. Maxon. p. 66. l. 19. r. 1700. p. 70. l. 7. r. Sachem. l. 9. r.
Nanhygansicks p. 72 l. 16. after Terror, insert, and so. p. 73. l. 1. r.
Wampanoags. p. 76. l. 12. r. 19th December. p. 78. l. 1. for in, r. on. l. 2.
from the bottom, f. in, r. from. p. 79. Notes l. 7. for Awashonks, r Weetamore.
p. 83. l. 11. f. Societies, r. Sectaries p 86. l. last but one, r. Nicommors p
91. l. 21. r. a few who. l. 22. r. remain p. 92 l. 19. for Boston, r.
Charlestown. p. 94 l. 23 in the Notes, for part of those of them who, r.
Proportion, l. 27. r. Recovery. p. 100. l. 23. r. Wampanoags. p. 109 l 4 in the
Note r. Groundlessness l. 10. f. the r. those p. 111. l. 10. f. on r. or. p.
112. l. 5. f. the r. those.


