A LETTER TO THE Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Massachusetts Bay,
relating to their approaching ELECTION OF REPRESENTATIVES.

To extend the Governor's Right to command, and Subjects Duty to obey, beyond
the Laws of One's Country, is Treason against the Constitution, and Treachery
to the Society whereof we are Members: And, to dissolve the Ties by which
Princes stand confined; and overthrow the Hedges, by which the reserved Rights,
Privileges, and Properties of the Subjects are fenced about, tempts every
Prince to become a Tyrant, and to make all his Subjects Slaves. Judgment of
whole Kingdoms and Nations. See, Page 3 d, Printed in the Year, 1739.

Advertisement.
THE following was offered to the Printers in Boston, but was rejected. One of
them saying they dare not print it, for fear of incurring the Governor's
Displeasure, which might prejudice them in their Business.

To the Gentlemen Freeholders, and other Inhabitants, qualified by Law to vote
in the Election of Representatives.
Gentlemen,
THE annual Election of your Representatives drawing nigh, and the Importance
of a good Election, being greater than is generally imagined, (nothing less
than the civil Salvation of the People depending upon the same) has induced me,
together with the Request of many of your Friends, to lay before you, the
Necessity of using the greatest Care in your several Elections, not only from
the great Danger of a bad One at all Times, but also from the present
Circumstances of the Province.

In order to comply with this their Request, and to set before you the Danger
you and your Posterity are brought into by a bad Election; I have published
this Letter, in which I have made use of some Helps from Cato's Letters, which
were wrote upon the glorious Cause of Liberty, and have been justly regarded by
all wise Men of every Party; and therefore, what is done here in Imitation of
those valuable Letters, cannot be judged to be factious, or against the
Interest of the Public.

But, however some may receive this, I am sure, every true Lover of his
Country, (who has Honesty and Wisdom enough to refuse any Bribe offered him as
an Equivalent for the least Privilege of his Country) will approve of it, and
govern himself accordingly in voting.

Gentlemen,

You are born to Liberty, as you are English Men, and as you are Descendents of
the first worthy Setlers of this Country, who purchased their and your
Liberties, at the most invaluable Price of their Blood and Treasure; it is
therefore your Interest, and your Duty to Posterity, to preserve them entire,
without suffering the least Breach to be made on them.

The Constitution, which you live under, is an Epitome of a mixed Monarchy,
where your Governors have every Right to protect and defend you; none to injure
or oppress you. You have a large Share in the Legislature; you have the sole
Power over your Purses: But it depends upon yourselves alone, to make these
Rights of yours, these noble Privileges of Use to you. And in order to make
this plain to you, I shall recount some of the Privileges you enjoy by your
Charter, and show what a Part you have in the Government; as the End of it is,
and ought to be, wholly for your Advantage.

The Charter ordains, that you shall have a General Assembly, convened, held
and kept, every last Wednesday in May, which shall consist of the Governor and
Council for the Time being, and of such Freeholders, as shall be elected and
deputed from time to time, by the major Part of the Freeholders, and other
Inhabitants qualified to vote in that Choice, present at such Election. This
General Assembly, at their first Meeting, proceed to elect twenty eight
Counselors; after which Election, they proceed to make what Laws may be
necessary for the public Good, to raise what Moneys may be necessary to
support the Government, in defending and protecting you this is the sole
Privilege of your Representatives. To levy and assess reasonable Taxes and
Assessments upon your Poles and Estates, is another Privilege of your
Representatives. The General Assembly have the Right of disposing of the waste
Lands. The Consent of your Representatives is absolutely necessary in all Acts
of Government, and many of them must originate in the House, especially those
material Articles of supplying the Treasury and taxing the People.

By this you may see the great Share you have in the Government, having at
least two Branches of the Ligislature (who have all the Moneys and other
Advantages in their Power) which are appointed by your Election. Your
Representatives (who are immediately of your Appointment) are the Trustees of
your Liberties, who, if they give up, or are inclined to give up any the least
of them, you have it in your Power, the next Year, to choose more faithful Men
in their Room; and such Representatives will choose such Counselors, and then
all will be well. For not only good Care will be taken, that no Laws but such
as are for your Good and Welfare shall be enacted; but also, that none be
trusted with the Execution of them, except those who have Competent
Understanding and Integrity. Such a General Assembly (which depends upon your
Election of Representatives) will be very tender of the least Privilege, and
will keep a proper Guard upon encroaching Prerogative. They will be able
properly to distinguish between the invaluable Privileges granted by Charter,
and the Instructions given to a Governor, and will know they have no Business
with Instructions ( except from the People) and that any Compliance with an
Instruction which is contrary to the Charter, is a traitorous giving up the
Liberties of their Country, and an Abuse upon his Majesty. For although it be
one of the wise and prudent Maxims of the English Government, ' That no Blame
or Wrong be imputed to the King'; it is also another, ' That no Wrong be done
to the People'. They will know, that the only Rule of their Government ought to
be your Good, and that they are inviolably obliged to keep a watchful Eye upon
your Charter, as their Directory, and to see that no Infraction be made on it.
That being your Constitution, from such a Behavior in your Legislature, you
may naturally expect, his Majesty's Council (who constitute the middle Branch)
will, in giving their Consent to the Appointment of civil Officers, be actuated
by the same good Principles, they were, as a Branch of the Legislature; and
consequently, they will not consent to the Appointment of an unqualified Person
to an executive Office in the Government, nor to the Removal of any Judge,
unless he has been guilty of Malefeazance in his Office. It was (Gentlemen,)
one of the material Blessings obtained at the happy Revolution, that the Tenor
of the Judges Commissions in England, should be altered, from during Pleasure,
to, so long as they behave well. The Crown having the Power of creating and
removing Judges at Pleasure, was found by fatal Experience, to be one of the
greatest Misfortunes the Nation labored under; the Law being always expounded
in Favor of the Crown, from whence arose the Doctrines of dispensing Power,
the Forfeitures of Charters, and many other slavish ones, destructive of
Liberty, which produced the Nation's Delivery from Slavery by King William of
immortal Memory; who restored to our Forefathers their Privileges, that they
lost in the common Calamity of those Times, which so much endeared that
glorious Deliverer to those Worthies, that there was not then, as there scare
is now, a Jacobite to be found in the whole Province; so that we can vie with
any of his Majesty's Subjects for Loyalty.

You have here seen some small Sketch of your happy Constitution by the
Charter, which confirms to you all the Privileges of English Men; and as a
Reward for your Ancestors great Merit in settling this Country, adds many
others, giving you a larger in the Government, than the People in England have.
The Improvement of which depends upon you wholly; for to preserve your
Liberties, they must be kept up in their whole Strength. And to this End* it
lies upon you to choose for your Representatives, Men that will be really such;
Men that you cannot suppose will be ignorant or careless of your Interests; or
what is much worse, that will act quite contrary to them.

For Names (Gentlemen,) will not defend you, when the Thing signified by them
is gone. The Emperors of Rome were as absolute with the Show of a Senate, and
the Appearance of the People's choosing their Praetors, Tribunes, and other
Officers of the Common Wealth, as the Eastern Monarchs are now, without these
seeming Checks, and this Show of Liberty; and in some Respects, they were more
secure; as the Infamy of their Tyranny was shared by those Assemblies, the
Advantages were all their own, and the Condition of the People was rather worse
for these mock Magistrates, and pretended Representatives; who, under the
Color and Title of the Protectors of the People, were, at the People's
Expense, the real Helpers and Partakers of the Iniquity of the Tyrant. The
Kings of France have Parliaments, but Parliaments which dare not dispute their
Royal Pleasure; and the poor People would not fare one Jot the better, if these
Parliaments were bribed not to dispute it.

This wretched Case, Gentlemen, will be yours, and the wretched Case of your
Posterity, if ever an ambitious or designing Governor shall, hereafter be able
to corrupt or awe your Representatives. And whatever wicked Bargains are then
made, will be made at your Expense, and you must pay the terrible Reckoning at
last. It requires therefore your best Tho'ts, and most vigorous Resolutions, to
preserve your Constitution entire in all its Parts, without suffering any one
Part to prevail so far over the other, as to reduce it in Effect, though not in
Name, to a simple Form of Government, which is always Tyranny. It will be
immaterial to you, whether this is brought about by Confederacy, or by Force;
by Knaves, or Fools; whatever be the villainous Means, Violence, Oppression,
and every Rank of Evil will be the End. Wherefore, with an honest and generous
Design of saving your Country, you ought to choose Representatives, whose
Interests are at present the same with your own, and likely to continue the
same. Representatives, who are not already pre-engaged, nor, from their
Circumstances, Profession, Offices, and Manner of Life, are likely to be
engaged in a contrary Interest. He will prove but a sorry Advocate, who takes
Fees from your Adversary; and as indifferent a Plenipotentiary, who receivs a
Pension from the Prince, whom, he is commissioned to treat with* Nor can there
be any Security in the Fidelity of One, who can find it more his Interest to
betray you, than to serve you faithfully. Virtue and Vice will be but ill
balanced, when Profits and Honors are thrown into the wrong Scale. A great
Protestant Peer of France, having changed his Religion, in Compliance with his
Master Henry the 4th of France, who had changed too, was soon after asked by
that Monarch publicly, which of the two Religions he thought the best? The
Protestant, Sir, undoubtedly, said the Peer, by your own royal Confession,
since in Exchange for it, your Majesty has given me Popery and a Marshal's
Staff to Boot. Where Boot is given, there is always a tacit Confession that the
Exchange is unequal without it. Choose not therefore such, who are likely to
truck away your Liberties, for an Equivalent to themselves.

It is the Right and Duty of the Electors, to examine into the Conduct, and to
know the Opinions and Intentions of those, who offer themselves to their
Choice. And (if they have served before) the best Way to form a Judgment of
their present Views and Designs, is to survey their past Behavior, when in
Office. How can any of you be truly represented, when you know not the
Sentiments of those who represent you? It is still your happy Lot, that you
have frequent Means and Opportunities to resent effectually the Corruption of
those, who have basely betrayed their sacred Trust, and slighted with an
insolent Scorn and Contempt, your prudent Instructions, given for the
Preservation of your Liberties; admit no such Man to be so much as a Candidate
again, nor indeed any Man to be a Candidate, until he has declared in the most
explicit and solemn Manner, his most hearty Regard for your invaluable
Liberties, and his fixed Resolution to preserve the same, and withstand any
Attempts to destroy them.

This, Gentlemen, is your Time, -- which if you suffer to be lost, may be
forever lost. Choose not therefore those, who would bribe you, with getting you
made distinct Parishes and Praecincts, or with obtaining any other separate
Advantage for you, because, you may depend upon it, the Purchase of this Favor
for you, must cost you very dear, for they must give a Quid for your Quo. And
if, in order to get this Favor for you, and to establish his Interest with
you, your Representative should, by his Vote, (which is probable) gain a
Compliance with an Instruction diametrically opposite to the Charter, or do any
other Damage to the Public; upon duly stating the Account, you will find
yourselves upon the Balance great Losers, having suffered more in the public
Loss, than you have gained by your private Advantage. And History furnishes us
with numberless Examples of the greatest and heaviest Misfortunes falling upon
those and their Families, who have given up the Liberties of their Country, in
order to gain a private Advantage, that being very insecure under an arbitrary
Administration.

Choose not those, who are in Confederacy with the Disposers of civil and
military Honors, by which Means, some have been able to carry almost all their
Points in the House, a few Years past. For you may depend upon it, they cannot
act as free Agents; and what the Consequence of that in a few Years will be,
you may judge from what has already happened to you. By this, you find Laws
enacted without this essential Clause in them, viz. Any Law, Usage, or Custom
to the contrary notwithstanding; which is a repealing Clause: But this is left
out, because, the Governor has an Instruction to consent to no repealing Act
whatever; which is depriving you of one of your best Privileges, being nothing
less, than taking from the General Assembly the whole legislative Power granted
them by the royal Charter; for it ever will be a fundamental Maxim in
Politics, -- That the same Power which can enact, can either alter or
abrogate: -- According to which, If our General Assembly have no Power to
repeal, they never had a Power to enact; from whence it will necessarily
follow, That our whole Body of Laws are ipso facto, null and void. This mean
Compliance with Instructions, is the Root and Foundation of all your heavy
Sufferings, and may yet produce worse and more heavy; whereas an honest
Noncompliance with an Instruction, which infringes upon your Liberties, will
be a considerable Security to them, by being never troubled with it again,
unless now and then by Way of Scarecrow, as you have been with the Instruction
for fixing the Salary.

You are Freemen, and Men of Reason and Spirit; awaken your Spirit, exert your
Reason, and assert your Freedom. You have a Right to Petition the General
Assembly, to propose your Thoughts and Grievances to them, to be heard and
relieved when you suffer any.

Choose not the Gentlemen of the Militia; for although it may be objected, That
they are not so dependant, as the Gentlemen of the Army in England, because
they receive no Pay; yet remember their Duty, together with those Darlings,
their military Honor and Power, depend upon obeying the Word of Command, as
well as the Officers of the regular Troops. And it is well known, That Power
and Honor have a greater Influence upon most Men than Money. Because,
Coveteousness is a Vice, that even the Miser himself would have the World
believe he despises; whereas, Power and Honor are allowed to be admired by
all. Your military Officers have considerable Power lodged in their Hands, more
in some Respects, than is proper and convenient for your Interest, to entrust
many of them with. And this has been considerably augmented by the new Law
passed by the last General Court, for raising the military Fines, threefold.

Choose not those Officers who depend upon Fees, because, as you now have two
Sorts of Money passing, and the Bills of the old Tenor, extant, are to be
called in by the Year 1741, and no other Money is to be passing (unless the
next General Assembly take Care of you) except that of the new Tenor: You may
depend upon it, the Officers will endeavor that no new Regulation shall be
made of their Fees to prevent your being oppressed, but that they shall remain
upon the present Establishment. So that a Place now worth in Fees 500 l. per
Annum, will then be worth more than 1500 l. per Annum. A very fine Advance upon
your growing Poverty.

If a Motion should be made and obtained, in the Courts of this Province, That
all Bills of Cost should be taxed, to be paid in Bills of the new Tenor, it
must considerably increase your Law Charges, especially when you compute the
Costs of the many small Actions brought before Justices, for Debts not
exceeding Forty Shillings, and for the unpardonable Crime of not Training, for
which terrible Fault, I knew a Man pay Thirteen Shillings new Tenor, the
Justices Fees, which added to two Fines sued for, made in the whole Twenty
Three Shillings new Tenor, and so amounted to Three Pounds Nine Shillings,
Bills of the old Tenor. By this you see what you are coming to, unless you
prevent this growing Oppression by using proper Care in the ensuing Election of
Representatives. I am not insensible, That almost all the Officers, civil and
military, will exert themselves in the ensuing Election, in favor of
themselves and their Brethren; and will tell you, they are sensible how
prejudicial the new Tenor Bills are, and that they carry a Sting in their Tail,
but that, that shall be prevented by a new Regulation of Fees; yet regard them
not in this Affair, because your All is at Stake; (although in their respective
Offices, when they behave well, as many of them, to their Honor, do, treat
them with all due Deference and Respect) but tell them plainly, you fear your
good Nature and Credulity in sending them and their Friends, your
Representatives, has brought all your Misfortunes upon you; and that therefore
you think it high Time, for the sakes of their Families, as well as your own,
to alter your Elections, and to choose some of those uncourtly People, who have
always kept up that excellent Preservative of Liberty- Jealousy; and that you
have already suffered too much by gilded Pills, to take any more of them; and
that you can have no Manner of Reliance upon this their Promise, least a Law
for regulating Fees, should meet with the same Fate, which the Bill did, that,
Anno 1734, passed the House of Representatives, for restraining the Clerk of
the Naval Office, taking exorbitant Fees. Tell them further, That this Instance
convinces you, That you are to hope for no Relief from such Gentlemen; for if a
Law would not pass to check the Exactions of such an obnoxious Officer, who
obtained that very profitable Post in a disagreable Manner, and stands, us be
ever has done, upon very ill Terms with many great Men here. It cannot be
reasonably thought, that they, when they get into Power, will do more against
themselves, their Friends, and the Governor's Friends, than they did against a
Man, whom they would have gladly curtailed in his Fees, but that they feared it
would have been made use of as a Precedent, to have prevented their, and their
Friends intended Oppression* This glaring Instance must always stare them in
the Face, and give them the Lie, when they pretend to say they are for any
other new Regulation of Fees, than what shall be in favor of the Officers. No!
Gentlemen, Tell them Interest will not lie, and you are not to be deceived; and
that upon this Maxim you will act in your ensuing Election. Tell them you are
not quite so blind, as not to see, That as your Trade decays, the Number of
Candidates for every Vacancy will daily increase, which must give Prerogative a
considerable Advantage over Liberty. Tell them, all the additional Profit
raised by this new Money must come from you, and so add double Weight in the
Scale of Prerogative (which is heavy enough already) against Liberty; and that
this ought to make you consider, what large Strides Prerogative will be daily
making toward absolute and despotick Power, when it is so considerably
augmented, and the Supports of Liberty so much enfeebled.

Gentlemen, It highly imports you to consider what you are about, and whether
you will bring Life or Death upon us. Oh! Take Care of yourselves, and of us
all: We are all in your Hands, and so at present are your Representatives. But
very quickly the Scene will be shifted, both you and we shall be in their's.

Choose therefore honest Freemen, who when they have been your Representatives,
have followed your Instructions, taken Care of your Privileges, and have showed
themselves firmly attached to the best Interests of their Country, and have
been as tender of your Liberties, religious and civil, as of the Apple of their
Eyes.

Choose Men of good moral Characters, who have always in their Dealings in Meum
et Tuum acted honestly; for it is a great Hazard, whether he who would cheat
his Neighbor of Twenty Pounds, will not fell his Country for Judas's Price.

Choose such as have always shown themselves, and are likely to continue, your
fast Friends; who have opposed every unjust Exaction of your civil Officers,
and have almost stood alone for your Sakes, in the Prosecution of such Officers
for that Offense.

Choose such as are most likely to relieve you from such Burdens, under which
we all sadly groan, and under which we must certainly sink, never to rise
again, if we are not relieved.

I am, Gentlemen, With exceeding Sincerity, and all good Wishes, Your most
affectionate Humble Servant, AMERICANUS.


