DANGER OF SCHISMS and CONTENTIONS With Respect to the Ministry and Ordinances
of the Gospel, represented IN A SERMON Preached at the Meeting of the
Presbytery at Woodbridge, October 10 th, 1729: And published at the Desire of
some of the Ministers present.

BY JONATHAN DICKINSON, M. A. Minister of the Gospel, at Elizabeth-Town in
New-Iersey.

2 Cor. iv.5. For we Preach not our selves but CHRIST JESUS the Lord: And our
selves your Servants for CHRIST JESUS sake.

1 Cor. iv.5. Therefore Judge nothing before the Time, until the Lord come who
will both bring to Light the hidden Things of Darkness; and will make Manifest
the Councils of the Heart.

New York, printed by I. Peter Zenger, 1739.

THE DANGER OF SCHISMS and CONTENTIONS, With Respect to the Ministry and
Ordinances of the Gospel, etc.
I Cor. iii.4. For while one says I am of Paul, and another I am of Apollos,
are ye not carnal?


THE Gospel of Reconciliation is the greatest Privilege that was ever enjoyed
by the Children of Men, and ought to be received with admiring and adoring
Views of God's infinite Goodness in this unspeakable Gift. By this we are
distinguished from the greatest Part of the World, who sit in Darkness and see
no Light* while the Day spring from on High has visited us, and Life and
Imortality are brought to Light, among us: By this we are instructed in our
Duty and Interest, and guided in all the Ways of Righteousness, Peace and
Comfort. By this we are put under the best Advantages to be Favorites of
Heaven, and to be the Children of God, to be happy in this World, and to be
happy for ever. -- How sad a Consideration therefore is it, that this glorious
Privilege should be the unhappy Occasion of Factions and Schisms, Strife and
Debate, amomg those who are thereby so peculiarly dignified and distinguished!
But thus it has always been; and thus by melancholy Experience we yet find the
Case. Our Jarrs and Animosities are occasioned, and our Divisions and
Confusions justified by that blessed Institution* that breaths nothing but
Love, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness and Goodness. -- This Conduct in the
Beginning of Christianity, was the Cause of that heavy Complaint of the Apostle
in the third Verse of our Context. For are you not carnal? For whereas there is
among you Envying and Strife, and Divisions; are ye not carnal and walk as Men?
The Justice of this Complaint is exemplified in the Words of the Text. For
while one says I am of Paul, another I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal? -- In
the Words are,

I. An implicit Accusation of these Corinthians. One says I am of Paul,
another I am of Apollos. i. e. They were divided into two contending Parties,
pretending to have these great and eminent Ministers of Christ their respective
Heads or Leaders; the one Side being denominated from the one, the other Side
from the other; and each Party in such a distinguishing Manner preferring the
one, as (comparatively at least) to despise the other of these excellent
Servants of Christ. -- It seems indeed from the iv Chap. and 6 verse of this
Epistle, That Paul and Apollos were not personally the Objects of their
Factions Preference or Contempt; but there were other Ministers of Christ, of
less Eminence in the Church, about whom they maintained such Fewds and Debates,
who are here in a Figure represented by Paul and Apollos. But whoever were the
pretended Heads of these different Parties, they were divided into Factions,
the Peace of the Church was sacrificed to these Debates, and Schism and
Confusion were the sad Effects of their thus prefering one Minister of Christ
to another.

II. We have in the Words, a necessary Consequence of their Conduct set before
'em; Are you not carnal? Does not this your Behavior plainly and evidently
show, That if you are not under the Power, you are at least under the
Prevalence of a carnal and unsanctified Spirit?

The Sum of the Words are contained in this Doctrine.

That a factious setting up and preferring one faithful Minister of the Gospel
above another, is an Argument of a carnal Mind.

For Illustration hereof I shall endeavor to consider.

1. Who may be said factiously to set up and prefer one Minister of the Gospel
above another.

2. How this appears to be an Argument of of a carnal Mind.

And conclude with some Reflections by Way of Improvement.

I am then in the first Place to consider, who may be said factiously to set up
and prefer one faithful Minister of the Gospel above another.

That I may set this in a just View, and obviate such Prejudices as may be
entertained against this Doctrine, I would first premise, That a bare
Preference of one Minister to another, on account of his superior Gifts,
Graces, or ministerial Qualifications, was not the Fault these Corinthians were
charged with in our Text; nor is this to be considered as an Argument of
Carnality. We must shut our Eyes, and act in Defiance to the clearest Dictates
of our Reason and Observation, if we don't allow, that God has endowed some of
his Servants with much brighter Capacities, and more eminent Degrees of
Learning, Knowledge, Grace, and other needful Furniture for this sacred Trust,
than some others are favored with; and there is just Cause that we should
esteem and value them accordingly. Paul for Instance, was doubtless in all
these Respects preferable to Apollos and other his Contemporaries in the Work
of the Ministry. It was but Justice to give him the Honor of being in Nothing
behind the very chiefest Apostles. Though in this Case we are very apt to
exceed in setting too high a Value upon Men's Persons; yet there is no Danger
of over valuing the Grace of God, that is discovered in their Abilities for, or
Improvement in this important Work. This being premised, I proceed to show,

1. That they are chargeable with this factious Spirit, who prefer one, and
despise and depreciate another faithful Minister of Christ. -- The Feet of them
that preach the Gospel of Peace and bring glad Tidings of good Things, are
beautiful. They are worthy to be esteemed, that watch for our Souls; and to be
honored for their Work's sake, who are Ambassadors of Christ; and are in his
Name and Stead entreating and beseeching us to be reconciled to God. And though
there are Diversities of Gifts by the same Spirit, and Diversities of
Administrations by the same Lord, given to the several Ministers of the Gospel,
they are all to profit withal; and all (in a Person qualified for the great
Work) made subservient to the Interest of Christ's Kingdom in the World. How
great is the Injustice therefore, how criminal the Injury and Indignity done to
those Ministers of Christ, who are the Objects of Contempt and Abuse, for want
of some particular Qualifications, that some of their Hearers are pleased to
admire in others. I am grieved to see so many Instances of Slights and Neglects
on this Account, from some of our People toward their faithful and painful
Ministers in these Parts of the Country. And what adds to the Grievance is.
That there is nothing more common in this Case, than to admire and applaud
those Qualifications in others, that are manifest Imperfections. And thus the
Servants of Christ must be laded with Contempt, for avoiding the Mistakes of
their fallible Brethren. But suppose it were otherwise; suppose there be indeed
some peculiar Excellency in one Minister of Christ that another wants, must his
Esteem and Reputation be therefore raised upon the Ruin and Destruction of the
others? Must one Minister be vilified and contemned, because God has given
superior Gifts and Graces to another? Must Paul be despised on Account of
Apollos's Eloquence of Speech? Or Apollos be contemptuously treated because
Paul exceeded him in all the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit? Must the ten
Apostles be treated with Disrespect and Neglect, because James and John were
Boanerges; or these two be despised, because they had not the same calm and
easy Methods of Address with the other Ten? This were to maintain perpetual
Debates and Emulations, to root out vital Piety, and to make the Followers of
the Prince of Peace to be literally an Army with Banners. This is what the
Apostle largely argues against, throughout the xii. Chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, which he concludes with this Challenge, Are all
Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all Teachers? Are all Workers of Miracles? Have
all the Gifts of healing? Do all speak with Tongues? Do all Interpret? In
Allusion to which I may say* Are all Men of equal Sprightliness and Sagacity?
Are all equally eloquent? Have all the same charming Voice or winning Methods
of Address? Are all Sons of Thunder? No! God has set the Members every one of
them in the Body as it has pleased him. And we are accordingly to esteem and
value all that are carefully discharging the awful Trust committed to them of
the Lord, as Ministers of Christ; and Stewards of the Mysteries of the Kingdom.
And not add to their heavy Weight; and weaken their Hands in their difficult
Work, by Slights and Contempts, Abuses and Indignities.

If it should in this Case be pretended, that we may have especial Reason to
Esteem one Man's Ministry; and to despise others in Comparison of him, on
Account of the peculiar spiritual Advantages received under his Ministrations.
Perhaps others will make the same Presence and Plea, in direct Opposition to
ours: And thus every Minister must be both admired and despised in his Turn,
according to the real or imaginary Success of his Ministry. But this Mistake
lies in giving the Honor to the Instrument, which belongs only to the
principal Agent; and not ascribbing to the Sovereignty of Gods free Grace, all
the Blessings that he is pleased to afford to the means of his Grace. We should
in this Case consider the Apostles Admonition, in the 5* 6; and 7 Verses of our
Context. Who then is Paul or who is Apollos, but Mnisters by whom ye believed,
even as the Lord gave to every Man? I have planted, Apollos watered* But God
gave the increase. So then, neither is he that planteth any Thing, neither is
he that waters: But God that gives the Increase. By which we are instructed
to attend upon the Ministry God has set over us, with a Dependence not upon
the Means; but the God of Means, for the saving Efficacy of it. If our Minister
have not such superior Capacities or desirable Qualifications, as we see or
imagine in some others: Yet since the Providence of God has settled us under
his Ministrations, we are in the Way of God and Duty, while we are seriously,
humbly, and dilligently attending upon them. And we may depend upon this, that
if ever God bestow saving Grace upon us, it will be in his own Way.

2. They are also chargeable in this Respect who endeavor to make Parties and
Divisions in the Church, on Account of such Preference of one Minister of
Christ to another. When once Men come under the Power of such a factious
Spirit, to have Men's Persons in Administration because of Advantage, they will
commonly Use their best endeavors to add to their Party, that they may justify
that Conduct by their Numbers, which must be condemned both by Religion and
Reason. These will never want Pretenses to palliate their dividing Practices;
and to seduce others to an Imitation of their Irregularities. This is to
promote the best Welfare of their Neighbors. This is to bring them under the
Advantage of a more Powerful Ministry, whereby their eternal Interest may be
best promoted. It Is to associate them with more serious Christians; and to
bring them acquainted with more vital Piety. These and such like Panegyricks
upon themselves and their Party, are too commonly heard from some among us, who
seem to suppose they are in the Service of Christ, when breaking in upon the
Peace of the Churches, and actively endeavoring to foment Discords, Divisions
and Confusions among them. But let it be considered, that Nothing can be more
contrary to the Spirit and Tenor of the Gospel, than divisive Principles and
Practices. Whatever Good may be pretended to; its a clear Case, that Church
Divisions are certainly Sinful and displeasing to God. That Rule must therefore
take Place here; That we don't do Evil, that good may come of it. Let but any
serious Person consider the strong Declaratons so frequently found in the Word
of God against Factions and Divsiions, it must make him awfully careful to
avoid, what is so contrary and displeasing to the infinite Fountain of Peace
and Love. I would therefore earnestly invite such Church Dividers as I have now
described, to read and contemplate such Texts as these. Cor. 1.10, 12, 13. Now
I beseech you Brethren in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak
the same Thing; and that there be no Divisions among you: But that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment. -- Now
this I say* that every one of you says I am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I
of Cephas; and I of Christ. Is Christ divided? Was Paul Crucified for you? Or
were ye Baptized in the Name of Paul? Romans xvi.17, 18. Now I beseech you
Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them: For they that are such, serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ; but their own Belly; and by good Words and fair.
Speeches, deceive the Hearts of the Simple. Iam. iii.15, 16. But if you have
bitter Envying and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and ly not against the
Truth. This Wisdom descends not from above; but is earthly, sensual,
devilish. For where Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion and every evil
Work. 1 Cor. xiv.33. God is not the Author of Confusion: But of Peace, in all
the Churches of the Saints.

If it be pretended, That we are bound to seek our greater Edification; and
consequently to desert that Ministry under which we cannot find equal Advantage
to our Souls. I answer, this Objection is founded upon a Mistake before
obviated; and the Objector forgets, that Paul planteth, and Apollos waters;
but it is God that gives the Increase, that whoever are the Dispensers of the
Means of Life, the Excellency of the Power is of God, and not of Man. I will be
bold to say, if we do not find spiritual Edification under a faithful Minister
of Christ, whether of the most eminent Capacities or not, it is our own Fault.
And I can hardly be persuaded to believe, That God will bless us with
extraordinary Edification for wandering out of his Way, and propagating Schisms
abrest to so many solemn Admonitions to the contrary. -- And I would desire the
Objector further to consider the necessary Consequences of such Pretenses. If
one Minister may lawfully desert the Ministry and Society to which he belongs,
for greater Edification, another may, and every one may desert them from the
same Pretense: and thus the Society will be filled with utmost Confusion, if
not brought to an utter Dissolution. And if this Practice be lawful in one
Society, it is lawful in every Society. Every Congregation may by the same
Plea, break through all the Obligations between their Minister and themselves,
desperse from Parish to Parish, and from Town to Town, to seek their greater
Edification, until there be no such Thing as an united Congregation left; nor
any such Thing as a religious Society in the World. And how agreeable to the
Mind of Christ are such Principles and Practices, as directly tend to the
Dissolution of his Churches, may be even left to the most prejudiced Person
among us.

But perhaps some will be ready to enquire, Whether there be no Cause to
separate our selves, and to encourage others to separate from the Ministry to
which they sustain a special Relation; and to attend upon the Ministrations of
another, more likely to serve our spiritual Interests? -- To which I answer.
When our Consciences are imposed upon by sinful Terms of Communion, or what we
esteem to be such; when our Minister is openly vicious or immoral; or his
Doctrines heterodox and subversive of the Fundamentals of Christianity, and of
vital Piety; when the Ordinances of the Gospel are neglected, or corruptly
administered; and the great Duties of the Ministry sloathfully omitted, or
triflingly and carelessly performed; and when there can be no Redress of such
Grievances from the Discipline Christ has appointed in his Church; I think a
Man may then have a Call to peaceably withdraw from such a Ministry, and list
himself under another. But as none of my Hearers can pretend this to be their
Case. The Appeal may be made to their Consciences, and to the Consciences of
others, that are in this Church dividing Scheme from the same or such like
Pretenses, whither their Ministers are not sound in the Faith, regular in their
Lives, and painfully diligent in the great Work committed to them of the Lord.
What Foundation can there be therefore for breaking the Peace, or dividing the
Communion of our religious Societies? It must certainly concern us all to
hearken to that Admonition, Ephesians. iv.2, 3. With all Lowliness and Meekness, with
Longsuffering forbearing one another in Love, to endeavor to keep the Unity of
the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace.

3. They are also chargeable in this Respect, who are censorious and
uncharitable toward some of the faithful Ministers of Christ, and those that
adhere to their sacred Administrations, on account of such Preference of one
Minister to another Men are loath to be esteemed in the Wrong, or to be
disesteemed for their sinful Conduct; and therefore very ready to excuse one
Fault by committing another. This is commonly seen; and in no Case more common,
than in this before us. Divisions are Matter of public Observation, and some
Apology must be made for them: The want of justifiable Reasons must therefore
be made up with Censoriousness and uncharitable Aspersions. Whence those
Pretenses which are too often heard among us, That such Ministers whom any are
pleased to disesteem, though of acknowledged Regularity in their Lives, and
Diligence in their Work, are unsanctified Persons, destitute of spiritual
Experiences; and therefore unfit to guide others in a Way wherein themselves
are Strangers. They want right Views, are not influenced with a Zeal for the
Cause of Christ, or with a Love to the Souls of Men. They and their Followers
are dead and lifeless, of a Laodicean Indifferency; and therefore both to be
forsaken. How common such like, and yet more severe Imputations, not fit to be
mentioned, are among some Professors of Religion in these Parts, is too well
known to need any particular Representation, But what is the Occasion of all
these Invectives and uncharitable Surmises? If there be visible Matter of
Complaint that can be justified before impartial Judges.; if there be any
Scandal in their Lives, any censurable Fault or Neglect in their Ministry; why
is not a Redress sought after? Why don't these dissatisfied Persons apply to
the Discipline of the Church, to have those Causes of Complaint obviated and
removed? But if the Case be the direct Reverse of these Supposals; if the
Objects of these Censures can safely appeal to their Hearers, in that Language.
1 These. ii.10. Ye are Witnesses, and God also, bow holily and justly, and
unblameably we have behaved our selves among you. If they have approved
themselves sound in the Faith, laborious in their Callings, and (at least
visibly) faithful to him that sent them; by what Plea or Pretext can such
Censoriousness be justified? -- These Ministers don't (perhaps) imitate some
peculiarities of others, that some Men are pleased to esteem; nor applaud what
they cannot but suppose to be Mistake and Imperfection; and are therefore thus
severely judged and censured.

But who are these that judge another Man's Servant, who to his own Master must
stand or fall? Whence is this Spirit of Discerning? Whence are these Men
Masters of the inward Sentiments. Principles or Views of others? By what
Warrant do they invade his prerogative, who alone is the Searcher of the Hearts
and of the Reins? Is it a light Thing to depreciate the Ministry of a Servant
of Christ and to do what we can to render it unsuccessful to the Souls of his
Hearers? Do these Men take no Notice of all the Admonitions given them on that
Account in the Word of God? Have they no Regard to such Taxes as that, in Mat
vii.1* 2. Judge not, that you be not judged. For with what Judgment ye judge ye
shall be judged. Or that in Romans xiv*10, 13. But why do thou judge thy
Brother? Or why do thou set at naught thy Brother? For we shall all stand
before the Judgment Seat of Christ. Let us not therefore judge one another any
more. Whatever Views such Men may have of raising their own Reputation for
Piety, by such uncharitable Reflections, they would do it more effectually in
the Esteem of all serious and judicious Persons, by Humility and Lowliness of
Mind, and by esteeming others better than themselves, according to the
Apostolic Direction, Phil. ii.3. But while they are saying, as Isaj lxv.5.
Stand by thy self, come not near me, for I am holier than thou. They are a
Smoke in God's Nostrils; and their Conduct cannot but be very unacceptable to
him, who resists the Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble.

I am aware what Answers may be made to all this. It will probably be urged, by
such to whom this Discourse is more directly pointed, That those Ministers and
their Adherents who are thus censured by them, have not experienced those
Convictions and Humiliations as are necessary Preparations to a saving
Conversion to God; nor such Evidences of the Love of God, or such Joy and Peace
in believing, as those that are the true Children of God have experienced, --
Besides, they find Fault with those that have had these Experiences, and are
evidently sanctified Persons, which is a black Mark upon them, that they are
Strangers, who cannot intermeddle with these Ioys. These seem to be the chief
Arguments used to justify the uncharitable Invectives that are so often heard,
and so much complained of among us.

To the first of these I answer. How do these Men know what have been the
religious Experiences of others; or what Intercourse there has been between God
and their Souls? The most humble, and therefore the most serious Christians are
the least ostentatious; and least likely to boast of their own Seize; and
he only that pondereth the Heart, is capable to determine what their State is,
what Change has passed upon their Souls; or what Experiences they have had, or
have not had, of a Work of Grace in their Hearts. To us belongs Charity and
Hope, where an irregular Conversation don't give us Cause to the contrary. But
suppose that these Objects of Censure have not experienced just the same Kind
or Degree of Conviction or Humiliation, that some others have passed through,
of whose good Estate there is the greatest Confidence. Is it therefore good
Evidence of their Unregeneracy? Shall we limit the holy one of Israel? Or
confine the Operations of divine Grace to any special or particular Methods?
Don't continual Observation convince us, That the Spirit of God does in a
Variety of Ways, Means and Degrees awaken Sinners to a Sense of their Guilt and
Danger; and bring them from a State of carnal Security to the Footstool of his
Mercy.

To the second (and perhaps the chief) Plea for this uncharitableness, I would
observe, That it is one Thing to find Fault with Men's Conduct, and another to
censure their State. I hope those Ministers that are most loudly complained of
as unregenerate, do not run into the same Mistake which they condemn in others;
and judge all those to be Hypocrites, by whom they themselves are so severely
judged. No! we would hope well of many of these our Brethren, though we cannot
justify their Conduct.

We would charitably conclude some of them to be sincere Christians, though we
find Fault with their factious divisive and censorious Principles and
Practices, which we cannot but Esteem at the best as a dead Fly in the
Apothecaries Ointment. And must we call Darkness Light; and Light Darkness.
Must we sooth and flatter Men in their manifest Faults; and join with them in
the Subversion of the Peace and Prosperity of our Churches; or be thus
abusively treated? To the righteous Judge do we submit our Cause, to him who
knows our Work, and our Labor, and Patience, from whom we hope for Acceptance
in our sincere Desires and Endeavors to serve him; and have therefore no
Reason to fear the severest Censures of our most uncharitable Brethren.

4 They are also chargeable with a factious setting up and preferring one
Minister of the Gospel above another, who limit the Success of Gospel
Ordinances to particular Dispensers of them. As there is a great variety of
Gifts among the the several Dispensers of the Gospel of Christ, so is there a
like variety of Taste and Sentiment among their Hearers, differently esteeming
and applauding the several Preachers, according as their Ministry is suited to
their Disposition, Genius, or Circumstance. And how apt are Men to run into
Extremes in this Case: How ready to conclude, that because they have, or
suppose they have experienced peculiar Advantage, by a Particular Ministry,
that therefore no spiritual Benefit is to be hoped for from any such, who don't
use the same Methods of Address. From such like Pretexts, the Ministry of all
those that han't the same Manner of Preaching, which they think so well of,
must be condemned, as dead and lifeless, useless and unprofitable. And the
Hearers must be admonished to betake themselves to better means of Edification,
as they would hope for a Conversion to God; and Salvation for their Souls. My
Hearers are generally sensible, that I am not proposing to 'em an unexampled
and fictitious Case. We need not go far to find numerous Instances of this Kind.

We too often hear of Ministers being magnified above measure for their
Success, as though by their own Power and Holiness they could convert Men to God.
And others perhaps equally painful and faithful decry'd as unsuccessful and
therefore culpable, for not having as they imagine so many converted to Christ
by their Ministry. And if this be really so, upon whom does the Reflection
terminate? Unto whom does it belong to give the Increase? It is not sufficient
Matter of Distress and Grief to a faithful Servant of Christ, to Labor in vain
and spend his Strength for naught, that there must be Weight added to a
burden, that is of it self too heavy to bear?

But it will be said perhaps that the Case is self evident. We see by
Experience, that the most thundering and terrifying Methods of address have
Success; and that others have not. If this were true would you argue from
thence, that Gods Grace is limited to the Gifts or peculiar Dispositions as a
particular Preacher? -- But who are the Ministers among us, that neglect to let
in Sinners View their Dreadful Misery and Danger; and their last necessity of
fleeing from the Wrath to come? Who are they that don't affectionately display
the Terrors of the Lord before the Eyes of careless secure Sinners, in the same
Methods and Words that they are found in the Scripture; though it may be not with
the same Elevations of Voice, as some others are capable of? -- If we were
rocking Sinners to Sleep in their carnal Security, by crying Peace Peace, when
God says there is no Peace; if we were so cruel to the Souls of our Hearers, as
to leave 'em in their Stupidity and Sinful Pursuits, without warning them of
their Guilt and approaching Misery; or were prophesying smooth Things and
Deceit to 'em: There would then be just Cause of Complaint. But when we may
appeal to the Consciences of our Hearers, that we have with all awful Care and
Diligence endeavored to stop their Career for Destruction; and even travailed
in Birth to see Christ formed in them; how hard is our Case, to be censured as
unfaithful for want of Success.

And I would further Observe to these Objectors, that they may mistake in their
Conclusion, and pretended Experience or Observation. There may be a great many
converted to God that they know nothing of, under that Ministry which they so
causelessly slight and reject. I hope they will not* all be found unconverted and
unsanctified Persons, whose Humility and Modesty restrains them from frequent
and open Discourse about their Convictions and other spiritual Experiences.

And I trust we have (these Censures notwithstanding) many Seals of our
Ministry, that will be our Crown and Rejoicing in the Day of the Lord Jesus.
Though we have nothing to boast of; but have great Cause to be humbled for
Unfruitfulness and Unsuccessfulness in our great Work: (yet blessed be God) we
have also Cause to adore the Riches of that free Grace, that has made us
Instruments of saving Advantage to so many precious Souls. And this we
acknowledge to the Praise and Glory of God, notwithstanding all the Censures of
our uncharitable Brethren.

And I would further Observe on the other Hand, that though I am far from envying
the Ministers of Christ their Success; (the Lord greatly multiply the Number of
sincere Converts, who ever he will please to improve as the Instruments of
their Conversion) and as far am I from censuring as unsincere any that have
hopeful Evidences of Sanctification: Yet it must be remembered, that there is a
great Difference between sudden Terrors, and a saving Conversion to God; and
that we may not conclude all such to be converted, as are alarmed by an
awakening Sermon.

But after all, if the whole be granted, the Success of any particular Minister
can be no Warrant to any Man to leave his Station, and follow him: For this is
to go out of God's Way, and consequently out of the Way of his Blessing. Nor
can it be a Warrant to censure any faithful Minister of Christ, for want of
Success: For these shall be found a sweet Savor of Christ* both in them that
are saved; and in them that perish. 2 Cor. ii.15. And notwithstanding all the
Abuses and unkind Treatment they may meet with from ungrateful or uncharitable
Men, they may claim the gracious Promise, that Christ will be with them always,
even to the End of the World.

5 They likewise come under the Imputation in our Text and Doctrine, who
neglect to support the Minister God has set over them, from a higher Esteem to
some other. There is no Duty of Christianity more fully and plainly enjoined in
the Scripture, than giving an honorable Support to the Ministers of the
Gospel. Read to this Purpose, 1 Cor. ix.11, 13, 14. If we have sown unto you
spiritual Things, is it a great Thing, if we shall reap your carnal Things? Do
you not know, that they which minister about Holy Things, live of the Things of
the Temple; and they which wait at the Altar are Partakers with the Altar? Even
so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of
the Gospel. And Gal. vi.6. Let him that is taught in the Word communicate to
him that teaches, in all good Things. I have often wondered how Men could have
Peace in their own Consciences, in the Neglect of such a plain and manifest
Duty. Don't they know, that they live in an open Violation of the Law of God,
in Ways of highest Injustice to their Minister, and Injury to themselves, both
Souls and Bodies? Have they not Reason to expect the Curse of God upon all they
possess, when guilty of such a robbing him of what he challenges from their
Estates for his immediate Service? Is it not equally true under the Gospel
Dispensation, as under the legal Economy, that they rob God* and are cursed
with a Curse for it, that withold from, and refuse to contribute their
Proportion to the Support of his Ministers and Ordinances, according to that in
Mal. iii.8, 9? Had they rather forfeit God's promised Blessing upon their
Substance, and their Interest in his Favor, than part with a small Portion of
their worldly Goods, for his Honor and their own Welfare.

But perhaps in answer to all this, they have an Excuse at Hand. They have but
a low Esteem for their Minister, his Method of Preaching is not to their Taste.
Though he be a Man of Piety, Capacity and Diligence; yet his Manner of Address is
not agreeable to them, nor so likely (as they imagine) to promote the Interest
of their Souls, as the Ministry of another Man, which they therefore choose to
attend, and think themselves excused from this Part of their Duty. The true
Meaning of which Apology is plainly this. If one is pleased to say he is for
Paul, and another he is for Apollos, God will dispense with his Law, and excuse
them from their commanded Duty. But should it not be considered, that
Christians are not only under the Obligation of a divine Precept to this Part
of their Duty; but that there is also a mutual Covenant between a Minister and
his Congregation, whereby they are as well obliged to his Support, as he to the
Discharge of his important Trust; that he depends only upon the Congregation to
which he is immediately related, for his Subsistence; and is necessarily
reduced to Indigency and Want, through their parsimonious witholding his Due. No
Apology can therefore be made for this Conduct, no Pretense can justify it
before God and the World, from being a Contempt of God's Law, a Neglect of a
plain manifest Duty and a Fraud of the worst Kind to him that is set over them
in the Lord.

I am next to consider the Evidence of our Doctrine, and and to show how this
appears to be an Argument of a carnal Mind. And.

1 This is evident, because if we had not a carnal Mind, we should love and
esteem all the faithful Ministers of Christ for his Sake. We should honor
their Character, prize and value their Labors; and welcome the Message they
bring us in the Name of the Lord, as well for his Sake that sent them, as for
our own. We should not be one for Paul; and another for Apollos. We should not
propagate Factions and Divisions, disturb the Order, destroy the Peace, and
subvert the Edification of the Church of Christ, by factiously prefering one of
the Servants of the same Lord to another; if we were under a suitable Influence
of a Love to Christ and to his Interest and Kingdom, and were not too carnally
minded. Our Lord tells us, Luke x.16. He that hears you hears me; and he
that despises you despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that
sent me. The Ministers of the Gospel are called Ambassadors of Christ, and
Stewards of the Mysteries of the Kingdom. 2 Cor. v.20. 1 Cor. iv.1. To which of
the Ministers of the Gospel do these Characters belong? Which of them represent
the Person and act in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the faithful
Discharge of their Work? Is it Paul only; or only Apollos; or Cephas; or is it
each faithful Minister indifferently? Whence then is this Disrepect to any of
the Servants of our common Lord; whom each of them represents in discharging
the Service he has appointed them, if we have any just value for him that sends
them? Whence can arise these Abuses and Contempts of those whose Character and
Services deserve our Honor and Esteem, but from the Actings of a carnal Mind?
Moreover;

2. This is also evident, because whatever directly tends to propagate
Divisions, flows from Carnality. Though I understand that some among us, from
Pretenses to I know not what Religion, justify their divisive Practices; and
speak favorably of Contentions and Confusions, as Signs of the Progress of a
Work of Grace: Yet in God's Account, such Divisions are yet to be numbered
among the Works of the Flesh; and the Authors of them to be esteemed under the
Influence of a fleshly Mind. Now the Works of the Flesh are these -- Hatred,
Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions. etc. Gal. v.19, 20: This Wisdom
descends not from above; but is earthly, sensual* devilish. For where
Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion, and every evil Work. Iam iii.15, 16.

It is true, we may be the innocent Occasions of some Divisions by doing our
Duty, while the Lusts of our Opposers are the immediate Cause of them; in which
Sense our Lord himself was said not to send Peace upon Earth, but a Sword. Mat.
x.34. But this no Way affects the present Case, which is setting up Altar
against Altar, dividing the Communion and Peace of the Church, promoting
Schisms and Debates, merely because the Contenders are pleased to vilify such
Ministers of the Gospel, against whose Faithfulness they can find no
justifiable Objection. And if this be doing of their Duty, they must find some
new Law to direct their Duty, very opposite to the Gospel of Peace; and a new
Rule of Duty, not yet received by the Disciples of the Prince of Peace. Nor
will it do in this Case, to call the Sincerity of such Ministers into Question*
this were to add to their Fault, by their Censoriousness and Uncharitablness.
Or in other Words, it would but give clearer Evidences of their Carnality.

3. This is further Evident; because the impleaded Practice directly tends to
destroy the Interests of Religion, and to subvert the Kingdom of Christ in the
World. The Apostle tells us, Romans xiv.17. That the Kingdom of God is
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Whatever therefore tends to
destroy these, does so far tend to destroy the Kingdom of God. This is a clear
Case, and needs no Remarks. And I think I need not endeavor to prove, That to
(...) subvert the Kingdom of God in the World is a Work of the Flesh. I wish
therefore, that Church-dividers would duly consider, that they are serving the
Interests of an opposite Kingdom to that of our Lord Jesus Christ, while they
are thus sowing the Seeds of Strife and Debate, Contention and Confusion among
us. Upon the whole it is no Censoriousness to conclude with Respect to these
Destroyers of our Peace and Love, Ye are yet carnal: For whereas there is among
you envyings and Strife and Divisions, are ye not carnal; and walk as Men?

But it is Time to make some Reflections upon what we have heard. -- I presume
my Hearers have generally considered whether this Discourse tends; and will
therefore bear with me, if I make a particular Application of it to such as
have a special Call to apply it to themselves.

Bear with me, my Brethren, if I am constrained to address you in the Language
of the great Apostle, 1 Cor. xi.18. I hear that there be Divisions among you,
and I partly believe it. The great Infractions of the Peace and Order of this
Congregation; and thereby the sinking Interest of Religion therein, is a
Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation. And what justifiable Cause can you
assign for the Schisms that have so long prevailed in this Place? Will any of
your pretended Reasons of these dividing Practices stand the Trial of
indifferent Judges, or of that Judge who has required you to obey them that
have the Rule over you, to submit your selves to them that Watch for your
Souls; and to be at Peace among your selves? There is verily, my Brethren, a
Fault among you, that deserves your most serious Consideration and solemn
Repentance before God, whatever you may think of it. How confident soever you
may be, that your Ways are right before God, by whomsoever you may be
encouraged and supported in your dividing Practices, I am greatly mistaken, if
they will stand the Trial of the great Day, when all Disguises will be removed;
and you and I must be judged according to what is written in the Book of God.
It therefore certainly concerns you, to weigh your behavior impartially in the
Balances of the Sanctuary; and to consider it, as it must be considered at the
Bar of Christ. This being an Affair of everlasting Consequence, I would most
earnestly invite and entreat you in the Name and Fear of God, seriously to
hearken to, and lay to Heart these following Considerations.

1. Are you equally certain, That you have a justifiable Plea for your so
frequently turning your Back upon the Ordinances of Christ here dispensed; and
for your Gadding about to change your Way; as you are, that Christ requires of
you not to forsake the Assembling yourselves together; to honor and esteem him
that is set over you in the Lord, to walk charitably; and to study the Things
that make for Peace, and those Things whereby you may edify one another? Or if
you falsely imagine you have such Certainty, what will be the Consequence, if
the Lord Jesus Christ in the great Day shall disown your Conduct, silence all
your Pleas and Excuses; and say to your Minister, as in Luke x.16. He that has
despised you has despised me; and that has despised me, has despised him
that sent me?

Is it a light Matter for you to do what you can, to prevent the Success of the
Ordinances of the Gospel in this Place? Don't these Divisions tend to weaken
the Hands of your Minister; and to bring others into a low Esteem of, and
Disregard for his Ministrations; and thereby into infinite Danger of being
barren and unfruitful under them? And is this a small Thing in your Esteem?
Consider how many precious Souls there are, whose eternal Welfare very much
depends upon the Success of the Ministry here; and would you be the Instruments
of their eternal Ruin? Can you be content that any of these should curse you to
all Eternity, as the sad Occasions of their Disregard to the Things of their
Peace, so often inculcated upon them from this Desk? O! take heed that you lay
not a stumbling Block in the Way of the everlasting Happiness, of the immortal
Souls of your Neighbors.

3. Are the Offenses that are raised among you a small Matter in your Eyes? As
you are causelessly taking Offense with your Minister, and other Christian
Brethren, with whom you should take sweet Council together; and walk to the
House of God in Company; so are they likewise justly and necessarily taking
Offense with you. And thus that Union and Communion which becomes Saints is
interrupted, your Spirits too much sowred, and your Affections too much
alienated from one another. God is dishonored, Piety and Charity wounded in
the House of their professed Friends. This is visibly your Case, the sad
Consequences whereof are open to the World. Though you may make light of these
Offenses, our Lord Jesus Christ does not so. The Estimate he makes of them, you
may learn from his own Mouth, in Mat. xiii.6, 7. But who so shall offend one of
these little Ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a Millstone
were hanged about his Neck; and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea.
Woe unto the World because of Offenses: for it must needs be, That Offenses
come: But woe to that Man by whom the Offense comes.

4 Don't you think that the Lord Jesus will in the Day of his appearing and
Kingdom, stand by that Word of his, whereby he has so strictly forbidden
Contentions, Divisions, and Confusions among his Disiples? You seem to have
little or no regard to the Sinfulness of your divisive Courses; but even seem
to justify them as lawful and laudable; and by your Practices to commend them
as your Duty and Interest. But what says the Scriptures? Do not you your
selves know how these Things are every where forbidden and condemned in the
Oracles of God? Some View of this has now been laid before you in this present
Discourse. And what can you say to it? Can you yet be upright in your own Eyes?
Will you yet justify your Divisions, when God himself so severely condemns
them? But whose Word must stand in the great Account, his or yours? How will
these Things appear, when you must answer for them before your Judge? What will
you do when God rises up, when he visits what will you answer?

5. Will not your glorious Judge at his coming justify that Word of his,
whereby he has required you to honorably support and maintain your Minister?
Your Duty in this Respect is plainly legible. You cannot by any Umbrage evade
the Force of the clear and plain Manifestations of God's Will in this Respect.
But yet you live in open Violations and a seeming Defiance of those Divine
Injunctions, and seem to have Peace in so doing. Indeed, Sirs, it is Time to
consider, that how secure soever you may now be in this Matter, there will be
an after Reckoning. And what Plea will you then have to make? How will you
answer the Demands of your Judge, when he calls you to Account for this Part of
your Duty.

And now I would further improve this Discourse, by a particular Address to my
Brethren in the Ministry. If it be an Argument of Carnality in our People, to
factiously set up and prefer one Minister to another, it certainly concerns us
to take Care, that we are not the Instruments and Occasions of these Divisions.
It would be sad indeed for any of our Order, to abet and encourage these
Factions and Confusions. Nothing could be more contrary to the great Ends of
our Ministry, Nothing could more directly tend to subvert the Interest of
Christ's Kingdom among us, which we are bound by such sacred and awful
Obligations to endeavor to promote and advance; than for us to excite and
(...), or even to countenance these unchristian Animosities and Emulations. Are
we Servants of the Prince of Peace, let us approve ourselves such, by using our
utmost Essays to promote vital Piety among our Hearers; and to procure Peace on
Earth, and good Will among Men. Let us with earnest Diligence, fervent
Prayerfulness; and assiduous Application to our Great Work, endeavor if
possible to unite our People to our Ministry, and to one another. Though we may
meet with unworthy and ungrateful Treatment from some of our Hearers, whose
eternal Welfare we have so earnestly consulted and pursued, though our Prayers
and Labor of Love for their Souls be so evilly requited with Reproach and
Censure; we are not to sit still in a Melancholy Dejection under our hard Lot;
but consider these Abuses and Calumnies, as a spur to greater Seriousness,
Activity, and Diligence, in our sacred Calling.

If we are wrongfully censured, it should be improved as a Caution and Warning;
if justly, as a loud Call to Humiliation and Reformation. If upon an impartial
Examination we can justify our own Sincerity: Yet we cannot but condemn our
many Imperfections, which the censorious Treatment we meet with, should awaken
us to repent of, and reform. This is the best Method to quiet the Clamours of
our Accusers; or at least to wipe off their Reproaches. -- In a Word, let us in
all Things approve our selves as the Ministers of God in much Patience, though in
Afflictions, Necessities and Distresses, by Pureness by Knowledges* by Long
suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy Ghost by Love unfeigned, by Honor and
Dishonours, by evil Report and good Report. -- Let us strive with all earnest
Application to pluck Sinners out of the Snares of Death; and to see Christ
formed in the People of our Charge. If God denies us Success, let that also
quicken our Diligence and Prayerfulness; if he grant us Success, we shall not
repent our greatest Care and Pains: but find Cause to praise him for ever.

Finally* let me earnestly exhort and entreat you all, to endeavor to live in
the Love of God, and in Love with one another, to let the Peace of God rule in
your Hearts, to be perfect, to be of good Comfort, to be of one Mind, to live
in Peace, that the God of Love and Peace may be with you. And I would
particularly exhort those of this Congregation that have so long been fomenting
Divisions and Factions here, to seriously lay to Heart, the Iniquity of their
dividing Courses; and not to presevere in Practices so displeasing to God, and
(...)to themselves. I would implore them in the Name and Fear of God, to
consider those Things; and not to drive the Ordinances of God from them; and
provoke him to bring upon them a Famine, not of Bread; nor a Thirst for Water:
But of hearing the Word of the Lord. -- I conclude with that pathetick
Expostulation of the Apostle Phil. ii. beginning. If there be therefore any
Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort of Love, if any Fellowship of the Spirit,
if any Bowels of Mercy, fulfill ye my joy, that ye he like minded, having the
same Hope, of one Accord, of one Mind. Let nothing be done through Strife or
vain Glory: but in lowliness of Mind, let each esteem others better than
themselves.

FINIS.

