Mr. Webb's Election SERMON May, 31, 1738.

The Government of CHRIST considered and applied.

A SERMON Preached at Boston, In the Audience of His EXCELLENCY Jonathan
Belcher, Esquire; The Honorable His Majesty's COUNCIL; And the Honorable House of
Representatives of the Province of the MASSACHVSETTS. May 31, 1738.

Being the Anniversary for the Election of His Majesty's COUNCIL for the
Province.

By John Webb, M. A. And Pastor of a Church in Boston.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed by J. DRAPER, Printer to His Excellency the
GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, for N. PROCTER, at the Bible and Dove in Fish-Street,
and S. ELIOT in Cornhill. 1738.

At a Council held at the Council Chamber in Boston, upon Thursday June 1 st,
1738.
Ordered,

THAT Thomas Hutchinson and Edward Hutchinson, Esqrs; give the Thanks of this
Board to the Rev. Mr. John Webb, for this Sermon preached Yesterday before the
Great and General Court or Assembly; And that they desire a Copy thereof for
the Press.

Attest. Simon Frost, Dep. Secr.

AN Election SERMON.
Isaiah ix.6. -- The Government shall be upon his Shoulder. --
THE Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ is of that Nature and Concernment to
Mankind, that a Discourse upon it can never be out of Season: and, if I mistake
not, it may very fitly be considered on this Occasion; when the Heads of our
Tribes are met together in a solemn Assembly, to give Thanks to the God of
Heaven, for the many great and distinguishing Privileges, both civil and
religious, which we are favored with; and to ask Direction and a Blessing from
on High, upon all the Administrations of Government in the Land; and especially
upon the important Affairs, which lie before the Great and General Assembly of
the Province.

And agreeably I have chosen these Words of the evangelical Prophet, as the
Foundation for such a Discourse.

And, to make the way clear, we may observe, That in the sixth and seventh
Verses of this Context, we have one of the most illustrious Prophesies
concerning the Messiah, that is to be met with in any Part of the Old
Testament. For here, many hundred of Years before the Accomplishment of it, the
Prophet gives us a particular Account of the Coming and Kingdom of Christ: and
is as exact in the Description of his Person and Government, as if he had lived
in these Gospel Days, and seen the Fulfillment of his own Predictions.

And accordingly there are two things observable in the Prophesy.

First, We have here a plain Prediction of the Incarnation and Humiliation of
the Son of God, in theDischarge of his mediatorial Undertaking. This the
Prophet gives us in two Words; unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given.
But as I have not time to explain these Passages at present; I must go on to
consider, the Glory that should follow upon the Abasement of the Son of God,
and be the Reward of his Humiliation.

And therefore,

Secondly, We may further observe a very clear Prediction of the glorious
Exaltation of the Son of God, after his Birth and Sufferings in the human
Nature. And in this he is described both by his Name and Dominion.

1. He was to have a Name given him above every Name. For says the Prophet, His
Name shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, I he overlasting
Father, The Prince of Peace. Now these Characters of his Person and Office, are
the most magnificent that any Language can describe; and serve to create in
every pious Mind, a most lively and astonishing Idea of the incomparable Glory
of our exalted Redeemer: For they cannot be ascribed to any mere Creature
without Blasphemy and Nonsense Pool.
. And therefore must belong only to the eternal Son of God, who is one in
Nature and Essence with God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost. Again,

2. He was to have a Dominion every way answerable to the Dignity of his
Person. This was foretold in the Words of my Text, and in the following Verse.
And the Government shall be upon his Shoulder. -- Of the Increase of his
Government and Peace there shall be no End, upon the Throne of David, and upon
his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with Judgment and Justice, from
henceforth even for ever.

Here by Government we may understand the Administration of all Affairs in the
Kingdom of Providence and Grace.

And when the Prophet foretells that this Government should be upon the
Shoulder Christ; the Meaning is, That our Lord Jesus Christ, by Virtue of his
mediatorial Undertaking, would have a Right to this Government, and have the
Administration of it committed to him by the Father.

And whereas the World Shoulder is used to express this; it is a plain Allusion
to a common Custom among Mankind to lay heavy Burdens upon the Shoulder: and as
plainly intimates, in this Place, That as all Governments if they are rightly
managed, so this especially is a very great Burden, requiring extraordinary
Care, and Diligence, and Fidelity, in the Administration of it.

And having taken this general View of the Words: I come now more particularly
to consider this important Truth that is evidently contained in them. Namely,

Jesus Christ has the Government of all Things committed unto Him by the Father.

In discoursing upon this weighty Subject, I shall go into the following Method.

I. I shall say something concerning the Person who is the Subject of this
Government.

II. I shall consider the Nature and Properties of this Government.

III. I shall show how Christ came to have the Administration of it put into
his Hands.

IV. Say what the great End of it is.

And

V. Apply the Matter, as near as I can, so as to Answer the Design of the
present Solemnity.

I In the first Place, I shall take a brief View of the Person, who is said to
have this Government upon him.

And in a Word, The Person who is the more immediate Subject of this Rule and
Government, is the Lord Jesus Christ, as he is GOD and MAN united in one
Person. For it is not the Son of God, considered as God alone; nor the Son of
Man, simply considered, that has this Dignity and Dominion given to him: For in
the former Sense, the Son of God being equal with the Father, Phil 2.6.
in all divine Perfections, needs no delegated Power from him; but has a
natural Right to exercise a universal and absolute Sovereignty over all created
Beings. And in the latter Sense; that is, if we consider Christ only as Man, he
would be very unequal to the Charge committed to him; for it is vastly too
great, as we shall presently see, for any created Being as such. And from hence
it necessarily follows, That it is, and must be, the Lord Jesus Christ,
considered as GOD-MAN in one Person, who has the Government laid upon him. And
therefore he is spoken of, in our Context, as partaking both of the human and
divine Natures. His human Nature is plainly pointed out in these Words, Unto us
a Child is born; for he could become a Child and be born, in no other way, but
as he was made Man. And when the Prophet adds, Unto us a Son is given, this,
compared with the following Character of his Person, does as plainly intimate.
That he is the eternal Son of God, as well as the Son of Man. And agreeably
this same Prophet does, in another Place of his Prophecies, describe him to us,
under the Title and Character of Immanuel. Isa. 7.14. Behold a Virgin shall
conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call his Name Immanuel: which, being
interpreted, is, God with us; for this is the Exposition which the Holy Ghost
himself gives of the Word in Matthew. 1.23. And having said this concerning the
Person who administers the Government spoken of in the Text,

II. I come now to enquire more particularly into the Nature of this Government.

And in general, By this Government of Christ we may understand his
Administration of all Affairs in Heaven and Earth, so as to advance the Glory
of God, in the eternal Salvation of all God's Elect, and in the everlasting
Destruction all his and his Peoples implacable Enemies. Usher and Mastrecht.
.

Now this Government may be considered, either in general, as it is extended to
all the Creatures, for the good of his Church and People in the World; and in
this respect it is the same with the Kingdom of Providence. Or, it may be
considered in particular, as it has a more immediate Relation to the Church, of
which he is constituted Head in the new Covenant; and in this regard, the
Kingdom of Christ is usually called the Kingdom of Grace.

But as the time will not allow me to consider the Government of Christ in this
doubleRespect; so it will sufficiently answer my present Design, to speak of it
in the first Sense only: or, to give you some short Account of the Government
of Christ in the Kingdom of Providence.

And accordingly I shall here say something, First, concering the Acts of
Christ s Government. And, Secondly, concerning the Properties of it.

First, I shall consider the Acts of Christ's Government; or show wherein, or
in what Respects, he exercises that Power and Authority committed to him by
the Father.

But as it would be endless almost, to reckon up all the particular Acts of
Christ's regal Authority; I shall mention only, His upholding and preserving
all Things in Being: His overruling and directing all Things, to the great End
they were made for; and his judging the World of Angels and Men at the last
Day. For these three more general and comprehensive Acts include all the
Particular ones under them.

To proceed then,

1. Jesus Christ, by Virtue of his sovereign Power, upholds and preserves all
Things in Being: Hence he is said, in Heb. 1.3. To uphold all Things in Being
by the Word of his Power. And again the Apostle observes, in Col. 2.17. He is
before all Things, and by him all Things consist. And therefore from these, and
the like Passages, it plainly appears, That the Weight of the Creation is laid
upon Christ; and that he supports the Whole, and all the Parts of it. For, as a
pious Expositor Henry.
well observes, When, upon the Apostasy of Man, the whole World was breaking to
Pieces under the Wrath and Curse of God, the SON OF GOD, undertaking the Work
of our Redemption, has bound it up again, and established it by his almighty
Power and Goodness. He therefore preserves the World from disbanding and
running into Confusion: He keeps up the Frame and maintains the Order of it: He
has all the Care upon him of whole Family in Heaven and Earth; and provides all
things necessary for their constant Support. And this he will continue to do,
till he has brought in the whole Number of God's elect and redeemed Ones, and
completed his own mystical Body: For it is principally for the Sake of these,
that the World, as it now is, continues in Being.

Again,

2. As Jesus Christ upholds, so he actually overrules and directs all Things,
so as to answer the great End of their Being: that is, so as to advance the
Glory of God in the winding up of all.

And here I might fitly consider the Influence he has over the natural World,
or that which we usually call the ordinary Course of Nature. For, as this is
part of God s providential Kingdom, so it necessarily falls under his general
Care and Direction: And he makes use of all Things in it, some way or other, to
subserve the main Ends of his Government.

But as it is of greater Concernment to us to consider the Dominion of Christ
over the moral Word; over Angels and Men, both good and bad; I shall confine my
Discourse under this Head, to this Part of Christ's Government: and say,

(1.) All the Angels, both good and bad, are in Subjection to Christ; and he
rules and governs them all according to his Royal Will and Pleasure. And
agreeably, the Apostle Peter speaking of our Lord Jesus Christ, says in I Epist
2.22. He is gone into Heaven, and is on the right Hand of God, Angels, and
Authorities, and Powers, being made subject to him.

And therefore as for the Holy Angels, who kept their first Estate; Christ
being an Head of Confirmation to them, they are the Courtiers of Heaven that
surround his Throne of Glory; the Ministers of State that constantly and
cheerfully attend and execute his Orders. And for this Reason, they are called
ministering Spirits,in Heb.1.14. And he sends them forth, not only to minister
for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation, but he makes great Use of them in the
Administration of the Kingdom of Providence. For we frequently read in
Scripture, of their immediate Agency in many of the great Events of Time; and
particularly in some of the most remarkable Dispensations of his Justice and
Grace to the World of Mankind.

And as the Angels of Light, so the Powers of Darkness, or the evil Angels, are
absolutely under the Dominion of Christ. They are indeed the most powerful and
implacable Enemies he has to deal with. But however, as our great Redeemer is
the Angel spoken of in Rev. 20.I. Who has the key of the bottomlesPit, and a
great Chain in this Hand, He either permits or restrains them at his Pleasure.
And when, at anytime, he gives them leave to exert their Power, and vent their
Rage and Malice, he overrules them and their Actions, so as to accomplish the
great Ends of his own Government, contrary to their own Inclination and
Endeavor; as when he made them to confess him to be the Son of God Luke 4.41
, and to be the Means of his Death John 13.17.
, whereby the Kingdom and Works of the Devil were to be destroyed: For upon
this great Event we read, in Col. 2.15. Of his spoiling Principalities and
Powers, and making a show of them openly, triumphing over them in hisCross. And
having said this concerning the Dominion of Christ over the Angels both good
and bad. I come to say,

(2) Jesus Christ exercises the same sovereign Power and Authority over the
whole World of Mankind; and rules and governs them, and all their Affairs, both
public and private, according to his Will. For we read in the 28th Verse of
the 22d Psalm, which is a plain Prophesy concerning Christ. That the Kingdom is
the LORD's, and he is Governor among the Nations.

And in Consequence of this, He Forms the States andEmpires of the World, and
enlarges, or diminishes, or dasheththem to Pieces again, as he sees fit. This
Power he claims to himself in the 18th Chapter of the Prophecies of Jeremiah;
and say particularly in the 6th Verse, Behold, as the Clay is in the Potters
Hand, so are ye in my Hand, O House of Israel. And as he Forms the Kingdoms of
the Earth, by his sovereign Power; so he gives the Dominion over them to whom
he pleases: He pulls down one and sets up another, without giving any Account
of his Conduct. And agreeably we read, in Dan. 2.21. He changes the Times and
the Seasons: he removes Kings and sets up Kings: he gives Wisdom unto the
Wise, and Knowledge to them that know Understanding.

And in this Part of his Administration, he over-ruleth the grand Affairs of
Empires and States, so as best to subserve the great End of his mediatorial
Kingdom. A very remarkable Instance of this we have, in his Enlarging the
Borders of the Roman Empire, and establishing Peace in all the Parts of it,
about the time when he gave out the evangelical Law from Zion, and sent forth
his Ambassadors to publish the glad Tidings of Salvation in all Parts of the
Earth: For by this means, the Apostles of our Lord, had the greatest Advantage
to Travel from one Place to another, to preach the everlasting Gospel to every
Creature Matthew. 28, 19, 20. Mark 16.15.
, agreeable to the Commission they had received for this Purpose.

And as the more public, so the more private Affairs of Mankind, are under the
Government and Direction of our Lord Jesus Christ. For he is perfectly
acquainted with every individual Person in the World; and knows all that
belongs to him, Yea, he searches the very Hearts of the Children of Men, and
turns them which Way soever he pleases, even as the Rivers of Water are turned
Rev. 2.23. Prove. 21.1.
. And hence it is he makes the Godly to be his willing People in the Day of his
Power, Psalm. 110.3 And directs the Counsels and Actions of the wicked, even
contrary to their own Intentions, so as to accomplish his own most glorious
Designs: as we may see in the Instance of the King of Assyria, spoken of in the
10th Chapter of Isaiah. For his private Design was plainly to destroy and to
cut off Nations not a few,Verse 7: but our sovereign Lord overruled him and
his Managements, so as only to correct and reform a degenerate People; as we
find in the following Context. And thus I have considered the Dominion of
Christ, as it is exercised over all Things; and more especially over Angels and
Men, both good and bad. And now there remains but one thing more to be spoken
to under this Head. And this is,

3. Jesus Christ will finally Judge the World, and reward every reasonable
Creature according to his Deeds. This is asserted and confirmed to us from the
Mouth of our Savior himself, in John 5.22, 23. The Father judges no Man, i.
e. he judges no Man immediately in his own Person; but has committed all
Judgment to the Son: and for this weighty Reason, That all Men should honor
the Son, even as the Father. And of this we have a further Testimony in Acts
17.31. where we are told, That the Father has appointed a Day, in the which he
judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained: where of
he has given Assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised him from the dead.
And therefore, at the appointed DayandHour, which is known only in the secret
Councils of Heaven, Jesus Christ will descend from Heaven, in all the Pomp and
Glory that becomes this high Office, and the great Occasion; and as we are
assured, in Romans 2.6, and onwards, He will render to every Man according to his
Deeds: To them who by patient Continuance in well doing, seek for Glory, and
Honor, and Immortality; eternal Life: But to them that are Contentious, and do
not obey the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness; Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish, upon every Soul of Man that does Evil; of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile.

And with this Act of judging the World, Christ will conclude his
Administrations in the mediatorial Kingdom, properly so called. For presently
upon this, we read of his delivering up the Kingdom to God, even the Father. As
in 1 Cor.15.24.

And thus I have considered the more general and comprehensive Acts of Christ's
regal Authority. And now,

Secondly, The next Thing in order, is, to say something concerning the
Properties of Christ's Kingdom and Government. And here I have Time only to
name the Particulars that deserve a more large and distinct Consideration. As
for Instance,

This Government of Christ is universal, and knows no Bounds within the Compass
of God's Creation. This is evident from what has been said already. And
therefore the Kingdom of Christ is said to rule over all, in Psalm. 103.19. And
he himself is called, LORD of all, in Acts 10.36.

Again, This Government of Christ is administered with irresistible Power; or in
such a Manner, as effectually to bring to pass the Counsels, of Heaven that are
concerned in it. For as all Power in Heaven and Earth is given to him, we may
fitly apply those Words to him, in Dan. 4.35. He does according to his Will in
the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth: and none can stay
his Hand, or say to him, What do thou?

Put however, This Government is conducted by the most consummate Wisdom. For
as infinite Wisdom laid the Design, and formed the Model of it; so our Lord
Jesus Christ, in his Administration, makes use of those Laws, Means and
Instruments, which are every Way fitted, in the best Manner, to answer the
glorious Intentions of his Kingdom And with an Eye to this (I doubt not) he is
called, the only wise God our Savior, in Jude, Verse 25th.

Moreover, This Government of Christ is administered according to the strictest
Rules of Justice and Righteousness. Hence it is said in the 7th Verse of the
Context, to be ordered and established with Judgment and with Justice. And
this is confirmed in Psalm. 89.4. where Justice and Judgment are said to be the
Habitation, or the very Basis, of Christ's Throne. And, in Psalm. 45.6. The
Scepter of his Kingdom is a right Scepter.

And to this I shall add, The Administrations of Christ's Kingdom are tempered
with infinite Goodness, Grace and Mercy. For though, as I said but now, Justice
and Judgment are the Habitation of his Throne; yet, his Throne is also called,
a Throne of Grace, in Heb. 4.16. And accordingly, He is most mild and gracious
in the present Exercise of his Government: in extending Patience and
Long-suffering toward his Enemies: in doing Good to all; yea, even to the
unkind and unthankful: in declaring his Readiness to be reconciled to Sinners
upon their Submission to him: and in opening all the Treasures of Grace and
Goodness to his willing and obedient People. And upon these accounts, he is
called Prince of Peace, in our Context.

And now, finally, This Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ is an everlasting
Kingdom. For so it is said to be, in the Verse following the Text. Of the
Increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no End, upon the Throne of
David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with Judgment and
with Justice, from henceforth even for ever. And agreeable to this are those
Words in Psalm. 45.6 Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. Indeed, the Time
is hastening, when an End will be put to the present Method of Christ's
Administration in his Kingdom. For when the whole Number of God's elect Ones
shall be effectually called and completely saved; which is the special Design
of the present Administration; Christ will then (as I observed before) deliver
up the Kingdom to God, even the Father 1 Cor. 15.24.
, i. e. He will resign the more immediate Government into the Hands of the GOD
HEAD: But however, the happy Effects of this Government will still abide; and
the Glory both of the REDEEMER and REDEEMED continue for ever and ever.

And thus I have given you some account of the Nature of Christ's Kingdom, in
the Acts and Properties of it: which was the second general Head I proposed to
consider. And now,

III. The next Thing in order, is to show, how Jesus Christ, God-Man, came to
be vested with this sovereign Power and Dominion over all Things:

And, in a Word: It was by the special Will and Appointment of the Father. For
Christ did not take to himself this great Power without Leave from the Father;
nor without his immediate Designation to the Office. For it was agreed between
God the Father, and God the Son, in the Covenant of Redemption, That in Case
the Son would undertake the Work of Man's Redemption, the Father would make him
his Firstborn, higher than the Kings of the Earth. See Psalm. 89.27. And
accordingly the Government, in the Text, is said to be laid upon this Shoulder,
and not assumed by him. And again, the Father, speaking of this Exaltation of
Christ, says in Psalm. 2.6. I have s^t, i. e. I have appointed, raised up, and
crowned, my King, upon my holy Hill of Zion.

And there appears to have been these two Reason more especially, why this
glorious Dignity was conferred by the Father upon his Son Jesus Christ.

1. The first was, to Reward his great Humiliation, Suffering and Death, in the
mediatorial Undertaking. For this Undertaking was a free and voluntary Act in
the Son of God. It was what he was under no Obligations to enter upon, any
farther than his own Will inclined and disposed him. And therefore since he was
pleased, in conformity to his Father's Will, and in Conjunction with it, to
undertake an Affair that required greatest Abasement in himself, and would, in
the issue, bring the highest possible Honor to God; God the Father decreed and
promised this Dominion to his Son: and in Consequence of these, has conferred
the highest Honor upon him, as the Reward of his Undertaking. Of this the
Apostle gives us a large and distinct Account, in Phil. 2.5, and onwards, Let
this same Mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus: who being in the Form of
God, thought it no Robbery to be Equal with God: But made himself of no
Reputation, and took upon him the Form of a Servant, and was made in the
Likeness of Men: And being found Fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and
became obedien^ (...) Death, even the Death of the Cross. Wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, and given him a Name, which is above every Name: That
at the Name of Jesus, every Knee should bow, of Things in Heaven, and Things in
earth, and Things under the Earth: And that every Tongue should confess, that
Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father.

2. Another special Reasn why this Dignity was conferred upon Jesus Christ,
was, That he might be qualified to accomplish the great Business of his
mediatorial Undertaking. For the Work of Man's Redemption was of that Nature
and Importance, and the Difficulties attending it so great, that it appears
absolutely necessary that he, who should undertake the Work, should be vested
with a sovereign Power and Dominion over all Things; a Power to overcome all
Opposition, and to overruled all Events, so as to effect the great End
proposed. And, for this Reason, we are told, in Col. 1.19. It has pleased the
Father, that in him should all Fullness dwell, i. e. a fullness of Power and
Authority, as well as a fullness of Grace and Merit. And by this means, Christ
is said to be mighty to save, in Isa. 63.1. And able to save to the uttermost,
all that come to God by him, as in Heb. 7.25. And this leads us to the next
general Head in the Method proposed. And this is,

IV. To give a short Account of the great End of Christ's Government and
Kingdom.

For, as ever well constituted Government has some noble End in View; a public
Good, that is constanly aimed at, in all the faithful Administrations of it: so
the Kingdom of Christ, being the Result of infinite Wisdom, the highest and
last End of all, must necessarily be proposed in it. And this can be nothing
less than the Manifestation of the Glory of God. For this is the declared End
of all the Works of God, in Creation. Providence and Redemption. And in
particular, it evidently appears to be the great End our blessed Savior had in
View, in the whole of his mediatorial Undertaking. To be sure, it is what he
had a principal Regard to in coming into the World: and therefore we have that
Anthem of Praise, sung by a Multitude of the heavenly Host, at his Incarnation
and Birth, Luke 2.14. Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth Peace,
good will toward Men. Again, it is what his Eye was chiefly fixed on, in all
that he did and suffered on Earth: and therefore, upon his leaving the World,
he made that most comfortable Appeal to his Father, John 17.4. I have glorified
thee on Earth: I have finished the Work which thou gave me to do. And
consequently, when he had entirely past through his State of Humiliation and
Suffering; and, in a State of Exaltation, had all Power in Heaven and Earth
committed to him, he necessarily kept the same great End in View.

And accordingly we have a most glorious display of the divine Perfections in
the Reign of our Redeemer: They all shine with an infinite Brightness, in the
Administrations of his Government.

But as I have not Time to illustrate this in all the Particulars, I shall, on
this Occasion, only name the infinite Mercy and Justice of God, which appear
with a distinguishing Glory in the Reign of our a Lord Jesus Christ. For when,
on the one Hand we consider Christ as Head over all Things to the Church, as in
Ephesians. 1.22. we have the most ravishing Discoveries of the infinite Grace and
Mercy of God, and of all other divine Perfections, that are more nearly related
to them; not only in Christ's gathering a People to himself out of the World,
but in his continual Care to defend them against all the Power and Rage of
Earth and Hell, which are in Combination against them; to assist them in all
their Duties; to supply all their Wants; to support them under all their
Weaknesses; to comfort them under all their Sorrows; to carry on and perfect
his own Work in them; and to conduct them, at length, safe into the immediate
Presence and Enjoyment of God; where Grace, Grace, will be the Subject of
everlasting Songs of Praise: So, on the other Hand, when we consider Christ as
Lord of all, and exerting his Power over his Enemies; Here we have the most
awful Manifestations of infinite Holiness, Justice and Righteousness; in the
Judgments which he frequently executes on Earth against Sin and Sinners; in
the Restraint he continually lays upon his implacable Enemies; in the Frowns of
his Indignation which they are perpetually under; and in pouring out all the
Vials of divine Wrath upon them in the World to come. And upon these Accounts,
the Apostle gives us to understand, in the forecited Phil. 2.11. That, first or
last, Every Tongue shall confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of
God the Father.

And this brings me now,

V. In the fifth and last Place, To apply the preceding Discourse, to the
Honor of the Lord Jesus Christ, and our own Instruction.

And here,

1. From what we have heard we may reasonably infer the eternal Power and
Godhead of our blessed Redeemer. For, though the Government under
Consideration, was committed to him, as we have said, by a particular
Dispensation from the Father; yet, such is the Nature and Importance of it,
that it requires nothing less than infinite Perfections to conduct it aright.
That is to say, There needs the same infinite Power, which at first created all
Things, to uphold and preserve the World in its Being and Order: There needs
infinite Knowledge to understand the particular Nature and Circumstances of
every individual Being, as it falls under his Care: There needs infinite Wisdom
to guide every Thing to its proper End: There needs infinite Patience to bear
the many and repeated Affronts that are daily offered to the Sovereign of the
World: and there needs infinite Justice and Righteousness; and, in a Word,
every divine Perfection, to judge the World with an exact and righteous
Judgment. And therefore, since the World is thus upheld and governed, and will
be thus judged by Christ, at the last Day; the Consequence from hence is plain
and necessary, That he is the infinite God in our Nature:

And agreeably, we have these Characters of his Person and Office, given to him
in our Context; such as THE MIGHTY GOD, THE EVERLASTING FATHER, THE PRINCE OF
PEACE; that, as I observed before, cannot be ascribed to any mere Creature,
without Blasphemy and Nonsense. And besides, on the account of his universal
Dominion, the inspired Apostle made no Difficulty to call him, God blessed for
ever, in Romans 9.5. And, upon further Search, we find, that several of the
incommunicable Attributes of the divine Natures, are, in Scripture expressly
ascribed to our Lord Jesus Christ. Such as proper Eternity, Immensity
Omnipotence, Omniscience, and the like; as I could easily show, were this a fit
Season to enlarge upon the Subject.

And therefore, by the Way, we may with Propriety enough take Notice of the
gross Contradiction and Idolatry, which those Men, in the way of their
Reasoning and Practice, run themselves into, who deny the Divinity of Christ in
the highest Sense of the Word; and yet, at the same time, own that all divine
Perfections belong to him, besides Self-Existence, absolute Supremacy and
Independency (which they would have to be the only incommunicable Characters of
the one supreme Cod;) And also allow, that divine Honors are due to Christ, on
the account of his Dignity and Dominion.

For when they deny his Godhead in an absolute. Sense, they, at best, make him
but a dignified Creature. And this, in the Nature of Things, is to make him but
a finite Being; for to suppose an infinite Creature, is an infinite Absurdity.

And again, When they confess that all divine Perfections besides those above
mentioned, belong to our Lord Jesus Christ; and consequently, that Eternity,
Omnipotence, Omnipresence, Omniscience, and the like, are truly ascribed to
him; this is, in effect to make him the most High God. For this God frequently
challenges these Perfections as belonging to himself alone: and besides, these
Perfections do also, in the Nature of Things, necessarily suppose the Subject
of them to be strictly and properly infinite; unless we suppose, than which, I
think, nothing can be more absurd, That there is greater and less, in proper
Eternity, Immensity, Omnipotence, and the like. And therefore when we consider,
on the one Hand, what they say to derogate from the true and proper GodHead of
Christ; and, on the other Hand, what they are forced, from Scripturelight, to
ascribe to him, they make Christ, in one and the same Sense, to be both finite
and infinite; which is a flat Contradiction.

And besides, if Christ is not the supreme God, he cannot be the proper Object
of divine Worship: for God himself challenges such Worship, as his Property
alone, Matthew. 4.10. And therefore, when they are obliged to acknowledge such
Worship is due to Christ, and pretend to pay such Homage to him; they give the
Glory which is due to God alone, to another, contrary to his express Will in
the Case, Isa. 42.8. And this is downright Idolatry. Nor does it at all excuse
or lessen the Crime, to distinguish divine Worship, as they frequently do, into
Supreme and Subordinate; since there is no Foundation for such a Distinction to
be met with in the sacred Scriptures. And therefore to conclude this Head, Let
us devoutly acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ, to be the only true God, and our
God, and so worship and glorify him accordingly.

II. We should hence learn to eye and adore the Sovereignty of Christ, in all
the Dispensations of Providence and Grace that we meet with. For as he has the
Superintendency of all Things in Heaven and Earth; and does particularly
overruled and direct the grand Affairs of Kingdoms and Provinces here below,
according to his Will and Pleasure; we are certainly bound to eye the Hand of
his Providence in all the Times and Seasons that pass over us. And if we
religiously attend this Duty, we shall soon find, that we owe as much to the
special Providence and Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, as any one People under
Heaven.

For when we consider the many and great Things he has done for us; some of
which we have seen with our Eyes, and many more which our Fathers have told us
of; and, particularly, how he at first bro't our Predecessors into this
Wilderness, and bear them hither as upon Eagles Wings; how he supported them
under the many Dangers and Hardships of a Wilderness State; how he drove out
the Heathen before them, and gave them a sure Footing in the Land; and at
length turned an howling Wilderness into a fruitful Field, as we see at this
Day. And when we further consider the many invaluable Privileges, both civil
and religious, where with we have all along been favored and distinguished
among the British Colonies: precious Privileges, secured to us under the
Sanction of a Royal Charter, and peaceably enjoyed under the Protection of our
lawful and rightful King GEORGE II. who, among innumerable Instances of his
paternal Care for the Welfare of his Subjects in general, has, by a
distinguishing Act of Grace, filled up the several Posts of Honor and
Government, reserved to himself by the Royal Charter, from among the Sons of
our People; who are therefore, under the strongest Ties in Nature, of Interest
and Affection, to seek our Peace and Prosperity: I say, when we consider these
things in general, we shall scarce find any People in the World, that owe more
than we do, to the governing Providence and Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Put, upon this Occasion, I cannot forbear to be more particular in one Article,
wherein the Honor of our dear Lord Jesus Christ is most nearly concerned, and
whereby our Obligations to him are heightened to that Degree, that, I verily
believe, no one People in the World were ever under greater, to make the best
Returns of Praise and Obedience to him. And this is with respect to our
religious Privileges, which I hinted at before.

For, as Christ, in taking the Government of the World upon him, had a peculiar
Eye to his Kingdom of Grace which he was to set up in it; so his grand Design
in forming and establishing this People at first, appears evidently to have
been, That he might set up his Gospel Kingdom in these Parts of the World, in
the Purity and Power of it; and therein receive the most explicit and practical
Acknowledgments of Himself in his kingly Rule and Government.

And accordingly he first inspired our Forefathers with the purest Sentiments,
concerning the Nature of the Gospel Kingdom, and of His Sovereignty alone in
it; and enabled them to bear a faithful Testimony to this glorious Truth in
their native Land.

And when, in the Course of his Providence, he ordered the Matter so as to
transplant and establish them here; he immediately took Possession of these
Ends of the Earth for himself. He set up Gospel Churches in the Land: Churches
Pure in their Doctrine, Worship and Discipline; and in the Constitution of
them, the freest, I am persuaded, of any in the World, from those Mixtures of
human Invention, which have been so great a Stain upon most of the Churches of
the Reformation.

And as he thus planted, so he illuminated these Churches at first, with
Pastors after his own Heart. And having early put it into the Hearts of our
Fathers, to erect a School for the Prophets; he has from thence granted a rich
Supply of such Pastors from Time to Time, besides a considerable Number that
have been our chief Glory and Defense in the civil Administration.

And agreeably we have all along had many signal Tokens of Christ's promised
Presence with us. He has accompanied the Means of Grace we enjoy, with the
converting and sanctifying Influences of his Holy Spirit: and many have (...)
the Sons and Daughters born to God, in most of the Assemblies of our Zion. And
though there has been a visible, and growing Declension in these Churches, which
has off-times been observed and bewailed; yet our compassionate Redeemer has at
Times remarkably revived his own Work, here and there, among us. And not long
since, he made a most surprising Display of his free and sovereign Grace in
some Parts of the Land, in converting, or reforming, whole Congregations and
Towns almost, in a few Months space, by the immediate Influences of his Spirit,
succeeding the Means of Grace, without any awakening Providence to excite
thereunto See the Rev. Mr. Edward's faithful Narrative, etc. lately published
in London, by Dr. Watts and Dr. Guyse.
. And as we still hope and pray, that this may be only the first Fruits of a
larger Harvest to come; so all Orders and Degrees among us, are upon this, and
all the Accounts abovementioned, under infinite Obligations to pay all possible
Honors to our great Redeemer, as the King, which the Father has set upon his
holy Hill of Zion. And agreeably, I come now, in the following Uses, to apply
the Subject to the several Orders among us.

And therefore,

III. Is the Government to the World committed into the Hands of our Lord Jesus
Christ? then all the Rulers of the Earth, are to be considered as the Subjects
of Christ; and, as far as he has made himself known to them, they are expressly
bound to honor him in all their Administrations.

For, as Christ is Lord of all, he keeps the Reins of Government in his own
Hands; and disposes of States and Rulers according to his own sovereign Will
and Pleasure. And therefore he has given to none of the Princes of the Earth;
no, not to the greatest of them, a Power to act their own Will, in an arbitrary
and despotic Manner; or to make their own Will their only Rule, in the Exercise
of that Power committed to them: But, in all their Administrations, he requires
they should have a strict Regard to such Laws, as he has made known to them,
either by Providence or Grace.

And if such as we usually call sovereign Princes on Earth, owe this Subjection
to Christ, as absolute Lord of Heaven and Earth; all subordinate Rulers and
Judges in a State, are, doubtless, under as great Obligations to yield an
entire Subjection to the Laws of Christ, in their Administrations of Justice
and Judgment among the People: Nor will the Pretense of Obedience to the Laws
or Instructions of the higher Powers excuse them, or any else, in breaking in
upon the known Rights of Mankind, or transgressing any of the Laws of Nature or
Revelation, when there happens to be an Inconsistency, between them, as
sometimes there has been, through the Weakness or Wickedness of Men in Power:
But, in this Case, the known Rule, by which the Apostles of our Lord governed
and justified themselves, is to take Place, Acts 5.29. We ought to obey God
rather than Men.

It is therefore the Duty and Interest of all in Authority among Men, whether
supreme or subordinate, to eye the Lord Jesus Christ as sovereign Lord of all;
to set his Laws before them, as the general Rule of their Administrations; and,
as near as they can, to imitate him in all those moral Perfections, which shine
so gloriously in the Administrations of his Government.

And now, may it please your EXCELLENCY, with the honorable Board of
Counselors, the honorable House of Representatives, and all that sustain any
Posts of Honor and Service in the Government: You see, my honored Fathers,
whose you are, and whom you ought principally to serve.

The Lord Jesus Christ, as Sovereign of the World, has placed you, under our
gracious King GEORGE on the Throne of Great Britain, at the Head of Affairs in
this Province: you therefore owe the highest Honor and Allegiance to Him.

And to express this Loyalty to the King of Kings, you must not only make that
personal Dedication of your selves to Him and his Service, which equally
concerns all Mankind; but you must, with the greatest Diligence and Fidelity,
apply your selves to the special Duties of your respective Stations, in the
Service of your King and Country.

And here, since our blessed Lord Jesus Christ has set up his Kingdom of Grace
among this People, as I observed before; and has given you, not only the Laws
of Nature, but the Light of divine Revelation, to guide you in all your
Administrations; you ought surely, as christian Rulers, to be chiefly concerned
that this Kingdom of Christ may flourish in the Land.

And to this Purpose, you must employ your superior Power and Talents so as to
make the civil Administration, in the most effectual Manner, to subserve the
great End of the Redeemer's Kingdom.

And this may be done; not by making and executing Laws, with a Design to
oblige the Consciences of Men in Matters of divine Faith and Worship; for this
is a Royalty of Christ, a Flower in his Crown, which he has reserved only to
himself: But it may be done, by employing the Sword of Justice, for the
Restraint and Punishment of open Profaneness, Immorality, Irreligion, and the
like; by distinguishing the most faithful Subjects of Christ, with the more
peculiar Smiles of Government; and by setting before the People a bright
Example of every christian Grace and Virtue.

And here I might with Propriety eno', have gone into a particular
Consideration of the State of this People; and have shown both the reigning
Distempers of the Land, and the Methods our honorable Rulers, in their several
Stations, are to go into, in applying the proper Remedies for the Cure of them:
But I find my self prevented, by several late excellent Discourses of this
Nature, upon this Occasion; and have, in a great Measure, prevented my self, in
one or two Discourses published heretofore, by the Direction of the honorable
House of Representatives.

I shall therefore, in this Place, only earnestly entreat all that are
immediately concerned in the Elections of this Day, That in the Choice of his
Majesty's Council for the Province, which is a singular Privilege we enjoy,
you would have a strict Regard to the Honor of our Lord Jesus Christ; and not
choose Men to serve a particular Turn; but Men that are understanding in the
Times, to know what Israel ought to do; and Men endowed with divine Wisdom from
Christ, the wonderful Counselor: For these are the only Men that can act from
the purest Principles, in the Service of God, their King, and their Country.

And when you come to act in General Assembly, I humbly Request, on the behalf
of our common Lord and Master, That you would act from the same divine
Principle. And if there are any Laws wanting to secure the Honor and Interest
of Christ's Religion among us, that you would take the Matter into serious
Consideration.

And here, suffer me, with due Defference, to express my prevailing Fears, that
there is something of this Nature greatly wanting on your Part, to prevent the
cruel Oppression and Injustice that has, for a long time, been reigning among
us, on the account of the uncertain and fluctuating State of our Medium of
Trade: for Righteousness between Man and Man, is certainly an essential Branch
of the Religion of our blessed Savior.

And if any thing farther may be done by our honorable Legislators, to
restrain that Flood of Iniquity which threatens our Ruin; this is what our
supreme Lord expects and requires from you.

But, upon the best enquiry I have been able to make, I find, to your Honor,
that we have a most excellent Body of Laws, for the Suppression of Vice and
Immorality; and that the great Thing wanting on this Head, is the due Execution
of the wholesome Laws in being. Not that I suppose this is the only thing
wanting to effect a through Reformation in the Land; for there is evidently, in
this respect, too great a Backwardness in all Orders and Degrees among us; and
even among those who are called to minister in holy Things, and are Watchmen
and Reprovers by Office.

But as my Business here is with the civil Magistrate; may I prevail with the
worthy Gentlemen in Commission for the Peace, to exert themselves, and be
zealous in the Cause of Virtue and good Order; in searching out and punishing
the Workers of Iniquity, as the Laws of the Land, and the Oath of God you are
under, oblige you; for herein you will eminently serve Christ the Lord.

And suffer me with great Humility, on this Occasion, to entreat your
Excellency in Conjunction with the honorable Council, solemnly to renew your
Charge to the Judges and other Magistrates, who immediately receive their
Commission from you; in the Words, (or to the like Effect,) that the renowed
King Jehoshaphat did on a like Occasion, as we find, in 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. Take
heed what ye do: for ye judge not for Men, but for the Lord, who is with you in
the Judgment. Wherefore now, let the Fear of the LORD be upon you, take heed
and do it: for there is no Iniquity with the LORD our God, nor respect of
Persons, nor taking of Bribes. And when you may find a Necessity to enlarge the
Number of those in Commission, I earnestly beseech you, in the Name and Fear of
God, always to have an Eye to that excellent Advice, which Jethro once gave to
Moses, in Exodus 18.21, 22. Provide out of all the People, able Men, such as
fear God, Men of Truth, hating Covetousness: and place such over them. -- And
let them judge the People at all Seasons.

And now, to urge the Advice given to our honorable Rulers in their several
Degrees, I shall take Leave just to mention some few of the many Arguments and
Motives, which, with due Consideration, must have the greatest Influence upon
you. As for Instance,

All the Power you are vested with, you received originally from Christ, as he
is supreme Governor among the Nations. And therefore God himself, speaking of
civil Rulers, says, in Psalm. 82.6. I have said, Ye are Gods, i. e. I have
appointed and constituted you Rulers over the People. And agreeably the Apostle
tells us, in Romans 13.1. The Powers that be are ordained of God. And for this
Reason, the civil Magistrate is called, the minister of God, in the 4th Verse.
Again,

In your Advancement in the World, the Lord Jesus Christ has imparted of his
own Honor unto you. And therefore ye are called Gods, by his special
Appointment, in the forecited Psalm. 82.6. And agreeably he demands from his
People a proportionable Degree of Reverence and Obedience unto you. For that is
his sovereign Will in this Case, Romans 13.2. Let every Soul be subject unto the
higher Powers. And again, in Verse 7, Render therefore to all their Dues:
Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear,
Honor to whom Honor. Furthermore,

As Christ is Lord of all, he keeps the same strict Eye upon you, that he does
upon the rest of Mankind, and critically observes and records all your Tempers,
Designs and Managements in your Administrations among the People. And to this
Purpose we read, in Psalm. 82.2. God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty;
be judge among the Gods, And besides,

Though, for the present, you are raised in Honor and Power above your Brethren,
yet, your Breath is in your Nostrils; and you must, in a little Time, be
levelled with the meanest of the People, in the Dust of Death. For so say the
Lord himself, the Author of your Advancement, in Psalm. 82.6, 7. I have said, Ye
are Gods: and all of you Children of the most High. But ye shall die like Men,
and fall like one of the Princes. And here I cannot but take Notice, with Grief
and Sorrow, of the late convincing Proof of this, in the Death of that
honorable Person The Hon. Edmund Quincy, Esquire; who died of the SmallPox in
London, in an Agency for the Province, to the Court of Great Britain, on a very
important Occasion.
, who, for many Years past, and in diverse Stations, has been a great Honor and
Blessing to his Country, in the Wisdom, Prudence, Piety and Steadiness, that
ever appeared in the Share he once had in the public Administrations; and whom
God has taken from us in the Height of his Service for the Country. This sad
Instance, I doubt not, my honored Fathers, has given you a lively View of your
own Mortality. And as you must thus die like other Men. your Glory will not
descend into the Dust after you. Nor will there any further Notice be taken of
you on Earth, than only either to grace your Memory with Praise, in case you
now approve your selves Fathers and Benefactors to your Country; or, to load
your Names with Infamy, if you should prove (which God forbid) to be the
Oppressors of the People. But this Consideration, though great in it self, is but
of little Weight in compare with the following one. For,

In the last Place, As Christ will judge Angels and Men at the great Day, he
will particularly call all the Rulers of the Earth to an Account for their
Administrations in this World. And as their Talents and Betrustments here are
greater than others; so (no doubt) will be the Terror or Comfort of their
future great Account. And agreeably, we read concerning such Kings and Rulers,
who set themselves against the Lord, and against his anointed; and prove
themselves the Plagues of Mankind, while they have any Power in their Hands;
That Christ will at last break them with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in Pieces
like a Potters Vessel, see Psalm. 2.2, 9. And therefore, not only the mean Men,
but even the Mighty, who bid Defiance to Heaven, when they shall see Christ,
appear from Heaven, in flaming Fire, to take Vengeance on his Adversaries; will
hide themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains. And say to the
Mountain and Hills, Fall on us, and hide us from the Face of him that sits
on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb: For the great Day of his Wrath
is come; and who shall be able to stand? as in Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. While, on the
other Hand, those Princes and Rulers among Men, who, like David, serve God and
their Generation, according to the Will of God, shall have distinguishing
Crowns of Glory set on their Heads at the last Day, and be peculiarFavourites
around the Throne of Christ for ever and ever. And from this Consideration of
the final Judgment, we have that Exhortation to the Rulers of the Earth, with
which I conclude this Head, Psalm. 2.10.11.12. Be wise now therefore, O ye
Kings: be instructed, ye Judges of the Earth. Serve the Lord with Fear, and
rejoice with Trembling. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the
Way, when his Wrath is kindled but a little: blessed are all they that put
their Trust in him. And this leads me to the last Head or Improvement; which is
this,

IV. Let us all now submit to the Scepter of Christ's Government, and be
chiefly concerned for the Advancement of his Kingdom and Interest in the World.
By the Kingdom of Christ here I intend his spiritual Kingdom, which is the
great End of his providential Kingdom. And this is what we are under infinite
Obligations to seek the Advancement of; both on the Account of Christ's setting
up this Kingdom among us; and considering also, that the grand Design of our
Forefathers in coming hither, was to assert and maintain His Supremacy alone
in this Kingdom. And now, that we may, in the most effectual Manner, answer the
just Expectations of our blessed Lord and Savior concerning us; I shall just
Hint at a few Things, and conclude the Discourse.

1. Let it be the first and great Concern of every one, that this Kingdom of
Christ may be set up and flourish in his own Heart. And therefore, where the
Foundations of this Kingdom have not been laid already in any Heart; let the
miserable Sinner, with a diligent Use of all the other Means of Conversion, be
earnest in his Supplications, that the almighty Spirit of our Redeemer, would,
in the Way of free and sovereign Grace, conquer the reigning Enmity within, and
give him a new Heart, and a new Spirit. And where Christ has done this already;
let the happy Soul rejoice in God his Savior, and, in the Exercise of a lively
Faith, pray continually for the quickening, sanctifying and comforting
Influences of the ever blessed Spirit of Grace; for hereby we shall readily bow
to the Scepter of Christ, and become his willing and obedient People, and know
in happy Experience, what that Kingdom of God means, which consists in
Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Upon this,

2. Let us Confess and bewail the great Opposition which the Kingdom of Christ
meets with in the World, and more especially among our selves. For after all
the spiritual Light and Privileges, where with Christ has distinguished this
Land and People, he has a multitude of open and secret Enemies among us. There
are a great many here and there who lead such loose and debauched, such profane
and irreligious Lives, that they proclaim to all the World, that they will not
that Christ should reign over them. Again, Among those who profess a Subjection
to Christ, and have taken to themselves a Form of Religion, have we not reason
to fear, from the prevailing Deadness and Coldness of Professor, and their
Backwardness to every good Work: and from their Readiness to drink in the
Poison of Error, and upon any light Temptation to forsake the pure scriptural
Worship of these Churches; which, no doubt, is observed and resented by our
Savior as a very great Apostasy from him; and more especially in any of the
Children of New England; I say, when we consider these Things, have we not
reason to fear that a very great Proportion of visible Professors, are utter
Strangers to all vital Religion; and so, whatever their outward Profession may
be, they are Enemies in Heart to Christ and his Religion? And besides, when the
very best of Men look into their own Hearts, they soon find a great deal of
Opposition to the Work of Grace there, from the Workings of that inbred Enmity
against God, and his holy Laws, which all Mankind bring into the World with
them. And therefore in our concern for the Advancement of Christ's spiritual
Kingdom, these, and the like Things, are greatly to be lamented by the People
of God. Again,

3. Let us earnestly pray for the Enlargement and Prosperity of Christ's
Kingdom in the Power and Glory of it: That his Kingdom may come, and his Will
be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. And to this end, That the Lord would make
bear his holy Arm in the Eyes of all the Nations, that all the Ends of the
Earth may see the Salvation of our God: That where the Name of Christ is known,
his Scepter may be universally, bowed down unto: and especially our own Nation
and Land

And since God has given us a Protestant King on the British Throne, with the
hopeful Prospect of a long Succession of such Princes in the illustrious House
of HANOVER; for which we owe the most grateful Acknowledgements to Heaven; Let
us pray, That the Days of our King may be many, and his Reign prosperous; That
the Honor of Christ, by whom Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice, may be
ever near his Heart. And especially let us go on to pray, that the most
afflictive Dispensation of Providence, in the Death of our late incomparable
and gracious Queen CAROLINE, (whose Death has been as heartily and universally
lamented in this Province, as in any Part of his Majesty's Dominions) may be
sanctified to his Royal Person and House, and to the whole Nation: That his
Majesty may be graciously supported under the irreparable Loss; and from this
most affecting Instance of the Vanity of earthly Glory, in the Height of it,
may be abundantly quickened and enlarged to a faithful Discharge of that Duty,
which the sovereign Lord of all expects from one in his exalted Station: That
when he comes to lay down his earthly Crown in the Dust, he may receive a most
disstinguishing Crown of never-fading Glory in the World to come.

Again, Let us pray, that our more immediate Rulers may have abundant Measures
of the Spirit granted to them from on high, to fit them, in their several
Stations, eminently to serve the Lord Christ, in being a Praise to such as do
well, and a Terror to evil doers.

That our Ministers, in the Course of their Ministry, may desire to know
nothing, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and be enabled to display the
lovely Glories of our Redeemer, in their Doctrine and Conversation.

That our Churches may hold fast the Things they have received; and by walking
steadfast in the Faith and Order of the Gospel, may have rest and be edified.

That the Means of Grace which we enjoy, may have those divine Influences
attending them, whereby saving Conversions may be multiplied among us, and
Converts filled with Righteousness.

In a Word, Let us pray for the plentiful Effusions of the ever-blessed Spirit
of Grace, that the Work of God may appear unto his Servants, and his Glory unto
their Children; and that the Beauty of the Lord our God may be upon us. And now,

4. Finally, Let us all, in our several Places and Relations, study and
endeavor, by divine Assistance, faithfully to discharge the Duties required of
us in the Gospel of God our Savior. And then may we hope to have the Smiles of
his Providence upon us in all our Affairs, both public and private; and in a
little Time to see the Fulfillment of that gracious Promise, which (I doubt
not) has a Reference to these Gospel Days, in Isa. 44.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Thus says
the Lord that made thee, and formed thee from the Womb, which will help thee,
Fear not, OJacob my Servant, and thou Jesurun, whom I have chosen. For I will
pour Water upon him that is thirsty, and Floods upon the dry Ground: I will
pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine Offspring: And they
shall spring up as among the Grass, as Willows by the Watercourse. One shall
say, I am the LORD's: and another shall call himself by the Name of Jacob: and
another shall subscribe with his Hand unto the LORD, and Surname himself by the
Name of Israel. Thus says the LORD the King of Israel, and his Redeemer the
LORD of Hosts, I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no
God.

FINIS.

